

rirl etc
INFORMATION
KKLATINC to
QUEENSLAND
AND ITS RESOURCES.
A COMPLETE LIST OF TOWNS
IN THE COLONY,
WITH DESCRIPTIVE PARTICULARS THEREOF.
ISSUED GRATIS
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND,
1, VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, S W
Reprinted from the ‘Australian handbook ’ for 1899, published by
Messrs. GORDON & GOTCH, London.








INFORMATION
RELATING TO
QUEENSLAND
AND ITS HE SO URGES.
A COMPLETE LIST OF TOWNS
IN THE COLONY,
WITH DESCRIPTIVE PARTICULARS THEREOF.
ISSUED GRATIS
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND,
1, VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, S.W.
Reprinted from the ‘ Australian Handbook ’ for 1899, published by
Messrs. GORDON & GOTCH, London.




THE COLONY OF QUEENSLAND.
Queensland, which comprises the north-eastern portion of the
continent of Australia, was formerly known under the name of
the Moreton Bay district, the name of Moreton having been
conferred on it in honour of his patron, the Earl of Moreton
(the President of the Royal Society), by Captain Cook, who dis-
covered it in May, 1770, although it is believed to have been
visited by both Portuguese and Dutch in the beginning of the
seventeenth century. Captain Cook reached on May 10 what
he called Moreton’s Bay, which he describes as a “wide open
bay, in the bottom of which the land is so low that I could but
just see it from the topmast head.” Standing along the coast,
he named all the principal points and headlands and bays,
narrowly escaping shipwreck through striking on a coral reef.
On June 17 he beached his vessel in the harbour, to which the
name of Endeavour Bay was given. After repairing the vessel
he continued his voyage on August 13, till Cape York was
reached. In 10° 30' 8. lat., at Possession Island, when about
taking his departure, he once more hoisted English colours, and
took possession in the name of King George 111. of the whole
Eastern coast. Captain Cook’s observations were, however,
almost entirely limited to the coast, and accordingly very little
information is afforded by his narrative, of the capabilities or
features of the country.
Lieutenant Flinders, later on, in July, 1790, was despatched by
Governor Hunter, who was desirous of gaining some information
respecting the coast to the northward of Port Jackson, particu-
larly of two large openings marked by Captain Cook. The sloop
Norfolk, 24 tons, manned with volunteers from the two king’s
ships then in harbour, sailed from Sydney Cove on July 8.
Flinders was accompanied by Bong-ree, a native of the north
side of Broken Bay, who had been noted for his good disposition,
and open and manly conduct. After passing the Solitary Isles,
“which Mr. Flinders thought, with equal propriety, might be
termed the ‘ Miserable,’ from their sterile and uninviting appear-
ance,” anchor was cast in Shoal Bay; on the 15th, Cape Byron
was made; having hauled off the land to avoid the reef lying off
Point Danger, on the following morning a course was steered
westwards for a large space : breakers were seen off the” south
point of the opening, which Mr. Flinders was satisfied was
Moreton Bay. Passing' between these breakers and Point
Lookout he found ground in 20 fathoms. As he drew nearer,
there appeared to be a very large extent of water within the
opening. The country to the seaward was wretchedly sandy.
The vessel was hauled in round Cape Moreton to go into Glass-
house Bay, and in the evening was anchored on the west side of
the bay, about two miles from a low sandy shore. Here com-
munication was had with the natives, who were at first friendly,
but ultimately had to be fired upon, the spot from this cause
being called Point Skirmish (the southernmost point of Bribie
Island). From here the Norfolk was taken up the opening(between
Bribie Island and the Mainland), supposed to be a river, which,
from the quantity of pumice stone on the bank, was called the
Pumice Stone River. Flinders walked to the top of one of the
“round mounts,” about nine miles distant from a branch of the
river that pointed towards the Glasshouse Peaks, from the sum-
mit of which “ the view of the bay and the neighbouring
country was very extensive. The uppermost part of the Bay
appeared at S. 24° E., and most probably communicated with a
line of water which was visible at S. 12° 8., where there were
several distinct columns of smoke. This last bearing, which
Mr. Flinders apprehended to be near the head of the river, he
was not permitted to enter with the sloop, from the intricacy of
the channel and the shortness of the time which remained for
his excursion.” The natives on the river shore were very
friendly, dancing and singing to attract attention and to express
their goodwill, and were considered superior to any that had
been seen in the neighbourhood of Port Jackson. In all,
Flinders passed fifteen days in Glasshouse Bay, and describes it
“ as so full of shoals that he could not attempt to point out any
passage that would lead a ship into it without danger.” After
leaving Moreton Bay Mr. Flinders’ next place of destination was
Hervey’s Bay, which he reached in two days, and where he
remained till August 7, during which time he had sailed round
the interior of it, but without being able to enter any opening
that might have led him to a river. The limited time at Mr.
Flinders’ disposal, and the small vessel which he commanded,
wee both inimical to anything like a thorough investigation,
and he returned from his voyage of exploration with no very
favourable report of the new country he had been commissioned
to explore. He expresses himself as disappointed in not being
able to penetrate into the interior by either of the openings
examined in his expedition, and states that it was an ascertained
fact that no river of importance intersected the east coast
between 24° and 29° of S. lat. In this he erred, as subsequently
Clarence River, in Shoal Bay, and the Brisbane River, in Glass-
house or Moreton Bay, were discovered in the bays in which he
had himself anchored. The Norfolk was the same craft in
which Flinders and Bass, at the end of 1798, had sailed round
the island of Tasmania.
A second journey was undertaken in 1801 by Flinders, his
flagship being the Investipator, formerly the sloop Xenophon—
a smaller vessel, the Lady Nelson, serving as a tender. His first
voyage was undertaken from Sydney as the starting-point; the
second was under the direct auspices of the Admiralty authori-
ties, and Spithead was his point of departure, Sydney serving
as a sort of depot and victualling station. He left Spithead on
i July 18, 1801, was off Cape Leeuwin on December 7, and
E anchored in Sydney Cove on May 9, 1802 ; leaving it on his voy-
i age of discovery on July 22nd of the same year, he sailed all
i round the coast line of Queensland to the shores of the Carpen-
- tarian Gulf, and after a lengthened journey, fraught with many
i perils, reached Sydney again on June 10, 1803. In a despatch to
! Governor King, dated June 10, 1803, he was enabled to state that
: the navigation of Torres Strait was “both practicable and easily
i made.” An interesting relic in connection with this voyage is
t now in the Brisbane Museum, consisting of the shell of a man-
, grove tree, on which Flinders cut the name of his ship, a portion
, of the original inscription is clearly to be seen. This tree, till
December, 1888, was standing on Sweer’s Island, and has for
i many years past been known as the Investigator tree. In 1817,
I by order of the home authorities, Lieutenant Philip P. King
i in the Mermaid examined and charted the eastern shores of
; Queensland, and considerably added to the gradually accumu-
l j lating stock of knowledge of North-Eastern Australia,
i j In 1823, in consequence of a recommendation of Mr. Commis-
, j sioner Bigge that a new penal settlement should be formed to
; the northward of Port Jackson, either at Port Bowen, Port-
■ Curtis, or Moreton Bay ; Lieutenant Oxley, then Surveyor-
j General of New South Wales, was directed by Sir Thomas Bris-
■ bane to proceed to Port Bowen. He left Sydney on October 23,,
accompanied by Lieutenant Stirling and Mr. Uniacke, in the.
Mermaid, the vessel employed by Lieutenant King. His journey-
i was for the purposes of exploration, as well as for ascertaining
the fitness or otherwise of the new land for a convict settlement.
After examining the coast line north of Cape Moreton, the expedi-
tion returned to Moreton Bay, and on December 2 the river
Brisbane was discovered which received its name from the ruling
Governor of New South Wales. It is said that the existence of
: the river had been known some time before to certain runaway-
convicts, Thomas Pamphlet and Finnegan, who had been ship-
wrecked on the coast. They were found by Oxley living with
the natives, and he was by the former told of, and guided to, the -
Brisbane river. Mr. Oxley explored the Brisbane for fifty miles,
and also explored and named the Bremer, a tributary of the
Brisbane. The suitability of the country asyi fresh penal depot:
was soon apparent, and in September, 1554, the brig Amity,
having on board Lieutenant Oxley, Lieutenant Miller, a detach-
ment of the 40th regiment and thirty prisoners, left Sydney and
anchored off Redcliffe Point (so named by Flinders from the
redness of its cliffs, afterwards- called by the natives Humpy-
bong), where a settlement was formed; but, the position not
being found suitable, it was afterwards transferred to near the
present site of Brisbane. In 1825 the settlement of the colony
may be considered to have taken place, when the first batch of
convicts, of the most desperate and incorrigible character, was
landed at Eagle Farm, near Brisbane, in the belief that there
was but little chance of their returning to the head station in
New South Wales. From this unpromising beginning, rapid
progress in any direction could not be expected. The convicts
wore principally employed in clearing the land, building, and in
making roads and improving the communication inland.
In September, 1825, the Brisbane River was ascended, ex-
amined and described by Major Lockyer, of the 57th Regiment.
Major Lockyer, in his narrative, gives it as his opinion that
“ Moreton Bay is well calculated to become a place of trade when
once settled.”
Captain Miller, of the 40th Regiment, was the first com-
mandant; after him were successively Captain Bishop (1824 to-
-1825); Captain Logan (1825 to 1830), who was murdered by the
blacks (some believe the convicts were implicated) in the neigh-
bourhood of what is now Ipswich, on Nov. 16, 1830; Captain
Clunie (1830 to 1835); Captain Fyans (1835 to 1837); Major Cot-
ton (1837 to 1839); Lieutenant Gravatt(May, 1839 to July, 1839) ;
Lieutenant Gorman (1839 to 1840). Partly from the turbulent
character of the convicts over whom they ruled, and in part
from the almost unlimited power entrusted to the officers in
charge, this period of the history of the settlement is not of the
most satisfactory character, and will not bear dwelling upon. In
1842 this era came to a close, and thenceforward the colony
marched rapidly on its career of progress. After the departure:
of Lieutenant Gorman, Dr. Simpson, the Acting Police Magis-
trate, had the control of affairs. He was succeeded on Nov. 14,
1842, by Captain J. C. Wickham, R.N., who was made Govern-
ment Resident! nl 853, and held that position until the separa-
tion from New South Wales, in 1859. The Rev. John Vincent was
appointed chaplain of the Moreton Bay settlement on September
18, 1828: his residence was the building lately used as the Colonial
Secretary’s office. In 1828 the prisoners’ barracks (late Supreme,
Court) and the military barracks (afterwards known as the Trea-
sury buildings) were erected ; the Observatory, or Windmill, as it
was first called, on Wickham Teirace, was built in the following
year. In March, 1836, the settlement was visited by James Back-
house, who described Brisbane Town as consisting of ‘ ‘ the Houses
of the Commandant and other offices, the barracks for the miltary
and those for the male prisoners, a treadmill, stores, &c.” On
May 4, 1842, the district was proclaimed open to free settlement,
and on Dec. 7 of the same year the first sale of land took place at
Sydney. The first land sale in Brisbane was held on August 9,1843.
In August, 1837, the first steamer, the James Watt, anchored in
Moreton Bay. In 1839 the first direct steamer from England, the
Sophia Jane, ploughed the waters of Queensland. In the same
year the convict settlement was broken up. On January 27,
3


1842, the first steamship, the Shamrock, belonging to the Hunter fie
River Steam Navigation Co., afterwards known as the A. S. N. Cc
Company, arrived. It is reported that the More ton Ray trade Si:
was not then remunerative to the Company, and in a few months th
the steamer was withdrawn. The interior was first explored by ! fit
Mr. Oxley and Sir T. L. Mitchell, Surveyors-General of New Ai
South Wales. In 1827 Allan Cunningham made known the ex- th
tensive district now called the Darling Downs. This and other fit
districts have also been reported upon by Kennedy, Leichhardt, 18
Gregory, Dalrymple, Landsborough, and others, the squatters in lie
many cases being the pioneers of discovery and settlement, In H
1840 the first coaster, a small schooner named the John, began to re
rade between Brisbane and Sydney. In 1842 Governor Gipps wi
visited Moreton Bay. In 1843 the first coal seam was opened at
Redbank. In the same year the settlers had the opportunity of Ni
taking part in the first general election in New South Wales, Sc
Moreton Bay being included in an electoral district, which com- di
prised the" Upper Hunter and Port Macquarie. But as the di
nearest polling place to Brisbane was at Raymond Terrace, it is on
not surprising that the privilege was not very largely availed of. of
It was not until 1851 that Moreton Bay had its own representa- Bi
tive in the New South Wales Parliament; two years later an T 1
additional.member was accorded ; ultimately, in 1855, being ex- an
tended to nine members, representing eight electorates. On se;
June 20, 1840, the Moreton Bail Courier, now known as the G(
Brisbane Courier, was established. In 1840 it was computed that m
the population of the district was 2,257. Of this number 829 pn
resided in Brisbane, and 103 in Ipswich, the remainder being the p a
total population of the colony outside these towns. About this iof
time the port of Moreton Bay was defined, the Custom House Qi
established, a partial survey of the bay was undertaken by Cap- co
tain Wickham at the expense of the “Moreton Bay District Ni
Association,” and the first river steamer, the Experiment, began th
to ply between Brisbane and Ipswich. An attempt was also in
made to found a new colony, to be called “North Australia,” of gr
which Port Curtis was to be the capital, but the effort was a is
failure, and the settlement in a short time was abandoned. The us
first immigrant ship, the Artemisia, arrived in December, 1848 ;
the Fortitude anchored in Moreton Bay on January 20, 1849. al;
In December, 1859, in deference to the repeated petition of the th
leading settlers, the Moreton Bay district, which had hitherto sh
been an appanage of New South Wales, was erected into an inde-
pendent colony, under the name of Queensland, this name 1 C<
having been given to it in honour of the august Lady who has so co
long presided over the interests of the vast British Empire. To di
the late Rev. Dr. Lang the success of the Separation Movement to
is principally due, and for his able and successful efforts he
received the thanks of the Legislative Assembly. Dr. T.ang Se
fixed the 30th parallel as the southern boundary of the colony, of
but his recommendation in this matter was not followed. The N
proclamation of the new colony appeared in the London Gazette w
of June 3, 1859. From the date of separation the colony
advanced by rapid strides, and soon began to take a place among so
the Australian group. The first Governor who took office was M
Sir George Ferguson Bowen, on December 10, 1859, having
arrived in H.M.S. Cordelia. The first Parliament assembled on pi
May 29, 1860, the first Colonial Secretary being Mr. (now Sir) Tc
R. G. Wyndham Herbert, K.C.8., till recently one of the Perma- P(
nent Under Secretaries of State in the Colonial Office. The first
Legislative Chambers were the old convict barracks, in Queen G(
Street, afterwards known as the Supreme Court buildings, the as
site of which is now occupied by business premises.
Mr. Justice Ratcliffe Pring was the first Attorney-General, nc
Mr. Eliott was the first Speaker, and Mr. A. Macalister, th
C.M.G., the first Chairman of Committees.
In 1858 gold was first discovered about thirty miles from Rock- ea
hampton. In 1859 (Oct. 12) Circuit Courts were proclaimed at R.‘
Ipswich, Drayton, and Maryborough. bj
In 1851 the population increased to 8,575. In 185 C it was loi
estimated at 17,082. In December, 1861, it had increased to 29
34,367 ; in the following year to 45,077, and in 1864 the census th
returns gave 74,036 persons. In 1860 the returns of stock were an
23,504 horses, 432,890 horned cattle, 3,166,802 sheep, 7,147 pigs.
In 1864 the exports had increased to £1,247,054, of which wool m;
formed the chief item. In 1866 the shadows of adversity fell bo
upon the young colony, and a season of disaster was experienced lai
t hat is not even yet forgotten. The failure of the local bank, A>
the depression in the pastoral interests, and bankruptcies in all at
quarters, mark this as the black-letter year in the Colony’s th
history. In 1869 the population was enumerated at 109,897. In cr
the same year the revenue from all sources was estimated at pr
£772,851, and the expenditure at £784,356. On the 31st of Di
December, 1873, the population had increased to 146,690, and the Ai
revenue for the year was £1,120,034 13s. Sd., the expenditure of
being £956,335. ' nc
Sir George Bowen was succeeded in the governorship, in
August, 1868, by Major (afterwards Colonel) Blackall, who died of
on January 2, 1871. The system of immigration at the ex- isl
ponse of the colony now began to exert an influence on wi
its fortunes, and the influx of largo bodies of immigrants fol
has done much to develop the resources of the country, ea
The Marquis of Normanby succeeded Colonel Blackall in di
August, 1871 ; he was transferred to New Zealand in 1874; fn
he was followed by the late Mr. (afterwards Sir) W. W. do
Cairns, who was appointed Governor in August, 1874, and Is'
was sworn in on January 23, 1875. He did not stay out en
his full term of office, being transferred to South Aus- on
tralia in the early part of 1877. His successor was Sir Arthur jdi
Kennedy, formerly Governor of Hong Kong, who was sworn in j pn
■on April 10, 1877. and retired from office on May 2, 1883, dying | an
on the voyage home, near Aden, on the 3rd of June following. \
I n the intervals between the departures and arrivals of sq
Governors, the government was ably administered by the late
Colonel Sir Maurice Charles O’Connell. During the absence of
Sir Arthur Kennedy in England (in 1880) his locum tent ns was
the late Sir J. P. Bell, by whom the duties appertaining to the
Governorship were performed to the satisfaction of the colonists.
After the retirement of Sir Arthur Kennedy, Sir Arthur Palmer,
the President of the Legislative Council, became Acting
Governor till the arrival of Sir Anthony Musgrave, in November,
1883. He did not survive his term of office, d}’ing after a few
hours’ illness on October 9th. 1888. He was followed by Sir
Henry Wylie Norman, who was sworn in on May 1, 1889, and
remained Governor of Queensland till November, 1895, when he
was succeeded by Lord Lamington.
During the last few years a movement has been made by
Northern residents to procure the separation of Northern and
Southern Queensland and the erection of the former into a
distinct and independent colony. It is proposed that the
dividing lino shall be a line running west from Cape Palmerston
on the east coast in South latitude 21° 30' to the eastern boundary
of South Australia, separating the waters flowing north in the
Burd#dn, and Gulf of Carpentaria from the waters flowing south.
Tills portion of the Colony has an area of about 249,000 square miles
and a population of upwards of 50,000. The grounds upon which
separation is asked for are—the great distance from the seat of
Government and consequent defective administration of Govern-
ment ; inadequate representation ; unjust appropriation of the
public revenue and loans to the North, while the North has had to
pay its full quota of interest on the loans, and an absolute diversity
of interests between the inhabitants of tropical and temperate
Queensland on the subject of coloured labour. Considerable
correspondence and some parleying has taken place between the
Northern representatives, the Government of Queensland, and
the Imperial authorities. Of late, measures have been introduced
into the Queensland Parliament, dealing to some extent with the
grievances complained of. The proposed name of the new colony
is North Queensland, and this title is now coming into general
use by the residents.
The inhabitants of the mid-central portion of Queensland are
also agitating for separation, principally, it is understood, on
the grounds of inadequate representation and want of proper
share of the public expenditure.
In June, 1894, Lori Ripon, the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, expressed the opinion that, in view of the present
commercial and financial position of Queensland, the moment
did not appear favourable for considering an}’ scheme of terri-
torial partition.
The Constitution Bill introduced into Parliament during the
Session of 1892, but not passed, had for its object the partition
of the Colony into two provinces. The dividing line between
North and South Queensland would be the 21 s of south latitude,
which is a few miles north of Mackay.
The Southern Division would comprise Brisbane and all places
south to the border and north to 21°, which would take in
Mackay, Rockhampton, etc.
The Northern Province would comprise the whole of the
present Colony N. of 31° S. lat., and would include Bowen,
Townsville, Charters Towers, the Gulf country and Cape York
Peninsula.
Each Province would have local legislations and Provincial
Governors and the usual States’ rights, but would be governed
as a whole from the Metropolis (Brisbane) as heretofore.
Boundaries.—The boundaries of Queensland are —on the
north, the Gulf of Carpentaria and Torres Strait; on the east,
the Pacific Ocean ; on the south, the colony of New South Wales
—the division being an imaginary line from Point Danger on the
east, running westward along the Macpherson and Dividing
Ranges and the Dumaresq river to the Macintyre river, thence
by the 29th parallel of S. latitude to the 141st meridian of E.
longitude ; on the west, the 141st meridian of longitude from the
29th to the 26th parallel, and thence the 138th meridian north to
the Gulf of Carpentaria. The northernmost point is Cape York,
and the most southern (on the coast) is Point Danger.
The southern boundary of the colony has been fixed and
marked on the ground in an efficient manner, but the western
boundary is not so clearly defined, there being a atrip of border
land about five or six miles broad, which both colonies (South
Australia and Queensland) claim. So far as can be ascertained
at present, the boundary line lies about five miles to the east of
the position assigned to it on the Map of Queensland, This dis-
crepancy has arisen from the adoption of the longitude of the
principal headlands on the coast from the Admiralty survey.
During 1885 the boundary line between the colony and South
Australia was defined from the 141st meridian on the 26th parallel
of S. latitude to the 138th meridian, and northward to 21° 30',
near to Mount Herbert.
By letters patent, dated October 10, 1878, for the rectification
of the maritime boundary of the Colony, it is decreed that “all
islands included within a line drawn from Sandy Cape north-
ward to the south-eastern limit of Great Barrier Reefs, thence
following the line of the Great Barrier Reefs to their north-
eastern extremity, near 9J° S. lat., thence in a north-westerly
direction, embracing East, Anchor, and Bramble Cays, thence
from Bramble Cay in a line IV. by S. (south, seventy-nine
degrees west, true), embracing Warrior Reef, Saibai. and Tuan
Islands, thence diverging in a north-westerly direction, so as to
embrace the group known as the Talbot Islands, thence to and
embracing the Deliverance Islands, and onwards in a W. by S.
direction (true to 138’ B. long.), should be annexed to and form
part of the colony of Queensland.” The law authorizing this
annexation came into operation on August 1, 1879.
Dimensions. —The Colony includes an area of 668,497
square miles (668,224 square miles as re-calculated by the
4
QUEENSLAND.


Surveyor-General), of which 2,2-10 square miles are comprised in
islands : equivalent to nearly four times the area of France, and
nearly twelve times the area of England and Wales.
Geographical Features. —Bays and Gulfs. —Among the
bays and gulfs that indent the eastern coast line of Queensland are
Moreton Bay, Laguna Bay, Wide Bay, Hervey Bay, Port Curtis,
Keppel Bay, Port Bowen, Shoalwater Bay, Broadsound, Repulse
Bay, Edgecumbe Bay, Port Denison, Abbott Bay, Upstart Bay,
Bowling Green Bay, Cleveland Bay, Halifax Bay, Rockingham
Bay, Mourilyan Harbour, Trinity Bay, Bathurst Bay, Princess
Charlotte Bay, Lloyd Bay, Weymouth Bay, Temple Bay, Shel-
burne Bay, Hannibal Bay and Newcastle Bay ; on the western
side are Bynoe, Morning and Disaster Inlets, and the Gulf of
Carpentaria. At the mouth of the Batavia and Ducie Rivers is
a very fine harbour, called Port Musgrave. It is reported to
be, excepting Port Curtis, the finest natural harbour on the
Queensland coast.
Harbours. —The colony possesses numerous harbours, of which
Moreton Bay is the principal. It is formed by Bribie, Moreton,
and Stradbroke Islands and the main land. Anchorage may be
found in almost any part of this bay, under shelter of the
numerous shoals. It is about 40 miles long, from north to south,
by 17 miles wide, and receives the waters of six navigable rivers,
viz., the Nerang, the Pimpama, the Logan, the Brisbane, the
Pine, and the Caboolture. Most of these rivers have, however, a
Divisions. —Queensland is divided into twelve large
districts, viz., Moreton (comprising East and West Moreton),
Darling Downs, Burnett, Port Curtis, Maranoa, Leichhardt,
Kennedy, Mitchell, Warrkoo, Gregory, Burke, and Cook.
The Moreton district occupies the extreme south-eastern
corner of the Colony. It is bounded on the south by the colony
of New South Wales, and stretches inland to the Dividing Range.
In it are included the city of Brisbane—the metropolis of the
colony and the seat of government and also the town of
Ipswich. The rivers watering it are the Brisbane, Bremer, Logan,
and their branches, which have their sources in the mountain
ranges. The Southern and Western Railway bisects the district.
Coal is found and worked in several places along the banks of
the Bremer ; gold exists in the Enoggera ranges, a few miles from
Brisbane. Sugar-cane has been successfully cultivated in the
southern portion : in West Moreton a very large area is under
cultivation, principally for maize ; vegetables and fruit, too, are
largely grown. Its area is 8,832 square miles, or 5,652,480 acres.
Formation : Recent volcanic and carboniferous.
The old district of East Moreton is now divided into the two-
electorates of Nundah and Moreton, the southern boundary
being Kedron Brook, while the south Pine river separates
Moreton from Nundah. Taylor’s Range and Moreton Bay being
the western and eastern boundaries respectively. It comprises
a large area of land well suited for farming, dairying, market
L Xli <Ul.l Ul« U/aUUUIIUXO. fHUOO tiiuou A A V w o Alt* . AAV „ v , V,* , ~
bar en:rance. Besides Moreton Bay there are Hervey Bay, gardening and fruit culture. . . , . -
lUprvnf.l Tim- Pm-t, Curtis Port, Bowen. Port Denison. Rocking i The Darling Downs district includes an extensive tract of
Keppel Bay, Port Curtis, Port Bowen, Port Denison, Rocking-
ham Bay, Port Albany (near Cape York), Thursday Island, and
several other smaller harbours on the eastern seaboard. The
principal harbour at the head of the Gulf of Carpentaria is at
Investigator Roads.
Straits. —The South passage between Moreton and Stradbroke
Islands, the North passage between Moreton Island and Bribie
Island, Whitsunday Passage between Whitsunday Island and
the mainland, Capricorn Channel, Endeavour Strait, at the ex-
treme north between Prince of Wales Island and the mainland,
Torres Strait, between Cape York and New Guinea, and Rocking-
ham Channel.
Capes. —The principal headlands on the Queensland coast are
Point Danger, Point Look-out, Amity Point, Capo Moreton,
Point Skirmish on Bribie Island, Sandy Cape, Double Island
downs on the summit of the Dividing Range, to the west of the
Moreton district. It was discovered in 1827 by Allan Cunning-
ham, the botanist, and named by him after Sir Ralph Darling,
the then Governor. It is one of the richest pastoral districts in
the Colony, and also comprises a large extent of fine agricultural
land, much of which has recently been repurchased by the
Government and disposed of to small farmers. Wheat,
maize, barley, oats, arrowroot, potatoes, and all kinds of
English vegetables and fruits are cultivated with success. Good
coal is also reported to exist over several parts of the Downs.
The principal towns are Toowoomba, Drayton, Warwick, Dalby,
Stanthorpe, Condamine, Leybum, and Goondiwindi. The rivers
flowing through it are the Condamine, Severn, Weir, and Moonie.
voint Hanger, ionii hook-out, Amity iomt, nape .......... -n. ...-.. ->’. - - ~
Point Skirmish on Bribie Island, Sandy Cape, Double Island The Western Railway traverses the northern portion of the di«-
Point, Capes Capricorn, Manifold, Townsend, Palmerston, Up- trict, and the Southern line the extreme eastern portion. It
start Bowling Green, Cleveland, Grafton, Tribulation, Bedford, has an area of 6,067 square miles, or 3,882,880 acres in the
Flattery, Melville, Sidmouth, Direction, Grenville, Orford Ness, settled districts and 18,995 square miles or 12,156,800 acres in
York, Duyfhen, and Bold Point; the two last-named project tbe unsettled districts. Formation . The northern, eastern,
into the Gulf of Carpentaria. and southern portions carboniferous, the remainder principally
Rivers. —The principal rivers are the Burnett (with its tribu- : eohan sandstone. _..
taries, the Auburn, Boyne, and Barambah); the Pioneer, the The Burnett and Wide Bay district lies between the Moreton
Fitzroy (formed by the junction of the Mackenzie and Dawson and Port Curtis districts, the Pacific Ocean bounding the "Pole
rivers, with their subsidiary creeks), and the Burdekin, flowing lof the eastern portion; it is„ principally occupied for jastoral
into the Pacific ; the Flinders (one of the longest in the colony purposes. (In this division is also mchided Fraser s Islmul--
but with a small mouth), the Albert, Gregory, Leichhardt, Ihe soil and climate are more suitable to the gro\N th of tropical
Nicholson, Mitchell, Gilbert, Norman, Staaten, Coen, Batavia, productions, such as sugar, cotton, arrowroot, ginger, &c. , sugar
Ducie, and the Richardson, emptying themselves into the Gulf of is largely grown on the river banks. Maiy Wugh situated on
Carpentaria; the Kennedy, having as affluents the Laura, Nor- the river Mary, and Bundaberg on the Burnett, are the ports,
manby, Coleman, and King, flowing into Princess Charlotte Gympie, Mount Perry, Gayndah, Nanango and Elds void are
Bay ; the Herbert, and the Diamentina or Mueller river, flowing other townships. The Gympie gold mines have yielded large
inland. The Victoria, or Barcoo, river flows towards Cooper’s quantities of the precious metal, and are likely to be worked to-
Creek, the Condamine or Balonne towards the Darling, the advantage for many years to come. A aluable discoveries have
Mary empties itself into Hcrvey’s Bay, the Calliope flows into been made of other ores, also of coal, which is now worked at
2, y Y P. A . , ,4 , 2’, id. „ TI.O Union Rnrnutt Rnmim Marv. and verv manv
Port Curtis, the Brisbane, which receives the water of the
Bremer and other streams, rises in the Burnett Range, and falls
into Moreton Bay; other Rivers debouching into this bay are the
Albert, an affluent of the Logan, Nerang, Pimpama, Logan, Pine,
and Caboolture. The Warrego rises in Auckland's Table Lands,
and flows SW., eventually falling into the Darling. There are
numerous streams of lesser magnitude in various parts of the
colony, many of those in the west being lost in the interior of
the continent.
Islands. —The waters of northern Queensland are studded with
hundreds of islands, many of great beauty and, it is believed, |
fertility. The natural breakwater of the Great Barrier Reef
smoothes the sea, and makes sea-travelling here a pleasure.
The largest of the islands belonging to the colony are Stradbroke
(about 33 miles long by 6 miles broad), Moreton (20 miles in ex-
treme length by an extreme breadth of 5 miles), Bribie, Fraser
or Great Sandy Island, Curtis, Whitsunday, Palm, Hinchinbrook
and Lizard, on the eastern side ; Prince of Wales, Banks, Mul-
grave, Wednesday, Thursday and Horn Islands off the northern
coast; and Wellesley Islands (Momington, Bentinck and Sweers)
in the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Mountains.—A range of mountains, known generally as the
Coast Range, extends from York Peninsula in the north to
within a few miles of the capital, running nearly parallel with the
seaboard at an average distance of 50 miles from it. It com-
prises the Cook, Kirchner, Razorback, Wyatt, Pioneer, Connor,
Dawes, Glasshouse and other Ranges. The highest peak is
Mount Dalrymple, 4,200 feet. The Bellenden Ker Range is in
the north to the south of Cairns; its highest points tower up
5,400 feet. The Main Range runs inland of the Coast Range.
The Dividing Range extends from the head of the Dumaresq
river to the sea coast at Point Danger, forming the dividing line
between the colonies of New South Wales and Queensland ; the
western portion is known as Macpherson’s Range. There are
numerous other lines of hills of less altitude. The heights of
some of the tallest mountains are :—Bellenden-Ker Range,
Wooroonooran, 5,400 feet; Chooreochillum, 5,200 feet; and
Mount Sophia, 4,200 feet. Mount Dalrymple, 4,200 feet. Mount
Harold, 4,150 feet; and Mount Massie, 4,100 feet. Macpherson ,
Range : Mount Lindesay, 4,064 feet. Mount Elliot, 4,060 feet.
The average height of the mountain ranges of Queensland has
been estimated at about 2,000 feet.
been made of other ores, also of coal, which is now worked at
Burrum. The Kolan, Burnett, Burrum, Mary, and very many
subsidiary streams water the district, which in its western and
south-western portions is of a mountainous nature. The North
Coast Line of Railway from the metropolis to Gympie, Mary-
borough and Bundaberg traverses the central portion of the dis-
trict. Lines from Bundaberg (seaport) to Mount Perry (copper-
field) to the rich sugar lands of the Isis, and the coal deposits at
Burrum are now open. Area 8,243 square miles, or 5,275,520
acres. Fraser’s island has an area of 520 square miles, or 332,800
acres. Formation : Principally carboniferous.
Port Curtis district (named by Flinders after Admiral Sir
Roger Curtis) lies to the northward of the Burnett district, from
which it is separated by the Dawes’ Range, and stretches west-
ward into the interior, and northward to Cape Palmerston, the
sea being its eastern boundary. Its area is 14,103 square miles,
or 9,025,920 acres. The rivers Dawson, Fitzroy, Boyne, and
Calliope, with their numerous tributaries, water this tract of
country, and it is intersected by the Central Railway. Impor-
tant gold-fields have been discovered on the Calliope river, the
Boyne, the Fitzroy, Mount Morgan, and other places. There are
also copper mines and quarries of marble. The chief towns are
Rockhampton, situated on the Fitzroy river, Mount Morgan, Glad-
stone, St. Lawrence, and Yaamba. The Connors, Broadsound and
Boomer ranges of mountains separate Port Curtis from the
Leichhardt district on the north-east. The highest Peaks in the
Connors’ Range arc 3,000 feet above the sea level. Formation :
Cambrian and Silurian, with some recent volcanic rocks, the
western border being granite, syenite and diorite.
The Leichhardt is a large tract of pastoral country, possessing
in favourable seasons, a good supply of water and grass, lying to
the SW., \V. and NW. of the Port Curtis district, and having a
breadth’of five degrees of latitude. The principal townships are
Banana, Emerald, Nebo, Clermont, Coppertield,Cometville,Spring-
sure and Taroom. The Central Railway traverses this district.
The chief rivers are the Dawson, Comet, Nogoa, and the Isaac, all
of which are tributaries of the Fitzroy. The breadth of country
watered by these rivers is about 350 miles. It is a fine
pastoral district, and much of it well adapted for agriculture.
It has also immense mineral wealth, and much copper and gold
have been produced with a limited mining population. It has
also marble and coal measures, but these have not been worked.
Dr. Leichhardt, in his famous journey of exploration in 1844,
5
QUEENSLAND.


from Brisbane to Port Essington, traversed a portion of it, going
from south to north. The watershed commences from the range
dividing the Condamine from the Dawson, and terminates at
the range dividing the Isaac from the Sutter. The area is 48,323
square miles or 30,926,720 acres. Formation : principally car-
boniferous, with some eolian sandstone.
The Maranoa district is a purely pastoral district to the west-
ward of the Darling Downs, and south of the Leichhardt district,
extending to the 29° of latitude, the southern boundary of the
colony. It is principally table-land and downs. Roma, Surat,
Mitchell, and St. George are the leading towns. The Maranoa,
Culgoa, Balonne, and Moonie rivers traverse this district, besides
several creeks. The Western Railway runs through the district
from its East to its West boundaries. Within the last few
years considerable areas of ground around Roma have been
placed under wheat, the cultivation of which promises to be a
great success The district seems also to be well suited for fruit-
growing, its grapes being the finest produced in the Colony.
The area is 38,892 square miles, or 24,890,880 acres. Formation :
the eastern portion of eolian sandstone, the western of creta-
ceous slates.
The Warrego district is situated to the westward of the
Maranoa district, and south of the Mitchell district, its southern
boundary being the colony of New South Wales. The Paroo,
Bulloo, Ward, and Warrego rivers flow through it. It is almost
entirely of a pastoral character. Charlevdle, Cunnamulla, Eulo,
and Thargomindah are the townships. The Western railway
intersects the district as far as Cunnamulla, which is 604 miles
west of the metropolis. Boring for artesian water has been
carried on in this and tbe surrounding districts with marked
success, the carrying capacity of runs not only being greatly
increased thereby, but adapting the district in time for settle-
ment. One of the earliest and deepest bores was put down at
Charleville, where, at a depth of 1,571 feet, the splendid yield of
three million gallons per diem was obtained. There are many
other bores in the district, giving even a greater supply than the
Charleville one. The area is 59,341 square miles, or 37,972,240
acres. Formation : almost entirely a vast bed of cretaceous
slates, the Grey and Cheviot ranges to the westward being of
Cambrian and Silurian rocks.
The Kennedy district, of which the chief ports are Bowen
and Townsville, comprises North and South Kennedy, and is
situated to the north of the Leichhardt district, occupying the
middle coastal portion of the colony. Other towns are Mackay,
Cardwell, Charters Towers, Millchester, and Ravenswood. It is
named after Mr. Kennedy, the explorer, who was killed by the
Aborigines on York Peninsula. Leichhardt first traversed this
district in 1844, on his way from Moreton Bay to Port Essington.
In 1856 Mr. A. C. Gregory passed through it, and in 1859 Mr. G. E.
Dalrymple explored a considerable portion of it. It is a well-
watered district, the river Burdekin and its tributaries running
through it, and is adapted to the growth of sugar, maize, and
cotton, as well as to the pasturage of sheep and cattle. The
Mackay district is specially noted as being one of the largest
sugar-producing districts in the colony, the cane being prin-
priucipally grown on rich alluvial flats, on the south side of the
Pioneer river. The Charters Towers goldfield, too, is of note,
being one of the richest auriferous districts in Queensland. The
area of the Kennedy district is 11,289 square miles, or 7,224,960
acres in the Settled Districts and 51,932 square miles, or 33,236,480
acres in the Unsettled Districts. Formation : The portions en-
vironing Bowling Green Bay are tertiary; in the neighbourhood
of Bowen the carboniferous prevails ; farther south are recent
volcanic rocks, with a considerable area of eolian sandstone.
To the westward, recent volcanic rocks cover a wide superficies,
while an immense strip of Cambrian and Silurian rocks almost
intersects the district.
Burke district is on the north-west of the Mitchell district,
west of the Kennedy, and south and South-west of the Cook
district; it extends to and encircles the southern portion of the
Gulf of Carpentaria ; numerous rivers, among which are the
Norman, Flinders, Bynoe, Albert, Cloncurry, Leichhardt, and
Nicholson, all emptying themselves into the Gulf, water the
district. The telegraph passes through to the principal town,
Normanton. Such portions as are utilized are in the hands
of squatters for grazing purposes. Gold and copper mining
has been carried on at the Cloncurry field ; the copper deposits
in this locality are very rich, and although the industry has
been for some years suspended, there are evident signs of
a revival ; at Croydon one of the most remunerative
gold-fields in Queensland has been found. Its area is 8,192
square miles, or 5,242,880 acres in the Settled Districts and 6,656
square miles or 4,259,840 acres in the Unsettled Districts. For-
mation : principally cretaceous, an immense island of Cam-
brian and Silurian rocks occurring in the Cloncurry district,
while the Great Dividing Range is of recent volcanic origin.
The following notes on the Burke district were furnished by
the late Mr. William Landsborough, who explored and rode over
the greater part of it during the years 1861 to 1870 :
“ The seaboard of the Gulf of Carpentaria is a plain, watered
by numerous rivers. This plain extends, with hardly a break
anywhere, to the watershed dividing the northern from the
southern country, which to the southward is nearly 400 miles
distant from the Gulf shore. The range has a considerable
elevation, but the ascent is so gradual that the traveller may
reach the plains of the Diamentina, which are on the southern
slope, without noticing the line of watershed Nowhere can
indigenous pasturage be found to excel that of this vast plain.
The trees and grass are similar to those of a great deal of the
Australian sparsely wooded country. In the driest seasons the
O’Shaughnessy, Gregory, and Leichhardt are running streams.
'The rivers have their sources in springs, a few miles from the
I watershed of the northern and southern country. On the banks
of these rivers are beautiful weeping tea and other trees. In the
| Leichhardt and its branches are deep waterholes. In the Gre-
gory, which has by far the greatest volume of running water,
the banks are so low that the river could be easily turned aside
on to the plains for the purpose of irrigation. The Gregory flows
; through 100 miles of plain country, in which there are many
branches, by means of which the stream could be spread over a
great extent of country ; the two largest of these branches flow —
one into the Nicholson, the other into the Albert. The
O’Shaughnessy is so rich in lime that every twig that happens
to be dipped for any time in it becomes petrified. The ranges
of the Burke district have not been much tested for minerals,
but they are known to have gold, and a considerable quantity
has been procured by the miners of the Cloncurry. Largo blocks
of virgin copper have been found on the banks of the Leich-
hardt, and competent geologists affirm that the copper mines of
the Cloncurry are among the richest in the world.”
A survey for a railway from Hughenden to Normanton (via
Croydon), with a branch to Cloncurry, has been made, and the
plans for some portion approved. The line is now made and
opened to Croydon from Normanton. As the ground is so
uniformly level, a surface formation throughout, with Phillips’
iron sleepers has been adopted.
The Gulf coast between Kimberley and the Albert consists of
very low-lying land (principally fringed by mangroves from 10
to 30 feet high), which extend several miles inland, gradually
giving place to open plains one to three feet above high-water
mark, with patches of coarse herbage growing upon them, and
intersected in all directions by belts of mangrove on small salt-
water creeks, the soil being sea-mud completely pulverised.
“ Salt-pan ” is the local definition of this class of country.
The Mitchell district lies to the westward of the South Ken-
nedy district, and is nearly central. It is watered by the Barcoo
and Thompson rivers, and numerous branches ; it is entirely pas-
toral, and of comparatively recent occupation. Tambo, Aramac,
Longreach, Barcaldine, Blackall, Muttaburra, and Isisford are
the principal centres of population. The Central Line penetrates
it as far as Longreach, 67 miles beyond Barcaldine. The area is
37,219 square miles, or 23,820,160 acres. Formation : Principally
immense beds of cretaceous slates about the centre, there being
a tract of eolian sandstone, which is also found to the southward
of Mount Grey.
The Gregory district comprises North Gregory and South
Gregory. It is purely pastoral, and less known than any of
the other districts. Opals, are found all over the district,
and of late trade in them has been somewhat extensive.
The chief opal centre is Opalton, between Longreach and
Winton. Gems are recovered in considerable quantities
on the lands adjoining Coopers Creek ift the extreme
West of the Colony. This extensive district lies between
the Mitchell, Burke” and Warrego districts, and the South
Australian boundary. The Diamentina, Herbert, Wilson,
and Mulligan rivers, and Sylvester, Eyre, King’s, Farrar’s,
Cooper’s, and other creeks traverse it. Cooper’s Creek will
ever have a tragic interest, from the fact that the first
i crossers of the continent, tsurke and Wills, perished in the
vicinity. The Grey and Cheviot ranges form its south-eastern
j boundaries; other ranges in the south of the district are the
Coleman, Cana way, and Macgregor. Formation: to the south-
westward, abutting on the South Australian frontier, eolian
sandstone ; the remainder principally cretaceous slates, with
here and there patches of eolian sandstone.
The settlement of the Burke, Mitchell, and Gregory districts
was principally due to the explorations of Mr. Landsborough.
Prior to 1862 the upper and the best portions of the Thompson
were unknown, and the same may be said of the Gregory, the
Herbert, and the Flinders, which were traced by him, and, in
consequence of his glowing reports of the country watered by
these rivers, were soon stocked.
Cook district is at the extreme north of the colony, and covers
an area of 32,025 square miles, or 20,496,000 acres. This is ex-
clusive of North Cook, which has an area of 3,200 square miles.
It is an immense wedge or conical shaped tract of land ; the
Pacific Ocean bounding it on the east, and the Gulf of Carpen-
taria on the west. The Mitchell, Lynd, Hodgkinson, Nor-
manby, Palmer, Laura, Coen, Batavia, Pascoe, Jardine, Endea-
vour, Kennedy, Gilbert, and other rivers water some por-
tions of it. Somerset, Cairns, Maytown, Herberton, Watson-
ville, Thomborough, Port Douglas, and Cooktown are the town-
ships, the last-named being the most northern town in the Aus-
tralian continent, and Somerset the most northern port. The
opening up of the Palmer river diggings caused this district to
become much better known, attracting a large immigration of
the mining population from all the colonies. The discovery by
Mulligan and Warner of a rich reefing district, now called the
Hodgkinson diggings, having as centres Kingsborough, North-
cote, and Thomborough, has also led to a considerable settlement
of population. The Palmer River gold-fields lie about the
central part of the district, in about 16° 30’ 8. lat. The Palmer
river is a running, winding stream of varying depth, depending
much on the season of the year. It is supposed by some to be
either the head waters of the Mitchell, or an important tribu-
tary. The Hodgkinson gold-field lies to the south of the Palmer,
at a distance of about 60 miles from the sea-coast. Its ports are
Cairns and Port Douglas. The principal town is Thomborough.
The Wild River, or Herberton tin field, lies about 85 miles SW.
of Port Douglas. It is believed to be one of the richest tin
mining localities in the world. The wealth of the district con-
sists of gold ; tin in considerable quantity, and silver ; and there
are also coal measures at Cape Bedford, and around Cooktown.
The famous Chillagoe district, so rich in silver and copper, is
6
QUEENSLAND.


located in the vicinity of the Walsh. Very largo areas have
been taken up, particularly by the Chillagoe proprietary, which
has received Parliamentary sanction to construct a. railway to
the Chillagoe fields connecting with the State system at Mareoba.
There is, too, some of the very best land on the rivers Mitchell,
Macleod, Walsh, Hodgkinson, Kennedy, Laura, and Normanby,
and superior sugar-growing country has been found on the
banks of some of the rivers flowing into the Gulf of Carpen-
taria. Large quantities of cedar are yearly cut and exported
from the scrubs of the Daintree and Mossman Rivers. Large
areas of land have been taken up for the cultivation of the
sugar cane. Rice is also being cultivated. T}ie principal
ranges are the Kirchner, Mitchell, and the Thompson. A rail-
way now starts from Cooktown westward to Laura, 67 miles ;
the Cairns line is now completed and open to Mareeba (47 miles).
The telegraph wire also traverses it.
Geology. —The Geological character is varied ; on the Western
Coast line there is a fringe of tertiary allu vial; the central portion
is almost entirely eolian sandstone. Towards the Eastern coast
are alternate strips of Cambrian and Silurian rocks, and granite,
syenite, and diorite. To the southward of Princess Charlotte
Bay, the tertiary alluvial is found. To the south-east are recent
volcanic rocks, eolian sandstone, and patches of Silurian, granite,
and syenite.
Mr. J ack, who has explored considerable portions of the district,
partly with reference to the existence of coal, and to report on
its geology, considers that the geological structure of the Cape
York peninsula is exceedingly simple. The backbone or dividing
ridge, which lies close to the eastern seaboard, consists almost
entirely of granite derived from the metamorphism of slates
and greywackes (the equivalents of the auriferous rocks of the
Palmer River). This granitic backbone rises into lofty moun-
tains in the Mcllwraith, Macrossan, Janet, and Carron ranges.
The ranges are generally flanked by little altered rocks. This
high ground has formed the shore of the vast sheet of water in
which the “ Desert Sandstone ” was deposited.
It is estimated that one-sixth of the entire area of the
colony is granite; the coast ranges from Broad Sound to the apex
of the York Peninsula being of this formation. The cainozoic
formation, consisting of conglomerates and desert sandstone,
occupies about one-fourth of the area, comprising the central
portion extending from the N. S. Wales border northward to
the Western shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria. In the neigh-
bourhood of Brisbane, metamorphic rocks are found. Primary
rocks prevail over an immense area, the carboniferous formation
extending from Brisbane in various breadths to the Port Deni-
son district, being continued with interruptions to the 21st
parallel. The Devonian formation embraces an area roundly
estimated at about 40,000 square miles. Volcanic rocks are esti-
mated to cover about 30,000 square miles. The greater part of
the Western division of the colony, about one-third of the entire
area, is occupied by vast cretaceous beds. According to Mr.
Daintree, “all the great plains westward of the main coast
range consist of subaerially decomposed oolitic and cretaceous
shales, limestones, and sandstones.” The Great Barrier Reef,
which stretches for a distance of 1,200 miles from Port Denison
to Torres Strait, is one of the remarkable features of the Queens-
land formation. It doubtless, at a remote period of time, formed
the coast line of the continent at this part. This huge natural
breakwater is of coral formation.
Municipalities.—On December 31, 1897, thirty muni-
cipalities and six shires were in existence, with an esti-
mated area of 431-|-|. square miles, 198,006 population, 41,634
dwellings, and 1,462£ miles of roads and streets. The estimated |
value of ratable property in these municipalities and shires was :
£14,399,003, the amount of rates levied being £125,233 os. lid.
The total receipts in 1897 were £245,086 17s. lid.; the total
expenditure was £223,233 Bs. Bd. The Endowments from the
Government funds in 1897 were £30,767 Bs. Bd. There are
upwards of 200 small towns or townships.
Divisional Boards. —During the Session of 1879 an Act j
was passed to provide for Local Government outside the boun-
daries of municipalities. This Act, which is known by its short
title of the “ Divisional Boards Act of 1879,” enables the in-
habitants of districts not included in municipalities, to attend to
their own local requirements, as regards highways and other
public works. The colony has been portioned out into divisions,
each governed by a board of not more than nine nor less than
three members, who are elected by the ratepayers. The rates
raised locally are subsidized from the Government funds.
During the session of 1897 a Bill was before the Legislature
which would modify the Act of 1879. On Jan. 1, 1898, there
were 117 Divisional Boards in operation. During 1897 the En-
dowment from Government was £32,218 16s. 2d.; loans, grants,
rates and other sources of income bringing up the re-
venue to £179,171 Bs. 4d. The expenditure on public works was
£118,553 6s. lOd. Payments in redemption of loans from Govern-
ment, with the interest, salaries, office and other expenses
made up a total expenditure of £175,748 14s. 7d. The capital
value of ratable property was £26,610,736, and the total amount
of assessment payable £109,401 7s. Id.
Financial Districts. —A Bill was introduced into the
Queensland Parliament on the Ist of November, 1888, to make
provision for the division of the Colony into Financial Districts,
and the dealing with Revenue and Expenditure within the
Districts.
The following are the boundaries of the several Districts as
given in the Bill, together with the area and population of each,
according to the Census returns of 1891.
1. Southern District commences at Point Danger, and is [
bounded on the South by the Southern boundary of the Colony ;
on the West by the Western boundary of the Colony to a point j
due West of the confluence of the Thompson and Barcoo Rivers ;
on the North by a line from that point to the confluence of these
Rivers, thence by the Cheviot, Warrego, Great Dividing, Carnar-
von, and Rigge’s Ranges to the Dawson River ; thence by that
river Southward to its junction with Cracow Creek ; thence by
southern watershed of Ross and Cracow Creeks and the ranges
forming the northern and western watersheds of Rawbelle River
and tributaries, and by Dawes Range to mouth of the Kolan
River ; thence by a line to Sandy Cape, and thence by the
eastern boundary of the Colony to Point Danger.
This comprises the old Districts of East and West Moreton,
Darling Downs, Maranoa, Warrego, South Gregory, Wide Bay,
and Burnett.
Its area is 209,278 j- square miles, and population by census of
j 1891, 268,784—144,495 males, 124,289 females. On Dec. 31, 1896,
'it was estimated to be 322,675. Revenue in 1896-97,
£7,724,712 13s. 2d ; expenditure, £1,566,900 7s. 2d.
2. Central District, the southern boundary, commences at the
! mouth of the Kolan River, and is the same as the north boun-
j dary of the Southern District; thence on the west by the west
boundary of the Colony ; northwards to the twenty-first parallel
of latitude; thence on the north by that parallel to the Selwyn
j Range ; thence by that range, Kirby’s Range and continuation
| ranges easterly again to the twenty-first parallel, by which it
continues to the Great Dividing Range, and along that to the
southern watershed of the Cape River ; thence to the confluence
of Belyando and Suttor Rivers ; thence by the Suttor to its head
in Leichhardt Range, by which and the watershed of Funnel
Creek and tributaries it continues to Cape Palmerston; thence
by east boundary of the Colony to Sandy Cape and west to the
Kolan.
i This comprises the old Districts of Port Curtis, Leichhardt,
South Kennedy, Mitchell, and North Gregory.
| Its area is 208,9891 square miles, and the population by census
of 1891, 46,857—28,423 males, 18,434 females. Op Dec. 31, 1896,
the estimated population was 56,127. Revenue in 1896-97,
| £594,060 14s. Bd. ; expenditure, £457,932 11s. 2d.
! 3. Northern District is bounded on the south by the northern
j boundary of the Central District; thence on the west by the
continuation northwards of the western boundary of the Colony
and thence by the northern and eastern boundaries of the Colony
I to a point east of Cape Palmerston.
j This comprises the old Districts of Cook, Burke, and North
Kennedy.
The area is 250,237*- square miles, and population by census
of 1891, 78,077—55,414 males, 30,180 females. On Dec. 31, 1894,
the estimated population was 93,377. Revenue in 1896-97,
) £680,699 9s. lid. ; expenditure, £599,255 13s. 6d.
| The Bill did not pass, but the Divisions are now generally, as
I well as officially, recognised.
Climate.—The climate resembles in some respects that of
Madeira, and there is an absence of the hot winds from which
the other Australian colonies frequently suffer; but with the
exception of the large tablelands, which enjoy a more temperate
l climate, the weather is very warm. The temperature is more
constant than in many other regions within the same isothermal
( lines. This equalization is due partly to the sea breeze temper-
I ing the heat of summer, and partly to the copious rains which
fall during the hottest months of the year. During a large pro-
portion of the year, the weather is fine, the sky cloudless, the
atmosphere dry, elastic, and exhilarating. The summer months,
December, January, and February, are hot, and towards the
end of February, when the rainy season begins to set in, the
weather is oppressive. The winter season, when dry (as it
generally is), is very agreeable. The mornings and evenings are
cool. During the day the air is warm and balmy, the sky
brilliantly blue, and the atmosphere singularly transparent.
Practically the divisions of the year, so far as heat and cold are
concerned, are the opposite of the seasons in Great Britain.
The colony is free from endemic diseases, and epidemics are of
rare occurrence. The diseases incidental to childhood are usually
very mild in their character and short in their duration. The
climate is described as everywhere favourable to the European
constitution; and in the incipient stage of consumption it
usually affords great relief. The rate of mortality will compare
favourably with other parts of the world; including Poly-
nesians, the death-rate in 1896 was 12T0 per 1,000. At the
time of the census taking, only 3,900 persons were returned
as suffering from sickness or accident. This is at the rate
of 9-91 in every 1,000 perons. Although the latitude of the
southern boundary of the colony is not higher than 29° 8., the
mean temperature is low, as compared with many places more
distant from the equator. In the more northern parts, espe-
cially on the low lands, the heat of the tropical sun is too great
to be comfortable to English constitutions, especially in the case
of newly-arrived immigrants. The mean reading of the baro-
meter at Brisbane is about 30-02°; and the mean shade tempera-
ture during the past eleven years was 67 T. In Brisbane
during 1897 the mean shade temperature was 69'6°. The mean
reading of barometer (corrected and reduced to 32 I'ah. and
mean sea level) during 1897 was 30-059. The total rainfall for
the year 1897 was 42-533 inches on 115 days. The prevailing
winds were southerly. The mean rainfall during the last thirty-
eight years has been about 50 "84 inches.
In connection with the weather reports a chief weather bureau
is in operation in Brisbane under the direction of Mr. Clement
Wragge, the Government Meteorologist. There are now upwards
of 20 first order observatories, 60 second order, and 80 third
order—in all there are 250 standard rain gauges—in North
Queensland, and 370 in South Queensland, and others are being
added. Daily forecasts are published of the weather of the
almost | Creek
point | added.
7
QUEENSLAND.


Colony, and also for Australasia, and as a rule these are found to
be very reliable, being verified to the extent of 80 to 85 per cent.
It may be said that there are two well-defined seasons ot
growth in the colony, each with its Spring, Summer, Autumn, and
Winter, and each maturing its own class of crop. The cereals
and British vegetables are sown, come to maturity, and are
harvested between the end of August and the Ist of March.
Native pastures, foliage plants and indigenous vegetation
generally start into spring growth about the end of August,
mature during January or February, and languish or become
dormant during the winter months. Those double seasons are
particularly well defined in the elevated districts of Queensland.
Character of Hand and Products. —The country as
regards the coastal districts is fairly watered, being intersected
by numerous streams and rivers. Several of the rivers are broad,
and navigable for many miles inland. The banks are very fertile
having long stretches of scrub-bearing lands, that, when cleared
and cultivated, grow the sugar-cane and other crops in abund-
ance. The soil and climate are suited for the production of a
large variety of articles of general commercial value, such as
wheat, barley, oats, maize (Indian corn), tobacco, coffee, rice,
potatoes, arrowroot, sugar, and cotton. All kinds of semi-
tropical and English fruits and vegetables are abundantly
grown. Among the former may be mentioned the banana,
pineapple, peach, loquat, guava, mango, passion fruit, fig,
melon, Cape gooseberry, orange, citron, lemon, mulberry, sweet
potato, and yam The land lying westward of the coast range
consists principally of elevated plateaux of plain land, sparsely
timbered, but well grassed.
The Pacific, or east coast portion, occupying nearly the whole
of the eastern seaboard of the colony, has a great variety of
soil and climate. Between sea and range there is some good
agricultural land; westward of the range is elevated tableland,
principally wide plains, well grassed and fairly watered. The
first settlement of the colony was in the neighbourhood of
Moreton Bay, and the course of settlement rapidly extended
itself thence. This portion of the colony offers advantages for
agriculture and pastoral pursuits, and also for mining. In the
district are raised European as well as tropical products.
Of late years the character of the country inland has been wonder-
fully changed through deep borings having revealed almost un-
limited supplies of subterranean waters. Hundreds of bores
have been sunk by the Water Supply Department and private
enterprise, and with few exceptions have resulted in the find-
ing of water. In fact, there is every reason to believe that the
whole of the Western district will in time to come have a fair
supply of water derived from underground streams or reser-
voirs. In 1897 it was estimated that there were 541 bores of all
classes in the Western Interior, aggregating 586,374 feet, equal
to 111-02 miles. The total flow of water is now estimated at
about 140 millions of gallons per day.
Indigrenous Vegetable Productions. —Of the indige-
nous timbers the most useful are the tollo wing The “Red
Cedar ” {Cedrela Toona, Roxb.) ; this timber, which is largely used
in cabinetwork, has also the reputation of being very durable, and
not subject to be attacked by the white-ant; the tree grows to
a large size, and was at one time plentiful in many of the
creek-side scrubs, but has been cleared out from most places of
easy access. The supply is still abundant, but has to be brought
from the northern scrubs and places of more difficult approach.
To prevent its indiscriminate destruction, the cutting is now
regulated by law. Several species of Flindersia supply the timber
known by the name of “ Yellow-wood.” This timber is durable,
strong, and one of the best for the manufacture of axe and pick
handles. Nine species of this valuable tree belong to Queens-
land, three reaching into New South Wales.
The pine timbers are furnished by the “Moreton Bay Pine”
Araucaria Cunninghainii, Ait.), a large tree of very wide range.
The “Kauri or Dundathu Pine” {Dammara robusta, C. Moore),
also a large tree of considerable range, but not equal to the last.
The “Bunya-Bunya” {Araucaria BidicUli, Hook.) furnishes an
excellent timber, but little finds its way into the market,
although the tree is found in certain localities in great
plenty, the tree being protected by Government, because the
fruit is a favourite food of the natives. The timber is strong
and beautiful, and in time to come will doubtless be in general
use both by the builder and cabinetmaker.
The timber known as “Cypress Pine” is the produce [of
several kinds of Catlitris ; the timber of such as are found along
the coast is highly prized for caolnet work, the grain frequently
being very beautiful, while those met with inland are used largely
for telegraph posts, for which they answer admirably, as the
wood is seldom attacked by the white ant. The tree also is of
erect growth, and often met with in large forests.
The “ She Pine ” {Podocarpus data, It. Hr.) is a beautiful tree
of erect growth, found on coast country, and suitable for
spars. The timber is soft, elastic, and useful for joiners’ work.
Three species of Tarrietia, a genus of large timber trees be-
longing to the order Sterculiaceiv, are abundant in the coast
scrubs, the timber of which is somewhat soft, resembling pine,
and for which it may be substituted. A similar white light
timber is furnished by the “Leichhardt tree” {Sarcocephalus
cordatus, Miq.). This is a large handsome tree, found in
Northern Queensland, and being extremely bitter is often used
by bushmen in cases of fever as a substitute for quinine. Several
species of Dysoxylon produce valuable timber, which is sometimes
called “ Pencil-cedar." That known as “ Satin-wood ” is produced
by Zanthoxylum brnchyacanthum, F.v. M. This does not grow to a
large size, but the timber is close-grained, of a yellowish colour, and
useful for the cabinet-maker. The stem, leaf, and branches are
closely covered with short conical prickles. Harpullia pcndula,
Planch, produces the beautiful highly prized “Tulip wood,” and j
Ithus rhodanthema, F.v.M., the timber known as “Dark Yellow-
wood.” This tree is very ornamental, and well worthy of a place
in garden shrubberies, for, as is the case with many Australian
trees, it flowers and fruits well as a shrub. It bears branches of
small red flowers; the fruit resembles bunches of bronzed grapes.
The “Silky Oak” (Grevillea robu*la, It. Hr.) is in great demand
for staves of casks, and in places is becoming scarce. One of the
most useful of Queensland timbers is the “Beech” (Gmelina
Leichhardtii, F.v.M.); it is strong, durable, easily worked, and
neither expands nor contracts to any considerable degree by ex-
posure to the weather, on which account it is largely used for
verandahs, floors, decks of vessels, &c. This fine tree is still
abundant in coast scrubs. Another large scrub tree ( Weinmannia
lachnocarpa, F v.M.) produces an excellent timber, and belongs
to the'same order {Saxifrages). There are in the tropical scrubs
several other beautiful timber trees.
The greater par of the timber termed “Hardwood” is the
produce of various kinds of Eucalypts. The following are the
most highly prized, viz., “ Ironbark ” {Eucalyptus sidcrophloia.
Heath., and A', crebrn, F. v. Muell.), “Spotted Gum” {h. maculata.
Hook-.), “Bloodwood” {E. corymbosa, Sm.), “ Blue Gum ” {E. tere-
ticornis, Sin.), “Stringy Bark” {E. acrnenioides, Schau.), “Rough
Stringy-bark ” {E. Daileyana, F.v.M.). The timber of this species
is highly prized on account of its toughness for axe and pick
handles. “Jemmy Low” {E. resinifera, Sm.). This is a very
large tree, and much in demand for fencing. “Turpentine’
{E. Microcorys, F.v.M.), “ Blackbut ” (E. pilularis, Sm.), “Pop-
lar-box ” {E. popuhfolia, Hook-.). Other hard woods are furnished
by {Tristania cimferta, E. Hr.) the broad-leaved or “Brisbane
Box ” {Myrtles Hillii, Henth.), the “ Scrub Ironwood,” this is per-
haps the hardest wood of the Colony; {Syncarpia lov.rifolia, Ten.),
a most valuable timber for piles and underground work ; {Lysi-
earpus ternifolius F. v. M.), an inland tree of great value for rail-
way sleepers, the timber is of a rich dark colour and excellent
for cabinet work. Many of the numerous Acacias grow to large
trees, and furnish excellent timber for various purposes.
Queensland also possesses a few really good indigenous fruits ;
as the “ Davidsonia Plum ” (Davidsonia pruriens, F. v.M.). This
is a small tree found in many of the tropical scrubs. The fruit
is about 2J in. long, and about IA in. diameter, a rich purple flesh
of a sharp acid flavour, very juicy, the two small flattish seeds
in the centre being easily separable from the flesh. The “ Her-
bert River Cherry ” {Antidesma HaUaehyartum, Haiti.). This is a
small tree, often met with along tropical creeks ; the fruit is
round and cherry-like, of a sharp acid taste, makes an excellent
preserve when converted into jelly, quite equal both in flavour
and colour to that made from the European currant. “Native
Kumquat ” {Atalantia glavca, Hook .). This thorny shrub is very
abundant on the Maranoa, where the fruit is made into jam.
The flowers are also fragrant, like the orange. The native limes,
the one with round fruits {Citrus Australis, Planch), and the
other with oblong fruits {C. audralasica, F.v.M.), are often con-
verted into jam, which is equal to that made from the cultivated
.fruit. The “Queensland Nut” (Macadamia ternifolia, F.v.M.) is
equal in flavour to the filbert, its only fault being the extreme
hardness of its shell.
No country is better supplied with fodder plants; there are
nearly 250 indigenous grasses, amongst which are the “Mitchell
Grass ’’ {Astrebla elyr.ioides, F.v.M. & Hail.); this is looked upon
by northern squatters as their great stAnd-by, as it is able to
withstand a very long drought, and quickly springs into growth
after a slight rain. The “ Satin-topped grass ” {Andropogon erian-
thoides, F.v.M.) is another very excellent grass. The “Blue
Grass” {A. sericeus, It. Hr.); this grass is highly prized by the
squatter. The “Kangaroo Grass” (Anthistiria ciliata, Linn.).
Tne “ Tall-oat Grass” {A. avenacea, F.v.M.) and the “Lands-
borough Grass ” {A. membranacec., Hindi.) are all fine kinds. The
“ Mulga Grass” {Nenruchne Mitchelliana, F.v.M,) is valuable as
thriving under shade on poor soil. The “ Salt-marsh Couchs ”
(Paspalum littorule, It. Hr., and Sporobolus virginicus, car. pallida)
are considered highly nutritious.
By a paper published in the proceedings of the Linnean Society
of New South Wales, Vol. V., written by F. M. Bailey, P.L.S.,
the Colonial Botanist of Queensland, it is shown that above 100
plants of medicinal value are indigenous to the colony. There
are also a great many from which excellent fibre can be prepared.
Three-fourths of the Australian ferns belong to this colony.
Amongst these are the “ Stag’s horn” {Platyceriu.ru grande, J. Sm.),
the “ Bird's nest” {Aspleniam nidus, Linn.), the “Snake's tongue”
(Lygodinm scandals, Sic.), a lovely climber, and the tree-like
Alsophila.
Animals. —The mammalia of Queensland are similar to
those of the other colonies, comprising several varieties of the
kangaroo and opossum, the bandicoot, wombat, native bear,
native cat, dingo, flying fox, flying squirrel, porcupine, the
platypus, and other animals peculiar to Australia. Among the
birds are the emu, plains bustard, scrub turkey, several kinds
of eagle and hawk, parrot, parroquet and cockatoo, black
swan, duck, heron, crane, pelican, pigeon (several species), quail,
the great kingfisher, wattle bird, crow, regent, bower bird and
lyre bird. Fossil remains discovered in the Darling Downs go to
prove that in a distant age the Moa ( IHnornis) existed in this part
of the Continent. Snakes are plentiful, over sixty kinds, of which
five are poisonous, have been enumerated ; and there are many
varieties of lizards. In some of the northern rivers alligators (or
rather crocodiles) are numerous. Among the denizens of the sea
are the whale, seal, dugong, shark, turtle (four kinds found in
Moreton Bay—keelback, sometimes of immense size and weight
—loggerhead, tortoise and green turtle), groper, porpoise, sawfish,
and swordfish. In the rivers and bays are schnapper, jewfish,
sole, bream, mullet, and other fish, besides oysters, crabs, and
other crustaceans. For oysters Queensland has long been famous.
8
QUEENSLAND.


The occupations of the people arc thus generally stated
Engaged in government, defence, law, and pro-
:
tection
Ministering to religion, charity, health, education,
3,610
art, and science
Engaged in supply of board and lodging, and
6,866
rendering personal service
Engaged in business in connection with the Ex-
change, valuation insurance, loan, lease or custody
20,386
of money, houses, land, or property rights .
Industrial class, embracing all persons not other-
wise classed, connected with the manufacture,
construction, modification, or alteration of
materials, so as to render them more available
31,271
for the use of man
47,184
5
10
47,086
10
15
39,153
15
20
35,328
20
25
42,353
25
30
41,225
30
35
33,132
35
40
23,864
40
45
18,866
45
50
16,461
50
55
13,717
65
60
8,337
60
70
8,413
70
80
2,594
80
90
427
90
,, 100
30
100 and upwards
1
Unspecified
2,404
Moreton Bay and Sandy Strait are the great nurseries and breed-
ing grounds for oi sters on the eastern seaboard of the Australian
Continent. In Moreton Bay there are about 260 banks extending
over 6,000 acres. The beche-de-mer (trepang or sea-slug) abounds
in Torres Strait. Mr. W. Saville-Kent reports that the total
number of known species of fish that can be accurately described
as pertaining to Queensland, falls but a few short of 000, em-
bracing two-thirds of the entire marine and fresh water fauna of
the Australian continent. Of these 900, over 300 species may be
classified as of more or less value for human food. The insect
world, as in other parts of Australia, makes up in number and
variety any deficiencies in the larger animals ; there are numer-
ous kinds of ants, the so-called white ant being most de-
structive to wooden buildings, mosquitoes, spiders, moths
and butterflies of large size and beautiful colours, locusts,
grass-hoppers, and flies innumerable.
Population.—According to the full returns of the census
taken on April 6, 1891. the population, exclusive of aborigines,
was 393,718 persons—223,779 males, and 169,939 females, being a
number in excess of the census taken on May 1, 1886, of 70,865
persons—33,43s males and 37,430 females. Among the popula-
tion were 8,574 Chinese, of whom only 47 were females, 9,428
Polynesians, of whom 826 were females, and 1,864 other alien
races, of whom 116 were females.
There were in all 80,653 dwellings, of which 2,224 were unin-
habited. Of these dwellings, 439 were stone, 2,273 brick,
62,433 wood, 3,337 metal, and 6,938 were tents. Among the
other dwellings are 247 ships, 289 drays, and 2,473 unspecified.
The number of inhabited dwellings to the square mile was OT2,
and the average number of persons to each inhabited dwelling,
5-04.
Agricultural class, embracing all persons mainly
engaged in the cultivation or acquisition of
food products, and in obtaining other raw
material from natural sources .... 67,992
Indefinite class, comprising all persons who derive
incomes from services rendered, but the direction
of which services cannot be exactly determined . 2,393
Dependent class, that is all persons dependent upon
relatives or private charity, or who are supported
at the expense of the Stare (among these are in-
cluded 60,818 engaged in domestic duties, and
142,661 scholars and students .... 214,016
The birth-places of the people, so far as could be ascertained,
were : -
Born in the Colony 176,971
Bom In the other Australian colonies . 28,336
Born in Great Britain .... 143,245
Born in Europe 22,085
Born in America 1,419
Born in India, China, and Japan . . 9,580
Born in other parts of Asia . . . 137
Born in Africa 226
Born in Polynesia 9,338
Born in Malay Peninsula and Archipelago 1,171
Born in other countries .... 5
Born at sea 832
Birthplace unspecified .... 373
Ages of the people :
Under 1 year to 5 years . . . 60,325
The conjugal condition of the people is thus stated; —Un-
married, 161,096 males, 105,605 females ; married, 57,887 males,
67,596 females; widowers, 4,502; widows, 6,695 ; unspecified,
294 males, 43 females.
The estimated population on Dec. 31, 1897, was 484,700 —
271,872 males, 213,328 females. Among these were 7,810 Chinese
—7,686 males, 124 females ; 8,603 Polynesian—B.oo3 males, 600
females ; 2,225 Japanese— 2,179 inales, 46 females; 472 Javanese
—445 males, 27 females; other Asiatics 919 —868 males, 01
females.
During the year 1897, there were registered. 14,313 births —
7,277 males, 7,036 females ; 5,423 deaths, —3,483 males, 1,940
females ; and 2,894 marriages. The rate per 1,000 of mean
i population was, births, 29'92 ; deaths, 1D33 ; marriages, 6'oo.
The estimated population on Dec. 31, 1898, was 492,602.
Religion.—There is no State Church in Queensland. The
voluntary system has prevailed since 1860, in which year an Act
was passed abolishing Shite aid to religion. Those ministers
who, at the time this Act was passed, were receiving stipends
annually from the public treasury, continue to receive them so long
as they officiate in the colony. (Only one is living now.) The only
connection between Church and State is in the annual registra-
tion of ministers of religion to enable them to legally celebrate
marriages. The voluntary system has hitherto worked to a cer-
tain extent satisfactorily ; the members of the various denomin-
ations, as a rule, subscribing sufficiently to the funds for providing
salaries for the ministers and church accommodation. In the
towns, ample means exist for public worship for fill denomina-
tions, but in the country districts there is much spiritual desti-
tution, with which, owing to the wide area over which the sparse
population is spread, it is found difficult to cope. Nearly all the
leading religious denominations are represented in the colony,
j According to the census of 1891, the religions of the people are
] thus stated:—Church of England, 142,555; Roman Catholic,
| 92,765; Presbyterian, 45,639; Wesleyan, 20,917; Congregational
! and Independent, 8,57 1 ; Baptist, 10,256 ; Primitive Methodist,
8,639; Methodist, 740; United Methodist Free Church, 572 ;
Lutherans, 23,383 ; other Protestants, 2,956 ; Salvation Army,
4,021 ; other Christian sects, 3,242; Hebrew, 809 ; other
( religions, 1,379.
Sunday Schools. -There is a Sunday School attached to
nearly every place of worship in the colony. No official returns
are available.
Education. —The system of education in Queensland has,
since January, 1876, when the Education Act came into
operation, been placed under a special department, called
the Department of Public Instruction, which is under the
control of the Minister for Education. Education is free
and secular. Under certain conditions religious instruction
may be given to the children out of school hours by ministers or
others (of this provision very little use is made). The Primary
Schools are of two kinds—State schools, maintained wholly at
the public expense, and Provisional schools, only partially main-
tained by the public funds. Provisional schools are subdivided
into regular, part time, and special (the latter being for even-
ing or special times). Non-vested schools are not now connected
with the Department. The subjects taught in the State schools
are reading, writing, arithmetic, English grammar, geography,
history, elementary mechanics, object lessons, drill, gymnastics,
and vocal music ; and in the case of girls, sewing and needlework.
The conditions for the establishment of a State school in any dis-
trict are—The selection of a suitable site at a sufficient distance
from any existing school; the permanent daily average attend-
ance of not less than 30 children of school-age, and the payment
of a sum to the Minister amounting to one-fifth of the cost of
erecting and furnishing the building. Local school boards
and committees assist in the supervision and management
of the schools. The teaching staff is comprised in three
classes —classified, unclassified, and pupil teachers. For
higher education the State also assists the formation and
maintenance of establishments of a more advanced character
than the primary schools. Upon the inhabitants of any district
raising by subscription a sum of £l,OOO for the purpose of
establishing a grammar school in that district, the Government
supplements it by double the amount for the erection of the
necessary buildings ; and if the sum of £250 per annum be
guaranteed for three years as school fees, by responsible
parties, the Government gives £5OO per annum for the salaries
of masters and current expenses. Brisbane, Ipswich, Too-
woomba, Maryborough, Rockhampton and Townsville have
availed themselves of this grant. In November, 1897,
there were three successful competitors, out of eight
candidates for Exhibitions to Universities. These exhibitions
are of the annual value of £lOO, and are tenable for three
years. They are open to all students under nineteen years of
age who have resided two years in the colony. Scholarships,
entitling the holders to three years’ instruction in any one of the
Grammar Schools, are annually competed for by children attend-
ing the primary schools. The necessary qualifications for
candidates are—attendance at a State school for eighteen months
and daily regular attendance for the six months previous to
competing, and age below fourteen. By recent regulations the
number of State school scholarships is limited to 36, three-
fourths being open to boys and one-fourth to girls. There are
also eight State school bursaries, six open to boys and two to
girls, entitling the holders to free education the same as scholar-
ship, together with an allowance not exceeding £3O per annum ;
and four State Bursaries to the Queensland Agricultural College,
entitling the holders to three years’ free board and instruction as
resident students at any agricultural college endowed by the
State. In December, 1897, 286 candidates (182 boys and 104 girls)
presented themselves for examination for grammar school
scholarships, of whom 27 boys and 9 girls were successful in
passing. Girls’ grammar schools have been established in
Brisbane, Maryborough, Ipswich and Rockhampton.
A movement is on foot for the establishment of a University
in Queensland, as “ the needful and crowning work of the educa-
tional system,’’Parliament having during the 1898 Session passed
a vote to cover the preliminary cost.
On January Ist, 1898, there were in all 791 primary
QUEENSLAND


schools in operation (being an increase of 3 State schools,
25 Provisional schools), comprising 388 State or vested schools,
and 399 Provisional schools. The number of teachers
employed was 1,825 —825 males and 1,000 females ; of these
893 were classified, 71 unclassified, and 416 were pupil-
teachers, and 415 were attached to Provisional schools.
The number of children on the roll during the year
was 95,028. The average daily attendance was 59,748
—31,339 boys, and 28,409 girls, an increase of 5,432. State
aid was withdrawn from the non-vested schools from Jan. 1,
1881. Nearly the whole of these schools are Roman Catholic,
and are continued on, independently of the Department.
The total expenditure on primary education during the year
was £199,081 (not including £28,191 on buildings, etc.); the
average cost in the State schools of the education of each
child, on the basis of annual enrolment, was £2 3s. Id., being
•an increase of 2s. id. per head on the cost of 1896; based
upon the daily average attendance, it was £3 Bs. 7}d. per head.
According to the census of 1891, the educational status of the
people was as follows :—274,813 persons could read and write ;
14,635 persons could read only ; 102,136 persons could neither
read nor write. In this latter class are included children under
3 years of age (37,236), also 17,857 Chinese, Polynesian, and other
alien races.
The private schools on January 1, 1898, numbered 173 —18
boys, 18 girls, and 137 mixed; 537 teachers—Bs male, 452
female; an aggregate attendance of 5,314 boys and 7,058 girls,
and an average attendance of 4,547 boys and 6,151 girls.
There are now ten grammar schools, viz., two at Brisbane
(boys and girls), two at Ipswich (boys and girls), two at Mary-
borough (boys and girls), two at Rockhampton (boys and girls),
and one each at Toowoomba and Townsville. During 1897 these
institutions had 753 pupils, and there were 67 teachers. The
total receipts for the year 1897 were £23,074 10s. Id., the ex-
penditure on them was £22,439 14s. 7d. To the end of 1897
these institutions had been subsidised from the State funds to
the extent of £236,535 9s. lid. (some portion of which being
loaned is in course of repayment). The average annual cost of
each pupil, based upon the fees paid by parents, endowments,
subsidies, &0., is about as follows ;—Brisbane (boys), £2O, Bris-
bane (girls), £25 15s. 4d. ; Ipswich, £2O Is. 4d. ; Maryborough,
£29 155.; Rockhampton, £37 15s. ; Toowoomba, £4l 16s.
During 1897 the aid granted by Government to the existing
grammar schools was £l,OOO each ; £lO,OOO in all.
Mechanics’ Institutes. —There are 91 institutions, com-
prising schools of art, free libraries, mechanics’ institutes, and
miners’ institutes, having an aggregate of 7,213 subscribers, at
rates averaging about £1 per annum, and 136,859 books in the
libraries. During 1897 these institutions received Government
aid to the extent of £2,639 6s. Od. The total amount received
from the State funds prior to this was £83,702 17s. 4d. The
total receipts during 1897 were £12,672 3s. 4d., and the
expenditure £12,670 3s. lid.
In connection with the Schools of Arts, Technical Colleges have
been established in several of the leading towns. The subjects
taught are freehand and mechanical drawing, chemistry, mathe-
matics (which includes practical mensuration), Latin, French,
German, shorthand, typewriting, painting, carpentery, elemen-
tary arithmetic, writing and cooking. During the year 1897 the
classes were attended by 2,826 students.
Agriculture and Stock. —The agricultural returns for
the year ending December 31, 1897, were:—Total extent of land
under cultivation, 386,259 acres ; land in fallow, 14,402 acres ;
total extent of land under crop, 371,857 acres. Wheat for grain,
-59,875 acres, produce 1,009,293 bushels ; oats for grain, 1,834 acres,
produce 31,496 bushels; barley for grain, 2,077 acres, produce
49,840 bushels; maize for grain, 109,721 acres, produce 2,803,172
bushels ; rye for grain, 470 acres, produce 8,329 bushels ; rice, 445
acres, produce 12,990 bushels ; potatoes, English, 8,197 acres,
produce 18,620 tons; potatoes, sweet, 3,581 acres, produce 17,466
tons; cotton, 48 acres, produce 19,977 tons; sugar-cane, 98,641
acres, produce 97,916 tons ; arrowroot, 391 acres, produce 2,888
tons ; tobacco, 755 acres, produce 5,703 cwt.; coffee, 311 acres,
produce 86,114 lbs,; sorghum, 3,635 acres; lucerne for hay,
23,362 acres, produce 52,827 tons ; panicum, 3,791 acres, produce
■6,749 tons ; vines, 1,881 acres, produce 4,822,991 lbs. ; bananas,
4,828 acres, produce 16,494,604 dozen; pineapples, 909 acres,
produce 351,524 dozen; oranges, 2,196 acres, produce 1,628,176
■dozen ; gardens and orchards 3,878 acres.
Compared with the returns for the previous year there are the
following differences :
Increases.— Land under cultivation, 49,484 acres; land in
fallow, 305 acres; laud under crop, 49,179 acres; wheat, 24,044
acres; barley, 955 acres; rye, 125 acres; potatoes, English,
525 acres ; sweet, 450 acres; sugar, 15,548 acres; arrowroot, 82
acres; coffee, 173 acres ; sorghum, 287 acres ; lucerne, 5,470
acres; panicum, 118 acres; vines, 39 acres; bananas, 315 acres;
pineapples, 86 acres ; oranges, 405 acres ; gardens and orchards,
570 acres.
Decreases. -Oats, 47 acres; maize, 5,994 acres ; rice, 155
acres ; cotton, 235 acres ; tobacco, 339 acres.
Of the produce the principal increases were :—Wheat, 408,039
bushels ; barley, 30,500 bushels ; rye, 910 bushels; rice, 10,462
bushels; arrowroot, 285 tons ; pineapples, 37,689d0zen ; oranges,
279,186 dozen.
The decreases were: —Oats, 685 bushels; maize, 262,161
bushels; cotton, 121,055 lbs.; sugar, 2,858 tons ; tobacco, 2,926
cwts.; grapes, 299,540 lbs. ; bananas, 664,620 dozen.
The average yield per acre was:—Wheat, 16’86 bushels; oats,
17T7 bushels ; barley, 24 - 00 bushels ; maize, 25 - 55 bushels ; rye,
17'72 bushels ; sugar, D5O tons.
Live Stock.—The return of live stock for the year ending De-
cember 31, 1897, was:—Horses, including foals, 479,280; cattle,
, including calves, 6,089,013 ; sheep, including lambs, 17,797,883 ;
i pigs 110,855. These figures show on the numbers of the previous
! year the following increases and decreases :—lncreases : Horses,
■ 27,073 ; pigs, 13,421. Decreases ; Cattle, 418,364 ; sheep, 1,795,813.
In 1897 the land held under lease by the squatters for sheep
■ and cattle-rearing purposes was, in the Settled Districts, com-
-1 prised in 44 runs, of the area of 2,876}} square miles, the yearly
! rent being £4,324‘25. 2d. In the Unsettled Districts were 2,874
runs, the area being 381,369 square miles, the rent being
£310,715 Is. 6d.
The average rent of the leased portion of runs in the unsettled
• districts is £1 4s. 7}d. per square mile ; on first-class runs it is
: about £2 7s. 6}d. per square miles.
Sugar Industry.—During the year ended June 80, 1896,
■ the 12 sugar districts produced a total of 86,255 tons of sugar,
a decrease of 5,457 tons on the previous year’s manufacture.
There were 84,883} acres of land under cane, and 91 mills were
in operation. For the year ending June 30, 1897, the figures
were:—Sugar produced, 100,744 tuns; extent of land under
cane, 93,251} acres ; mills, 80.
Mineral Sesources.—The first important discovery of
gold was made at Canoona, about 35 miles from Rockhampton in
July, 1858. At the end of 1853, Mr. Stutchbury, the Government
Geologist of N. S. Wales, is reported to have found gold near
Port Curtis ; this is said to be the first authenticated discovery of
gold in the colony, the next is reported to have been in August,
1856, on Canning Downs. Late in 1857 or early in 1858, gold
was found by a miner who accompanied Captain O’Connell when
making a tour of his district. In the year 1867 the
Government offered rewards, varying from £2OO to £l,OOO,
for the discovery of new and payable goldfields in Queens-
land. This led to the discovery, early in the year, of
several goldfields ; and in September, of Gympie, a locality
about 120 miles from Brisbane, where a nugget weighing
100 lbs., valued at £4,000, was found near the surface. The
gold-bearing quartz at Gympie is very rich, and numerous
claims are still very profitably worked, and new deposits have
been found in lower levels where a few years ago it was thought
impossible that gold would be found. There are at the present
time upwards of twenty-five gold-fields in the colony, comprising
the Palmer, Etheridge, Charters Towers and Cape River, Ravens-
wood, Cloucurry, Coen, Starcke and Cocoa Creek, Mareeba,
Ilodgkinson, Normanby (Bowen), Mulgrave, Russell Extended,
Grass Tree (Mackay) and Croydon (the last named was
discovered by Messrs. Brown and Aldridge in October, 1885),
Clermont (Peak Downs), Rockhampton, Gladstone fields,
Gympie, Kilkivan, Glastonbury, Pikedale, Talgai, Nanango,
Eidsvold, Paradise and Jordan Creek, on the Johnston River,
discovered early in 1898, and from which upwards of 700 ounces
alluvial were obtained during the first three months it was
worked. At Horn Island, one of the Prince of Wales’s group
lying to the SE. of Thursday Island, gold both in alluvial and
quartz has been found, but principally in the reefs in a
finely divided state. During 1897 1,191 ozs. were obtained.
Surfacing and alluvial digging is decreasing, while more atten-
tion is being given to quartz-reefing.
The mining statistics for 1897 were as follows:—Number of
miners, European, 11,938 —7,250 quartz, 4,688 alluvial, Chinese,
897 : total, 12,835. Total yield of gold, 807,028 ozs., estimated value
at £3 10s. per oz., £2,553,141. These figures show an increase of
167,543 ozs. on those of the previous year, principally from
Charters Towers, Gympie, Mount Morgan and Clermont.
There were from the alluvial mines 37,124 ozs., and from the
quartz 770,804 ozs., the former showing an increase in the yield
of 6,4000z5., and the latter an increase of 164,143 ozs. The yield
of gold to the ton of quartz ranged from 7 dwts. 11 grs. on the
Bowen field to 3 ozs. 14 dwts. 3 grs. on the Russell extended
field. The average yield was 1 oz. 5 dwts. 7 grs. to the ton.
The total quantity of quartz crushed was 779,287 tons (including
mill residues) the gross yield being 770,804 ozs. The prices
charged for crushing varied from 7s. per ton on the Gympie
field to 30s. on the Cloncurry field. The gold from the Rock-
hampton, Clermont, Mareeba, Cloncurry, and Starcke fields
assayed the highest price of £4 peroz., the lowest price being
from Croydon, which was worth only £2 9s. Bd. per oz.
The returns of the principal machinery employed on the gold-
fields during 1897 were as follows : 590 steam engines of
10,115 h.p., employed in winding, pumping, and crushing;
130 crushing mills (active), 36 mills “hung up” ; 17 buddies ; 25
whims ; 98 whips and pulleys ; 68 sluices, toms, and sluice boxes ;
277 winding machines; 1,880 heads of stamps; 1,104 Berdan’s,
Wheeler’s and Denny’s pans ; 14 arrastras ; 14 settling
tanks; 156 rock drills; 138 concentrators ; 91 furnaces ; 57 air
compressors ; 25 Huntingdon mills ; 43 vanners ; 3 water jackets
613 chlorination vats : 41 stone breakers ; 19 refining furnaces,
187 cyanide works. The approximate value of all mining plant
on the goldfields is estimated at £1,067,106. The miners’ rights
issued in 1897 numbered 8,623 ; business licences, 111. The
total number of all gold mining leases in force on the Queens-
land goldfields on December 31, 1897, was 401 ; the total area
of leases was 6,107 a. Or. 35p., the average area of each lease being
15a. Or. 37p.
At the end of 1897 there were registered 232 mining companies,
with 15,890,080 shares, the nominal capital being £7,033,857,
and the subscribed capital, £5,562,761. Of these companies 127
are at Gympie, 59 at Charters Towers, and 21 at Croydon.
The estimated gross produce of gold in the colony from 1867
to December 31, 1897, has been 12,006,918 ozs., valued at
£42,024.213.
Copper, tin, and coal are the other chief mineral products of
Queensland, so far as at present known. Copper is found in
10
QUEENSLAND.


various parts, but the richest mines are at Chillagoe, where there
has recently been much activity and a large influx of capital,
Clermont, Mount Perry, and Cloncurry. During 1897, 288 tons,
valued at £12,645, were raised, the greater part of which was
from the Herberton, Stanthorpe and Port Douglas mines. Copper
mining has been practically suspended, but is now being
revived with energy. Antimony is found at Tiaro, Neardie,
the Palmer, the Etheridge, and Hodgkinson district. The
total quantity of tin raised was 1,203 tons, of the value
of £37,509, the produce principally of the Herberton, Stan-
thorpe, and Cooktown districts. There were raised 358,407 tons
of coal, value about £139,889, the produce of the Ipswich, Wide
Bay, and Clermont pits. Silver and lead are found in the Stan-
thorpe, Herberton, Ravenswood, and Bowen districts; the
quantity of silver raised during 1897 was 234,065 ozs., valued at
£25,118. Bismuth is found at Ravenswood and Gayndah;
Sapphires, diamonds, agates and rubies have been found in the
creeks running into the Gilbert river, and also in the Withorsfleld
district. Manganese occurs at Gladstone, during 1897 397 tons,
value £1,506, were raised. Opals have been found in various parts,
the largest quantities being at Warrnarnbool Downs, in the Thar-
gomindah district, and at Fermoy in the Gregory district; in
1897 opals to the value of £10,250 were raised. Plumbago has
been found in large quantities at Mount Bopple, near Tiaro.
Iron has also been found in various parts. At Mount Wheeler
asbestos has been found.
Since 1872 tin has been found in very large quantities ;
it was first discovered at Stanthorpe, afterwards at several places
on the New South Wales border, and extensive deposits have
also been laid bare on the Palmer and other northern gold-fields.
Coal is extensively diffused throughout the Southern
and Central portions of the colony, and has yet to
take its place among the leading products. It is found
on the banks of the Brisbane and Bremer rivers, and in
other parts of the West Moreton district, on the Darling Downs;
at Burrum, near Maryborough—of which Mr. Tenison Woods
reported that there is not a more promising coal-field in Aus-
tralia, the deposits being of the same series as the Newcastle coal;
at Bowen, at Cooktown, and throughout a considerable extent
of the basins of the Dawson, Mackenzie, and Nogoa rivers;
indeed, the extent of the coal beds is unknown ; according to
Mr. Jack the western plains may turn out to be one vast coal-field,
Some of the coal has been found to favourably compare with the
New South Wales mineral, and the hard oil coals of the Darling
Downs are described as being capable of producing a large per-
centage of illuminating oil and paraffin. As yet comparatively
surface coal only has been got out, but the deposits at greater
depths are believed to be a true coal of much better quality. It
is estimated that the coal-beds underlie a surface of nearly
24,000 square miles.
The number of miners employed in other than gold-mining
during 1897 was: Silver and lead 89, tin 379, coal 1,179, copper
134, bismuth 8, opal 235, general 36, total 2,052.
The gross quantity and value of the ore and mineral raised was
360,693 (not including 234,065 ozs. silver), value £231,363.
The stone quarried and raised during 1897 was Bluestone,
65,724 tons, valued at £8 233, from nine quarries ; freestone, 6,982
tons, value £2,546, from thirteen quarries—seven atGatton, three
at Normanton, two at Warwick, at Maryborough ; felstone
porphyry, 19,830 tons, value £3,545 from seven quarries in the
Brisbane district. Limestone, 500 tons, value £5O, from
Paradise, 6,000 tons of granite, value £1,050, and 28,625 tons of
slate,value £4,D3.
The quantity and value of minerals raised from 1860 to
December 31, 1897, has been Copper ore, 60,278 tons, value
£2,020,761; silver ore, value £686,833 ; antimony ore, 3,024
tons, value £35,258 ; coal, 4,756,976 tons, value £2,132,199;
tin ore, 85,266 tons, value £4,412,298; opals, value, £101,300; gems,
value, £8,937 ; bismuth, 528 tons, value £57,535 ; wolfram, value
£1,507 ; manganese, value £3,909 ; lead, 1,817 tons, value £18,301.
In the extreme north considerable attention is paid to the
Pearl Fishery. A large number of schooners are engaged in the
trade ; the work is carried on principally by the employment of
the aborigines as divers (South Sea Islanders, Malays, and a few
Lascars and Chinese assisting), and partly by improved diving
dresses and apparatus. Dining 1897 there were licensed 39
pearling boats, and the estimated number of men employed
was 1,667. The localities of the pearl fisheries are Wai
Weer, Albany Island, Jervis Island, Somerset, Goode Island,
Endeavour Strait, Friday Island, Prince of Wales Island, Pos-
session Island, and Thursday Island. The beche de mer fishery is
carried on at the Barrier Reef, Murray Island, and Darnley
Island. The Dugong fishery has for years been carried on ; the
oil extracted is said to have medicinal virtues, not far below those
of cod liver oil. The collection of the becht-de-mer, a kind of sea-
slug used in Chinese cookery, employs a large number of hands,
and is a profitable source of revenue.
The fisheries in the Moreton district give employment to about
110 men with 68 boat-, the catches averaging considerably over 100
bushels per week, but the demand or sale is said to seldom
come up to the fish caught and marketed. Oysters are
systematically cultivated, and the export fur the year ending
Dec. 31, 1897, principally from the Moreton Bay banks, was
about 15,586 packages, valued at £17,363.
Electric Telegraphs. —Every town in the settled districts
has a telegraph office, and there is communication with the whole
of the Australian colonies and New Zealand. A line connects
Brisbane with Karumba, on the Gulf of Carpentaria, 1,426 miles
distant, also with Somerset in the extreme North, and by cable
thence with Thursday Island (upwards of 1,550 miles).
There is now telegraphic communication between Queensland
and New Caledonia. This cable forms the first section of the
cable across the Pacific Ocean to Vancouver.
, On June 30, 1898, there were 379 stations, and at 29 stations
i telephone was substituted for telegraph instruments. On
• January 1, 1898, there were 10,090} miles of line, and 18,472}
miles of wire. During the year 1897, 165,134 messages were
transmitted. The total revenue was £78,516 4s. lid. Extensions
are still going on. The quadruplex system is now operated with
Sydney, and also between Brisbane and Bowen, a distance of
850 miles, and the duplex between Bowen and Townsville, and
between Brisbane and Rockhampton.
The telephone is coming extensively into use, and in Brisbane
and suburbs there are upwards of 853 offices, places of business,
and private residences connected with the Exchange. Mary-
borough has 54 subscribers, Bundaberg 47, Rockhampton 75,
Townsville 77, Charters Towers 145, and Toowoomba 78, and
there are others in other towns. These numbers are con-
tinually being added to. A trunk telephone line is being con-
structed between Brisbane, Ipswich, ana Toowoomba. In Bris-
bane all telephone and telegraph wires have been placed
underground. Public telephone offices have been opened in
Brisbane, South Brisbane, Bulimba, Ithaca, Petrie Terrace,
Woolloongabba, Toowong, Albion and Fortitude Valley. The
charge for using the instrument is 3d. for every five minutes.
The telegraphic charges to any station in the colony exclusive
of all stations within a six mile radius of the General Post-Office)
are Is. for first ten words, exclusive of name and address, and
Id. each additional word. This rate also applies to the New
South Wales border stations. The suburban stations within
six miles of the General Post-Office, ten words 6d., each
additional word, Id. Telegrams marked “ urgent ” are charged
double rates. The intercolonial charges are: to New South
Walei, ten words, Is., each additional word 2d. ; to Victoria,
ten words, 35., and 3d. per word beyond; to South Australia
the same, excepting to stations on the overland line. To
Western Australia, ten words, 45., each additional word 4d. To
Tasmania, ten words, 45., every additional word 4d., only
ten words allowed free for address and signature. To New
Zealand messages of ten words, in which address and
signature arc included, are charged 4s. 6d., with fid. for
each additional word. To London the charge per word is ss. Id.;
name and address of sender and receiver form part of the
message, and have to be paid for. If the addresses of sender and
receiver are registered, messages can be more cheaply sent at
word rates.
Postal.—On January 1, 1898, there were 405 post-offices,
721 receiving-offices, and 119 money-order offices. The mileage of
the mail lines in 1897 was 31,176. During the year there passed
through the post 16,116,99$ letters, 8,722,930 newspapers,
3,714,425 packets, and 173,369 parcels, being an increase on the
figures of 1896 of 780,227, or 4 - 43 per cent, of letters ; a decrease
in newspapers of 148,680, or D 27 per cent. ; a decrease in
packets of 228,587, or 4'57 per cent. ; and an increase in parcels
of 24,990 'I he total revenue of the Post-office Department for
1897 was £246,514. The expenditure on the Post and Telegraph
Department was £313,943 18s. 2d.
'The rate of postage on town letters is Id. for every half-ounce ;
on inland letters it is 2d. per half-ounce. The postage to any of
the Australian colonies is 2d. per half ounce. For any place
beyond the Australasian colonies 2}d. for each half-ounce. Post-
cards, inland and intercolonial, single, Id. ; reply, 2d. Since
June 1, 1884, the differential rates charged on correspondence
to the United Kingdom have been done away with, and also
the necessity for marking by any particular route (except as
regards the Californian, French, and German services). The
uniform rate fur letters now by any route is 2}d. per half-ounce.
Book-rates, Inland and Intercolonial : four ounces Id., and Id.
extra for every additional four ounces. To all places except
the above, for each two ounces or fraction thereof, Id. Printed
papers (except books and newspapers) to any place within or
beyond Queensland, for each two ounces or part thereof, Id.
Commercial papers (comprising partly- or wholly-written docu-
ments not partaking of the nature of a letter), inland and inter-
colonial, two ounces or part, Id. ; to other places, two ounces 3d.,
four ounces 3}d., six ounces 4d., eight ounces 4}d., ten ounces
5d., each additional two ounces up to five pounds Id.
Newspapers printed and published in Queensland, not exceed-
ing 10 ounces, one half-penny for each paper ; this rate applies
to town, inland, and to other Australian colonies. The charge to
Great Britain is one penny for each paper not exceeding 4 oz.
Intercolonial papers one halfpenny for every 2 ozs. ; foreign, one
penny f.r 4 ozs.; halfpenny for every additional 2oz .
Money-orders can be obtained on all the leading towns in the
colony. Commission charged for any sum not exceeding £5,
sixpence ; over £5 but not exceeding £lO, one shilling. To the
neighbouring colonies the commission is fid. for any sum under
£2, Is. for sums of £5 and under, Is. fid. for sums of £7 and
under, 2s. for sums of £lO and under. To all other places,
6d. for every £1 or fraction thereof. To most of the
European cities, to Egypt, India, Japan, tnited States and
many foreign cities, and to several of the British colonies,
money-orders can also be sent at the foregoing rates, subject
in some cases to a small deduction on payment.
On January 1, 1898, there were 119 money-order offices, being
an increase of six on the previous year. During 1897 the
number of transactions was 205,481 (increase 0 - 61), the amount
of same being £787,598 (increase 3 - 94).
Postal notes are issued of the following values and fees :- ls. to
Is. 6d., }d.; 2s. to 4s. 6d., Id.; ss. to 7s. 6d., 2d. ; 10s. to 205., 3d.
The business in nostal notes for 1897 showed an increase of
13 44 per cent, in the number of transactions, and an increase
in the amount of l„ - 93 per cent, as compared with 1896.
11
QUEENSLAND.


The postal service to the United Kingdom is performed by the
steamers of the P. and O. and Orient lines ; the mails being
carried overland by rail between Adelaide and Brisbane.
There are now (1898) eight mails outward and the same number
inward in each month to and from Great Britain.
The mail coastal services hive hitherto been performed by the
Australasian United Steam Navigation Company, comprising a
weekly service between Brisbane and Cooktown, and a fort-
nightly service between Cooktown, Thursday Island, Norman-
ton, and Burkctown.
In October, 1808, an arrangement was concluded with the
A.U.S.N. Company for three distinct service:, on the northern
coast, extending as far as Cooktown.
I. A weekly service between Gladstone (north coast railway
terminus) and Townsville, at a speed of not less than twelve
knots.
11. A weekly service between Townsville and Cairns via inter-
mediate ports.
111. A weekly service between Port Douglas and Cooktown by
the steamers leaving Brisbane on Saturday.
The parcel post came into force in Queensland on January 14,
1893. and its operations are most favourably reported on.
During the year 1897 there were received and despatched 173,369
parcels, the revenue amounting to £12,541 2s.
From October 1, 1891, Queensland, in common with the rest
of the Australian colonies (with one vote for all), entered the
Postal Union.
Railways.—The railways in Queensland consist of thirteen
distinct systems comprised in two divisions, the Southern
and Central Division, which includes the Southern and
Western, the Wide Bay and Central Lines, 2,061} miles ;
and the Northern and Carpentaria Division which in-
cludes the Mackay, Bowen, Northern, Cairns, Cooktown and
Normanton - Croydon lines, 547 miles. They are as fol-
lows : The Southern and Western Railway, being the line
from Brisbane westward and southward to the New South
Wales border (Wallangarra), the South Coast line, and the North
Coast line ; the Maryborough Railway, being the line from
Maryborough to Gympie and South Bundaberg and branches ;
the Bundaberg Railway, being the line from Bundaberg to
Mount Perry and Gladstone; the Central Railway, being
the line from Rockhampton westwards to Longreach, formerly
known as the Northern Railway, with the branches to
Clermont and Springsure; the North Rockhampton line
to Emu Park ; the Northern Railway, being the line from
Townsville to Hughenden and Winton (last section under con-
struction), including the Ravenswood branch; the Mackay
Railway, being the line from Mackay to Mirani, with branch
to Eton ; the Bowen Railway open to Wangaratta, 48 miles;
the Cooktown Railway, the line from Cooktown towards the
Palmer, 67 miles ; the Cairns Railway, open to Mareeba, 47
miles; the Normanton Railway from Normanton to Croydon.
The dates of openings of these lines were : The Southern and
Western Line (July 31,1865), the Central Railway (September 17,
1867), the Northern Line (December 20, 1880), the Maryborough
and Gympie line (August 6, 1881), the Bundaberg line (July 19,
1881), the Mackay Railway (August 10, 1885), the Cooktown
Railway (November 30, 1885), the Cairns Railway (October 8,
1887), the Normanton Railway (May 7, 1889), and the Bowen
Railway (June 2, 1890.)
The Southern and Western Railway consists of a line from
Brisbane to Cunnamulla, westwards, 604 miles, and to Wallan-
garra, southwards, 233 miles. The stations are—Central, Roma
Street, Milton, Aucheuflower, Toowong, Taringa, Indooroopilly,
Chelmer, Graceville, Sherwood, Corinda, Oxley, Darra,
Wolston, Goodna. Redbank, River View, Dinmore, Bundamba,
Booval, East Ipswich, Ipswich, Karrabin, Walloon Thagoona, Rose-
wood, Lanetield, Calvert, Grandchester, Laidley, Forest Hill,
Gatton, Grantham, Helidon, Murphy’s Creek, Spring Bluff, Har-
laxton, Toowoomba, Cranley, Wetalla, Gowrie Junction, (the
Southern Line branches off at this point); Gowrie, Oakey, Jon-
daryan, Bowenville, Blaxland, Dalby, Macalister, Warra, Chin-
chilla, Columboola, Miles, Drillham, Dulacca, Jackson,
Channing, Yeulba, Wallumbilla, Blythdale, Roma, Bungewor-
gorai, Hodgson, Brinsop, Muckadilla, Amby, Mitchell, Womallila,
Mungallala, Dulbydilla. Morven, Angellala, Charleville, Mangalore,
Murweh, Wyandra, Goongoola, and Cunnamulla. The fares are at
the rate of about 2Jd. per mile first class and IJd. per mile second
class. The stations of the Southern Line, after leaving the
Gowrie Junction are —Charlton, Wellcamp, Westbrook, Wyreema,
Cambooya, Qreenmount, Nobby, King’s creek, Clifton, Elphin-
stone, Talgai, Hendon, Deuchar, Toolburra, Rosehill, Millhill,
Warwick, Silverwood, Cherry Gully, Maryland, Dalveen, Thulim-
bah, Stanthorpe, Beverley, Glen Aplin, Ballandean, Bald Moun-
tain, Wallangarra.
A branch line from Hendon to Allora, 3} miles, was opened in
Juno, 1897.
The Sandgate Line has a length of 12} miles, and the following
stations: —Brunswick Street, Bowen Hills, Mayne, Albion,
Wooloowin, Eagle Junction, Nundah, Northgate, Nudgec, Cabbage
Tree, Deagon, and Sandgate Centra). At the Junction isa branch
line to Pinkenba, with stations at Clayfield, Hendra, Ascot
(Racecourse), Whinstanes, Eagle Farm, Meeandah, and Pinkenba.
The Highfields Branch, extending from Toowoomba to Crow's
Nest, 34 miles, with stations at Cranley, Wetalla, Pengarry
junction, Bimam, Cawdor, Shirley, Woolmer, Merin-
gandan, Klienton, Cabarlah, Gehatn, Mount Pleasant, Taylor,
Hampton, Pechey.
The Killarney Branch, from Warwick to Killarney, 28 miles,
with stations at Killarney junction, Hermitage, Swan Creek,
Summcrhill, Mount Sturt, Yangan, Neereeadah, Danderoo, and
Tannymorel.
The Brisbane Valley Branch extends from Ipswich to Esk, a
length of 43 miles, from the Junction, with stations at Brassall,
Pine Mountain, Borallon, Wason, Fairneyview, Femvale, Vernor,
Lowood, Clarendon, Bellevue, and Mount Hallon.
The North Coast Line to Gympie, 106 miles from Bris-
bane, and thence to Maryborough, Bundaberg, and Glad-
stone, starts from Nundah on the Sandgate Line, and has
stations at Virginia, Geebung, Zillmere, Bald Hills, Strathpine,
North Pine, Narangba, Burpengarry, Morayfield, Caboolture,
Beerburrum, Glass Mountains, Beerwah, Landsborough, Mooloo-
lah, Eudlo, Palmwoods, Woombye, Nambour, Yandina, North-
arm, Eomundi, Cooroy, Cooran, Traveston, Keefton, Monkland,
Nashville, and Gympie. The line from Gympie to Mary-
borough, 61 miles, with stations at Tamaree, Harvey s
Siding, Curra, Kadina, Gnnalda, Kilkivan Junction, Kanyan,
Gootchie, Gundiah, Netherby, Kooringa, Tiaro, Blackmount,
Owanyilla, Antigua, Mungar Junction, Graham’s Creek, \en-
garie, Oakhurst, Croydon Junction, Maryborough. The Pialba
Branch from Maryborough to Pialba, 25 miles, with stations
at Colton, Mikenbah. Urraween, Kawungan, and Pi.lba. The
Isis Branch, with stations at Isis Junction, Abingdon, Horton,
Doolbi, Childers, Huxley, Hapsburg, and Cordalba. The Mary-
borough to Bundaberg Line, 54 miles, with stations at
Croydon Junction, Aldershot, Torbanlea, Burrum, Howard,
Isis Junction, Goodwood, Elliott, Clayton. Thabeban, and
Bundaberg. The Bundaberg Railway, from Bundaberg to
Mount Perry, 66 miles, with stations at North Bundaberg,
Oak wood, Sharon, Gibson’s Siding, Bingera, Goondoon, Kolan,
Maroondan, Gin Gin, Watawa, Ualysford, Moolboolaman,
Gillen’s Siding, Hoolboonda, Wonbah, Wolca, Drummer’s Creek.
Bundaberg Gladstone Line, 111 miles, with stations at Meadow-
vale, Moorland, Avondale, Yandaran, Mullet Creek, Rosedale,
Murray’s Creek, Scrubby Creek. Miriam Vale, Iveragh, Rodds
Bay, and Annandale.
The Gayndah Branch, 46 miles from the junction, with
stations at Mungar Junction, Thinoomba, Hunters Hut,
Aramara, Broowena, Boompa, Biggenden, and Woowoonga.
A line to Kilkivan, branching off from the junction, with
stations at Dickabram, Miva, Brooyar, Boowoogum, Woolooga,
Oakview, and Kilkivan.
The Fassifem Branch extends from Ipswich to DUgandan, 3G
miles, with stations or platforms at Little Ipswich, Churchill,
Hampstead, Purga, Goolman, Hillside, Rockton, Peak Crossing,
Flinders, Churchbank. Harrisville, Wilson’s Plains, Radford,
Munbilla, Anthony, Blantyre, Roadvale, Teviotville, Hoya,
Boonah, and Dugandan.
A branch line to Pittsworth, 29 miles from Gowrio Junction,
with stations at Wyreema, Umbiram, Southbrook, Greenhills,
and Broxburn.
The South Coast Lino, extending from South Brisbane (Mel-
bourne Street) to Beenleigh, 24 miles, and Southport, 50
miles, with stations at Gloucester Street, Park Road,
Fairfield, Yeronga, Yetrongpilly, Moorooka Rocklea,
Salisbury, Cooper’s Plains, Sunnybank, Runcorn, Kuraby,
Kingston, Loganlea, Bethania Junction, Holmview, and
Beenleigb, Stapylton, Ormeau, Pimpama, Coomera, Oxen-
ford, Helensvale, Ernest Junction, Southport, with branch to
Logan Village, and Beaudosert, with stations at Waterford,
Buccan, Logan Village, Jimboomba, Cedar Grove, Woodhill,
Veresdale, Olenengle. and BeaudesePt
There is also a branch line to Nerang, with a station at
Molendinar. , „ .
The Cleveland line 21 miles, with stations at South Brisbane,
Gloucester Street, Park Road, Logan Road, Coorparoo, Morning-
side, Mooraree, Hemmant, Lindum, Wynnum, Manly, Birkdale,
Wellington Point, and Ormfston.
The Central Railway starts from Rockhampton, with a ter-
minus at present at Longreach, 425 miles, with stations at
Yeppen, Gracemere, Langley, Malchi, Kabra (for Mount Morgan),
Neerkoll, Stanwell, Warren, Bnshley, Wycarbah, Westwood,
Goganjo, Herbert's creek, Boolburra, Duaringa, Wallaroo. Dingo,
Stanley, Walton, Blackwatcr, Tolmies, Comet, Yamala, Weemah,
Emerald, Selma, St. Helen’s, Glendarriwill, Anakie, Borilla,
Withersfleld, Bogantungan, Drummond, Pine Hill, Belyando,
Alpha, Beta, Main Range, Jericho, Alice, Busthinia, Back
Creek, Barcaldine, Westboume, Saltern, Brixton, Dartmouth,
Ilfracombe.
There is a branch line now nearing completion to Mount
Morgan, to which place it is expected to be opened by the end
of the year (1898). At present it is opened to Moornmera (19
miles from Rorkh impton), 9 miles beyond Kabra on the Central
Line. ' , . ,
A line has also been constructed to Broadmount, which
branches off from the Emu Park Line at Nankeen Junction.
Broadmount is made to connect with the Brisbane to Gladstone
Line by a steamer, built by the Government to carry mails
and passengers, thus providing a through system between
Brisbane and the Central Railway.
There is a branch line from North Rockhampton to Emu
Park, 29 miles, with stations at Lakes Creek, Williamstown,
Nankin Creek, Coolcorra. New Zealand Gully, Tungamull,
Coowonga, Coorooman, and Tanby.
The Clermont Line extends from Emerald to Clermont, 62
miles, with stations at Emerald Downs, Gordon Downs, Capella,
Retro, Retro Creek, and Langton.
The Springsure line extends to Springsure, 41 miles, with
stations at Emerald, Femlees, and Minerva.
The Northern Railway, starting from Townsville, to Stamford
(towards Winton), 274 miles. The stations are Oonoonba,
Cluden, Stewart’s Creek, Roseneath, Brookhill, Stanley,
Antil Plains, Toonpan, Mountain View, Woodstock, Double
Barrel, Philps Siding, Reid River, Cardington, Haughton
12
QUEENSLAND.




140
"
v^.
142
14^
>• |i
CJbsse.
Gulf of Tapuau
W
M8
1
SO
U 11
1
52
154
R»isxxirjE%£
V
Wm^M er% ' 9v
MVSCT
I.
T0*A£
i/ rw>,/r 1
WSweTMc (g
vSk\ j,
"tH/jg
fer—
10
it!
\ \
T.r-
*
m
•\
\
Hata
M4ck6 fN
«■ nSL* h
lie.
I 12
Chervffi IL-.^
"'M, .4
troN
APE vft^v
/[ tfS/Ilvi
12
Jhryfher
Jbra
{ //a m )R
<s>
RAILWAY MAP
RJ
yOHK [((,(( 3
v-» r
aULF c
J* Arrihzrjpi
x *® **
irruruth ,
/
1
KIKSIrtiAlil ,
,/ coe* 7
V-z^-
U U)
W
14
CA R PUN T/
\R TA
IM*
j
■* >
A
'English/ IKles.
O
!4 i
masGRAYE / y~\/
Tv.
\
3|7 t (7 3^
6<j so too no mo vo
TMxterFl/
/ ( <V5f y 3
0 x
i •
%//
1 v;
Goldfield ' <<
./MyrmwcUl *.
COR
J.
4 L
SEA
•6
nda 0
-
IS
ncloT. (ll(h-
Co.
l\d\
tV %.
‘Tf
/ jpy^r
PORCH ESTER*"^§$ti
gg^LfiT
®~T l) V^V-jiaV
&'»HS Is
*»ARCEBA
VT ?
\ V j NARE
ULj
H
\
/—
iT\ T \
f'
(
\6 —
PljtpdLf
f / NO^F
Je ' t»\ >
<MAN
\ \
Vo
<?
18
lx
)V-!
S5,
»A^
/ J M
r n JK \
tj Cj^BE
}\\ CLARK
r|£
2rVf» i
H
1X / \
/ r\
| \ 4*
' ' 4- 0 T0
|20 -
U B /
1444
YAPPER V N
• >
-> V
V 0^ . _ 4 '
V VTVi-p-L
UJ’MINST
p—
\
5^>
!
O
-JZ
V/r" 1
X
j I
( HpMESTBAD0^TV
On
(1
_
20
/ /
UGLAd J Jr /
f PENTLANDjf
K
r\j p E R T yWGHeHD
eT \ V
SELLHEIITS
\carusle“%^^ c
aconsfield
\eulc
° I s A
«<T
\
Gnrtorv
4 \/ \
A L,
J '
\ A
\ \ \ \ A
\ \ \JABBKFCY
.BANY^/
X < /
'bton*
/ t 4
\ O.
<
J
fti
22 —
-T
y //' AYRSHIRE '11
1N0 ( )
UlXv
V T/
CAIRNS^V*^
.
22
O rV^
j RODNlS^
CLERMONT
™\m
1
4 4 '" \
vv
<• Tropic
o/ - Cc»pr\prn M j.
>Vc hell
Ac X\ CLERMOlJS
BELYaAo
R0PE «X UEB
cafella /\ Bl
nrALBor Z <Z\ V
A
c
UVI
V y. 1
JL‘
1 (——
PORTLAND 1 fV
7*h~*£-
X/* 1
1 r-\ 0 W
-A
2+ —
VTT
1 0
) Af
HU/fw£HT^
y
SV'rji c t
ilaiT CLijirdKI
l iBULA
. «!
24
*
*
h\T
\ \ ROSES
h TV
JjS\
Jhz
J<5^
r?
/A. y
y yWOLSBlEY j
S' /j /
pMITCliELL \
nuytfw /
yrror/ / /
wJCMMMVLLA /
\ *i?k iN -Ayy
0 /
, , /
/?
luU4i.
VI
v)r*
LAOOUCH
ABERDERiJ ' "
UN TTo
K 1 Pelham I PUAOENa
rELHAM fCMt£ ]
O P
S c 'Pie* >
7 , Sc£
1 » * S *Jfy-
r
)BurnettX s
tescuaT ii
L
VfLDefK
Bg *o
fe 1 04 69
u&<aa '- z
* h
e*
1
b
26 —
"T“ A
C r
'o £/° r y
/ I
( i
v-^v^r
r» .,«- ( bl
•*OVINIA T.T
I | \ \ 6
LWERJ r \ f W’r
rmnt
ROY
felW —
2€
p
W ' X.BUU
W a r r 4
Co/ PAROoVp®],
HER
KENNED 1 '
/ L.ot'C 1 T
\ PlT
ly/toiJn\
‘V N
n<CHUA»V^_^ -i
w/u
MMNIWjfflU
b O
/ DistJ
v
:D >
r -\J -
/ P7
Maran
\f /ELGIN
0 X7 /-'
„W*AU RICH YaT
der^^^5
’tag «a
31 1
A-
■**>*/
f /
CO
\
H )
WELL 1 JfN C T fe} N
J / \
CASSIULIS
a E^Wiort e rv--.
/
M.ARSH "* KR HJ6
Aumn s awjr
—
28
>0-
j WarH
°Y
-V //£££'
V berharb,
W V
A»R*¥KVpT> TlVtfi
jOf i isud/ieJ J Jp)J J
A
-
LUST h/a.)
1 1
LIA
1ST E W y
'' S OF1
1 «
//¥.
A/£
VBURIttTYXVv /
> GOUGH /
/^calB
L=
138
140
14-2
44 I4S
148 ISO
152
154
PUBLISHED WITH THE AUSTRALIAN HANDBOOK. 1899.
♦


Valley, Ravonswood Junction, Fanning, Exley, Macrossan
Bridge, Sellheim, Plum Tree, Charters Towers, Sandy creek,
Featherby, Southern Cross, Powlathanga, Balfe s Creek,
Lamond, Allandale, Homestead, Mundic Creek, Cape River,
Pentland, Warrigal, Bungaree Creek, Burra, Torrens Creek,
Warreah, Prairie, Jardine Valley, Hughenden, and Watten.
The line to Bavenswood branches off at Ravonswood Junction
(24 miles in length), with stations at Grass Hut, Kirk River, and
Mount Wright.
The Mackay Railway, extending to Mirani and Eton, with
stations or platforms at Racecourse Crossing, Lagoons, Te Kowai,
Alexandra, Palms, Walkerston, Pleystowe, Newbury Junction,
Marian, Bolden, and Otterburn. From Newbury Junction the
line goes to Eton, 9 miles, with stations at Vince, Victoria, and
Drapers.
The Bowen Railway', extending to Wangaratta 48 miles, with
stations at Don, Euri, Wilmington, and Guthalungra.
The Cooktown Railway - , extending to Laura (67 miles),
with stations at Asmus, Marton, Jansen, Flaggy, Wilton, Coolah
Alderbury, Normanby, Battle Camp, Welcome, Sandown, and
Deighton.
The Cairns to Herberton Railway, extending to Mareeba, 47
miles,with stations at Edge Hill, Stratford, Freshwater, Redlynch,
Springs, Barron Falls, Kuranda, Myola, Oaklands, Koah,
Biboohra. A private line is now being constructed by the
Chillagoe Proprietary to connect the newly opened mineral
fields at Chillagoe with the Cairns Line, toning at Mareeba.
The Normanton Croydon Railway is now open to Croydon,
a distance of 95 miles, with stations at Clarina, Glenore, Haydon,
Blackball, Creen Creek, Golden Gate.
Two of the three lines constructed under the provisions of
“The Railways Guarantee Act of 1895,” Y - iz., Colton to Pialba,
and Hendon to Allora, have been opened.for traffic. The third,
Mayne to Euoggera, is now under construction.
All the Queensland railways are on the narrow-gauge
principle, the rails being only 3ft. 6in. apart.
The Railway returns for the year ending June 30, 1898,
were Length of railway opened, 2,635| miles ; total cost of lines
opened and unopened, £18,030,003; gross earnings, £1,179,273;
gross working expenses, £686,066; train miles run, exclusive
of ballasting, 5,007,370 miles; cost per train mile, 2s. 9d. ;
earnings per train mile, 4s. 10Jd.; percentage of nett earn-
ings on capital, £2 18s. Sd. ; percentage of avorking
penses to revenue, £5O os. 4d. ; tons of goods carried, 1,323,782 ;
number of passengers carried (exclusive of season-tickets),
2,742,108.
The Railway lines to June 30, 1898, averaged £6,850 per
mile in cost of construction. The line from Roma Street to
Central Station (J mile) cost £103,786, being £207,536 per mile.
On July 1, 1898, the rolling stock on all the lines of rail-
way was returned at 310 locomotives, 344 passenger carriages,
4,754 goods waggons and 96 brake vans. Contracts were made
in August, 1898, for 10 more goods engines of the heaviest
type, to be built in the Colony. Contracts for a large number
of carriages, goods waggons, and cattle and sheep trucks have
also been entered into during the past year.
Tramwavs. —Tramways are in operation in Brisbane.
Horses supplied the motive power originally, but about the
middle of 1897 the electrical system came into operation, and
has been applied to all the lines. The lines ara being further
extended into the suburbs. Ths power-house contains three 450
h.p. compound condensing engines, and three 300 Kilowatt
General Electric Company’s dynamos. Eighteen miles of
streets are traversed, equal to 25 miles of single track. The
rolling'stock in September, 1898, consisted of 40 electric and
20 horse-cars, the latter being used temporarily. The head
office of the Company is at 52, Morgate Street, London, E C.
Shipping:.—The number of vesselsof all nationalities entered
inwards in 1897 was 642, of the aggregate tonnage of 569,610,
with crews of 24,602 men. The clearances were 654 vessels, of
559,290 tons, and crews of 24,510. There are on the Register 17
ocean steamers of 10,098 tonnage and 3,011 h.p., 49 harbour
steamers of 4,474 tonnage and 1,581 h.p., and 56 river-going
steamers of 1,524 tonnage and 803 h.p.
Xiighthouses. The principal lights on the coast of Queens-
land are: on the north-east corner of Moreton Island (in lat.
27° 1’ 57” S., long. 153° 28’ E.), a first order revolving light,
attaining its greatest power at intervals of 60 seconds ; Com-
boyuro, Cowan Cowan Point, and the Yellow Patch fixed light
(fourth order condensing), on the NE., W. and N. part re-
spectively of Moreton Island, showing white or red according to
their bearings. Tanualuraa light, at the back of the Ship Patch,
used in line with Cowan Cowan for entering by the North
Channel, and in that direction having the power of a first order
light; two small lights at Cape Moreton to avoid Smith rock ;
a fourth order D. condensing on Caloundra Head, also one on
Bribie Island ; a fourth order holophote on Bribie Island which
forms alead with the latterfor entering the North-WestChannel:
three gas buoys also mark this Channel; twenty small
lights for the navigation of the Brisbane river; an iron
screw pile lighthouse at the outer edge of the bar, fourth
order occulting 10 seconds bright, 2 eclipsed; rod and
white; red and white, 4th order, leading lights for Bar
cutting; two leading lights for entering boat channel,
one sixth order light at Cleveland Point, one small light at
St. Helena, and one at the south end of Moreton Island ; two
leading lights Southport; two leading lights at the bar of the
Noosa river; at Double Island Point a third order dioptric light
re\ - olving— intervals of flashes 30 seconds a dioptric light at
Sandy Cape of the first order, reaching its greatest brilliancy
every two minutes ; at Wide Bay Bar two leading lights Hook
Point, and three at Inskip Point; twenty-three small lights
Great Sandy Strait; two fourth order leading lights on
Woody Island, and three small lights on Little Woody Island,
for entering Great Sandy Strait from the north; two lead-
ing lights Quarantine Station, white cliffs, leading to mouth
of Mary River ; twentv-one leading and other lights in the
Mary River; fifth order fixed light at Burnett River Heads ;
and thirteen small lights in river. At Lady Elliott Island
(fourth order, revolving every 30 seconds) ; at Bustard Hoad,
fixed and flashing second order, also screened fifth order
light for clearing outlying rock ; Gatcombe Head, fixed white
and red, also light on Oyster Rock and Settlement Point; light
at Auckland Point, and at Pilot’s Cottage ; two red lights,
Auckland Creek ; Cape Capricorn, third order light revolving
every minute, auxiliary light for clearing Rocky Islets; also
fourth order holophote, forming lead with main light for clearing
Cottier Bank, one gas buoy on Timandra Bank ; fourth order
light, red and white at Sea Hill; six leading lights Koppel Bay
and Port Alma; twelve leading lights and Upper Flats light-
ship in Fitzroy River; at North Reef, second order fixed and
double flashing light; at Broad Sound one fixed white light;
a second order fixed and flashing light at the Pine Islets ; at,
Flat Top Island, fourth order red and white fixed light, and
twenty-seven small lights in Pioneer River, and for Flap Top
anchorage ; at Dent Island (Whitsunday passage), a 4th order
dioptric light, revolving every 30 seconds ; at Port Denison, a
fixed white light, four leading lights south entrance, and red light
at each end of jetty ; at Cape Bowling Green, a third order
light revolving every minute ; at Cape Cleveland, a revolving
light of the fourth order, attaining its greatest brilliancy every
20 seconds ; and an auxiliary light leading between Four Foot
and Twenty Foot rocks. At Townsville, one sixth order
light at end of eastern breakwater, small green light at end
of western breakwater, and six other lights at Ross Creek,
a fourth order fixed light on Bay Rook. Five leading lights at
South entrance Hinchinbrook Channel; Mourilyan Harbour two
leading lights; a' sixth order double-flashing white light,
from summit of south-eastern of the North Barnard Islands ;
five loading lights at the Johnstone river ; at Cairns two
white leading lights and one small red light; illuminated
tide-gauge on Fairway Beacon ; at Low Islands a third order
revolving light (minute intervals); at Island Point, a fifth order
fixed red light; two lights at entrance of Dickson Inlet;
fourth order holophote on Rocky Islet, and fourth order con-
densing Archer Point, for leading between Cape Tribulation
and “a” reef; and also coloured arcs for leading clear of
“d ” reef and Blackbird Patch, off Monkhouse Point; at Cook-
town (Endeavour River), two red leading lights; and a fourth
order fixed white light on Grassy Hill; at Channel Rock (Cape
Melville), a lightship exhibiting a fixed light; at Claremont
Islands, a lightship showing- a fixed light; at Piper Island, a
lightship showing a fixed light; at Goode Island, a fourth order
fixed light; at Thursday Island, two leading and one single
light; at Proudfoot Shoal, a lightship showing a fixed white
light. At Booby Island a second order dioptric light, revolving
at intervals of one minute. Off the Norman bar a light-
ship ; at the entrance to the Norman River six leading
lights. In all, in 1897, the number and order of lights
exhibited waslst order 2, 2nd order 4, 3rd order 4, 4th
order 16, sth order 6, 6th order 4, holophotes 5, lightships 6,
smaller lights 200, yearly consumption of oil, about 6,000
gallons of paraffin and 18,000 of kerosene. During 1897-98
thesj lights were maintained at an expense of £20,000.
Friendly Societies. --There are numerous Friendly
Societies in Queensland, comprising Oddfellows, Foresters,
Rechabites, Sons and Daughters of Temperance, Protestant
Alliance, Hibernian Benefit, Druids, and others, in all number-
ing about 341, with 24,500 members, and funds to the amount of
£187,500. There were distributed in the way of benefit
during 1897 £53,000, the cost of management being £14,000.
Defence and Volunteer Forces. —On December 31,
1897, the Defence Force (including A Battery P.F.) numbered
279 officers and 2,533 men. The Volunteer Force numbered 48
officers and 951 men, in addition to which there are members
of Rifle Clubs and Police Force, which latter could be called
out if necessary for the defence of the Colony. The forces
comprise eight batteries of artillery, one company of engineers,
four regiments of infantry, ten companies of Rifles, twelve
companies of Mounted Infantry, and four Ambulance Corps.
Two batteries protect the entrance to the Brisbane River,
besides a system of submarine mines, and there are batteries
at Rockhampton, Townsville, and Thursday Island. Two gun-
boats and two torpedo boats belong to the Colonial Govern-
ment, and are stationed in the Brisbane River; the hopper
barges too can be utilized for defence. The Marine Defence
Force on January 1, 1898, numbered 16 officers and 330 seamen,
346 in all.
Under the Australian Naval Defence Bill Queensland is a
contributory to the maintenance of what is known as the
Auxiliary Squadron, which arrived in Australian waters in
August, 1891.
Real Property. —From the year 1862 to December 31, 1897,
the operations io the Real Property Office have been as follows :
—lnstruments lodged for registration, 361,132; titles operated
on, 567,497 ; new titles, 268,041 ; deeds of giant registered,
89,876. Hie total area now subject to the provisions of the Real
Property Acts of 1861 and 1877 is 12,959,694 a Or. 19p. During
1897 the business of the Real Property Transfer Office was : in-
struments presented for registration, 14,212; new titles issued,
10,812 ; number of titles operated on, 25.435.
Mills and Manufactories. —On January 1, 1898, there
were 1,803 mills, manufactories and works, employing in all
22,843 hands. Among the more important of these were ;
13
QUEENSLAND.


21 boiling down works, 45 tanneries, 20 fellmongcrios and wool-
scouring establishments, 149 cordial factories, 24 breweries, 4
distilleries, 13 flour-mills, 13 ice works, 19 jam factories, 11 meat-
preserving works,Bl sugar-mills, 164 butter factories, 39 boot and
shoe factories, 20 clothing factories, 131 saw-mills, 26 machinery
and engine works, 4 railway carriage works, 19 foundries, 3 docks
and slips, 11 ship and boat-building yards 15 bedding and curled
hair factories, 97 coach and carriage works, 13 gas works, 26 soap
and candle works, 9 tobacco factories, and 121 creameries.
At Ipswich an extensive tweed factory has for some time been
in successful operation; also locomotive works; at Nundah
there are larger ailway-sarriage works ; and at Toombul works
for the manufacture of signals and interlocking appliances.
Locomotive engines are being manufactured at private
establishments in Brisbane and Maryborough. There are
several cheese and butter factories and creameries in full work.
Under “The Meat and Dairy Produce Encouragement Act of 1893 ”
provision is made for the subscribing of a portion of the capital
required for the erection of suitable buildings and machinery for
the manufacture and exportation of meat and dairy produce from
the colony, and a bonus is also given on all butter and cheese
exported, provided the shipment is not less than 1 cwt.
in the case of an individual, or 10 cwt. from a factory.
Patents, &o. —Fees : On application for provisional protec-
tion, £1 ; on filing complete specification, £2 ; on certificate of
renewal before end of 4 years, £5; before end of 8 years, £lO.
Trade Marks : On application to register, £2; for continuance of
market and of 14 years, £l. During 1897 there were granted or
registered 381 patents, 231 trade marks. 8 designs, 18 copyrights
(books), 21 copyrights (fine arts).
Distilleries and Breweries. There are five distil-
leries ; one in the Mackay district, one at Brisbane, one at the
Logan, and two at Bundaberg. During the year ending June 30,
1897, there were U'2,803‘8 gallons of proof spirit made at these
distilleries. There are 22 registered breweries in working.
During the year ending June 30, 1897, there were brewed
5,378,515 gallons of beer.
Revenue. —The Revenue for the year ending June 30, 1898,
was £3,768,152 9s. 2d., being a Increase on the previous
year of £155,002 Bs. 7d. The Expenditure for the year was
£3,747,428 6s. lid., the excess of Revenue over Expenditure being
£20,724 2s. 3d. The Debit Balance on June 30, 1897, was
£286,772 6s. 4d., which, with the amount transferred to Trustees
of Public Debt Reduction Fund £8,886 4s. 2d.—made
a total of £295,608 10s. 6d., deducting the proceeds of 4 per
cent. Treasury Bills redeemed by Government Savings Bank,
3i per cent, stock, extinguishing old deficit £295,608 10s. 6d.,
and the surplus asaboveof £20,724 2s. 3d. in all, £316,332 12s. 9d.,
there remained a Credit Halance on June 30, 1898. of
£20,724 2s. 3d. The principal heads of revenue, and com-
parison with 1896-97 are as under : —Customs, £1,207,848 13s. od.,
an increase of £8,661 19s. 6d. ; Excise, £123,396 3s. 4d., an
increase of £51,719 19s. 6d.; Stamp Duty, £110,207 Is. 7d., an
decrease of £4,721 13s. Id. ; Dividend Duty, £61,595 18s. 7d., an
increase of £4,361 13s. sd. ; Licenses, £56,597 Is. 10d., a
decrease of £720 14s. 3d.; Land Revenue, £176,524 ss. 10d., an
Increase of £34,305 os. 4d. ; Pastoral Oc.aip iti0n,£346,248 Us. lOd.
an increase of £2,709 Is. 3d.; Mines, £37,902 14s. 4d., an increase
of £9,222 10s. Bd. ; Railways, £1,158,657 2s. 6d., an increase of
£21,796 9s. 4d. ; Post Office, £174,864 2s. Id., an increase of
£10,797 17s. 2d. ; Electric Telegraph, £84,075 7s. 7d., an increase
of £8,806175. 6d.; Harbour Rates, £277,125125. Bd.,an increase of
£876 16s. sd. ; Office Fees, £21,513 4s. 3d., an increase of
£1,782 6s. Od.; Fines and Forfeitures, £4,444 16s. 2d., a decrease
of £579 Is. lid. ; Miscellaneous Receipts, £186,091 3s. 3d., an
increase of £5,983 6s. 9d.
Public Debt. —On July 1, 1897, the public debt of the
Colony amounted to £33,598,414, represented by Debentures,
£11,534,380, and by stock inscribed in the Bank of England,
£22,064,034. The yearly interest now amounts to about 61,274,244.
there being £1,724,480 at 3 per cent., £10,489,414 at 34 per cent.,
and £21,889,300 at 4 per cent. The debt has been incurred on
account of immigration, railways, telegraphs, roads, bridges, and
other public works.
Insolvency. —During 1897, 500 estates were surrendered—
-474 voluntarily and 26 compulsorily. The liabilities amounted to
£113,913 2s. 10d., and the assets realised £27,181 11s. 7d.
Savings Banks. —On June 30, 1898, there were 142
branches of the Government Savings Banks in operation, the
amount to the credit of 68,126 depositors being £2,807,705
an increase on the previous year of 4,816 depositors, and
of £239,228, in the amount of deposits. The total sum
deposited during the year was £1,508,125 ; the average
value of each account was £4l 4s. 3d., and the average value of
each deposit, £lO 13s. Id. The interest added to depositors’
accounts was £72,285185. sd. The revenue for the year was
£84,733, and the expenses (interest, salaries, &c.), £81,274,
leaving a profit on the year’s business of £3,459. The funds are
principally invested in Queensland Government Debentures
and Treasury Bills. In 1895-96 the interest allowed on deposits
(not exceeding 4-200) was 3J per cent, but in July 1, 1896, it
was reduced to 3 per cent.
Banking. —On June 30, 1898, eleven banking companies
were in business, having about 150 branches or agencies through-
out the colony. Of these, the Queensland National Bank,
the Royal Bank of Queensland, and the Bank of
North Queensland, are local institutions; the first-named
Corporation doing the Government banking business. The
Government deposits, however, are distributed among several
of the banks. The total assets of the 11 banks on the date
mentioned were £16,527,139 10s. Id. ; of which gold and
other coin was £1,646,153 6s. Od. ; bullion, £269,979 16s. Id. ; i .
■ ! and landed property, £717,816 18s. lOd. The liabilities
r I were £12,358,922 2s. 10d. The paid-up capital of the companies
; amounted to £13,207,637 17s 3d.; the aggregate of the last
. I dividend to £249,490 18s. 9d. The deposits not bearing
interest amounted to £3,726,995 14s. 6d. ; those bearing
: interest to £4,919,687 Is. 7d.; the Government deposits bear-
ing interest amounted to £2,651,164 os. 9d.
Imports and Exports. —ln 1897 the Exports amounted
in value to £9,091,557, being £l9 os. Id. per head of popula-
tion ; and the Imports, inclusive of live stock (overland), to
£5,429,191 being £ll 6s. lid. per head. The principal exports,
the produce or manufacture of the colony, in name and value,
were Arrowroot, 282,334 lbs., value £3,404 ; bcche-de-mor, 59
tons 8 cwt., 2 qr., value £4,869 ; bone dust, 6,441 ions 17 cwt.,
value £18,508; but ter, 417,372 lbs., value £16,251; coal, 7,369 tans,
value £3,341 : horns and hoofs, value £7,980 ; manure, 4,479 tons
14 cwt., 1 qr., value £14,830; precious stones, value £1,140 :
tortoiseshell, value £3,561; copper ore, regulus, smelted, and
matte", value £21,388 ; oysters, value £2O 000 ; fruit. £87,446 ;
gold, 805,318 ozs., va1ue£2,539,585 ; gold ore,value £3,847 ; guano,
5,581 tons, value £14,062 ; hides, 405,306, value £272,921 ; leather,
139,854 lbs., value £5,305 ; molasses and treacle, value £10,710 ;
pearl shell, value £130,053 ; frozen, preserved, and salt meat,
value £1,028,039; silver ore. value £7,016; rum (colonial),
value £1,900; sugar (white, yellow and ration), value
£681,038 ; tallow, value £272,528 ; timbei, value £7,791 ; tin
(ore and smelted), value £36,670 ; wool (clean and greasy),
value £2,509,342.
The exports ovqrland of live stock 'comprised 4,615 horses,
176,329 cattle, and 1,113,910 sheep, valued at £834,684.
The imports comprise every description of manufactured
goods, the bidk coming from the United Kingdom. A large
trade in American manufactures, particularly agricultural im-
plements, tools, and articles for domestic use, is also done.
In 1898, the exports amounted in value to £10,856,127, being
£22 os. 9J. per head of population ; ami the imports to
being £l2 3s. 10d. per head.
Immigration. —During 1897 the arrivals in the colony from
all quarters numbered 29,110. The departures during the year
were 25,479, leaving a net increase of 3,631 souls.
Pacific Island Immigration —During 1897 11 vessels,
aggregating 1,061 tons, were engaged in the trade, bringing 910
males and 25 females, principally from the New Hebrides Banks
and Solomon Islands, who were distributed over the Childers,
Bundaberg, Maryborough, Mackay, Ingham, Geraldton, and
Cairns districts. The number returned to the Islands was 924
853 males, 71 females, 40 being children. On January 1, 1898,
it was estimated that the Pacific Islanders in Queensland num-
bered 8,455.
Charitable Institutions. —There are 56 public hospitals
in the colony (two being for children, one each at Brisbane and
Rockhampton), also two benevolent asylums, one at Dunwich
(Stradbroke Island), the other at Rockhampton, and ten orphan
asylums. Into the hospitals during the year 1897 17,20(>
patients were admitted; of the 18,236 under treatment,
15,567 were discharged, relieved or cured, 1,097 died, and
1,057 were still under treatment on December 31. These
institutions have 360 wards, and 2,000 beds. In addition to
the hospitals mentioned there are four lying-in hospitals—
at Brisbane (3) and Rockhampton respectively. In the
Benevolent asylums the admissions during the year numbered
347, and there were 949 inmates at the end of the year. The
number of inmates in the state and licensed orphanages on De-
cember 31, 1897, was 773 ; there were also 141 boirded out and
hired out, apprenticed, or adopted. In addition to the fore-
going there arc three lock hospitals, one at Brisbane, one at
Maryborough, and one at Rockhampton ; four Lunatic reception
Houses and four Lunatic Asylums. The reception houses have 19
wards and 61 beds. In the Asylums and reception houses 2,009*
were under treatment during the year. The lunatic asylum at
Woogaroo has 61 wards, 185 dormitories, and 985 beds; the
asylum at Ipswich 10 wards and 120 beds, and the Too-
woomba asylum 26 wards, 402 beds. (The proportion of
insane to rest of population is about 3 per 1,000, or one in
396.) There is a Blind, Deaf and Dumb Institution at South
Brisbane. There are nine Refuges or Homes, three of them
being in connection with the Salvation Army. There are also
18 Benevolent Societies, to afford outdoor relief to the dis-
tressed, established in the more important towns in the colony,
who distributed upwards of £6,311 6s 4d. during 1897.
Police. —The total strength of the force on January 1, 1898,
not including Native troopers and trackers, was 827, comprising I
Chief Inspector, 3 First Class Inspectors, 4 Second Class In-
spectors, 6 First Class Sub-Inspectors. 3 Second Class, and 5
Third Class, 14 Senior Sergeants, 65 Sergeants, 130 Acting
Sergeants, 596 C"nstables. The number of Native trackers was
121. There are 11 prisons, including the penal establishment
at St. Helena, and 5 police gaols.
Lav.* and Ju-tice.—The administration of justice is car-
ried on by a Supremo Court, composed of a Chief Justice and
four puisne Judges; by District Courts, each presided over by
a District Court Judge ; and by Police Magistrates, assisted by
Justices of the Peace.
Constitution. —The form of government is vested in a
Governor (the Queen's representative), an Executive Council, and
a Parliament of two Houses, the Legislative Council and the
Legislative Assembly. The Council consists at present (1897)
of thirty-eight members, nominated by the Crown for life,
presided over by a President elected by themselves. The
House of Assembly by the Redistribution Bill passed in 1887 now
comprises seventy-two members ; representing sixty electorates,
elected for three years. To exercise the franchise a person must
14
QUEENSLAND.


be of the age of twenty-one years ; he must also possess a voting Persons having property, either leasehold or freehold,
freehold worth £lOO, or pay rent for a house or land of not or a license to depasture land in any electoral district in which
less than £lO per annum, or hold a pastoral license from they do not reside, have the right of a vote in any district in
the Crown, or be in receipt of £lOO per annum as a salary, which such property is situated as well as in the district for
or pay £4O per annum for board and lodging, or £lO for lodging which they claim as residents. Members of Parliament are
alone. He must also be a natural-born or naturalized subject of entitled to £3OO per annum each, and also to mileage expenses
the Queen, and have resided in the colony six months before of Is. 6d. on land, and the actual cost of passage to and fro by sea.
15
QUEENSLAND.


EMIGRATION, LAND, AND
EMIGRATION.
Board of Immigration' —John Mac Donnell (Chairman), Dr.
Marks, G. C. Horstmann, W. H. Irving, Dr. Thomson, J. O’Neill
Bronan.
Government Immigration Agent: Brisbane, J. O’Neill Brenan.
Depot : Kangaroo Point, Brisbane; Agent-General, Sir Horace
Tozer, K.C.M.G. ; Secretary, Charles S. Dicken, Esq., 0.M.G.,
Westminster Chambers, 1, Victoria Street, Westminster.
The average cost of the voyage from London to Queensland is—
sailing ship, cabin, £45 to £5O (some lines, £25 to £35); inter-
mediate, £22 ; steerage, £l5. Length of voyage ninety to one
hundred and twenty days. Steamships are now largely used
for conveying passengers direct, the vessels taking about fifty-
five to sixty days on the voyage.
The regulations with respect to the effects of passengers (who
may have no near relatives on board) dying on the voyage are,
that the surgeon-superintendent is required to take an inventory
of their effects in the presence of the captain. The effects and
inventory so taken are sent through the Agent-General for the
Colony, or by other convenient opportunity, to the friends of the
deceased. In the case of other passengers dying on the voyage,
their goods and effects are handed over to the Curator of Intestate
Estates, by whom they are sold by public auction. After pay-
ment of all debts and expenses, the residue, not exceeding £lOO,
may be paid over by the Curator, upon satisfactory proof of re-
lationship, to any person claiming to be entitled, without the
necessity of probate or letters of administration being taken
out.
The arrangements for free and assisted immigration are now
under the Immigration Act of 1882 (which repealed the Immi-
gration Act of 1872, and the Amendment Act of 1875, though not
affecting anything already lawfully done under that Act),
Amendment Act of 1884, Amendment Act of 188 G, Amend-
ment Aet of 1887, and an Order in Council, June 5, 1891.
Emigration matters in general are under the control of the
Agent-General of the Colony, and of the agents subordinate to him.
Colonial Nominees. —The regulations for the nomination by
British subjects who have resided continuously in Queensland
for six months, and can satisfy the Immigration' Agent upon
that point, of personal friends or relatives (who must be persons
of good character, and free from any mutilation, deformity,
mental or bodily defect) in Europe whom they desire to bring
out are as under. Applications for such passages are to be made
to the Immigration Agent in Brisbane, Assistant Immigration
Agents at Townsville, Mackav, Rockhampton, Bundaberg
and Maryborough, or to the Clerks of Petty Sessions in
the various towns of the Colony. In making the applica-
tion, payment is to be made according to the following
scale :—For a male child between one and twelve years of age,
£2 ; female child between one and twelve, £1 ; for males between
twelve and forty, £4 ; for females between twelve and forty, £2 ;
for persons of either sex above forty and under fifty-five, £B.
Above fifty-five years the full amount of passage money, £l2. (Any
person who arrives in the Colony under the provisions of clause 17
of the principal Act, as a free, assisted, or nominated immigrant,
having previously resided in any part of the Australian colonies
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £5O, with or without
imprisonment for any period not exceeding twelve months.)
(Any application is liable to be refused by the Immigration
Agent, or the nomination, even if granted, may be rejected by
the Agent-General in London, should he think fit to do so.) A
passage certificate will then be issued, available for twelve
months from its date, which the applicant, or nominee, has to
forward to his friend or relative. The latter will have to present
it to the Agent-General for Emigration in the United Kingdom,
or to any appointed Emigration Agent in Europe. A passage
contract ticket will then be given him, entitling him and tne
members of his family mentioned in the certificate issued in
Queensland to a free passage. If the friend or relative do not
make use of the passage certificate, the nominee can get his
deposit returned, less 10 per cent.
The following are the regulations, made June 4, 1801
The only persons eligible to be nominated under the pro-
visions of the ninth section of “ The Immigration Act of 1882,”
shall be relatives or personal friends of the applicant. Every such
person must be of good character, must not have been convicted
of crime, and must be free from any mutilation, deformity, mental
or bodily defect, or any disease calculated to shorten life or to
impair physical or mental energy, and must have been vaccinated.
Mechanics or artisans shall not be eligible to be nominated
under that section; nor shall more than two children under
twelve years of age of the same family, or any person above the
age of forty-five years, be eligible to be nominated without the
sanction of the Minister.
Persons other than female domestic servants, ploughmen,
gardeners, and farm labourers, shall not be eligible to be nominated
under the ninth section unless they are relatives of the applicant.
An application under ninth section will not be received
except from a person who has been a bond fide resident of Queens-
land for at least six months. Every applicant must in his appli-
cation state the length of his residence in the Colony, and the
places where he has resided.
Applications under the ninth section must be in duplicate.
One copy will be sent to the Agent-General.
In the case of applications under the ninth section, the
MINING REGULATIONS.
Immigration Agent, Assistant Immigration Agent or Clerk of
Petty Sessions must satisfy himself by personal inquiry (the
result of which the Clerk of Petty Sessions must report to the
Immigration Agent) that the person for whose passage applica-
tion is made is a relative or personal friend of the applicant.
The Minister may direct that a passage warrant be not issued
in respect of any person nominated.
Passage warrants under the ninth section will be made out in
duplicate.
One copy, to be marked “ Provisional,” will be issued to the
applicant, and the other copy, to be marked “Final,” will be sent
to the Agent-General, who will cause inquiries to be made through
his agents as to the eligibility of the persons named therein to be
nominated under the provisions of this Order.
An application for a passage, accompanied by certificates,
must be forwarded to the Agent-General in respect of every
person nominated. The application must be signed by every
such person who is of full age, or by the head of the family when
a person is nominated with his or her family.
If the Agent-General is satisfied that all the conditions of
this Order have been complied with, he will, upon surrender of
the Provisional Warrant, issue the Final Warrant to the person
nominated, which will entitle him to a Passage Contract Ticket.
A memorandum shall be printed on the Provisional Warrant
stating that it must be surrendered and exchanged for a Final
Warrant at the office of the Agent-General before a passage can be
obtained.
The Agent-General will refuse to issue a Final Warrant to
any person named in a Provisional Warrant if he finds that such
person is not eligible to be nominated under the provisions of this
Order, or that the description in the application is incorrect in
any material particular.
The Order in Council of the 27th of October, 1887, published
in the Gazette of the sth of November, 1887, shall be and is hereby
rescinded.
Any person desirous of emigrating to Queensland, who, by
reason of having neither relatives or personal friends resident in
the colony is not eligible to receive a nominated passage, can,
upon obtaining the approval of the Hon. the Agent-General for
Queensland, 1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London,
be granted a full paying steerage passage upon payment of the
sum of £l3 13s.
Ship kits are now supplied by the government, and the
articles are, at the termination of the voyage, to be delivered to
the Immigration Agent at Brisbane.
Reception and Employment or Immigrants. —ln various parts
of the Colony are established depots, to which all emigrants
may be forwarded if necessary. The Police Magistrate, or other
assistant Immigration Agent specially appointed, will register
applications made for servants, and engagements made within
the dep6t in pursuance of such applications, and will take all
measures to facilitate the making of such engagements. The
Immigration Agent is authorised to grant a free railway ticket to
any assisted, free, or remittance emigrant, being a steerage pas-
senger, who may be desirous of proceeding into the country
after arrival in tne Colony.
Rent. —Small houses can be procured from ss. and upwards per
week.
Rates of Wages. —As regards artisans the rate of wages
must be considered as nominal. Agricultural labourers, 12s.
to 15s. per week and found ; blacksmiths, 9s. to 10s.; butchers,7s.
to 10s. ; masons, Bs. to 9s. a day. Bullock-drivers, 17s. to 20s. and
found; carpenters, Bs. to 11s. per day; cooks (male), 255. to
51s. per week ; coopers, 7s. to 10s. per day ; coachmen and grooms,
15s. to 20s. per week and found. Compositors, Is. per 1,000 ;
50s. per week. Engineers, 9s. to 12s. 6d. per day, boiler-makers,
shipbuilders and other constructive iron workers from 9s. 4d. to
11s. ; iron-moulders, 9s. to 10s.; pattern-makers, 10s. to 125.; farm
servants, 12s. (id. tolls, per week and found ; ploughmen, 17s. 6d.
to 20s, per week and found; glaziers and painters, Bs. to 9s. per
day ; gardeners, ss. 6d. to 7s. (id. per day ; grooms, 12s. 6d. to
15s. per week and found ; hut-keepers, £3O to £4O per year;
house servants (male), £3O to £6O per year; labourers, ss. to 7s. per
day ; miners, Bs. to 10s. per day ; plasterers, Bs. to 10s. per day ;
plumbers, 7s. to 10s.; bricklayers, Bs. to 12s. per day; bricklayers’
labourers, ss. to 7s. ; wheelwrights. Bs. to 10s. ; coachbuilders,
7s. to 10s.; cabinet makers, 7s. to 10s. ; quarrymen, 255. to 455.
per week ; shoemakers, 255. to 455. per week ; shearers, 17s. 6d.
to 20s. per 100, hand or machine; shepherds, £3O to £45 per year,
with board and lodging; tailors, 7s. 6d. to 10s. per day ; cutters,
70s. to 120 s. per week ; tin and iron-plate workers, 355. to £3 per
week. Upholsterers, 7s. 6d. to 9s. per day ; bookbinders, 7s. to
10s. ; watchmakers, Bs. to 10s. In nearly all trades eight hours
is counted a day’s work, and overtime is generally paid for at the
rate of time and a-half. Metropolitan grocers and butchers take
a half-holiday weekly (not Saturday) ; many large drapers close
at 1 p.m. Saturday. A movement, which promises to be success-
fully terminated, is on foot for the compulsory closing of a half-
day weekly in respect of all shop trades.
FEMALES.—PIain cooks, 14s. to 20s. per week ; general servants,
Bs. to 155.; housemaids, Ss. to 155.; laundresses, 14s. to 20s. ;
milliners, 15s. to 30s. ; nursery-maids, (is. to Ss.; dressmakers,
15s. to 30s. per week; barmaids, 15s. to 30s. ; cook and laun-
dress, 12s. to 20s. ; nurse-needlewoman, 10s. to 15s. ; house-
parlourmaid, 10s. to 15s. per week.
Prices of Provisions- —Bacon, 9d. to Is. 2d. per lb.; beer,
16
QUEENSLAND.


9s. to 12s. per dozen quarts; brandy, 7s. 6d. per battle ; bread,
6d. to Bd. per 41b. loaf; butter, fresh, Is. to Is. (id. ; butter, salt,
lid. to Is.; candles (sperm), i)d. to Is. per lb. ; cheese, 9d.
to Is. 2d. ; coffee, Is. (Id. to 2s. per lb.; Eggs, 6d. to Is. per
■dozen (more in winter). Flour, lid. to 2d. per lb. ; milk,
sd. per quart; beef, 3d. to 4d. per lb. ; beef, salt, 2Vd. to
3Jd. per lb. ; mutton, 3d. to 4d. per lb. ; pork, 6d. per lb. ; veal,
•fid. per lb. ; mustard, Is. per lb. ; kerosene oil, 2s. per
gallon ; oatmeal, 2d. to 4d. per lb. ; potatoes, 7s. to 9s. per cwt. ;
rice, 4d. per lb. ; salt, 2d. per lb. ; soap, sd. and (3d. per 11). ;
starch, 6d. per lb. ; sugar, 2d. to 4d. per lb. ; tea, Is. lid to 3s. per
lb. ; arrowroot, 3d. to 6d. per lb. ; tobacco, 4s. to Bs. per lb. ;
colonial wines, 33s to 3(is. per dozen ; coals, 17s. to 20s. per ton ;
firewood, ss. to 7s. per load.
During 1897 there was neither free nor assisted emigration to
Queensland. 402 adult nominated emigrants were sent out in
various steamers.
LAND REGULATIONS.
During the Session of 1897 a Bill dealing with the land and
codifying all previous Acts was introduced and carried through
Parliament. This Act came into operation on the Ist March,
1898. The administration is largely vested in a Land Court
(hitherto called the Land Board) which consist of three persons,
instead of two as before, and the duties of the Court may be
performed by one member with respect to the following
matters:—l. Determination of the amount of rent or compensa-
tion, or any other amount. 2. Disputes as to boundaries.
3, Consideration of applications to select land. 4. Appeals from
decisions of Commissioners. But the decision of a single member
■of the Court is subject to appeal to the Land Appeal Court.
The Land Appeal Court is an entirely new tribunal for the
purpose of appeals by way of re-hearing, and consists of a
District Court .Judge and the Members of the Land Court, other
than the member against whose decision appeal is made. The
decision of the Appeal Court is final, except that on points of
law the matter may be referred to the Supreme Court (Full
Court). Further, in the case of tenures under the Acts of 1884
and 1886, the lessees retain their full right of appeal to the
Supreme Court, as provided for under those Acts. Such lessees
have also the right to have the amount of compensation, in the
event of resumption, or with respect to the value of improve-
ments, on determination of the lease (otherwise than by
forfeiture), settled by arbitration in the manner prescribed by
the Public Works Lands Resumption Acts.
The portion of the new Act having reference to pastoral leases
is very similar to the provisions of the 1884 and 1886 Acts, and
applies only to runs brought under its provisions. These runs
are, however, rapidly reverting to the Government, who in cases
where they are required for closer settlement, refuse to re-lease
them and subdivide them into smaller holdings.
The several modes in which land may be acquired, may be
described as follows :—(1) By Agricultural Selection, i.e., Agri-
cultural Farms and Agricultural Homesteads ; (2) Grazing Selec-
tions, i.e., Grazing Farms and Grazing Homesteads ; (3) Scrub
Selections; and (4) Unconditional Selections. The more accessible
lands near lines of railway, centres of population, and navigable
waters are set apart for agricultural selection in areas up to
1,280 acres, while opportunities of acquiring grazing selections in
areas up to 20,000 acres are given over a great extent of Queens-
land territory within accessible distance of the seaboard and the
various lines of railway'.
Except in the case of Scrub Selections and Unconditional
Selections, no person who is not a British subject by birth or
naturalisation, or who is under the age of 16 years, or who seeks
to acquire the land as the agent or servant or trustee of another,
will be allowed to select. A married women is not competent to
select an Agricultural Homestead or a Grazing Homestead,
unless the disqualification is removed by the Land Court in
the case of a married woman who has obtained an order for
judicial separation or an order protecting her separate property,
or who is living apart from her husband.
Applications for selections must be signed by the applicant,
but may be lodged in the Land Office by his duly constituted
attorney', and must be accompanied by a deposit of a year’s rent,
and one-fifth of the survey fee. Applications lodged prior to the
time proclaimed as that at which land is to be open for selection
are regarded as simultaneous with those lodged at the time of
opening.
Where land is open for different modes of selection alternately,
priority among simultaneous applications for the same land is
given to an application for it as an Agricultural Homestead as
against an application for it as an Agricultural Farm ; to an
application for it as an Agricultural Farm as against an applica-
tion for it as an Unconditional Selection ; and if the laud is
open for Grazing Selection, to an application for it as a Grazing
Homestead as against an application for it as a Grazing Farm.
Priority among simultaneous applications for the same land
by the same mode of selection is determined by lot, unless in
the case of simultaneous applications for the same land as a
Grazing Selection or an Unconditional Selection, a higher rental
is tendered than that proclaimed. In that event the highest ;
tender secures priority.
When an application has been accepted by the Land Com- !
missioner and approved by the Court, and the applicant has j
paid for any improvements that may be on the land, he becomes
entitled to receive a license to occupy the land in the case of an |
Agricultural Selection or a Grazing Selection, or a lease in the
case of a Scrub Selection or an Unconditional Selection, j
Within six months after the issue of a license the selector 1
must commence to occupy the land, and must thereafter con-
tinue to occupy' it in the manner prescribed.
Agricultural Selections. —Agricultural Farms : The largest
area that may be acquired by any one person as an Agricultural
Farm is 1,280 acres. If the same person is the (selector of both
an Agricultural Farm and an Agricultural Homestead, the joint
area must not exceed l,2Soacres. The purchasing price may range
from 10s. an acre upwards, as may be declared by proclamation.
The term is twenty y'ears. The annual rent is one-fortieth of the
purchasing price, and the payments are credited as part of the
price. The land must be continuously occupied by the selector
residing personally on it or by his manager or agent doing so.
Within five years, from the issue of the license to occupy, or such
extended time not exceeding two years, as the Court may allow,
the selector must enclose the land with a good and substantial
fence or make substantial and permanent improvements on it
equal in value to such a fence. On the completion of the
improvements the selector becomes entitled to a lease of the
farm, arid may thereafter mortgage it; or, with the permission
of the Minister, may' subdivide or transfer it; or, with the
approval of the Court, may underlet it. After the improvements
have been effected, any lessee (whether he acquired by selection
or transfer) who has held the farm for five years and has duly
fulfilled the condition of occupation, may pay the part of the
purchasing price then remaining unpaid and obtain a deed of
grant in fee-simple. After ten years of the term have elapsed,
the purchase may be completed by the then registered lessee
irrespective of the time he has held it. Agricultural Homesteads :
Land open to selection as Agricultural Farms is not available for
Agricultural Homesteads unless so proclaimed. The area allowed
to be selected as an Agricultural Homestead varies with the
quality of the land. If the price at which any land (open to
both modes of selection) is available to Agricultural Farm
selection is not less than £1 an acre, 160 acres is allowed for a
Homestead : if its price as a Farm would be less than £1 but
not less than 155., then 320 acres can be taken as a Homestead;
and if its price as a Farm would be loss than 15s. an acre, then
640 acres is allowed for a Homestead. The price for a Homestead
is 2s. (id. an acre, the annual rent 3d. an acre, and the term ten
years. The land must be continuously occupied by the selector
residing personally thereon. Certain improvements having
been made, the holder is entitled to a lease at any time after five
years from the commencement of the term, on the selector
proving that the conditions have been duly' performed and that
the sum expended in improvements on the land has been at tho
rate of 10s., 55., or 2s. 6d. an acre respectively, according to the
quality of the land, he may pay up the remaining rents so as to
make his total payments equal to 2s. 6d. an acre, and obtain a
deed of grant of the land in fee-simple. The selectors of a group of
two or more Agricultural Homesteads may associate together for
mutual assistance, and on making proof of bona fldes to the
Commissioner, may receive from him a special license enabling
not less than one-half of the whole number to perform the
conditions of occupation and improvement for the group. The
residence may be upon any' one or more of the Homesteads, and
if more than 10s. has been expended in improvements on any
Homestead while the special license is in force with respect to it
the surplus may be attributed to the others.
Grazing Selections. —Grazing Farms : The maximum area
allowed to be acquired by' any one person as a Grazing Farm is
20,000 acres. 'The term may be 14, 21, or 28 years, as the pro-
clamation opening the land to selection may declare. The
annual rent for the first period of seven y'ears may range from
Ad. per acre upwards, as may be proclaimed or tendered. The
rent for each subsequent period of seven years will be deter-
mined by the Court, but it cannot be decreased at any re-
assessment, nor can it be increased by more than one-half of the
rent for the period immediately preceding. A Grazing Farm
must be continuously occupied by the selector residing personally
on it, or by his manager or agent doing so. As in agricultural
selections certain improvements are demanded, and selectors
are similarly permitted to select in groups. When a Grazing
Farm is enclosed in the manner required, the selector becomes
entitled to a lease of it, and may thereafter mortgage it; or, with
the permission of the Minister, may subdivide or transfer it; or,
with the approval of the Court may underlet it. Grazing
Homesteads : Lands open for selection as Grazing Farms must
also be open for selection as Grazing Homesteads, and at the
same rental and for the same term of lease. As already stated,
an application to select as a Grazing Homestead takes precedence
of a simultaneous application to select the same land as a
Grazing Farm. The conditions and other provisions above-
mentioned in respect of Grazing Farms are applicable also to
Grazing Homesteads, with the following exceptions (1) During
the first five y'ears of the term of a Grazing Homestead, the
condition of occupation must be performed by the continuous
personal residence of the selector on the land. (2) Before the
expiration of five y'ears from the commencement of the term, or
the death of the original lessee, whichever first happens, a
Grazing Homestead is not capable of being mortgaged, assigned,
or transferred.
Re-purchased Lands.— Lands repurchased by the Crown
under the provisions of “ The Agricultural Lands Purchase
Acts of 1894 and 1897,” are made available to Conditional
and Unconditional Selection, on a term of twenty y'ears in
either case. The rent to be paid for the first year is equal to
£lO for every' £lOO of the purchasing price, and (no payment
being required tho second year) an annual payment, £7 19s.
for every £lOO, continued from the third to the twentieth
y'oar will, at the end of the term, have paid off the principal
sum and interest at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum. If the
payment of the balance of the purchase-money is made before
17
QUEENSLAND.


the end of the term a rebate in interest is made accordingly.
The selection must I e o? jupiod during the term by the residence
of the selector or his registered agent.
SUMMARY.—The following summarises the terms on which
land can be secured :
Agricultural Farms, up to 1,280 acres at from 10s. per
acre ; term of 20 years ; annual payments of one-fortieth
of price ; balance at any time after sth year, conditions of
occupation and improvements.
Agricultural Homesteads, up to 640 acres at 2s. 6d. per
acre ; term of 10 years ; annual payments of 3d. per acre ;
balance at any time after sth year ; conditions of personal
occupation and improvements.
Grazing Selections, up to 20,000 acres at from Jd. per acre
per annum rent; term of 14, 21 or 28 years ; conditions of
occupation and fencing.
Scrub Selections, up to 10,000 acres at from peppercorn rent;
term of 30 years ; conditions of clearing and fencing.
Unconditional Selections, up to 1,280 acres at from 13s. 4d.
per acre ; payable in twenty annual instalments,
Auction Purchase, at from 20s. per acre for agricultural land,
and from 10s. per acre for other land ; terms up to 3 years,
Occupation Licenses on annual tenancy.
During 1897 the return of applications for agricultural and
grazing farms under the Land Act was : agricultural farms, 738,
area, 161,827 acres ; grazing farms, 281, area 2,185,394 acres ;
grazing homesteads, 57, area, 309,918 acres; unconditional
selections, 143, area, 23,635 acres; Agricultural Lands Purchase
Act selections, 621, area, 75,498 acres ; agricultural homesteads,
253, area, 53,211: total farms selected. 2,093, area, 2,809,483
acres, total annual rental, £39,369 11s. sd.
MINING REGULATIONS.
Mining for gold in this colony is regulated by the Gold-fields
Act, 1874, and an Amending Act of July, 1878, which applies to
New Gold-fields, and repeals the Act of 1877. During the
session of 1882, an Act called “ The Minerals Land Act of 1882 ”
was passed, by which “The Minerals Land Act of 1872” was
repealed. This Act came into force on January 1, 1883, and the
regulations made under its provisions were gazetted on January
5, 1883. By this Act the Governor is empowered to constitute
any portion of Crown land a mining district, to alter or amend
the boundaries of a mining district, exempt any prescribed area
ot land within a mining district from the operations of this Act,
and constitute any portion of a mining district, or the whole
thereof an area within which mining shall be carried on solely
by the owners of mining licenses. On payment of 10s. the
Governor may cause to be issued to any person (not being an
Asiatic or African alien) a mining license fo? one year, and on
payment of the sum of £4, a business license. All applications
for mineral leases to be made on the prescribed form, and to be
accompanied by the proper survey fee and the first year’s rent.
The yearly rental of every lease to be at the rate of 10s. per acre,
payable in advance, the term not to exceed twenty-one years,
but a further lease of twenty-one years may be granted on such
terms as the Minister deems equitable. Area not to exceed 160 acres.
Under a mining license, the holder may also take up an area not
exceeding 160 acres for prospecting for minerals, without
payment of any further fee, and in the event of the discovery of
payable minerals he has the right to hold the ground under
mineral lease.
By the Amending Act of 1878, every gold-field is deemed a
new field until three years after its proclamation. A miner’s
right is not available for such field unless properly endorsed. No
miner’s right issued to an Asiatic or African alien is available
for any new gold-field unless the same has actually been
discovered by an alien. The object of this clause is to check
Chinese intrusion on the gold-fields. Mining without a right
is punishable by removal of the offender from the field, and
the infliction of a fine of £2, or one month’s imprisonment.
Miners desirous of prospecting for gold may mark off and
hold protection areas, ranging according to the distance from a
proclaimed gold-field of from 150 to 400 yards square. Such areas
have to be pegged, registered, and continuously worked. On
payable gold being found and reported to the Warden, the pros-
pectors are entitled to a reward claim, which varies from two to
twenty claims of the ordinary area. Fifty feet frontage are
allowed to each miner on river and creek claims. On ordinary
quartz claims, fifty feet along the line of reef, by a width of 400
feet, are allowed. The extent of ground in any lode claim not to
exceed three chains by five chains, alluvial claim not to exceed
four chains by four chains. This area may be increased by the
Warden when the ground is poor, or expensive machinery has
been erected. Europeans holding miners’ rights, which are
granted for ten years or less on payment of an annual rate of 10s.,
are allowed to occupy and enclose, for the purpose of residence,
an area of land not exceeding a quarter of an acre, as a business
or residence area, to be marked off in a rectangular block, or
as near thereto as possible, the frontage of which to any road,
creek, or water shall not exceed 72 feet, the boundaries to>!
defined by corner pegs 3 inches in diameter and standing
18 inches out of the ground, and can also occupy, under certain
conditions, market garden areas not exceeding five acres. They
may also take up a piece of ground of not more than 40 acres
(according to distance from town centre) to be known as a
homestead lease for residence or garden purposes, the rental being
Is. per acre per annum. They are also entitled to mine in Crown
lands, to make dams, races, and tramways, to divert waters, to
put up and remove any building, and to use any timber, gravel,
or clay for their own building purposes. Upon erecting buildings
or for making improvements on a business or residence area, to the
value of £5, the holder can have such area registered as exempt
from the condition of residence for a period not exceeding one year.
Prospecting dredging areas can also be taken up for two miles
along the course of any river for the purpose of dredging for
gold.
Leases of land not exceeding 25 acres for any term not exceed-
ing 21 years are also granted for mining purposes at a yearly
rental of £1 per acre. These leases, however, are not granted on
new gold-fields until two years after proclamation.
Mining matters are under the control and jurisdiction of duly-
appointed wardens and commissioners.
In the session of 1886 a Bill [The Mineral Lands (Coal Mining)
Act] was passed, dealing with coal mining. It empowers any
person to occupy for twelve months an area of 640 acres for the
purpose of searching for coal on payment of sixpence per acre ;
this license is renewable for a further twelve months on payment
of a further sixpence per acre. The licensee may at any time
apply for a lease of any part of the land not exceeding 320 acres,
for which the yearly rent will be sixpence per acre and a
royalty of threepence for every ton of coal raised.
In the Amendment Land Act of 1889 there are some provisions
affecting mining.
The Mineral Lands (Sales) Act of 1392, applies to lands on gold-
fields, and gives the power to holders of miner’s rights and
licenses to mine on land sold, subject to reservation of gold and
silver, on obtaining the written sanction of the Warden or
Commissioner.
The “ Mineral Land (Sales) Amendment Act,” passed in 1894,
provides for the construction of drives through land intervening
between leaseholds, and imposes a royalty of Is. per oz. for gold
in return for the granting of a lease under the freehold surren-
dered by the lessee.
The Gold Fields Act Amendment Act of 1896 proclaims all
lands on goldfields, except such as are held in fee simple or some
recognised title, to be commons subject to certain specified
conditions.
18
QUEENSLAND.


GOVERNMENT AND EXECUTIVE.
Governor and Commander-in-('hief, Lord Lamington.
Charles Wallace Alexander Napier Cochrane-Baillie, second
Baron Lamington, son of the first baron from Annabclla Mary
Blizabeth, daughter of Alexander Robert Drummond, of
Cadlands, Hants, and grand-daughter of the fifth Duke of
Rutland, was born 1860, and succeeded his father in 1890. Was
educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, 8.A., 1881. M.P.
for North St. Pancras from 1886 until ho succeeded to the
peerage. Was Assistant Private Secretary to the Marquis of
Salisbury when Prime Minister in 1885-86. Lieutenant Lanark-
shire Yeomanry Cavalry D.L. and J.P. Lanark.
Private Secretary, Pascoe William Grenfell Stuart.
Aide-de-Camp, Capt. Pelham.
Lieutenant-Governor, Sir A. S. W. Griffith, G.C.M.G., C.J.
President, His Excellency the Governor.
Vice-President, Premier, and Chief Secretary, Hon. James Robert
Dickson, C.M.G.
Attorney-General, Hon. Arthur Rutledge.
Home Secretary, Hon. J. P. G. Foxton.
Postmaster-General and Secretary for Public Instruction, Hon.
W. H. Wilson.
Secretary for Agriculture, Hon. J. V. Chataway.
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.
Secretary and Treasurer for Mines, Hon. Robert Philp.
Secretary for Public Lands, Hon. D. H. Dalrymplo.
Secretary for Railways, and Secretary for Public Works, Hon.
John Murray.
Member without Portfolio, Hon. A. H. Barlow.
Member without Portfolio, Hon. Geo. W. Gray.
Clerk of the Executive Council, Albert Victor Drury.
PARLIAMENT OF QUEENSLAND.
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
President, Right Hon. Sir H. M. NeIson,K.C.M.G..P.C., D.C.L. | Clerk Assistant and Usher of the Black Rod, Charles W-
Chairman of Committees, Hon. F. T. Brentnall. I Costin.
Clerk of the Council, Henry Wyat Radford. | Librarian, Denis O’Donovan, C.M.G., F.R.S.L., F.R.G.S., &c.
Hon. William Allan.
~ William Aplin.
~ John Archibald.
A. H. Barlow.
William Draper Box,
F. T. Brentnall.
Robert Bulcock.
Chas. H. Buzacott.
FeUx Clewett.
James Cowlishaw.
John Deane.
~ John Ferguson.
~ William Forrest.
„ Angus Gibson.
Speaker, Hon. Arthur Morgan.
Chairman of Committees, Samuel Grimes.
Clerk of the Assembly, Lewis Adolphus Bemays,
F.R.G.B.
Albert ... ... Thomas Plunkett.
Aubigny W. Thorn.
Balonne G. W. B. Story.
Barcoo Geo. Kerr.
Bowen Rbt. Harrison Smi
Rbt. Harrison Smith,
f E. B. Forrest.
Brisbane (North) ... •! T. Macdonald-Pater-
• son.
Brisbane (South)
Bulimba Hon. J. R. Dickson.
C.M.G.
Bulloo John Leahy.
Bundaberg T. Glassey.
Bundanba James C. Cribb.
Burke W. Maxwell.
Burnett William Kent.
Burrum N. E. N. Tooth.
Cairns Thomas Givens.
Cambooya Donald Mackintosh.
Carnarvon J. F. G. Foxton.
J. F. G. Foxton.
Carpentaria ... James Forsyth.
Charters Towers ... |j ’ h?Dunsford.
Clermont V. B. J. Lesina.
Cook John Hamilton.
Croydon William H. Browne.
Hon. Albert Norton.
„ Patrick Perkins.
~ William Grene Power.
~ Alexander Raff.
~ James Thorneloe Smith.
~ Joseph Capel Smyth.
~ Ernest James Stevens.
~ William Frederick Taylor, M.D.
~ Andrew Joseph Thynne.
~ John Sargent Turner.
~ John Webber.
~ Andrew Heron Wilson.
~ Walter Horatio Wilson.
~ Henry Conwell Wood.
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
I Clerk-Assistant and Serjeant-at-Arms, Hon. Charles George
] Holmes a’Court. *
C.M.G., F.L.S., Hansard Reporting Staff for both Houses.—Principal Shorthand
1 Writer, John Gilligan.
Cunningham ... Francis Kates. ! \f qrv borom/b 4 John Bartholomew
Dalby Joshua T. Bell. Maryborough ... -j j T Annear.
_ . , I William Henry Mitchell C. B. Fitzgerald.
Drayton and ... J Groom. Moretou ... ... John D. Campbell.
Toowoomba ... (J. Fogarty. Murilla W. J. H. Moore.
~ , , (John Bartholomew
Maryborough \ j. T . Annear.
Enoggera James George Drake. i\r, ]s£ , ravp J \\m. Bhgh Henry
Fassifem Hon. George Thorn. g ( O'Connell.
Fitzroy Albert James Callan. Normanby Hon. John Murray.
Flinders Chas. McDonald. | Nundah T. Bridges.
t- j „ (W. G. Higgs. Oxley Samuel Grimes.
Fortitude V alley .. |p\ McDonnell. Port Curtis Jason Boles.
OW,y0 W ,y ... , W.ni,.„ Hamilton. )*•«*&
Gympie \ George Ryland. Rockhampton North J. C. Stewart.
Tr , , (Alfred Samplings Rosewood D. T. Keogh.
Herbert \ Cowley. Stanley F. Lord.
, . . JT. B. Cribb. Toowong T. Finney.
Ipswich |a. J. Stephenson. Toombul A. L. Petri
A. L. Petrie.
Kennedy G. Jackson. Townsville i Hanran -
Leichhardt H. F. Hardacre. Townsville ( H on. Robert Philp,
J-iCiClilicil LI li ~, Ml XI. r. IIdIUdCIC, ( AAvll. UOWVI I
Lockyer W. D. Armstrong. Warrego W. W. Hood.
Logan James Stodart. Warwick A. Morgan.
Maranoa Hon. A. Rutledge. Wide Bay ... C. M. Jenkinson
~ , f Hon. David Hay Woolloongabba ... Thomas Dibley.
Mac Kay ... ...» Dalrymple Woothakata ... John Newell.
( Hon. J. V. Chataway. ■
Hon. George W. Gray.
~ Augustus C. Gregory, C.M.G.
~ Frederick Hamilton Hart.
~ John Christian Heussler.
„ Frederick Hurrell Holberton.
~ James Lalor.
~ William Frederick Lambert.
„ Peter Macpherson.
~ C. Ferdinand Marks, M.D.
~ John McMaster.
~ B. D. Morehead.
~ Hugh Mosman.
~ Sir H. M. Nelson, K.C.M.G., P.C.
D.C.L.
F. Lord.
PRINCIPAL OFFICIAL DEPARTMENTS.
CHIEF SECRETARY’S OFFICE.
Treasury Bui Idi tigs.
Chief Secretary, Hon. James Dickson, C.M.G.
Under-Secretary, H. S. Dutton.
Chief Clerk, J. Brunton Stephens.
PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD.
Treasury Buildings.
Members, William Townley, Chairman.
Thos. Mylne.
M. O’Malley.
Secretary, J. P. Bichard.
AGENT-GENERAL.
Agent-General for Queensland in London, Sir Horace Tozer.
Secretary, Charles Shortt Dicken, C.M.G.
Executive Engineer, Gavan Gemmell Dick.
DEFENCE FORCE.
Commandant, Col. Howel Gunter, LA.
Assistant Adjutant-General, and Chief Staff Officer,Lieut.- Col.
J. S. Lyoter.
Staff Officer, Infantry, Major J. P'. Robertson.
~ ~ Artillery, Major J. J. Byron.
~ ~ Mounted Infantry, Lieut.-Col. P. K. Ricardo.
~ ~ Volunteers, Lieut.-Col. Kenneth Hutchinson.
19
QUEENSLAND.


MARINE DEFENCE FORCE.
Naval Commandant (Acting), Commander Walton Drake
Q.M.D.F.
IMMIGRATION OFFICE.
Office and Dep6t, Kangaroo Point.
Board of Immigration.
John Maodonnell, Chairman ; W. H. Irving, G. C. Horstmann,
Hon. C. F. Marks, M.D., John Thomson, M. 8., J. O’Neil
Brenan.
Immigration Agent and Officer in Charge of Labour Bureau, John
O’Neill Brenan.
Matron, Mrs. Kennedy.
HOME SECRETARY’S OFFICE.
Treasury Buildings.
Home Secretary, Hon. J. F. G. Foxton.
Under Secretary, W. H. Ryder.
Chief Clerk, John Flockhart Sloan.
Accountant, P. A Kob.
GOVERNMENT RESIDENCY.
Thursday Island.
Government Resident and P.M., Hon. John Douglas, C.M.G.
REGISTRAR-GENERAL’S OFFICE.
Treasury buildings.
Registrar-General, Joseph Hughes.
Compiler of General Statistics, Thornhill Wccdon.
Deputy Registrar-General, R. B. Howard.
Assistant Statistical Officer, T. W. Shackcl.
REGISTRAR OF TITLES’ OFFICE.
Treasury Buildings.
Registrar of Titles, J. O. Bourne.
Master of Titles, Edward Gore Jones.
First Deputy Registrar of Titles, George M. Jonc=.
Second Deputy Registrar of Titles, Alex. D. Sillars.
Northern Branch. Local Dep.Registrar of Titles,A.D. E.Holcombe
Central Branch, Local Dep. Registrar of Titles, James Mitchell.
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
New Public Offices, Queen Street.
Commissioner, W. E. Parry-Okedon.
Chief Clerk, R. H. Lawson.
Police Magistrate (Brisbane),
Second Police Magistrate, G. P. M. Murray.
Police Magistrate (South Brisbane), W. Yaldwyn.
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
Office, William and George Streets.
Government Printer, Edmund Gregory.
Overseer, G. A. Vaughan.
Accountant, James Thorpe.
PRISONS.
Comptroller-General of Prisons, Cbas. C. E. do F. Pcnnofather.
Superintendent St. Helena, J. Ryan.
Superintendent (Brisbane), R. F. Lewis.
Superintendent (Rockhampton), James Hamilton.
Superintendent (Townsville), D. P. Downie.
ASYLUMS FOR INSANE.
Goodna.
Medical Superintendent, J. B. Hogg, L.R.C.P.
Assistant Medical Superintendents, J. R. Nicoll, M.B.
Toowoomba
Medical Superintendent, J. B. Hogg, L.R.C.P.
BENEVOLENT ASYLUM, DUNWICH.
Superintendent, Patrick Smith, M.D.
INSPECTOR OF SHEEP AND CATTLE.
Chief Inspector of Stock and Registrar of Brands, P. R. Gordon.
INSPECTION OF SHOPS AND FACTORIES.
Chief Inspector, Charles McLay.
Inspectors, A. E. Crichton and M. B. Bcrnays.
Female Inspector, Edith M. Smith.
DEPARTMENT OP PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
Office, Treasury Buildings.
Secretary for Public Instruction, Hon. 1). H. Dalrymplo
Under Secretary, John G. Anderson, M.A.
General Inspector, David Ewart.
Chief Clerk, C. A. J. Woodcock.
Accountant, J. W. C. Drane.
Registrar, Thomas Mclntyre.
Inspector of Orphanages, Walter Scott.
GOVERNMENT STORES.
Storekeeper, A. Woodward.
CENTRAL BOARD OP HEALTH.
Secretary, W. W. R. Love, M.B.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LANDS.
George Street.
Secretary for Public Lands, Hon. J. V. Chataway.
Under Secretary, F. X. Heeney.
Chief Clerk, William Scott.
SURVEYOR GENERAL’S OFFICE.
Office, George Street.
Surveyor-General, Archibald McDowall.
PASTORAL OCCUPATION BRANCH.
Officer in Charge, J. E. Burstall.
DEPARTMENT OP AGRICULTURE.
Secretary for Agriculture, Hon. J. V. Chataway.
Undersecretary, Peter McLean.
Principal of Agricultural College, John Mahon.
BOTANIC GARDENS.
Curator, P. MacMahon.
MUSEUM.
Curator, C. W. dc Vis.
LAND COURT.
Members, W. A. Tully, T. S. Sword, and W. C. Hume.
Secretary, Patrick W. Shannon.
WORKS DEPARTMENT.
Secretary for Works, Hon. John Murray.
Under Secretary, R. Robertson.
Engineer for Bridges and Government Architect, Alfred B. Brady,
M.lnst., C.E.
MINES DEPARTMENT.
Secretary for Mines, Hon. R. Philp.
Under Secretary, P. F. Sellheim.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
Geological Surveyor, Robert L. Jack.
Assistant Geological Surveyors, William H. Rands, W. E,
Cameron, Benjamin Dunstan.
RAILWAYS.
Secretary for Railways, Hon. John Murray.
Commissioner of Railways, Robert J. Gray.
Secretary to Commissioner, T. S. Pratten.
Chief Engineer, Southern and Western Lines, H. C. Stanley
M.1.C.8.
Deputy Commissioner and General Traffic Manager, James F.
Tballon.
THE TREASURY.
Treasury Buildings.
Treasurer, Hon. R. Philp.
Under Secretary, T. M. King.
SAVINGS BANK.
New Public Offices, Elizabeth Street.
Manager, T. W. Wells.
STAMP OFFICE.
Treasury Buildings.
Commissioner, H. Milman.
Chief Clerk, E. J. Hennessey.
CUSTOMS.
Custom House, Petrie’s Bight.
Collector of Customs, William H. Irving.
Chief Clerk, J. C. Kent.
Inspector of Invoices, J. T. Honeyman.
Lapding Surveyor, C. W. Rich.
WATER SUPPLY BR VNCH.
Hydraulic Engineer, John B. Henderson, M.lnst., C.E.
MARINE DEPARTMENT.
Port Mailer, Marino Surveyor, Capt. T. M. Almond.
Harbour Master, John Mackay.
MARINE BOARD;
Chairman, Capt. T M. Almond.
Secretary, S. A. Pethebridge.
Engineer Surveyor, Robert Stewart.
Nautical Surveyor, E. A. Cullen,
Assistant Nautical Surveyor, D. Fison.
POST OFFICE.
Queen Street.
Postmaster-General, Hon.W. H. Wilson.
Under Secretary, J. McDonnell.
Superintendent of Mails, R. T. Scott.
Accountant, J. W. Lawry.
Correspondence Clerk, G. H. Buzacott.
ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH OFFICE.
Queen Street.
Superintendent of Telegraphs, J. McDonnell.
Chief Manager and Inspector of Telegraph Southern District,
Robert Orton Bourne.
Chief Manager and Inspector of Post and Telegraph Offices
Northern District, T. H. Cowl.
Electrical Engineer, John Hesketh.
AUDIT OFFICE.
Treasury Buildings.
Auditor-General, Edward Deshou.
Accountant, R. H. Mills.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
Treasury Buildings.
Acting Attorney-General, Hon. W H Wilson.
Crown Solicitor, James Howard Gill.
Under-Secretary, William Cahill.
Registrar of Supreme Court, William Bell.
Registrar of Supreme Court, Townsville, T. G. Fraser.
Registrar of Supreme Court Rockhampton. J. L. Blood-Smyth
INSOLVENCY, INTESTACY. .AND INSANITY OFFICES.
Official Trustee and Curator of Insanity and Interiacv..l B Hall.
Chief Clerk and Deputy, G. F. L. Foxton.
SHERIFF’S OFFICE.
Supreme Court Buildings.
Sheriff, P. Pinnock.
Under Sheriff, John Gallwey.
20
QUEENSLAND.


SUPREME COURT.
Chief Justice, His Honor Sir S. W. Griffith. G.C.M.G.
Puisne Judges, His Honor Pope Alexander Cooper, His Honor
Patrick Real. Northern Judge, His Honor Charles E. Chubb.
Cantral Judge, His Honor Virgil Power.
Associate to the Chief Justice, E. Douglas.
Associate to Mr. Justice Real, P. K. Copley.
Associate to Mr. Justice Cooper, Charles B. Philpott.
Associate to Mr. Justice Chubb, M. C. L. Chubb.
Associate to Mr. Justice Power. Bernard J. Berne.
Judges of the District Courts, G. W. Paul, Granville G. Miller,
Arthur Baptist Noel.
ECCLESIASTICAL DIGNITARIES.
Episcopalian.
Bishop of Brisbane, Eight Rev. William Webber, D. D.
Coadjutor Bishop, Right Rev. J. Stretch, D.O.L.
Bishop of Rockhampton, Right Rev. Nathaniel Dawes.
Bishop of Northern Queensland, Right Rev. C. G. Barlow.
Presbyterian.
Moderator, Rev. A. McWatt-Allan.
Roman Catholic.
Archbishop of Brisbane, Right Rev. Dr. Dunne.
Vicariate of North Queensland, Vicar Apostolic, Bight Rev. John
Hutchinson.
INSURANCE COMPANIES IN BRISBANE.
Aachen and Munich Fire Insurance Co. Agents, Burns, Philp
<fe Co., Ltd.
Alliance Marine and General Assurance Co., Limited, of London.
Manager, H. V. Bath, Eagle Street.
Atlas Assurance Company. Manager, A. J. Carter, Eagle Street.
Australasian Plate Glass Insurance Company, Limited. Hart
and Beattie, Queen Street.
Australian Mutual Provident Society (Life), Queen Street. Resi-
dent Secretary, H. W. Apperly.
Australian Widows’ Fund Life Assurance Society, Queen and
Edward Street. Local Agent, Union Trustee Company of
Australia.
Batavia Sea and Fire Insurance Company. Agents, Gibbs, Bright
& Co., Eagle Street.
British and Foreign Marine Insurance Company. Ltd. Agents,
Gibbs, Bright & Co., Eagle Street.
Caledonian Insurance Company. Agent, J. C. Hassall, Queen
Street.
China Traders’ Insurance Company, Limited. Agents, Queens-
land Mercantile Company, Limited.
Citizens Life Assurance Company, Limited. Resident Secretary,
J. Farrell, Queen Street.
Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Company, Limited. Crock
Street.
Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society. Secretary. Geo. A.
K. Darbyshire, 43 Queen Street.
Commercial Union Assurance Company. Local Secretary,
C. J. Trundle, Adelaide Street.
Equitable Life Assurance Society, Albert Street.
Guardian Fire and Life Assurance Company, Ltd. Agents,
Gibbs, Bright <fe Co., Eagle Street.
Imperial Fire Insurance Company, Ltd. Resident Manager,
Geo. 8. Matthews, Queen Street.
Lion Fire Insurance Company, Agents Davis and Rees, Elizabeth
Street.
Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance Company. Agents,
Webster <fe Co., Mary Street.
London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company. Agents, A.
A. McDiarmid <fc Co., Limited, Creek Street.
Manchester Fire Assurance Company, General Agent, G. S.
Hutton, Adelaide Street.
Mutual Life Association of Australasia, Queen and Eagle Street.
Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, 115, Queen Street.
Manager, W. H. Kelynack.
National Fire and Marine Insurance Company of New Zealand.
Manager, A. C. Saltmarsh.
National Mutual Life Association of Australasia, Secretary,
S. G. Martin, Queen Street.
New York Life Insurance Company, 227, Queen Street.
New Zealand Insurance Company. Manager, Edgar W. Walker
Queen Street.
North Australian Lloyd’s. Agents, Bums, Philp, & Co., Eagle
Street.
North British and Mercantile Insurance Company. Agents,
B. D. Morehead & Co., Mary Street,
North Queensland Insurance Company, Limited. Agents, Bums,
Philp & Co., Limited, Eagle Street.
Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society. Agent, George Cannon,
Eagle Street,
Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation, Queen Street.
Manager, J, C, Hassall,
Palatine Fire Insurance Company, Limited, Eagle Street.
Secretary, Thomas B. Steele.
Phoenix Assurance Co. Agent, F. Horwood, Eagle Street.
Queensland Mutual (Branch of Manchester) Fire Insurance Com-
pany, Limited. Manager, Keith Wilson, Eagle Street.
Queensland Lloyd’s (Underwriters), E. J. Holmes, Managing
Underwriter, corner of Creek and Adelaide Streets.
Royal Exchange Assurance, Agents, Webster & Co., Mary
Street,
Royal Insurance Company, Agents, Gibbs, Bright & Co., Eagle
Street.
Royal Insurance Company (Queen Branch). Manager A. T.
Minto, Queen Street.
South British Fire and Marine Insurance Company. Manager,
W. A. Rigby, Queen Street.
Standard Fire and Marine Insurance Company of New Zealand.
Agents, A. A. McDiarmid & Co., Limited, corner of Creek and
Adelaide Streets.
Sun Insurance Office. Agents, A. A. McDiarmid & Co., Limited,
Creek Street.
Underwriting and Agency Association of London. Agents, Par-
bury, Lamb & Co., Eagle Street.
Union Insurance Society of Canton. Agents, Gibbs, Bright &
Co., Eagle Street.
United Insurance Company, Limited (Fire and Marine)
Resident Secretary, E. Wickham.
Universal Plato Glass Insurance Company, Eagle Street.
Victoria Insurance Company (Fire and Marine). Secretary,
S. B. Cameron, Queen Street.
BANKS
Australian Joint Stock Bank, Limited, Queen Street. Manager,
R. W. Chapman.
Bank of Australasia, Queen Street. Manager, E. T. Cooper.
Bank of New South Wales, Queen Street. Manager, G. Eddington.
Bank of North Queensland, Limited, Queen Street. General
Manager (acting), Mackenzie Lees.
Commercial Banking Company of Sydney, Limited, Queen
Street. Manager, D. J. Abercrombie.
Commercial Bank of Australia, Limited, 130, Queen Street.
Manager. A. 11. Hudson.
English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank, Limited,
Queen Street. Manager, P. A. Matthews.
London Bank of Australia, Limited, Queen Street. Manager,
J. J. Booty.
Royal Bank of Queensland Limited, Queen Street. General
Manager, Edward Denny Day.
The Queensland National Bank, Limited, Queen Street.
General Manager, W. V. Ralston.
Union Bank of Australia, Limited, Queen Street. Manager,
A. H. Chambers.
Government Savings Banks are established in all the settled
portions of the colony.
BANKERS TO THE GOVERNMENT.—THE QUEENSLAND
NATIONAL BANK, LIMITED.
CONSULS AND CONSULAR AGENTS.
Belgium, E. Pollet, Consul General, Melbourne, J. M. Manson,
Consul, Brisbane.
Denmark, Poul C. Poulsen.
France, Hon. B. B. Forrest (Vice-Consul).
German Empire, Hon. J. C. Heussler, M.L.C.
Italy, Barron 1.. Barnett (Consular Agent).
Japan, NakagawaTsunejiro, Consul, Townsville.
Netherlands, Hon. J. C. Heussler, M.L.C. (Consul).
Portugal, Vice-Consul, F. H. Dart, M.L.C.
Sweden and Norway, R. W. Thurlow (Acting).
Switzerland, G. Gross.
United States, W. J. Weathcrill (Consular Agent).
PRESS,
Daily—Morning, Brisbane Courier; Evening, The Telegraph,
The Evening Observer.
Weekly —The Australian, Government Gazette, Queenslander,
Flashes, Week, Nord-Australische Zeitung, Queenslander Herald,
Moreton Mail, The Worker, Queensland Sportsman, Figaro, The
Age, The Street.
Monthly— Australia'jn Paslorahst, Australian Star, Tropiculturist,
Church Chronicle, Queensland Baptist, Queensland Mercantile
Gazette, Queensland Law Journal, Queensland Agricultural
Journal.
CLUBS.
Johnsonian Club, Adelaide Street.
Queensland Club, Alice and George Streets, Brisbane.
LLOYD’S AGENTS
Parbury, Lamb & Co., Eagle Street, Brisbane.
STAMP DUTIES.
The duties imposed by “The Stamp Act, 1804,” came into
operation on November Ist, 1804. Adhesive stamps may be
Used for Agreements, Charter Party, Bills of Exchange, payable
on demand or at sight, ad valorem duty on Bills of Exchange
and Promissory Notes drawn or made out of the Colony, Draft
issued by a Bank (located where there is no stamp office) payable
outside the Colony, Policies of Insurance, Receipts. Other
duties must be denoted by impressed stamps ;
£ s. d.
Agreement cr Contract accompanied with a deposit.
(See Mortgage.)
Agreement for a lease, or for any letting. (Sec Lease.)
Agreement for sale of property. (Sec Conveyance on
21
QUEENSLAND.


Agreement, or any Memorandum of an Agreement, £ s. d.
under hand only, and not otherwise specifically
charged with any duty, whether the same be only
evidence of a contract or obligatory upon the parties
from its being a written instrument ... ... ... 0 2 6
EXEMPTIONS.
(1) Agreecmcnt or Memorandum, the matter
Whereof is not of the value of £5.
(2) Agreement made between the Government and
parties tendering for the performance of woi'k
and labour, or the supply of materials for use
by the Government.
Annuity—
Conveyance in consideration of. (See Conveyance
on Sale.)
Purchase of. (See Conveyance on Sale.)
Creation of, by way of security. (See Mortgage.)
Appointment of a new trustee and appointment in
cxe mtion of a power of any property or of any use,
shai o, oi interest in any property by any instrument,
not being a will 0 10 0
Apprenticeship, instrument of 110
Articles of Clerkship whereby any person first be-
comes bound to serve as a clerk in order to his
admission as a solicitor of the Supreme Court ... 10 10 0
Articles of Clerkship whereby any person having
been bound by previous duly stamped articles to
serve as a clerk in order to his admission in the
Supreme Court, and not having completed his ser-
vice so as to be entitled to such admission, becomes
bound afresh for the same purpose 10 0
Assignment—
By way of security or of any security. (See Mort-
gage.)
Upon a sale or otherwise. (See Conveyance.)
Assurance. (See Policy of Insurance.)
Award in any case in which an amount or value is
the matter in dispute—
Whore no amount is awarded, or the amount or
value awarded does not exceed £5O 0 2 6
Where the amount or value awarded—
Exceeds £5O and does not exceed £lOO ... 0 5 0
£lOO „ „ £2OO ... 010 0
£2OO „ „ £5OO ... 1 0 0
„ £5OO „ „ £750 ... 110 0
„ £750 „ „ £l,OOO ... 2 0 0
For every additional £lOO, and also for any frac-
tional part of £lOO 0 5 0
Bill of Exchange—
Payable on demand or at sight, or on presentation,
or in which no time for payment is expressed. 0 0 1
Bill of Exchange of any other kind whatsoever (ex-
cept a bank note), and promissory note of any kind
whatsoever (except a bank note), drawn or expressed
to be payable or actually paid or endorsed, or in any
manner negotiated in the Colony of Queensland —
Where the amount or value of the money for which
the bill or note is drawn or made does not
exceed £5O 0 1 0
Exceeds £5O, and does not exceed £lOO 0 2 0
And where the same shall exceed £lOO, then for
every £5O, and also for any fractional part of £5O 0 1 0
exemptions.
Draft or order drawn by any bank in the Colony
of Queensland upon any other bank in the
Colony of Queensland, not payable to bearer
or to order, and used solely for the purpose of
settling or clearing any account between such
banks.
Letter written by a bank in the Colony of Queens-
land to any other bank in the Colony of
Queensland, directing the payment of any
sum of money, the same not being payable to
bearer or to order, and such letter not being
sent or delivered to the pi r -on to whom pay-
ment is to be made, or to any person on his
behalf.
Letter of credit grantel in the Colony of Queens-
land authoriz ng drafts to be drawn out of the
Colony of Queensland payable in the Colony of
Queensland.
All debentures, Treasury bills, and promissory
notes for the payment of money, on demand,
issued by the Government of Queensland.
All bills of exchange or promissory notes issued
by any bank for Government purposes to the
Colonial Treasurer.
All promissory notes for the payment of money on
demand, issued within the Colony of Queens-
land by any bank or banking company legally
incorporated and carrying on business in the
said Colony.
Bill of Lading or Receipt of or for any goods, mer-
chandise, or effects to be carried beyond the Colony
Bill of Lading and each copy 0 10
Receipt and each copy 0 0 6
exemption.
Copy of Bills of Lading given to Sub-Collector in
accordance with “ The Duty on Cedar Act of
Bill of Sale— £ s. d.
Absolute. (See Conveyance.)
By way of security. (See Mortgage.)
Bond given as a security for the due execution of an
office, and for the accounting for money received by
virtue thereof 0 10 0
Bond of any kind whatever not otherwise charged nor
expressly exempted from all stamp duty 0 10 0
exemptions.
Bond given by the parent or friends of any lunatic
for the maintenance of such lunatic in any
asylum for the relief or cure of lunacy.
Bond given by any person on obtaining letters of
administration.
Bond given pursuant to an Act of Parliament or
by direction of the'Collector of Customs in and
for the Colony of Queensland, or any of his
officers, upon or with relation to any duty of
Customs for or in respect of any goods, wares,
or merchandise exported or shipped to be ex-
ported from the said Colony or imported into
the said Colony. And also any bond given as
aforesaid for or in relation to any other matter
or thing in connection with the levy and
collection of duties of Customs in the said
Colony.
Renewal of any such bond by reason of the death
or insolvency of the sureties, or either of them,
or otherwise.
Charter Party—
When the charter does not amount to £2O 0 10 0
When it amounts to more than £2O and less than
£lOO 0 15 0
When it exceeds £lOO ... 10 0
Companies (Queensland), on registration Is. per cent, on the
nominal share capital or increase of capital.
Companies (Foreign) capital, not exceeding £l,OOO, 10s. ; for
every £l,OOO after the first, up to £200,000, Is. per £lOO of
nominal capital. For the registration ot any document re-
quired or authorized to bo registered, ss. ; for making a record
of any fact authorized or required by the Act, to be recorded
by the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies, ss.
Conveyance or Transfer on sale of any share or shares
in the stock or funds of any company or corporation—
For every £lO, and also for any fractional part of
£lO of the then value of shares or stock trans-
ferred 0 0 6
Conveyance or Transfer on sale of any property (ex-
cept such shares or stock as aforesaid, and runs or
stations hold under lease or promise of lease or license
from the Crown, or any interest therein) —
Where the amount or value of the consideration
for the sale does not exced £5O 0 7 6
Exceeds £5O and does not exceed £lOO 0 15 0
Exceeds £lO0 —For every £lOO, and also for any
fractional part of £lOO of such amount or value 015 0
exemptions.
All conveyances or transfers of lands to the Govern-
ment for public purposes.
Any grant from the Crown under the hand of the
Governor, for the time being, of the Colony of
Queensland, to any purchaser of Crown lands
in Queensland.
Transfer under the Gold Fields Acts or Mineral
Lands Acts of a claim or share in a claim
where the consideration paid does not exceed
£5O.
Conveyance or Transfer, by way of security, of any
property (except such shares or stock as aforesaid)
or of any security. (Sec Mortgage).
Conveyance or Transfer of any kind not hereinbefore
described 010 0
Deed of any kind whatsoever not described in this
Schedule 0 10 0
Lease or Agreement for a Lease or any written docu-
ment for the tenancy or occupancy of any lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, the following duties
in respect of the rent at the rate per annum—
Where the rent shall not exceed £5O at the rate per
annum 0 2 6
Where the same shall exceed £5O and not exceed
£lOO 0 5 0
Above £lOO, for every fractional part of £lOO ... 0 5 0
EXEMPTION.
Leases from the Crown.
Lease of any lands, tenements, or hereditaments,
granted in consideration of a sum of money by way
of premium and also of a yearly rent amounting to
£2O and upwards. (Both the ad valorem duties
payable upon a conveyance according to the consi-
deration therein expressed, and for a lease in con-
sideration of a rent of the same amount.)
For every transfer or cancellation of any lease
(other than a transfer of any run or station held
under lease or promise of lease or license from
the Crown, or of any interest therein) one-half
the amount originally paid, or in the case of
leases made prior to the passing of this Act,
one-half the amount which would have been
paid thereon had they been made subsequent
to the passing of this Act.
22
QUEENSLAND.


Mortgage of stock or marketable security, under hand
only. (See Agreement.)
Mortgage, Bond, and Covenant—
(l) Being the only or principal or primary security
for the payment or repayment of money—
Not exceeding £5O 0 2 6
For every additional £5O, and also for any
fractional part of £6O 0 2 6
(2) Transfer or assignment of any mortgage, bond,
or covenant, or of any money or stock secured
by any such instrument—
For every £5O, and also for any fractional part
of £5O of the amount transferred or
assigned, exclusive of interest which is not
in arrear v 0 13
And also where any further money is added
to the money already secured. (The same
duty as a principal security for such further
money.)
(3) Re-conveyance, release, or discharge of any
such security as aforesaid, or of the benefit
thereof, or of the money thereby secured ... 0 2 6
Policies of Insurance—
Upon any policy or instrument of guarantee or
indemnity against loss or damage by fire or
other casualty to any property on land—
For every £lOO or fractional part of £lOO in-
sured for any period exceeding six months 0 10
For every £lOO or fractional part of £lOO in-
sured for any period not exceeding six
months 0 0 6
Upon any time policy or instrument of guarantee
or indemnity whereby any insurance is made
upon any ship or vessel, or upon any goods,
merchandise, or other property on board of
any ship or vessel, or upon the freight thereof,
for any period or voyage, for every £lOO or
every fractional part of £lOO ... 0 0 3
For every renewal 0 0 3
Upon any policy of insurance on wool, tallow,
skins, meats, or sugar to be carried both on
sea and land ... per cent. 0 0 3
Upon any policy or instrument of guarantee or
indemnity against accident or fidelity or want
of honesty, for every £lOO or any fractional
part of £lOO 0 10
Upon all other policies, for every £lOO or frac-
tional part of £lOO 0 10
exemptions.
Life policies issued under the Act 29 Vic. No. 18.
Life policies not exceeding £6O.
Policies effected and expressed to be effected by
way of re-insurance.
Cover notes and interim receipts issued pending
inspection and acceptance of any risk or issue
of policy.
Promissory Note. (See Bill of Exchange.)
Receipt given for or upon the payment of money
amounting to twenty shillings or upwards 0 0 1
EXEMPTIONS.
Receipts given for or upon the payment of money
to or for the use of Her Majesty.
Receipts endorsed upon any instrument duly
stamped under this Act acknowledging the
receipt of the consideration money therein ex-
pressed.
Receipt given for money deposited in any bank to
be accounted for.
All receipts for money withdrawn by depositors
from the Government Savings Banks.
All receipts or discharges given by any seaman,
labourer, or menial servant for the payment
of wages.
Release or Renunciation of any property, or any
right or interest in any property—
Upon a sale. (See Conveyance on Sale.)
By way of security. (See Mortgage.)
In any other case 0 10 0
Request for the registration or the entering of any
instrument under the provisions of the Real Property
Acts not otherwise stamped ... . 0 2 6
Settlement—Any instrument whether voluntary or
upon any good or valuable consideration other than
a bona tide pecuniary consideration, whereby any
definite and certain principal sum of money (whether
charged or chargeable on lands or other heredita-
ments or not, or to be laid out in the purchase of
lands or other hereditaments or not), or any definite
and certain amount of stock or any security is settled
or agreed to be settled in any manner whatsoever—
For every £lOO, and also for any fractional part of
£lOO of the amount or value of the property
settled or agreed to be settled 0 5 0
EXEMPTION.
Instrument of appointment relating to any pro-
perty in favour of persons specially named or
described as the objects of a power of appoint-
ment where duty has been duly paid in respect
of the same property upon the settlement
£ s. d.
creating the power, or the grant of representa-
tion of any will or testamentary instrument
creating the power.
Transfer of any run or station held under lease or
promise of lease or license from the Crown, or of any
interest therein, where the declared value of such
property or interest, or the value thereof assessed as
in this Act provided, shall not exceed £lOO 0 10 0
And where such value shall exceed £lOO, then for
every £lOO and any fractional part of £lOO ... 010 0
EXEMPTION.
Any transfer from the mortgagee to the mortgagor
of any run or station held under lease or pro-
mise of lease or license from the Crown, or of
any interest therein.
SUCCESSION DUTIES.
Where the whole amount passing by death to any
person amounts to less than £2OO No duty.
person amounts to loss tnau a’o •
To £2OO and less than £l,OOO 2 per cent.
To £l,OOO and less than £2,500 3 ~
To £2,500 and less than £5,000 4 n
To £5,000 and less than £lO,OOO 6 ~
To £lO,OOO and less than £20,000 8 ~
To £20,000 and upwards 10 ~
Provided that to the wife or husband or children of the
deceased the duty shall be charged at one-half the above rates.
Where the legatee is a stranger in blood to the deceased or a
charitable institution the duty shall be double the above rates.
Succession, which in the whole is of less value than £2O, no
PROBATE AND LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION.
Probate. Adminis-
tration.
Where the net value of the property of the £ s. d. £ s. d.
deceased person does not exceed £5O ... Nil. Nil.
Where it exceeds £5O, but does not ex-
ceed £lOO 0 10 0 1 0 0
Where it exceeds £lOO, but does not ex-
ceed £2OO 1 0 0 2 0 0
Where it exceeds £2OO, but does not ex-
ceed £5OO t 2 0 0 4 0 0
Where it exceeds £5OO 5 0 0 10 0 0
LICENSES.
£ s. d.
Apothecary or chemist to use a still of not more than
8 gallons, for any scientific purpose, or making per-
fume 2 0 0
Auctioneer, General Licenses per annum 15 0 0
~ (for police district only) ~ 5 0 0
Bagatelle license or renewal of same, each table ...5 0 0
Bagatelle license (temporary) for a special district, each
table 2 0 0
Billiard license or renewal of same, each table 10 0 0
Billiard license (temporary) for a special district, each
table ... 5 0 0
Brewer 25 0 0
Brickmaker (for each mould) ~ 4 0
Carrier (for each vehicle) ~ 0 2 6
Club License (not less than 50 persons in Brisbane, nor
25 elsewhere) fee of £5 at registration.
Distiller (for distilling, rectifying or compounding
spirits from sugar-cane grown in Queensland) per ann. 25 0 0
Distillation of spirits from any material 10 0 0
Hawker and peddler ~ 1000
Miner’s right „ 0 10 0
Business license ... ~ 4 0 0
Licensed Victualler within a town or municipality, or
within a distance of five miles from the boundaries
thereof 30 0 0
Licensed Victualler, if at a distance of more than five
miles from the boundaries of a town or municipality 15 0 0
(Renewal of license respectively will be the same
amount)
For a second bar or counter over which liquor is sold
under a Licensed Victuallers’license 10 0 0
Licensed Victualler or Wineseller (temporary) for a
special district, for not more than £ months 15 0 0
For railway station bar (per annum; from £5 to ... 30 0 0
Packet license or renewal of same for every 200 tons or
part of the registered tonnage of the vessel £5, but
not to exceed £2O.
Pawnbroker 10 0 0
Slaughter-house 0 2 6
Timber—To cut hardwood 5 0 0
To cut pine, beech, or any timber defined as rare 7 0 0
To cut cedar 10 0 0
To cut and split slabs, fencing stuff or shingle 3 0 0
To cut firewood, strip bark, or bum charcoal 2 0 0
To remove stone, gravel, &c., off Crown Lands 5 0 0
Transfer of Special Timber Licenses 1 0 0
10 0
Spirit Merchant Registered) in Brisbane 30 0
elsewhere 20 0 0
23
QUEENSLAND.


£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Spirits-rectifying and compounding 10 0 Os wheeled buggies, without tops, mounted on
License to manufacture Tobacco, Cigars and Cigarettes.
For every factory according to the weight per annum
manufactured,- -
Not exceeding 5,000 lbs... 5 0 0
Above 5,000 lbs. but not exceeding 10,000 lbs. ... 10 0 0
10,000 lbs. „ ~ 20,000 lbs. ... 20 0 0
20,000 lbs. „ ~ 50,000 lbs. .. 5 » 0 0
50,000 lbs. ~ ~ 100,000 lbs. ...100 0 0
~ 100,000 lbs. „ ~ 200,000 lbs. . 150 0 0
~ 200,000 lbs. „ „ 350,000 lbs. .. 200 0 0
Exceeding 350,000 lbs v 250 0 0
„ „ 350,000 lbs. .. 200 0 0
250 0 0
License, annual, to sell or deal in tobacco, cigars and
Cigarettes 0 5 0
License to sell poisons 1 0 0
Annual fee for renewal 0 5 0
A certificate not to be granted to any person of the Asiatic
race. The sale of opium is restricted to a legally qualified
medical practitioner, g pharmaceutical chemist, or a wholesale
dealer in drugs.
Wine-maker (to keep and use a still of not more than
50 gallons nor less than 16 gallons, for the purpose
of distilling brandy from wine, to fortify the produce
of his own vineyard 10 0
Winesellers license or renewal of same 10 0 0
Sale of Queensland nude wine “only” not stronger
than 32 per cent ... ...5 0 0
(From Dec. 2, 1886, a winoseller can only sell Colonial
wine)
Stage carriage 0 5 0
License for Oystering. To col'ect oysters for sale ... 0 10 0
License for oyster bank (annually) 5 0 0
For men employed 0 10 0
For each boat or vessel not exceeding 3 tons em-
ployed in collecting, obtaining or carrying away
bank oysters for sale 10 0
For every ton or part of a ton over 3 tons 0 10 0
To occupy land for the purpose of making oyster beds
or layings 5 0 0
Fishing License (for each boat) 10 0
For ca'ching fish with net 0 10 0
Pearl Fishing License 5 0 0
For person in charge of ship, or diver using diving
apparatus 10 0
To deal in pearls 25 0 0
And for every boat employed 0 10 0
For every ship of 10 tons or under 3 0 0
Above 10 tons £3 for the first 10 tons and 10s. for
every ton or part of a ton above not exceeding in all 20 0 0
To occupy Crown lands for the purposes of pearl shell
and bech-de-mer fishery 2 10 0
Auctioneers’ and Distillers’ Licenses cease on Dec. 31 ; Brewers’
Publicans’ Licenses on June 30. Pawnbrokers’, Carriers’,
Hawkers’, and Peddlers’ Licenses expire in one year from date
of issue.
QUEENSLAND CUSTOMS TARIFF.
£ s. d.
Acid, acetic, containing not more than 33 per cent of
acidity ... per lb. 0 0 3
For every extra 10 per cent, or part thereof of acidity
per lb 0 0 1
Acid, sulphuric per cwt. 0 5 0
Ale, beer, porter, cider, and perry per gallon 0 13
Ale, beer, porter, cider and perry, for 6 reputed quart
bottles 0 16
For 12 reputed pint bottles 0 16
Arrowroot per lb. 0 0 1
Axle and lubricating grease per cwt. 0 6 0
... ... ... per ewr, o o o
per lb. 0 0 3
Bacon per lb. 0 0 3
Barley per bush. 0 0 0
Barley (malting) ... ~ 0 16
Beans and peas ~ 010
Biscuits ... per lb. 0 0 2
Bitters, if containing not more than 25 per cent, of
proof spirit per gallon 0 6 0
Bitters, if containing more than 25 per cent, of proof
spirit per gallon C 14 0
Blue per lb. 0 0 2
Boots and shoes, except india-rubber shoes (present Eng-
lish sizes to be the standard): —
Men’s (No. 6 and upwards) ... per dozen pairs 113 0
Youths’ (Nos. 2-5) ~ 110
Boys’(No. 7-1) „ 0 17 6
Women’s (No. 3 and upwards) ... ~ 0 19 6
Girls’ (Nos. 11-2) ~ 0 16 0
Girls’ (Nos. 7-10) ~ 0 11 6
Boot uppers (men’s) ~ 0 18 0
Bran and pollard per bush. 0 0 4
Brandy per proof gal. 0 14 0
Butter per lb. 0 0 3
Butterine and other similar products ... ~ 0 0 4
Cakes per lb. 0 0 2
Candles per reputed lb. 0 0 2
Carriages:—
Tilburys, dog-carts, gigs, Boston chaises, and other
wheeled vehicles, with or without springs or
thorough braces ... each 10 0 0
Express waggons and waggons for carrying goods,
or single or double-seated waggons and four-
springs and braces, and hansom cabs ... each 12 0 0
Single and double-seated waggons, waggonettes,
and four-wheeled buggies, with tops ... each 15 0 0
Omnibuses and coaches, for carrying mails or pas-
sengers each 20 0 0
Barouches, broughams, mail phaetons, drags,
landaus, and similar vehicles each 30 0 0
Cement per barrel 0 2 :•
Chaff per ton 0 15 0
Cheese per lb. 0 0 4
Chicory ~ 0 0 6
Chicory root (kiln dried) ~ 0 0 3
Chocolate confectionery ~ 004
Cigarettes (including wrappers) ~ 0 6 0
Cigars ~ 0 6 0
Coal per ton 0 2 0
Cocoa and chocolate per lb. 0 0
Coffee (raw) ~ 0 0 4
Coffee (roasted) ~ 006
,, 0 0 6
per reputed lb. 0 0 2
Condensed milk per reputed lb. 0 0 2
Confectionery and Succades per lb. 0 0 4
Cordage and rope per cwt. 0 8 0
Cordials per gallon 0 14 0
Corn flour per reputed lb. 0 0 2
Doors (wood) each 0 4 0
Farinaceous food, prepared, not being wheaten flour or
otherwise specified per lb. 0 0 2
Fish, pickled or salted, in casks, and dried fish per lb. 0 0 1
Fish (preserved, not salted) ... per doz. reputed lbs. 0 2 0
And in same proportion for larger or smaller contents.
Flour per ton of 2,000 lbs. 10 0
Fruit, pulp, and fruit preserved by acids ... per cwt. 0 5 0
Fruits (bottled, or in tins or jars) per doz. reputed pints 0 16
And in same proportion for larger or smaller contents.
Fruits (dried) per lb. 0 0 3
Genova per proof gallon 0 14 0
Ginger (preserved and dried) per lb. 0 0 4
Glucose per cwt. 0 10 0
Glue per lb. 0 0 2
Hams per lb. 0 0 3
Harmoniums each 3 0 0
Hay per ton 0 15 0
Honey per lb. 0 0
Hook'and eye hinges per cwt. 06 0
Hops per lb. 0 0 8
Iron castings for building purposes, and malleable iron
castings per cwt. 0 3 0
Iron (corrugated) „ 0 2 0
Iron (galvanized) „ 0 2 0
iron (gaivamzeu; ~ u z o
Jams and jellies per dozen reputed lbs. 0 2 0
And in same proportion for larger or smaller contents.
Lard per lb. 0 0 1J
Lead (piping and sheet) per cwt. 0 2 0
Lead (white and red) ~ 030
Ljather (except otherwise enumerated) ... per lb. 0 0 4
per lb. 0 0 1J
0 3 0
0 0 4
Macaroni per reputed lb. 0 0 2
Maize .... per bush. 0 0 8
Maizerncal per reputed lb. 0 0 2
Maizena ~ 0 0
Malt per bush. 0 4
Methylated Spirits (foreign) per liquid gallon 0 5 0
Molasses and syrups —
In packages containing one gallon or under, per cwt. 0 10 0
In any other packages „ 076
0 7 6
Mustard per lb. 0 0 3
Nails per cwt. 0 3 0
Nuts (all sorts except cocoanuts) per lb. 0 0 3
Oatmeal per cwt. 0 4 0
Oats per bush. 0 0 8
Oils—
Castor, packed in bottles, jars, and other vessels
(not exceeding one gallon in size) as under;—
Quarter-pints and smaller sizes ... per dozen 0 0 6
Half-pints ami over quarter-pints... ~ 0 10
Pints and over half-a-pint ~ 0 2 0
Quarts and over a pint ~ 0 4 0
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ~ 0 12 0
Chinese (in bulk) per gallon 0 10
0 10
Cod liver (in bottle) ... per doz. reputed pints 0 2 0
And in same proportion for larger or smaller
contents.
Cod liver (in bulk) per gallon 0 10
Colza (in bulk) ~ 0 10
Linseed and other vegetable oils (in bulk) per gal. 0 10
Mineral, and all other oils not otherwise enumer-
ated (except perfumed oils) and turpentine, per gal. 0 0 6
Ncatsfoot (in bulk) per gallon 0 10
Salad, packed in bottles, jars, and other vessels (not
exceeding one gallon in size), as under :
Quarter pints and smaller sizes ... per dozen 0 0 6
Half-pints and over quarter-pints... ~ 0 10
Pints and over half-a-pint ~ 0 2 0
Quarts and over a pint ~ 0 4 0
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ~ 0 12
Old Tom per proof gallon 0 14
Onions per ton 10 0
Opium per lb. 1 0 0
Organs, cabinet each 3 0 0
Paints (wet and dry) per cwt. 0 3 0
Paper bags (not printed) per cwt. 0 8 0
24
SLAISI>.


£ s. d.
; £ s. d.
I Tobacco ... per lb. 0 1 0
! Cigars ~ 0 2 0
Paper bags (printed) ~ 0 12 0
Patent groats per lb. 0 0 2
Pearl barley per lb. 0 0 I
Cigarettes „ 0 2 0
Peel (dry and drained) ~ 0 0 2
Pepper per lb. 0 0 3
Pianos (upright) each 0 0 0
EXPORT DUTY.
Log cedar per 10U superficial feet 0 2 0
Sawn Cedar,over 4 inches in thickness, per 10c) superficial
feet 0 2 0
Pianos (horizontals, square, grand or semi-grand) ~ 12 0 0
Pickles, packed in bottles, jars, and other vessels (not
exceeding one gallon in size), as under :
Quarter-pints and smaller sizes ... per dozen 0 0 6
ARTICLES EXEMPTED FROM DUTY.
From 31st March, 1807.
Agricultural. Implements and machines, namely : —Acme
Half-pints and over quarter pints ... ~ 0 10
Pints and over half-a-pint ~ 0 2 0
harrows, cane shavers, chaff-cutting machines, cheese pressers,
Quarts and over a pint „ 0 4 0
circular coulters, clod crushers, corn crushers, cultivators, dairy
refrigerators, disc harrows, drill-wheel hoe cultivator, earth
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ~ 0 12 0
Pork (not including mess pork) per lb. 0 0 2
Pork (mess) ~ 00 1
Potatoes per ton 0 15 0
scoops, fertiliser and drill combined, field and garden rollers,
furrower, marker, hiller, and ridgercombined, gang ploughs, grain
cleaners and dressing machines, grain mills, grain separators.
Preserved meat (not salted), and extract of meat
per doz. reputed lbs. 0 4 0
And in same proportion for larger or smaller contents.
Rice per lb. 0 0 1
Rum (foreign) per proof gallon 0 14 0
Sago per lb. 0 0 1
grain sowers, hay presses, hedge cutting and trimming, horse
hoe and cultivator combined, horse hoes, horse rakes, buskers-
and shcllcrs, mowing machines, potato raisers, rake and plough
combined, reapers, root cutters, scarifiers, screening, seed drills.
sifting, smutters, spading harrows, strawsonisers, straw stackers,
stubble diggers, stump extractors, stump-jumping ploughs,
sulky ploughs, thatch making, threshers, winnowing machines ;
Balt beef ~ 0 0 1
Sarsaparilla (if containing not more than 25 per cenr. of
alkaline earth; alumina ; American oak for staves ; animals.
proof spirit) per gallon 0 6 0
alive ; anchors over 3 cwt. ; antifermentine ; art materials and
Sarsaparilla (if containing more than 25 per cent, of
proof spirit) per gallon 0 14 0
mediums, including canvasses mounted or in rolls, brushes, &c. ;
art pictures, printed, used as studios or copies by artists;
Sashes per pair 0 4 0
artists’ colours; asbestos, unmanufactured ; ash timber in
Sauces (packed in bottles, jars, and other vessels not
exceeding one gallon in size) as under—
Quarter-pints and smaller sizes ... per dozen 0 0 6
plank ; asphalt.
Racks (wooden) for brushes ; bagging and wool-bagging;
ballast, being stone unsuitable for building purposes, gravel.
Half-pints and over quarter-pints ... ~ 0 10
Pints and over half a-pint ~ 0 2 0
Quarts and over a pint ~ 0 4 0
Over a quart and not exceeding a gallon ~ 012 0
Snuff per lb. 0 5 0
Soap per cwt. 0 10 0
sand, or earth : bark for tanning ; bark (long) in bundles ; bass
and bristles ; bicycle and tricycle parts and accessories, rough
and unfinished, namely :—brackets, lugs, fork sides, rims, chain
wheels and chain rings, hubs, handle bars, stems and T pieces,
seat pillar stems and T pieces, crowns and crown plates, spokes.
fork and tube strengthened, steel stamping and forgings, and!
Soap and washing powders per lb. 0 0 2
Soap (perfumed, fancy, and toilet) ~ 0 0 3
Soda (bi-carbonate) per cwt. 0 10
any other part or parts which may come in rough and un-
finished, as may be specified from time to time by the Treasurer
and published in the Gazette; birthday cards; blocks ; boiler
„ (crystals) ~ 020
Spices per lb. 0 0 3
Split peas per lb. 0 0 1
plates, boiler tubes; bolts and nuts; books, copy—for schools, with
printed headings; books (printed), except for advertising
purposes ; bookbinders’ leather and cloth; bottles, empty;
bottling wire ; boots, children’s, 0 to 6 ; braces, rachet ; brass—
Spirits (perfumed) per liquid gallon 10 0
~ all other per gallon 014 0
Starch per lb. 0 0 2
Starch (in cardboard and other boxes, containing as
bar, sheet, and rolled ; brass cocks and valves ; brass, ingot ;
brass screw wire, wove wire, and gauze; brimstone ; buckles
of every description; bunting, in the piece ; buttons, braids,
tapes, waddings, pins, needles : and such minor articles required
under) —
Under half-pound per dozen 0 10
in the making up of apparel, boots, shoes, hats, caps, saddlery.
One pound and over half-a-pound ... ~ 0 2 0
Two pounds and over one pound ... ~ 0 4 0
Four pounds and over two pounds ... ~ 0 8 0
Stearine per lb. 0 0 1£
upholstery, carriage and other vehicles, umbrellas, parasols and
sunshades, as may be enumerated in any order of the Treasurer
and published in the Government Gazette.
Cabbage-tree leaf ; candlewick ; cane shredders ; canvas :
Sugar (raw 7 ) per cwt. 0 5 0
Sugar (refined) ~ 0 68
Tapioca per lb. 0 0 1
Tallow 0 Olj
Tanks (iron) each 0 8 0
r ea (in paper, cardboard, or other packets, made up for
sale by retail) —
Half-pound and under per packet 0 0 4
Over half-pound per lb. 0 0 8
capsules for bottles ; cartridges for spurting purposes, filled and
unfilled; cartridge fillers and recappcrs; carriage and car* -
makers’ materials, namely:—axles, axle-boxes, and whip
sockets, carriage shafts, spokes, felloes, naves, hubs, bent wheel
rims, spring steel, brass hinges, tacks, tire-bolts, shackle-
holders, rubber cloth and American cloth ; castor-oil seeds ;
castor-oil in bulk ; chaff-cutting knives ; chalk ; chloride of lime ;
Christmas cards ; cocoanuts ; coin—gold, silver, and bronze ;
copper—sheet, plain, ingot, rod, wire; copper nails, piping,
and wire (thread-covered); copper, perforated, and copper
gauze ; copper, bar and scrap ; copper-wire rope ; copper tacks,
Tea ~ 0 0 6
Timber, logs per 100 superficial feet 0 16
~ undressed of a scantling 96 square inches and
over per 100 superficial feet 0 16
copper rivets, copper clouts, and Flemish nails ; copperas ; corks,
cork, and cork socking; corn sacks (jute), to contain three
~ dressed and sawn of a scantling under 96
square inches ... per 100 superficial feet 0 3 0
The Duty on timber to be estimated as of a thick-
ness of one inch, and to bo U) proportion for any
greater thickness. Any thickness under one inch
to be reckoned as one inch.
Tobacco (manufactured) per lb. 0 4 0
bushels ; cotton wicks ; cotton waste ; cotton wool; cotton-seed
oil; cotton and linen thread, sewing, knitting, embroidery,
crochet, crochet thread, sewing silks and twists; cream separ-
ators ; cream testers ; curiosities (antique) ; cylinders and tubes
containing gas or ammonia.
Diving pumps and dresses ; diving dress parts, namely :
| helmets, corsets, cup leathers, valves, springs and screws, coitet
j screws, nuts and keys, pumpspanners, pipe couplings, faceglasses
| repairing cloth in solution ; dredgers and steam tugs to be used
\ in execution of harbour works ; droppers and standards for wire
fencing ; drugs and chemicals, viz.: —acetate of soda, boracic acid,
benzoic acid, carbolic acid, citric acid, oxalic acid, phosphoric
acid, pyrogallic acid, salicylic acid, sulphurous acid, tannic acid,
tartaric acid, albertine, aloes, alum, ammonia, anti-toxin,
serums, arsenic, bisulphide of carbon ; borax, calumba root
j camphor, carbolate of lime, carbonate of potash, cascara bark,
caustic potash, chloride of gold and tin, cinchona bark,
j collodion, cream of tartar, cyanide of potassium, ergot, Garfield
tea, gentian root, glacialine, glycerine, iodine, ipecacuanha root,
lithofuge, nitrate of silver, nut-galls, nux vomica, pearl-ash
phosphorus, saltpetre, senega root, silicate of soda, soda nitrate,
soda sulphate, soda caustic, sulphur, sulphate of copper or blue-
stone, sulphate of barytes, sulphate of iron, sulphate of
ammonia, sulphate of magnesia, sulphate of potash, sulphate
of quiniue, sulphide of sodium, superphosphate of lime,
strychnine; dye.
j Elastic ; electro-plating materials, namely Nickle anodes,
j nickle salts, rouge composition, Tripoli composition, wire
scratch brushes, polishing mops, wheels, felt and leather;
j engine packing ; engravers’ prepared plates or process blocks ;
explosives, bellit, roburite, spurting powder, and percussion
I caps, dynamite, gelatine dynamite, lithofracteur, blasting powder,
fuse, detonators, and other explosives; eyelet punches and
Tobacco (unmanufactured, entered to be manufactured
in the Colony. At the time of removal from a Customs
bond, or from an importing ship to any licensed
manufactory, for manufacturing purposes only into
tobacco, cigars, and cigarettes) per lb. 0 2 0
Turpentine per gallon 0 0 6
Twine per lb. 0 01J
Vermicelli per reputed lb. 0 0 2
Vinegar (in bottle) for 6 reputed quarts 0 1 0
Vinegar (in bottle) for 12 reputed pints 0 10
Vinegar (in wood) per gal. 0 0 9
Wheat per bushel 0 0 4
Whiting per ton 0 7 6
Whisky per proof gallon 0 14 0
Wine (sparkling) per gallon 0 10 0
Wine (other kinds) ~ 0 6 0
,, 0 6 0
. per lb. 0 0 2
Writing paper (cut)... per lb.
Case Spirits—Reputed contents of two, three, or four
gallons shall be charged on and after the first day of
March, 1889, as follows ;—Two gallons, and under, as
two gallons; and not exceeding three, as three gallons ;
over three, and not exceeding four, as four gallons.
EXCISE DUTY.
Deer _ M ,_ • ... per gallon. 0 0 3
Spirits j>er proof gallon 0 12 0
Methylated spirits per liquid gallon 0 2 0
0 12 ()
0 ; eyelets.
QUEENSLAND.


Family portraits and clothing (old), felt and felt sheathing,
fibre, cocoanut; fire engines ; fish oil in bulk, fish, frozen and
fresh ; flax ; flock ; fruit, green ; flowers, cut.
Game, frozen and fresh; garden seeds, bulbs, trees,
and shrubs; gimp, silk or cotton ; glaziers’ tools; gold, un-
manufactured ; gold leaf; graining combs ; grass yarn or grass
rope, twisted ; grindstones ; gutta percha.
Hatmakers’ materials, namely—felt hoods, shellac, galloons,
spale-boards for hat boxes, black silk plush, cap-peaks,
straps and hat leathers, cork tips and sides, corrugated cork and
vents ; heirlooms, which have been in use and which have been
left by will to, or inherited by, the importer, provided that such
articles are not imported for sale, and that the intrinsic value
thereof does not exceed 75 per centum of the value of new
articles of a similar description ; hemp ; hessian ; hides, raw ;
hooks and eyes; hose, india-rubber and canvas; hydraulic
lifts.
India-rubber; india-rubber insertion; india-rubber in solu-
tion ; infusorial earth ; ink, ruling; ink, printing; insulating
materials ; iron, ore ; iron, plain sheet (not including galvan-
ized) ; iron, pig; iron, bar ; ironrod —from y\ths to J inch ;
channel iron, angle and tee iron, rolled iron joists up to 10
inches by 5 inches ; iron, scrap ; iron, hoop ; iron sleepers, fish
plates, points and crossings, switch-box for portable railways
and clutch bolts ; iron, sheet, chequered and gauze ; iron pipes,
cast ; ivory.
Jewellers’ tools:—Bellows, broachers or rimers, burnishers,
doming punches and dies, drawplates, drawtongs, bench and
hand; emery wheels, felt, wool, leather polishing wheels;
furnace bodies, gauges, gravers and scoopers, ingot moulds,
mallets, nippers, plyers, polishing lathe heads, polishing lathes,
saw-frames, screwdrivers, triblets for rings, tweezers, watch and
clock brushes; jute.
Kapock.
Lead, pig; leather—patent, enamelled, kid, hogskins, levant,
morocco, and imitations thereof; grained, Russia, chamois,
chrome, and glace ; linotype metal, linseed ; liquid stain for
leather ; lithographic stones ; lithographic ink and colours; loco-
motives under ten inch cylinders.
Machinery of the following descriptions, not including engines
and boilers—Flour-milling ; bookbinding and ruling machines ;
yaryan evaporators; canning machines; steam-threshing
machinery. Machinery for carding, spinning, weaving, and
finishing .the manufacture of fibrous material, and cards for such
machinery; machinery used in the manufacture of paper and
felting ; machinery—Centrifugals—multiple effets ; dry-air, for
refrigerating, without engine ; freezing machines, not including
engine power; gas engines; portable engines; sewing
machines; traction engines and steam ploughs; tubing for
artesian wells. Machines—namely Planing machines and
machines for joinery, hot-air machinery for drying timber,
hydraulic hat-moulds, knitting machines, printing machines
and presses, but not the motive power (if any) for same ;
machinery for telegraphic purposes. Machines and machinery,
not including boilers and engines, namely American band-saw
frames, bagfolding, bark-cutting, biscuit, for cutting and
stamping designs ; bone crushing, bootmaking, bottle washing,
brick and tile making, burring, used by fellmongers;
burring, used in woollen factories; button fastening, button-
making, cash registering and numbering, cloth cutting,
condensers, corrugated iron curving, darning, drilling,
drying (Cummer style), electric, and fittings; electrotyping,
embossing, engine governors, eyelet, felting, flock-making,
fret-saw, fruit-paring, fruit-preserving, honeycomb-making,
horse clippers, label cutting, lathes, manure, mincing, oil ex-
pressing, patent brakes for locomotives and motors, pill-making,
plate bending, platform weighbridges, printers’ and book-
binders’, punching, punching and flaring hoops, rice dressing
and cleaning, rubber stamp making, shaping, shearing, for iron ;
sheep shearing, and all parts thereof; slotting, soda water,
steam hammers, stone breakers, stone grinding (for printers),
tinsmiths, tobacco cutting, twine balling, washing and scouring,
for manufacture of blankets and rugs ; washing and wringing,
all kinds; wire net making, woodworkers' boring. Mining (
machinery, namely:—air compressors, ball mills for crushing
quartz, rock drills, roller mills for crushing quartz, steel rings
for quartz mills screens and gratings, vanners. Machines and
machinery, and parts thereof, required for mining purposes,
agricultural, pastoral, or other purposes, which are not specified, j
and are of new invention, and of a description not heretofore
made in Queensland, as may be exempted from time to time by
the Governor in Council, and published in the Gazette. Machine
belting, not leather ; magic lanterns and slides, malleable iron
piping ; manure, guano; maps, charts, and globes ; marble, un-
wrought ; materials, for scientific purposes, of china, earthen- j
ware, and porcelain ; metal fittings for portmanteaus, travelling ■
bags, and leggings; metal frames for bags and satchels ; metal
tubing, except tin, zinc, welded and lead; millet straw; 1
mould boards and shears, steel for ploughs and steel beams ;
mill-stones ; mill silk ; Muntz metal; music ; Myrabolans, un-
ground
Naval and military stores imported for the service of the
Colonial Governments, or for the use of Her Majesty’s land or
sea forces ; newspapers (printed) ; Newlandite.
Oakum ; oars ; oil of rhodium ; oil engines and fittings which !
can be only used for oil engines ; opticians’ materials—optical
tools, lenses, rough-edged; spectacle and eye-glass frames, j
empty, and repairing parts; spectacle and * eye-glass cases,
empty ; ores ; outside packages, in which goods are ordinarily
imported, and which are of no commercial value except as
covering for goods.
Packages returned empty in which Queensland produce has
j been exported, namely : —Crates, bales, and bags, provided that
j the number of such articles re-imported by any person or firm
is not greater than that exported by them, and are of a similar
I size and kind ; paint brushes ; paper patterns; paper, hand-
| made or machine-made, book or writing, of sizes not less than
the size known as “ demy ’’ when in original wrappers, and
j with uncut edges as it leaves the mill; paper (printing); pallet
knives; passengers'cabin furniture and baggage and passengers'
! personal effects (not including vehicles, musical instruments,
glassware, chinaware, silver and gold plate, and plated goods,
and furniture other than cabin furniture), which are imported
with and by passengers bona fide for their own personal use, and
not imported for the purpose of sale ; patent porcelain or steel
roller for flour mills ; persons coming to reside permanently in
Queensland may Import with them their furniture and effects
] which have been in use, and are not imported for sale, up to the
’ value of one hundred pounds (£100), duty free; Phorviium teno.x ;
phosphorised pollard and distributing carts for same ; photo-
j graphic materials—cameras, sensitised plates, lenses, and
[ mounts ; picture cards for schools ; plated nails ; pottery mate-
rials, namely :—Potters’ lead, Paris white, ground body manga-
! nese, oxides of chrome, copper, zinc, tin, black cobalt and
| uranium, sub-oxide of copper, carbonate of iron, bichromate of
potash, white fluorspar, ball clay and Brandon mineral paint,
1 ground flint, cornish stone, china clay, ground glass, felspar,
I granite shavings, glaze for porcelain or china; preservitas ;
( precious stones, unset; pumps,
j Quicksilver.
j Rattans, canes and willows ; regalia for friendly societies;
| resin ; reaper and binder—combined, strippers.
! Saddlers’ tools ; saddlers’ ironmongery, such as hames, and
mounts for harness, straining, surcingle, brace, girth, and roller
j webs ; collar check ; saddle serge ; saddle trees ; saddle-binding;
safety matches; salt; scientific instruments, being metal or
glassware; seaming twine ; sheep dip; sheep lick ; shoe pegs,
peg wood ; shoemakers’ nails, viz.;—Sparrow-bills, wrought and
| cast tips, bright and black malleable hobs, wrought hobs, nug-
gets, Hungarian cut sprigs, steel bills, tingles, iron and brass
| rivets ; shot; silver —bar, ingot, and sheet; silver, unmanufac-
tured ; silver leaf; skins, raw; slates, school; slate pencils ;
soda-ash ; sizeoline and hytra size ; soap colourings ; specimens
of natural history ; split wood staves ; staymakers’ binding,
eyelet-holes, corset fasteners, 1 jean, lasting, and cotell; starch,
| manufactured in bond from imported rice, under such restric-
tions and regulations as the Treasurer may impose ; staples for
( wire fencing; steel wire rope; steel rails; steel —unwrought,
| sheet,bar, angle, and tee ; straw, mill, and paste boards ; straw
plaits, palm-leaf plaits, Tuscan plaits; surgical and dental ap-
| pliances and instruments, namely : —Aspirators, atomisers for
surgical purposes only, bandages, basins (pus), batteries, gal-
vanic belts, surgical binders, bistouries, bottles, injection
bougies, brushes (throat), catheters, chairs (dental, complete),
chairs (operating, surgical), dilators, elevators, bod-clothes,
enemas, exhausters, breast forceps, head-rests (dental), inhalers,
I injectors, instruments, namely amputation, cupping, dissect-
| ing, ear, eye, midwifery, tooth, uterine, and veterinary, instru-
ments and engines used in dental operations, lancets, lamps
(used solely for surgical or dental purposes), laryngoscopes,
pessaries, probes, protectors (chest), pumps (stomach), specula,
splints, stethoscopes, stockings (elastic, silk), suspenders,
syringes, trocars, trusses, tubes, and urinometers.
Tailors’ trimmings, namely: French canvas, buckram,
wadding, padding; silk, worsted and cotton bindings and
braids ; stay binding; tar, Stockholm ; thimbles (ship’s gear) ;
tinfoil; tin plates ; tools, namely Grindery tools, edge-planes,
kit, peg, shaves, and welt-trimmers; adzes, anvils, augers,
screw and shell and auger bits; awls, awl pads, and hafts ;
axes, hatchets, tomahawks ; bevels, blowpipes, braces and bits,
and breastdrills; bruzzes for wheelwrights; bung-borers;
brushes, patent roller for blockmaking; chisels and gouges;
choppers and cleavers, butchers’; compasses—dividers : com-
passes —carpenters' and coopers’; diamonds, glaziers’; files and
rasps ; forks—digging, hay, and stable; hoes, garden, planta-
tion ; knives—butchers’, hay, pruning, putty, saddlers’, shoe-
makers’, cane ; needles of all sorts ; palms, leather ; planes and
plane-irons ; rules, tapes, and chains—measuring; saws of all
kinds, but not the machinery (if any) connected therewith :
scissors, scrapers (ship); screws—bench brass, coach, gal-
vanized, hand, table, wood ; scythes and scythe-handles ; shears
garden, hedge, sheep, tailors’, tinmen’s; shovels—iron or
wood ; sickles, spades; spokcshaves, shaves, and spoke trim-
mers ; squares ; squeezers, cork ; steels, butchers’; stocks and
dies, and taps for same,; saddlers’ tools, namely:—Rein rounders,
claw, carving, French edge, patent leather tools, wheels,
rosette cutters ; trowels ; vices, and patent saw-vices ; tools—
hammers (mining), picks (mining); trace and plough chains,
and iron hames ; traps, iron and steel; twine, for net-making,
( only when imported by net-makers ; type ; typewriters.
Umbrella-makers’ materials, namely—sticks, runners, notches,
caps, ferrules, cups, ribs, stretchers, tips, and rings, for use in
, the making of umbrellas, parasols, and sunshades; reversible
and levantine silk mixtures, of not less than 44 inches in width.
Valonia, unground.
Whalebone; wheels and axles, steel ; wire, iron—plain,
barbed, and galvanised ; wire, steel; wire, heel; wire netting ;
wooden hoops for casks ; wool, unmanufactured; wool packs;
works of art, namely :—paintings, engravings, and statuary.
Yarn—Russian, Italian, and coir ; yarn—jute and hemp.
Zinc.
Articles and materials (as may from time to time be specified
by the Treasurer) which are suited only for, and are to be used
and applied solely in the fabrication of goods within the colony.
26
QUEENSLAND


On all moneys received by the conductor of any autho-
rized Totalisatpr by way of stakes, wagers, or bets,
or agreed to be paid to him, for every twenty
shillings 0 0 6
On sale of merchandise, whether for cash or credit
5 per cent.
On purchases of merchandise when not in funds —
For the first £600 or under
5
On all over £500
2i „
On cash purchases when in funds—
For the first £1,000 or under
24 per cent.
On all above £1,000
14 ,,
On purchase or sale of vessels when not in funds...
5
On purchase or sale of vessels when in funds
24
On sale or purchase of houses or land—
For the first £1,000
5
On all above £1,000 ...
2* „
On sale or purchase of Government securities
1
On sale or purchase of wool, tallow, hides and sheep-
skins, inclusive of auctioneer’s commission
2i
On consignment of merchandise withdrawn and
delivered to order
24 „
On all property withdrawn, shipped, or delivered
to order
2* „
On granting or guaranteeing letters of credit
2* „
On guaranteeing cash sales
1
On guaranteeing credit sales
24 ,.
On all advances for duty, freight, lighterage, cash
outlay, and on accounts current per annum —
over current bank overdraft rates
1
On ordering goods or superintending the fulfilment
of contracts where no other commission is
charged
24 „
On guaranteeing bills, bonds, or other engagements
and on becoming security for the administration
of estates or to Government or individuals for
contracts, agreements, &c.
24
On acting for the estates of persons deceased as
executors and administrators
5 ,,
On debts, rents, interest, and other accounts
recovered or collected
5 „
On sale or purchase of gold-dust, bullion and specie
4
On acting as trustee in assigned estates, on amount
realized (if more than one trustee, the commission
to be divided)
N.B.—Auctioneers’ commission or brokerage to be
charged when incurred.
On investments made on mortgage or otherwise ...
5 „
24
Land agent’s and auctioneer’s charges for commis-
sion when incurred to be allowed for at the follow-
ing rates, viz.
On the first £1,000
5 „
On all above £1,000 and up to £5,000
24
On all above £5,000, as per special agree-
ment
On sales of furniture or other movable chattels
and effects
5 „
For letting properties on first yearly rent or less
period
5 „
On all purchases not otherwise specified, when not
in funds—
On the first £500 or under
5 ,,
On all above £500
24 ,
All decisions of the Treasurer in reference to articles so admitted
free to be published from time to time in the Government Gazette.
AD VALOREM DUTIES.
For every £lOO of the value thereof, a duty of £3.
Alpaca cloth, with border-.
Cotton piece goods ; Crimean flannel, in the piece.
Furniture springs.
Linen piece goods.
Moleskin, in the piece.
Paper, except otherwise enumerated.
Tailors’ trimmings—ltalians.
Union ticks, in the piece.
Zanella cloth, with border.
For every £lOO of the value thereof, a duty of £l3.
Bags and sacks, being bran, com sacks (except jute com sacks
to contain 3 bushels, free, March 31, 1897, flour, gunny, ore,
and sugar bags and mats; bicycles and tricycles ; bootcloth ;
burnishing ink.
Carriage-makers’ materials, viz. : —Carriage springs, carriage
trimmings, carriage cloth in the piece ; castors for furniture ;
casks, and staves and heads imported in shooks; cigarette
papers ; cocoa-beans, raw ; cotton, raw ; cutlery ; curled hair.
Drapery and millinery, viz:—bonnet shapes; cotton blind
nets ; cords—cotton, linen ; worsted (in hanks, coils and reels);
piece goods, viz. : —baize, Bedford cord, cloths, dress goods,
flannel, linseys, mosquito nets and valence nets, ribbons, serges
and estamenes, silks, trimmings (mantle and dress), tweeds,
velvets and velveteens, woollens; wool (Berlin and knitting);
carpeting, druggeting, floorcloth, oilcloth (in the piece); lace
(cotton and silk); straw hats and bonnets (untrimmed and
unlined, paper and glazed calico not to be considered lining).
Gilt mouldings for pictures; glass-stoppers for soda water
bottles.
Hair-seating for furniture.
Ironmongery and hardware, viz :—door-knobs- -glass, brass and
china; emery cloth, emery paper, emery powder ; hammers (ex-
cept mining); hinges (except otherwise enumerated); holy-
stones ; irons—hatters’, Italian, smoothing, and tailors’; latches ;
locks, mortice furniture, all kinds ; patent door-springs; pencils,
carpenters' ; sash fasteners ; tinned rivets, weighing machines
of all kinds (except platform weighbridges), and weights for
same ; isinglass.
Lamp chimneys and globes ; lemon peel in brine.
Ostrich feathers, raw.
Paper hangings ; pens.
Saddlers’ materials, viz.: —saddle-cloths and saddle-girths
made up ; sponge; stone, unwrought.
Watches, clocks, and all parts thereof ; window and plate glass.
Upon all goods, wares, and merchandise, Imported into
Queensland other than those mentioned in the foregoing
schedules, for every £lOO of the value thereof a duty of £23.
DIVIDENDS DUTY ACT.
(Came into operation, September 19, 1890.)
For and in respect of all dividends declared or ascertained by,
or becoming due from any Company having its Head Office or
chief place of business in Queensland, for every twenty shillings
of the amount of such dividend the sum of one shilling and a
proportionate sum for any part of such twenty shillings.
In the case of Companies not having their Head Office or chief
place of business in Queensland (and not being insurance com-
panies), the same duty shall be paid on so much of the total
dividends declared by the company during the year, as is pro-
portionate to the average amount of capital employed in Queens-
land during the year, as compared with the total average capital
of the Company during the year.
In the case of mining companies, the first and subsequent
dividends shall be taken to be applied in repayment of the cost
actually incurred by the Company before the declaration of the
first dividend in respect of labour or material employed in
developing the mine, and in the second place, in repayment of
three-fourths of the cost of any machinery erected for raising
ores and other materials from the mine.
Every Company carrying on life fire, fidelity guarantee, or
marine insurance business, a sum equal to twenty shillings for
every one hundred pounds on the amount of the gross premiums
received (excluding any portion actually paid away by way of
re-insurance effected in Queensland with any other company)
during the year ending December 31.
TOTALISATOR TAX.
£ s. d.
PILOTAGE RATES.
For anchorages: 4d. to 6d. per ton according to locality, the
minimum rate being 20s. and 50s. respectively.
For distances : according to distance and tonnage. Minimum
rates for 3 miles: vessels under 100 tons, 10s.; vessels over 2,000
tons, 100 s. Maximum rates for upwards of 30 miles : vessels
under 100 tons, 80s. vessels over 2,000 tons, 2405.
Vessels calling at Queensland ports to land or ship passengers,
Is. 6d. per heart or per ton of cargo landed or shipped. Inter-
colonial vessels ; where master is exempt, 6d. per ton once in
every month; for every coaster, 4d. per ton (if under 50 tons,
2d. per ton).
COMMERCIAL CHARGES, BRISBANE.
On all purchases not otherwise specified, when in
funds —
On the first £l,OOO or under , 24
On all above £l,OOO l 4
SHIPPING AGENCY.
On procuring money on bottomry and respondentia
On procuring freight or passengers for vessels ... 5
Collecting freight—English or foreign vessels ... 5
Colonial 5
On ships’ disbursements or outfits—
When not in funds 5
When in funds 24 ~
On entering and clearing vessels from the Austra- £ s. d.
lian colonies IXO
On entering vessels from England or elsewhere (the
Australian colonies only excepted) 3 3 0
On clearing vessels from England or elsewhere (the
Australian colonies only excepted) 3 8 0
On clearing coasting vessels—
Not exceeding 20 tons 0 10 0
Above 20 tons 110
27
QUEENSLAND.


TOWNS IN
ADAVALE (25° 50' S. lat., 144° 36' B. long.), a postal town-
ship. with savings bank and telegraph station, occupying a small
portion of a large flat in the Warrego district and electorate,
about 610 miles W. of Brisbane, and 116 miles W. of Charieville
(to which a coach runs weekly, faro £3), situated on the
Black water Creek, 7 miles above its junction with the Hulloo
River. There are here three hotels. Imperial, Royal, and Great
Western, three stores, four tradesmen’s premises, post and
telegraph office and police quarters, Court-house, Divisional
Board’s Hall —a commodious building and provisional school.
Episcopal minister and Roman Catholic priest visit occasionally.
Coach runs weekly to Windorah (136 miles, fare, 705.) and Thar-
gOmindah (210 miles), fare, 100 s. The Racing Club here holds
three meetings annually, at which large sums, as well as valuable
trophies, are given away. It is the centre of a fine pastoral dis-
trict, the principal stations being Milo, Gumbardo, Kyabra,
Gooyea, Wolford Downs and others. In the Juudah district,
about 40 miles distant, mining for opals is carried on. Pop Ra-
tion, 192 (census 1891).
ALiBERTON (27° 54' S. lat., 153° 14' E. long.), a small town-
ship situated on the Logan river, in the parish of Albert,
county of Ward, electorate of Logan and police district of Beeu-
leigh, 28 miles NW. of Brisbane, It has a Lutheran chapel,
State school (No. 265), and private school. Agricultural district,
producing sugar, maize, potatoes, and arrowroot. Steamer com-
munication with Brisbane regularly, and by Beenleigh railway
(4 miles). Population, 63 (census 1891).
ALBION (27° 25' S. lat., 153° 4' B. long.), a suburban town-
ship(county Stanley, electorate of Toombul), forming portions of
the Shire of Windsor and Toombul Divisional Board miles from
Brisbane, situate on the Breakfast Creek. It is a station with tele-
graphic communication with Brisbane on thoSandgate Railway;
there is also frequent communication by omnibus. The direct
line, via. Fortitude Valley, was opened to here in November, 1890.
Industries : saw-mill, a pottery, brickyards, and stone quarries.
There arc Episcopal, Presbyterian, Baptist, and Salvation Army
places of worship, and a branch of the Queensland National
Bank. In a large and commodious public hall, Freemasons,
Oddfellows, and other societies hold their meetings. There
is a post, telegraph, and telephone office, money-order office and
savings bank and a daily delivery of mails.
ALICE (24° 2' S. lat., 144° 47' E. long.), a post and telegraph
station on the Central Railway, in the electorate of Mitchell,
326 miles W, of Rockhampton. Delta, Evora, and an out-
station of Corcena, called Lochnagar, have all their supplies
sent here, and their wool also is despatched from here. The
next railway station to Alice is Busthinia, 4 miles. Eight
miles from Alice is Back Creek, where is an artesian well and
a tank, which is filled by a windmill.
ALLORA (28° 1' S. lat., 152° 1' E. long.l, a small municipal
township, with money-order office, savings bank, telegraph and
railway station, 17 miles from Warwick, and 153 miles by rail
SW. of Brisbane. A branch line from Hendon, 3£ miles dis’ant,
was opened during 1897. This railway is one of the lines
constructed under the Railway Guarantee Act, 1895. It
is situated on the south side of Dalrymple Creek (which falls
into the Condamine), in the county of Merivale, electorate
of Cunningham, of which it is the headquarters. There are
70 miles of streets and roads in the municipality, which was
proclaimed on July 24, 1869 ; area 18 7-10 square miles. The
value of the ratable property is estimated at £49,382. In
1890 Allora was gazetted a licensing district. It is also the head-
quarters of the Allora Police district. The district is an agricul-
tural and pastoral one. The Australian Joint Stock Bank, Queens-
land National Bank, post and telegraph office, court-house, police
quarters and town hall are the principal public buildings.
There is also a School of Arts, with library of 1,330 vols., and
two largo halls for entertainments. State school (No. 3 1 . The
places of worship comprise Episcopal, Methodist, Presby-
terian, and Roman Catholic churches. Hotels : Princess of Wales,
Tattersalls, Club, Commercial and Royal, and two boarding
houses. Two steam flour-mills, a saw-mill, and a butter factory
are here. Lodges: Masonic (E.C.) and Protestant Alliance.
Allora is surrounded on every side by farms, on which wheat,
maize and lucerne (for hay) are principally grown. The soil
is a deep black, and is of exceeding richness, giving heavy
yields of wheat, as well as growing all del criptions of vegetables
of a temperate clime to great perfection. The Central
Downs Agricultural and Horticultural Society meets here.
The far-famed stations of Glengallan, East Talgai, Goomburra,
and Clifton are all within a radius of 10 miles of Allora. In
January, 1898, the Headington Hill Estate, purchased by the
Government under the provisions of the Agricultural Lands
Repurchase Act, comprising nearly 37,000 acres, was thrown
open to selection, and up to September, 1898, 33,000 of it had
been selected. Over 8,000 acres of the Glengallan Estate has
also been similarly purchased, and is being surveyed preparatory
to being thrown open to selection. There is a large supply of
valuable timber at the head of Dalrymple Creek, among which
are very fine samples of cedar, beech, and mahogany, and an
almost inexhaustible supply of pine and hardwood. The Clifton
Coal Mine is situated about five miles from Allora, on the
Southern Railway lino. The coal is of good quality. There is
also a very good supply of fireclay ; but neither at present is
being worked. Formation : Mostly volcanic alluvial black
soil on flats, the ridges being basaltic. The water supply is
obtained from the creek and from wells, water being found
at a depth of from 30 to 40 feet on the flats. Population, 994
(census 1891), now about 1,100. Newspaper: Allora Guardian.
QUEENSLAND.
ARAM AC (22° 59' S. lat., 145° 14' long.), a post-town about
750 miles .NW, of Brisbane, 40 miles N. from Barcaldine, the
nearest railway station, and 390 miles from Rockhampton, in
the Mitchell electorate and county of Rodney, situated on a
beautiful site surrounded by magnificent downs on the Aramac
Creek, a tributary of the Thompson River. Coaches run to the
Barcaldine Railway Station, 42 miles, and to Muttaburra twice
weekly, fares, 255. ; also to Ilfracombe weekly, fare, 255,
Hotels : Royal, Aramac, Albion, and Marathon. Branches of the
Government Savings Bank and Bank of New South Wales are
here, also money-order office, telegraph station, hospital,
court-house and police station, school of arts with 607 vols.,
State school (No. 312), cordial factory, six general stores, and
tradesmen’s premises. Thq surrounding country is taken up
by sheep runs. Several homestead farms and grazing selections
have been surveyed and taken, and when favoured by good
seasons produce fair returns, and large areas of land in 20,000
acre blocks have been selected, and fenced and stocked with sheep
or cattle. There are splendid high downs, well grassed ; the
natural water is limited, and the climate generally arid.
There is no scarcity of water in the town, owintr to the
fact that several artesian wells overflow into the Politic and
Pelican creeks tributary to the Aramac. An artesian bore put
down here struck a fine supply of water at 1,400 feet depth ; esti-
mated daily output 750,000 gallons, and supplying an excellent
free public bath, throughjwhich the water from the bore flows
directly into the Aramac Creek. The town is also reticulated
from the bore, and the town fruit and vegetable gardens
are irrigated by its means. The water diffuses a sulphurous
smell, similar to that of other bores in the neighbourhood, which
have an excellent medicinal reputation for rheumatic and kindred
affections. Chinamen’s gardens afford supply of vegetables in
good seasons. It is the place of meeting for the divisional
board, petty sessions, licensing court and small debts court,
and there is a flourishing Jockey Club, also Masonic Lodge.
A Roman Catholic priest visits monthly, regular weekly services
being conducted by lay readers, and there is an Episcopal
church (visited monthly). The Aramac Divisional Board, also
the Marsupial Board, hold their meetings hero. Geological for-
mation : soft sedimentary rock, with an upper stratum of
marine fossils, belemnites, and innumerable species of bivalves.
Population of town, 389 ; district (census 1891), 2,765.
ARRILALAH. See Forest Grove.
AUGATHELLA (25° 47' S. lat., 146° 34' E. long.), electorate
of Warrcgo, co. of Orrery and shire of Augathella, formerly
known as Ellangowan, is a post-town with savings bank office
and telegraph station on the left bank of the Warrego river ; on
the direct road from Mitchell, Morven, and Charieville to Tambo,
52 miles from Charieville, 80 from Tambo, and 62£ miles from
Morven ; about 180 miles NW. of Roma, and 489 miles W.N.W.
from Brisbane, with which there is bi-weekly mail communication
by coach to Charieville railway st ition ; a coach runs also to
Morven twice a week. Public-houses : Royal, Ellangowan
and Tattersalls, 5 stores, post and telegraph office, court-
house, police barracks, 2 saddlers’ shops, 1 hairdresser, 1 baker,
2 blacksmiths, 1 shoemaker’s shop, a butchery, and a State
school (No. 357). Anglican and Roman Catholic clergy visit,
Augathella is the business centre of a large numberof stations,
and there is a large through traffic of teams and cattle. It is
the principal stock route from the West to the leading markets
of Queensland and N. S. Wales. Burcnda cattle station is 12.
miles distant. Population 238 (census 1891), with vicinity about
327. There are here Mulga soil, fit for wheat, and rich black soil
for farming. Nive Downs and Bureuda stations are noted for
their beautiful prairie plains.
AYR (19° 33' S. lat., 147° 24' E. long.), a township on. the
Boudekin Delhi (Bowen electorate), 60 miles SE. from Townsville
andSlOmilesNW. of Brisbane, having postand money-order office.,
telegraph station, and Government savings bank, it is situated
near Plantation Creek, about six miles above the landing wharves
for coasting steamers, within a radius of about four miles of the
Airdmillan, Seaforth, and Kalamia stations. It has direct conir
munication with Monsville and Bowen, to the former by coach
twice weekly to the Reid River, and thence by rail, and al-o by
steamer from Plantation and Banata Creek at irregular inter-
vals. To Bowen the transit is by coach t vice weekly to Wan-
garratta, thence by rail. The Government building* are a
court-house, police station, gaol, post office and State school.
There are in the town two hotels, (Delta and Queen’s), five
stores, two saddlers, two blacksmiths. There is but one
church, the Church of England, but the town is visited at
stated intervals by Roman Catholic and Presbyterian clergy-
men. Government officers are P.Vl..senior constable, and
two constables, postmaster, and assistant medical officer, and
school teacher and assistant. Masons are represented by the
Delta lodge, S.C. A., Oddfellows by the Lower Bondekin lodge,
M U.5.0.0.F. A Progress Association is in existence, as is also
a Turf Club (the Bondekin Delta). The district is purely agri-
cultural, the manufacture of sugar being the only industry
carried on, for which purpose there are three mills. The dis-
trict possesses very few attractions to the tourist, beyond the
shooting and the fishing (game and fish being plentiful), the
only point of interest being the irrigation works, instituted and
carried on by the various plantations. Local government is
represented by the Ayr Divisional Board. The population of
the town is about 210, of the town and district about 2,100;
these figures include children and aliens. Newspaper: Ayr
Chronicle.
28
[Ada —A
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


BALLANDEAN (28° 50' S. lat., 151° 45' B. long.), a receiving
office and railway station, in the county of Bentinck, electorate
of Carnarvon, and Stanthorpe police district, situated on the
Severn river, 14 miles SSW. of Stanthorpe, 221 miles S\V. of
Brisbane. Tin-mining, stock-rearing, and fruit, tobacco and
maize-growing are the industries of the district. The Ballandean
cattle station is here. Hotel: Britannia. Provisional school,
one store. The country is granite, sandy, with lime and clay.
Silver, copper, gold, and other minerals have been discovered
in the district, also bismuth. A fine quality of marble has
also been found in the vicinity. Population, 108 (census 1886).
BANANA (24° 29' 8. lat., 150° 6' E. long.), a post-town,
savings bank, and telegraph station and district registry office,
in the county of Ferguson, electorate of Port Curtis, police district
of Banana, on the road from Dalby to Westwood, near the Dawson
river (about 14 miles), 320 miles (374 by telegraph route) NW. of
Brisbane, and 110 miles S. of Rockhampton. Coach runs weekly to
and from Westwood railway station (70 miles), fare 30s. Hotels :
Criterion and Banana. Trades—butcher, blacksmith, and a
storekeeper. The township is situated on a gentle rise, at the
foot of which is a large lagoon, fringed by a belt of scrub, adding
beauty to the scene and denoting the fertility of the soil. From
this lagoon the water supply is derived. In 1885 this dried up,
and a well was sunk for the use of the townspeople, when
an abundant supply of water was struck at a depth of 70 feet.
There is a very fair supply of water in the well at all times,
but it is inclined to be brackish; but for this, water would
have had to be brought from the Dawson. Generally the
district suffers from deficient watcr-supplv in dry times ; wells
have been sunk in various places along the main road by the
Divisional Board. The Divisional Board completed in the latter
part of 1890, within sight of Banana, a fine dam, which
proved a great success, and is expected to conserve a
constant water supply. Public buildings: court-house, lock-up,
barracks, school-house (No. 5), and post and telegraph office.
The Banana Divisional Board meets hero and a Lands office is
now established. The district surrounding Banana is purely
pastoral, but the soil is said to be well adapted for agricultural
purposes. At Woolein Creek, and also at Camboon, 24 and 45
miles distant respectively, quartz reefs have been found.
Character of country—black soil plains. Population, 117 (census
1891).
BARCALDINE (23° 33'8. lat., 145° 17' E. long.) (county
Rodney), formerly Lagoon Creek, a station on the Central
Railway, 358 miles W. of Rockhampton, with post, money-
order, telegraph, and savings bank office. It lies 869 feet
above sea level. It has a District Court, a State school
(No. 531), a public hall, a Masonic hall, and a School of Arts
reading room, with library of 729 vols. The lodges of the Masons
(E.C.), Oddfellows (M.U.), Hibernians, and Foresters (A.0.F.),
meet here. Places of worship for Primitive Methodists, Roman
Catholics, also Salvation Army barracks, branches of the
(Queensland National and New South Wales Banks, the Victoria
Hospital, and three carrying agencies. Hotels: Shakespeare,
Royal, Union, Welcome Home, West End, Commercial, Carriers’
Arms, and others. The stations (sheep) in the neighbour-
hood are: Saltern Creek, Barcaldine, Delta, Dalgi, Lochnagar,
Home Creek, Evora, Leichhardt, Tara, Coreena, and Dun raven,
and there are several grazing farms in the vicinity of the
town. Coaches run to Blackall (67 miles), Aramac and Mutta-
burra. Water is obtained from two artesian wells. The first one,
sunk by the Government at a depth of 690 feet, yielded 175,000
gallons per day, and though a diminution in- the flow was
reported, the water is now running stronger than when the bore
was first put down. The second one was put down by the Divisional
Board, and yields about one million gallons per day ; depth,
1,310 ft. deej). At the railway station sheep and cattle yards are,
provided with troughs for watering travelling stock. A large
wool scouring works is supplied with artesian water from a boro
put down near the establishment. A boiling down works, in
which £5,000 of local capital was invested, was burned down in
1895. A large boiling-down works, with wool scouring plant,
has been established at Westbourne, 5 miles from Barcaldine,
the water for which is supplied by an artesian well. The
town is situated on the edge of the Downs, and some of the
best country in the district is open for selection here.
Some of the settlers are now trying wheat growing. There
are ten artesian wells on Corinda station, six on Saltern Creek,
the largest of which yields 1,500,000 gallons per day, several on
Coreena, two on Leichhardt, three on Tara, one on Peuts, one
on Dunraven, one on Clover Hills, one on Elton grazing farms,
one at Home Creek, one at Evora, and two on the Aramac Road.
Two wells, in both of which water has been struck in useful
quantities, at Wellshot. Most of the grazing farms open to
date in this district have been selected and stocked. The
town generally is reported to be progressing. Newspaper : the
IVestern Champion. Population (census 1891), 2,482.
BEAUDESERT (co. Ward), 27° 59' S. lat., 158° 2' E. long.,
a post town, with money-order office. Government savings bank,
telegraph, and railway station on the South Coast line, and
Logan River (Spring Creek runs through centre of town), 47
miles from Brisbane. It has a public school (No. 158), several
tradesmen’s premises, an Episcopal church, St. Thomas, with
institute for young men, Roman Catholic church (St. Mary),
Custom House, police court and lock-up, three sawmills and
creamery, Oddfellows' lodge, post and telegraph office, and three
hotels : Railway, Beaudesert, Logan and Albert. Formation :
basaltic flats. Population (census 1891), 450. Newspaper;
from the western bank of the former, is the chief town of the
Logan district. The liver is navigable for many miles above
it, and steamers ply on it to and from Brisbane, with
which it is connected by railway, 24 miles; and Southport, 26
miles. Many small townships and industrious communities
surround and are in touch with it, viz.—Yatala, Waterford,
Alberton, Gramzow, Loganholmo, Mount Cotton, Redland Bay,
Woolfdean, Pimpama, Coomera, Nerang, Tambourine, Beaudesert,
etc., nearly all enjoying railway communication. A mail coach
plies to and from Tambourine (15 miles) daily, fare 3s. Sundry
other mails are delivered by horse. The town itself is of a good
size, possessing railway station, court-house, police quarters,
with their accessories, post and telegraph bureau, with its
adjuncts of savings bank and money-order office, pound yard,
first-class State school: five churches, Church of England, Wes-
leyan, two Lutheran and the Apostolic, four hotels of commo-
dious size, viz.—lmperial, Railway, Beenleigh, and Royal, school
of arts with 525 vols., with one of the finest dancing halls in the
colony. Masonic lodge, and agricultural show grounds, with
yards, ring, and all other requisite conveniences. There are also
racing, cricket, tennis and bowling clubs. A police magis-
trate resides in the town. There are several general and
tradesmen’s stores, also a resident doctor, and chemist’s
shop. It is surrounded by several sugar mills, central and
private; two distilleries, and two soda-water factories.
The water supply is derived from a small reservoir situate
towards the west of the town. The whole district was ex-
ceedingly prosperous until the disastrous flood of 21st January,
1887, gave it a severe check, ruining many, and injuring
all more or less. The successive floods of 1893 caused a
good deal of damage to the promising sugar crop. There
is, however, every prospect of a satisfactory extension of
industry throughout the whole district. Two sugar mills
are on the Albert River at Yatala, a mile distant, while others
of smaller capacity are at various centres. Long experience
has proved tfie thorough adaptability of its rich varied soils
and genial climate for the successful growth of the sugar cane,
which amply repays the labour expended upon it. A fair annual
average yield of cane to the acre is 25 tons. It is bought by the
manufacturers either delivered at therollers,oronthe river bank,
whence loaded into the punts, which are broughtalongside of and
taken away from the growers’ various properties by steam launch.
Beenleigh is the centre of an extensive agricultural dis-
trict, the population being chiefly composed of the German
element, who make the best of farmers and are a most indus-
trious class of people. They grow all kinds of produce on
their various farms, but prefer sugar cane. An owroot is
extensively grown and manufactured at Pimpama, the clear
running streams there giving it a beautiful and delicate
app&irance. It is compressed into neat lib. packages, and
surplus exported to London. Several saw-mills are scattered
over the district, timber being plentiful. Brick-making con-
stitutes also one of the varied industries. The breeding of
horses, cattle, and pigs is a business of no mean dimensions ;
and dairying occupies a large share of attention. The climate
is exceedingly genial and healthy. Beenleigh is a prettily
located town, high and dry, and its adjacent surroundings are
highly picturesque. The Logan electorate returns one member
to the House of Parliament; some years ago it was paititioned
into an additional electorate —the Albert, which returns one
member also. Formation: argillaceous and quartzose schists
and basalt. Population (census 1891), 536. Newspaper :
beaudesert Dispatch.
BETOOTA, a township and receiving office on the Mount
Leonard station, in the North Gregory district (co. Rosebery),
situated about midway between Canterbury and Birdsville,
about 909 miles W. from Brisbane, and about 25 miles from
the South Australian border, at the junction of several
roads—Windorah to Birdsville, the Diamentina to South Aus-
tralia via Haddon, and the stock route from the Herbert and
Diamentina to Bourke and Wodonga ; consequently, it may bo
expected to have a fair trade in the future. Brown’s Creek
passes round the town on two sides, forming an island in
flood times. On the north side a water-hole gives a permanent
supply to the town. It has Custom House officers’ quarters,
police barracks, a hotel, store, saddler’s, and butcher’s shop.
Grazing locality. Population, about 50
BIGGENDEN, See Mount Bigoenden.
BIRDSVILLE, (25° 55 S lat., 139° 20 E. long.),
a post-town in the co. of Rosebery, and Diamentina
division, electorate of Bulloo and Gregory, on the west
bank of the Everard, an outside channel of the Diamen-
tina river, about seven miles on the Queensland side of the
South Australian border, 15 miles from Pandie Pandie (8.A.),
and about 340 miles from the Hergott Springs (S.A.) railway
station, to which a coach runs weekly (faro, £7 10s.), 950 miles
W. of Brisbane. The principal mail route from Brisbane is via
Cearleville, Windorah, and Betoota. There are also three other
mail routes —Birdsville to Boulia (257 miles); Birdsville to
Dubbo Downs (150 miles), fortnightly ; Birdsville to Haddon
Downs 18. A), 120 miles, fortnightly. These three mails are
run with pack-horses. Hotels; Birdsville, Royal, and Tatter-
sail’s ; there are three stores, two butchers’ shops, and a cordial
manufactory, and a court-house, customs, and police station.
There are three vegetable gardens kept by Chinamen. The Dia-
mentina Divisional Board meets at Monkira. There is a weekly
mail from Brisbane, Hergott Springs and Adelaide, with which
latter place much of the business of thedistrictis done, and whence
Logan Albert Leader. all the stores are brought principally by camels. The southern
BEENLEIGH (27° 44' S. lat., 153° 15' E. long.), county of ! markets are largely supplied with fat cattle from the stations
Ward, parish of Boyd, electorate and police district of Logan, around here. District is purely pastoral, rather thinly grassed,
situate between the rivers Albert and Logan, a short distance principally stony plains, stony ridges, and sand hills, with
29
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Bal—Bir]


flooded flats. There are about 52 permanent residents and 3
Chinese.
BLACKALL (24° 25' 37" S. lat„ 145° 28' 3" E. long.), a
municipal borough (incorporated May 20,1880), with money-order,
telegraph and savings bank office, in the county of Tambo, and
Barcoo electorate, on the Barcoo river, about 625 miles NW.
of Brisbane, 380 miles inland from Rockhampton, and 75 miles
S. from Jericho Railway Station. “It is prettily situated in
the centre of undulating plains upon a sandy ridge, and runs
parallel with the Barcoo river.” Hotels, Dash’s, Royal,
Prince of Wales, Universal, Bushman’s Arms, Barcoo, and Tatter-
sail’s; and several stores and tradesmen’s shops. The Dis-
trict Commissioner of Crown Lands has his office here. Public
buildings comprise a lock-up, inspector’s quarters, Lands Office,
Town Hall, court-house, Council Chambers, a district gaol, post
and telegraph office, parsonage, and hospital. Churches: An-
glican, and Roman Catholic. Banks: Queensland National
and New South Wales. State school, No. 299 News-
paper : Barcoo Independent. School of Arts, with library of
967 vols. The district is almost entirely pastoral. The sheep
stations are Northampton Downs, Minnie Downs, Ravensbourne,
Listowel Downs, Terrick Torrick, Malvern Dills, Avington,
Lome, Alice Downs and Bloomfield. The inhabitants are well
supplied with vegetables from market gardens. A reservoir
supplies the township with water, and there is in addition an
artesian supply yielding 280,000 gallons daily. The communica-
tion is by mil from Rockhampton to Jericho, 75 miles, thence
coach ; or by coach to Bnrcaldine railway station, or coach to
Charlesville. Blackall is the most central town in Queensland.
The Divisional Board, also the Marsupial Board, meet here. There
is a Lodge of Oddfellows, and a Masonic Lodge, also a cricket, a
racing club and a pastoral society. The estimated area of the
municipality is 5 square miles, having 8 miles of roads, 145
dwellings, and property of the ratable value ;of £21,580. The
country around Blackall is well grassed, timbered chiefly with
gidyah, and considered first-class for sheep. Much land has
been taken up by selectors, and there are a few grazing areas.
Formation; blue rock, sandstone, and limestone. Population,
by census 1891, of the municipality 777 (now 800), of the census
district 4,529.
BLACK SNAKE (26° 6' S. lat., 152° 28' B. long.), co.
Lennox, electorate of Wide Bay, police district of Gympie, is
about 12 miles from Kilkivan SW. at an altitude of 1,200 feet,
and about 170 miles N. by W. of Brisbane, situated on the
Black Snake Creek. Hotel: Black Snake, with store in connec-
tion. There are eight distinct lines of reefs, notably the “ Black
Snake” and the “Mariners,” which when working yielded a
large average of gold per ton. Three miles due north of Black
Snake is the Mount Coora Copper Mining Company’s works,
Near here a cobalt lode was discovered by Mr. P. Smith.
This lode is now being worked. It is of great width and
extends for over half-a-mile in length. The Assistant Govern-
ment Geologist believes that it will prove a very valuable
deposit. Formation : hard homblendic and micaceous schists
and altered volcanic rock. Principally a mining district,
although pastoral and agricultural pursuits arc engaged in
to a limited extent. In the scrubs, large quantities of valuable
timber, pine, cedar, iron bark and gum exist, but owing to the
almost impassable roads over the Black Snake range it cannot
be brought to a market.
BLOOMFIELD RIVER (16° 5' S. lat., 145° 16' E. long.),
a tin-mining and sugar-growing locality, with a receiving
office, lying about 40 miles to the south of Cooktown, 45
miles by mail route, rid Mount Romeo, and 30 miles by sea.
The river from which it takes its name flows into the south end
of Weary Bay. It has a sand-bar at its mouth, and is only
navigable for about eight miles, owing to falls and rapids ;
in one place the water falls almost perpendicularly over a wall
of rock 185 feet high. A short distance from the mouth is the
wharf, and saw and planing mills and the township of
Ayton, which consists of a post office, police station
and police court, and several private houses. Three miles from
the river is the Vilele Plantation of 5,000 acres, and adjoining
is that of Messrs. Hislop & Co., of 2,500 acres, and Air. P.
Cochrm’s of 1,200 acres. Tin is found in greater or less quantities
in all the gullies to the south, west, and north of the river.
The principal mining centres are Mount Romeo, 12 miles north,
Rossville ; Mount Hartley, 14 miles north ; and China Camp
and Upper Bloomfield, 10 to 13 miles south-west. Most of the
country being covered with a dense tropical scrub, it is hard
to penetrate and difficult to prospect, but several promising look-
ing lodes of tin are known of. These rich tropical scrubs have
been proved very suitable for the growing of sugar cane, coffee
and tobacco, the latter flourishing much as in Java, and of a
similar quality. Alessrs. Aplin, brown & Co., of Townsville,
send one of their steamers to the river about every six weeks.
BOGANTUNGAN (23° 36' 8. lat., 147° 14' B. long.), a rail-
way station and post-town with money-order, and telegraph
facilities, 227 miles west of Rockhampton. It is in the police
district of Clermont, county of Plantagenet, electorate of Leich-
hardt. and is situated on the Medway and Grass Tree creeks.
Public buildings : Institute, railway station, and State School
(No. 384). Hotel : Commercial, one store (Chinese) and butcher’s
shop. It was once a thriving busy place, but the extension of
the line westward has affected its prosperity and reduced its
population, and the township, has bad to take its place with
other minor camps along the line. Population (census 1891), 143.
BOOLBURRA (23° 45' S. lat., 149° 45' E. long.) is in the
Port Curtis district, county of Puckington, and Rockhampton
police district, about 100 miles W. of Gladstone, and 400 miles
NW. of Brisbane, situated on the river Dawson, near the junc- j
tion with the Mackenzie. It is a station on the Central line, !
| a receiving office, and is distant 58 miles SW. from Rockhamp-
ton. It has a provisional school (No. 202). The school-house is
used occasionally as a place of worship. There are permanent
reserves for a public cemetery and schools. Agricultural and
pastoral district, subject to floods in the rainy season. Popu-
lation of town, 58 (census 1891); with vicinity about 120.
BOONAH, a railway station on the Fassifem line and the
Teviot Creek, 59 miles from Brisbane, and one mile from
Dugandan, the terminus of the branch. It is a telegraph station,
and has also a post office, money-order office, branch of the
Government savings bank and Queensland National bank, two
hotels, State school, school of art, with 175 vols., Episcopal,
Roman Catholic, Primitive Methodist and Salvation Army places
of worship; and there are three saw-mills in the vicinity.
Boonah is surrounded by mountain ranges, and the scenery is
said to be unsurpassed for grandeur and natural beauty. Agri-
cultural and pastoral district.
BOULIA (22° 55' S. lat., 139° 38' E. long.), a post-town,
“well and prettily” situated on the west bulk of the Burke
river, about 500 feet above sea level, in the county of Wills,
electorate of North Gregory. The Wills Channel joins the Burke
15 miles above the town, at the site of the old N. M. Police
Barracks. The town contains two hotels, Australian and Royal,
two large stores, and “ fully a score of presentable houses,” and
some tradesmen’s premises. The water supply is derived from
the river and from wells sunk in the town, good water being
obtainable at an average depth of about 40 feet. Eouliais distant
from Winton about 240 miles, shorter than this by two other
routes ; about 1,350 miles from Brisbane, to which the route is by
coach to Winton, coach to Longreach, thence rail and steamer,
or coach to Winton, thence coach to Hughenden, from there
rail and steamer. Cloucurry is about 193 miles distant, and
Birdsville 257 miles. There are post and telegraph offices,
also a court-house and barracks. Water is obtainable by
sinking at an average depth of about 30 feet: The country around
Boulia is described as magnificent grazing country, chiefly
stocked with cattle. Many of the stations around exceed 3,000
square miles of country. Good building timber is found in
the neighbourhood. Boulia is a first-class meteorological station.
Population, 101 (census 1891).
BOWEN (19° 59'8. lat., 148° 16' E. long.), Port Denison, co. of
Herbert, parish of Pring, police and electoral district of Bowen, a
seaport and municipal town, under a mayor and live councillors,
with money-order office, savings bank, and telegraph repeating
station, on the northern shore of the inlet in Edgcumbe Bay,
known as Port Denison, about 725 miles (817 by overland
telegraph route) NW. of Brisbane. There is regular steam
communication with Brisbane (by the A.U.S.N. Co.’s and
the British India Mail Co.’s steamers), also with Rockhamp-
ton, Sydney, and other Southern ports. The harbour,
which was discovered in 1859, by Captain Sinclair, is one
of the best on the eastern coast of Australia, secure
in all weathers, and admirably adapted as a port of
call for all vessels using the inner passage to the Torres
Strait. Bowen is the outlet and port of a large area of
pastoral country. There is ah extensive deposit of good
coal within 60 miles, but lack of capital prevents its
being worked. Mr. Jack, the Government Geologist,
who visited and reported on the coal-fields, states his opinion
that “the Bowen river coal-field is the geological equivalent
of the most valuable part of the New South Wales coal mea-
sures.” There are within the boundary of the municipality 3J
square miles, 26 miles of streets and 290 dwellings. Estimated
value of ratable property, £63,837. It was proclaimed on
August 7th, 1863. The Australian Joint-Stock Bank,
and the Bank of N. S. Wales have branches here. The town
possesses Anglican (Trinity) and Roman Catholic (St. Mary’s)
churches, a Presbyterian church, Salvation Army barracks, a
State school (No. 10), girl and infant schools (No. 235), a convent
and private school, a good hospital (Kennedy), a school of arts,
with a library of 2,301 volumes, police court-house, and derives
a good supply of water from the river Don. There are five
hotels—Phaff’s, North Australian, Union, and Railway Com-
mercial. Tbe Court-house, a large brick and stucco building,
is now also utilised for the Post-office and Lands Departments.
Bowen, being the telegraph repeating station for the North,
has a large number of operators. A commodious pier, upwards
of one-third of a mile in length, affords facilities for the loading
and discharge of vessels. A “swinging basin" is now dredged
to a depth of 22 feet below low water, and the channel and
swinging basin are respectively 150 and 350 feet wide. The
jetty here has been strengthened, and its width at the outer
end increased, and the berths and swinging basin dredged.
Vessels of very large tonnage, notably the L'ington Grange and
Denton Grange , registering 9,000 tons each, have been loaded
and discharged with great facility. The district is a pastoral
one, but there is a considerable extent of excellent agri-
cultural land around the town as well as in the vicinity
of the coalfield. The first sod of the Bowen railway was
turned by the Mayor on June 14, 1888, and the line is now
completed to Wangaratta, (48 miles). Boring with the diamond
drill was tried on the coalfield at the foot of the Leichhardt
range, and several narrow coal seams have been cut
through. The drill was continued to the depth of 391 feet to
the bedded porphyrites. At Havilah, Bowen River, coal seams
of various thicknesses were gone through to a depth of
340 feet. There are indications of coal within 15 miles
of the port. Marble has been found in the neighbourhood. The
Normanby gold-field lies about 60 miles 8. from Bowen.
The water supply is derived from the Don River, at a distance
of 3 miles. A meat freezing works on the railway line 6 miles
from town is now in operation. Geological formation of the
30
[Bla —Bow
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


town site—granite. Population of the municipality, 1,500; of
the district, 2,778 (census 1891). Local newspaper : Port Denison
Times (Saturday) and The Mirror (Friday).
BOWEN DOWNS (county Rodney) (22° 30'8. 1at.,145°!' E.
long.) is a postal receiving office, situated on Cornish Creek, a
tributary of the Thompson river, about 750 miles NVV. of Bris-
bane, and 318 miles SW. of Bowen via Rockhampton ; there is
mail communication once a week. Aramac, the nearest town,
is about 36 miles 8. The surrounding country is of a pastoral
character, being fairly grassed in undulating downs.
BOWER BIRD, a mining locality on the Creek of
the same name, distant about 100 miles NW. of Cloncurry,
and 2 miles W. of the Leichhardt river (it is also known as
the Leichhardt Goldfield), at a point 5 or 6 miles above the
“ Impassable Gorge.” The nearest port is Burketown, about
190 miles, nearly due north. Normanton is about 195 miles in a
direct line NNB. The actual distance by road from Cloncurry is
about 110 miles, of which the first 60 miles are described as good
and the latter part rough, though capable of improvement.
There are 3 well-built stores, 2 hotels and tradesmen’s and other
premises, and 80 quartz miners are at work. According to Mr.
Rand’s report the reefs are situate on the > astern fall of a hill in
the Bower Bird Creek Valley. On this hill there are numerous
large outcrops of quartz running in a northerly direction which
stand out very prominently, having the appearance of large
“buck” reefs, as they are termed by miners. In 1898 the
Warden reported that there had not been that development in
mining which its prospects last year appeared to warrant.
BREAKFAST CREEK (27° 27' 8. lat., 153° 6' E. long.),
an important suburb of Brisbane, distant from the General
Post-office about two miles. It is situate on the creek of the
same name and the Brisbane River, which it faces, and or
its banks are the residences of many merchants and tradesmen.
Omnibuses and tramcars ply frequently during the day. The
Creek proper is cro-sed by a bridge, consisting of three continuous
main girders, having curved top and bottom booms, a centre span
of 77 feet and two side spans of 36 feet and 51 feet respectively,
each resting upon cast-iron cylinder piers and masonry abut-
ments, total width 52 feet, it is built of steel throughout,
and cost about £12,000. In this locality is a post-office,
a large State school and a commodious hotel near the
bridge. The boat-shed and building of the Breakfast Creek
Rowing Club are on the banks of the Creek, within a short
distance of the river. They are the most complete in Brisbane.
Near the bridge is the office of the Hamilton divisional board.
About IJ mile from the bridge is the racecourse of the Queens-
land Turf Club, said to be one of the best in Australia. Meetings
of the club are held four times a year. A nicely laid out
bowling green is not far from the bridge and is well
patronised. The Breakfast Creek road is the main route
by road to Sandgate, and there is great traffic to this locality
on Sundays and holidays. Near the bridge is a large area
of ground, known as the Albion Park, where horse races
are held weekly, the centre of the ground is used for football and
cricket. A wharf erected by the Toombul Divisional Board
affords facilities for the landing of fish and meat.
BRISBANE (27° 28'3" 8. lat., 153° 6' 54-93" B. long.), an
Episcopal city, and the capital of Queensland, is situated 58 feet
above sea-level, on the river Brisbane, which surrounds it
on two sides, about 25 miles by water (12 in a direct line)
from its debouchement into Moreton Bay, one of the largest
bays on the coast of Australia, and after which for a long
time the district was called. It lies about 500 miles N. of
Sydney. Brisbane was originally settled in 1825, having been
made a penal station by Sir Thomas Brisbane, the Governor at
that time of Australia, from whom its name is derived. In
1842 the colony was opened to free settlers, and from that
period the city has been yearly glowing in importance as
the population of the country increases, and its resources
are developed. Brisbane is divided into four portions;
North Brisbane, South Brisbane, Kangaroo Point, and Fortitude
Valley, and comprises three electorates—North Brisbane, South !
Brisbane, and Fortitude Valley, each returning two members.
(South Brisbane is now a separate .Municipality.) There are |
seven principal streets, Ann, Adelaide, Queen, Elizabeth,
Charlotte, Mary, and Alice—Queen Street being the leading |
thoroughfare—running about north-east and south-west, about
half a mile long ; these are crossed at right angles by six others,
William, George, Albert, Edward, Creek and Wharf Streets. In
Eagle Street, and what is known as Petrie’s Bight, are the prin- }
oipal wharves. The length of streets in all is 52J miles, with 6,270 j
dwellings. The area of the city is 2J square miles, and the j
value of the ratable property is estimated at £5,759,946. !
Amount of rates levied in 1898 was £32,313 11s. lid. The city
was incorporated September 7, 1859. The public buildings com-
prise several churches and chapels—ten Episcopal, five Wes-
leyan, six Baptist, five Congregational, one Bible Christian, one
Lutheran, seven Presbyterian, three Primitive Methodist, one
United Methodist, four Roman Catholic, one New Church, a
Friends’ Meeting-house, a Jews’ Synagogue, and one Scandi-
navian. There are besides several places of worship in the suburbs.
The Presbyterian Church is a handsome building with tower, on
Wickham Terrace, and the Wesleyan Chapel in Albert Street
is a fine building with a lofty spire. Among some of
the principal buildings are St. Stephen’s (Reman Catholic)
Cathedral, in Elizabeth Street, a fine imposing edifice;
a campanile has been built in the Cathedral yard, in which is
hung a bell of 2 tons weight, the largest in the Australian
colonies ; St. John’s Church, in William Street, by the river side,
the largest Episcopal and the cathedral church (a wooden bell
tower with a peal of 8 bells adjoins the building) ; All Saints’,
on Wickham terrace with a fine organ, ranking next; Trinity
! Church at Fortitude Valley ; the Baptist Tabernacle on Wickham
Terrace; the Town Hall, which has a frontage of 99 feet to
Queen Street {a building of large proportions and commanding
! appearance, is at a future time to be erected in Roma Street);
the Houses of Legislature, in George Street, the largest buildings
I in the city; the Post and Telegraph Office, Police Court in
Elizabeth Street, the Government Printing Office, overlooking
j the river, now much enlarged, extending through from
William to George Streets, Government House, the Masonic
Hall in Alice Street, the Temperance Hall in Edward Street,
| the School of Arts in Ann Street, with a library of 20,885
volumes ; the Museum in William Street, nearly facing the
I Government Printing Office on the river bank (it is proposed
j to turn this into a Free Public Library), Supreme Court,
1 and large public offices between George and Quay Streets :
the Police-station in Roma and Albert Streets, having barrack
accommodation for 45 men ; the new technical college, the Govern-
ment Analyst’s quarters ; the Port offices in Edward Street, a
Drill Shed for the Volunteer Artillery in Adelaide Street; Her
I Majesty’s Opera House in Queen Street, one of the finest
theatres in Australia, the Gaiety Theatre, in Adelaide Street;
! and All Hallows Convent, with school. An immense four-
story building, known as the Treasury Buildings, one of the
finest architectural piles in the colonies, has been erected, re-
placing the Treasury and other buildings in William and George
Streets. At Kangaroo Point are large immigration barracks
capable of accommodating 500 inmates. The Custom House
is a three-story building with dome, on the river bank.
The business of the banks, insurance, and other societies
is carried on in buildings worthy of the city ; the Union Bank,
the Commercial Bank, the Bank of New South Wales, the pre-
mises of the Australian Joint Stock Bank, the premises lately
used by the Queensland Deposit Bank, the Australian Mutual
Provident, New Zealand, Colonial Mutual, and Mutual Assurance
Companies’ Offices, are the most notable among them. The
building of the Queensland National Bank, on the site formerly
occupied by the School of Arts, is in the Classical Italian style,
and is one of the largest and tlnest banking houses in the
Australian colonies. The London Bank of Australia, at
the corner of Queen and Creek Streets, is also a very fine
building ; the Royal Bank has commodious premises in Queen
j Street. The premises of the Queensland Club, at the corner of
! Alice and George Streets, are in the Italian style, with wide
verandahs and colonnades. Very many other buildings, both
public and private, have- been erected, and most of the
streets show signs of advancement in their architecture.
The warehouses, shops and stores are numerous, and some of the
former are handsome and commodious buildings. The premises
of the Brisbane Newspaper Company, at the corner of Edward
and Queen Streets, are a palatial pile of seven stories, 82
feet in height. At the opposite corner is a largo three-story
building of stone for the Australian Mutual Provident
Society. A fine pile of buildings has been erected in Queen
Street, for the Telegraph Newspaper Company. Like the
Courier Office it is fitted with the most modern machinery.
Ample provision for the education of the rising generation
is afforded by the Boys’ Grammar School, the Girls’ Gram-
mar School, and the Normal School, and other State schools.
The grammar school is on Gregory terrace, on an elevated site.
Extensive accommodation is provided for boarders. A Girls'
Grammar School has been built near to the Boys’ School,
and the premises have been enlarged. The Christian Brothers
have also a fine school on Gregory Terrace, with accom-
modation for 200 pupils, and new schools have been opened
in Charlotte Street and in Boundary Street. The old Supreme
Court buildings in Queen Street (erected 1828) were pulled down
at the end of 1880. They were among the oldest buildings in the
city, and dated back to convict days. They had long been
an architectural eyesore to the street, and apart from their
historic interest had little to recommend them. The site
is now covered with a superior class of commercial premises.
A magnificent iron bridge, called the Victoria, on the lattice-
girder principle, with swing openings to allow of the passage
of ships, until February, 1893, connected North and South
Brisbane. This bridge was designed by Robinson and I’Anson,
of Darlington ; the iron-work was manufactured by Peto,
Brassey and Betts, of Birkenhead ; and it was erected under
the engineership of the late Thomas Oldham, and subsequently
of A. R. Jones. It was commenced in 1863, and was opened
with some ceremony by the Marquis of Normanby on June 15,
1874. On February 6, 1893. thc> northern half of this bridge was
swept away by the most destructive flood ever known in Bris-
bane. An entirely new bridge costing, including approaches,
about £111,987, is now completed and open. The new structure
consists of six 170 feet steel spans, carried on five piers of
cast iron cylinders filled with concrete, with abutments of
masonry and concrete. There are two carriage-ways, each
24 feet in width, and two footways, each 9 feet wide,
carried upon steel cantilevers from the outside main girders.
The decking is of steel trough plates covered with tarred
metal, and the carriage-way on same formed of hardwood
block paving. Total length of bridge 1,040 feet 8 inches, being
35 feet 8 inches longer than London Bridge, and width between
parapets of footways 73 feet. The gradient of the bridge
is one in 90, and the clear height of the superstructure above
high water 34J feet at the north end and 23 feet at the south
end. The structure was designed by Mr. A. B. Brady, Engineer
of Bridges to the Government. There is frequent
communication with Sydney by the A.U B.N. Co.’s, Messrs.
Howard Smith and Co’s., Adelaide Steamship Cos.’ and other
steamers, and there is also overland communication by rail,
the railway journey occupying about 26 hours. A regular
31
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND,
Bow —Bri]


line carrying the mails plies between Brisbane and
the northern ports, Cooktown being the northern
terminus. There is also regular communication with London
by the vessels of the British India Steam Navigation Company,
and occasionally by sailing ships. There is good wharf accom-
modation for a large amount of tonnage, but owing to the great
increase of the shipping trade, extended wharfage has been
Ifound necessary, and has been provided both on the north and
south sides of the riser. The A.U.B.N. Co. have a wharf,
extending from their Mary Street to the Eagle Street
wharves, called the Norman wharf. Near the Victoria Bridge
is a largo wharf, 700 feet long, erected by the Corporation, at a
cost of £35,000, Till recently, owing to the bar at the mouth of the
river, and the shallowness of the river itself, vessels of largo
tonnage could not come up to the city, but this was over-
come by a direct cutting made through the bar at the
mouth of the river. During 1891-92 the bar cutting was deepened
to 20 feet for a width of 100 feet along centre and a complete
channel 300 feet wide to upwards of 15 feet at low water
was available between Brisbane and the Bay. Owing to the
heavy floods in February, 1893, a considerable silting up of the
channels took place, to such an extent that even the inter-
colonial steamers, unless of light draught, were unable to come
to the Brisbane wharves. The channels have been rodredged,
and some of them deepened, and the river is now in such a con-
dition, enabling the largest steamers to come up the river
and berth at the wharves. At the Lytton Hocks
the first channel, 100 feet wide, and having a depth
of 21 feet at low water, has been blasted, giving
ran extra depth of 18 inches all through the river cuttings.
There is now a depth of 20 feet at dead low water available
from the Bar to the town wharves. A spacious dry dock
at South Brisbane, completed and opened in Septem-
ber, 1881, takes in large vessels. Brisbane is the
terminus of the Southern and Western railway, the con-
necting link between it and Ipswich having been opened
in June, 1875. The railway station in Roma Street is a com-
modious building, and admirably fitted for its purpose. Cold
storage works have lately been erected at a cost of £4,045.
line is now constructed to a temporary Central station in the
heart of the city, in Ann Street. From here the line is carried
to the Valley, and now extended to connect with the Main
North Coast Line to Gympie, Maryborough, Bundaberg and
Gladstone. Several omnibuses ply to various parts of the
city and the suburbs, and electric tramways are open to Exhi-
bition and South Brisbane, New Farm, Breakfast Creek, western
suburbs, and Bulimba, other extensions being contemplated.
Among the leading hotels are the Gresham, Metropolitan,
Queen’s, Royal, Lennon’s, Belle Vue, Imperial, Grand, and the
Excelsior. The city has a good general hospital at Bowen Bridge,
to which several additions have been made, with exten-
sive quarters for the nurses; a lying-in hospital—Lady
Bowen, on Wickham Terrace, a female refuge, a sick
children’s hospital, a large new building, an orphanage,
for which buildings on the cottage system have been
erected not far from the new gaol at South Brisbane, and
several other institutions of a charitable character. There is a
fire brigade, well equipped with 2 steam fire engines, reels,
hose, &0., having its bead station in Edward Street. This
building now ranks as one of the best appointed institutions
in Australia. The Town Hall, the Gaiety Theatre, the Nor-
man, the Centennial, and other Halls, are used as places
of entertainment. The Theatre Royal is in Elizabeth
Street; the Opera House before alluded to is in Queen
Street. Race-meetings are regularly held at the Eagle Farm and
Breakfast Creek course, and a large prizes are offered. A central
market has been erected in Roma Street. The Botanic Gardens are
laid out with great taste; they abound with tropical
and semi-tropical trees, shrubs, and plants, and may be
considered one of the principal “ lions ” of Brisbane. A
stone wall and iron fence has been built round them, and
the walks are now asphalted. The Queen’s Park is a portion of
the Botanical Gardens, and is used as a cricket and football
ground. A battery of 24-pounder guns is here. The floods
of February submerged the greater portion of the gardens,
killing a vast number of trees, plants, and shrubs. Other lungs
of the city are Victoria Park, Albert Parkand Bowen Park. At the
latter place the annual exhibitions of the Queensland National
Association are held, and those already held have attracted a
large number of visitors from all parts. An International Exhi-
bition on a large scale was held during the winter of 1897, the
additional buildings imported for the purpose being those used
at the Tasmanian Exhibition. Great improvements have been
made on the grounds to fit them for athletic and other sports
and exhibition purposes. The large building was burned to the
ground during 1888, and has been replaced by a much finer
one of brick, with towers. It is proposed to utilise this building
for a Museum. A concert hall forms part of it, and this will hold
3,000 persons. A large organ, one of the finest in the colonies, has J
been erected in ir, and was opened in December 1892. The
Acclimatisation Society’s grounds at Bowen Park, adjoining i
those of the Association, are much frequented, and the society [
is doing a most useful work. At One Tree Hill, now called, j
Mount Coot-tha, a largo area has been reserved as a public
park. From toe summit of the hill a magnificent view is
to be had, embracing Ipswich on the one hand and Sand- |
gate and the Bay on the other. The cemetery is at Toowong, !
about 2 miles distant from the General Post Office. It is
picturesquely situated and well laid out. Nearly in the centre of |
the ground is a dome-shaped hill, the top of which is sur-
mounted by a monument to Governor Blackall. The city |
3s divided into five wards—East, West, North, Valley, and
Kangaroo Point,each of which returns two aldermen,one of whom
retires annually ; the mayor is chosen by the aldermen. The
boundaries of these wards were amended in October, 1880.
The first Mayor was the late Mr. John Petrie, in 1859-00. Brisbane
is lighted with gas (a second company has now its works
and mains in operation supplying South Brisbane), and is
well supplied with water from a largo artificial lake (180
acres in area) in the ranges near the heads of the Enoggera
creek, 240 feet above sea-level, 7 miles distant from the city,
whence it is conveyed by a double service of pipes, one
8 inches in diameter and 74 miles long, the other 12 inches in
diameter and 8 miles long, the aggregate discharging capacity
of both mains being about 53,400 gallons per hour into
smaller pipes that reticulate all parts of the city. The area
of the watershed is about 8,295 acres, and the storage capacity
of water, one thousand million gallons. The requirements of the
city and suburbs have demanded an additional storage reser-
voir, which has been made at Gold Creek, between the
Enoggera watershed and that of Moggill. The area of the water-
shed from which the new reservoir is filled is 2,470 acres, the
area of the reservoir is 67J acres, and its capacity 395,500 000
gallons. The water from this source is brought by a 16-inch
main, capable of discharging 1,678,752 gallons in 24 hours, via
1 Brookfield, Tarings, and Toowong. The supply from here was
available during 1888. Further provision for water supply
i becoming absolutely necessary, works for obtaining a supply
1 from a point on the Upper Brisbane River were undertaken,and the
supply of the c'ty and suburbs with water from this source is now
an accomplished fact. According to the engineer's report, “ The
Brisbane River works, now completed with the connecting mains,
as laid are capable of delivering at the rate of 6 million gallons
of water per day in Brisbane, and by simply increasing the
main capacity, and adding two pair of engines to the machinery,
this quantity can bo doubled. The present works, with the assist-
ance of the two reservoirs, will allow 40 gallons per head to a popu-
lation of 250,000. There is a service reservoir on Wickham Terrace,
which has been supplemented by a second one of larger capacity, in
orderto improve the watersupply to thehigherlevelsof South Bris-
bane and Kangaroo Point, and two other service reservoirs, one at
Highgate Hill, 190 feet above high-water mark, with capacity
of 2,000,000 gallons, and another at Red Hill, 230 feet above
high-water mark, have been made. Both these reservoirs
are in connection with the Gold Creek works. The exten-
sion of the city has been much hindered by the hilly
nature of the ground : and the formation of the roads has
been attended with a large expenditure of money and labour.
Some portions of the city are elevated, upwards of 100 feet
above the mean sea-level. During the last few years great im-
provements have been made in the formation and paving of the
j streets of Brisbane. The principal line of traffic has been
I paved with wood blocks, and all telephone and telegraph lines
laid under ground. The drainage has received attention, and
provision made for flushing the sowers with salt water. The
climate of Brisbane is, as a rule, dry and healthy, though the
temperature is high in the summer months. The mean ex-
ternal shade temperature is abqut 70°. Population (census
1891), within a five miles radius, 93,657 ; within a ten miles
radius, 101,554. In 1896 the estimated population within a five
miles radius was 100,913. The newspapers published in Brisbane
are the Brisbane Courier, the Evening Observer, and the Telegraph,
issued daily ; the Queenslander, the Week, Government Gazette,
Flashes, Queensland Figaro, the Worker, Queensland Sportsman,
Age, Street, and the Australian, published weekly, and some
small classs papers monthly.
BRISBANE, SOUTH (South Brisbane) (27° 29' S. lat„
153° 44' E. long.), an independent municipality, with four wards,
is that portion of the city on the opposite, or southern, side of
: the Brisbane River. It is connected with the city by the new
Victoria bridge, a five-span iron structure, with two roadways,
j erected at the total cost of £140,000. Omnibuses ply continuously,
also ferry boats, and there is also electric tramway communica-
tion on the overhead trolly system. Total length of tramways,
four miles. Incorporated January 7, 1888 ; 70 miles of streets.
5,016 dwellings, area 4J square miles. Value of ratable property,
£1,413,108 ; estimated population, 23,000. Revenue, receipts for
: 1896, £26,013 ; expenditure, £24,996 ; liabilities, £13,196 ; assets
(including reserves), £201,820. It has two post, money-order, tele-
graph and savings bank offices, a court-house, a fine town hall,
completed in 1892 at a cost of £12,000, near the intersection of
Vulture and Stanley Streets, and two fire brigade stations (one
volunteer). Branches of the New South Wales. Royal and
Queensland National Banks. Hotels: Palace, Graham’s,
Clarence. Terminus, Railway, Stanley and others. The dry-
i dock here was opened in September, 1881. The first vessel
taken in being the Boon ; it will take in vessels up to 420 feet in
i length. Spacious whafves have been erected, at which ships of
considerable tonnage can lie alongside and load where the
Southern and Western Railways deliver alongside ex truck.
J The Government wharves in the bight below the dry-dock are
500 feet long and 50 feet wide, and provided with four ten-ton
I cranes. The markets and cold storage works of Geddes, Birt &
j 00., recently erected at a cost of £36,000, are on the wharves,
j and connected with the Southern and Western Railway system.
Stanley Street is the principal thoroughfare. There are several
[ places of worship and four State schools, and two municipal
schools of arts, with a free reading-room and a library of over
5,000 volumes, and in conjunction with the largest of the two, a
technical college has recently been built and opened. The
, Brisbane gaol is here, it is of brick with concrete foundations,
and has gaoler’s and warders’ quarters, hospital, workshop,
kitchens, store, debtor’s and warders’ room, and underground
tank together with brick boundary wall 18 feet high. The South
32
[Bri —Bri
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND


Brisbane line connects with the main line at Corinda. The
railway is completed to Melbourne Street, where there is a fine
commodious station, a two-storey red brick building. All
passenger trains now start from here for Beauleigh, Southport,
Beaudesert, Wynum and Cleveland. The boarding-out system
for orphans having been adopted, the Dramantina Orphanage
buildings are about to be used by the Government as an asylum
for incurables. Magnificent buildings have been erected for the
Deaf, Dumb and Blind Institution, which is now in full work-
ing order. South Brisbane is now directly connected with the
Mount Crosby Water Reservoir by syphon laid on the bed of
the river. A service reservoir has been erected on Highgate
Hill, capable of holding 2J millions of gallons of water. There
are several factories, a flour mill, and other industries carried on
in South Brisbane. The Brisbane cricket ground is at Woolloon-
gutta ; it has an area of 13 acres, vested by the Government in
three trustees ; it has bicycle track (three laps to mile), cricket
pitches, two football grounds, lawn tennis courts. Grand stand
and pavilions have been erected, and the ground is now classed
as amongst the bast in Australia.
BROOKFIELD (county Stanley), a small settlement and
post town, about 10 miles from Brisbane. The beautiful Moreton
Bay chestnut grows here on the banks of the creeks. The public
buildings are the Bible Christian Church, Orange Hall, and
State school No. 16. The locality is picturesque. The country
has the character of being more or less auriferous, but no
payable results have yet been obtained.
BROUGHTON (20° 27' S. lat, 146° 40' E. long.), a post
town at the junction of the Broughton river with the Burdekin,
about 14 miles SB. from Charters Towers, known as a gold
field before Charters Towers. Coaches ply daily, fare ss. Prin-
cipal hotel: Broughton. ISeveral quartz reefs are here. One store.
BUDERIM MOUNTAIN. See Mount Buderim.
BULIMBA (27°26' 40" 8. lat., 153° 3' 30" B. long.), a postal
suburban township on the creek of the same name, in the elector-
ate of Bulimba, and Balmoral Divisional Board, about 4 miles
distant from the Post Office, Brisbane. It is in telephonic com-
munication with the city, the public telephone being at the Post
Office. It has an Episcopal Church (St. John Baptist), a Primitive
Methodist and a Baptist Chapel, a public school (No. 17), a school
of arts, with library of 1,081 vols., one hotel (Bulimba), extensive
stearine candle and soap works (Apollo Company, Limited),
and chemical works. At Queensport are extensive works for
meat freezing and meat preserving, also brickyards. Communi-
cation with Brisbane is maintained by means of the steam
ferry and tramcars.
BUNDABERG (24° 53' S. lat., 152° 21' E. long.), a port and
municipality (proclaimed April 22,1891), in the county of Cook,
electorate and police district of Bundaberg, situated on the banks
of the river Burnett, about 10 miles from its mouth, 70 miles (52
postal) N. of Maryborough, and 217 miles N. of Brisbane, with
which it is now connected by rail. It is governed by four local
bodies : North (under the Gooburrum Divisional Board), East
(under the Woongarra Divisional Board), South and West (under [
the Barolin Divisional Board), and the municipality proper by !
the Municipal Council. The Mount Perry Railway and North [
Coast line, partly constructed towards Gladstone, cross the river
Burnett by a steel lattice girder bridge. The distance to Mount
Perry is 661 miles. The railway to Gladstone is now completed
and open." Hotels: The Grand, Imperial. Royal, Queen’s}
Metropolitan, Palace, Tattersalls, Federal, Gympie, Melbourne, j
Sydney, and Custom House, North Bundaberg, the smallest
township at present, though the longest settled, contains i
five hotels, five general stores, two butchers’ shops, several j
Small stores, Johnston's saw-mills, sugar factory and distillery,
Bundaberg foundry, connected by a branch line with the railway;
Gladwell’s sugar-mill, Woondooma plantation, Methodist and {
Anglican churches, a lock-up, a primary school (No. 161), Goo-
burrum boards hall and town hall, and 911 inhabitants (census
fH9I). It is connected by steam ferry to South Bundaberg. East !
Bundaberg is an important suburb, containing a public school
(No. 497), Woongarra Board’s Office, Ebenezer Hall, the Milla-
quin Refinery, Burnett River saw mills, Skyring’s saw mills, five
hotels, stores, brickyards, a brewery, gas works, butchers’ j
shops, a fine distillery, and a number of residences. Bunda-
berg proper has branches of the N. S. Wales, Commercial,
Union, Royal, and Queensland National Banks, a fine school
of arts, with library of 6,280 volumes, superior post and telegraph
offices, a 2-story brick building, with a clock tower 92 feet
high, a court-house, lands office, immigration depbt, a hospital, j
Anglican, Roman Catholic, Primitive Methodist, Baptist, !
Lutheran, Presbyterian and Wesleyan churches, and two
State schools (Nos. 412 and 18), for boys and girls respec- i
tively, a money-order office and Government Savings Bank,
a number of stores and tradesmen’s premises, and a
steam joinery. Societies: Oddfellows (2), Protestant Alliance, j
Foresters, Rechabites, Orange, Masonic (3), Building, Penny
Bank, Caledonian, Good Templars, W.C.T. Union, Pastoral
and Agricultural Society, also Horticultural Society. The i
area of the municipality is 1J square miles, length of streets
30 miles, 1,050 dwellings, ratable property valued at j
£249,430. The town has been lit with gas since October,
1884. The water supply is chiefly derived from tanks, and }
wells, and springs in the neighbourhood. The bar has 17
feet of water at spring tides, and vessels of moderate draught
can cross with safety. From the bar to the town the river is easily j
navigable at ordinary tides for sea-going steamers of 500 tons.
Three saw-mills supply large quantities of timber to the
northern markets. There are also two breweries. Regular steam :
communication is established with Rockhampton, and some
of the boats of the A.U.S.N. Co.’s fleet call on their round to and
from Brisbane and the northern ports. The great staple exports
e are sugar, golden syrup and sawn timber. The Woongarra scrub
e is situated here, which takes its name from a hummock in the
11 locality. The scrub is of volcanic origin, and is eight miles
;, broad by twelve long. The town is connected by rail to the
n Isis scrub, and large quantities of cane and juice are brought
e hither to be manufactured into sugar at Millaquin and other
n factories. A great impetus has been given to the sugar
e industry since the erection, in 1882, of the Millaquin Re-
;- finery on the river bank, a mile below the town. This
e is the largest sugar factory in the Colony; it has a front-
>f age of 200 feet, by a depth of 225 feet, the buildings—
e three in number—being three stories high. 90,000 gallons of
e juice can be treated here daily ; from the factory, pipes are
u i laid under the roadways, connecting with a number of crush-
i- ing mills situated on plantations, reaching out in all directions
n through Woongarra for a space of eight miles. Other mills send
it juice to Millaquin by punts. The factory has now undertaken tiie
d manufacture of golden syrup. In 1894 a branch railway connecting
d Millaquin with Bundaberg was opened. There are, besides the
Millaquin refinery, the Fairymead refinery, and plantation, three
d miles lower down the river, and the Bingera plantation and re-
n finery, situate up the river, twelve miles above the town. There
o are other sugar factories making vacuum pan sugars. There
d theiabout thirty-two sugar-mills at work ; about one-half make
y arer own sugar, the others sell to the factories. There are four
0 good wharves, which are connected by rail to the Main Coastline.
Bundaberg was gazetted a district court town on May 29, 1880,
t sittings being three times a year, and a Circuit Court,
i, October 6, 1888, sittings being twice in each year. The climate
d of Bundaberg is remarkable for its salubrity. Being within the
.- influence of the trades, and in close proximity to the sea, a
i. fresh south-east wind prevails in summer, which counteracts
to a great extent the heat of the sun. The average rain-
.l fall is 30 inches. Summer heat seldom exceeds 90“ in the
■- j shade. Coal has been found in the neighbourhood, but the seams
s are too thin to pay for working. Population of municipality
- (census 1891), 3,982 ; now about 5,000. Local papers : Bundaberg
t Star and Bundaberg Mail , Guardian and Leader.
s BUNDAMBA (27° 39' 8. lat., 152° 42' E. long ), a post-town,
1 telegraph, and railway station on the Ipswich line, 22 miles
3 from Brisbane, in the electorate of the same name. Two State
i, schools are in the vicinity (Nos. 19 and 137). Large quarries are
r here, from which much of the stone with which the streets
- of Brisbane are metalled is obtained ; several coal pits are also
i at work. Population, 146 (census 1891.)
BURKETOWN (17° 48' 8. lat., 139° 34' E. long.), a
i post-town, money-order savings bank office and telegraph
, station, in the co. of Porchester, electorate of Carpentaria and
i police district of Burke, on the left bank of the Albert River,
I about 1,500 miles NVf. from Brisbane, and 80 miles distant
i , from the South Australian boundary. It is a port of entry and
L clearance, a warehousing port, and is the second port of the Gulf
;| of Carpentaria. It has fortnightly steamer communication,
• i via Normanton, with Brisbane. The southern mail steamers
■ with mails, passengers, and cargo arrive at the Albert Bar,
i and are there met by a small steamer, into which they are
• transhipped and brought up to town. In a direct line it lies about
12 miles from the sea, but the river winds nearly 30 miles.
. Hotels: Albert, and Commercial. It was first settled many
years ago, but was practically deserted, owing to an epidemic
of yellow fever that was brought by an infected boat. It is now
; reputed to be a healthy locality. The Burke Divisional Board
i have a fine hall capable of accommodating 300 persons. There
I are here a court house, custom house, police barracks, and
, 1 boatmen's quarters, a State school (No. 530), gymnastic
; club and reading-room, post and telegraph office, aerated water
i | company, Dugong Fisheries Company, Carpentaria Meat
■ ; Export Company’s works, treating about 90 head of cattle per
i day ; branch of the Queensland National Bank (a fine building),
; j three general stores, several tradesmen’s premises and private
residences. There are two gardens kept by Chinamen, and
j a large market garden. A lagoon and an artesian well
j supplies the township with fresh water. A coach runs to
, Camooweal every week, and also to the Bo we' - Bird Gold-
I field on arrival of steamer. Silver has been found in the
district. Quantities of wool are forwarded from flurketown. At
Rocklands station, situated on the tableluid 200 miles from
I Burketown, the Company have an artesian boring plant.
Should abundant water be found there will probably come the
substitution of sheep for cattle. Artesian boring is in progress
in other parts. Lind has baen surveyed and open to selection,
but the capital is said to be wanting to encourage settlement.
The tick pest and financial disturbances have militated against
the progress of both town and district, but there are hopeful
j signs of recovery. Newspaper : Burke Telegraph. Population
I (census 1891), 164.
BYERSTOWN (16° 14' S. lat, 144° 31' E. long.), lies
at the head of the Palmer river, about 75 miles BW. of Cook-
town, though by a more direct route it is stated to be only
60, and about 1,110 miles NW, of Brisbane. It occupies an
elevated and healthy site on the banks of the Palmer river,
and had police barracks, and two Chinese stores. It is now
j nearly deserted except by Chinamen. Formation ; granite. The
Normanby diggings are a few miles distant on the Cooktown
road. Large reefs have been found here, and gold is believed
i to be present in considerable quantities.
CABOOLTURE (27°6'S. lat., 152° 59E. long.), apost-town,
with Government Savings Bank, money-order office,and telegraph
station in the county of Canning, electorate of Moreton, 31 miles
N. of Brisbane, situated on the north bank of the Caboolture river,
where is the railway station ; there is also a railway station at
Morayfleld on the south side of the river; coaches run to Kilcoy via
33
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Bro—Cab]


Woodford and Villeneuve three times a week. Steamers come up to
the township for timber at irregular intervals. Hotels : Club,
Royal, and Stanley. There are four stores, some tradesmen's pre-
mises, and entertainment hall. The Government buildings are post
and telegraph office, State school, police barracks and quarters,
and courthouse. A police court is held here twice a month.
Bank : Royal. Episcopal and Primitive Methodist churches, and
Salvation Army Barracks. The Good Templars have a hall here,
with weekly lodge meeting. The Masons’ and Oddfellows’ also
meet in the same building. About 5 miles from the village, up
the river, the Primitive Methodists have another chapel, and the
Good Templars have a hall opposite. The German Lutherans
have also a chapel on the Durundur road, about two miles
from the village. Four cheese factories are now in opera-
tion. The water supply is derived from creeks about
half a mile north of the township. Maize and other
farm products are grown on the banks of the river.
Dairying is now largely followed, particularly in Upper
Caboolture ; pig raising is being carried on to a considerable
extent. Large quantities of cedar, beech, pine and hardwood
obtained in the coast range, are exported from the place.
There are State schools at Upper Caboolture, Caboolture South,
and at Caboolture North, and provisional schools at Stoney
Creek, Round Mountain, Durundur road, Roxburgh, Fernvale,
and Toorbul. The Divisional Board meets at Caboolture town-
ship about once in six weeks. There is a sawmill on the river,
between the bridge and the wharf. Caboolture is on the North
Coast Railway, which is now open through to Bundaberg.
Population (census 1891), 248; of entire district (census 1891),
18,591 persons.
CAIRNS (16° 54' S. lat., 145° 44' E. long.) (county Nares),
electorate of Cairns, is a municipality (proclaimed May 28th,
1885), and seaport, about 900 miles NW. of Brisbane (established
in September, 1876), at the mouth of Trinity Inlet, on the western
shores of Trinity Bay, with a fine harbour, commodious and
well sheltered, where coasting vessels of any tonnage can go along-
side the wharves at all times. Mails arrive and depart to and from
the South once or twice a week. Cairns contains a court-house
Divisional Hall, Municipal chambers, State school (No. 362), St.
Monica’s school, school of art, with library of 944v015., policeoffice,
pilot station, custom-house, two bonded stores, police-barracks,
hospital, savings bank, money-order and telegraph office, and
Botanic Garden. Hotels : Cairns, Crown, Railway, Court-house,
Imperial, Mining Exchange, and others. Sittings of the Northern
Supreme Court and District court are held here. Cairns
may be considered, by the great advantages of its har-
bour and wharves, as the natural outlet for the Mulgrave,
Etheridge, Hodgkinson, Russell River, Towalla, and Mareeba
gold-fields, the Tinaroo and Wild River Herberton tin mines,
and the silver fields of Muldiva and Montalbion district; also
for the rich copper district of Chillagoe, which has recently
come into prominence. The distance by road from Cairns to
Thomborough is 60 miles. Cairns is surrounded by miles of the
finest sugar lands in Queensland. Several Chinese hold freehold
property thereabouts, and are sucessfully carrying on agricultural
pursuits. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company have
a sugar plantation at Hambledon, about 6,000 acres, worked
with a 8,000-ton mill, fitted with double-crushing power and
refinery, and all the most improved machinery. A wharf
has been erected by them at the Inlet, and this is connected
with the mill by atramway fourmileslong. TheMulgrave Central
Mill Company is now in full swing, with a 4,000 ton mill. The
Aloomba Company have also a mill. Steps are being initiated for
securing central mills for the Barron River and Russell River dis-
tricts. A central rice mill is erected on the Barron River, about
six miles from Cairns, and two other mills have recently been
called into existence by the Chinese. On the Smithfield Road
there are also several farms on scrublands, which produce prolifi-
cally all semi-tropical produce, and even English potatoes. The
same on the Mulgrave Road, where there are many orchards
also. The 16 miles from Cairns to Riverstone is a fine stretch
of road to travel over, and is about being connected with
a tramway. Cairns enjoys a salubrious and healthy climate.
The town is situated parallel with the sea, and has a
fine long beach, a feature of which is the magnificent natural
shade trees dotted over it, and facing which are numerous private
residences. The court-house, town hall, and hospital are built on
the Esplanade, as are most of the Government buildings. The
principal thoroughfares are Abbott and Lake Streets. The
area of the borough is 37 square miles, having 38 miles
of roads, 520 dwellings, and property of the ratable value
of £239,784. A largo industry has been opened up in cedar
now that railway communication is available. Tin is shipped
here from the Wild River, a distance of 50 miles. Gold was found
in August, 1879, about 26 and 32 miles from Cairns at the
Mulgrave, which is a declared goldfield. In 1891 gold was dis-
covered in Freshwater Creek, 12 miles from Cairns. The
Russell goldfield has been worked for some years. Towalla,
seven miles from the Russell, keeps fairly going as a reefing
field. Mareeba gold-field, five miles from Mareeba, the
terminus of the third section of the railway broke out in
May, 1893. The Queen Constance mine fell off, and since then it
has only been worked in a perfunctory fashion. The majority of
the other claims have not fulfilled expectations, and are now
mostly abandoned. Reefs are also being worked at the
Chosliey, seven miles from Mareeba, many believing it to be
the same line of reef. Calms is the 72nd division under
the Divisional Boards Act, having nine members. Separated
in 1891, the Barron Divisional Board started in addition
to the old Cairns board. A Land Court is established, with an
acting Land Commissioner. Banks; Queensland National,
New South Wales, and Bank of North Queensland,
Anglican and Roman Catholic places of worship, also a Primi-
: tive Methodist chapel. A road is open from Cairns to the
Herberton tin mines, passing through Qoldsborough and the
Upper Mulgrave gold-fields, and another passing over Tinaroo
Spur. The second section of the Caims-Herberton Railway
to Myola (24 miles) was opened in May, 1891, and the third
section, to Mareeba -(46 miles), on Aug. Ist, 1893. The
stream tin at the Tate River is very rich, but only workable
during the wet season. The late Rev. J. B. Tenison-
Woods, when lecturing upon the tin fields of this district,
compared the surrounding country to a second Cornwall, and
asserted that with capital it would afford employment for
20,000 people for some years. The rich scrubland sheltered
by the coast range has been found equal to the production
of three tons of sugar to the acre, and to be also specially
adapted for tobacco culture. Tobacco is being cultivated, but
only on a small scale. Large exports of bananas, 5,000 to 7,000
bunches weekly, also of fruit, particularly pine apples, during
the season. Several new centres have been erected along the
line of railway, the principal being Kuranda. Near Kuranda
are the Barron Falls, ranking for their beauty and great depth
of fall amongst the finest in Australia. The population of Cairns
by census of 1891 was 2,400, now about 2,000. The average
rainfall for the past six years has been 117 inches per annum
Local papers : Cairns Argus, Cairns Advocate, and Mining Post.
CALCIFER, see Chillaooe.
CALLIOPE (24°4' S. lat., 151° O' E. long.), a gold-field and
postal centre in the county of Clinton, situated between the
Calliope and Boyne rivers, about 17 miles from river to river,
and 329 miles NW. of Brisbane. Hotels : Sun, Diggers’ Arms,
and TattersalTs. There is a State school (No. 20), a school of
arts, with library of 336 vols., two places of worship, Unde-
nominational and Roman Catholic (both visited), Episcopal and
Presbyterian ministers also visit, and two stores. The port of
Gladstone is about 15 miles distant NE. Coaches run to Rock-
hampton bi-weekly, fare, 255. ; to Gladstone twice a week, fare,
ss. It is a rich mineral district, and is also of good grazing
capabilities. Population, 202 (census 1891); in 1895, 279, and 25
Chinese. Formation : metamorphosed rock, principally grey
and green slates. At Marblestone, 9 miles from Calliope, large
beds of fossiliferous limestone are to be seen.
CAMBOOYA (27° 41' S. lat., 151° 53' E. long.), a post-town,
telegraph and railway station in the county of Aubigny, 125
miles SW. of Brisbane, situated on Hodgson’s creek. The rail-
way line from Warwick to Toowoomba runs through the
centre of the township. Cambooya is 1,524 feet above the sea-
level, and is 24 miles by rail (13 miles byroad) from Toowoomba.
Coach runs to Leyburn three times a week, fare, 10s. Hotel: ’
Royal. Provisional school, No. 196.
CAMOOWEAL (19° 57' S. lat., 138° 17' E. long.), a town-
ship, situated on a plain 1,500 feet above sea level, in the county
of Nowrana, and electorate of Carpentaria, with post and postal
note office and telegraph station, and Government Saving®
Bank, 250 miles from Burketown, 200 miles E. from Cloncurry,
situated on the Georgina Creek, about 7 miles from the
Northern Territory border. A coach runs to and from Burke-
town ; fare, £5. A coach also runs to Cloncurry, thence to
Hughonden railway-station Buggies also run to Urandangie
and Boorooloola (Northern Territory). It is the meeting place
of five mails —viz., Urandangie, Northern Territory (S.A.),
Burketown, Herbert Vale, and Cloncurry. Hotels ; Landsborough
and Cosmopolitan, provisional school, post and telegraph office,
police quarters, court-house andcustoms(Queenslandand Northern
Territory) police and customs quarters. Tradesmen : Two store-
keepers, a blacksmith, a saddler, butcher and dairyman. Court
sits first Wednesday in each month. Local institutions:
Jockey Club, Progress Association, and Cricket Club. Camoo-
weal is now a first-class meteorological station. District is
of pastoral character, reputed to be one of the finest in Aus-
tralia. Principal stations are, cattle; Rocklands Pastoral
Company (5 miles), Barclay Downs (35 miles), Yelvertoft (50
miles), Austral Downs (60 miles), Lake Nash (80 miles), Undilla
(50 miles), Herbert Vale, Margaret Vale, Lily Dale, Riversleigh,
sheep: Morestone Downs (45 miles). Chinese grow potatoes and
other vegetables, also grapes. The Rocklands Pastoral Co.
have enhanced greatly the value of their property by boring.
Seven bore's give now an unlimited supply of well water (re-
quiring pumping), at an average depth of 350 feet; and the
success which attended the efforts of this station has induced
others to follow their example, notably, Avon Downs and
Alexandria. Formation: Flint and limestone. Remarkable
caves exist some 14 miles from the town. They are four in
number, one lying under the other. They vary in height from
60 feet to 103 feet, and are approached from a well or hole in the
roof. In wet weather a waterfall of great beauty is formed. A
bonded store has been established at Camoo weal. Population,
83 (census 1891).
CANNIBAL CREEK, a tin mining locality in the
Palmer district, opened in 1882. Rich discoveries of ore have
been made here, but the yield of metal has not been equal to
expectation. In June, 1882, a site for a township was fixed and
the main and cross streets were marked out by The warden.
Large and extensive machinery was erected here, but the venture
was a failure.
CAPE BEDFORD is an aboriginal Mission station,
situated on the north side of Cape Bedford, about fourteen
miles (by water) from Cooktown. It is in charge of the Rev. •
Mr. Schwarz, and was started in 1886. The site appears to have
few advantages, “ the surface for miles being barren drift-sand,
swept by the winds into dome-topped and ridge-crested drives.”
Mr. Meston speaks highly of the management, and describes the
aboriginal girls at the station in the politeness of their manners
34
[Cai— Cap
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND


and modesty of demeanour as excelling any he had seen before.
A service is conducted entirely in their own language, into
which hymns, chapters, prayer, and responses have been trans-
lated.
CAPE GRAFTON. an aboriginal Mission s cation, usually
known as the Bellender-Ker Mission, is situated about ten miles
from Cairns, on the shore of the West side of False Bay, looking
North across Trinity Bay. The Mission is under the superin-
tendency of Mr. Gribble, and is controlled and the funds chiefly
supplied by the Church of England. Mr. Meston describes the
locality as having much excellent land, abundance of water, a
large hunting area, and unlimited sea fishing. A considerable
amount of work is reported to have been done. The school
children are said to be cheerful and healthy, and the system of
teaching, feeding, and housing apparently satisfactory. A draw-
back to the station is its proximity to Cairns, which is said to
have a demoralising effect on the blacks.
CAPELLA (Co. Talbot) (23° 11' 8. lat, 148° 4' E. long.), a
township, post, telegraph and railway station on the Clermont
Railway, 32 miles from Emerald and 197 miles W. from
Rockhampton. It is in the electorate of Peak Downs, and
situated on the Capella Creek. It has two hotels, Royal Mail
and Exchange, a provisional school (No. 410), and two stores.
The school-house is used for divine service. The Catholics have
a chapel. The surrounding country is fine open downs, suitable
for all kinds of agriculture. Coal has been found in the
neighbourhood, and a shaft is now down upwards of 100 feet.
Population, 83 (census 1891).
CAPEVILLE (20° 32' 8. lat., 145° 28' E. long.) is a mining
locality on the Cape River, 870 miles NW. of Brisbane, in the
electorate of Kennedy, police district of Charters Towers, divi-
sional board district of Dalryrnple. It is 59 miles from Charters
Towers, and 141 miles from Townsville. The district is pastoral
and mining, principally of the reefing character. Many of the reefs
have yielded handsome returns, but of late little progress has been
made in mining, and in quartz mining very little has been done.
The railway was extended to Cape River in October, 1884, crossing
the river six miles below Capeville, and is now open to Hughen-
den, and in course of further extension. Pentland, to which a
mail coach runs daily (4 miles), situated on the Northern
Railway, about six miles distant, is the principal township
railway depot for the Cape River district. A small battery
has been erected here. Specimen Gully is mainly populated
by Chinese diggers, by whom alluvial mining is carried on.
Upper Cape is situated 15 miles higher up the Cape River
than Capeville, and 18 miles from Pentland. Hotel and two
stores here. Population fluctuates, generally about 30 white
and same number of Chinese. Alluvial sluicing is the principal
occupation. The mail route from Pentland to Georgetown
passes through here. Formation : principally granite. Popu-
lation, 19 (census 1886).
CARDWELL (18° 15' 8. lat., 146° 3'E. long.), a township
about 950 miles NW. of Brisbane, on Rockingham Bay, situated
at the foot of a range of mountains, in the county and police
district of Cardwell, electorate of Herbert, opposite the North-
west end of Hinchinbrook Island, 2 miles from Meunga Creek,
now bridged. It was founded in 1863 by Mr. G. E. Dalryrnple.
Mails arrive regularly by steamers plying between Towns-
ville, Dungeness, Cardwell, Mourilyan Harbour, the Johnstone
River, Cairns, and Port Douglas. Hotels ; Marine and
Royal. It was till recently the port of Hinchinbrook, Rocking-
ham Bay, which includes Dungeness, at the mouth of the River
Herbert on the south, and the Murray, the Tully, and the Hull
rivers, with several smaller streams, all of which flow into the
bay, north of the town. Both Dungeness and Geraldton are
now ports of entry arid clearance. Cardwell possesses
one of the finest harbours in the colony, easily approached
in all weathers, with a depth of water varying from four to ten
fathoms, and it is a post town, money-order office, savings
bank and telegraph station. A jetty, 2,000 feet long, extended
into the bay, but it was partially destroyed by a cyclone in
1882, and the gales of March 1890 almost wrecked it. Some
500 feet are yet remaining, and a new jetty, 530 feet in length,
was completed in June, 1892. There is a court-house, a
custom-house, harbour-office, telegraph office, police station,
pilot-station and divisional hall, lands office, four stores,
two butchers, one baker, one blacksmith, and about 24
dwelling houses, State school No. 136. Meat works, including
boiling down and tinning, have lately been erected. Many resi-
dences were destroyed by the cyclone in March 23, 1890.
No church, but a minister visits from Ingham. The town
is cut up into allotments, but the principal street faces
the beach. The surrounding country is of a very fertile
character, and will grow nearly anything, and for grazing
purposes cannot be surpassed, the lands on the Murray,
the Tully, and the Hvdl—practically unlimited in extent-
being especially celebrated for richness and fertility. The
range at the back of the town has all along been a formid-
able barrier to its advancement, cutting off as it practically
does the communication between it and the country to the
westward. Immense Kauri pine-scrubs clothe the eastern
and western slopes of this range. There is excellent forest timber
in quantities throughout the district, and one steam saw-mill is
in operation near the town, whilst there is a large export of cedar
from Clump Point. In the district a large area is under cultiva-
tion, principally for cane, other crops being maize, yams, sweet
potatoes and coffee. Various minerals are known to exist in
the district, including gold. Cardwell is 28 miles from the
Herbert River, 240 from the Etheridge diggings, and about
90 miles (120 by telegraph route) NW. from Townsville. Large
numbers of the dugong are caught here, and there is a factory
efore. for the extraction of the oil. Population of town, 139'; with
into vicinity, 3,435 (census 1891).
brans- CARNARVON (17° 10' 8. lat., 139° 45' E. long.) is situated
on the western point of Sweer’s Island, called Inscription
mallv Point, Gulf of Carpentaria, about 70 miles to the westw:ird of
miles Normanton, and about 1,650 miles NW. of Brisbane, via Towns-
okiny ville. Sweer’s Island is not now a port of entry and clearance,
perin- CAWARRAL (23° 15' 8. lat., 150° 45' B. long.), (county of-
hieflv Livingston, police district of Rockhampton), electorate of Rock-
's the hampton North, a township and post town, 29 miles from,
der a Rockhampton on the Cawarral Creek, 395 miles NW. of
n-able Brisbane, and 4 miles from Tungamull, the nearest railway
school station, to which coaches run, coach fare, Is. 6d. Hockhamp-
em of ton is its port. Hotel; Cawarral. A primary school (No. 135), •
draw- two places of worship. Primitive Methodist and Roman Catholic,
aid to an( t a school of arts. Saw mill about 3 miles off. District is
principally pastoral, but there are quartz reefs in the vicinity.
. Principal mines are Long Tunnel, Commissioner, Nil Desper-
ngM> a andum, Helena, and Hunter Extended. During 1896 146 ozs.
rmont were obtained from 114 tons of stone. Formation : Serpentine
irom ar)c i slate. Population, 320 (census 1891).
!> CHARLEVILLE (26° 24' 8. lat., 146° 14' B. long.), a mum-
Mail cipal town, till 1897 theterminus of the Western Railway, 483 miles
tores. \y -0 f Brisbane, witbjtri-weekly mail from Brisbane. Coaches run
•tw to Blackall, Adavale, Wlndorah, and Cunnamulla, also Eulo and ,
liable xhargoraindah. The town, which has amoney-order, telegraph and
1 ttie sav j n g s Bank office, is situated on the east bank of the Warrego
1 tee t- river, and is the centre of the electorate of Warrego, which returns .
one member. Nearly the whole of the district is included in the
lining Murweh Divisional Board, which meets here. The division is sub-
in the divided into three parts, each returning three members. Muni-.
, divi- cipality was proclaimed March 24, 1894, area 29J square miles,
arters 41 miles of streets and roads, 300 dwellings, ratable property
istoral estimated at £40,874. Public buildings : court-house, barracks,
e reefs and police quarters, post and telegraph office, hospital,
sheen state school (No. 185), and railway station,divisional hall, and
done, school of arts, with library of 601 vols., Labour hall, Episcopal,
ossing Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic churches. The town
ighen- possesses an artesian well, giving an output of 3,000,000 gallons,
hich a of clean fresh water daily, with pipe-pressure of 100 lbs. to,
■them the square inch. Seven hotels : leading, Charleville Hotel,
mship Metropolitan, and Victoria. Ton stores, three bakers, four,
attery blacksmiths, and other tradesmen. Banks: Queensland
dated National and Commercial. Newspapers: Churleville Tinut and-
d on. Charleville Courier, District exclusively pastoral, but market
River gardening carried on by Chinese. Population of town, 1,456 .
I two (census 1891) ; now about 1,500.
white CHARTERS TOWERS (20° 3' 8. lat., 146° 18' E. long.),
ncipal a mining municipal town, with post, money-order, savings
etown bank, and telegraph office, in the county of Davenport, electorate
Popu- and police district of Charters Towers, 82 miles from Townsville,
with which it is connected by rail, three through trains daily, •
nship 2J miles from Millchester, and about 820 miles NW. of Brisbane. .
uated Coaches run every hour to Millchester, fare Is. There are oyer ;
police 30 hotels, among others the Crown, Royal, Occidental, Imperial,
,’orth- the Courthouse, Reefers’Arms, Excelsior, Mac’s, Queen, Railway.,
(reek, Day Dawn, Brilliant and Metropolitan. The Burdekin River is
mple. about 8 miles distant. The town is situated on the northern spurs
owns- of the Towers Mountain, at an elevation ot about 1,000 feet,
istone and consisted originally of two main streets—Gill and Mosman,
1 and but the town has considerably increased of late. It was in-
iking- corporated June 21, 1877. In the municipality are 17 miles,
River of streets {6 miles metalled), and 1,250 dwellings, area 640 acres,
) Hull estimated value of ratable property, £250,203. Charters
o the Towers was discovered in January, 1872, by a party of miners,
in are (Mosman, Clarke and Fraser). It received its name from Mr.
sesses Charters, who was the first warden. Towers or Tors signifying
ached the peaks where the first gold was discovered. It was pro-
to ten claimed as a goldfield on August 31, 1872. The town is about-
.vings the centre of the goldfield. Sittings of the Supreme Court,
ended are now held here twice a year, and of the District Court,
ne in quarterly. Local banking establishments ; Queensland National,
Some Union, London, N. 8. Wales, Australian Joint-Stock, Australasia,,
mgth, Royal, and North Queensland. There are two iron foundries..
se, a Among the local institutions are a school of arts, with library of.
ition, about 3,336 volumes, and a hall with stage appointments, court--
tores, house, hospital, Church of England (St. Paul’s), Wesleyan, Roman -
it 24 Catholic (St. Columba), Presbyterian, Primitive Methodist,
uding Baptist and Lutheran places of worship, Salvation Army, and
r rosi- a school (No. 215) for boys, and one (No. 118) for girls and infants,
1890. and two mixed State schools, one at Queenton and one at Richr.
town mond Hill. The girls’ school occupies a central site on the crown,
faces of the Mexican ridge. The hospital of brick has eight wards,
’ertile and 60 beds. The post and telegraph office is also of brick,
•azing An abundant supply of water is obtained from the Burdekin.,
irray, Gas works have been erected, and arc now supplying,
ent—- the town with gas, and a company also supplying electric
The light. It is a large reefing district, some of the principal,
rmid- lines of reefs being Day-Dawn, St. Patrick, Queen, Mus-
ically tralian, Old Identity, Victory, Brilliant and St. George, Queen’
,0 the and Victory, Brilliant, Sunburst, Caledonia, Wellington, Golden
is tern Surprise, and Alexandra. Some of the reefs are found'to-urn-
imber prove at lower depths. The Brilliant reef has been preyed,
trill is to carry gold to a depth of over 2,500 feet, and the workings ’on
cedar the Day Dawn line are approaching that depth, and wherever-
Itiva- they are on strikes of gold they tire not getting poorer witlr
sweet depth. The principal mines are the Brilliant, Day Dawn Block-
ist in and Wyndham, Brilliant and St. George, Brilliant Central,,
the Craven’s Caledonia, Mill’s Day Dawn United, New Queen,
about Victoria, Victory, Kelly’s Queen, Queen Cross, Papuan, and-
L.arge Queen Central. The Brilliant Mine during 1897 yielded 40,337
dory ozs. of gold, and the dividends amounted to £BO,OOO. The Day
35
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND
Cap—Cha]


Dawn Block and Wyndham yielded 32,216 ozs., and the dividends
were £87,000. The Brilliant and St. George return was
83,885 ozs., dividends declared £63,000. Several extensive
pyrites works are also in operation, by which large quantities
of gold are obtained. The deepest mine on the field is the
Brilliant Extended Block, now down to 2,558 feet, the Brilliant
Extended being about 200 feet less. Number of miners em-
ployed, 2,970 —2,670 being engaged in quartz, and 300 alluvial
mining. About 250 of the population ate Chinese, principally
gardeners, cooks, servants, and storekeepers. Since the opening
of the field to December 31, 1897, the total yield of gold from
the Charters Towers and Cape diggings has been 3,944,647 ozs.
During 1897 the total yield of gold was 360,369 ozs. In the early
part of 1898 the Warden wrote that “ appearances promise that
the yield of 1898 will surpass that of previous years.” Great
things were at one time looked for from a pyramidal hill, near
the Seventy-mile diggings, about 16 miles 8. of Charters Towers,
now known as Mount Leyshon, whose formation is supposed to
be similar to that of Mount Morgan, being the deep-seated core or
“ neck ” of an ash-discharging volcano, while Mount Morgan is a
deposit from a hot spring or geyser, but this mine is now abandoned.
To the east of Mount Leyshon is an isolated “neck,” the
highest neck of which is now called Mount Mawe. Payable gold
is believed to exist here, as gold has been found in most of the
creeks which rise in the mount. The gold is exceedingly fine,
and needs careful treatment to work without losing much of
it. The Day Dawn mine has a i-ailway, 1J mile to their Ex-
celsior machine, a steam motor drawing the trucks. The works
are spoken of as one of the finest plants in Australia. In the
latter end of 1885 a reefing district called the Black Jack was
discovered, situate about 5 miles SW. from Charters Towers.
Most of the other larger mills are connected with the Govern-
ment railway by small branches or sidings, among them being
Mill's Day Dawn United,lDay Dawn P.C., Brilliant, Brilliant
Block, Brilliant and St. George United, Kelly’s Queen Block,
Brilliant Extended. The Brilliant Central Company are apply-
ing for permission to connect. Population of municipality, 4,597
(census 1891); now about 5,000. Population of the field, including
Gape River, 23,290. Newspapers—the Northern Miner, Mining
Standard, and the Towers Herald (daily), North Queensland
Register, and Eagle, North Queensland Figaro (weekly). For-
mation : sienite, granite, diorite, porphyry.
CHILDERS, a rising township in the Isis district, and a rail-
way-station on the Maryborough-Childers branch, 40 miles N. from
Maryborough, with postal, money-order, savings bank and tele-
graph facilities. It owes its rise and existence to the develop-
ment of the sugar industry, and has every prospect of becom-
ing an important centre. It has branches of the North Queens-
land and Commercial Banks, six hotels, a State school, Primitive
Methodist, Anglican, and Roman Catholic churches, the usual
tradesmen’s premises, court house and Government offices, and
several stores. Bi-weekly newspaper: the Isis Standard. Masons,
Oddfellows, and Foresters have lodges. In the neighbourhood
are four large sugar-mills.
CHILLAGOE, which includes Calcifer and Qirofla, a
copper and silver mining locality in co. Chelmsford, situated
■between the Tate and Walsh rivers, about 10 miles distant
from and on the watershed of the latter river, and about 80 miles
NW. from Herberton. The prospects were reported as
being exceptionally good, and it was expected that Chil-
lagoe would become a large and important field for both
copper and silver, as several rich silver lodes have been
discovered. The nearest and best route to the coast is vid
Mareeba to Cairns. The Chillagoe Proprietary are now building
a railway to connect the field with the Cairns line at Mareeba.
At present Cobb <fe Co. run the mail coach from Mareeba to
Herberton, and in conjunction with their mail coach is run a
mail coach from Herberton to Gerofla once a week, via Watson-
'ville, Noineback, Montalbin, Coorboora, Calcifer, Chillagoe, and
■Gerofla, leaving Herberton on Friday at 5 a.m., and reaching
Chillagoe on Saturday at 5 p.m. Return : Leave Chillagoe on
Wednesday at 7 a.m., arriving at Herberton on Thursday at
6 p.m. Pares, Mareeba to Herberton, 10s.; Herberton to
Chillagoe, 40s. Large smelting works have been erected at
Calcifer and Girofla, and work is now going on. There are
two hotels. During 1896 there were raised silver lead and silver
to the valueof £476, and copper to the valueof £13,160. Formation:
Feldspar granite, intruded upon in many places by large bands or
bodies of quartzite dyke, impregnated with ferruginous matter.
But the most striking feature in this locality is the presence of
large bodies or hills of limestone, extending for miles over the
surface, and worn by atmospheric influences into picturesque
and fantastical shapes, assuming in places the appearance of
towers and in others of embattled parapets with numerous
caves. One locally known as The Temple is described as having
a magnificent theatre, 100 feet in diameter, and some 80 feet
high, the roof festooned with stalactites, while the floor was
covered in places with stalagmite. Another cave is 200 feet in
length, and 50 feet in width, with a gothic roof 80 feet high.
The Government geologist is of opinion that the Chillagoe and
Koorbora fields bid fair to rival or excel the richest of our
mineral fields. Some of the deposits of silver and copper ore are
on a gigantic scale. Population about 400.
CHINCHILLA, a township, post, telegraph and railway
station on the Western line, 203 miles SW. from Brisbane,
having a State school, branch of the Government savings bank,
two hotels—Royal and Commercial—and two stores. Farming
district.
CLERMONT (22° 49' 11" S. lat., 147° 38' E. long.), a
municipal town (originally proclaimed January 21, 1867)
having a mayor and five councillors, money-order office, savings
bank, post, telegraph, and railway station, in the county and
electorate of Clermont, about 227 miles NW. of Rockhampton,
575 miles NW. of Brisbane, situated on Sandy Creek and
both sides of a large permanent lagoon ; the main part of
the town is on low ground and liable to floods ; the Govern-
ment buildings are on higher ground. Hotels: Prince of
Wales, Commercial, Leo, Railway, Queen’s, and Roval. The
celebrated Peak Downs copper mines are four miles from
the town. They were discovered in 1862 bya diggernamed Mollard,
who was at the time prospecting for gold, and have yielded a
large quantity of ore. Operations are now stopped, but may be
resumed, if copper should rise in price. The district is also an
auriferous one. There are three coal collieries, Blair Athol,
El Dorado and Hope, within 12 miles of the town ; they
supply coal to the Government for use on the western line, and
also supply the town, and it is reported the demand is greatly
below the quantity the pits can put out. The cost of carriage
is reported to be much hampering this industry. The New
Quarry Hill G. M. Co. took up the sandstone formation at
the east end of the town, known as the Quarry. At a
depth of 210 feet a seam of coal from 9 to 12 inches in thick-
ness was struck and passed, and another at 222 feet,
but at 300 feet heavy water was met. A pit was sunk
along the railway line close to Clermont, but operations
did not result in success. Large quantities of gems have
been found here, but it is reported that no market can be
found for them. The places of worship are Presbyterian
(St. Paul’s), Episcopal (All Saints), Wesleyan, and Roman
Catholic Church (St. Mary's!. Public buildings—court-house,
hospital (a very large building, situated in a salubrious
position on the crest of an eminence, about 5 mile SW. of
the town!, State school (No. 21), lock-up, and police quarters.
Banks : Joint Stock and New South Wales. Clermont has
also a school of arts (with a library of 1,587 vols.), the Peak
Downs Telegram buildings, two aerated water factories, and a
town hall. There are in the municipality (area 18 square
miles) 31$ miles of roads and streets, 400 dwellings, and the
ratable value of the property is £38,251. The bridge across
the lagoon was completed in August, 1886. A district court
is held twice a year, and there is a resident police magistrate.
The railway station is about half a mile from the town.
The surrounding country is largely occupied by stations,
the principal being Logan Downs, Wolfang, Retro, Huntly,
Peak Downs, Gordon Downs, Langton, Peak Vale, Surbiton,
Banchory, Beaufort, Kilcummin, Avon Downs, Malvern Downs,
Cotherstone, Craven, Emerald Downs, Moray Downs, Elgin
Downs, Laglan, Albro, Frankfleld, Leichhardt Downs, Gros-
venor, May Downs, Bully Creek, and Fleurs. This township
is on the main road to the Aramac and Western Country.
The climate of Peak Downs (the name of the district) is
very salubrious. A considerable amount of land has been
selected in the neighbourhood, and some attention is
now being bestowed on agriculture. Local societies : Pastoral,
Agricultural and Horticultural Society, Peak Downs Turf
Club, Miners’ Association, Oddfellows’ (2), Freemasons’, and
Foresters’ Lodges. The Belyando Divisional Board, and the
Clermont and Belyando Marsupial Boards meet here. In the
district are iron bark forests of great extent, constituting one
of its principal sources of wealth ; an immense number of rail-
way sleepers are sent from here. Yield of gold for 1897
for entire district, 23,006 ozs. In 1898 the Warden reported very
hopefully, and that the yield for the past year had exceded his
most sangnine expectations. The principal reefs are the Palm
Tree, the Somersetshire or Doctor line, and Star of Hope. The
discovery of gold in the vicinity of Sandy Creek, about 29 years ago,
caused the establishment of Clermont. From Sandy Creek the
principal yield of gold came for a long time, but it is now reported
as being nearly deserted. At present the chief seat of operation
is at Black Ridge, where a population of over 500 are supported.
It is described as quite a settled little mining town, which a few
months ago was a dense scrub. At the Miclere a steady little popu-
lation is still maintained. On Blister or White Hill, about a mile
from Clermont, a promising lead has been discovered. After the
mining fever subsided Clermont became the centre of the splendid
pastoral country adjacent to it. On three occasions severe floods
have occurred, causing an immense amount of damage. One of the
features of the district is the Peak Range, which is composed of
a number of isolated peaks. The most remarkable one is Wolfang
Peak, about 28 miles NE., consisting of an immense patural
obelisk rising out of a high mount, which stands alone about
the centre of a large expanse of undulating downs. This peak,
which is nearly 1,000 feet in height, is only a few feet in
extent on the top. Other remarkable peaks are Fletcher’s Awl,
the Gemini, Table Mountain, and Malvern Peak. The water
supply is derived from Corporation Wells on the Lagoon, and
other places. Formation ; volcanic. Population of municipality,
1,300 (now about 1,900); of census district, 5,080 (1891), of the
gold-field about 1,564. The Peak Downs Telegram, established
1864, is the local paper.
CLEVELAND (27° 33' S. lat., 153° 19' E.long.),a small town-
ship, with money-order, telegraph and savings bank office and
railway station on the west shore of Moreton Bay, 22 miles E. ot
Brisbane by land and about 35 miles by water. It is in the elec-
torate of Bulimba, Stanley Co., and police district of Cleveland.
Hotels : Brighton and Cleveland. Schools at Cleveland East and
West (Nos. 35 and 20). Government buildings : Railway station,
police-station, court-house, and post and telegraph office, also
Divisional Board Office. Episcopal and Roman Catholic places of
worship, and a school of arts, with library 920 vols. It is much
frequented as a watering-place, and has a jetty extending
into deep water. The jetty into Raby Bay has at low spring
tide 8 feet. There are two neatly kept reserves for public
recreation. The one at the extreme point has been much
36
[Chi—Cle
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


improved by levelling, tree planting, and enclosing with a
circular fence, forming a pleasant drive round, from which the
, new jetty runs into Raby Bay. A commodious public bath
has been provided by the Divisional Board. There are some
splendid oyster beds in the immediate neighbourhood of
Cleveland, which are reserved for the use of the inhabitants.
Splendid oranges and bananas are grown in the district. The
railway station buildings are in close proximity to the post
and telegraph and police offices. Cleveland was one of the
first places in Queensland where sugar cultivation was tried.
As early as 1862 the late Hon. Louis Hope had several acres
of land under cane. Fellmongery works on Hilliard’s Creek,
about 4 miles distant. Population, 282 (census 1891).
CLONCURRY (21° 41' S.lat., 140° 33' E. long.), a post town
with money-order, telegraph and savings bank office, and copper-
mining centre in the Burke district (co. Beaconsfield, electorate
of Flinders), on the river of the same name, a tributary of the
Flinders, about 272 miles S. of Normanton, its port, 540 miles W.
from Townsville, and about 1,500 miles MW. of Brisbane. The
main road to Boulia and the Herbert River passes through it.
The communication with Brisbane is cither vid Townsville by
rail to Hughenden, thence coach : coach fare £8 ; or by steamer
from Thursday Island to Normanton, thence coach: coach
fare £6. Hotels: Royal, Imperial, Prince of Wales, Post Office,
and Palace. There* is a court-house and police station, State
school (No. 411), a hospital, several stores, a branch of
the Queensland National Bank, Divisional Board’s hall, and
several tradesmen’s shops. Divisional Board meets here. In
1897 the yield of gold for the entire district was estimated at
570 ozs., the falling off being due to the drought. The most
auriferous part of the district was the Top Camp, on the Clon-
curry river, about 30 miles S. of Cloncurry. At Soldier’s Cap,
6 miles from Top Camp, is a reefing centre, but the place is
now nearly deserted. The Warden reported that the progress
made in mining during 1897 had been small. The district
is abundantly rich in copper, and has fine grazing capabilities ;
most of the runs are now fenced. The principal stations are Fort
Constantine, Eddington, Dalgonally, Leilavale, and Devoncourt
for cattle, and Penola Downs, JSulolo, Granada and Clonagh
for sheep. The proposed transcontinental line was projected
to come within 30 or 40 miles of Cloncurry, and a rail-
way is much needed to develop the mineral resources of
the locality. In 1883 the Great Australian copper mine, which
is about a mile S. of the town, was bought by a syndicate of
English capitalists. Operations have for some time been stopped,
with little chance of being resumed unless railway communication
should be made, and the metal rise in price. The ore averages
about 25 per cent, of copper. Very rich copper discoveries have
been made to the southward of the township. Silver lead in quan-
tities has been found, about 45 miles NW. of Cloncurry. Near to
the town on the Boulia road is a mountain of rich iron ore known
as “ Mount Leviathan,” better known as the Black Mountain.
This hill is about 250 feet high and a mile in circumference.
Cloncurry is plentifully supplied with water from two public
and many private wells. Newspaper: Cloncurry Advocate.
Population, 243 (census 1891) ; of district (1896), 513.
CORN (13° 55' 8. lat., 143° 15' E. long.), a quartz reefing town-
ship, situated on the headwaters of the Coen River, in the Cook
district, about 160 miles from Laura (terminus Cooktown railway).
It has a post office and savings bank, the building being also {
utilised as Warden’s and petty sessions court, and a school of arts,
with library of 387 vols., portion of the building being available
as a school, two hotels, four stores, and two butcheries. Progress |
Association meets here. It is a telegraph station on the tele-
graph line to Thursday Island. There is a fortnightly mail service |
overland between Coen and Cooktown. A similar service runs
from Coen to Moreton via Rokeby, Meta Downs, Mein, Pinetree, !
Merluna, and York Downs. Two cutters sail weekly from
Cooktown to Port Stewart, conveying goods and passengers; j
from thence to Coen is 45 miles. An alluvial diggings of con-
siderable extent but poor, has been discovered between Coen \
and the east coast, at what is called the Rocky. The port for
Rocky is Cheater River, about 20 miles north of Port Stewart.
In 1897 the Rocky alluvial diggings were almost abandoned ; ;
but a new reefing field in the vicinity of Neville Creek, about 7
miles from the Rocky, has been opened, a small water-power
battery erected, and some good orushings obtained. Chester
River will probably be the port for Coen in the future. In the
early part of 1898 the Warden reported that progress during the
past year had not been very marked. Tunnelling claims may
be called the leading feature in the year’s record, nine having
been put in an average distance of 130 feet at the base of a
chain of hills ; some valuable reefs are reported to have been
discovered about 26 miles N.B. on the Nisbett river watershed.
The yield of gold for 1897 from quartz was 5,386 ozs. Mining
(quartz reefs) pastoral and agricultural district. Coen is the
township for five pastoral properties of the district, viz., Rokeby,
Langi, Pinetree, Merluna and York Downs, all fairly good
stations that are gradually being stocked. Population of Rocky
diggings and Coen, including Chinese, 367. Formation : granite
and schist.
COMET (or Cometviixe) (23° 40' S. lat., 148° 31' B. long.) is
a railway station on the Central Railway in the county of Deni-
son, electorate of Leichhardt, police district of Rockhampton.
The township, which has a post office, savings bank, money-order
office, and telegraph station, is on the banks of the river of the
same name, 140 miles W. of Rockhampton. The present
terminus of the line is at a place called Longreach, 424 miles
W. of Rockhampton. Public buildings are comprised in the rail-
way station, and State school. Hotel: the Comet. There are no \
resident clergymen, but the township is visited occasionally by
Primitive Methodist, Church of England, and Roman Catholic j
| ministers. State school (No 173), formerly the court-house.
A large gum tree, marked abbut five miles below the town-
ship, at the junction of the Nogoa and Comet Rivers, marked
by Leichhardt, and locally known as the Leichhardt Tree,
though not known when done (though believed to be Dec.,
: 1844), and two gum-trees marked L, on a deserted sheep station,
called “ Corio, ’’ about a mile from the township, are locally sup-
posed to be Leichhardt’s last marks. Eleven miles to the east
of the township, and immediately contiguous to the railway, a
surface seam of coal was struck some years ago ; but the quality,
as usual in surface seams, was not good. A tract of country
about ten miles square, on the west of Tolmie’s Range, shows
indications of an extensive coal-mine, the surface of the ground
being strewn with petrified wood. Gold has also been found in
this range, but not in payable quantities. Population 80 (census
1891). Pastoral district. Formation: carboniferous.
CONDAMINE (26° 57' 8. lat., 150° 6' E. long.), a post town
situated on the river of the same name, 24 miles from the
Western Railway, in the county of Bulwer, electorate of Murilla.
about 240 miles W. of Brisbane. State school (No. 24), and
police barracks here. The communication with the metro-
polis is vid the Miles railway station. A buggy runs twice
a week with mails. Population, 106 (census 1891). Pastoral
district. Formation : generally a sandy soil with hard chalky
subsoil. Great quantities of ironstone are to be found on the
river bank.
COOKTOWN (15° 27' 20" S. 1at.,'145° 17' 8.10ng.), a muni-
cipal township, in co. Banks, Cook electorate, on the southern
bank of the Endeavour River, about 1,050 miles NW. of Brisbane.
The entrance to the river is about 800 yards wide; it lies be-
tween Grassy Hill on the south side, and a low sandy point on
the north, named St. Patrick’s Point, and is easy of access, Mount
Cook (about 1,500 feet high) being a most prominent land-
mark. The A.U.S.N. Company’s steamers ply weekly, and
the Torres Strait steamers monthly, to Brisbane ; there are also
other steamers. The A.U.S.N. Co.’s steamers run from here to
Normanton and Burketown vid Thursday Island. Hotels :
Sovereign, Great Northern, Queen’s, and seventeen others. In
1770 Captain Cook beached his vessel, the Endeavour, in the
river for repairs, having previously had to throw his guns over-
board to get off the reef on which the vessel had been stranded.
It is believed that the Eiideavour struck not far from 16° 7' 8. lat.
145° 36' 48" E. long, on a large reef to the northward of the
true Endeavour Reef. The exact locality has been identified, but
the guns themselves, though searched for, have not been found,
thick layers of coral having grown, it is believed, over them. The
river is rather an arm of the sea, the tidal influence extending
inland about 15 miles. The mouth is really an estuary, into
which the Endeavour River runs just above the town. On the
southern side of the estuary—which is nearly a mile wide in
front of the town—and between the houses and the sea rises
Grassy Hill, which forms a good shelter to vessels lying at or
near the wharves. The main street (Charlotte Street) runs
parallel with this hill, nearly north and south, beginning at
the wharves to the northward and ultimately merging into the
I Palmer Road. This street is a wide thoroughfare, is well built
j upon for more than half a mile, many of the business places
being commodious and substantial structures. In this
{ street, at the junction of Adelaide Street, a memorial to
the late Mrs. Watson has been erected. There are a
J number of cross streets also, on which have been erected many
business and private houses. Most of the streets are a chain and
a half wide. Cooktown is the port for vessels plying between
Queensland, New Guinea, and New Britain. It extends for li
mile along the river bank, and is almost environed by hills.
Municipal area, 15 square miles, with 20 miles of streets and 847
dwellings; value of ratable property, £137,922, incorporated
April 3, 1876. Among other institutions are branches of the
Queensland National, New South Wales, and North Queensland
banks; these are handsome buildings, more especially the
Queensland National Bank, a court-house, Federal Hall, built
for a skating rink, Masonic hall, and Immigration barracks.
The hospital is a fine building on an elevated site, and
can accommodate 60 patients ; a new wing has been added
to accommodate 20 patients; the tower is used as a fever
ward. There are bonded stores, a custom house, four wharves,
with 14 feet of water at low tides, with sheds and dry stores for
goods, money-order office, telegraph station, savings bank, and
post office. A monument to Captain Cook, erected at a cost of
about £1,300, was unveiled here in 1889. Several large stores
have been erected in various parts of the town by European
and Chinese merchants. Places of worship : a Roman Catholic
Church (St. Mary’s), Primitive Methodist, also an Episcopal
Church with parsonage, and Presbyterian church. The Salva-
tion Army meet in the Federal Hall. There is a convent school
in connection with the Roman Catholic church. Cooktown is
the residence of the Vicar-Apostolic, Dr. Hutchinson, who is
assisted by two priests. There is a national school, a girls’ school
(No. 177), a boys’ school (No. 453), and a Roman Catholic school.
Assizes of the district court and sittings of the Supreme Court are
held at stated intervals in the court-house, a large building at
the lower end of Flinders Street. The School of Arts lias a
library of 2,154 vols., with reading-room and mineral and curio
collection. Among the local societies are a Turf Club, Lodges
of Freemasons, Oddfellows, Good Templars, Rechabite Lodge
and Foresters’ Lodge, Rifle Club, and a rifle butt for practice,
a fire brigade engine house in Queen Street. The Queen’s
park is well situated near Pynch’s Bay, and is planted with
numerous tropical plants. The cemetery and also the race-
course are situated at the Two Mile, the latter being alongside
the railway line. The Chinese quarter called China Town, is
37
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Clo-Coo]


in Adelaide Street, running parallel with Charlotte Street. The
most prominent building here is the Joss House. The Chinese
population has greatly decreased within the last few years,
The water supply is rather defective. It has been proposed
to get it by pumping and gravitation from the Isabella creek,
a tributary of the Endeavour, about 19 miles WNW. from
Cooktown. Cooktown is the port of, and owes its rise to, the
Palmer River diggings. A railway to the Palmer gold field is
now' open to Laura Station, 67 miles from Cooktown. Coal
has been discovered in the district on Pairleigh Station, Little
River, and Mr. Jack, the geologist, reports hopefully of it.
The coal burns well, but the proportion of ash is high. Coal
has also been discovered at Indian Head, just across the river
beyond the North Shore. A coach leaves the Laura Station
for MaytoWn weekly. Much land is being taken for sugar
and tobacco growing, and both are found to grow well. The
Mclvor and Morgan lands are highly spoken of. Since the
Annan bridge was opened, the whole of the land between
the Annan and Bloomfield rivers has been withdrawn from
selection and proclaimed a mining district. Two bridges
now cross the Annan and Endeavour. The Endeavour
Bridge is a low-level one, 364 feet long, in nine spans of 40
feet. The Annan River Bridge is 1,100 feet in length, being
22 spans of 50 feet. Both the two last named bridges have been
lowered for their better protection against floods. Messrs. Burns,
Philp & Co. have several schooners trading between Cooktown
and New Guinea, and also have the mail contract for Port
Moresby. Rice has been grown with success in the vicinity, and
the cocoanut palm has been found to thrive. There is plenty of
suitable land to be found for the growth of the sugar-cane on the
' coast both north and south of Cooktown. Tobacco growing
has been tried with success, and is likely to become a great
industry. Coffee is qlso found to grow well, and several
"acres of it have been planted. Much attention is being
given to fruit-growing, especially the mango, smooth-leaf
pineapple and cocoanuts. All of these thrive abundantly,
both trees and fruit being larger than grown elsewhere.
The Cook District Pastoral and Agricultural Society have
a fine piece of land near Boundary Street for show pur-
poses. Cooktown is the centre of a very extensive beche-dt-
mer and pearl fishery, extending from Cape Grafton to the
■islands of New Guinea. The Daintree Divisional Board holds
its meetings in the [Board office next the School of Arts.
The tin-fields within a few miles of Cooktown are Rossville
or Upper Annan, on a branch of the Annan river, almost due
south from Cooktown, distant 34 miles. Good tin also is
found on the plateaux or table-lands, chief of which is
O’Keefe’s, where there are lodes. Mount Amos is distant
SB. by E. 25 miles. A good deal of work has been done, and
good prospects obtained from the lodes. At Mount Leswell
rich lodes have been found and favourably reported on by mining
experts. Mount Romeo is an important goldfield, distant about
45 miles. At Cocoa Creek, on the Endeavour river, about 40
miles distant, both alluvial and quartz gold have been found, also
antimony. There are several splen did waterfalls, which, in case
'of irrigation, would prove very valuable. At the new Starcke
gold field (near the mouth of the river; the yield for 1896 was
364 ozs. 3 dwts. Stream tin is found along_tho banks of the
numerous creeks which run into the Annan and its tribu-
taries, and tin-mining is also prosecuted on Mount Windsor,
above the Normanby, where gold has also been found.
Mdunt Hartley is distant 47 miles, and lies between Mount
Amos and Mount Thomas. The lodes here are exceptionally
rich, and only awaiting capital to develop them. The Bloom-
field tin-field lies 10 miles inland from the southern bank of
the Bloomfield river. A saw mill is at work here, cutting
local timber, especially pencil cedar, which is of considerable
value. Population 2,200 whites, and 360 Chinese. Newspapers ;
Cooktown Independent and Endeavour Beacon.
COOLGARRA (17° 30' S. lat., 145° 29' B. long.), former!"
known as Return Creek, is a mining township in the Herberton
district, situated 21 miles from Herberton, and 14 miles from
Irvinebank. Tin, silver, copper and bismuth are found here. The
township is pleasantly situated near the head of Return Creek, a
tributary of the Herbert River. It has a general store, and
public-house. At Glen Linedale, about 10 miles S. from
Coolgarra, the Oberlin Tin Mining Company have a fine
plant for the treatment of tin ores. When last visited by the
Government geologist most of the mines had been abandoned,
and the shafts were full of water. There are hot springs in the
' neighbourhood, about 2J miles NW. of Woodleigh Station.
Hotel and bath-house have been .built here. The locality is
likely to become a favourite resort. Formation: “a series of
altered vertical greywackes, quartzites and shales." Population,
93.
COOMERA (27° 51' 8. lat., 153° 20' E. long.), a small town-
ship, with savings bank, post office, telegraph and railway station
(on the river Coomera and the Beenleigh and Southport railway),
in the county of Ward, electorate of Albert, police district of
Coomera 38 miles SB. from Brisbane. Has Church of England
and Wesleyan chapel, two State schools (Nos. 124 and 283),
Divisional Board’s office, police station, and two hotels, Ferry
and Railway. Products of the district are sugar, maize,
potatoes, and timber. There are here a sugar-mill and a saw-
mill. Population, 188 (census 1891).
COPPERFIEL.D (22° 49' S. lat., 147° 43' E. long.), a post
town, in the county of Clermont, about 580 miles NW. of Bris-
bane, 4 miles from Clermont SW., and about 232 miles inland
W. of Rockhampton, its port, situate on Douglas Creek. A pro-
" visional ’school (No. S 6), one hotel,(Union, and a general store,
’ with butcher’s shop, are here. Wesleyan and Salvation Army
ministers visit. A buggy.with mails plies to and from the
Clermont railway station. Close to the township are the re-
mains of the largest smelting works in the colony. At one time
! thirteen shafts were being worked and twenty-five furnaces were,
i in full blast on one property; now everything is silent and desolate.
A municipality was proclaimed on May 10, 1872, but the corpora -
i tion is now defunct, and the town is included in the Belyando
Divisional Board. In the past the town has been principally
supported by copper mining, but a considerable quantity of gold
has been obtained, and agriculture is steadily increasing. The
reefs here are well spoken of by all experts who have examined
them, but capitalists have not been induced to open them up to
any depth, and the surface stone has all been taken out in most
places. In 1898 the Warden reported that “ Copperfleld wasgetting
a better trial than it had ever had before ; the yield of gold for
I the year was 22,006 oz. Several extended claims had been taken
up. Two cyanide companies were doing well with the old tailings,
j of which there were several thousands of tons to be treated.”
Population was at one time about 2,000, it is now 139, the
township having continued to decay by the closing of the Peak
Downs copper mine, which has been a great detriment to the
locality, but there is some prospect of the copper mining
industry being revived at no distant date. Formation, prin-
cipally grey slate.
CRAIGLEE, county Nares, a small township, about 4
I miles distant from Port Douglas, situated at the foot of the
range. It is a camping place for teams travelling between
Herberton and Port Douglas. It has one hotel (Mowbray), and
primary school. Population (census 1891) 77.
CROW’S NEST (27° 17' S. lat., 152° 4' B. long.), a post
town, with money-order, telegraph office, savings' bank, and
railway station, 135 miles NW. (75 miles in a direct line) from
Brisbane in county of Cavendish and electorate of Aubigny,
police district of Crow’s Nest, situated on the head of
Cressbrook Creek. In 1884 this locality attracted some
notice from gold being found in the vicinity. The gold-
field is situated about 13 miles from Crow’s Nest township
and 18 miles from Murphy's Creek on the Cressbrook Creek
watershed. Some 20 years ago gold was discovered here, and
small finds have from time to time been made, but not of a
paying character. Gold has been discovered in various places in
the district, but not as yet in any great quantity. Tin has also
been found, but sufficient trial has not yet been given to ascer-
tain if it would pay to work. The country around bears con-
siderable resemblance to the Stanthorpe district. In the district
are thousands of acres of the finest pine forests in Queensland,
and large areas have been taken up for agricultural and grazing
purposes. State school here (No. 293), Anglican, Roman
Catholic and Methodist churches ; the latter is visited from
Roma. Salvation Army place of worship. Hotel : Royal ;
court-house, police barracks ; three stores, blacksmith’s and
carpenter’s shop. Maize, potatoes, and lucerne principally are
cultivated in the neighbourhood. Large waterfalls and
numerous varieties of ferns are to be found. Settlement is
reported to be increasing in the district, new land being taken
up every year. Population, 155 (census 1891); with district
now estimated at about 400.
CROYDON (18° 12' 13'' S. lat., 142° 14' 58" E. long), a
gold-mining field and township, 94 miles due E. of Nor-
manton, 103 miles from Georgetown, and. 25 miles due 8.
from Green Creek telegraph station, in the police district and
county of Burke, and electorate of Croydon. It has a post-office,
money-order, savings bank, and telegraph office, and is a
municipality (incorporated April 9, 1892). Area if square mile,
16 miles of roads, 800 dwellings ; value of ratable property,
£114,526. The route to it is via Normanton, thence by rail,
Coaches run to Herberton and Georgetown. Abundance of
excellent water can be obtained at a moderate depth on any
part of the field. Several dams are built at various machine
sites, but a number of batteries now obtain a sufficient supply
to enable crushing to be continued throughout the year. There
are twenty hotels, the principal being the Palace, Temple’s, The
Club, Criterion, Queen’s, Commercial, and Imperial; several
stores, also a court-house, gaol, hospital, and police barracks.
Banks: Queensland National, New South Wales, and Royal.
Churches : Episcopal, Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, and Primitive
Methodist, and Salvation Army. State school and two private
schools. This gold-field is on what was known as Croydon Downs
cattle station, the owner of the station being Mr. W. C. Brown,
who, with Messrs. Aldridge Bros., originally prospected the
locality, and found gold in October, 1885. Soon afterwards a
rush set in, and in a short time about 1,500 people were on
the field, and at the end of 1887 it is estimated there was a popu-
lation of about 6,000. The first reefs discovered were the True
Blue, Iguana and Lady Mary, and the first claim laid off was
the Lady Mary Reward Claim. The gold obtained at or near the
surface was very rich ; the average yield of gold per ton during
the first year of the field was 4 ozs. 12 dwts. 8 grs. At the pre-
sent time the number of distinct quartz reefs being worked
upon, and found to be auriferous, is over 200, and the extent
of auriferous ground worked, about 600 miles. In the early
part of 1898 the population of the field was 4,143. Some of the
shafts are now down a considerable distance, and the stone
is reported to be improving as a lower depth is reached.
Gold shows freely, and some of the stone has assayed a large
percentage. Mining operations are located in an undulating
flat, running out from the broken ridgy country, between
ridges and hillocks into the plain or low-level forest country l
which stretches away towards the shores of the Gulf. This
flat has alternate layers of clay and heavy sand on its surface,
and bands of granite, sandstone, conglomerate, and auriferous
quartz traverse it in all directions. One remarkable blow of
38
[Coo —Cro
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


quartz on this flat is the Iguana Hill. The yield of gold for Aug
1897 amounted to 61,792 ozs. from mill treatment and 13,684 oz. tele,
from tailings treated by cyanidation. The average yield from 140
mines being 1 oz. 9 dwts. 7 grs., the gross value of gold won 129
during the year being £145,432. Since the field was opened the larg
out-put has amounted to 721,796 J ozs. of gold. At present there Posl
are 238 stamps, three Huntington mills, and five cyanide plants at mm
work. The town itself is situated on the southern boundary of the and
goldfield, the principal lines of reef in the immediate vicinity are
l>eing the Iguana, Mark Twain, Golden Gate, Lady Isabelle, bool
Highland Mary, True Blue, Glengarry, and Mountain Maid, all Ban
of which have given rich returns. There are several mining and
camps in the vicinity ; Table Top is 4 miles NE. of the Upper , Catl
Twelve Mile ; Golden Valley, about 4 miles N. Mark Twain is I Mer
0 miles from Croydon. Golden Gate is 6 miles distant N.W. the
along the Normanton road. This locality has the largest out- dist
put of any line of reef on the field. A large township of over 600 beii
residents has sprung up at Golden Gate, and there are several also
hotels and stores. At the Jubilee or Twelve Mile there are torn
large.reefs. At Esmeralda station, about 70 miles distant south, sons
the reefs are large, but so far are reported not to haye been dry,
remunerative. Newspapers; Golden Age, Mining Hews, and alwi
Independent (weekly). erec
CUMBERLAND (18° 23' S. lat., 143° 28' E. long.), a post fron
town, with telegraph office and savings bank, in the co. of Aus
Gilbert, electorate of Burke, about 18 miles S. of W. of George- by t
town, situated on Cumberland Creek, six miles from its junction the
with the Gilbert River. Hotels; the Etheridge, Welcome Inn ; Dra
police barracks, post and telegraph office, 2 stores, butcher’s, Orel
and baker’s shops, but no buildings of any very great note. It timi
lias a provisional school. Coach passes weekly from George- area
town to Croydon ; fare to Croydon £2 ; to Georgetown 12s. The Cre<
water supply is derived from a dam erected by the mining com- plai
panics. Within a few hundred yards of the town is situated the agri
famous Cumberland mine ; operations were suspended in 1896 stat
and mill closed. A considerable proportion of the inhabitants Pop
left for Green Hills, distant about 18 miles from Cumberland, The
and within 4 of the Gilbert River. There are other mines in to tl
and near the town. The country around is well adapted for I]
cattle and horses. The class of stock is equal to any in the in
outside districts of the colony. Though virtually a mining Rivi
town, a little farming is done in the neighbourhood, which well Tow
repays the trouble devoted to it. Maize grows remarkably well, priv
and yields from 40 to 80 bushels to the acre. Potatoes, both Nor
English and sweet, do well. Tropical fruits of all descrip- deri
tions flourish when a little care is bestowed on them. Along the a p
Ibanks of the Gilbert River there is magnificent soil, and in the Dab
bed of it there is a never-failing supply of underground running hert
fresh water. Though very hot for five or six months in the year, Geo:
the climate is very healthy. The wet season generally com- derl
mences in December and lasts up to March. The average rain- fort;
fall is about 31 inches. Formation : granite and quartz. Popu- Aus
iation, 118 (census 1891), now reduced. ' and
CUNNAMULLA (28° 04' 14" S. lat., 145° 40' 53" E. long.), a mar
post town with money-order office, telegraph station, railway D
station, and savings bank, in the county of Wellington, elec- plac
iterate of Balonne, on the eastern bank of the Warrego River, and fron
most centrally situated, being almost equally distant from Sf. ther
George in the east, Bourke in the south, Thargomindah in the D
west, and Charleville in the north, about 560 miles W. from ! post
Brisbane, with which it has been connected by rail. Coaches of E
leave regularly for Barringun, Eulo, Thargomindah, St. the 1
George, and Widgeegoara. The streets of Cunnamulla are may
■well formed, and the hotels and stores are above the average to be Bris
found in back country townships. Hotels; Railway, Post Office, four
Commercial, Royal Exchange, and Tattersall’s Club. The public ing,
buildings comprise post and telegraph office, a court- and
house, lock-up police station, reading room, divisional board ings
room, Anglican and Roman Catholic churches. The Divisional road
Board Hall is used as a place of worship by the Methodists rata
and Salvation Army. There are five principal stores, a Chinese witt
store, several tradesmen's premises, aerated water factories, l Har
saw mill, and branches of the Queensland National and Com- The
mercial Banks. Statp school (No. 289). Local clubs ; South and
Warrego Jockey Club and Cricket Club, Reading Room (1,20 > ID
vols.), and Tennis Club. The hospital, with accommodation for grap
14 patients, is a fine building. It is constructed on the cottage fron
or bungalow principle. It stands in a reserve containing 40 mist
acres, about a mile from the business portion of the town. Fan
Two Customs (Inland) Office and bonded stares have been D
established here. There are 4 gardens kept by Chinamen, and E. 1
there are 3 dairies about 3 miles out. The town is in tele- mile
graphic communication with the metropolis, and is now con- j It 11
nected with Brisbane and Charleville by rail, through commuui- D
cation being effected on October 10, 1898. From its favourable mou
position Cunnaraulla is expected to become a 'great depot for broo
delivery of stock going to southern markets. Boring here has well
August 21, 1863), with money-order office, savings bank, and
telegraph station, and station on the Western Railway, about
140 miles by road W. of Brisbane (153 miles by rail), and
129 miles distant from Ipswich. It is the central depot for a
large tract of country. The Royal, Queen’s Arms, Imi>erial, and
Post Office are the leading hotels. Within the bounds of the
municipality (2 J square miles) are 13£ miles of streets and roads,
and 332 dwellings. Ratable value of property is £36,367. There
are in the town a school of arts, with a library of about 1,000
books ; branches of the Commercial and Queensland National
Banks ; three churches—Episcopal, Roman Catholic (St. Joseph),
and Presbyterian—one primary school (No. 238). A Roman
Catholic school is conducted at the Convent, by the Sisters of
Mercy. Near the railway station is a neat and useful hospital;
the post and telegraph offices are in the main street. The
district is mainly a sheep-grazing one, but large areas are now
being placed under wheat. Lucerne, maize, and potatoes are
also grown. The Bunya mountains are a point of interest to
tourists. Dalby is gaining some reputation as a resort for per-
sons suffering from phthisis, the atmosphere being uniformly
dry, the heat of summer rarely oppressive, and the nights
always cool. The Queensland Government is now (1898)
erecting a consumptive sanatorium about three miles out
from Dalby. the first State institution of the kind in
Australia. Its cost will be £6,500. An annual race meeting is held
by the Northern Downs Jockey Club on a fine course just outside
the town. Societies : Oddfellows’ Lodge, Cricket, Amateur
Dramatic Clubs, Masonic Lodge (S.C), Gymnasium and
Orchestral Society. The Southern District Court meets three
times in the year, and a Land Court is held monthly. A large
area has been taken up by selectors, particularly at Cattle
Creek, Irvingdale, Matda Hill, St. Ruth, Jimbour and Cecil
plains. The farmers combine sheep and cattle breeding with
agriculture. Hares are plentiful on the Jimbour and other
stations. The water supply is derived from wells and dam.
Population of district, 1,378 (census 1891) (now about 1,250).
The Dalby Herald is the local paper. One member is returned
to the Legislative Assembly.
DALRYMPLE (19° 55' S. lat., 146° 5' E. long.) is
in the Charters Towers police district, on the Burdekin
River, 75 miles SW. from Townsville, 25 NW. from Charters
Towers, and 830 miles NW. from Brisbane. There are two
private residences, and an accommodation house. The Great
Northern Hotel is 5 miles distant. The water supply is
derived from Fletcher Creek. The district is entirely of
a pastoral character. Dalrymple is named after Mr. G. E.
Dalrymple. The northern traffic that formerly passed through
here now goes by a new road from Townsville to Gilberton,
Georgetown, &e. A short clistance from here is the won-
derful basaltic wall, covering nearly 70 miles. It is of volcanic
formation, and is one of the greatest natural curiosities on the
Australian continent. It is said to be inaccessible to horsemen,
and is a great stronghold of the aborigines. Formation : pri-
mary, granitic, basaltic. Population, 25 (census 1886).
D ABB A (27° 35' S. lat., 152° 55' B. long.). This is a stopping-
place on the Southern and Western Railway Line, 10 miles
from Brisbane. The country here is heavily timbered, and
there is but little settlement at present.
DRAYTON (27° 33' S. lat., 151° 59' E. long.), a township, with
post and savings bank office, in the county of Aubigny, electorate
of Drayton and Toowoomba, on Drayton Creek, a tributary of
the Condamine, about 4 miles S. from Toowoomba, of which it
may now almost be considered a suburb, and 100 miles W. of
Brisbane. Hotels : Downs and Criterion, a State school (No. 31),
four places of worship—Episcopal (St. Matthew), a stone build-
ing, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, and Wesleyan—a court house,
and town hall. A shire council has been formed, and the meet-
ings are held at Drayton, area 33 square miles, 70 miles of
roads, 180 dwellings. Population, now about 700. Value of
ratable property, £109,192. It is an agricultural district,studded
with farms and homesteads. In the vicinity are Eton Vale,
Harrow, and Westbrook station properties. Formation : basalt.
The soil is rich red and black, and very fertile, and the cereals
and English fruits are largely grown.
DUG-AND AN (county Churchill), a post] town and tele-
graph station, and terminus of the Passifern Railway, 60 miles
from Brisbane. A State school (No. 333), some tradesmen’s pre-
mises, and two hotels, Australian and DUgandan, are here.
Farming and grazing district. Population, 144 (census 1891).
DULVADILLA (or Dui.bydh.la) (23° 40' S. lat., 148°,46'
E. long.) formerly the terminus of the Western Railway, 411
miles W. of Brisbaue ; the line is now open to Cunnamulla.
It lies 1,443 feet above sea-level, and is 39 miles from Mitchell.
DUNGENESS (18° 33' S. lat., 146° 19’ E. long.) lies at the
mouth of the Lower Herbert River, and the entrance toHihehin-
brook Channel, 20 miles from Ingham, 28 miles from Card-
well, and about 935 miles NW. of Brisbaue, in the electorate
GLCUVCIJ Ul OtOUk IK tv DOUIUCIU MV,V “"‘ 7 . , »
resulted in a plentiful supply of artesian water, estimated at of Cardwell, police district of Ingham. It is a port» ot
22,600 gallons per hour, being struck at a depth of 1,402 feet, entry and clearance, and has a pilot station, customs’
All over the district artesian supplies have been struck, mostly . office, light-keeper’s residence, and one hotel (Sea View). It
the bores yielding immense supplies. The surrounding comprises about naif a dozen houses built on the low sandy point
stations have been much improved for sheep. A very ,on the southern side of the river mouth, which is here nearly Jof
large area has been selected as grazing farms and agricultural
farms. The Paroo Divisional Board meets at Cunnamulla. The
sittings of the Southern District Court are held here twice a
year. Opal mines have been found in the district, about 90
miles W. and N. from here. Formation, principally volcanic.
a mile wide. The site at the extreme point is by no means a
secure one, as each wet season brings a heavy fresh down ;the
river, cutting off a portion of the point. At 5 miles up its
course the river water becomes fresh or only slightly' brackish.
There is a wharf and shed for the convenience l of
the Herbert River trade. A tram line from this wharf to
Halifax, a distance of 8 miles, to connect on with the Colo-
Population (1,000 estimated), of district ‘(census 1891), 2,114. the Herbert River trade. A tram line from this wharf to
Newspapers: Warrego Watchman and OullamuUa Conft. Halifax, a distance of 8 miles, to connect on with the Golo-
DALBY (27° 32' S. lat.. 151° 15' B. long.), co. Aubigny, on nial Sugar Company’s tram road (whose western terminus is at
Mvall creek, electorate and police district of Dalby, 1,123 present only half a mile from Ingham), is much needed. There
feet above the sea level, is a municipal township (proclaimed is a good route] for the proposed tram line from Lucinda Point
39
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Cum—Dun]


and it is said it could bo laid down at a comparatively small
cost. The output of sugar each season shows favourably.
The imports and the passenger traffic are also increasing.
The best sites available for building purposes are tbe allot-
ments reserved for Government offices, and a few adjoining
allotments opposite the Government wharf, also at the first
elbow of the river, at a point known as the Chinaman’s Hut.
A good site for wharfage is also obtainable here. Steamers ply
three times a week to Townsville, 70 miles 8. ; fare 20s. Hin-
chinbrook Channel, dividing Hinohinbrook Island from the
mainland, has a bar at its south entrance, which is liable to shift
after bad weather or heavy floods. There is considerable pas-
senger and cargo traffic passing through the township to and from
the plantations and Ingham, all passengers and cargo being tran-
shipped here. The place is reported to have an unenviable
reputation for the myriads of sand-flies and mosquitoes.
Established at this township is the receiving and forwarding
depot for the Herbert River passenger and cargo traffic ; and
it is consequently a busy place during the sugar season, w r hich
begins July 1, and ends March 1. The limits of Dungeness
Harbour have lately been altered as follows: —The area between
two lines drawn respectively BE. by 8. J 8. _ from the eastern
extreme of Hillock Point, and from the leading beacons to the
south of Lucinda Point, continuing their line NE. § E. to the
point of intersection in about latitude 18° 30' 8. on the east, to a
line with Leafe Peak and Bishop’s Peak in line bearing SW. by
W. \ W. on the west, including all rivers, creeks, and navigable
waters in that area. Formation, level, low lying sand and man-
grove mud marshes. Population, 53 (census 1891), now less.
DURHAM, a mining locality, with a receiving office, in
the electorate of Burke, on the Durham Creek. Water supply is
derived from a Government well and the battery dam. It is about
6 miles W. from Georgetown, with one hotel— Bush Inn, and
provisional school. At Mount Turner, between here and
Cumberland, a rich silver ore lode las been found. The Warden
reports “the whole of the country is teeming with gold, silver,
copper, and innumerable indications of other ores.” The
Durham Company’s mine is the principal claim. The mine was
closed during the year, and the township was reported to be
“ rapidly assuming the aspect of decay peculiar to deserted
mining camps, where a partial clearing in the bush strewn with
countless empty bottles is the sole memento of former glory.”
Population, about 30.
DTEEHEAD, a new reefing locality in the Burnett dis-
trict, situated about forty miles 8. of Eidsvold, and sixty-five
miles W. of Gayndah. There are several reefs now in course of
being prospected and worked, and a promising future is pre-
dicted foi this gold-field, the area over which the reefs extend
being estimated at eight or nine miles. A recent visitor reports
that the reefs are large, but the ore would be, he thought, of a
low grade.
EIDSVOLD (25° 24' 8. lat., 151° 5' B. long.) a mining
township, proclaimed July 25, 1887, situated between the Burnett
River and Boundary Creek. 2J miles from the former, about 37
miles in a direct line WSW. of Mount Perry, the nearest rail-
way station to which a coach runs daily, fare 205., and about
the same distance a little N. of W. of Gayndah ; distance by road
about 60 miles. It is in the county of Rawbelle, electorate of
Burnett, Eidsvold police district. The discovery of the Mount
Rose reef by Mr. Achilles, while prospecting in this district
in December, 1886, led to the opening up of this field. The
church (St. Patrick’s), and Primitive Methodist chapel. Court-
house, post and telegraph offices, police barracks, and railway
workshops. The institutions include School of Arts, tennis club,
brass band and cricket clubs, Progress Association, and Court
Leichardt A.O.P. The climate is dry and salubrious. The water
supply is derived from a pumping station on the Nogoa. There
is a good racecourse about 3 miles from town, where race
meetings are held periodically. There is also a fine sports
ground, neatly fenced, and being planted with shade trees.
Pastoral district, but a successful start has been made to grow
oranges, grapes, lemons, and other fruit; as the soil is very
fertile (a sandy loam), this industry has proved very successful,
the fruit finding a ready market in the far west. Wheat grow-
ing on a large scale has been commenced 12 miles south of
Emerald. A Government experimental farm is established
about 12 miles south of Emerald, where many varieties of wheat-
are being tried. Wheat growing in the district has been very-
successful. Population, 406 (census 1891) ; now about 800.
EMU PARK (or Hewittville) (23° 15' 8. lat., 150° 51' E.
long.), in the county of Livingstone, electorate of Rockhampton
North, police district of Rockhampton, about 29 miles E. from
Rockhampton, is the watering place for Rockhampton, with
which it is now in railway connection, and the central
district and has many natural advantages. Hotels : Emu Park,
Grand, and Railway. It has a State school, Church of England ,
police station, a telegraph station and post office, two stores,
bakery, butchery, aerated water factory, skating rink, and
several villa residences and cottages, and is a favourite place of
resort. There are pleasure boats, several gardens and an excel-
lent race course, plenty of fishing and shooting to be had. Emui
Park is prettily situated near the north end of Keppel Bay,
and opposite Keppel Islands. Pastoral district. Population!
228 (census 1891).
EROMANGA, known locally as “ Opalopohs,” is described!
as “ pleasantly situated on light red-soil open country on the
north bank of Eurongella Creek, South Gregory district,
about a quarter of a mile east from the Eurongella home-
stead. Indeed, by the older residents, the town ie best known
by the name of Eurongella. The road from Thargomindah viti
Kyabra, to Windorah passes through the town, and it is one of
the main stock routes of the colony. Generally as far as Mount
Margaret it traverses rather poor country, abounding in flats
and mulga ridges, fit for cattle-grazing only ; but from the
mount it passes through rather pretty, open, well-grassed
country, the soil of which is evidently excellent, and this part
is well suited for carrying sheep. Within a distance of, say,
fifty miles in a direct line from Eromanga there are in the west
and north-west five opal properties, each averaging about 12
acres,” and at times giving employment to several men, but
at the present time, owing to want of water, operations are
suspended. The principal mines are the Little Wonder and
the Lucknow ; the former is about 35 miles W. from Eromanga-
The township contains two public-houses, a store and black-
smith’s shop, all built of brick, and it is a postal receiving:
office, and has a police-station.
ESK (27° 15' 8. lat., 152° 26' E. long.), electorate of Stanley, a
post town, with telegraph, savings bank, and money-order
and railway station on Sandy or Esk Creek, 43 miles from Ips-
wich, and 67 miles from Brisbane. The line to Esk was opened in
1886. State school (No. 140).; School of art, with library of 525
vols. Church of England, ’ Primitive Methodist, Presbyterian,
formation, according to the Assistant Government Geologist, ; an( j Roman Catholic places of worship, police station and post-
consists of granite; he judged from tbe work already done j office, three hotels (Royal, Commercial and Central), saw-mill's
that tbe prospects of Eidsvold as a reefing district were several tradesmen’s shops, a large store and sattle sale yards,
good. The sinking through hard blue granite is slow, laborious capable of accommodating 6,000 head of cattle. There is a branch
and expensive. The deeper stone is much richer in gold. 0 f the Masonic body (Scottish Constitution. Mount Esk, a high
Early in 1898 the Warden reported more hopefully ol ihe state of mountain of quartz, felspar and granite, lies E. of the township,
the field. During 1897 2,596 tons of quartz were crushed for a between it and the Brisbane River. District grazing princi-
yield of 3,720 oz. of gold, an average of 1 oz. Bdwt 15£grs. pally. Formation: low undulating sandstone ridges. Popula-
In addition to this, 1,132 oz. was obtained from tailings. Works | tion, 407 (census 1891); now about 500.
for the systematic treatment of tailings have now been erected, i ETHERIDGE. See Georgetown.
pr U oducinfminra r nd t two^n7t I ;'John’s Craek. 8 The j ETON (27° 46' 8. lat., 151° 57' E. long.’), a smaJl town, 23 miles
mines are the Minerva, the Lady Augusta, Stockman Extended f into thetowm
S.W. Lady Minerva, No. 1 East Perseverance, and the
Mount Rose. Churches: Episcopal, Roman Catholic, Primi-
tive Methodist and Salvation Army barracks. Public build-
ings : Post, money-order and savings bank office and tele-
graph station, court-house, police barracks, State school and two
private schools. Hotels: Grand, Garry’s, Star, Tattersall’s and
Post Office. Large public hall called the Variety Hall. The
principal thoroughfare is Morton Street. Pastoral and mining
district. Population, 1,258 (census 1891), but now about 1,015.
EMERALD (23° 28' 8. lat., 148° 5' E. long.), a post town
and railway station, with savings bank, money-order office, and
telegraph station, in the police district of Emerald, Leich-
hardt electorate, on the Central line, situated on the west bank
of the Nogoa river, 165 miles W. of Rockhampton. It was the
terminus of the line, but the railway is now opened to Longreach.
A line from here to Springsure (42 miles) is completed and open.
The branching-olf point is about a mile from the post office,
on the east side of the Nogoa River. The branch line to Clermont
(60 miles) is also opened. The township has now settled into a
permanent country town. There is a branch of the Commercial
Bank of Sydney. There are four general stores besides three or
four small Chinese fruit shops, &c., four hotels, Bryden’s,
Leichhardt, and Commercial and Railway, four butchers’ shops,
four dressmakers, shoemaker, and saddler’s shop, one chemist
and newsagent, one private boarding house, two carpenters and
contractors, two drapery stores, one tailor, one stock and station
agent, .and a cordial factory. Btate school (No. 354), Church of
England (St. Luke’s), Presbyterian church, Roman Catholic
opened in Aug., 1885) ; the line was brought right into the town,
and opened in March, 1886. It has post, savings bank, money-
order, and telegraph office, police quarters, lock-up, a State
school (No. 310), and a railway station. Hotels : Railway and
Northern. A central sugar mill, subsidized by the Qovem-
i ment, is here. In 1396 a small alluvial rush took place to a.
locality on Blackwater Hole Creek, about 12 miles W. of Eton,
and some of the miners weie reported to be doing well.
Population, 28 (census 1886).
EUNGELLA, a mining locality in the Bowen district.
I county of Carlyle, situated on the south bank of the Broken
| River, 8 miles from its head, and about 7 miles southerly from
“ B.” Creek, about 57 miles in a direct line West of Mackay, but
! farther by any known route, which at present is through scrubs
and rugged mountainous country. A good track has been cut
through the scrub. It is reached by horse from the Mirani rail-
way station (34 miles), by a passable road to the foot of the coast
range, on the inland side of which Eungulla is situated. It has
one hotel, a butcher's shop, a post-office, and aprovisional school.
The road from here is described as a bad one, over an ascent
of 2,500 feet above sea-level. The reef is cavernous, ferruginous
quartz, changing to mundic stone at a depth of 28 feet. District
principally agrazing one. Population, about 60.
FIG TREE POCKET. This settlement lies 9 miles from
Brisbane, and is so called from agigantic fig-tree, which once stood
on the point called Fig Tree Point Sugar, maize, and the
vine do well here. A Roman Catholic church and Primitive
Methodist and State school (No. 36) are the public buildings.
40
[Dur— Fig
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


The nearest railway station is Indooroopilly, on the same side
of the river; unless the river be crossed, when the Sherwood
station may be reached in about a mile.
FOREST GROVE (or Arrii.ai.ah), a post town, in the
county of Portland, electorate of Mitchell, police district of
Arrilalah, on the Thompson River, about 850 miles from Brisbane,
and 30 miles from Longreach, the present terminus of the Central
Railway. Coach runs to Longreach, fare 155., and Stonehenge
and back weekly. It has two hotels, Club and Royal, a pro-
visional school, 3 stores, blacksmith’s, baker, butcher, and
saddlers’ shops, and police barracks and court-house combined.
Grazing district. It is on the main route south for all stock
going to southern markets. Population (census 1891) 135.
FORTITUDE VALLEY (97° 28' 8. lat., 153° 4' E. long.)
(generally known as “The Valley”) formerly a marshy, low-
lying flat, much of which has now been filled up, situated one
miIeNNE. of the General Post-office, is the largest and most im-
portant suburb of Brisbane, to which it is connected by a continu-
ous row of shops. It takes its name from the circumstance that
a number of immigrants from the Fortitude, one of the first of the
immigrant ships sent out by Dr. (Lang, settled here (January 21,
1849). It returns two membersto tbe Legislative Assembly, and
two members to the Municipal Council. Places of worship; Church
of England (Trinity), St. Michael and All Angels (New Farm),
Roman Catholic church (St. Patrick's), and Presbyterian church.
There are also four chapels belonging to various denomina-
tions ; the largest of which is the Wesleyan chapel ; schools in
connection with the Board of Education (boys’ No. 37, and
girls’ No. 239); Roman Catholic boys’, girls’, and infants’schools ;
an Oddfellows’ hall, used for public meetings, to which is attached
a free reading-room and library of 1,748 volumes; a Foresters' hall,
one of the largest places of assembly in the suburbs; a second
Oddfellows’ hall, in Wickham Street; branches of the
Queensland National Bank, Commercial Bank of Sydney,
and N. S. Wales Banks ; and post, money-order, telegraph,
and savings bank office, a substantially erected building.
The building of the Queensland National Bank is a very
striking edifice, the front being terra-cotta work in the
Italian style. The residence of the Roman Catholic Arch-
bishop, Dr. Dunne, is situated here, a new and handsome
building, also a convent of the Sisters of Mercy, in con-
nection with which is an industrial school (St. Ann’s), a
new and imposing building, in which are taught lace-making,
needlework, etc. The Convent School is the largest and most
commodious ladies’ boarding school in Brisbane, and is a
prominent edifice from its elevation aod size ; it also com-
mands the finest view of the city and environs ; there is also a
convent and large school under the control of the Christian
Brothers, situated on Gregory Terrace, with a branch school for
poorer scholars in Boundary Street. A public swimming
bath has been erected in Wickham Street; it is supplied
with salt water. On Bowen Terrace and on the elevated
points on the banks of the river are numerous villa resi-
dences. From here fine views around Brisbane may be ob-
tained. On the outskirts of the Valley are many residences
of wealthy citizens, merchants, and others. The hospital, and
children’s hospital, are also here situated ; opposite the former
are the Acclimatization Society’s garden. The grounds of the
National Association adjoin those of the Acclimatization Society.
The building known as the Exhibition was destroyed by fire in
June, 1888. This has been replaced by a large and hand-
some brick building with spacious concert hall attached,
which has one of the finest organs in the colonies. It is
proposed to use this building as a museum. The grounds
are well provided with stalls and sheds for stock of all
kinds, and in the centre is a large ring used for the show of
cattlej and also for cricket, football, and other sports. The
Rugby Football Association have grounds on the Bowen
Bridge Road, where the principal football matches are played.
There has been erected on the Brisbane River at the old
race-course, New Farm, a sugar refinery fitted with the
latest and most improved machinery. Various factories,
including two tobacco, are now carried on in the Valley.
The main northern road runs through the Valley. About
three miles distant from the post-office is the raco-cour.se, con-
nected by rail with Brisbane. The race-course is reputed
to be one of the prettiest in Australia, the grand stand,
training ground, and horse accommodation being very com-
plete. The line to Sandgate and the Main North Coast Line to
Gympie, Maryborough, and Bundaberg passes through the
valley, with a station at Brunswick Street where provision
is made for goods traffic, not only from the shipping but
from all the Northern ports; it has the largest and most
complete goods depot in Brisbane. A branch has also been
extended to Bulimba, where wharves are erected, to
enable the large ocean steamers to receive and discharge
their cargoes. The bulk of the inhabitants belong to the
working class, nearly all of whom reside on their own free-
holds. Considerable improvement have been made in the
drainage of the Valley. On the river bank within the boundaries
the Valley are the works of the Brisbane Gas Company, also of
several wharves. Some four miles further down the river are
the Queensland Meat Export Works erected in 1892 which are
now in full work and can dispose of 100 head of bullocks per
day. Steamers for England berth alongside and take in the
frozen meat, a trade that is being largely developed. Population,
included in that of Brisbane, is 15,955.
GATTON (27° 40 S. lat., 152° 17' E. long.), counties of Churchill
and Cavendish, electorate of Lockyer, a post town, with telegraph
station, money-order and savings bank office on Lockyer’s
Creek, and the S. and W. Railway, 01 miles W. of Brisbane,
337 feet above sea level. Hotels; the Royal, the Wilmot, and
: the Brian Born. State school (No. 41). Places of worship;
1 Episcopalian, Roman Catholic, Congregationalist, and Pres-
j byterian ; the Congregationalists and Roman Catholics
have resident ministers. Bank : Royal. The Government
i buildings comprise the railway station, courthouse, and
I State school, and there is a school of arts, with 773 vols.,
and Roman Catholic school. Gatton has four general stores,
two blacksmiths, two butchers, and two saddlers, and
the usual accompaniments of a country township, with a
racecourse and recreation ground. The Government Agri-
, cultural College is in the vicinity. It is surrounded by
| an extensive pastoral and farming district, from which large
quantities of agricultural produce—potatoes, maize, lucerne,
and vegetables—are obtained. Orangeries and vineyards are
also in full yielding. The country is open forest plain with
black soil on sandstone rock. Formation : carboniferous. The
Tararnpa Divisional Board has its office and holds its meetings
at Gatton ; the Marsupial Board for the district also meets here.
Population, 241 (census 1891).
GAYNDAH (25° 38' S. lat.. 151° 37' E. long.), county of
Mackenzie, electorate of Burnett, a small municipal township
(proclaimed November 28, 1866), with post, telegraph, savings
bank, and money-order office, 80 miles W. of Maryborough,
and about 200 miles NW. of Brisbane. The railway (Maryborough
and Gayndah) is now open to Woowoonga, 30 miles dis-
tant. It starts from Mungarr, on the Maryborough-Gympie
Railway. Coaches run to Shamrock, fare 15s. ; Mount
Perry, 20s ; Eidsvold, 205.; and Degilbo (35 miles). It is the
capital of the Burnett district, and is prettily situated on the
south bank of the Burnett River, and surrounded by hills,
“ To the traveller approaching from the east the first view of
the town is attractive ; from the last of many hills the main
street may be seen stretching away for nearly two miles along
the windings of tbe great river; most of the houses have
kept the line of march along the western road, but few
having ventured up the steep slope of One Tree Hill which domir
nates the town on the left.” It has a school of art, with
library of about 1,776 vols., hospital, a school (No. 42),
a court-house, town-hall, and police-quarters. Hotels
Club, North Star, Queensland, and the Sportsman’s Arms>
a new two storey building. An Episcopal church (St. Mat-
thew’s) is the principal place of worship. There is also a
Roman Catholic chapel (St. Joseph’s). The Gayndah and
Burnett District Hospital is a fine building, prettily situated
at the entrance of the town from McKenzie’s Bridge, capable
of accommodating 30 patients. Within the limits of the
municipality (31 square miles) are 20 miles of streets and 180 dwell-
ings ; ratable value of property £33,037. All kinds of
cereals and vegetables grow moderately, and the Land Commis-
sioner considers that the soil about Gayndah is exceptionally good
for farming, fruit- -grape, orange, fig, and peach—growing, and for
vegetables. Wheat is being cultivated largely, and grows
well; the soil and chmate are reported as admirably suiting
the orange tribe. The district is also well suited for pastoral
purposes. Most of the land within 15 miles of the town is reported
to be of the finest description, with plenty of water available for
irrigation, requiring only capital and energy to ensure the
prosperity of town and district. In June, 1886, gold was dis-
covered about 80 miles NE. from Gayndah, at a place called
Mount Shamrock, by F. G. Simpson, John Roberts, and John
Woodyatt. The locale is at the junction of the Chowey and
Didcot Creeks, about 3 miles BW. of Degilbo head station.
Chlorination works have been erected here, the plant is exten-
sive and complete. Silver has also been found in this
neighbourhood, but most of the claims taken tip for silver
have been abandoned on account principally of the diffi-
culty of treating the ores, and the low price of silver. A ne w
mining company has been floated to work the British Empire
claim, about fifteen miles from Gayndah. At Dykehead, some
65 miles W., some promising ree's have been discovered,
and are now being prospected. Valuable slate beds have
been found at Mount Debateable. At Eidsvold, about
50 miles W. of Gayndah, gold reefs have been found, which
promise well. At Paradise, 30 miles E. from Gayndah, are
promising reefs. The Rawbelle Divisional Board and the
Marsupial Board meet here. In the neighbourhood are the
following stations : —Wetheron, Yenda, Ideraway, Mount
Debateable, Mundubbera, Coonambulo, Cooranga, and Ban Ban.
Population, 613 (census 1891) ; now about 500.
GEORGETOWN (18° 22' S. lat., 143° 82' B. long.), a post
town, savings Dank, money-order and telegraph station (county
of Gilbert, electorate of Burke), on the west bank of the Ethe-
ridge river, a tributary of the Einasleigh, about 1,100 miles
NW. of Brisbane, 360 from Townsville NW,, 225 from Nor-
manton 8., 238 (postal) from Cardwell, and 102 miles
from Croydon Railway station. The south end of the
township is close to the confluence of the Etheridge with
the Delaney River. There are several hotels, the principal
being Royal, Australian, Salutation, Welcome and Queensland ;
branch bank of N.S. Wales, a hospital, courthouse, Divisional
Board’s Office, warden's office, police barracks, post and telegraph,
office, three general stores, besides Chinese stores, and several
tradesmen’s premises. District court sittings are held
here twice a year. State school (No. 178). Religious
services are held occasionally by visiting clergymen from
Croydon. Georgetown is the meeting-place of three mails,
viz., from Townsville, Normanton, and Herberton. The
Gilbert and Etheridge district comprises an area of 12,000 square
miles. The principal claims are the Cumberland (17 miles dis
tant), Durham (6 miles distant), and Golden Crown, situated at
Durham township ; West Spiro, and St. George, situated in
Georgetown. In the district copper and tin are found;
41
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
For—Geo]


also galena largely impregnated with silver, bismuth and
other minerals, and marble. In 1893 the Mineral Commis-
«ioner reported there is scarcely a square mile of country
in the Etheridge district that does not contain some mineral or
other. “The Rocky,” a locality about 8 miles south of George-
town, is at present the most flourishing part of the goldfield.
Long Lines of payable reefs are now being worked, and the
population is increasing. A very fine mining exhibit will
illustrate this district at the Paris Exhibition. Lane’s
Creek is a mining camp, about 20 miles E. of Georgetown.
It has one crushing-mill, and all the usual adjuncts
to a small township. The principal claims are the Bril-
liant, National, Cosmopolitan, Calliope and Jenolan. Cas-
tleton, formerly known as the O’Donoghue, is a mining
centre, about 33 miles S. from Georgetown. The principal
claim is the Big Reef, so called on account of its immense size.
Owing to the destruction of the dam by the floods the mill
was closed during the greater part of 1896. Charleston
has 5 hotels—one to each stamper, a state school and court of
[petty sessions is held here. The cyanide works are being
successfully worked, the tailings giving a yield of one ounce to
the ton. A considerable area of country on the Gilbert and its
tributaries has been taken up for pastoral occupation. The
Government Geologist, reporting of this district in April, 1887,
savs: “ The Etheridge gold-field more than any other in the
colony requires the introduction of capital and a denser popu-
lation. The mines being scattered over so wide an area
require a battery for each, whereas if a number were at
work within reasonable distance one central plant would be
sufficient for all. Some of the mundic ore is found to be very
■difficult of treatment by ordinary appliances.” The presence of
sulphurets, notably of lead, interposes great difficulty in the
profitable treatment of ores, some of which under the exhaustive
treatment at Footscray melting works have yielded at
the rate of 20 oz. to the ton. Coaches run to" Herborton
and Port Douglas, fare 205., Herberton to Georgetown,
£5, Georgetown to Croydon, £2. Owing to its elevated
■situation, about 1,000 feet above sea level, Georgetown
is reported to enjoy a salubrity unknown almost in
the coast towns, though a mild form of fever prevails after
the wet season. About 40 miles NE. from Georgetown, near
the Einasleigh River, hot springs are found to exist, boiling
up into geysers. In 1889 they were visited and reported on by
the Government geologist. At present they are quiet springs,
though in the past it is believed that at rare intervals they were
active geysers. The water, which is spoken of as being inde-
scribably nasty, has been analyzed by the Government analyst,
who considers it a chlorinated sulphuretted water, and possessing
similar medicinal properties to that of Harrogate, but in a
.lesser degree. Formation : granite. The Institutions include
Etheridge Lodge, E.C., and Buffalo Lodge. Population (census
3891), 433, now 442, of whom 77 were Chinese. Newspaper ;
Handle Miner.
Bell, Commercial, Young Australia, Royal, and Railway.
It is one of the oldest places on the coast, having been
settled in 1846, at the instance of the late Mr. W.
E. Gladstone, and up to the time of Separation, had
a Government Residency appointed and maintained by the
Sydney authorities. It possesses a flue harbour, reputed to be
the best in Queensland, spacious, deep, and well sheltered by
Facing and Curtis Islands, and the Auckland creek at this
point empties itself. A jetty, named by a late Governor,
Sir A. Musgrave, the Victoria pier, has been erected, at which
there is 26 feet of water at low springs, but vessels of large tonnage
can also berth at the wharves in the creek. It was proclaimed
a municipality on February 1, 1863; is governed by a mayor and
five councillors, and contains 5 miles of streets, 168 dwellings, and
in area of 81 square miles. Estimated total value of ratable
property, £53,329. There is a money-order office, savings bank,
and a telegraph station, post office, customs house and bonded
store, and court house,branches of the Joint Stock and Commercial
Banks, a school ot art, with reading-room and library of 2,299
volumes, a town-hall, a national school (No. 44), eight stores, two
blacksmiths, a coach-builder, several milliners, builders, a
fruiterer, and a book and stationery establishment in connection
with the Observer. Places of Worship; Church of England,
Presbyterian, Roman Catholic church and Salvation Army.
Gold in quantity is found in the neighbourhood, and
manganese. At the Cania gold-field there is some mining. Gold
has been discovered at the Boyne and Mount Jacob. Maize,
potatoes, hay and fruit are grown in the district. Large
numbers of cattle are shipped from time to time, and here
the Gladstone Meat Company have their works. The
j Institutions include a free Masonic lodge, Gladstone lodge, M.O.
Oddfellows, Foresters, football, cricket, tennis, and turf clubs.
The bridge over the Boyne is the principal work on the railway.
Total length of bridge 2,196 feet, being one of the longest in the
: colony. At Callide Creek, about 62 miles from Gladstone, coal
I has been discovered. The assistant geologist considers it a good
steam coal, and estimates the total weight of available coal at
i 50 million tons, but its distance from a port is a great drawback.
[ Population 416 : of the census district, 2,306. Newspapers :
) Gladstone Observes • and Gladstone Advocate.
GOLDEN VALLEY. See Croydon
GOLDSBOROUGH (17° 2’ S. lat., 145° 50' E. long.), a
raining centre on the Mulgrave gold-field, 26 miles from Cairns.
The township is most picturesquely placed in the valley of the
Mulgrave, from which river it is but a short distance, and is
built upon a fine creek which runs into that river. Before the
discovery of tin at Herborton there were about 100 miners on the
field, and several of the claims were paying fairly, but there is
little doing now, though it is believed that with proper and
energetic working there would be profitable returns. At six
miles distant is the Upper Camp, where reefs were worked.
GO OB UE. RUM, a settlement, with a receiving office, about
41 miles from North Bundaberg (with which it is connected by
a good road) inhabited by farmers, timber-getters, and cattle
rearers. There is a school (No. 407), and an Episcopal place of
worship on the Kolan Road. The country around is thickly
timbered and overrun with native animals dingo, kangaroo,
and wallaby. Sugar-cane, maize, pine-apple, and sweet potatoes
grow well. Population about 100.
GOODNA (27° 37' 8. lat., 152° 56' E. long.), a railway station
on the Brisbane and Ipswichline and the Brisbane River, 15 miles
W. of Brisbane, 43 ft above sea-level. It has a post office, money
order and savings bank office, and is also in telegraphic com-
munication with the metropolis. It is in the county of Stanley
and electorate of Bundamba. Hotels: Royal Mail, Redbank,
and Railway. Places of worship : Congregational, Primitive
Methodist, Episcopal (St. Albans) and Roman Catholic
There is a primary school (No. 45). The Woogaroo Lunatic
Asylum, the principal asylum for the insane in the colony,
is here. District is noted for its coal-mines, has good building
stone and a considerable extent of land under tillage, prin-
cipally for maize. A sugar-mill was at Redbank Plains, about
three" miles distant, but sugar-growing has now been dis-
continued ; there is also a saw-mill. Industries: Brickmaking,
timber-getting and wood-cutting, and there are several trades-
men. The chemical works at Redbank were partially destroyed
in the disastrous floods of February, 1893, and the whole town
suffered severely. Population, 291 (census 1891).
GEEALDTON. See Johnstone River.
GIN GIN (25° 0' S. lat., 152° 0' E. long.), a post town and
railway-station on the Bundaberg Line, and creek of the same
.name, 29 miles from Bundaberg. It has a telegraph station, a
branch of the Government Savings Bank, a state school
(No. 298), a court-house, lock-up, and police quarters, Presby-
terian place of worship, mechanics’ institute, with library of 349
vols., and two hotels —the Queen's and Gin Gin. Among the
•social institutions are race and cricket clubs, quadrille assembly
;and Oddfellows’ lodge. Agricultural and general farming and
■dairying district. Sugar is also grown, and there is some gold
.mining. Much timber is also sent away. Population, 148
{census 1891). Much increased since.
GIROFLA. See Chillagoe.
GILBERTON (19° 15' 8. lat. and 143° 14' E. long.), a
receiving office, about midway between Cardwell, on the east
coast of the colony, and Normanton, on the north west (Gulf
■of Carpentaria), each being about 225 miles away. (Burke
electorate). It is distant from Brisbane about 870 miles
NW., by steamer 110 miles from Georgetown, less as the
crow flies, and 240 W. from Townsville, which is the port,
it is about 130 miles from Hughenden railway station. Part of
the town is situated on the south bank of the Upper Gilbert
• River, which is here nearly 200 yards wide. The locality is
about 2,000 feet above sea-level, but the highest places are
■Christmas Hill, Mount Hogan, and the head of Percy River.
The place comprises one European store, a receiving post
■office, one boarding-house, one butchery, a 10-head battery,
and one Chinaman’s garden. Early in 1897 it was reported
■ to have ceased to be a reefing centre. Formation : slate, granite,
whist, quartz mica, sandstone, felspar, and diorite. The
regular mails of Pentland and Georgetown run from Lynd-
ihurst by Mount Hogan and Gilberton weekly. There is a
good road between Hughenden and Georgetown by Oak
Park Station. At Mount Hogan there is an improved machine
with 10 head of stamps and 8 grinding pans. Population, 20
.European miners and a few Chinamen. Two stores, one butcher,
two Chinese gardens, a receiving office and police station. At
Upper Percy River there is a crushing mill, a public-house and
store, a receiving post-office, a butcher, and two Chinese
gardens. At Christmas Hill, 10 miles E. from Mount Hogan,
there are three mining claims.
GLADSTONE (23° 52' S. lat., 151" 17' E. long.), a sea-
5 port. 1 contim
Part of 1 timber-
GOONDIWINDI (28° 33'S. lat.. 150° 21' E. long.), electorate
of Carnarvon, a municipal town with post office, money-order and
savings bank office and telegraph station, in the county of Marsh,
and electorate of Carnarvon, on the borders of New South
Wales and Queensland, lying distant from Brisbane about 200
miles BW., and from Warwick, 140 miles, and situated on the
north bank of the Barwon or Macintyre river. It was pro-
claimed Oct. 12, 1888. Municipal area 5| square miles, 123
dwellings, 27 miles of roads and streets. Ratable value of pro-
perty £36,620. A mail coach runs bi-woekly to Warwick, faro
50s. There are five hotels. Commercial, Royal, Queen’s Arms,
Queensland, and Victoria, five stores, and several tradesmen’s
premises, a court-house. Episcopal, Presbyterian and Roman
Catholic churches, a primary school (No. 46). a branch of
the N.S. Wales Bank, Masonic lodge, Oddfellows’ lodge
(M.U.), a school of art, with library of 795 vols., a jockey
club, divisional hall, hospital, police quarters and there
is here a public crossing - place by bridge across the
Macintyre River to N.S. Wales. It is the chief crossing
port, railway station in the county of Clinton, electorate of Port ! Macintyre River to N.S. Wales. It is the chief crossing
■Curtis, about 328 miles NE. of Brisbane, with which it is now in I place for stock from Central Queensland to N.S. Wales. The
railway connection, and 91 SW. of Rockhampton. A bi- large bridge connecting the two colonies was finished in June,
weekly service is carried on by the A.U.B.N. Co. from 1880, and is called the Goondiwindi and Border Bridge. It has
Brisbane and Rockhampton. Hotels : Metropolitan, Blue been built at the expense of both colonies, but on the respon-
42
[Ger—Goo
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


sibility of Queensland. An inspector of customs for N.B. Wales
is stationed here. Two saw-mills are in the vicinity. Teamsters
go regularly to Cambooya and Warwick. The soil is very suitable
for growing cotton, oranges, grapes, and other fruit, and no
doubt if the country were properly irrigated by the noble stream
running through it, both horticultural and agricultural opera-
tions to a large extent could be carried on. Formation:
alluvial. Population, 510 (census 1891), now about 800 ; inclu-
sive of district, now about 1,900. Newspaper: Mclntyre Herald.
O-RANITE CREEK (19° 32' 8. lat., 146° 16' E. long.), a
tin-mining locality in the Palmer district, opened in 1876 by
Whitehead and Co. and Messrs. Tracey. The produce of the
mines has been considerable.
GREEN HILLS, a new gold-field proclaimed April 23,
1896, situate about eighteen miles from Cumberland. It has
been the scene of a considerable rush of miners, and several
fine specimens have been found, as many as sixty to seventy
varying from 8 to 180 ozs. The Warden in 1897-98 reported
that the locality had produced a fair quantity of gold, although
the season (drought) had been greatly against prospecting for
alluvial. Some rich specimen reefs had been found. Over
2,000 ozs. of alluvial had been won, and two prospectors had
“dollied” from the reefs about 500 and 400 ozs. of gold
respectively.
GREGORY (15°59' 8. lat., 144° 16' B. long.),co. of Chelmsford,
about 3 miles SE. from Maytown, is on Queen Creek, on the road
to Byerstown. It was formerly known as the “ Queen of the
North” reef. It has one crushing plant, a Miners’lnstitute,
with library of 615 vols. It is the chief reefing district of the
Palmer. Population 29 Europeans, 5 Chinese.
GYMPIE (26° 12' 8. lat., 152° 38' E. long.), a gold-fields town-
ship and municipality, with a money-order office, savings
bank and telegraph station, in the county of March, prettily
situated on the side of a range of hills on the upper waters
of the river Mary, 107 miles N. of Brisbane, and 54 miles
(61 by rail) 8. of Maryborough. It is described as “a large
township, extending nearly 3 miles N. to 8., consisting of three
distinct portions, Gympie, the One Mile, and Monkland.” The
latter part is extending rapidly, owing to rich discoveries in the
lower levels. There is rail communication between Gympie,
Maryborough and Brisbane. The existence of gold was made
kn iwn in October, 1867, by Mr. James Nash (after whom the
town was first named Nashville, but it was afterwards altered
to Gympie, the native name for a certain kind of stinging tree
growing in the district), and the discovery soon attracted a
large number of miners and others. In the following month
(Nov. 8) the first quartz reef, the Lady Mary, was opened up by
Messrs. Pollock and Laurence. The Caledonian reef was dis-
covered a day or two later by Mr. Goodchap. White’s and
Walker’s gullies were found and worked soon afterwards.
Immediately after the finds at the Deep Creek, the One Mile
Township was formed. “The richest workings were in Nash’s,
Sailor’s, White’s. Walker’s, and Nuggetty Gullian, and on Deep
Creek nuggets of large size were often found, the largest being
one of 804 ounces, which was picked up in the neighbourhood of
Sailor’s Gully. The alluvial gold was easily worked, as only in a
few exceptional cases was it more than a few feet below
the surface.” There are nownumerous reefs being worked ; those
giving best results being the Smithfield, Phoenix, Pile, Glanmire,
Oriental, Victory, and Scottish Reefs; the principal claims are
—Crown and Phoenix, No. 1 North Phoenix, No. 4 and No. 5
North Phoenix, Wilmot Extended, No. 2 Great Eastern, No. 1
North Glanmire, Phoenix Golden Pile, North Smithfield,
South Glanmire, and Monkland, Oriental and Glanmire,
2 South Great Eastern, Australasian, Columbia-Smithfield.
Scottish Gympie Gold Mines, 1 North Oriental and Glanmire,
South New Zealand Junction, 1 North Columbia-Smithfield,
Columbia Consolidated, 1 North Victory, 3 North Smith-
field, 1 North Smithfield, 7 South Lady Mary, Smithfield and
Phoenix Golden Pile, 6 North Phoenix, North Oriental and
Glanmire, 3 North Phoenix, 1 South Great Eastern, 1 North
Great Eastern, 2 North Oriental and Glanmire, and Great New
Zealand. The most successful mines in 1897 were:—North Smith-
field, 9,309 ozs. : Columbia-Smithfield, 16,931 ozs. ; Phoenix ,
Golden Pile, 4,339 ozs.; 1 North Phoenix, 3,860 ozs. ; 4 North
Phoenix, 9,001 ozs. ; No. 2 Great Eastern, 5,593 ozs.; Oriental and
Glanmire, 3,449 ozs. ; 5 North Phoenix, 3,782 ozs. ; Smithfield
and Phoenix Golden Pile, 5,625 ozs. ; the Brennan’s Caledonia
crushed 89J tons of stone for the phenomenal yield of 1,238 ozs.
The return’s of the field for 1897 were 95,422 ozs. of gold from
62,900 tons of stone. Up to the end of 1897 the total yield
had been 2,204,573 ozs., of a total value of £7,716,005 10s.
The dividends paid in !1897 amounted to £168,300. As
evidence of the permanency of the field the following are the
results of the first-half of the year 1898 Stone crushed,
40,158 tons ; gold yield, 50,110; dividends declared, £78,233 ;
all of which show large increases over the first-half of 1897.
The largest individual producer was the North Smithfield, with
5,978 ozs., closely followed by the Columbia-Smithfield, with
4,955 ozs. The eastern and south-eastern ends of the field are
now attracting much attention, and new shafts are going down,
and the field is extending in all directions. The most valuable |
and best known part of the Gympie field lies on the eastern
side of the Mary. The deepest shafts are the Aurelia shaft,
on the Great Monkland, 1,500 feet; Scottish Gympie Gold
Mines, about l,soofeet; Australasian, about|l,2oo feet; Smithfield
and Phoenix Golden Pile about 1,200 feet ; Inglewood United,
1,215 feet; the United Smithfield, 1,400 feet; Wilmot Extended,
1,120 feet; and No. 1 North Phoenix, 1,200 feet. The
Australian Joint-Stock Bank, the Bank of New South Wales,
the Queensland National Bank, the Union and Royal Banks
I have branches here, and there are agencies of the principal
1 Insurance Companies. The town possesses a good hospital
(a handsome and roomy two-story brick building with
accommodation for 60 in-door patients), a school of arts,
with a library of over 4,000 volumes, one theatre —the Royal—
the Olympic, Masonic, Hibernian, and Oddfellows' halls, a court-
house,a powder magazine, several public offices, and a building in-
cluding post and telegraph offices. A school of mines and
mining museum was started, but it is now amalgamated
with the School of Arts. The places of worship are St.
Peter’s and St. Andrew’s (Church of England), St. Patrick’s
{Roman Catholic), stone building), Presbyterian, Baptist,
and Methodist chapels and Salvation Army barracks. There
are eight State schools, two Roman Catholic, and several
private schools. The Queensland National Bank, Royal
Bank, Bank of New South Wales, and the A.J.B. Bank
! have handsome brick buildings for their banking houses,
j Hotels: Northumberland, Commercial, Freemasons, Queen’s,
Exchange, and abouty thirty others. Sittings of the district
court are held three times a year. There are lodges and tents
in connection with Temperance, Masonic, and several other
societies. A Stock Exchange was established in 1884. A gas
company was formed in 1881, and gas was laid on in Septem-
ber, 1883. The Warden reported early in 1897 that in his
opinion the future prospects of the field never looked
brighter.. The country surrrounding Gympie, although but
little prospected, is known to abound in minerals; cop-
I per, silver, antimony, cinnabar, bismuth, and nickel
■ having been found in payable quantities. At Miva, about
1 40 miles to the north, extensive coal-beds have been discovered,
but remain as yet unworked. Indications of the existence of
1 coal have also been found in the Noosa district near Lake
Weyba. A company worked dredges in the Mary river, but the
results were not sufficiently encouraging, so_ opera-
tions were discontinued. The area of the municipality
(proclaimed June 26, 1880) is 3,840 acres, having 2,156
dwellings, 66 miles of roads and streets, and property
of the ratable value of £245,028. The Government
geologist is of opinion that the Gympie beds belong
rather to the lower carboniferous than to the Devonian
formation, to which they are generally attributed. The rocks
are chiefly grey shales, black pyritous shales, greywackes,_
i sandstones, grit, and conglomerates. The latter are masses of
pebbles and boulders suggestive of a volcanic origin. Popu-
lation of the municipality, 11,750; of census district about
14,000. The Gympie Tunes, the Gympie Miner and Truth are the
local papers.
HALIFAX, a post, telegraph' savings bank, and money-
order office, near the mouth of the Lower Herbert River, about
seven miles from Dungeness, and twelve miles from Ingham, to
which conveyances run. Bank : Queensland National. News-
paper : Northern Aye. Further information of the district will
be found under Ingham and Dungeness.
HARRISVILLE (27° 50' S. lat., 152° 40' E. long.), a railway
station on the Ipswich and Fassifern line, lies at an elevation
of 175 feet, is 19 miles from Ipswich, and 43 W. from Brisbane.
The line is completed to Dugandan. It has a telegraph
i station, money-order office savings bans, court-house. Shite
school (No. 621) school of arts, with library of 424 vols.,
hotel (Railway), Episcopal Church (Bt. John's), Presbyterian
j Church and Masonic lodge. Industry: Trelawney cheese factory.
It is in the county of Churchill, electorate of Fassifern, and
j is situated on the Warrill creek, a tributary of the Bremer.
; Agricultural and pastoral district.
HELICON. —A refreshment station of the S. and W. Rail-
way, 72 miles from Brisbane, having telegraph and savings bank
facilities. In the neighbourhood are stone quarries and also the
noted spa water springs.
HENDON (Co. Merivale) (28° 2'B. lat., 151° 57' E. long.), a
railway and telegraph station on the southern line, 154 miles
S.W. from Brisbane, lying on high ground 1,500 ft. above sea-
level. The line to Allora, opened in 1897, branches off here.
State school (No. 143). Hotel : Railway. Population about 180.
HERBERTON (17° 24' 8. lat., 145° 26' E. long.), county
Cardwell, police district of Herberton, electorate of VVootha-
kata, a tin-mining township of seventeen years’ standing. It
is situated on the Wild River, about 3,000 feet above
sea-level, 85 miles SW. of Port Douglas, 35 miles from
the Mareeba railway station, and 55 W. by 8. of the port of
Cairns (about 85 miles by railway route). Tin was first dis-
covered by Mr. W. Jack and party in April, 1880, though stream
tin was found by John Newell in November, 1879. There
are 6 hotels—Post Office, Cosmopolitan (both 2 stories), and
Royal, and three others—all built of cedar. It has a money-order
office, telegraph station, and savings bank. The road from
Port Douglas passes along the western bank of the Barron
River until it reaches a point 25 miles from Herberton,
when it bears 88W., crossing first-class pastoral forest
country, and passing through a belt of ’rich scrub containing
thousands of acres of level agricultural land covered with cedar
and other valuable timbers, and passing through the town-
ship of Atherton, 12 miles from Herberton. The prospector’s
selection of 60 acres,containing several valuable working tin-lodes,
adjoins the township, which is situated on a granite ridge on
the eastern bank of the Wild River, which is one of the principal
branches of the Herbert. The tin-country, lode and alluvial, of
which Herberton is the capital town, extends for an occupied
distance of 40 miles SW., and several miles in each other direc-
tion, which includes the town of Watsonville, seven miles west,
Montalbion 18 miles W., and the mining townships at Irvine
bank and Return Creek, 17 and 25 miles distant respectively, also
Koorboora. There are also extensive alluvial tin workings on the
43
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Gra-Her]


Tate and Quartz Hill on the Georgetown road. The principal
mines are the Great Northern Freehold, at Herberton, the Great
Western New North Australian mines near Watsonville, and the
Vulcan Tin mine at Irvinehank. The country around is high and
dry, with, during the greater part of the year, plenty of grass
and water. In the town are two large stores, and some smaller
ones. The main street, Grace Street, is a wide thoroughfare.
A large hall for public assemblies, the property of the
School of Arts (library of 1,25 b vols.), Divisional Board’s Hall,
a State school (No. 254), Episcopal, Salvation Army, Primitive
Methodist, Presbyterian and Roman Catholic places of
worship, court-house, police barracks, gaol, and hospital are
amongst the institutions of the town. Banks : Queensland
National, Bank of Australasia. There are Masonic and
Oddfellows’ Lodges. There are three saw-mills in the
Barron, about 10 miles from Herberton. The principal
traffic is with Cairns, via Mareeba railway terminus, to and from
which Cobb’scoach runs twice weekly, and also a line of buggies ;
although a portion goes to Port Douglas. Coach also runs to
Georgetown, fare £5, and to Croydon, £B. There are crush-
ing machines at work, beside a silver and copper-smelter and
tin-smelting works. Fresh lode discoveries are of frequent
occurrence, and one section of the district—l 4 miles from
Herberton—is being worked for silver-lead ; while valuable
copper-lodes are found in all directions, notably in the
Chillagoe district, about 85 miles west from Herberton, the
principal being Boomerang, Griffith, Calcifer, and Girofla.
At Irvine-bank are tin-crushing and smelting works.
During 1897 there were turned out from here 935 tons
of tin, valued at £27,967. The silver produced for
the district amounted to 32,507 oz., and the copper to 153 tons.
The total value of metal produced £41,714 (including 2,521
representing the lead contents). The deep alluvial lead near
Herberton, which has been worked for a length of two miles,
and has turned out 600 tons of tin, is still being energetically
worked and prospected. For the year 1896 the Warden reported
that the past year had not shown any general tendency towords
inn roveraent, and silver mining for a time had been at a stand-
still, but copper mining had shown some activity. The water
supply of Herberton is derived from the Wild River. District
court is held twice a year. Eureka Creek is a large mining
centre, as is also a rising site at what is known as Baker’s
Camp, between Watsonville and Irvine-bank. The Evelyn table-
land and Upper Barron Valley are agricultural centres. Hot
mineral springs exist at Nettle Creek 25 miles from
Herberton. There are three of them, the principal one being in
the bed of the Creek, and the other two on the bank. The
temperature varies from 165° to 185°. These waters are said to
have wonderful medicinal properties, and the cures of several
confirmed invalids suffering from rheumatism are reported. It
is expected that when the railway is completed to this district
the hot springs will be much frequented. The population of
the town and suburbs was 1,175 (700 in 1897) ; and of the district,
of which it is the centre (census 1891), 3,477, and 344 Chinese.
Newspaper: the Wild River Times. Formation: granite and
porphyryprincipally.
HOMESTEAD, a railway and telegraph station, 127 miles
distant from Townsville, and 45 from Charters Towers. Reefs
are reported to be in the vicinity, and some mines are at work.
HORN ISLAND, one of the islands of the Prince of
Wales’s groups, off the apex of the Cape York peninsula, has
lately come into notice through the discovery of gold by Smith
and party in 1894, since which time the field has been more or
less worked. During 1897 1,180 tons of stone were crushed
for 850 ozs. 15 dwts. of gold. Population 18.
HOWARD (25° 30'8. lat., 152° 28' E. long.), a coal-mining
town, and the commercial centre of the Burrum coal-field, 18
miles by railway NW. of Maryborough, in the county of Cook,
division of Isis, electorate of Burrum, and police district of Mary-
borough, situated about one mile west of the Burrum River. The
coal mines are at Torbanlea, about 3 miles S.B. of Howard; there
is a branch railway line to the pit. There are two shafts at
the mines. One is worked and the other used for ventilation.
The monthly output is about 2,500 tons. The pits belong to the
Isis Investment Company. There are here two general stores
two hotels, and several small cottages. A State school and
teachers’ residence on the north side of the railway line
opposite the Torbanlea station have been erected. The
Queensland Colliery Company have two shafts working;
there is a railway siding to the pit. The coal is reported
to be little inferior to the Newcastle coal, with a
probability of its heating properties improving when a
greater depth is reached. Under energetic management
the Queensland Colliery Company have developed splen-
didly. A new shaft with 7 feet clean seam of coal has
been opened. The daily output is about 40 trucks, or 250 tons.
The supply is practically unlimited. The coal is of excellent
quality both for gas and steam. Walker’s orangery has about
4,000 trees, and Henry Smith’s Sheffield orangery is a splendidly
kept place with nearly 2,000 trees. A deep sea lading port is
only required to make Howard an extensive coaling centre. The
mines are situated about 18 miles from the mouth of the Burrum
River, the bar at the entrance is sand and shale. The depth at
high water is about 14 feet, with safe anchorage and deep water
inside. Vessels of 8 feet draught can run up about 6 miles
to the junction at the Isis River, which flows into the
Burrum. If the channel of the Burrum Bar were deepened to,
say, 8 feet at low water, it is said it would be one of th<>
most useful harbours in the Colony. The Hon. A. C. Gregory and
the late Rev. Tenison-Woods declared that the Burrum coal age
and formation was identical with that of Newcastle, N.S.W. Mr.
Rands, late the assistant Government geologist, is of opinion that
the Burrum coal-field will prove to belong to the Mesozoic
carbonaceous series. The coal-beds have been traced in a NW.
direction from Torbanlea to the Gregory River, a distance of
20 miles. Besides the coal industry, orange growing is about
the only other source of income. The soil on the banks of the
Burrum is particularly adapted for orange culture. The famous
Isis scrub is about 20 miles distant in a NW. direction. Sugar
is largely grown there. A third colliery, the Riverbank, is being
opened up on the bank of the Burrum about 1 j mile S. of
Howard. Brickmaking has been tried, and would be a success-
ful industry if there were a larger demand for the article.
Howard has two hotels : Royal, and Miners ; three churches :
St. Matthew’s Episcopal, Roman Catholic, and Primitive
Methodist. State school (No. 345). Police station, court-
house, post, money-order, savings bank, and telegraph office.
School of Arts with 644 vols., saw mills, stores, bakery, boot-
shops, two butchers, and other tradesmen; Population, 461
(census 1891), now considerably larger.
HUGHENDEN (20° 51' S. lat., 144° 13'E. long.), a post-town
(opened in 1877, and municipality, proclaimed April 30, 1887),with
money-order, savings bank, and telegraph office, picturesquely
situated on the banks of the Flinders River, 90 miles SW. of
Charters Towers (163 miles by the railway line), and 235 J miles
from Townsville, in the county of Douglas, electorate of
Flinders, police district of Bourke. The area of the borough
is 16 square miles, it has 15 miles of streets, 375 houses,
value of ratable property £36,601. The country upon which
the township and station of Hughenden now stand was first
taken up by Messrs. Henry and Devlin in 1863-4. In the
following year Mr. R. Gray, who had been in partnership with
Mr. Henry, purchased the cattle and country from him. It
has fourstores, eight public-houses—Hughenden, Great Western,
Railway, Shamrock, Flinders, London Tavern, Royal, and
Exchange, two saddlers, two wheelwrights, a chemist, two
blacksmiths, and other trades, a State school (No. 388),
private school, a court-house, lock-up and sergeant’s residence,
and a school of arts, with library of 932 vols. The
Queensland National Bank is a substantial and imposing
banking house, also the Bank of Australasia. There is a fine
Episcopal Church (St. Thomas’s), a Roman Catholic church, a
Divisional Board’s Hall capable of seating 400 persons, and
a Masonic Hall (two story building), Lodge Star of the
West, E.C. In the neighbourhood is one saw mill. The
fourth section of the Northern line from Torrens Creek to
Hughenden was opened on October 19, 1887. An extension
of the line towards Winton, 39 miles, is now in progress. Coaches
run to Winton, tare £4 ; Cloncurry, fare £5 ; Richmond, fare £2.
Hughenden is in the centre of a good pastoral district,
and is at present the main watering place for travelling
stock. It will be the principal emporium for wool and station
supplies for the western and north-western portions of the
colony. The country all round is taken up chiefly with
sheep stations. It is on the direct road to the Cloncurry,.
280 miles distant, also on the road to Norman ton, and to Win-
ton, which is a rising township, distant 140 miles in a south-
westerly direction towards the Diamentina River. Three dams
have been constructed on this road, at distances of 20, 50, and
80 miles respectively from Hughenden. The hydraulic engineer
is of opinion that were plenty of water available for irrigation
purposes, some of the country in the vicinity of Hughenden
would become of great value for agricultural purposes. Hughen-
den Divisional Board meets here monthly, and a District Court
is held here twice a year. The water supply is derived from
the Flinders by means of a pulsometer pump. Formation :
Cretaceous, with grey clay shales and sandstone. Population,
1,516 (census 1891), now about 1,500 ; of census district, 2,463.
There is a Dumping company established here, where most
wool from the surrounding district is pressed prior to being
railed to Townsville. Many homestead areas and grazing farms
have been taken up in the vicinity of the town, and owing to
the richness of the soil and close proximity to the Flinders
River, where water can at all times be procured, the selectors
should do well. The town has a Chamber of Commerce, Pastoral
Association, Jockey Chib and Licensed Victuallers’ Association,
Masonic, Oddfellow’s and Foresters’Lodges. Newspaper: Hughen-
den Observer.
HUMPYBONG (or Redcliffe) (27° 14’ S. lat., 153° 8° E.
long.), (county of Stanley), electorate of Moreton, police dis-
trict of North Pine, is situated about 30 miles N. from Brisbane,
(about 18 miles in a direct line), on the shores of Bramble
Bay on the South, Moreton Bay on the E., and Decep-
tion Bay on the North, the southern extremity, Woody
Point being immediately opposite Sandgate ; the northern.
Reef Point, being opposite the North Passage. It
is here that the first settlement in Moreton Bay was
made by Mr. Oxley, who left Sydney in the year 1824 in
the brig Amity, for the purpose of establishing a penal settle-
ment. The locality was found to be ineligible on account of
its supposed unhealthiness, scarcity of water, and other reasons,
and the camp was transferred and re-established where Bris-
bane now stands. The houses of which the original settle-
ment consisted were allowed to go to ruin, or, in the language
of the aboriginal proprietors of the soil, “The humpies were
allowed to go ‘bong.’” Remains of the first settlement of
Queensland are still to be seen. Several villa residences
have bee) i erected in the vicinity; much land has been
cut up into allotments and sold, and the locality is
becoming a very favourite watering-place. A steam-boat now
runs to Brisbane; fare 2s. 6d. The nearest railway station
is North Pine (11 miles) to which a conveyance runs. Agita-
tion is going on for the extension of the railway to
Humpybong. Provisional school (No. 164); (there is also
44
[Horn—Hum
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


a school near Redcliffe Point), x*>st and telegraph office,
also police barracks. Hotels : Great Western, at Woody
Point; Red Cliff Point Hotel and Walsh’s Hotel at Scarborough.
Four general stores, a baker’s and two butchers’ shops. Con-
gregational place of worship. Episcopal services are regularly
held. Masonic Lodge I.C. here. Direct telegraphic communica-
tion with Brisbane is now established, and there is a Govern-
ment savings bank. There is a commodious private boarding
establishment, “Orient House,” owned by Mr. Tubbs
near Redcliffe Point, and there are a temperance hotel and
two boarding-houses at Woody Point. Coaches from the hotels
and boarding-houses meet the steamer. There are two jetties,
one at Woody Point and one at Redcliffe Point. The average
temperature, as compared with Brisbane, is, summer, 8° to 9°
lower ; winter, 8° to 9° higher. Wells have been sunk in diffe-
rent parts of the peninsula, and permanent water obtained.
A magnificent sandy beach extends (with trifling breaks) from
Hay’s Inlet to Reef Point, over 4 miles in length, affording
good bathing and fishing. Population, 203 (census 1891).
IDA, 2 miles N.E. from Maytown, the principal mining
centre for the Ida, Comet, Just in Time, Louisa, and Heart’s
Content reefs having two hotels—Perseverance and Club
House, one store, a Mechanics' Institute with library of 393 vols.,
and 3 crushing machines.
INDOOROOPILLY (27% 29’ S. lat., 153° B. long.), a
postal town, telegraph and railway station, suburban to Bris-
bane (5 miles), in the county of Stanley and electorate of Oxley,
on the Brisbane River. There are here Episcopal, Wesleyan,
Primitive Methodist, and Bible Christian places of worship, a
State school, No. 108, and the Stamford Hotel. At this point
the railway crosses the river on a fine new bridge that replaces
the one destroyed by flood. It consists of two spans 340 feet
each, supported in mid-channel upon a stone central pier, and
cantilevers carry a footbridge for passenger traffic. The total
cost of the bridge was £70,894.
INGHAM (18° 39’ S. lat., 146° 10’ E. long.), atownship, with a
post, savings bank and money-order office, and telegraph station,
on Palm Creek, a branch of the Herbert River (Lower Herbert),
in co. Cardwell, electorate of Herbert, police district of Ingham,
and division of Hinchinbrook. The communication from Bris-
bane is by steamer to Townsville, thence by steamer. Coaches
run to Halifax township and various plantations, and to meet
passengers at the various landings. A railway to Townsville has
been surveyed--distance 66J miles. It has three hotels —Royal,
Day Dawn, Exchange, and Planters’ Retreat, and the Halifax
at Victoria Wharf—branches of the Queensland National and Com-
mercial Banks, Church of England, Wesleyan, and Presbyterian
churches, parsonage, court-house, police barracks, gaol, customs
quarters, hospital, State school (No. 450), also State school at
Halifax, and Provisional schools at Ripple Creek, Macknade, and
Victoria, lands office and tradesmen’s premises, tele-
graph office, three stores, and school of arts with library
of 392 vols. Cardwell is the nearest town, 42 miles
north. The district is largely taken up for sugar-
cane. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company have a large
area of land, the whole of it, with .the exception of 500 acres,
being leased to tenants, who grow cane on contract, and
there are very extensive appliances for the crushing
of cane and manufacture of sugar, equal to about 6,000
tons of sugar for the working season of six months.
Gairloch Plantation, about 5,000 acres, owned by A. 8. Cowley
and Co., is leased in small areas to farmers, who grow cane for
the Colonial Sugar Refining Co., and Ripple Creek. Hamleigh
Plantation, owned by Messrs. Whittingham Bros, of Melbourne,
is situate on the banks of Trebourne Creek. Area about 4,627
acres. Ripple Creek Plantation, owned by Messrs. Wood Bros,
and Boyd. Area about 1,000 acres, situate on the north bank of
the Herbert River, opposite Gairloch. Macknade Plantation,
owned by F. and A. Neame, is situated on the north bank of
the Herbert River, nearly opposite Halifax township. Area
7,194 acres, of which over 2,000 acres are leased to farmers, being
divided up into 27 farms. The mill has treble crushing,
and is capable of turning out 6,000 tons of sugar in the
•season. Since the Pacific Islanders Labour Act has been
extended, large portions of land in the district have
been leased by small farmers for the purpose of growing
cane for the Colonial Sugar Refining Co. At Halifax, about 12
miles from Ingham, there are settled a large number of small
and prosperous farmers who have been growing cane for that
company for some years, and are now extending their cultiva-
tion ; Victoria and Fairford Plantations belong to the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company; and there are other plantations.
The Victoria plantation has a large mill, illuminated at night
by the electric light; it has two steam ploughs, 24 miles of
permanent tramway, 4 locomotives and the latest manufacturing
appliances. An additional sugar mill has been erected at
Ripple Creek plantation. In all upwards of 60 farmers are
engaged in sugar growing, the yearly crop being about
50,000 tons. A Pastoral and Agricultural Society (has been
formed. The Hinchinbrook Divisional Board meets at
Ingham. The extension of the sugar industry induced
a large number of men on the plantations and small farmers
from the Southern colonies, and elsewhere, to select home-
steads, and settle on the land with their families. A large
quantity of tin ore has been shipped from Ingham, the
produce of the tin mines near Mount Fox, about 30 miles dis-
tant, but there are few mines now working. The tin mines
at Mount Benham, about 16 miles from Ingham, have sent
down a large quantity of stream tin, and many rich lodes
have been found there only waiting for capital to develop
them. Several valuable lodes have also been lately discovered
at the Kangaroo Hills Tin Mines, and are kept back on account
of v/ant of capital to develop them. Population 320 (census
1891); inclusive of Malays, Kanakas, and others, it is said there
are about 1,500 in the district. Newspaper; Ingham Planter.
INGLEWOOD (28° 25’ S. lat., 151° 7’ E. long.), a post town,
with money-order and telegraph station, in the county of Clive,
electorate of Carnarvon,on the Mclntyre Brook, at the junction of
Canning Creek, 180 miles SW. of Brisbane, the communication
being by the Cambooya or Warwick Railway Stations, the former
80 and the latter 70 miles distant. It has court-house (visited
by the Stanthorpe police magistrate), two hotels (the Royal and
the Sportsman’s Arms), a school (No. 55), Church of England,
a Masonic lodge (Scottish Constitution , and a police station ;
and is surrounded by sheep and cattle stations. Two coaches
run from Goondiwindi to Warwick, through fare £1 10s. ;
Inglewood to Warwick, (80 miles) £l. A coach also runs twice
a week from Pillsworth to Goondwlndi, stopping at Inglewood
each night. Fare, Pillsworth to Inglewood, £l. A Stanthorpe
mail runs twice a week to Inglewood. The Inglewood Divi-
sional Board meets here in the Board Hall. The soil is reported
to be “ very fair arable land, fit for carrying lucerne, potatoes,
maize, wheat, barley, oats, and many other useful crops, in-
cluding tobacco, if the means of communicating with a good
market were available.” At Texas, about 35 miles distant, a
large area of tobacco is being grown, and there is a tobacco
factory. Population (census 1891), 84.
IPSWICH (27° 37' S. lat., 152° 48' E. long.) is situated at
j the head of navigation, on the river Bremer, 23£ miles W. of
Brisbane, 65 feet above sea-level. It is in the county of
Stanley, electorate of Ipswich, and is the capital town of
| the district of West Moreton. The principal part of the
town is on the south side of the river. It is connected
1 with the north side by two bridges; a new structure having
been built at a cost of £13,384 to carry the railway, the original
one is devoted solely to vehicular traffic. It is in direct
railway communication with Brisbane A station was
formed here during the Governorship of Captain Logan,
who gave the name of Limestone Hill to the ridge over-
looking the present town. Prom this fact the locality originally
bore the name of Limestone. On this ridge a kiln was erected
for burning lime for buildings in Brisbane. The party con-
sisted of five convicts and an overseer. The first house was
erected in 1829. From this small beginning Ipswich began its
career, and it is now one of the largest towns in Queensland,
and, till the opening of the railway, almost rivalled Brisbane in
business importance. It is pleasantly situated on the slopes
of three hills, which drain into the Bremer, and is very salu-
brious. The district is a mining, manufacturing, and agricul-
tural one. There are some rich seams of coal on the banks of the
I Brisbane and Bremer near the town, which have been worked
i for some lime with profitable results ; the coal crops out from
the surface, and needs little labour to obtain it. The Waters-
: town, Bundanba, Tivoli, Aberdare, West Moreton, Cooneana,
Rose Hill, Borehole, Radstock, Everton, Braeside, New Chum,
Mount Pleasant, Boxwood, Nil Desperandum, Liverpool, Din-
more, Swanbank, and other pits now do a large trade. Pits
have also been opened at Walloon and Purga. The district
may l>e said to be one vast bed of coal of good quality. The public
buildings comprise the churches and chapels, among them being
Anglican (St. Paul’s, St. Thomas’s), Roman Catholic (St. Mary’s),
Presbyterian (St. Stephen’s), three Wesleyan, Lutheran, .Baptist
three Congregational, and two Primitive Methodist; the seven
State schools (Nos. 56, 69, 61, 246, 366, 60, and 247); Roman Catho-
lic schools ; (the Catholics have a convent and school-house—fine
large buildings—at the back of their church), the Christian
Brothers have a large school; the hospital, the court-
house, lands-office, custom-house, the post, telegraph
and money-order office, Government savings bank, two
grammar schools (boys’ and girls’), the school of arts, with a
library of upwards of 5,520 volumes, the railway station —a new
building, lunatic asylum (which is built on a pretty piece of ground
at Sandy Gallop, commanding a very fine view;; woollen factory,
at which excellent tweeds, worsteds, blankets, &c., are turned out,
cotton factory, the only one in Australasia manufacturing grey
calico, Turkish and honeycomb towels, gas works, the Queensland
Times office, a handsome two-story structure, with numerous
large mercantile establishments and stores. There are
three large saw-mills in operation, also two extensive
foundries. Ipswich also boasts of some fine public halls,
among them being those belonging to the Freemasons,
the Oddfellows (2), St. Patrick’s Catholic Benefit Society,
and the Good Templars ; the Olympic Assembly Rooms, situated
in Down Street, North Ipswich, and one in Brisbane Street. The
Queensland Pastoral and Agricultural Society, which has a fine
show-ground at Sandy Gallop just beyond the town boundary,
is in a flourishing condition. A Building Society has been
established some time. Principal hotels—North Star, Palais
Royal, North Australian, Commercial, Bull’s Head, Club, and
Volunteer Arms. There are branches of the Australasia,
New South Wales, Australian Joint - Stock, Royal, and
Queensland Nation,al Banks, also agencies of the leading
insurance companies. The railway to Brisbane was opened
in June, 1875, the line to Harrisville (18 miles) was opened
in July, 1882, and a further extension to Dugandan in
October, and that to Esk, in 1886. The railway workshops
are on the reserve at North Ipswich. The area occupied by
buildings and sidings is about 22 acres, but about 100
acres have been enclosed with a substantial paling fence. A new
goods station and extensive alterations have been made at the
station to cope with the increasing traffic; the new bridge
constructed over the Bremer was opened in May, 1897.
Ipswich was incorporated into a municipality on March 2,
1860. The length of roads and streets in the municipal
45
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Ida—lps]


boundaries is miles, covering an area of. 2,560 acres. There are
1,875 dwellings, and the value of the ratable property is stated at
£254,508. The town is lighted with gas, and water is also laid on.
The waterworks were opened by Governor Kennedy in 1878, and
the water is obtained by pumping from a point of the Upper
Brisbane River about 3£ miles from the town. The mains and
sub-mains are laid throughout the town and in most of the
suburbs. Geological formation : limestone. Population of the
municipality 7,625, including the suburbs, 5 miles radius (census
1891), 13,059 persons. Local newspapers : the Queensland Times,
tri-weekly, established 1857, and the Standard, published in tho
labour interests,
IRVINE BANK is a township, with money-order,
Government savings bank, and telegraph office, on
Gibbs Creek, Chelmsford county, electorate of Wootha-
kata, police district of Herberton, 11 miles west
from Watsonville, 18 miles westward of Herberton, and
80 miles from Port Douglas, where an extensive reducing
and tin - saving plant has been erected by Messrs.
Moffatt & Co. who have been styled the fathers of Irvine
Bank. The lodes are described as being unusually rich.
The chief produce here is the Vulcan mine, “which, after a
period of comparative eclipse, has again disclosed a large body of
ore.” It is spoken of as being the mainstay of Irvine Bank. The
smelting works and plant here are described as being now quite
perfect in the district for the treatment of tin. The most important
claims are the Tornado, Madigan’s, Pinnacle, Royal Standard,
Earl’s, and the Vulcan. In connection with the Loudoun Mill
there are complete wheelwright, blacksmithing, and tinsmiths
works, also an ironfoundry at which all castings are made. One
store, butcher’s and baker’s shops, three hotels, Commercial
Cosmopolitan, Post Office, and Irvine Bank, police barracks, post-
office, school of arts with library of 1,293 vols., and State school (No.
519). Roman Catholic Church here and Episcopal and Presby-
terian ministers visit. Coach runs vid Herberton to Mareeba
railway station. Water is derived from Irvine Bank Mining Co.’s
dam. Population, 250 (census 1891), now, about 400.
ISISFORD, formerly known as Wittown, (24°14'S. lat.,
144° 22' E. long.), is a township, with a post, telegraph, money-
order, and savings bank office, in the parish of the same
name, electorate of Barcoo, situated on the banks of the
Barcoo (Mitchell’s Victoria), on the direct route westward to the
Diamentina and Herbert Rivers, about 80 miles W. of Blackall,
and 460 miles W. from Rockhampton. Coach runs twice weekly
to and from Ilfracombe railway station, 60 miles, fare £2 2s. 6d.,
also a weekly coach to and from Blackall, SO miles.
Bank : Queensland National Bank, Limited. There
is a hospital and resident surgeon. Two hotels : The Club
and Westward Ho, and another hotel, the Belvoir, situated
on the east side of the Barcoo river, one mile from Isisford.
A court-house and police barracks, and a State school (No. 63);
resident police magistrate ; Jockey Club ; Oddfellows’ and
Foresters’ lodge. The tradesmen include four principal stores,
tobacconist, two saddlers, blacksmith, commission agent, two
fruiterers, and two butchers. Pastoral district. Population of
town (census 1891) 214, now about 350.
JERICHO, so named after Henry Jordan, the
pioneer of the country, a post, Government savings
bank, money-order and telegraph office, on the Central
Railway, electorate of Barcoo, distant 305 miles W. from Rock-
hampton. Jericho has three hotels: Railway, Queen’s, and
Empire ; two stores, and other places of business, a good police
barracks and quarters, provisional school, and Roman Catholic
place of worship. Most of the Blackall traffic and surrounding
stations is done through here. The extension of the line
westward has however, seriously affected the trade of the
town. A coach runs twice a week to Blackall. The surround-
ing country consists generally of downs lightly timbered but
poorly watered, and to some extent infested with poison glass.
Population 183 (Census 1891).
JIMNA (26° 35' 8. lat., 152° 20' E. long.) is situated on the
creek of the same name, in the county of Lennox, and elec-
torate and police district of Wide Bay, 100 miles NW. of
Brisbane, the communication being by mail coach to Kilcoy,
fare £l, thence horse. The district is partly of a mining
(alluvial) and partly of a grazing character. There are patches :
of good land in the neighbourhood that might be turned to
agricultural account. Jimna was originally an out-station be-
longing to Yabber station. In 1868 heavy alluvial gold was
found here; population at the time was 2,000. The country
in and around Jimna is of a very auriferous character. Reefs
have been found showing a little gold, but sufficient capital
was not employed to develop them. The place has been almost
deserted, but it was reported that some promising-looking reefs
were being opened out. The country is of a very broken nature,
fine timber on all sides, cedar and pine among them. The
climate is said to be delightful. All fruit grows well here,
particularly oranges and apples. Soil, mostly black and choco-
late and well grassed. Formation : Porphyry, slate, and granite.
The falls of Yabber, estimated to be nearly 250 feet high, are
about 15 miles distant NW.
the district, which has been found admirably adapted for sugar
culture, and a large area of land is under cane cultivation on
the four plantations on the two branches of the river. The
principal plantations are Goondi, with two sugar mills, tho
property of the Colonial Sugar Co., Mourilyan, belonging
to the Mourilyan Sugar Co., Innishowen, belonging to tho
Queensland Sugar Co., and Innisfail, the property of the
Johnstone River Sugar Co. Geraldton is a place of petty
sessions, has four hotels, Johnstone River, Union, Federal, and
Exchange, money-order, savings bank, post and telegraph
offices, a court-house, customs-house, lands office, police barracks,
and three general stores, and four stores kept by Chinamen, an
aerated water-works, two boarding-houses, a bakery, butchers,
saddler, hospital, including surgeon’s quarters, and State school
(No. 527), and Mundoo Provisional school, a Roman Catholic
church (Our Lady of Good Counsel), joss-house, and school of
arts. Branches of Queensland National and Commercial Banks.
The plantations have almost larger establishments than the
\ township itself, and there is also a butchering establish-
ment on the south branch. The Divisional Board have erected
a good wharf at the township, and their hall is a credit to.
the town. A large wire rope ferry fcr conveying horses
and drays to East Geraldton is now working. Town is re-
ported to be improving, and the health of both town and
district is bettered as the scrub is cut down and cleared.
Streets are levelled and drained, and footpaths marked off. The
entrance to the Johnstone is navigable at sx>ring tides for
vessels drawing 14 feet of water, and several sailing ships
discharge cargo at Goondi, nine miles by water above
Geraldton. One plantation—the Mourilyan—has made a tram-
way 2 feet 6 inches gauge to convey produce and stores
to and from Mourilyan harbour, about seven miles distant.
The harbour, though not so large as appears from the
Admiralty charts, is a well-sheltered place, and contains about
150 acres of water of fair depth, and a deep-water frontage of a
quarter to half-a-mile. The entrance has been greatly improved.
A local correspondent reports as followsGeraldton is the
centre of the Mourilyan and Johnstone River sugar district, and
the following companies hold large areas of the land, and have
powerful and extensive sugar-manufacturing plants erected
thereon—namely, on the south branch of the river, the Mourilyan
Sugar Company, Limited, and, the Queensland Sugar Company,
Limited; and on the north branch, opposite the township,
the Johnstone River Sugar Company,” also Goondi Mill, the
largest and most complete. In addition to the companies men-
tioned, there are also a very large number of non-resident
selectors. Large quantities of sugar are exported to
southern ports and China. A considerable breadth is under
I crop for maize by Chinamen, and immense quantities of
bananas are sent away weekly. Gold having been found in the
two branches in 1884, a “rush’' took place, several good
finds were made. A good track has been cut to Herberton.
The almost impenetrable jungle prevents prospecting to any
considerable extent, and it will be some time before the true
richness of the district will be ascertained. Average yearly
1 rainfall is about 120 inches. The climate, though very humid
(Johnstone River has the largest rainfall of any place in Queens-
land), seldom exceeds 80° in the shade, and with the exception of
periodical slight visitations of fever there is nothing to prevent
Europeans working. The population of Geraldton numbers 853
| (census 1891), with the residents on the plantations, selections,
and Mourilyan Harbour, Chinese, Malays, Cingalese, and Kanakas,
1,500.
KAMERTJNGA (10° 53' S. lat., 145° 41' E. long.), a settle-
ment and proclaimed township, in the county and electorate of
Cairns on the Barron River, 9 miles from Cairns. This was a
flourishing township during the construction of the second
section of the Cairns Herberton Railway but is now almost
deserted. Five families mostly employed at the State nursery
reside here. Overseer of the State nursery, Mr. E. Cowley.
Successful experiments on a large scale in the cultivation of
plants are carried on here, particularly with sugar-cane of New
Guinea’ varieties. Coffee and tropical economic plants arc culti-
vated to a large extent.
XAEUMBA, See Kimberley.
KILKIVAN (26° 6' S. lat., 152° 13' E. long.) is a post,
telegraph, and money-order station, and mining town-
ship, on Wide Bay Creek, in the electorate of Wide Bay,
mining and police district of Gympie, co. of Lennox, about 50
miles (65 by rail), SSW. of Maryborough, 26 miles W. of Gympie,
and 135 miles NW. of Brisbane. It is a very mountainous
country, and full of metallic substances. Gold, copper, cinna-
bar, silver, antimony, coal, iron, cobalt, and other minerals exist
hereabouts in quantities, but cinnabar, cobalt and silver has
not been worked for the past three or four years Pine and cedar,
too, are plentiful. Kilkivan, as a gold-fieia, gave some good
yields a few years since. Very little gold mining has been
done in this district of late; the yield for 1897 was estimated
at about 231 ozs. The Cobalt mines are near Black
Snake. The mines at Black Snake and Mount Corra are owned
about 15 miles distant NW. ~ ’ by English and Sydney capitalists, who have over 3,000 acres of
JOHNSTONE RIVER (17° 32' 8. lat., 146° 4' E. long.) 1 freehold land; Mount Corra is now (1897) abandoned. Black
(of which the postal centre is now called Geraldton) is in the j Snake workings are employing a fair number of miners, who are
county of Nares, electorate of Herbert, and police district reported to be doing satisfactorily. In 1892 silver discoveries that
of Mourilyan, situated on the Johnstone river. The town- promised much were made. An argentiferous lode at the head of
ship lies at the junction of the north and south branches, Pat Hen Creek, about 4 miles from the railway station, was tried,
four miles from the Ocean, and about 160 miles NW. ! and the results were encouraging, but later on the mines were
of Townsville (to and from which there is a bi-weekly eitherexempt or abandoned. fA State school (No. 168), Wesleyan,
mail, while there are three steamers plying between Towns- Episcopal and Roman Catholic churches, railway station, court-
ville and Cairns), and 930 miles NW. of Brisbane. It is 1 house, and police quarters. Hotels: Railway and Kilkivan.
now a port of entry and clearance. Johnstone River has Lodge of Protestant Alliance F. Society. Tho Kilkivan branch
come into prominence from the fine rich alluvial soil in of the Maryborough Railway was opened for traffic on Decern-
46
[lrv —Kil
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


ber 6, 188(5. There is weekly coach communication with Nanango,
fare 255. Population, 153 (census 1891), now about 377. The Kil-
kivan Divisional Board has its office here. The Division em-
braces an area of about 1,500 square miles, and extends for a
considerable distance on the Burnett Watershed. Kilkivan
being in the centre of some of the finest grazing country in the
colony, should at no distant date be a dep6t for receiving stock
for the various freezing works in the south. There are
facilities for cattle trucking. Besides being superior grazing
country, the land immediately surrounding Kilkivan is particu-
larly well adapted for agriculture. The Government have
opened a large area of the land included in the large gold-field
reserve for Homestead selection, giving a rare opportunity for a
number of settlers to secure homesteads for the purposes of
dairying and agriculture, with rail facilities with such impor-
tant markets as Bundaberg, Maryborough, Gympie, and even
Brisbane. Land has been surveyed, and was expected to be
thrown open for selection during the winter or spring of 1897.
Formation ; granite and porphyry.
KILLABNEY (28° 5' S. lat., 152° 25' E. long.), an agri-
cultural township and centre, in the electorate of Cun-
ningham, police district of Killarney, with post-office, and
savings bank,|2Smiles from Warwick, with which it was connected
by rail in August, 188(5. It is situated on the River Condamine
on elevated ground, being 1,691 feet above sea-level. By rail Bris-
bane is 197 miles distant NE.—about 90 miles in a direct line.
Bank : Australian Joint-Stock. State school (No. 163). Hotels :
Royal and Killarney. It has a court-house and lock-up,
Episcopalian and Presbyterian places of worship. Salvation
Army barracks, three stores, and three sawmills. It is described
as a thriving locality, having rich soil, yielding in suitable seasons
heavy crops of maize and tobacco. Fruit is grown to perfection.
Population 387 (census 1891).
KIMBERLEY or Karumba (17° 27' 37" S. lat., 140° 52' 54
E. long.) is a telegraph, pilot station, and post office, at
the mouth of the Norman River (on the North Head), 38
miles NW. of Normanton by land, 60 miles by the river. It is
in the county of Burke, electorate of Carpentaria, police district
of Norman. There is a fortnightly mail service by steamer be-
tween Brisbane and Burketown. Coasting vessels from inter-
colonial ports also arrive at intervals. Much dredging
work has been done here, and a wharf and coal store
have been erected on the bank of the river. Government
building are post and telegraph office and pilot’s cottage
Vessels after crossing the bar have a depth of water from 5 to 6
fathoms for a distance of 25 miles. There is a lightship at
the Norman River bar for the guidance of vessels making the
port at night. The country is mostly sandy, of fairly pastoral
quality, and abundance of fresh water may be procured by
sinking to a depth of from 6to 14 feet. The district comprises
an undulating plain, with salt-pans and patches of timber.
One large plain, submerged in the wet season, would, it is
believed, be well adapted for rice-growing. Kimberley is the
terminus of the telegraph, the wire extending in an unbroken
line from Brisbane on the east coast to here, on the western
coast, a distance of 1,425 miles. The place is reported to be very
healthy, and visitors from Croydon and Normanton suffering
from fever speak highly of its recuperative climate as being
equal to any of the southern watering places. Good fishing and
shooting most of the year. Population about 20.
KINGSBOKOUGH (16° 53' S. lat., 144° 53' E. long.), a
mining centre, with postal receiving office on the Hodgkinson
gold-field, distant about 2£ miles from Thornborough, and 66J
miles W. from Cairns. There are here a court-house, Catholic
church (closed), a provisional school (No. 143), one store, and
several private houses. There are numerous reefs in the vicinity.
In 1897-8 mining matters were hindered by the drought.
Yield of gold for the Hodgkinson district for 1897, 3,005 ozs.,
19 dwts. Claims in the vicinity are Reconstruction, General
Grant Tunnel, Vulcan, Caledonia, Homeward Bound, and Tyr-
connell. Population, 50 (census 1886); now less.
KINGSTON (16° 18' S. lat., 144° 18' E. long.), more gene-
rally known as Oakey Creek, a post and telegraph station,
and Government savings bank, is the centre of the several
alluvial (Palmer) diggings. Stoney Creek is 5 miles distant:
Fine Gold, 10 miles: Limestone, 19 miles. Many gold-bearing
reefs have been discovered in this neighbourhood, and during
1893 some nice alluvial gold, principally small nuggets, was
obtained in Boomerang Gully, a tributary of Oakey Creek,
but the extent of the gully was small. Population, 91 (census
1891).
LAIDLEY (27° 38' 8. lat., 152° 25' E. long.), a post-town
and railway station, in the electorate of Lockyer, police district
of Laidley, on the Ipswich (and Toowoomba Line, 51 miles W.
from Brisbane. Hotels: Railway, Exchange, Britannia, and
Queensland National. It is situated 353 feet above sea-level,
on the creek of the same name in the county of Churchill, and
has a money-order, telegraph, and savings bank office, branches
of Queensland National and Royal Banks, court-house, police
barracks, and Victoria, Norman and Masonic Halls. Tradesmen ;
six storekeepers, two watchmakers, three cabinet makers, two
saddlers, five blacksmiths, five butchers, two ironmongers, a
chemist, two bakers, two tailors, two bootmakers, two
stationers, and three auctioneers ; two State schools, and Church
of England, Primitive Methodist and Presbyterian places of
worship; school of arts (library 487 vols.), lodges of
Masons and Oddfellows, and a brass band. Divisional Board
has its offices in the Victoria Hall. Local Societies : Agricultural
and Industrial Society, Farmers’ Union and branch of Women’s
Christian Temperance Union, Choral Union. Industries; Bacon
factory, brickyard, saw mill, timber yards and flour mills. A
bore for artesian water was sunk by the Government to a
depth of 2,600 feet, but no artesian water was obtained.
Agricultural district. At the old township, J \ mile from the.
railway station, is a Roman Catholic church. Farming locality.
Population of town 391 (census 1891). Newspaper ; Lockyer Star .
LEYBURN (28° 8. lat., 151° 37' B. long.), a post, savings
bank, money-omer and telegraph town on Canal Creek, in the
county of Merivale, electorate of Cambooya, Warwick police
district, 150 miles BW. of Brisbane, with which the com-
munication is by the Cambooya Railway Station, 29 miles distant.
Toowoomba is 42 miles NE., Warwick 40 miles BE., and Goondi-
windi 110 miles distant BW. There are two hotels (Golden Fleece
and Royal), two stores, blacksmith, shoemaker, and carpenter's
shop, a tannery and a saddler, an Episcopal place of worship
(St. Augustine’s), Roman Catholic church, a public school (No.
68), police barracks, and i court-house. Coaches run to War-
wick, fare 10s., and to Cambooya, fare 10s. A telegraph line has.
been erected to Yandilla, which is reported to be a great benefit
to the district. Within a radius of from 7to 20 miles are the-
following stations :—BUangowan, Talgai, Canal Creek, Bal-
gownie, Felton, Stonehenge, Yandilla, and Tummaville. Popu-
lation, 216 (census 1891). It is a very old mining district,
embracing Thane’s Creek and Darkey Flat.
(LIMESTONE, a mining district, situated on Limestone
Creek, about 85 miles S. of Maytown, about 7 miles N. of Mitchell
river, and 75 miles E. from Thornborough Names of towns, ‘‘ Gro-
ganville,” ‘ ‘ Harbord ” and ‘ ‘ Quartzboro.” The road from Maytown
is well watered, with accommodation houses at Oakey Junction,
Goat Station, Cradle Point, Sandy Creek, and McGhan s. In.
the district are two Chinese stores, one hotel, the Union, pro-
visional school, police station, court-house, post and telegraph
! office, andja butcher. Mining company : North Cross. On the
north bank of the Mitchell River, about 25 miles E. from Lime-
| stone, is what is known as the antimony mine. It is now
| abandoned, want of machinery, the fall in price of the ore, and!
i a good road to the locality kept the place back ; there is a
I new road about five miles farther than the old one. Though
named Limestone, it is reported that there is not an atom of
j limestone within ten miles. Population, including neighbour-
hood, 50 Europeans and about 30 Chinese.
LOGAN VILLAGE (27° 50' 8. lat., 153° 10' E. long.), a
small township, railway station in the county of Ward,
Tambourine Division, on the south bank of the Logan River,,
about 27 miles from Brisbane. Has a Congregational chapel, a
Provisional school (No. 123) a creamery (Model Dairy Company),
i and an hotel. Produces maize, cattle, and timber. The railway
was extended to here from Bethania Junction in September,
1885. Grazing and farming district. Population, 61 (census
1891). now about 85.
LONGREACH (28° 27' S. lat., 144° 8' S. long.), a
post town, money-order office, savings bank and telegraph
station, and terminus of the Central Railway, 424 miles
W. of Rockhampton, situated “on a stony knoll within 3 miles
of jiemianent water-holes in the Thompson river.” It hasbranches
of the Queensland National, Commercial, and N.S. W. banks arid,
several hotels —Commercial, Long-reach, Royal. Federal, Imperial,
Great Western, and others—and stores and other buildings,
police-station, court-house, post and telegraph office,
two cordial factories, boiling down and wool scouring
works, a State school and two private schools. School of Arts
library of 807 vols., Church of England, Wesleyan and Roman
Catholic places of worship, and a brewery. Population, 157
(census 1891). Newspaper : Standard.
LUKINVILLE (16° S. lat., 143° 46' E. long.), formerly the
postal centre of a mining locality, named after Mr. George L.
! Lukin, from 20 to 30 miles W. of Palmerville, near the junction
of tho Garnet creek with the Palmer river. The digging is
alluvial, either the bed or the banks of the river, and is described!
by the Warden as being evidently derived from the gold-bearing
rocks higher up the river.
LYTTON (27° 25' S. lat., 153° 11' E. long.), a small town-
ship in the co. of Stanley, parish of Tingalpa, electorate of
Bulimba, near the mouth of the Brisbane River, of which it may
be considered the south head, 13 miles NE. of Brisbane. It has.
a lighthouse, water police, and custom-house station, and is in
telegraphic communication with the metroplis, with which it
has a daily mail. There is steamer communication, or the
Cleveland line can be made use of. Hotel: the Lytton. The
reformatory school for boys is here ; there is accommodation
for 90 boys, with schoolroom, workshops, store-room, etc.
The boys are employed in bag and tent making, stone-
breaking, clearing and stumping the parade ground, and!
in keeping the fort in proper order. State school (No. 221>
A battery mounting two 5-ton and two 64-pounder guns
has been made here, and a redoubt constructed on the-
top of Signal Hill, mounted with two 10-barrelled Norden-
felt and heavy guns, commanding the entrance to the river ;
considerable additions have lately been made to the fort.
The river is also defended by a system of submarine mines.
The water supply is derived from wells close to the Reformatory
hill. A rifle range, with nine targets, has been established
here. Agricultural district.
MACKAY (21° 9' S. lat., 149° 13' E. long.), a seaport,
municipal township, with money-order, savings bank, post andi
telegraph station, on the south bank of the Pioneer River, 625 miles
NW. of Brisbane, in the county of Carlisle, parish of Howard, and!
Mackay electorate. Captain John Mackay claims to be the dis -
coverer of Port Mackay in the early part of 1860, while the leader of
a party organized in New England to search for grazing country.
The town was named after him, and so was the river, but at
the suggestion of Commodore Burnett, the river’s name was
altered to Pioneer, as there was another Mackay River. From.
Brisbane and Keppel Bay in the south, and from Townsville,
47
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND
Kil—Mac]


and Bowen in the north, there is communication by the regular
A.U.S.N. Co.’s mail boats, and also by the steamers of Howard
Smith and the Adelaide S.S. Co.. Intermediate boats also run,
and give communication with the ports north and south.
Coaches run to Nebo and to St. Lawrence from the terminus
of the line and from the town respectively. The late Sir
John Coode inspected the harbour, and reported on it, but
thougti he suggested three designs he considered that
the improvement of the Harbour of Mackay must, from
the adverse circumstances that surround the case, prove
a work of exceptional difficulty. The town contains a court-
house, the hospital is situated on the river bank two miles
above the town, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Lutheran,
Church of England (Trinity), and Primitive Methodist churches,
two State schools (Nos. 71 and 313) in town and four in the
country—Eton, Walkerston, Te Kowai, Hill End, and Mirani.
There are Provisional schools at Coningsby, Habana,
Marion, Flat Top, Homebush, Kelvin Grove, Hampden,
The Leap, Grasstree, Alligator Creek. Plane Creek, and
Chelona, one Roman Catholic and one ladies’ school, two
private schools ; branches of the Queensland National, Union,
Joint-Stock and Commercial Banks, a school of arts, with library
of 38,90 volumes, and large hall for public entertainments, police
barracks, immigration barracks, court-house, lands office, cus-
toms-house, post and telegraph office, gas-works, and Good
Templars’, Masonic, Druids’, Oddfellows’ and Protestant
Alliance, Foresters’, Rechabite and Good Templars’ Lodges,
and Benevolent Society. Several hotels; among others, Prince
of Wales, Imperial, Royal, Riverview, TattersalTs, Queen’s,
Oxford and Wills’. A bridge has been built over the Pioneer at
Sydne3'-street. It is an iron lattice girder bridge, 1,414 feet long
by 24J feet wide. Telephonic communication with the various
Government offices and leading business places has
been installed. The Divisional Board (Pioneer) have con-
structed a bridge over Barnes Creek, a necessary adjunct
to the Sydney Street bridge. These, with the wooden
bridge (Pioneer), are under the control of a Board, known
as the Mackay Bridges Board. There are in the muni-
cipality (area 5,120 iicres) 49 miles of streets, 910 dwel-
lings, and property rated at £206,913. Sugar, tobacco,
coffee, and other tropical and semi-tropical productions
thrive here. Two breweries are in full work. The district is
pastoral and agricultural, containing large areas of rich
alluvial deposits of considerable depth, with hundreds
of sugar farms within a radius of 20 miles from the
township. The mills on the south side of the river are
Homebush, Meadowlands, Te Kowai, Race Course C.M., Marian,
The Palms, Pleystowe and Plane Creek Central Mill Company,
and on the north side of the river: North Eton C.M. Habana,
Farleigh, Nindaroo, Proserpine Central Mill Company,
Foulden, Pioneer, Ashburton and Richmond. The four last
are not working. The sugar industry dates from September 14,
1868, when the first sugar mill was started working in the
Mackay district by Mr. John Spiller, who was the first
grower of cane at the Alexandra plantation; the first cane
planted was in 1864. At the Alexandra plantation is a rum
distillery. The distillery at Pleystowe has been dismantled and
closed, the site being required for the erection of extensive sugar
works. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company have a large area of
freehold land, now mostly occupied by farmers who have taken
purchasing leases, and have on a portion of it, Homebush,
the largest mill in Queensland, capable of turning out annually
about 8,000 tons of sugar. With this mill are connected
about six miles of permanent tramway, and a long length of
portable tram-lines. All the more important mills have
now adopted double-crushing, and the triple effect. Home-
bush is lit by the electric light, also Habana, Far-
leigh, Marian, Racecourse, and Plane Creek Mills,
for which there is a complete plant on each estate.
The central mill system, by which the manufacture and cul-
tivation of sugar is divided between the mill-owners and
farmers, is now generally adopted. The old Homebush,
Habana and Pleystowe plantations are peopled with small
settlers, and other estates are being subdivided. Two
mills capable of making 6,000 tons of sugar each yearly, have
been erected under the Sugar Works Guarantee Act
of 1893 : one at Marian and the other at Pleystowe.
Last year the district produced about 22,200 tons
of sugar. The estimated output for 1898 is 35,000
tons. The developments in sugar have greatly increased
the prices of land lately, and added largely to the population.
Mackay is the port for the produce of the Mount Orange and Mount
Gotthard copper mines—when these mines are at work ; it is
also the port for the Mount Britten and Eungella gold
field; and at Yatton, in the adjoining district, rich gold
deposits have been found. Much of the auriferous land is owned
by Mackay residents. Extensive gold deposits have been found
at Eungella in the ranges to the SW. of Mackay. The Orchid
P.C. (now Eungella G.M. Co.) was described as a surface show
of “ phenomenal richness,” and machinery was erected to
work the claim, but the results were very disappointing;
early in 1894 the place made “ a most astonishing
recovery, but the recovery was of short duration
only ” ; and the claim is now abandoned and the machinery
sold to the Homeward Gold Mining Company. At Grass
Tree, now known as Minterton, on the coast, 25 miles 8. of
Mackay, gold has been found in kaolin felspathic porphyry
dykes from Bto 18 feet through. The crushing in 1896 was very
disappointing, and the mine is not now in work. A railway is now
open to Eton. Total length of line, Mackay to Mirani, 22 miles ;
Newbury junction to Eton, 8 miles. The terminus of the
line is at the corner of Tennyson and Alfred Streets, whence i
an extension goes to the Pioneer River, where commodious
wharves are erected. During 1897 communication with the
southern portion of the district was considerably assisted by
the building of a bridge over Sandy Creek. Several tramways
are projected for facilitating the carriage of cane
from the rapidly extending plantations to the
existing mills. Mackay is a Circuit Court town, courts
being held twice a year. According to the Government geologist
“coal seams of workable thickness and of good quality are known
to exist in the Mackay district, and others may with confidence
be expected to be discovered in localities not yet explored.” For-
mation : sedimentary lying on basaltic and granitic basis with
coal seams of the tertiary period. Population of municipality
(incorporated September 22, 1869), 4,600 ; of the district about
13,200. The Mackay Mercury (established 1866), the second oldest
paper in North Queensland, Mackay Standard, and the Mackay
Chronicle are the local papers. The Sugar Journal is also pub-
lished in Mackay, but it is a colonial rather than a local produc-
tion.
MAROON, the locale of the Batavia river Aboriginal
Mission, is situated on the shores of Port Musgrave, about a mile
from the extreme end of Cullen point, about 120 miles S. of
Thursday Island. This mission is under the auspices of the
Federated Presbyterian churches of Australia and Tasmania, and
was started in the latter part of 1891, the Rev. J. G. Ward (since
deceased) and N. Hey, Moravians, being the first missionaries.
Mr. and Mrs. Brown have since joined the mission. Under
their guidance the natives have been set to work usefully.
About 50 acres have been partially cleared, 3 or 4 acres put
under vegetable and fruit culture, and a substantial house put
together. The natives are paid in food, and only paid if they work.
Owing to the lightness of the soil and the climate, the growth
of vegetation and trees has not come up to expectation, though
cocoanuts and bananas thrive. As a centre of influence, Mr.
Douglas thinks a better selection could not have been made.
In his last report he stated, “ I have no doubt myself of the bene-
ficial effects of the mission, it has humanized the natives and has
made them feel that some, at any rate, of the white men are
their friends. ” Mr. A. Meston, who lately visited the locality,
considers the site as in many respects very unfavourable, being
unhealthy, the land of the most worthless character, heat
oppressive, and swarming with millions of mosquitoes and flies.
The buildings comprise a commodious residence, a church and
schoolhouse. The missionaries are reported as doing a good
work under very adverse circumstances.
MAREEBA (17° 1' 4'' S. lat, 125° 26' 48" E. long.), a
mining township, in county of Nares, in the parish of
Tiuaroo, electorate and police district of Cairns, having post
and money-order office and telegraph station and Government
savings bank. It is the present terminus of the Caims-
Herberton railway (46 miles), the line having been opened
for traffic in August, 1893. It is situated on Granite
Creek and the Barron River. The field itself is about five miles
distant from the township. An Agency of the Bank of North
Queensland is here, also a provisional school. School of Arts,
police station, and a newspaper, the Mareeba Herald, 6 hotels,
Federal, Terminus, Exchange, Carriers’ Arms, Imperial, and
Railway; stores, and other tradesmen’s premises. Churches ;
United Protestant and Roman Catholic. Ministers of several
denominations visit. The town site was officially marked out
in July, 1893. On February 21st, 1893, Messrs. Hort and Finlay-
son reported the discovery of a payable gold reef 6 miles from
Mareeba. A large population was attracted, but the expecta-
tions have, it is stated, not been realized. The mine, so
far as it is yet known, is an immense outcrop of gold-bearing
quartz, crowning the summit of a low hill, the only elevation
for miles around. Yield of gold 1897, 5374 ozs., principally
from the Queen Constance Mine. The Queen Constance and
Clohesey Companies were reported to be in liquidation in 1897 ;
the former was let on tribute, and gave fair wages ; later on the
mine was sold to Messrs. Munro and Newell, and several en-
couraging crushings were soon after made. The average
yield has increased from 3 dwts. per ton to over 10 dwts.
Sixteen men are employed in 7 mines, and over
400 ozs. of gold obtained from it in 1897. The mine
has been re-christened the Mareeba Jubilee. The out-
put of the metals from Herberton, Montalbin, Irvinebank, and
Chillagoe comes to Mareeba for railage to deep water (Cairns).
Meat preserving works (known as the Barron Meat Co.’s) have
been erected on the railway line about 5 miles from Mareeba.
The company started early in 1897, killing on an average 50 to
60 head of cattle daily, the produce from which is concentrated
beef, tallow, hides, bones and manure. Cobb’s coaches run to
Herberton and through to Croydon via Georgetown ; RodMcßea
runs to Herberton only; fare to Herberton, 10s., Georgetown,
£5 10s., Croydon, £7 10s. Mareeba is surrounded by fair agricul-
tural and pastoral country. Population (Sept. 1898), of
town and district 400. Formation: Clay slates and schists,
covered here and there with basalt. At Clohesey, 8 miles
distant, reefs have been discovered, and a crushing plant has
MARYBOROUGH (25° 33' S. lat., 152° 43' E. long.), a
municipal township (proclaimed March 23, 1861, reincorporated
January 8, 1875), in the county of March, electorate of Mary-
borough, on the north bank of the river Mary, 25 miles from
its mouth, about 180 miles N. of Brisbane. Communication with
Brisbane is by rail, and also steamer several times a week.
The railway to Gympie was opened for traffic on August 8,
1881; there is also railway communication to Gladstone,
Bundaberg, Mount Perry, Kilkivan, Woowoonga, and the Isis
Scrub. A railway, under the Guarantee Act. is now open
to Pialba, the watering-place for the district, and a large
48
[Map —Mar
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


centre of agriculture. Hotels; The Royal, Custom House,
Commercial, Sydney, Southern Cross, Melbourne. Queen’s,
Tattersall’s, the Grand, and numerous others. Vessels drawing
17J feet of water can reach and be berthed at the town
wharves. It is the port of shipment for the greater portion of the
produce of the Wide Bay and Burnett district, and is also the
principal town in the district. There are 100 miles of streets
(municipal area 22 square miles), 2,275 dwellings, and property
rated at £403,565. It has a fine hospital, having accommoda-
tion for 96 patients, a School of Arts, in connection with which
is a Technical College with a competent staff of teachers, in
Kent Street, with a library of about 8,466 volumes, branches
of the Joint-Stock, Australasia, New South Wales, Com-
mercial, Queensland National, Union Banks, and agen-
cies of the leading Insurance Companies, also a custom-house,
immigration barracks, and a town-hall, and several other public
halls. In connection with the post-office is a money-order and
telegraph office, savings bank, and telephone exchange. A large
handsome building is occupied as court-house, survey and land
offices, and also by the clerk of petty sessions. The grammar
schools for boys and girls were opened in September, 1881.
The schools are built on commanding sites. The Wes-
leyan and Presbyterian churches are handsome brick
edifices. There are ten places of worship—St. Paul’s church
(Episcopal), which has a handsome tower and peal of nine
bells ; Presbyterian, and Wesleyan churches, Roman Catholic
church (St. Mary’s), all fine brick and stone edifices, and
Baptist, Lutheran, and Primitive Methodist chapels.
There are seven State schools (Nos. 38, 72, 9, 315, 193,
236, 485), also one at Newtown. There are also a Roman
Catholic and Christian Brothers’ Schools. The town has
one company of Defence Force, a Naval and a Fire Brigade,
an Agricultural and Pastoral Society, also Horticultural Society.
The public gardens are small but beautiful. Maryborough is a
well laid out town, and the number of its pretty gardens has
earned for it the name of the Garden Town of Queensland.
A wooden bridge, the longest in the colony; spanned the
river in the direction of Gympie, this was destroyed in the great
flood of 1893, and is now replaced by a low level concrete bridge.
The water supply is derived from Tinana Creek. The water is
pumped through a rising main, 10 inches in diameter and two
miles long, into the service reservoir, placed at an altitude of
162 feet above Tinana Creek. This reservoir is 102 feet in
diameter, 13 feet deep, and holds 650,000 gallons; from here the
water flows into town by a gravitative main, 9 inches in
diameter and about 7| miles long. The water is conveyed
across the river Mary by means of a wrought-iron inverted
syphon of about 480 feet, supplied at each end with an
expansion joint. This syphon is embedded several feet in the
river bed, in a trench excavated by divers. The town
has been lighted with gas since August, 1879. On the land
under cultivation maize, potatoes, lucerne, and other crops
and sugar are principally grown. Oranges are also largely
cultivated. The banks of the Mary, from the township up,
consist chiefly of rich scrublands under cultivation for
sugar, giving employment to two juice mills, the Yengarie
refinery, and a large sugar factory, in the town. Timber,
suitable for building and other purposes, abounds in the
neighbourhood, and is largely exported. In its preparation for
shipment several large mills in the vicinity of the town are
employed, Wilson, Hart and Co.’s being the largest in Queens-
land. There are two large iron-foundries, with one of which
is connected a large ship-building yard. The Union Foundry
(Walker’s, Limited), is the largest in the colony, employing, when
in full work, upwards of 600 hands. Most of the large
central sugar mills erected in the colony under the provisions of
the “Sugar Works Guarantee Act,” have been manufactured at
Walker’s Limited. The same firm, in 1898, completed a contract
for thirty railway locomotives for the Queensland Govern-
ment, and are now engaged building a further
ten; other industries being a brewery, one tannery,
two large sash and door factories, extensive carriage works, boot
and shoe factory, large flour-mill, two soap manufactories, and
a stove and iron foundry. Maryborough is the outport
of the Gympie, Mount Shamrock, and Eidsvold gold-fields and
Burrum coal-field. The Queensland Smelting Company’s Aider-
shot works, the largest in Australasia, are situated 5 miles from
Maryborough, and treat ore from all the colonies. The stations
in the neighbourhood are principally engaged in raising cattle.
The district is under the control of the Tinana, Burrum, Isis,
Antigua and Granville Divisional Boards. The population now
numbers about 10,000 in the municipality. In the district
(census 1891) were 12,178. The Maryborough Chronicle (daily),
Colonist (weekly), and the Wide Bay and v ßurnett News (tri-
weekly), are the local newspapers.
MAYTOWN (15° 59' S. lat., 144° 20' E. long.) (co. of Chelms-
ford, electorate of Cook, and Palmer Police District), formerly
called Edwardstown, is a post-town,with money-order and sav-
ings bank office, and telegraph station, about 122 miles SW. of
Cooktown (about 90 miles in a straight line), the port of the
district, and 961 miles from Brisbane. A mail coach runs
between Laura Railway Station (Cooktown and Palmer Rail-
way) and Maytown (50 miles) once a week, fare £2. The
railway is in course of extension towards Maytown. The
town is situated on the east bank of the Palmer River, at
an elevation of 802 feet above the sea-level. It originated in
the gold diggings in the vicinity (known as the Palmer),
which attracted a large mining population. It has a branch
of the Government Savings Bank, a State school (No. 292), court-
house, school of arts, with library of 505 vols., and hospital
(Palmer River), police barracks, and lock-up. Hotel: Prince of
Wales. Episcopal and Roman Catholic services are held in the
Divisional Board Hall. It has eight stores, of which about half
are kept by Chinamen, a miner’s institute and some small
public buildings. It is a quartz reefing district of promising
character, and with railway communication would, it is expected,
prove to be one of the richest gold-fields in Australia, moun-
tains containing gold existing for miles. The reefs extend in
all directions for about 30 miles from the township. The
gold obtained is of a high quality, its average value being over
£4 per oz. Many of the reefs, owing to high rate of carriage
and want of machinery, will not yet pay for working. In
addition to gold, tin, iron, antimony, coal"and silver are found
in the district. On the entire field (Palmer) the population
was estimated, by census of 1891, at 838, of whom about
one half were Chinese; of town alone, 135 (census 1891),
now (1898), 278 Europeans and 422 Chinese. Maytown is the
capital of the Palmer Goldfield, whence roads communicate
with Limestone (16° 30' S. lat., 144° 40' B. long., bearing 30' 31"
E.), distance 40 miles, which became of note in 1886 by the dis-
covery of the Anglo-Saxon line of reef, which for some years gave
some phenomenal returns of gold. The Coen (13° 50' S. lat.,
143° 5' E. long., bearing N. 28' 22" W.), distance 170 miles,
where gold was discovered first in 1878, but was virtually
abandoned until 1890, when some rich gold-bearing reefs
were discovered, which have yielded handsome returns
to the miners. This field is distinct from the Palmer Gold'
field (although in the Palmer police district), and is distin-
guished by a different set of rocks from the former, being prin-
cipally a micaceous granite, also by a poorer quality of gold,,
which however, is compensated by the richness of the reefs.
Formation : basalt, conglomerate sandstone, clay slate, granite
quartz, diorite, <fec., and marine limestone, in which occur
ironstone veins.
MILES (26° 39' S. lat., 150° 7' E. long.), a post town, in the
electorate of Murilla, with money-order office, telegraph station,
savings bank, and railway station, 231 miles from Brisbane,
It lies 972 feet above sea-level. State school (No. 341), two hotels :
Queensland and Sportsman’s Arms, and two stores. Well tim-
bered district, with poor sandy soil. Large quantities of iron-
bark sleepers and bridge timber are supplied from the neigh-
bourhood, there being two saw-mills. Population, 170 (census
1891).
MILLC HESTER (20° 10' 8. lat., 146° 19' E. long.), a post
town, about 820 miles NW. of Brisbane. It owes its name to-
most of the quartz crushing mills being first erected there.
Hotels: Royal, Rose, Shamrock and Thistle, Old Identity and
Millchester. Churches: Anglican and Roman Catholic (Bt.
Bridget’s); also a primary school (No. 157), and several
tradesmen’s' premises. Pyrites are in the vicinity. Charters.
Towers is about 2J miles distant; coaches run about every
quarter of an hour, fare 6d. The Burdekin low-level bridge is
about 14 miles distant. Population, 630 (census 1891).
MITCHELL (26° 32' 8. lat., 147° 52' E. long.), a post,
town, with money-order office, and telegraph station, and
Government Savings Bank, in the county of Dublin, electo-
rate of Maranoa, on the Maranoa river," 372 miles NW. of
Brisbane, and 54 miles W. of Roma. It lies 1,104 feet above
sea-level. There are four hotels—Post-Office and Green Gate
being the principal, three general stores, two saddlers, two..
butchers, and a shoemaker, aerated water factory, a State school
(No. 27), Roman Catholic chapel, Anglican church, Wesleyan
church, court-house, postand telegraph offices, police quarters and
lock-up, land office, and first-class meteorological station. Clergy-
men of the different denominations make periodical visits and
hold services. A jockey club (Mitchell Downs) is here, and
in the neighbourhood is a good racecourse. It is the
centre of a wealthy pastoral district, over forty large
stations being in the neighbourhood. Table vegetables
and fruits grow well, and the soil is now being turned to
account for farming operations. Much land having been selected,
attention is being given to vine-growing, for which the soil and
climate seem well adapted. Several Homestead selections have
been, and are still being, taken up, and, with favourable seasons,
farming, and more particularly maize and vine culture, will be
carried on to a large extent. This district is destined
in the near future to become one of the most important ,
agricultural centres in Queensland. Trial is also being made of
broom, millet, cotton and other plants of commercial value.
Coaches ply to St. George and also to Bollon. The Divisional
Board of Booringa has its head-quarters here. Among the local,
institutions are Rifle, Cricket, Tennis, and Football Clubs, the
Mitchell and Maranoa Agricultural Association, and the Vine-
growers Association. Population (census 1891), 376.
UOXAL, a gold-field, in the co. of Bowen, electorate of
Burnett and police district of Eidsvold, about 22 miles SE. of
Cania, 70 from Gladstone, and 80 from Mount Perry, but nearly
130 by road. It lies at the head of Monal Creek, which forms
the head of the Burnett waters at the junction of Raspberry
Creek. The first reward claim was granted on this field in
June, 1891, to John MacNamara and party. The principal line
of reefs are Lady Griffith, Trident, United Rise and Great
Eastern. During 1897 1,507 J tons of stone yielded 1,545 J
ozs. of gold. The township consists mainly—from the
rugged nature of the country—of one irregular main street.
There are here two hotels, Royal and Monal, a Provisional
school, one butcher and three stores. Communication is by
coach to Gladstone (70 miles) weekly. Population about 305.
Formation : volcanic.
MONT ALBION (17° 29' S. lat., 145° 3' E. long), a
silver - mining township, with post, savings bank, and
telegraph office and police station, in the county of Chelms-
ford (Walsh division), electorate of Woothakata, police dis-
trict of Herberton, situated on Gibbs Creek, a branch of the
49
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
May—Mon]


Walsh River, about 22 miles W. from Herberton, on the main
road to Georgetown ; a coach runs to Herberton via Orient Camp,
and Watsonville, twice a week; fare 10s. each way; also a
coach to Gerofla and Tate once weekly ; fare 305., also a coach to
Mareeba (37 miles) the terminus of the Cairns railway. It has
three hotels (the principal being Montalbion and Post Office),
a State school, hospital, Petty Debts Court, three stores, and
school of arts, with library of 757 vols. No place of worship,
but periodical services are held by Roman Catholics, and
other ministers occasionally visit. Police station and court-
house. Water supply is derived from two large dams and
several good natural watorholos. Montalbion was supported
by the silver-mining industry. The original discoverers were
two brothers by the name of Prentice, who sold to Messrs.
George Young & Co. The new owners erected smelting works
and developed the mines at a large outlay, ultimately
disposing of the mine to a company: the works are now
closed. About the middle of 1889 silver ore of unusual
richness was unearthed at Albion West claim. It was
expected to average from 150 to 300 oz. per ton; but
•on further development it was found there was intrusion
of galena in large quantities, disturbing and displacing the
richer sulphide ore. The ore could not be treated successfully
■op the spot, and would have to lie sent away for treatment, ihe
"township of M uldiva is now nearly deserted. Other smaller
"places are Red Cap, Daryalong, Kooboora, and Lappa Lappa. In
the district of Chillagoe, about 60 miles distant W., several dis-
coveries of silver are reported. There are enormous copper lodes
in the vicinity. Other metals are gold, silver, tin. Formation :
granite and porphyry. Population, 485 (census 1891); now about
120. , „
MORVEN (20° 25' S. lat., 147° 5' E. long.), originally called
Sadler’s Waterholes, is a post town, savings bank, telegraph and
railway station on the Western line and Hamburg Creek, origin-
ally part of the Victoria Downs run, the head station of which is
some six miles distant. It was formerly one of the oldest bush
camping grounds for teamsters in this part of the colony. It is
in the electorate and police district of Warrego, and lies 427 miles
from Brisbane. Hotels : Royal and Victoria Downs, State school
(No. 625); Episcopal place of worship, Roman Catholics hold
service in the police barracks, and the Salvationists in Burenda
Hall; court-house, police barracks, lock-up, two butchers , black-
smith’s, and two saddlers’ shops, two storekeepers and forward-
ing agent. The station building serves for post, telegraph, and
savings bank offices. Pastoral district. The following stations
receive their rations, and forward their wool from here:
Victoria Downs, Burenda, Nive Downs, Killarney, Brunnell
Downs, and Angellala Downs, all lying north-west of Morven.
Morven is the postal centre of a large number of stations, south
•of Morven, on Boatman Road, a new road having been opened
up a distance of 70 miles. Stations on this route are Armadilla,
East Tregoning, Ularunda, Clifton Chance Downs, Thirsty Downs,
Boatman, Bendena, Bonna Vonna, Elverton and Elmina. Truck-
ing yards are here for sheep and cattle. There is a good
road from here to Tambo vid Augathella : distance to Auga-
thella, 6 4 miles; Augathella to Tambo, 80 miles ; coach runs
to Augathella, fare 20s. The water supply is from a large dam
fed by the Hamburg creek. Town reserve is 16L square miles.
Population, 114 (census 1891), now about 160. Formation:
Upper cretaceous. , , ~
MOUNT BIGGENDEN, a receiving office and station
on the Maryborough to Gayndah railway, fifty-four miles from
.Maryborough. The line is now completed and open to Woo-
woonga, 4 miles beyond. The mine is situated about five miles
SW of Baxter’s Hotel, on the Gayndah road, about six miles
SBE. of Degilbo head station and about four miles from the
Biggenden railway station. The deposit consists of an irre-
gular mass of magnetite, bounded on the north by the slates and
on the south by a bed of limestone. The Warden reported . ‘ I
should not wonder if this ground is going to turn out another
geological wonder, for the whole of the ground seems to
abound with different kinds of minerals, especially bismuth,
copper, cobalt, fgold, <fec.” The gold-bearing rook in this mine
is spoken of as being of great geological interest, being the only
body of hornblendic rock in the world being worked payably
for gold ; the bismuth, too, has been got in treating this rock.
Population (census 1891) 69, now about 20 adults.
MOUNT BRITTEN (21° 30' 8. lat., 148° 27' E. long.)
county of Wodehouse, electorate of Normanby, police dis-
trict of Fort Cooper, a gold-field, situated on Oakey Creek
running into Cooper’s Creek, which belongs to the watershed
of Nebo creek. It is said to have been discovered by
Patrick Heenan in 1879, but was first prospected in February,
1881. The field is situated on the Leichhardt, Denham and
Connor’s ranges. It is about 25 miles NW. of Nebo, and 85
miles BW. from its port, Mackay, with which, however, there
is no regular communication. 'lt has a post office, boarding-
house (Mount Britten), and Provisional school (No. 404).
Several large nuggets have been found in the field, the largest
being 69 ounces. Several reefs show good signs, and may probably
turn out payable. Several rich patches of alluvial have been
found. The gold-field is described as a very picturesque
and romantic spot, hills of every shape and colour, conical,
dome-shaped and isolated, looking like a huge military camp
from the distant ranges. The most promising reefs are the
Little Wanderer, the Erratic Star, and the Edith Mary-, but the field
has gone back vervmuch, and population fallen off. The district j
is of a pastoral and mining character, abounding more or less in
minerals and precious stones —rubies, opals and supposed
diamonds have been found. Much of the surrounding country
is suitable for agricultural purposes. Formation : volcanic. The
Eungella gold-field is 20 miles distant. All vehicular traffic ;
from Mackay to Eungella passes through Mount Britten.
Population (1892) about 100, now less.
MOUNT BUDEEIM (or Buderim Mountain), 26° 41' S.
lat., 153° 4' B. long.), a postal township, with tri-weekly mail
communication, 13 miles from Mooloolah, about 40 miles from
the Caboolture railway station. There are a school of arts, a
general store, a sugar mill (closed), three or four private resi-
dences, and a State school. Bananas are the principal pro-
duction. Sugar, fruit, and oranges are also grown.
MOUNT MORGAN, a gold-mining township, in the
co. of Raglan, electorate of Fitzroy, and a police district,
with post office, money-order, savings bank and telegraph
office, at the head of Dee River, 28 miles SBW. from Rock-
hampton, and the site of the famous mine believed to
be the richest deposit of gold in Australia. The mine is at the
summit of the Mount, and originally formed part of a selection
belonging to a man named Donald Gordon, by whom it was sold to
Messrs. Frederick, E. G., and T. S. Morgan (brothers), at the rate
of £1 per acre, in all £640. A co-partnership was formed, and the
mine worked. The interests in the property several times changed
I hands, and eventually the whole was merged into a Limited
Liability Co., with a capital of £1,000,000, in one million shares of
£1 each (17s. 6d. paid up). These shares in September, 1897,
ran about £3, having greatly fallen in price. Gold occurs
i here in a formation in which it has never hitherto been
i recognized, the greater part of the mount being “a mass of drusy
ironstone and siliceous sinter.” The gold is of unusual fineness
and unprecedented purity. The place of deposit is the centre of
an extinct hot spring or geyser. Large yields of gold have already
been made from this mine, the gold, which is the richest native
gold yet found (assaying, 99‘7), having been extracted from the
stone at from 2 oz. to 12 oz. to the ton. The so-called reef is 600
feet long by 300 feet wide, and of unknown depth. The original
works have been largely augmented, and there are extensive
chlorination works. New mundie works are in course of
erection. The company are also sinking a water shaft in the
hope of striting a permanent supply, water being at present
obtained from several Large drains built on the River Dee. The
yield from the mine for the year 1896 was 151,137 ozs. 11
dwts. from 104,292 tons of stone, being an increase on the
previous year of 18,898 ozs. 18 dwts. During 1896, 1,541 hands
were employed. Large works have been added, by which
low grade ore can be treated at a minimum of cost. The
i works are erected on the side of a hill, and the material treated
goes from one process to the other by means of gravity. Two
lines of coaches run daily to and from the Moonmera Railway
; Station (16 miles), which is 20 miles from Rockhampton ; fare,
3s. 3d. A railway from Kabra on the guarantee system is
about being constructed on the Abt rack-rail system ; as stated,
it is opened as far as Moonmera (the foot of the “ Razor Back ”),
and is expected to be completed to the Mount by the end of 1898.
This, together with the now proved permanent character of the
Company’s minos((shares are now at about £6) is causing the town
to progress even more rapidly than it has done in the past. A
large population has now settled around the mine, and a
town of some size has sprung up, having a branch of the
Bank of North Queensland, Queensland National Bank, two
State schools, and a third building, school of arts with
I library of 1,444 vols., and stage well found in scenery and
appointments. Anglican, Primitive Methodist, Wesleyan,
Presbyterian, Salvation Army and Roman Catholic places of
worship ; nolice barracks and court-room. Hotels : Leichhardt,
Queensland National, Sunburst, Mountain View,
Imperial, Metropole, and others. Several stores and tradesmen’s
premises, Foresters’ hall, Oddfellows hall. Clubs Turf, Rifle,
i Swimming, Cricket, Polo, and Football. A system of water-
supply and electric lighting for the town are projected. News-
! papers : Mount Morgan Chronicle, Mount Morgan Herald , In-
dependent and Truth. It is now a municipality (proclaimed
May 22, 1890). Area, 4 square miles; 14 miles of streets, 930
dwellings ; ratable property, £126,802. Population (census 1891),
3.514, now about 7,000.
( MOUNT PERRY (25° 13' S. lat., 151° 41' E. long.),
i for some time called Tenningering, but now known by
its old name, is a postal centre, 200 miles NW. of Brisbane,
i comprising the townships of Fife Barnett and Tenninger-
ing. It is in the county of Bowen, police district of
Tenningering, and electorate of Burnett, and is situated
on Sunday creek, at the foot of the mountain whose
name it bears, about 67 miles by rail, inland from the port
of Bundaberg; 110 miles from that of Maryborough, and 200
miles NW. of Brisbane. The district is of an auriferous, pastoral,
and cupriferous character, principally the latter. There is a
great extent of mineral country, containing vast deposits of iron,
copper, gold, silver, lead, and coal, within a radius of GO miles ;
I much of this is practically unexplored. The largest of the mines
i is the Mount Perry Copper Mine, which employed, when in
i full work, from 70 to 100 men. The development of the
auriferous reefs at Reid’s Creek has not been attended
j with the success expected. The places of worship are a Wes-
: leyan chapel and a Roman Catholic church (St, Patrick s), only
occasionally used, the visiting priest residing at Bundaberg.
Services are occasionally held by visiting clergymen of the various
denominations, while a regular Episcopal service is conducted by
a lay reader. Hotels are Royal, Club, and Commercial. The
public buildings are comprised in court-house, police quarters,
and lock-up, a hospital, a primary school (No. 75), a school
! of art, post and telegraph office, railway station and Perry
divisional board’s office (formerly the old court-house). There
are money-order, telegraph and savings bank in
the township, four stores, and several tradesmen’s premises
—blacksmiths, wheelwrights, bakers, butchers, and a chemist.
50
[Mor —Mou
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND


Coaches ply to Eidsvold gold-field, fare 255. The water
supply is derived from Sandy Creek. Formation ; granite and
schist. Population of Mount Perry and Fife Barnett townships,
351 (census 1891). Discoveries of bismuth, silver, and gold have
been made about SO miles from the town.
MOUEILYAN, a receiving office on the South branch of
the Johnstone River, about 880 miles N. (by sea) of Brisbane.
It is a fine harbour on the eastern coast, the entrance to which
has been Improved by dredging to a depth of 14 feet, at
low water for a width of 100 feet. It is intended to further
deepen the channel. The steamers of the A.U.S.N. and
Adelaide S.B. Cos. find no difficulty in entering and leaving
by the improved channel. During the crushing season the large
steamers of the latter company call at the harbour. Much sugar
has been grown in the neighbourhood, and the Mourilyan Sugar
Company’s plant is of a very complete character, the cane being
conveyed to the mills by tracks and locomotive power. The
plantation is about 7 miles distant, and is reached by train line.
The scenery of the harbour is described as being very romantic.
Population, 50 Europeans, 250 Asiatics.
MTJLDIVA, a silver mining locality in the Herberton dis-
trict, about 60 miles from Mareeba, the present terminus of the
Cairns railway. The fall in silver has resulted in the closing of
both mine and smelting works, and the place is now almost
deserted, the late residents having removed to Calcifer, better
known as Chillagoe, where smelting works have been erected.
MULGRAVE (19° 45' S. lat., 147° 15' E. long.). The Mul-
grave gold-field is composed of the Upper Camp and Golds- j
borough, the latter being 20 miles from Cairns, and the former t
6 miles farther. Upper Mulgrave consists of two stores, a
residence, and a few humpies and tents scattered about. The
locality is healthy, and abounds in fine agricultural soil. Popula-
tion, 46 (census 1880); now 75.
MURPHY’S CREEK (27° 30' S. lat., 152° 10' B. long.), a ,
postal, telegraph, and money-order township, savings bank, ]
and railway station, on the creek from which it takes its
name (a branch of the Lockyer), 82 miles W. of Brisbane, 788
feet above. sea-level. It has one hotel— Railway, and a store ; I
State school (No. 76), a commodious railway station, and j
Presbyterian, Wesleyan, and Catholic places of worship. Farm-
ing and grazing land in the vicinity
MUTTABURRA (22° 36' S.lat., 144° 31' E. long.), a post
town, with money-order and savings bank office, and telegraph
station, in the county of Cumberland, electorate of Mitchell, police
district of Muttaburra, on the western bank of the Thompson i
River, 53 miles NW. of Aramac (70 miles N. of Longreach), I
fare 255., about 98 miles from Barcaldine Railway Station, to
which a coach runs weekly, fare 3fls.; and about 810
miles NW. from Brisbane. Bank : Queensland National Bank
Limited. Hotels: Mount Cornish {Cobb and Co.’s office),
Australian, TattersalTs, Royal Mail, and Landsborough. It is
pleasantly situated, and likely to be of importance, as it is on
the high-road, north and south, for all travelling stock, and
in the centre of a large tract of good pastoral country, composed
of black soil plains and sandy ridges. State school (No. 304),
court-house (in which divine service is held), police barracks,
police magistrate’s residence, Roman Catholic church, post and
telegraph office, hospital, and two principal stores. The water
supply is from the Landsborough and the Town Dam. At
Sardine Creek, on the road to Aramac, 20 miles SE. from Mutta-
burra, is the Union Hotel. At 30 miles S., at Camoola, is the
Caraoola Hotel, on the road to Longreach. Population, 412
(census 1891). Principal stations in the neighbourhood are Bowen 1
Downs and Mount Cornish.
NANANGO (26° 41' S. lat., 152° 1' E. long.), a money-order, j
telegraph, savings bank, and post town, in the county of
Fitzroy, electorate of Burnett and Nanango police district,
about 130 miles NW. of Brisbane. It is situated on Sandy i
Creek, an offshoot of Barambah Creek, which is a tributary of
the Burnett River. Hotels : Commercial, Star, and the [
Burnett, a court-house, police quarters and lock-up, post !
and telegraph office, school of art, with a library of upwards
of 1,172 vols., a primary school (No. 77), a Roman Catholic
chapel (St. George’s), Presbyterian Church, an Anglican
church (visited occasionally), and two stores. Sale yards |
covering 5 acres of land have been erected by a company, at j
which sales are regularly held. Mails run from hereto Cresselly
vW. Taabinga, Booie, and Kilkivan. The Nanango Diggings are
situated in the scrub, about one mile North of East of the town-
ship, on the Burnett fall of the Brisbane range. The Seven Mile
Diggings are about 7 miles SE. on the Brisbane side of the range.
Gold has been discovered at various places near the township of 1
a superior quality, but is only imperfectly worked. At Cooyar j
Creek a small quantity of very rich gold has been found. Not
far from here plumbago has been found. Gold-mining has
been carried on about 2 miles to the eastward, also at a place on
Taromeo and Cooyar, 7 miles to the 8. of Nanango. At the Two !
Mile there is a lode of about 20 feet, full, it is said, of rich
leaders ; at the Seven Mile reefs prevail, having outcrop of poor
antimony. The communication with Brisbane is by coach twice a
week to the Esk Railway Station (63 miles); fare, 255. A coach
also runs to Jondaryan (65 miles.) The Nanango Jockey Club holds
its annual meeting here. The district is a mining, agricultural, '
and pastoral one. The breadth of land under tillage is inoreas-
ing. The Divisional Board of Nanango meets here. The
Board have erected a hall for their own use and for public
purposes. The Taromeo head station is 17 miles from Nanango.
The Nanango station is 2 miles distant, Taabinga 18 miles,
Tarong 13 miles, Barambah 28£. From Nanango to Mount
Stanley, on the Brisbane River, by marked tree line is 14 miles.
All roads in the district have been properly chained, and
the miles legibly marked on tin plates affixed to trees. Forma-
rater t tion: hard sandstone, quartzsites, and slates ; immediately
and I south of the town a grey granite occurs. The district is reported
rips, as being selected very freely for homestead and grazing farms,
have most of the selectors being Germans. It is expected to
become a great fruit-producing district. Oranges, almonds,
h of apples, and grapes grow in profusion. The timber, consisting
ane. of cedar, yellow-wood, hardwood and pine, cannot be surpassed,
hich Population, 274 (census 1891); that of the district has been
t, at increased by persons who have taken up land,
ther NEBO (21° 41' S. lat., 148° 44' E. long.), a small township,
and with money-order office, savings bank, post and telegraph station,
ving | on the creek of the same name which falls into the Con-
arge nors River, at the extreme north of the Leichhardt district,
ngar in the co. of Wodehouse, electorate of Normanby, police
ngar district of Mackay, 75 miles (postal) from Mackay BW., and
eing about 636 miles (612 by telegraph route) from Brisbane, NW.
The j Coach runs between Eton and Nebo (45 miles), twice a week,
line, fare 20s. There is one hotel. Fort Cooper, a provisional school
itic. I (No. 184;) one large store, police barracks, and Divisional Board
room, but no building of any note. '1 he district is principally
dis- of a pastoral character. Gold has been found in the neighbour-
the j hood at a locality known as Mount Britten. The Mount Got-
gof 1 thard mine lies about 40 miles NW. The Mount Orange mine is
nost about 30 miles S. The country immediately surrounding Nebo
itter ; has been laid out in grazing and agricultural farms. Several
i. grazing and agricultural farms have been taken up on the
Mill- I resumed portion of Fort Cooper runs North and South ; of the
fids- j grazing farms, three are stocked with sheep, three with cattle,
mer two with horses and two with horses and cattle. The Mount of
s, a Fort Cooper is about 10 miles distant. Population, 63 (census
The 1891).
>ula- NERANG (27° 58' S. lat., 153° 23' E. long.), a small town-
! ship, in the county of Ward, electorate of Albert, police dis-
), a ■ trict of Nerang, situate on the Nerang River. Communication
ink, with Brisbane daily by rail ; distance, 49 miles by telegraph
its i route), SE. Has post, telegraph, and money-order office,
788 j Government Savings Bank, Court-house, State school (No.
ore ; I 218), Church of England, R.C. Church, Wesleyan chapel, school
and of arts, with library of 615 vols., several stores. Hotels : Com-
irm- | mercial, Queen’s, Star. A coach runs to the Tweed River.
j Nerang is the head-quarters of the Nerang Divisional Board,
post 1 and also of the Southern Queensland Agricultural Society,
•aph Sugar, maize, cattle, and timber are the products of the district,
dice There is a State school at Tallebudgera (No. 201). Population,
)Bon i 268 (census 1891).
.ch), 1 NEWELTON, county of Cardwell,'electorate of Wootha-
i, to j kata, so named after Mr. James Newell, is a mining locality on
810 | the Dry River, about 10 miles from Herberton and 8 from Wat-
ank sonville, where silver ore has been found in large quantities,
ice), The revival of the copper market has given an impetus to mining
t is in this locality, many of the mines changing hands, being
3on taken over by southern investors. Mining district—silver,
and copper, and tin.
ised NCOS A. See Tkwastin’.
104), NORMANBY, a gold-field originally opened in 1872,
sks, about 60 miles due south of Bowen, with a weekly mail coach
and service. The road thereto is very rough and steep, having to cross
ater a range about 2,000 feet high. In the township are a store, three
At butcheries, and other tradesmen’s shops. In September, 1892,
tta- the field was visited by Mr. Jack, the Government Geologist,
the 1 who reported that the stone in the reefs was small and the
412 working unremunerative. The character of the reefs as true
wen 1 fissure veins bad been sufficiently demonstrated, and he believed
they would improve when sunk lower. The Warden, early in
der, i 1898, reported very unfavourably of it. The returns for 1897
of I were 130 ozs., and for the first nine months in 1898 153 ozs.
•ict, I Population, 84.
ndy NORMANTON (17° 39'S.lat., 111° 9' E. long.), county of
yof Normanton, electorate of Carpentaria, a town with telegraph sta-
the | tion, money-order office, and Government savings bank, and a
post ! port of entrance and clearance, situated on the banks of the
irds ! river Norman about 25 miles from its mouth by land, and 50 miles
olic ) by water, near the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria, about 1,382
can miles NW. of Brisbane by land, but much farther by sea. The
irds ; river has a very tortuous course from the sea to the town,
, at where navigation cease«. The minimum depth on the bar
elly of the Norman River now (1896) is 5 feet 6 inches. Mr. E. A.
are 1 Cullen surveyed the river between Baffle Group and Normanton
wn- 1 in 1888. He reports that there are eight shoals, for the most part
ffile ; rocky, with not more than 2 feet of water over them at
ige. low wafer springs, and that on account of the cost of im-
pof 1 proving the navigation it would be unwise to hold out any
>yar hopes of improvement in the immediate future. He suggests that
Not the Red Bluff, with which some 18 miles of railway would connect
has Normanton, would be a suitable shipping terminus. A site,
3on four miles below Red Bluff, has since been chosen, and an agita-
Two tion is going on at Croydon for a line to deep water to lessen
rich transit charges on goods. The lightship, formerly stationed at
poor the Brisbane River bar, is now placed off the entrance to the
ice a Norman River. Port Darwin is about 900 miles distant. The
inch Queensland National Bank and the Bank of New South Wales
olds have each established branches here, in substantial buildings, a
ifal, substantial school house (No. 360), with teachers’ residence,
eas- court-house and lands office, a Customs building and post and
The telegraph office, several stores, and eight hotels, Ueley’s, Im-
blic 1 perial, Central, Albion, and others. Normanton has a large
ngo. and handsome school of arts, with library of 1,271 vols., and a
iles, Roman Catholic church, a Church of England and Wesleyan
mnt church (the last closed). The Normanton Jockey Club has
iles. its meetings here. It is the outlet for the Cloncurry gold and
and copper mines, and also for the Etheridge and Croydon gold-
ina- fields. There is a resident police magistrate, who is Com-
51
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Mou—Nor]


missioner of Crown Lands. Norman ton being the headquarters
for Lands office in the Carpentaria di-trict. The township
is reported as healthy, with the exception of a month
or two after the wet season, when ophthalmia and mias-
matic fevers are more or less prevalent. Water supply
is derived from surface wells at present, but an artesian
bore, giving a good supply (300,000 gallons per diem) i
has been sunk. The Carpentaria district, of which Nor-
manton is the capital, is growing in population, and promises
to become in a few years one of the largest sheep and cattle
producers in the colony. Normanton, on February 6, 18S6,
was formed into a municipality, having an area of 20 square
miles, 130 dwellings, 20 miles of roads, and property of the
ratable value of £37,100. Mr. George Phillips considers that no
unimproved river in Queensland, except the Batavia, can
compare with the Norman for depth and clearness of channel
up to the head of navigation. A short distance from the
mouth, the river, turning to the SW., forms a magnificent
land-locked harbour, three miles long by half a mile wide, with I
plenty of room and depth of water for almost any number of
vessels to anchor, while on the N. head of the river (Karumba)
there is rising ground for fortifications. The construction of a
line of railway from Normanton to Croydon was commenced
about the end of June, 1888, and was completed in July, 1891
Normanton is situated on high ground, consisting of ironstone ;
gravel ridges, which continue in a NW. direction for about 1 \
mile from the township, when a low flat occurs. The large
Lucock’s reservoir, and from a spring which has been utilized on
the main Oxley road, whence an apparently inexhaustible supply
seems available. There is also a mineral spring. The river at
about 4 miles distance was spanned by a fine iron bridge, called
the Albert. It consisted of eight lengths of girders resting on
massive freestone abutments, and supported by piers of cast-
iron cylinders, 8 feet in diameter, but in the terrible floods of
February, 1893, the greater portion was swept away. It has now-
been replaced by a bridge of entirely new design consisting of
2 spans of 340 feet each, supported by a massive and substantial
centre pier of stone and concrete. The district is an agricul-
tural one. The extension of the line from betwetsi Oxley and
Sherwood to South Brisbane was opened for traffic June 2, 1884.
Population about 300, with vicinity (census 1891), 7,199.
PALMER (16° 4' S. lat., 144° 20' E. long.), a gold-field in
the northern part of the colony, about 961 miles NW. of Bris-
bane, and about 120 miles SW. of Cooktown, by road vi&
Byerstown (96 miles by direct route). These diggings were dis-
covered about the middle of 1873 by Mr. James V. Mulligan.
A Large digging population was drawn thither, and much gold
raised. Tin also has been found in quantities, and will pay
handsomely for working when there are better means of trans-
port. The tin is principally found on Granite Creek waters,
where, in the form of stream tin, it occurs in association with
gold. The quartz reefs are believed to be remunerative, were
capital for their development forthcoming. There are, it i&
gravel ridges, which continue in a NW. direction for about U capital for their development forthcoming. There are, it i&
mile from the township, when a low flat occurs. The large estimated, 100 well-defined reefs on the Palmer, the auri-
steamers of the A. U.S.N. Co. ply fortnightly between Normanton , ferous ground extending over 2,040 square miles. The gold is very
and Brisbane. The country immediately around Norma»ton is i pure, averaging an assay value of £4 to the ounce. In 189 T
reported to be of the poorest description, but there is good 988 J tons of quartz were crushed, yielding 1,221 ozs. of gold,
agricultural land at certain places that could be turned to an average of 1 oz. 17 dwts. to the ton. About 1,251 ozs.
reported to be of the poorest description, but there is good
agricultural land at certain places that could be turned to
account if water were available. Formation : Ironstone above
old desert sandstone, with cretaceous commencing 12 miles
south of the town. Population, 1,251 (census 1891), now about
500. Newspaper: The Norman Chronicle.
NORTHCOTE (16° 54'S. lat., 145° 3' E. long.), a mining
township and receiving office, onLeadingham Creek, a tributary
of the Walsh River, 16 miles E. of Thornborough, on the Cairns
road (the main dray road from Port Douglas to Thornborough
passes through Northcote), and about 16 miles from Mareeba
railway station. Within a few miles there arc several home-
steads occupied by families, also a number of Chinamen’s gar-
dens. It has one hotel (Winfield’s Antimony), one store, Pro-
visional school, and a post-office. Lodes of antimony have been
discovered in the district, some of them situated within a mile
of the township. One of the first reefs taken up on the Hodg-
kinson was by McLeod and party in this district. A Five-head
quartz crushing mill is erected near the township. The miners
say there are several reefs which would pay well if properly
worked. Formation: Slate sandstone diorite ; Elvan dyke
running through Northcote range. Population, 29.
NORTH PINE (27° 16' S. lat., 153° E. long.), (county
Stanley, division of Bedoliffe), a post town with money-order
office, savings bank, telegraph and railway station, on the North
Pine River and North Coast Line, 17 miles from Brisbane.
Public school, No. 183, police station, and court-house. School
of arts, with a library of 428 vols. Hotel: North Pine. Epis-
copal, Presbyterian, and Wesleyan places of worship; Masonic
and W.C.T U. lodges. Factory for making of churns and dairy
utensils here. Good farming, grazing, dairying, and timber-
getting district. Population about 609.
NORTON (24° 20' S. lat., 151° 16' B. long.), a mining town-
ship, in the county of Clinton, electorate of Port Curtis, Glad-
stone police district, situate on Wattle Creek, a tributary
of the Boyne River, about 36 miles SE. from Calliope, and
400 miles NW. from Brisbane. A mail coach runs to Calliope, 10s.,
and to Gladstone, 15s. A receiving office, school of arts, with
library of 324 vols., provisional school (No. 393), and police
barracks. Cheese is made in the district. The reefs here arc
the “ Who’d ’a’ thought it,” the “ Advance,” “ Frampton’s
United,” “Goody’s,” and the “Never, Never.” Formation:
slate and granite. Population, 101 (census 1891), now 41.
NUDOEE (27° 24' S. lat., 153° 4' E. long.) is a small
settlement, with post and telegraph station, about nine miles
from Brisbane, and contains a State school (No. 48), Roman
Catholic orphanage (St. Vincent’s), and German Lutheran church.
The train to Sandgate stops about two miles from the centre
of the village, which is noted for the production of pineapples.
NUNDAH, a railway station, with post, telegraph, and
savings bank office, on the Sandgate line, 5 miles from Brisbane.
It is the site of the Moravian Mission established many years
ago for the Christianizing of the aborigines, but the labours of the
missionaries were not marked by great results. There are here
two hotels, a good primary school, several stores, churches
belonging to the Anglican, Baptist, Wesleyan and German
Lutheran denominations, and large carriage works ; on the sur-
rounding heights are some really handsome private resi-
dences. Nundah is also the centre of the pine-apple growing
industry.
OAKEY CREEK. See Kingston,
ONE MILE. See Gympie.
were also won fiom the alluvial. Since the opening of the-
field the yield of gold to December 31, 1897, has been
1,353,182 ozs. Gold in quantity was appearing in the Conglome-
rate range, about 12 miles from May town, and the locality was
examined by Mr. J. Mulligan, but the results did not fulfil the
expectations. However, a considerable quantity of gold was
obtained by the pioneers, and a competent authority believes
that the “ caps ” and sheets of conglomerate on the north-
eastern slope of the main range cover auriferous deposits which,
has been proved by several “patches” being found by tun-
nelling under the “ caps ” 800 feet above the bottom of
the gullies. An experienced miner writes regarding these
diggings that “ the geological evidences betoken a regular
formation of gold-bearing rocks, extending in a northerly
and southerly direction for some hundreds of miles.” Palmer is
reached from Cooktown by the railway to Laura station, thence
the coach. Palmerville, or Lower Camp, was the dray terminus
when the field was first opened. May town is the postal centre
of the gold-fields. In the vicinity are coal-measures, ex-
tending from a point on the Cooktown and Palmerville
Road, about 19 miles from Palmerville, for 6 or 7 miles
northward down the valley of the Little River. They were
discovered in 1872 by Mr. N. Taylor. Mr. Jack, the Govern-
ment geologist, has reported on the field. The surface-coal is
not equal to the Newcastle, but it was expected to improve
at a lower depth. The geological features of the field com-
prise : Clay, slate, sandstone, metamorphic granite, conglome-
rate, limestone and basalt. In the clay, slate, and sandstone
the richest reefs and alluvial deposits have been found. In
February, 1887, he again visited this field, but owing to the floods
the examination was a cursory one. At the lower depths he
believes gold will yet be found in quantity. “It would not sur-
prise me if the gold yet to bo derived from deep loads below the
desert sandstone should greatly outweigh the poor four or five
millions worth taken from the modern valley.” In 1884 the
boundaries of the Palmer field were amended ; it now comprises
the whole of the watershed of the Palmer River above its
junction with the Mitchell River, and the watershed of the West
Normanby River above the northern water-bed of Isabella creek.
Some reefs were laid off in October, 1887, by the Warden, at
Limestone Creek, which flows into the Mitchell River southerly
from Maytown, and distant about 35 miles. These did not come
up to expectation, and would probably Vie abandoned. Popu-
lation, including Limestone, in 1896, 526, of whom 282 were
Chinese.
PALMERVILLE (15° 56' 8. lat., 144° 8' E. long.), is about
20 miles W. from Maytown. It had public-houses and stores, but
is now nearly deserted. It is the spot where gold was first dis-
covered on the Palmer River by Hann. Independently of its
auriferous resources there is a wide area of good agricultural
land in the surrounding district. Population principally
Chinese.
PARADISE. The Paradise gold-field is situated on the S.
side of the Burnett River about 8 miles NW. of Degilbo station,
and 2 miles below the mouth of Tarrabil Creek. It is in the
electorate of Burnett and Burrum Division. Gold was dis-
covered here in reefs about June, 1889, by Messrs. Allen and
party. The reefs extend back for a distance of 2 miles from the
Burnett River, and are situated on the steep ridges which lie
between Scrubbyor Paradise Creek and Finney’s Creek. The site of
the township is on the alluvial flat which fringes the river.
OXLEY (27° 33' S. lat., 152° 57' E. long.), a post town, During 1897 799 J tons of quartz were crushed for 1,038 ozs. 19 dwts.
telegraph, and railway station on the S. and W. Railway, 10 grs. of gold, it has a post-office, three hotels--Paradise,
eight miles S. of Brisbane It lies 63 feet above sea- i Pioneer Club and Commercial; Provisional school, court-house,
level. It is in the county of Stanley, electorate of Oxley, Warden's office and some tradesmen s shops. Llivine service is
and police district of Brisbane. The post-office is at the railway
station. Hotel; Coach and Horses. There are two stores and a
butcher’s shop. State school (No. 79), also a State school at Seven-
teen mile Rocks (No. 98), about two miles distant. Police station
here. Episcopal church. Oxley Creek is about half-a-mile distant,
and the Brisbane River the same. The water supply is derived from
I Pioneer ciuD ana commercial, -rruvisioiia,! »uiuui, tuui
Warden's office and some tradesmen’s shop*. Divine service is
held in the mission and public halls. Two lines of coaches run
to Woowoonga. the nearest railway station (about 15 miles). In
1897 the Warden reported that very little progress had been
made during the past year, and mining generally showed no
improvement. Formation: Mostly metamorphic slate and
i granite quartzitic. Population, (census 1891), 320, now 307.
52
[Nor—Par
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


PENTLAND (formerly known as Betts Creek) (20° 33' S.
lat., 145° 25'E. long.), distant 148 miles from Townsville on
the Northern Bailway, is a mining township, in the
electorate of Charters Towers on Betts Creek, 6 miles from
Capeville, and 7 miles SB. of Norwood, comprising three hotels:
Sportsman’s Arms, Pentland and Railway, three stores, one
butcher, a blacksmith, a saddler, a shoemaker, a wheel-
wright, cordial factory, provisional school (No. 467), court-
continue on each side for miles ; these ridges are intersected by
springy flats, which form a small creek running into the sea
about four miles on the east side of Point Parker. The ridges
are covered with pandanus trees, a sure sign of abundance of
water being obtainable by sinking. I consider the Point has
all the facilities for a large town being formed thereon.”
PORT DOUGLAS (16° 30' S. lat., 145° 28' E. long.), co.
Cook, parish of Salisbury, Woothakata electorate, lies about
wngnt, cordial factory, provisional scuoox pio. coun- wi, 7a ”h ~ f ,.„ r ,
bouse, police quarters, about 40 private residences, g° od s i the centre of the coast of Trinity 4O miles distant from
shed, and station buildings, in the latter post and telegraphic | Cairns, NW. Cooktown is 70 miles N., and Townsville abo t
business is conducted by the station-master. Large truck- | 164 miles SE. ; the distance to Thornbormigh is about 6o miles,
ing yards for homes and cattle have been erected. The and to Herberton about 80. There is weekly steamer co i-
Georgetown mails leave here weekly, and there is a good munication with Brisbane, and also with Townsville. A good
deal of traffic on this route and to the Etheridge. It road leads to the Hodgkmson and Herberton. Hotels . Exchange
is the centre for railway communication to the Lower and (a two-story building), Court-house, North Australian, and Cale-
Upper Cape gold-fields, Lolworth, Milray, and several other ; donian. It received the name of Port Douglas after the Hon.
cattle stations. Several goodreefs have teen discovered from Residrat at ls and. It
two to three miles N. of this, these have a favourable appearance.
.Mill timber of a superior quality is found here, which is trucked
to Charters Towers. The water supply is derived from the
creek and a dam erected by the Dalrymple Divisional Board.
An alluvial gold field has been discovered about midway between
Lower Cape and Pentland. Population, 131 (census 1891).
PERCYVILLE or Pekoy River, a gold-field town-
ship on the Percy Creek, in the county of Gilberton, electorate
of Burke, 28 miles N. of Gilberton. about 80 miles from George-
town 8., and 260 miles W. of Townsville. It has one hotel,
Percy, two stores, a butcher’s shop, police barracks, and court-
house. There are a few working reefs six miles down the river,
and some alluvial six miles or so up the river. Formation :
Slate and granite. Population, 30.
PIALBA (25° 22’ 8. lat., 152° 46' E. long.) is a watering
place, with a post and telegraph office, on the shore of Hervey
Bay, county of March, electorate of Wide Bay, and Mary-
borough police district, 22 miles north of Maryborough (with
•which it is now connected by rail), the citizens of which town
and Gympie make Pialba their favourite summer resort. The
climate is reported to be very salubrious and pleasant, the
maximum shade temperature in summer (February) being only
89°, and the minimum temperature in winter (July) 37°. It has,
facing the beach (which is described as being for eight miles
splendid hard beach, sufficiently wide for six buggies abreast),
two good hotels —Point Vernon and Pialbat State school (No.
419), a police-station, and Undenominational church, two stores,
two butchers' shops, and a bakery. There is abundance of Ash-
ling. Sugar-cane is cultivated in the neighbourhood. Popu-
lation, 118 (census 1891), now with vicinity about 500, among
them many Danish farmers, who reside on the tract of rich
agricultural country stretching along the coast here.
PIMPAMA (27° 51' S. lat., 153° 14' E. long.), a small town-
ship and railway station on Hotham Creek, in the county of Ward,
Albert electorate. Has receiving office, a State school (No. 81),
Wesleyan chapel, school of arts, with library of 632 vols. Is the
centre of the Queensland arrowroot manufacture. Wine is also
made. Communication with Brisbane by rail, distance 34 miles.
Population, 42 (census 1886); of town and district about 300.
PINE HILL (23° 39' S, lat., 146° 59' E. long.) is situated
about 2£ miles to the eastward of the Belyando river, 251 miles W.
of Rockhampton, in the electorate of Leichhardt and Clermont,
police district of Barcaldine. It has a post and telegraph office.
The railway buildings comprise passenger station, and station-
master’s house. Provisional school (No. 413), Episcopal church.
Pine Hill was composed to a considerable extent of what was
once Bogantungan, the buildings having been moved from one
place to the other, and many of these have been removed to
Barcaldine. Population about 45. Pastoral district.
PITTSWORTH (27° 42' 8. lat, 151° 38' B. long.) (formerly
Beauaraba), a post town, in the county of Aubigny, electorate
of Cambooya and Darling Downs central police district. It |
has a savings bank office, and is a telegraph, money-order and |
railway station. It is distant 137 miles from Brisbane, and 36
aniles from Toowoomba, and is the present terminus of the
Railway. It has a State school (No. 373), court-house, lock-up and
police barracks, a branch of the Queensland National and Union
banks of Australia, five hotels—Beauaraba, Railway, Union,
Royal and Grand; Anglican, Wesleyan and Roman Catholic
churches. Salvation Army barracks, three auctioneers, six stores,
four blacksmiths and wheelwrights, aerated water factory, two
shoemakers, two saddlers, two fruiterers, boot factory, two
butchers, jeweller and cabinet maker, and other tradesmen, one
soap factory, and one cheese factory. There are two branches of
the Masonic body, and lodges of Rechabites, Hibernian and
Protestant Alliance organizations. The district is an agricul-
tural and pastoral one, with deep black soil. Good coal is found 1
in several places. The principal sheep stations in the vicinity
are Felton, Yandilla, St. Helen's, Pine creek, and Lemon Tree. ,
Coach runs to Hermitage, Brookstead, Yandilla, Lemon Tree, and
Pine Creek. Population : town, 600 ; town and district, 3,000.
POINT PARKER (17° S. lat., 139° 25' £. long.) is situated
on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria, to the southward of
the Wellesley Islands. The anchorage is between Allen Island
and the mainland. At spring-tide vessels of any depth could
enter the harbour, and berth at low water in the “ Basin,"
within a mile of the shore. At low tides, steimers of ordinary
draught can enter. It was the proposed terminus of the Trans-
continental railway. Geographically it is said to be a most I
suitable position for a shipping port for the wool from the |
Diamentina, Flinders, Burke, Herbert, and Lome Rivers, and
Buchanan’s Creek; and for fresh meat from the Cloucurry, |
Leichhardt, Gregory, and Nicholson Rivers. Many thousands
of cattle are already depastured on the latter rivers. According i
to Mr. Hann, “ Point Parker is a series of sand ridges, which 1
John Douglas, Government Resident at Thursday Island. It
is situated on Island Point, about six miles north-west of Mowbray
River and ten of White Cliffs. The “ Point ” is a long, high
grassy hill or peninsula, 190 feet high (being surrounded on
three sides by water), projecting a considerable distance into
the sea to the eastward; to the northward of which, and pro-
| tected by it against south and south-easterly gales, is the
j entrance to Dickson’s Inlet. The latter has a depth of between
1 s feet and 6 feet on the bar at low water, and inside, and for
at least three miles up, a channel wide and deep enough for
large ships to float and turn. An uninterrupted deep-water
channel continues for three miles still higher up, but narrows
greatly beyond that point. The Inlet is entirely an arm of the
sea and affected by the tide to its furthest extremity inland.
The main street, called Macrossan Street, extending from beach
■ to beach, having the sea at one end, and the waters of the
: harbour at the other, lies at the bottom of a hill, and
is for the most part lined with wooden buildings. The
beach at the far end of the town is magnificent. It extends
for about five miles along the coast, is fringed with beautiful
green scrub, and the sand is white and hard under foot. There
is a sand bar which has been dredged to enable vessels to come
up to the wharves. The cutting is 70 feet wide to 6 feet below
low water, and extends from deep water outside to deep water
iaside the creek. The present anchorage is about 300 yards
from the shore, and landing is effected by a jetty. The Inlet is
to be dredged, when the channel will be deepene 1 and a
swing basin made to allow the steamers to come up to a wharf
at the foot of Macrossan Street. There are here a custom-house,
money-order office, post and telegraph, police station, pilot s
residence, court-house, a substantial Roman Catholic church
and Church of England (St. Andrew’s). Banks: Queensland
National, and Government Savings Bank. Primary school
(No. 334), school of arts (with library of 569 volumes), and
! hospital, a substantial building of hardwood, to contain 30
beds, to which is attached a residence for the surgeon.
Masonic and Good Templar lodges are here. The extension of
the Cairns line has been a detriment to the business of the
town by diverting it to Cairns, but the establishment of
central sugar mills on Mosmau River, Saltwater Creek, and the
Daintree River, under the Sugar Works Guarantee Act, will, it is
believed, again bring commercial prosperity. Port Douglas
is the centre of cedar and Kauri pine operations, the rivers
Daintree and Mossman, which are much resorted to by cedar-
getters, being within 12 and 5 miles distance respectively,
and it is the seaport of the Hodgkinson and Etheridge gold-
fields, and the Herberton and Tate tin-mines. Mounts Spur-
geon, Lewis and Frazer tin-mines, about 10 miles BW. from
Port Douglas, have produced a considerable amount of stream
tin. Large areas of land have been taken up for agricultural
purposes, and under cultivation for com and fruit, such as
oranges, mangoes, and other kinds, which grow in abundance,
and are exported to all parts of Australia. Newspaper : Gazette.
I Formation: slate and soft sandstone. Population, 494 (census
1891).
PORT KENNEDY. See Thursday Island.
QTJEENTON, a post town, money-order office, savings
bank and telegraph station, in county Davenport, about 1J mile
from Charters Towers, of which it may be considered a suburb,
as the Charters Towers railway station is situated here. Coaches
ply to Charters Towers, fare Is. It has several hotels—Junction,
Queen’s Head, Railwav, Sunburst, and others; State school,
Church of England and*Baptist places of worship, police station,
post and telegraph office, several tradesmen’s premises, a
foundry, six stores, and quartz-crushing works. It is
the chief centre of mining operations, the famous Brilliant
mine, also the Victory, Brilliant and St. George, Victoria
Carrington, No. 2 Queen, No. 7 North-east Queen, Golden Gate
and the Sunburst line, Brilliant Block, Great Eastern, and other
mines which have proved themselves to be among the richest in
North Queensland, are here. The crushing mills are the Junction,
Enterprise, and the No. 2 crushing mill, also the North Queens-
land Smelting and Gold Extracting Company. Population, 2,060
(census 1891). „ .
RANNES, a settlement on the Woolem Creek, 43 miles from
Westwood Railway Station, on the mail route between Taroom
and Westwood. Coach passes, fare 20s. It has one inn, Rannes,
two boarding houses, two stores, a butcher and baker. As a gold-
mining locality, the expectations have not been realized. Popu-
lation about 100.
RAVENSWOOD (20° 5'S. lat., 146° 54' B. long.), a mining
township, with money-order, savings bank, and telegraph office,
about 770 miles NW. of Brisbane, in the county of Gladstone,
electorate of Kennedy, situated on the watersheds of the Connelly
and Elphinstone Creeks, tributaries of the Burdekin River, and
the Northern Railway, being the terminus of the branch line
53
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND
Pen—Rav]


from Ravenswood Junction. It is 50 miles distant from Char-
ters Towers, E., 78 from Townsville, 8., and within 12 of the
Burdekin river. Public-houses : Ravenswood, Royal, Com-
mercial, Exchange, Miners’ Arms, TattersalTs, and Railway.
Ravenswood owns a court-house, a police barracks, post and
telegraph office, a hospital, a school of arts, with a nice hall, good
library of about 1,123 volumes, and reading-room, a private hall
used for Oddfellows, Foresters, and Masons, and a State school
(No. 141). The school buildings are good, and crown a hill, being
visible for miles. Of places of worship there are the Church of
England (St. Paul’s), Wesleyan church, and Roman Catholic
church and house, with a resident clergyman, and a cottage for
the Sisters of Mercy. The Good Templars have a substantial
hall. There are also lodges of Oddfellows, Foresters, and
Masons. There are nine European stores and about eleven
Chinese, three butchers’ and one chemist’s shops, and
branches of the Joint-Stock and Queensland National Banks.
Ravenswood gold-field was opened in 1870, Messrs. Jessop,
Buchanan and party being the pioneers in gold discovery ; the
then run-holders were Messrs. Curr, Carr and Cunningham.
The site of the first workings was at a place known as Middle
Camp. In 1879 prospectors extended their operations to
Connelly’s Creek, thence to Nolan’s and Jessop’s gullies, settling
down eventually at Top Camp, the present site of Ravenswood
town. The Jessop and Buchanan gullies were the real com-
mencement of the gold-field. The total yield since then to
Dec. 31, 1896, has been 449,876 ozs. The deepest shafts
are the John Bull G.M. Co., General Grant, the Politician,
the Black Jack, the John Bull block, and the Sunset.
At the water level mundic, from which it is most difficult to
separate the gold, is found in abundance, which would give hand-
some returns if the gold could bo extracted at a nominal figure.
The great drawback to the gold-mining industry has been the
intractable nature of the mundic, and the great cost and incom-
plete results of local treatment. During 1897 the yield of gold,
including alluvial, was 20,028 J ozs. There is a mundic extract-
ing works at Ravenswood. There are also two cyanide works,
D. Mclntyre’s and Peek and Peace’s, and another at John Bull
Mine. The field is rich in argentiferous ores, and from the great
Interest centred in them their development was expected to
prove the leading industry. Owing to the fall in silver most of
the mines have been abandoned. King and party were the first
to open the ground. The outlying mining settlements dependent
on Ravenswood are—Strathalbyn, 27 miles ; Kirk, 20 miles ;
Rochford, 25 miles, at which place, the reefs are large and the ore
is not of so refractory a character ; Lower Camp, 16 miles ;
and Sandy creek. Water is found in abundance at a depth seldom
exceeding 25 feet. Formation: granite and trap. The “country
rock is grey syenitic granite, in which hornblende accompanies
or replaces mica.” During 1886 several excellent galena lodes
were found about 20 miles South of Mount McConnell station.
Payable alluvial gold has been found in the bed of the Burdekin
River between the Twelve Mile Yard and Ravenswood station,
and at the Gorge, some 12 miles below the junction of the
Burdekin and Suttor Rivers. At Fish Creek, 15 miles, payable
gold has also been found. Population 1,167 (census 1891). Total
mining population is now estimated at 2,508. Newspaper—
Ravenswood Mining Journal (Sat.).
RAVENSWOOD JUNCTION (20° 8. lat., 146° 47' E.
long.), a railway, telegraph station and money order office, on
the Northern Railway, on the top of the range, 951 feet
above sea-level, 54 miles from Townsville, 24 miles from
Ravenswood, and 29 miles from Charters Towers. It is in the
electorate of Kennedy, and police district of Charters Towers.
There are here a small station, goods and passengers (being
station for the new rush at Mount Success, while close to the
line is a small township, which Includes two public-houses,
North Australian and Railway, two stores, two butchers’ shops,
and several other business or private houses, a Provisional school
(new Slate school, expected to be open in 1898), police station
and trackers’ hut. The line here is remarkable for a combina-
tion of very steep gradients and sharp curves, necessitated
from the line having had to follow the top of a spur to secure
the advantages of an inexpensive ascent of the range, which
would otherwise have been a costly and tedious undertaking.
The line is found to work admirably, heavy loads being taken up
with ease. Lately the line over the range has been altered. It
was formerly 1 in 25; on the new line it is lin 50. The new
line is one mile longer than the old one. The branch line to
Ravenswood joins at the station. A dam has been constructed
here to store water for railway purposes and the town’s folk.
There are several claims working in the vicinity. The Fanning
reefs are about four miles off, W. by N., and the Grass Hut
diggings about the same distance ; both are reported to be look-
ing up, and new claims are being taken up on the former.
The small village called Haughton Valley is about 5 miles
distant. Some dairying was carried on in the locality, but
drought and the tick pest are reported to have destroyed this
industry for the time. Formation : granite and limestone.
Population, 60 (census 1891), with vicinity about 300.
REDCLIEFE. See Humpybono.
REDLAND BAY (27° 37' 8. lat., 153° 15' E. long.). This
settlement lies 25 miles 8. from Brisbane (by road) in the co
of Stanley, electorate of Logan, division of Tingalpa, police dis-
trict of Cleveland on the shore of Moreton Bay State school
(No. 229) and school of arts, with library of 647 vols. Hotel: }
Redland Bay. Primitive Methodist and Anglican places of
worship, and a number, of substantial dwellings, and two piers.
Coach runs daily to and from Cleveland railway station (7 miles), )
fare 2s. The scenery here is noted for its beauty. Agricultural
district. Oyster fishery; Soil chocolate and very fertile. Chief
products, mangoes, oranges and grapes, which are sent
to town partly by steamer, but chiefly by road direct. Survey
of railway from Cleveland has been made. Population 133
(census 1891), with vicinity about 300.
REID’S CREEK (25° 40' 8. lat., 151° 40' E. lons-.),
situated on Branch Creek, about 4 miles BW. of Mount Perry,
is a mining locality, in the electorate of Burnett. There- is
Wesleyan church, but services have been suspended for some-
little time. The most extensively developed of the mines
is the property known as the “ Reid’s Creek and Mount
Perry Copper and Smelting Company,” which is being-
worked on tribute. Nearly all the gold-bearing stone is>
mundic stone and very difficult to treat locally ; and although
the yield has been from four to seven ounces of gold per ton,
yet the heavy expenses absorb much of the proceeds. From
the abundance of auriferous minerals known to exist in the
district, it was thought by mining experts that a great future was
in store for the. field. Reid’s Creek is now almost abandoned ;
there are a few diggers working the alluvial and the reefs, the
stone being sent to the Aldershot works for treatment. An
auriferous sand claim has been taken up with the intention of
erectinsr cyanide works. Population about 50.
REIDSVILLE (19° 43' 8. lat., 146° 56' E. long.), now-
known as Reid River, is a railway and telegraph station on the
Northern Railway (Townsville to Charters’ Towers', being 35
miles 8. of Townsville, on the east bank of the Reid river.
Hotel : Railway.
RETREAT CREEK. —A mining locality discovered
in October, 1892, by Mr. William Baird. The diggings are
situated on Retreat Creek, a tributary of the Batavia, about 60
miles N. of the Coen and 16 miles due E. of the Mein telegraph
station.
ROCKHAMPTON (23°2V 8. lat., 150° 30' E. long.)isthe
commercial capital of the Central Division of Queensland, under
municipal government, on the south and north banks of the
Fitzroy River, 43 miles by river from Sea Hill (generally con-
sidered the mouth of the river), by course of river (21
miles as the crow flies) at the head of navigation, and
about 420 miles (441 by overland telegraph route), (335 in a.
direct line), NW. of Brisbane. The city took its rise from
the famous Canoona rush in 1858, when thousands of people
flocked there, many of whom had to be taken back at the
expense of the Governments of Victoria and New South Wales,
as the extremely limited patch of surfacing became exhausted
in a few days. The leading hotels are the Leichhardt, Criterion,
Railway, Masonic, Palace, Albion, Union, Scariff, Royal, Crown,
and Queensland. It is in ihe county of Livingstone, and owes its
origin in the first Instance to the settlement of the Messrs. Archer
at Gracemere (6 miles distant from the present town), in August,
1855, and subsequently, as stated above, to the great Port Curtis
rush in 1858. Frequent communication by steamer is maintained
with all the principal ports of Australia. It is the port of
Central Queensland, and the outlet of the Dawson, Peak Downs
and Springsuro districts, and the rich and extensive western
lands watered by the Barcoo, Alice, Thompson, South Dia-
mentina, Herbert, and other rivers flowing into the interior.
A large shipping trade is done, only three ports in Australia—
Sydney ; Melbourne and Adelaide —exceeding Rockhampton in
the value of its exports, which in 1897 were £2,131,855. There
is fresh-wat.er service at all the wharves, and coal is procurable
in town. Vessels of 1,000 tons, drawing 16 to 17£ feet of water,
can come up to the town wharves at spring tides. A Harbour-
Board for the improvement and management of the Fitzroy
River was created in February, 1896. Its revenue is derived
chiefly from harbour and wharfage dues. The Board is doing
excellent work in deepening and otherwise improving the river.
Port Alma 36 miles distant by course of river (22 miles in ai
direct line), at the mouth of the river Fitzroy, is a fine natural
harbour, where ocean-going steamers and vessels can load and
discharge their cargoes. Wharves have been built here by the
Government. They are 500 feet in length, with a depth
of 25 feet at low water, enabling the largest vessels to
lie alongside. A patent slip takes tip vessels from 50
tons and in addition there is a gridiron at Sea Hill. There
is another port, Broadmount, just inside the mouth of the
river, which is now connected by rail (24 miles) with Rock-
hampton. This harbour can accommodate large ocean
steamers up to 25 feet draught. Rockhampton is the
starting-point of the Central Railway, the terminus at
present being at Longreaoh, 424 miles from Rockhamp-
ton, and branches north and south from Emerald to Cler-
mont (62 miles) and Springsuro (40. miles). A line also
runs to Emu Park from North Rockhampton, 29 miles.
Emu Park is a pleasant watering-place. The principal streets of
Rockhampton are lined w-ith trees, are wide and well
planned, the main streets having a width of 99 feet, the
principal business thoroughfares being East Street and William
Street, and are ornamented with numerous substantial stores
and other buildings. Among the latter are the Episcopal (St.
Paul’s church, consecrated in October, 1883), Roman Catholic
(Bt. Joseph’s), Presbyterian, (two), Wesleyan, Baptist, Congrega-
tional, Primitive Methodist (three), churches, Salvation Army
barracks, and Friends’ meeting house, immigration barracks,
the hospital, salubriously situated, and accommodating on art
average 70patients,children’s hospital, lunatic reception house, the
school of arts, with a library of about 9,082 volumes, and museum in
connection; the Supreme Court buildings, and Government
offices, gaol, police office and barracks, post and telegraph offices
(a two-story building of brick and stone with clock tower),
Masotdc. Hall, Oddfellows’ and Protestant Hall, the Orphan-
age, and the Benevolent Asylum. An orphanage has been
erected on Nerkoll Creek, about 14 miles distant, on the
Central Railway. It is known as the Meteor Park Orphanage.
54
[Rav —Roc
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


The Union, Australian Joint-Stock, Commercial,, Queensland lodges
National, Australasia,New South Wales, Royal, and North Queen- testant
land Ranks have branches, and the leading Insurance Companies library o
are represented by local agents. A useful mercantile institution in the c
is the Chamber of Commerce. There are five State schools j stocked
and three Roman Catholic schools. A handsome State consider
school is in William Street. A boys' grammar school, jbe grov
built from the design of Mr. S. Williams, was opened in 1881 ; j of long
a girls’ grammar school was opened in 1882. The Corpora- | good gar
tion consists of a mayor and eight aldermen. There are j and pror
76 miles of roads and streets in the municipality (incorporated The oral
December 22, 1860), area 23 l-10th square miles, and an esti- | oats, ba
mated number of 3,200 dwellings. Capital value of pro- 1 Much la
perty, £1,062,672. Many of the shops and private residences and as h
have the electric light. The streets are well lighted with also the
gas. The town is supplied with water, brought from the Crescent from the
Lagoon, some two miles distant, and pumped by steam power for artes:
into an artificial reservoir at the summit of Athelstane Range, (census 1
150 feet in height. The water supply is under the control of the (Wednesi
Council. The Botanical Gardens are about two miles from town, Friday),
on the bank of the Murray Lagoon, beyond the Athelstane Range. | ROB]
They have been much improved, and are largely frequented, co. Chu
notwithstanding their distance from town. The Fitzroy Bridge, Moreton,
a fine structure, resting on piers, with five spans of 232 feet and the
each and lit by electric light, its height from high-water springs Scrub, £
to the suspension chains being 20 feet, connects with North j the Boai
Rockhampton. During the floods of 1890 it was much damaged I the Rose
but is now restored. The Crocodile Creek Bridge, on the road side of tb
to the Town Common, was completed during 1878. The span is three stc
117 feet in length by 20 feet wide. North Rockhampton is now a | plumber,
municipal borough (incorporated September 19, 1883). It has I blacksmi
an area of 31 square miles, 513 dwellings, and 18 miles of streets, office, a
Capital value of land estimated at £155,330. Population in 1897 i and lock-
-2,565. A coach runs weekly to Yaamba, Marlborough, and St. ( can, Con)
Lawrence on the north coast. The gold-fields in the vicinity of 1 Salvation
Rockhampton and on Peak Downs give employment to a j large ha
number of miners. Minerals are widely diffused ; gold, copper, meetings
and silver deposits being found in various places within a radius for maiz
of 50 miles of the town. At about 26 miles SSW. from Rock- wood Ci
hampton, at the head of Dee River, a tributary of the Dawson creamerit
River, is the famous Mount Morgan gold-mine, believed to be the farm
the most valuable mining property in Australia. Yield of gold their daii
in 1897 from the Rockhampton fields, including Mount stands of
Morgan and Clermont, 200,385 ozs., value £812,542. There are from Ro!
emerald mines at Witherfield. About 15 miles NW. of Rockhamp- I produce,
ton, in the neighbourhood of Mount Etna, are spacious caves ] each side
known as Olsen’s and Jihannsen’s, containing large quantities of I sawmill <
bat guano. About three miles from Rockhampton is the estab- i school is
lishment of the Central Queensland Meat Export Company’s t from Gov
meat-preserving works, known as the Lake's Creek Works, j the town
which employs, when in full work, upwards of 900 hands, stone. P
Large refrigerating chambers and apparatus are connected with RUSS
the works. It is now one of the most complete establishments receiving
in Australia. Rockhampton is surrounded by land of good parish of
quality, especially suitable for grazing purposes. The Barcoo, of the riv
Thompson, Darr, Diamentina, Hamilton, and Herbert Rivers | and a cer
to the westward run through some of the finest pastoral country i The river
in Queensland. Population (census 1891), 11,629, now estimated j surround:
at about 16,000. Newspapers; the Morning Bulletin and the! RUSS
Daily Record, both daily, the Capricnraian, the North Rock- < locality al
hampton Times , and the People’s Newspaper, all weekly. i some slut
ROCKY WATER HOLES (27° 39’ 8. lat., 152° 56' E. { SALII
long.) This may be considered the metropolis of the division of SANT
Yeerongpilly. It lies on the Ipswich road, about six miles post town
from Brisbane and two from Sherwood. There are two public- graph B hil
houses, Primitive Methodist church, Presbyterian meeting- the shore
house, Divisional Board room, and blacksmith’s and other shops. N. of Br
lodges of Oddfellows, Good Templars, Hibernians, Pro-
j testant Alliance, and Orange, also a school of arts with excellent
library of 2,008 vols, and one of the best equipped reading rooms
in the colony. The district is a rich pastoral one, and well
stocked with sheep and cattle. Agriculture is now receiving
considerable attention, since it has been found that wheat can
i be grown, but the industry is precarious, in consequence
jof long droughts. A flour mill is here. There are some
good gardens, and the vine is extensively and successfully grown,
| and promises to become an important and profitable industry'.
The orange has been found to thrive in the locality. Wheat,
oats, barley, rye and potatoes are successfully cultivated.
! Much land has been taken up under conditional purchase
and as homesteads. The Bungil Divisional Board meets here,
also the Leichhardt Rabbit Board. The water supply is derived
from the Bungil Creek and from a reservoir and tank, but a bore
for artesian water was commenced in June 1897. Population
(census 1891), 1,698, now about 1,400. Newspapers : Western Star
(Wednesday and Saturday), and Maranoa Advocate (Tuesday and
Friday).
ROSEWOOD (27° 43' 8. lat., 152° 35' E. long.),
co. Churchill, electorate of Rosewood, police district of
Moreton, a station on the Southern and Western Railway,
and the postal centre of the settlement in the Rosewood
Scrub, 36 miles SW. of Brisbane. It is now a division,
i the Board’s office being in the township. It has four hotels,
| the Rosewood, Commercial, and Royal on the northern or Scrub
side of the railway', and the Rising Sun on the opposite side ; also
three stores, one with bakery attached, a chemist, a tailor,
plumber, carpenter, three saddlers, two shoemakers, two
blacksmiths, and two butchers’ shops, a post and telegraph
office, a State school (No. 131), a court house, police barracks
I and lock-up, a branch of the Government Savings Bank, Angli-
! can, Congregational, Catholic, and Baptist churches (all visited),
I Salvation Army, an agricultural hall and show grounds. A
large hall known as the Victoria Hall is used for public
meetings. A large area of land is under crop principally
for maize, but owing to the Lanefield Dairy and Rose-
wood Co-operative Dairy Companies, and throe other
creameries being established in the district, a number of
the farmers are sowing oats and planting sugar-cane to feed
their dairy' stock. There are four apiaries having from 40 to 80
stands of bees. Large quantities of Cape gooseberries are sent
from Rosewood. Also much timber ; butter and other dairy
produce, poultry and eggs. There are also two sawmills, one on
each side of the line, and a flour-mill in connection with the
sawmill on the south side of the railway. The Ash well State
school is about 24 miles distant. Water supply is derived
from Government tanks and private dams. There is a well in
the township, but the water is brackish. Formation : sand-
stone. Population, 41 (census 1886), now about 140.
RUSSELL RIVER, known as the Lower is a
receiving office on the Russell River, in the county of Nares,
parish of Bellender Kerr. It lies within 3 miles of the mouth
of the river, and 30 miles south of Cairns. There is one hotel,
and a central mill belonging to the Bellender Kerr Company.
The river is navigable for small craft up to the mill site. The
surrounding country is all dense scrubb.
RUSSELL RiVER UPPER, or Boongic, is a mining
locality at the head waters of the Russell River, where there are
some sluicing claims at work.
SALISBURY. Sec Port Douglas.
SANDGATE (27° 20'S. lat., 153° O'E. long.), a municipal
post town, with money-order and savings bank office, and tele-
graph station, in the county of Stanley, electorate of Nundah, on
the shores of Moreton Bay and Cabbage Tree Creek, 12| miles
N. of Brisbane, and about 8 miles NW. of the mouth of
the Brisbane River. It is pleasantly situated, and as a
watering place is well patronized all the year round by
visitors. It is also a favourite resort for enthusiastic flsher-
ROLLESTON (24° 27' S. lat., 148° 30' E. long.), a post town the Brisbane River. It is pleasantly situated, and as a
and telegraph station, in the county of Denison, district of | watering place is well patronized all the year round by
Leichhardt, formerly known as The Brown, pleasantly situated visitors. It is also a favourite resort for enthusiastic fisher-
on the banks of the Comet River, 44J miles SB. of Springsure, j men and boating parties, a large number of yachts being kept
the nearest railway station, to which horse or buggy must bo the by residents and others. A pier, with bathing places attached,
means of conveyance. It is the centre of a large squatting dis- extends out about 1,150 feet into the Bay. It is connected by
means of conveyance. It is the centre of a large squatting dis-
trict, being well grassed and watered, and admirably adapted for
squatting pursuits. The township, which is perhaps one of the
oldest in the colony, contains bne store, a blacksmith’s and
Ifor railway with the metropolis. Hotels: Osborne, Sea View,
: and Musgrave, with several excellent boarding-houses. Bank:
and Queensland National. There are Anglican, Baptist, Wesleyan,
UllltJOD IXI l/UL- UAUVUJ, WIIWIIUO DUO Miovivoimru o CKXsy*. -V"- “ , , . , • i 4. . .
saddler’s shop, one public-house—the Planet, post and telegraph and Roman Catholic places of worship; also a convent, a, mission
office, police station, and a Provisional school (No. 92). Popula- hall occupied by the Salvation Army, a school of arts, with
. . . ... ! tl 10. J n Knll onrl an Ar»nmr*ara
tion about 265.
ROMA (26° 36' S. lat., 148° 42' E. long.), a town on
Bungil Creek, in the county of Waldegrave, and electoral district
of Maranoa, 318 miles WNW. of Brisbane, lying 978 feet above
sea-level. It has a repeating telegraph station, savings bank,
money-order office and railway station. There is a daily mail
from Brisbane, and daily mail to Mitchell, Charleville and to
the West. The N. S. Wales, Australasia, and Q.N. Banks
have branches here. Roma possesses a good hospital, a
court-house, a handsome Episcopalian church (St. Paul’s),
Presbyterian church, Wesleyan church, Baptist church, very
fine Roman Catholic church (All Saints), and Salvation Army
barracks, eleven hotels —among others, School of Arts, Queen’s
Arms, Royal, and Railway, the first a substantial two-storied
building—a gaol, a State school (No. 93), a convent school,
a survey office, a lands office, police station, and a town
hall, five large stores, and several smaller ones. In the munici-
pality (area 15 sq. miles) incorporated May 25, 1867, and
re-incorporated May 25, 1876, having a mayor and eight
aldermen, there are 37 miles of roads, 400 dwellings, and
property rated at £54,585. Among the local institutions are
the Western Turf Club, the Western Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Association, an amateur dramatic club, and two
Masonic lodges (English and Scottish Constitutions), and
library of 2,120 vols., a town hall and an Anglican
mission church for West Sandgate and Brighton. There
are also post and telegraph offices, a court-house and
police station, a primary school (No. 153), and two con-
valescent homes in connection with the Brisbane and the
Children’s Hospitals. The accommodation for visitors has
been much improved by the erection of public bathing-houses
and several shelter sheds by the Corporation. The town is
lighted with gas from the local gasworks near the railway station.
It is under municipal government (proclaimed April 29, 1880),
with three wards, East, Central and North, area 3,840 acres, and
has been gazetted a place of petty sessions ; it has 440 dwellings,
41J miles of roads and streets, and ratable property of the
value of £138,497. Population 1,756 (census 1891), now about
1,900, but it fluctuates according to the season, there being a
travelling population of about 500 besides.
SANDY CREEK. This village is on the Leyburn road,
about seven miles from Warwick, it contains a State school
(No. 96), receiving office and two public-houses. Wheat is
grown here, and large quantities of wine are produced.
SCARRBURY (22° 59' S. lat., 144° 301 B. long.) is 36 miles
west of Aramac, on Aramac Creek, at the junction of four roads,
to Winton, Muttaburra, Aramac, and Blackall, via Saltern
Creek. Proceeding to Blackall from Muttaburra is a saving of 35
55
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Roc—Sea]


miles to go by this place on to Saltern Creek and Rodney Downs.
It has a store and a public-house.
SEVENTEEN MILE ROCKS. This village lies about
12 miles from Brisbane by road, and is on the Brisbane River.
In addition to about 20 houses it has a Piimitive Methodist
Church, State school (No. 98), and public hall. The principal
productions are maize, sugar-cane, wines, and potatoes. The
wattle bark in the vicinity has become an article of trade.
Population about 150.
SHERWOOD (27° 30' S. lat., 152° 59' E. long.) lies on the
railway line, 7 miles from Brisbane. It is surrounded by a
largo number of farms. The public buildings are—Presbyterian
Wesleyan, and Anglican churches, post and telegraph offices,
and a State school, with an average attendance of 176. In the
Corinda portion of Sherwood the public buildings are the school
of arts, masonic hall, and Sherwood Divisional Board offices.
Arrowroot, maize, and other farm produce are grown here.
SOMERSET (10° 45' S. lat., 142° 40' B. long.) is in the
county of North Cook, on the B. coast of Cape York Peninsula,
almost at its extreme point, and the south side of Albany Pass,
about 1,500 miles NNW. of Brisbane. It is the most northerly
settlement on the mainland. It was the residence of several of
the Government officials, but its situation having many draw-
backs, Thursday Island has now taken its place for governmental
purposes. The buildings and sheds are now used for a pearl-
fishing station. Population, 64 ;of census district, 1,470 (1891),
exclusive of the native population.
SOUTH BRISBANE. See Brisbane South.
SOUTHPORT (27° 57' S. lat., 153° 27' E. long.), a water-
ing place, with money order and savings bank office,
and telegraph and railway station in the county of Ward,
Albert electorate, Nerang police district, at the mouth
of the Nerang River or Creek, 51 miles SB. of Brisbane.
Hotels : the Pacific, better known as Hanlon’s, Scottish Prince,
Railway, Southport, Queen’s, the Grand at Deepwater Point
(now called Central Southport), about halfway between South-
port and Labrador; a State school (average attendance 2101,
and two private schools, Anglican Church (St. Peter),
Congregational, Catholic and Presbyterian chapels, Salvation
Army barracks, court-house, post and telegraph office,
police barracks, school of arts, with library of 1,487
vols., stores, lifeboat house, saw-mills and a central sugar-
mill, and several villa residences. It is surrounded by
magnificent scenery, and there is excellent fishing, boating, and
shooting in the neighbourhood. It is an agricultural and
pastoral district, and includes amongst its industries oyster
culture, timber for export, sugar growing, and a
remunerativa schnappering trade carried on a few miles
outside the ocean bars. The jetty has been lengthened
to 900 feet, and widened to i 2 feet, and there is now
a depth of water alongside of 10J feet at low water.
Tide rises about 4 feet. There is a ferry over the
creek which gives access to the main beach. Nerang is
about 7 miles distant, and is reached by train daily. Burleigh
Heads, about 9 miles distant, a bluff basaltic promontory about
600 or 600 feet above the ocean is a pleasant drive, principally
along the main beach. The social institutions include Masonic
lodge, football, cricket, tennis and rifle clubs, brass band,
amateur dramatic company and volunteer corps. Two coaches
run daily during the summer to the Tweed Heads via Burleigh.
Southport was formed into a shire, Feb. 6, 1889, but the shire
has been dissolved and the district embodied in the Southport
Division. The remaining portion of the district is included
within the Divisional Board boundaries. Value of ratable
property, £171,156. Population, 895 (census 1891), but varies
according to the season. Newspaper : Logan and Albert
Bulletin.
SPRINOSURE (24° 3' S. lat., 148° 3' E. long.), a
money-order, savings hank, railway, and telegraph station
on the creek of the same name, in the county of Denison,
electorate and police district of Springsure, about 485 miles
NW. of Brisbane. Emerald railway station (40 miles) distant,
is connected by rail. Hotels: Commercial, Shearer’s Arms,
and Queen’s Arms. Two stores, two saddlers, two wheel-
wrights, one blacksmith. The principal buildings, public
and private, are comprised in the Anglican church, (St.
Peter's), Presbyterian and Roman Catholic chapels (St. Mala-
chy’s), school of arts, with library of 872 volumes, the court-
house, Divisional Board’s office, the hospital, post and telegraph
buildings, and school (No. 102). Masonic lodge E.C. and an Odd-
fellows’ lodge M.U. The Bauhinia Divisional Board and *
Leichhardt South, Marsupial Board meet here. Population,
264 (census 1891). Societies: Masonic Lodge, Jockey
Club and Queensland Pastoral. Cricket and Tennis Clubs.
Agricultural and pastoral district. Formation; It is in the
centre of a volcanic region built up of successive beds of
lava, sometimes trachitic, but for the most part consisting of
variable basic rocks.
ST. GEORGE (28° 4' S. lat., 148° 33' E. long.) (county
of Belmore, electorate of Balonne, police district of St.
George) is situated on a magnificent reach of the Balonne
River, about 380 miles WSW. (412 by rail and coach) route
vid Yeulba, or Mitchell, from Brisbane on the direct road
from North Queensland to the Southern markets. Hotels :
Royal, Tattersall’s, Commercial, Australian, Metropolitan,
and Victoria. On July 31, 1884, St. George was constituted a
municipality under the title of the “Borough of St. George,”
but it has ceased to be one, and is now under the super-
vision of the Ula Ula Divisional Board. Sittings of the
District Court are held here. It has a money-order office,
branches of the New South Wales, Queensland National, and
Government Savings Banks, and seven stores. Public buildings :
. a court-house, police quarters, lock-up ; school (No. 134),
post and telegraph office, hospital, Episcopal, Presbyterian and
t Roman Catholic churches, and a School of Arts and reading room
. (518 vols.). The headquarters of the Balonne Jockey Club,
t Maranoa Rabbit Board, Pastoral and Agricultural Association,
1 and Divisional and Marsupial Board are here; other local insti-
-8 tutions are polo, rowing, lawn tennis, and cricket clubs. Coaches :
. Cobb and Co.’s and Roberts’; the former runs to Yeulba (125
miles) and Mitchell railway stations, and to Bollon (80 miles), and
e Mungindi (95 miles) on the N.S. Wales border. Roberts' runs
a down the Balonne River to Dirranbandi (50 miles), and Hebei
a (95 miles) on the N.S.W. border. Railway connection with Yeulba
i, will probably be made before long ; this route has been recom-
e mended by the Commissioner for Railways as the easiest and
1 cheapest line to construct. A flour mill is proposed to be
i. started here, and there are steam saw mills. The district
is mostly pastoral, and contains some very fine cattle and sheep
e stations, and large grazing farms varying from 70,000 to 20,000
i, acres depasturing sheep. An unlimited supply of artesian
i, water can be had all over the district by boring. The district
y also contains some of the finest wheat growing land in Australia,
if The climate is reported to be almost perfect. A bridge across
■- the Balonne River was erected and opened in the winter of
.1 i 1892. It is 481 feet in length, with twelve 35 feet and two
I- 28 feet spans, with a roadway 18 feet in width between the
I, kerbs. Population of town 900 (census 1891). Newspaper : St.
George Standard.
ST. HELENA (27° 25’ S. lat., 153° 15’ E. long.) (county
•- Stanley) is an island in Moreton Bay, used as a penal settle-
1, ment. It lies about 5 miles from the mouth of the Brisbane
~ River, 17 miles NE. of Brisbane, with which it is in telegraphic
li communication: it is 1£ mile long from N. to S., and three-
i. j fourths of a mile from E. to W. The prisoners are employed in
i, ! the cultivation of maize, lucerne, and sweet potatoes, in
t i saddlery work, tailoring, shoemaking, tinsmithing, blacksmith-
- j ing, bricklaying, bookbinding, quarrying, and carpentry. Sugar-
1, i cane was grown bere,butthe cultivation of cane is now abandoned
(, and the mill house used as a laundry. The wooden end of the jetty
a has been enlarged, and the steamers can berth alongside now
i, at all states of the tide. The buildings comprise the officers’
7 residences and the penal establishment. The prison covers an
•- area of nearly 6 acres, and is surrounded by a hard-wood fence,
y 12 feet high. The staff numbers 40. There are about 210
i prisoners in confinement. Free population, 52.
i ST. LAWRENCE (22° 20' 8. lat., 149° 32' E. long.)
r (county of Murchison, electorate of Normanby), a post
a, town, with money-order office, savings bank, and telegraph
s station, situated on the southern bank of the St. Lawrence
1 Creek, and lying 556 miles (532 by telegraph route), to
r the NW. of Brisbane, and about 6 miles from the head of
. Broad Sound. Coaches run to and from Rockhampton
e weekly. Hotels: Sportsman’s Arms and Carrier’s Arms. St.
s Lawrence is the outlet for a wide area of country, but the
i Connor’s Range at the back of the town is a serious barrier to
t the traffic. There is a court-house, used on Sunday as a place of
j worship, police barracks, a custom-house and lands office, both
3 substantial hardwood structures, but no building calling for par-
, tlcular notice. State school (No. 103), two general stores and two
5 j butchers’ shops. The meat-preserving works are capable of
. I treating 50 head of cattle per day ; the boiling-down works can
3 [ put through 100 head per day. There is steamer com-
t | munication with the metropolis about once a month; mails
1 ! are forwarded via Rockhampton. A Jockey Club is here. The
j 1 district is a pastoral one, mainly for cattle and sheep-raising. The
? water supply is derived from a Government dam a short distance
! ! from town. The Broad Sound Divisional Board meets here. A
large area of land for sugar-growing has been taken up in this
i district on Scrubby, Spider, West Hill, and Marion Creeks ; as
i the country is well suited for agricultural purposes there was
, every probability of this industry succeeding. Gold has been
i discovered at Yatton, about 26 miles W. from St. Lawrence (32
, j miles by the bridle road and dray track by way of Accom-
, modation House). Coal has also been found. Formation : granite.
- I Population, 206 ; of district (census 1891), 1,967.
STANTHORPE (28° 39' 8. lat., 152° E. long.), a township
situated on the Quart Pot Creek, in the county of Ben-
- thick, electorate of Carnarvon, distant from Maryland (N.S.
■ Wales) 10 miles W., from Warwick 36 miles S., and from
i I Brisbane 184 miles SW. (by rail 207 miles), 2,656 feet above
• sea-level. Hotels: Farley’s, Commercial, Horse and Jockey,
1 Sportsman’s Arms, and others. Stanthorpe, or the Border
Town, as it is sometimes called, possesses some good
■ buildings, notably the court house, police barracks,
land office, post and telegraph office, hospital, school
: of arts with 881 vols., National school (No. 132),
' Homan Catholic school, Temperance hall, and Freemasons’
hall. Money-order and savings bank institutions are also
established. The places of worship are Church of England
(St. Paul’s), Roman Catholic (St. Joseph’s), with con-
vent, and Wesleyan. It is the headquarters of the
Border Agricultural, Pastoral, Horticultural and Mining
Society, the show grounds of which are situate in the
town. Freemasons, Orangemen, Oddfellows, and Sons and
Daughters of Temperance have duly constituted lodges.
Bank : Australian Joint-Stock. There is a bi-weekly coach
service to and from Texas. In the latter district tobacco is
being grown on a large scale, and the leaf produced is reported
to be the best grown in Queensland, commanding a ready
sale at a remunerative price. Water supply is derived from
the creek and wells. The tin-mines, for which this
district is celebrated, are extensively scattered around the town-
ship, but the alluvial deposits are gradually becoming worked out.
56
[SeY —Stan
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


Tin was first found in the district by “ Joe Green ” on the Nun-
dubbermere Run. Fruit-growing is rapidly becoming a very
important industry in the district, and as the tin is being
worked out it is being replaced by fruit culture, for which the
climate and soil are admirably adapted. Sugar Loaf is situate
on the road to Tenterfield, distant 8 miles 8. from Stan-
thorpe; it has a national school (No. 133). A large saw-mill,
extensive tannery, and mill for grinding wattle bark have
been established here. Tobacco is being grown here in increasing
quantities, chiefly by Chinese. Almost every article of European
growth, particularly fruit, is productive all over this dis-
trict ; in fact, the Invigorating character of its climate has
■earned for the district of Stanthorpe the title of the Sana-
torium of Queensland. In 1882, Mr. Jack, the Govern-
ment Geologist, visited this district, and reported favourably
of its mineral resources. It has also been visited twice by
Mr. Rands, the Assistant Government Geologist, who is of
opinion that the extent and character of the stream tin deposits
coaches ply to both places, with a Roman Catholic church, a pub-
lic-house, the Tambourine, one store, and provisional school (No.
195). It is the centre of a fine agricultural and pastoral
district, producing tobacco, maize, arrowroot, oaten hay,
lucerne, and other crops. There are in the neighbourhood several
fine cattle stations and farms. It is situated about 9 miles
from the head of navigation on the Logan. There is regular
communication by steamer. Local paper : Loyan and Albert
TABOOM (25° 38' S. lat., 149° 45' E. long.), a money-order,
savings bank, post, and telegraph station, in the county_ of
Leichhardt, Murilla electorate, on the Dawson River, 180 miles
S. of Rockhampton and 343 miles NW. of Brisbane, the route
from Brisbane being by train to Miles, 231 miles, thence
bi-weekly mail coach, 95 miles. Hotels: Taroom and Leichhardt.
Three stores, two auctioneers, one saddler, two blacksmiths,
one bootmaker, two contractors, and one baker. Principal
buildings : Divisional Board hall, police barracks, court-house,
found in the neighbourhood afforded a very strong presumption Clarke’s Taroom hotel; Anglican and Roman Catholic churches,
that payable lodes exist in the district. In 1893 the discovery and State school (No. 105). Both the hospital and School of
of a tin lode at Sun Down Creek was reported, and several Arts are lodged in temporary buildings. During 1897 a new
claims had been taken up, but capital was needed to develop the building was completed on the site of the post-office for post,
claims had been taken up, but capital was needed to develop the
field. Principally owing to the fall in price of tin the mining
industry in the Stanhope district is reported to be steadily
declining. Attention has again been directed to the Pikedale
gold-field. Formation : granite grey wacke and basalt. _ The
population within the town boundary is 735 ; in the district it
is 1,869 (census 1891). Newspaper : Border Post (Saturday).
STONEY POINT (Windobah), (25° 26' S. lat., 142° 36' E.
long.), a postal township with telegraph station, situated
about 250 miles NW. by N. of Thargomindah, on the western
channel of the Cooper, in the county of South Gregory, elec-
torate of Bulloo. It lies on Cooper’s Creek, about 7 miles from
the crossing, and is about 780 miles from Brisbane. It is
reported to be difficult of access from the south after rain, but
in dry weather there are no obstacles. Coach runs to Charle-
ville railway station (306 miles), fare £6 10s., via Ada vale ; and
buggies conveying mails run to Longreach, Thargomindah, and
Birdsville. Hotels : Western Star and Crossing; a court-house,
police station, public school (No. 556), post and telegraph office,
School of Arts, one store, a blacksmith, butcher, and in the
vicinity two or three gardens. Opals are abundant in the
neighbourhood, but the mines have not been systematically
worked, nor have the best means been taken to turn the dis-
covery to the most practical account; but it is fully anticipated
that some day this resource will be a valuable one. Stoney
Point takes its name from a slight stony elevation near the
creek in the vicinity of the town. It was founded in 1878 by
G. C. Fitzwalter. Population, 99 (census 1891).
SURAT (27° 11' S. lat., 149° 2' B. long.), a post town, with
money-order, savings bank, and telegraph office, in the county
of Elgin, electorate of Murilla, police district of Surat, situ-
ated on the Balonne River, about 50 miles (61 postal) SE.
of Roma, 84 from St. George, and 346 miles (by rail and
coach route) due W. of Brisbane. Cobb’s coaches run twice a week
from Yuelba Railway Station (47 miles), fare 20s. ; from Surat to
St. George 30s. Hotels: Royal and Commercial. Churches: Church
of England and Roman Catholic, visited from Roma. Other
buildings, a State school (No. 142), a court-house, police
barracks, telegraph station, the Divisional Board’s hall, and
three principal stores. A bridge spans the Balonne at this
point. The country is utilized for both sheep and cattle,
but sheep farming is the principal industry. Many of the
selections are now well watered, having dams and wells on them.
telegraph, and land offices. Besides the mail coaches a coach
runs to and from Miles weekly. District pastoral, but a
number of agricultural farms recently thrown open have been
all taken and others in demand. The soil is said to be well
adapted for grapes and fruit trees. Population 300, census
district 812 (census 1891).
TENNINGERING See Mount Psrry.
TEWANTIN (26° 20' S. lat. 153° B. long.), a post town, with
money-order office, savings bank, and telegraph station, is the
township of the Newsa (or Noosa) district, which occupies
the Southern end of the Wide Bay electorate. It is situated
about 3 miles from Laguna Bay on the Noosa River, on a
long neck of high ground 32 miles SE. of Gympie (in the
Wide Bay police district and co. of March), and 90 miles due
N. from Brisbane. Hotel : Royal Mail. State school (No. 181),
also police quarters, court-house, lock-up and telegraph station,
one store, 2 butchers, a bakery, and a blacksmith’s shop.
It is reached from Brisbane by steamer, which trades regu-
larly, bringing timber to the metropolis, occasionally by other
steamers, or by coach to and from Cooroy railway station (16
miles) daily; coach fare 6s. Large timber-yards are in the neigh-
bourhood of the township, and many persons earn their living
by timber-getting. When the sawmills are in full swing
a small steamer is employed in dragging rafts of timber
to the mill, and towing fleets of timber-laden pontoons
down to the port, and another small steamer is also used
for towing purposes. There are also tramways in all
directions into the scrub, and when in full work employ
a large number of hands, also timber yards at Colloy,
about 1J mile down the river from Tewantin, where the
steamer loads. Messrs. Pettigrew and Son have also a wharf.
The North Coast line passes behind the town at a distance
of about 9 miles. The bay abounds in oysters and shell-
fish, and the lakes in the neighbourhood afford good shoot-
ing. The largest of the lakes, Cootharaba, is estimated to
be upwards of 12 miles in length by 6 miles in breadth.
The wood found here comprises Kauri (otherwise Dun-
dathu or Noosa) pine, cedar, Cypress pine, beech, (ash, tulip,
and hardwoods. The Kauri pine is a remarkably tall and
straight tree, tapering very little, measuring at the butt 4 to 10
feet in diameter, the average contents of a tree being reckoned
at 6,000 feet of timber. The water supply of the town Is derived
The quality of some of the land is highly spoken of for grazing from wells, tanks and lagoons. Formation ; Sandstone. At
purposes, and in good seasons some of the selections might be Noosa Heads are boarding-houses for the accommodation of
utilized for agricultural purposes. Much land has been taken visitors. Here there is reported to be one of the finest beaches
up hy Southern capitalists and also by selectors. Formation :
sandstone conglomerate. Population, 221 (census 1891).
TABLETOP (23° 16' S. lat., 147° 30' E. long.), a mining
township, situated about 13 miles south-east from Croydon,
Burke electorate, and about 8 miles from the Carron River.
Hotels: Australian, Miner’s Rest, and others. Tabletop is the
centre of a large rich auriferous district, many of the most
valuable and promising claims in the Croydon district being
in its immediate vicinity. There are several large stores ; a
cordial manufactory, and other business establishments, and a
post office. Provisional school (No. 554). Population 139
(census 1891) ; with Twelve Mile, 256.
TAMBO (24° 53' S. lat., 146° 14' E. long.), a money-order,
savings bank, and telegraph station and post town, situated in
the electorate of Mitchell, on a branch of the Barcoo River, about
550 miles NW. of Brisbane and 330 miles (400 by rail and coach
route) inland BW. from Rockhampton, and the oldest town on
the Barcoo river. It can be reached by coach vid Charleville
(136 miles) and rail. Hotels : The Club, to which is attached
a commodious hall with stage fittings. Telegraph, Tattersall’s,
and Carrangarra. Bank : Queensland National. A State
school (No. 150) is here ; also a hospital (Mitchell and Warrego),
Divisional Board’s office, court-house, and police barracks. 1
Catholic church and Presbyterian church (the latter a fine
building). There are two principal stores, several tradesmen’s
premises, and a cricket and lawn tennis club, and a Foresters’ |
and Masonic lodge. District Court sittings held twice a year, j
Coaches run to Augathella; to Alpha; to Blackall ; and to
Charleville, besides horse mails. A large dam at the head of !
the township has been constructed. Artesian water, estimated
at 200,000 gallons per day, has been struck at a depth of
1,000 feet. Purely pastoral district. Population, 430; census
district (1891), 886.
TAMBOURINE (Co. Ward)(27°ss' S. lat., 153° 17' E.long.),
a post town, 9 miles from Logan village, 15 from Beenlcigh, |
visitors. Here there is reported to be one of the finest beaches
in the colony. It is a favourite sea-side resort for the residents
of Gympie. Population 148 (census 1891), in district about
500.
THARGOMINDAH (27° 58' S. lat., 143° 43' E. long.), co. of
Wellington, Bulloo electorate, a post town with money-order,
savings bank, and telegraph station, on the Bulloo River, about
670 miles (750 by mail route) nearly due W. of Brisbane. It is
140 miles W. from Cunnamulla, and 340 miles W. from St. George.
Cobb and Co.’s coaches run to Charleville Railway Station, fare
to Cunnamulla 605., to Charleville £5 10s. Coaches also run
to Hungerford, fare £3; to Kyabra, fare £3 10s. ; to Windorah,
fare £5 ; and to other places. Hotels : Royal, Thargomindah,
and Club. Branches of the Commercial and Q.N. Banks are
here, also school of arts, with library of 1,104 vols., a local
finance company (Bulloo Agency Co., Ltd.), no church, a
hospital, court-house, post and telegraph office, police
barracks, 5 stores, including a bonded store known as
White’s Bond, 2 saddlers, 2 blacksmiths, 2 butchers, and
an aerated water factory. Offices for the Bulloo Divisional
Board, built of brick and stone, are here, and a public
school (No. 409). Five gardens along the river bank supply
the town with vegetables and fruit. Opals have been
found in several parts in the district, and during 1894
about £12,000 worth was raised, and silver is believed
to exist in the Grey Range, a continuation of the Barrier
Range, about 40 miles distant. The town is built on Mulga-
stony ridge, with cement about two feet below surface. Dis-
trict principally grazing. Country is well adapted for sheep sta-
tions, but is at present principally stocked with cattle. Some
of the stations have an area of over 2,000 square miles. Water is
found by boring at trifling depths. In March, 1893, artesian
water was struck at a depth of 1,100 feet, boring was continued
to a depth of 2,650 feet, and a flow of water amounting to about
670,000 gallons per diem secured. The bore has been leased
from the Government for a term of years by the Divisional
57
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Sto—Tha]


Board, who have laid the water on to the town, having
borrowed £1,400 from the Government for that purpose. The
town was lit by electricity for some months, but owing to the
expense kerosene has been substituted. A pastoralists’ associ-
ation has been formed. Clubs : Jockey, Cricket, Tennis, and
Debating Society. The district has every prospect of becoming
an important one, and Thargomindah, from its central position,
a thriving town. The nearest railway station (240 miles dis-
other mixed races, 1,094; total, 1,702. Next to the
Europeans the Javanese count the strongest, and their
numbers are increasing. In addition to the land population
there is a floating population engaged in the maritime industries
within the police district of Somerset, estimated at 1,200.
The water supply is derived from a reservoir excavated in
one of the hillsides, besides private supplies. A condenser
has been erected by the Government. Communication with
a tmiv ini' uu w ii. me iivcii coo icuvwaj ouactuii iuiujo uio v*vwv\* ■ ,
taut) is Bourke, in N.S. Wales. Until lately most of the trade the outside world is frequent and regular; there being a
has been done with Sydney, but tbe reduction made in service to Brisbane and all Queensland coastal ports by
the Queensland railway rates and other causes has diverted the A.U.S.N. Co.’s steamers, a monthly service by the 8.1.5. N. Co.’s
bulk of the business back to Brisbane. The headquarters of the steamers with London, besides communication by the steamers
has been done with Sydney, but tbe reduction made in
the Queensland railway rates and other causes has diverted the
bulk of the business back to Brisbane. The headquarters of the
Warrego Rabbit Board are here, and the meetings are held in
the Divisional hall. Population 338 (census 1891). Newspaper:
Tharaominda.h Herald.
THORNBOROUGH (16°58'S. lat., 144° 57' E. long.) is the
principal centre of the Hodgkinson gold-field, and is situate in
the electorate of Woothakata, County of Chelmsford, on the
south branch of the Hodgkinson River, about 56 miles (70
postal) SW. of Island Point (Port Douglas), 1,100 miles NW.
from Brisbane, and 30 miles from Mareeba railway station,
the present terminus of the Cairns - Herberton Railway.
Coaches ply bi-weekly to and from Mareeba railway
station. Hotels : Royal, Commercial, and Canton. Both
Thornborough and Kingsborough lie in a valley surrounded
by abruptly-rising bare-looking hills, on the brows and sum-
mits of which the claims are situated. Thornborough is built
mostly on two streets, the site being a very rough one. It
has a court-house, police barracks, a post, telegraph, and money-
order office, a district hospital, a Provisional school (No. 306), a
Roman Catholic chapel, school of arts with library of 300 vols., and
other social .institutions. There is an assay office, powder maga-
zine, also two principal stores, and smaller ones. The district
(within a radius of 20 miles) is an auriferous one, principally of
the reefing character, the stone averaging at first li ounce to
the ton, but now only a little more than half that. The
discoverer of the field was Mr. J. V. Mulligan, in March, 1876,
and the gold-field was proclaimed on June 15 following. It
promised to be one of the leading mining centres of Australia,
but the gold was principally near the surface, and the reefs
deteriorated as the shafts deepened. In 1897 the Warden
reported that the field had been steadily progressing, and but
for the drought the output would have been much larger. The
total yield of gold since the first discovery to December 31, 1896,
has been 237,904 ozs. During 1897 2,647 i tons of quartz were
crushed for 3,006 ozs. of gold. Several antimony lodes have
been discovered near Nortbcote. The ore averages 60 to 70 per
cent., and is easily got. About 12 miles distant from
Thornborough, wolfram in quantity has been found and worked.
“There is no regular lode, but the Wolfram is found in quartz
or mixed with the loose earth in pieces from the size of an egg
up to lumps about six or seven pounds weight.” The water
supply is limited owing to the river becoming almost dry in the
hot season. The Woothakata Divisional Board meets at Thorn-
borough. Town population, 68 ; with district 500, of whom 100
were Chinese.
THURSDAY ISLAND (Port Kennedy) (10° 34' S. lat.,
142° 12' E. long.), district of Somerset, is an island of the
Prince of Wales group, situated in Normanby Sound,
Torres Strait, about 1,500 miles N. of Brisbane, 400 from
Cooktown, and a like distance from Normanton. It is
about the most central (and almost the smallest) of the
group, being located between Horn, Prince of Wales, Friday,
Goode and Hammond Islands. The township is named
after the harbour Port Kennedy which is one of the
finest on the coast of Australia, vessels of large tonnage being
able to enter and anchor in safety off the township at any stage
of the tide and in all weathers. The main streets of the
town have been well formed, and many fairly sub-
stantial houses erected. It consists of about 200 buildings
inclusive of eighteen Government buildings). The Govern-
ment buildings comprise Government Kesidency, court-house,
custom-house, bonded warehouse, sub-collector’s and other
customs-house residences, harbour-master’s cottage, gaol,
water police and town’s police barracks, post, telegraph,
money-order and savings bank office, also garrison and forts
and a school-house, erected on a commanding site.
Banks : Queensland National (a handsome and com-
modious building) and Bank of North Queensland. Hotels:
Tattersall’s, Torres Straits, Royal, Imperial Hotel, Metropole.
and Grand, the two latter being amongst the finest hotel
buildings in North Queensland, four stores, besides many other
smaller places, the majority of which are kept by Chinese,
Manilamen, Japanese, Cingalese, and other coloured races.
There is a Homan Catholic school (kept by Sisters of the Mission
of the Sacred Heart of Jesus). Churches : French Mission of the
Sacred Heart of Jesus. Church of England service is held in
the memorial church erected to the memory of those lost in the
wreck of the Quetta on February 28th, 1890 ; the boll of the ill-
fated steamer his been recovered, and is now hung at the
church. An effort is now being made to secure the division of the
North Queensland Anglican Episcopacy, the centre of the new
Bishopric to be at Thursday Island. The general hospital is at
Vivien Point. There is a school of arts, with well-appointed stage,
and hall with seating accommodation for 250, and an excellent
library of about 2,907 volumes, also Oddfellows’ and
Masons’ lodges. Tho township is included in the Cook
electorate, and is under the care of the Torres Divisional Board,
and many substantial improvements have recently been made.
Population of Thursday Island on March Ist, 1898 : Europeans
608, Japanese, Phillipine Islanders, Malays, Cingalese,
Javanese, South Sea Islanders, Chinese, Aboriginals and
■ steamers with London, besides communication by the steamers
of the China Navigation, Eastern and Australian, Japanese,
and other lines, which are constantly calling. The climate
is very salubrious during the prevalence of the BE. monsoon,
i which blows from March to October, during which period the
thermometer rarely rises above 85°, or falls below 72°. The
i NW. monsoon prevails from November to March, when heavy
i rains set in, and the atmosphere becomes very humid. The
thermometer, however, rarely registers as high as 95°. Thurs-
day Island was first established by the Douglas administra-
tion as a harbour of refuge (to supersede Somerset, which had
previously been the Government settlement), on account of its
fine harbour and advantageous position. It is in the direct track
of all vessels reaching Australia via Torres Strait, is the centre
of the large and important pearl-shell and beche-de-mer fishing
; industries of Torres Strait; and, being only 90 miles distant from
; British New Guinea, will eventually become the entrepot for the
Western trade of that colony, and also the sanatorium for its
fever-stricken residents. The Imperial Government purpose
making a large coaling station here, and fortification works
in connection therewith are now constructed and manned by a
garrison of 100 men, for whom barracks have'been provided.
Three 6-in. guns are in position, and an additional sum has been
voted by Parliament to augment the armament. A jetty, which
will give 22 feet water at neap tides, has been erected.
Its total length is 947 feet, the T head being 45
feet wide and 200 feet long, enabling foreign-going steamers
to discharge and load cargo direct from and to shore, but it is
j used only by vessels of the A.U.S.N. Co. Hulks moored in the
! port provide facilities for coaling and the transhipment of
cargo ; Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co. have also erected a jetty
800 feet long, which runs out into 15 feet of water. In August,
1887, the telegraph wire was extended to here. The providing
and laying the cable was undertaken by the Eastern Extension
Co., and the cable was successfully laid by the cable ship
Recorder, on the night of November 17th, 1886. The cable
(a new one) extends from Thursday Island to Paterson.
Friday Island has been selected as the site for the Federal
quarantine station, and passengers who may unfortunately
be compelled to remain there will be pleased that they
have a beautiful spot on which to endure their enforced stay.
| Several cottages, formerly residences of pearl-shellers, have been
fitted out for the comfort of passengers, and are now under the
care of an experienced man. A leper station has also been
1 established on Friday Island. The harbour pilot station is
situated on Goode Island, and vessels entering the harlxmr arc
there boarded by the pilot. There is also a signal station and
lighthouse on Goode Island, for the purposes of signalling ap-
proaching vessels and guiding them through the Ipili Reefs,
and recently Lloyd’s took this over. Thursday Island
is also the headquarters of the Torres Strait Inner
Route coast pilots, who board ships there to pilot them
through the intricacies of the “ Inner Route ” to Brisbane and
other Southern ports. Thursday Island is the transhipping port
for cargo and passengers from London and the East bound to
Normanton and the Gulf ports, and Port Darwin, and from its
geographical position must in time become a place of very
great importance. There are numerous pearl-fishing stations
within from 3 to 50 miles of Thursday Island, 249 luggers and
boats being engaged in the trade. The principal items of local
produce exported from Thursday Island are pearl shell, beche-
de-tner and tortoiseshell. The exports during 1897 had a
mining value of £140,675. Gold-bearing reefs have been
discovered and worked on Hammond Island, close to Thurs-
day Island. At Horn Island a gold-field has also been pro-
claimed, and a quantity of gold obtained; and the prospect ot
the field developing into a permament one is now more
| satisfactory. Local paper : The Toms Strait Pilot.
TIARO (25°44' S. lat., 152° 37' E. long.), a post, money-order,
savings bank, and telegraph town, in the co. of March, and
electorate of Burrum, on the Mary River, about 146 miles
NW. of Brisbane, and 21 miles S. from Maryborough
(15 miles by road), to which it is connected by rail. Hotels :
Victoria, Railway, Royal and Queen’s ; Protestant and Good
Templars’ halls, and Divisional Board's office. The
hall of the latter served for a school of arts (now closed). There
is an Episcopd place of worship (St. Philip’s), with par-
sonage, Primitive Methodist and Presbyterian chapels, Roman
Catholic church, Salvation Army barracks and resident Primi-
tive Methodist and Presbyterian ministers. Government
buildings : court-house, post and telegraph office, police
station, State school No. (107), and railway station. There are
about 150 private dwellings, seven stores and several tradesmen.
Orange, Good Templars’, and Protestant Alliance lodges are held
here. A large bridge, 306 ft. in length spans the Mary River at this
locality. An extensive trade is done in timber, principally
hardwood. Most of the Northern contracts for piles, bridge-
building, <fec., are supplied from Tiaro and surrounding district.
There is an almost unlimited supply that suffers from want
of cheap transport to the main railway line. The local
government is looked to by the Tiaro Divisional Board. The
58
[Tho—Tia
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


water supply is derived from the river. Coal-seams are in are about LOCO Germans in the suburbs of Toowoomba, who have
the vicinity. An antimony mine—Neardie, the property of a all vineyards of more or less extent, and many thousand
Company—exists about 25 miles distant. Plumbago has been j gallons of wine are annually made. The grapes are ripe
found on Mount Bauple, about 4 miles distant. A large area in January and February, and bunches weighing 15 lbs._ have
of splendid scrub land is adjacent, occupied by farmers on
both banks of the Mary River. Agricultural and pastoral dis-
trict. Maize and potatoes are largely grown. The sugar mills are
Aurora, Myrtle Grove, Bryrium, and Bauple, and there is a co-
operative dairy. The cattle stations in the district are Neardie,
Gootchie, Miva, Gigoomgan, Merodian, Teebar, Clifton, Boompa,
Glenbar, and Tahiti. Formation : carboniferous, granitic, sand-
stone and slate. Population, 308; district (census 1891), 2,676.
TIN ANA (25° 34' 8. lat., 152° 36' E. long.) is the southern
suburb of Maryborough, and is connected with it by a bridge.
There are several public-houses, a State school (No. 216), and
post-office. Many of the inhabitants are Danes, Germans, or
Poles. Sugar is grown in the neighbourhood, and coal has
been found and worked. Population, 397 (census 1891).
TINAEOO (17° 30' 8. lat., 145° 29' E. long.) is a tin-mining
locality, situated on a creek of the same name, about 45 miles
from Cairns. It may be considered a portion of the Herberton
tin-fleld, although on the northern watershed of the range.
The first discovery of tin was made here. The production
being stream tin, work can only be carried on during the wet
season. In 1897 it was reported that a few miners obtained
about 1 ton of tin each, valued at £32 10s. per ton the scarcity of
water prohibiting them from getting more throughout the year.
TOOWOOMBA (27°34' 8. lat., 151°58' E. long.) is the prin-
cipal town of the rich pastoral district called the Darling
Downs. It is situated upon the summit of the Great Dividing
Range, 1,921 feet above the sea-level, at the head of Gowrie
Creek, a tributary of the Condamine, in the county of Aubigny,
electorate of Drayton and Toowoomba. The district was for
20 years represented by one member, Mr. W. H. Groom, but
is now divided into three electorates, Drayton and Toowoomba
Cambooya and Aubigny. It lies 101 miles W. of Brisbane
and 76 miles (by rail) from Ipswich. The hotels are numerous,
among them being the Imperial, Royal, Queen’s, Gladstone, White
Horse, Metropolitan, Governor Blackall, Club, Freemasons’
Arms, School of Arts, and Union. It was erected
into a municipality on November 19, 1860 (Mr. W. H.
Groom being the first mayor), has 61 miles of roads and
streets, and 1,700 dwellings, and is governed by a mayor
and eight aldermen. Municipal area, 3,840 acres, divided into
three wards, South, East, and West. Ratable land unimproved
is estimated to be of the value of £592,656, rated at 1 Jd. in the £.
The principal thoroughfares are Ruthven, Russell, Hume,
Neil, Campbell, Margaret, Herries, and James Streets. The
places of worship in the town are the Episcopal church (St.
James’s in Russell Street, also St. Luke's, a fine new stone
building, the Roman Catholic church (St. Patrick’s), in James
Street, the Presbyterian church, in Neil Street, Wesleyan
church and School-room, Neil Street, also German
Lutherans (three), Congregationalists, Baptists, Primitive
Methodists; there is also a Jewish synagogue. In con-
nection with the department of public instruction there are
7 State schools (Nos. 112, 110, 256, 109, 399, 414, 499), besides
which there is a Roman Catholic school, and the German '
residents have two schools, which receive no aid from the
State. In addition to these, there is a grammar school for
boys, on a commanding and healthy site overlooking the I
town, erected at a cost of £lO,OOO. Downs’ school,
Technical college, and three seminaries for young ladies.
The old court-house has been turned into an industrial !
and reformatory school. There are two companies of
Volunteers and a company of the Mounted Infantry, j
as well as a company of the Darling Downs Rifle Club. I
A good hospital—a building of brick—with largely j
increased accommodation, has been erected, and a lunatic
asylum, consisting of five blocks of buildings of brick, two
stories high, which will accommodate 350 patients, is now opened.
There are also a Masonic Hall and Assembly Rooms, a Town
Hall in James Street, a School of Arts, with class and
reading-rooms, and having a good library of about 4,680
volumes; there are branches of the Queensland National,
Australian Joint-Stock, Union, N.B. Wales, Royal. Commercial,
and Government Savings Banks ; and agencies of the principal
Insurance Companies. A Supreme and District Court and police-
office, post and telegraph offices, and lock-up and police quar-
ters are among recent public buildings. Waterworks, cost-
ing about £22,000, have been constructed, and the water
is now laid on to the town. The supply is derived from
wells, whence the water is pumped into a reservoir, from
which the water flows by gravitation. Swimming baths,
at a cost of about £l,OOO, are now open. The streets,
public buildings, and many of the private houses are lit
with gas. There are many handsome private residences, with
well aid-out gardens and grounds, in or near the town. The
town is extending, and new buildings are being erected,
especially on the Main Range, which is considered the
most healthy and charming locality in Southern Queens-
land. The locality is now the centre of a large agricultural
settlement. Some of the large sheep stations have recently
been repurchased by the Government under the provisions of
the Agricultural Lands Repurchase Act, and thrown open to
selection. Practically the whole of this country has been taken
up and settled by a most desirable class. Consequently the
agricultural industry has received a distinct stimulus. There are
two flour mills in the town, also four saw mills, three tanneries,
two soap factories, two breweries, two malthouses, a foundry,
and jam and fruit preserving and pickling companies. A
very fine butter factory has been added to the industries. There
i been shown at the local exhibition. There are two societies,
- the oldest of the kind in Queensland, which hold annual
; exhibitions : the Royal Agricultural Society, holding its show
- for stock in August, and the Drayton and Toowoomba Agricul-
, tural and Horticultural Society holds its annual exhibition in
, January. There is also a Horticultural Society which meets
- i monthly, when amateur and professional gardeners show
flowers and vegetables. There are two clubs. Downs’ andl
i j Gordon ; the last has < erected a gymnasium. During the
. i summer of 1896-7 Lord Lamington, the Governor, was making
I Westbrook Hall his summer residence. The population of
• i the district, including the municipalities of Drayton and
i Toowoomba, by census of 1891, of the municipality was 7,007,
now about 10,500. In the entire district it is estimated that the
; I population is nearly 30,000. The Darling Downs Gazette (estab-
; lished 1858) and the I'oowoomba Chronicle (established in 1861),
. | both tri-weekly, Biz (1893), Democrat (1895), Settler (1895), are
| the local journals. Formation : basaltic.
TOOWONG (27° 28' 8. at., 153° 1' B. long.), a residential
i suburb of Brisbane, 2£ miles distant, with rail, ’bus, and tele-
; phonic communication, and money-order office, and savings
: bank. It is in the county of Stanley, parish of Enoggera and
| municipal shire and electorate of Toowong. It has many villa
I residences, and has become both a popular and populous suburb
of Brisbane. Hotels : Regatta and Railway ; State school,) No.
13), and two private schools ; churches, Episcopal, Wesleyan,
Presbyterian, Primitive Methodist, and Baptist. Both water
and gas are now available. The new 16-inch main from Gold
creek reservoir passes through, and gives an ample water
, supply. The cemetery here is the principal place of interment
for the metropolis. The area of the shire (proclaimed May 20,
1880) is 2,880 acres, with 25 miles of streets, 928 dwellings, and
capital value of £281,319. Toowong is an electoral district under
the Act of 1887, and returns one member to the Legislative.
Assembly. Population of shire (census 1891) 4,437, now about
I 4,325.
TORQUAY-BY-THE-SEA. This is a small township
and watering-place in the county of March, division of Burrum,
situate on Hervey Bay, about 23J miles from Maryborough.
There is an excellent deep-water anchorage close by the town-
j ship, in which the largest vessels can lie, and it possesses a
magnificent beach. There are three sugar mills outside the
township. Hotel : the Torquay. «. A coach plies to the Pialba
railway station. Population fluctuates according to the season.
TO WALL A. A mining locality on the Russell extended
goldfield, on Coolaman Creek, at the heads of the north branch of
J tbe Johnstone Water, about 27 miles nearly due W. from Gerald-
ton and 35 miles E. from Herberton, in the district of Herbert.
There is a good dray road Irom Mareeba station, on the Cairns-
line, which is distant about 50 miles. The assistant Govern-
ment geologist describes the field as being situated in the midst
of an immense and dense scrub, at an elevation of about 2,300
feet above the sea-level, and in very rough country. The
1 crushing returns for 1896 were 304 tons of stone, yieldl
641 oz. 14 dwt. One hotel. The total output of reef gold to the
! middle of 1897 about 3,500 ozs., and about 300 ozs. of alluvial.
In October, 1593, Warden Macdonald described the locality thus:
“ The camp at Towalla is situated on the left bank of Coolaman
Creek, and as yet is a mere cluster of tents with a
few slab huts interspersed, all dotted about without any
semblance of regularity.” There are two stores and a butcher’s
shop. The site cannot be commended as a suitable one for a
| town ; moreover, some of the main lines of reef seem to run
[ right through the camp. A township has been surveyed and
gazetted, a mile from the presentcamp. Population, in 1897, about
20. There are two batteries run by water power, a two-head
one on Combo Creek, and a three-head on Coolaman Creek.
Average yearly rainy days 230. Formation : micaceous slate and
sandstone.
TOWNSVILLE (19° 10' 10" S. lat., 146° 57' 56" E. long.)
is a municipal town (proclaimed on February 15, 1866), and the
principal city in North Queensland, with money-order office,
savings bank, and telegraph station, situated on the shore of
Cleveland Bay, and about 870 miles NW. of Brisbane. It was
discovered by John Medwin Black in 1864, and named after
his partner, the late Captain Towns. It is in the county of
Elphinstone and electoral district of Townsville, and meet-
ing-place of the Thuringowa Divisional Board. There i»
regular communication with all ports north and south
by several lines of steamers. There is monthly com-
munication with the home country, rid Torres Strait, per
the steamers of the 8.1. Company; and to China every
three weeks, per China Navigation Company's steamers and
the B. and A. boats. Hotels; The Queen’s, the Imperial, the
Palace, Motropole, TattersalTs, Post-office, Commercial, Court-
house, Grand, Alexandra, Exchange, and many others. It has
71 miles of roads and streets, 2,255 dwellings within the munici-
pality, and property of ratable value of £794,823. Estimated
area of municipality 2,080 acres, with vicinity 8,000 acres. It is
a picturesque, if not elegant, town, built on the banks of Ross
Creek, and partly on the slope of Castle Hill, which rises to ars
altitude of 1,000 feet. On the beach, which is a fine stretch of
sand, several hotels and private dwellings are erected,
while on Melton Hill there are numerous superior resi-
dences. The business portion of the town consists almost
entirely of the main (Flinders) street, Melton and Castle
Hills preventing it from extending to the northward. The
street however extends for a considerable distance following*-
59
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
Tin—Tow]


the course of Ross Creek, and is thickly built upon for over a
mile. A swing bridge, named Victoria, spanning Ross Creek from
North to South Townsville, with a total length of 550 feet,
lias been built. It has ten fixed spans of 40 feet each, and two
opening spans of 57 feet 7f inches in the clear. The swing is
operated by hydraulic power. There is a large shipping trade ;
Townsville being the port for an immense territory to the W.
and NW., including several gold-fields and a large area of pastoral
country, even to the Diamentina, which, however, is hampered
by the openness of the anchorage. There are stone break-
waters which enclose a fine harbour, the depth of which is
being gradually increased by dredging. Large vessels fitted
ifor the carriage of frozen meat enter the harbour and
Joad direct from the refrigerating cars which bring
the meat from the works, about three miles away.
Substantial wharves and bulk stores line the northern
bank of the creek, which is navigable in full tides beyond the
•swing bridge to the railway wharves for shipping of considerable
■tonnage. The eastern breakwater, which was completed on
March 31st, 1889, is 4,088 feet in length, with a concrete parapet
4 feet high to within 900 feet of the full length, and has a branch
railway communicating with the main (Northern) line. The
■damages to the eastern and western breakwater caused by last
.year’s cyclone are now in course of being made good. The N. S.
Wales, Queensland National, Union, Australasia, Australian
Joint-Stock, Royal, Commercial, North Queensland, and London
Banks have branches, all substantial and handsome buildings.
There are agents of several insurance societies, and a branch of the
Mutual Provident Society, lodged in a fine brick edifice next the
Exchange hotel. The hospital, three two-story brick buildings,
"has ample accommodation for about 100 patients. There are
■also a customs-house, a largo and commodious post and tele-
graph office, a town-hall, two Masonic halls, immigration
barracks, a court-house, and a brick gaol, now proposed
to be converted into a lunatic asylum, and an extensive j
penal establishment at Stewart’s Creek (4 j miles dis-
tant), one of the best buildings of the kind in Queens- j
land. The Supreme Court is a fine two-story building (
■situated on Melton Hill facing the sea. There are now two ;
judges with the necessary officials resident here, so that (
most of the legal business is now transacted on the spot. The
regular sittings of the District Court are held here at stated
intervals. The Registrar of Titles and the Sub-Commis- |
■sioner of Stamps for the Northern District are stationed here, j
There are four State schools (Nos. 113, 257, 303, and 436) also a
State school (No. 509) at North Townsville, and another (No. 498)
at West Townsville, and the St. Joseph R.C. schools, a grammar
.school and an orphanage. The school of arts is a fine two-
story brick structure in the centre of the town, with
.a large and well-appointed concert hall, capable of seating
.500, and a library.of 1,947 vols. The Norman Hall is one of
the largest concert and ball rooms north of Brisbane, having
seating accommodation for 1,000; there is a splendid floor for
•skating and dancing, together with all the appointments of a
bijou theatre. The places of worship are St. James’s, St. Peter’s
and St. John’s (Episcopal), St. Joseph’s and St. Mary’s (Roman j
Catholic), Presbyterian, Congregational, and two Wesleyan
■chapels. Townsville is the head-quarters of the Bishop of j
North Queensland, the Right Rev. Dr. Barlow An Episcopal
■cathedral, costing £23,000 when completed, is sufficiently far
advanced to be used for worship. Even in its semi-finished j
•state it is the most imposing ecclesiastical edifice in the city. 1
Foundations are laid for a new large and picturesque j
Roman Catholic Church. A quarantine station has been
■erected on Magnetic Island, and a reception house built, j
Batteries are now completed on Magazine Island and
Kissing Point, manned by a permanent garrison. Among
fhe local institutions are the Townsville Turf Club, a ■
Pastoral and Agricultural Society, Freemasons’, Oddfellows’, j
Caledonians’, and other benefit and social lodges. Fire Brigade
.Board, Chamber of Commerce, and Stock Exchange. The immi-
gration barracks is a long wooden building, situated on Ross J
Island, near the mouth of the Creek, having accommo-
dation for about 500 inmates. There are two large foundries, j
an extensive brewery, a soap factory, also an ice works,
a gas company, four printing offices, a manufacturing
stationery and bookbinding establishment, and Free Bond j
and Storage Company’s building. The Queensland Meat |
Export and Agency Co.’s works, on the banks of the Ross (
river, are in full working order, employing a large number of I
Lands. The meat is conveyed, per rail, in special cars to the j
jetty, where it is transhipped into the steamers. The North !
Queensland Meat Export Co.’s works, situated at Alligator
Creek, are also in active operation. Formation: porphyry, i
blended with granite, and decided granite in the ranges. The j
■district is principally a pastoral one, though some portion is ;
under crop for maize and potatoes. The country west of Towns- ;
wille is famed for its pastoral wealth. The Northern railway from , >
Townsville westward is completed to Hughenden (235 miles), 1
with a branch line to Ravenswood. Three trains run daily to I i
Charters Towers and the intermediate stations, with several
•special cattle, sheep and goods trains every twenty-four [ <
hours. The station is on Flinders Street, some little distance ; i
from the business portion of the town. Waterworks afford one | i
of the best supplies in the colony; the supply is derived from j s
two wells, sunk about 3 and 4 miles respectively from Towns- ;
Aille, believed to have tapped a subterranean stream. The water is ■ '
pumped into a reservoir of 650,000 gallons capacity on Castle 1
Hill, about 180 feet above sea-level, and thence distributed to 1
nil parts of the town. The pumping machinery is most | (
complete, being equal to 30,000 gallons per hour. Accord- <
ing to the Government Geologist’s report, the whole ] S
of the alluvial deposit up to the sea-level is saturated
with fresh water, and this alluvial flat will afford an
abundant supply of water to meet the wants of a large city
for all time. There are promising indications of coal-measures
near Townsville. A considerable trade in lime is now being done.
It is carried by rail to the town, where it is largely used for
building purposes. Population, about 11,000 —inclusive of neigh-
bourhood, 13,016 (census 1891). The mean annual rainfall for the
24 years during which records have been kept is 52 - 09 inches,
the mean temperature about 73°. Newspapers: the Daily
Bulletin, and Evening Star, daily; North Queensland Weekly
Herald.
ULAM. —A gold-field at Twelve Mile Creek, about 32
miles S. from Rockhampton, a few miles from Mount Morgan,
where some remarkable finds of gold have been made. The
prospects of the field are reported to be dependent on the allu-
vial. Two men obtained in a few days 300 ozs. from the surface
of a small ravine, about 1 mile from the township. In 1896
the yield of gold was 427 ozs., from 381 tons. 17 cwt. The town
was laid out on October 6, and there were prospects of the field
becoming permanent ; but the field so far has not fulfilled
its first promise, although in 1897 the Warden considered its
prospects as really good. Population estimated 350.
UNION CAMP (16° 38' S. lat., 144° 40' E. long.), a mining
township on the Hodgkinson gold-field, electorate of Wootha-
kuta, in the centre of a promising reefing district. There arc
two stores, two public-houses, two or three tradesmen, and a
crushing machine.
TJRANDANGIE (21° 35' S. lat., 138° 24' E. long.), a town-
ship with telegraph station, situated three-quarters of a mile east
of the Georgina river, in the county of Piturie, opened in 1885
by Charles Webster and James Hutton, in the centre of a
splendid pastoral district on the main route for travelling stock
coming from the Gulf table-lands, the Northern Territory of
South Australia and West Australia for Southern markets. The
country around is principally taken up with sheep and cattle
stations. It is distant from the South Australian border 20
I miles eastward, 147 miles by the telegraph line SE. from
I Camooweal. 200 miles W. from Cloncurry, 210 miles NW. from
; Boulia and 350 miles SW. from Burketown. Buggy runs to Boulia.
Hotel: TattersalTs. One store, and a saddler. Local institu-
tions : A Jockey Club and Progress Association. Town popu-
: lation, 28.
YERESDALE (27° 55* S. lat., 153° 0' B. long.), a small
post-town and railway station on the Logan river, in the county
of Ward and Tabragalba division. Has police quarters, post
office, and State school (No. 122), school of arts, and chapel,
used by all Protestants. Communication with Brisbane (dis-
tance 42 miles) by rail. Is the centre of a very large grazing
and farming district, comprising black soil flats and apple tree
] ridges, producing maize, cotton, oats, Ac., and yields timber
largely. Population, 80 (census 1891). District now 277.
WALKERSTON (21° 14' S. lat., 148° 33' E. long.), co.
Carlisle, electorate and police district of Mackay, parish of
Qreenmount, a post town, 637 miles NW. of Brisbane,
with money-order office, savings bank, telegraph and railway
station, about 9 miles WSW. from Mackay, to and from which
1 there is a daily mail. Hotels : the Albion, Duke of Edinburgh
and Queen’s, the first-named having a fine assembly-room. It is
built on both sides of Baker’s Creek, whence the water supply
is derived, and is about a mile from the Pioneer River. It is
I the centre of the Mackay sugar district. It has a State school
! (No. 353), post and telegraph office, police barracks,
aerated water factory, four large stores, two bakers, one
blacksmith, one butcher, two carpenters, some tradesmen,
and several cottages. Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Roman
I Catholic places of worship,’ and Kanaka mission. The Good
; Templars have a handsome and commodious hall. Local
clubs : Good Templars, and cricket. Adjoining Walkerston
is the township of Alsatia, but as the two places are only a
I street apart, they practically form one township, and are
known by the name of Walkerston. The railway line from
Mackay to Eton and Mirani passes through Walkerston.
i Sugar mills within a radius of 3 miles are: Te Kowai, Peri, Pal-
myra, Cassada, Pleystowe, Branscombe, Nebia, Dumbleton, and
Palms. Sugar mills with distilleries : Alexandra, Pleystowe and
I Te Kowai. Formation : a sort of brittle sandstone, covered
with clay, and having an alluvial surface soil. Population,
378 (census 1891), now about 500.
WALL AN GARRA (28° 54' S. lat., 151° 59'E. long.), the
southern terminal station of the Queensland Railways, the
northern terminus of the Great Northern railway (N.S.W.),
(called Jennings), and the changing station for New South
Wales is situated in the co. of Bentinck, Carnarvon electorate,
close to the border, 233 miles SSW. from Brisbane. Hotels ; Com-
mercial, and Royal. It has a post, money-order and savings-bank
office, telegraph, and railway station, police barracks, a Roman
Catholic church, supplied from Stanthorpe, and an undenomina-
tional place of worship used by Wesleyans and Presbyterians,
being supplied from Tenterfield ; Episcopal services are also held.
Customs officers’ residence and office here also. A State
school (No. 458). A small public school and a steam mill are
at Jennings on the N.S. Wales side. Cattle yards and goods
shed have been erected for the intercolonial exchange of traffic,
and additional station accommodation has been provided.
The climate is cool and bracing, being about 2,870 feet above sea-
level, and is well adapted for fruit-growing, especially English
fruits. Boonoo Boonoo, an old N.S. Wales gold-field, is 12 miles
distant, Tenterfield is also 12 miles distant, and is a depot for
chilled meat industry. Population, 181 (census 1891), now about
200. Formation ; granite.
60
[Ula-Wal
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.


WARWICK (28° 12' S. lat., 152° 4' E. long.), a municipal
town (proclaimed May 25, 1861), on the river Condamine, about
64 miles by rail from tbe border of New South Wales, in the
county of Merivale, and electoral district of Warwick, about 100
miles by road SW. of Brisbane (169 miles by rail). It is situated
in the very heart of one of the richest agricultural districts in
Queensland, and is surrounded on all sides by farms, in which
operations are carried on similar to those in the “ old country.”
It has been described as beyond doubt the prettiest, healthiest,
cleanest, and most attractive inland town in the colony, with
broad, straight, rectangular streets, all running due north and
south and east and west; viewed from one of the surrounding
hills, or from the town hall tower, the town looks like a
large checker board, so evenly are the square blocks cut out, each
containing 10 acres. The buildings, both private and
public, have a substantial look about them; most of the
residences outside the business centres, and many in them, have
gardens in front of them, giving an air of comfort rarely seen
in Australian towns. Two large recreation squares of 10 acres
each neatly laid out and planted with ornamental trees, flowers,
and shrubs, exist in the centre of the town and give to the main
street a pretty and picturesque appearance. There are besides
two large parks. There is an immense quantity of excellent
building stone in the district, also good clay for bricks, and
plenty of marble, from which an excellent lime is made;
in consequence, many of the buildings are of stone and
brick. Warwick is situated at an elevation above the sea-
level of 1,497 feet, and enjoys a temperate and bracing cli-
mate. The municipality has an area of 24 square miles, 48
miles of streets, 836 dwellings, capital value of land being
£154,517. It has four churches, English (St. Mark’s), Roman
Catholic (St. Mary’s), Wesleyan and Presbyterian, all sub-
stantial buildings of stone. Attached to St. Mark’s is a neat
rectory of stone, a schoolhouse and other buildings. The
Salvation Army also has new barracks of its own. The hospital
is on an elevated site; it is a two-story stone building. It will
accommodate about 50 patients. The school of arts has a
library of about 4,000 volumes, the reading-room is free to the
public, the Council subsidizing the same. Technical classes have
been established in connection therewith. The building is of
brick, and is both convenient and roomy; with a large room
where meetings of various institutions are held. The post
office is a two-story stone building adjoining the telegraph
office, also of stone. A new post-office, however, is being
erected in a more central position, at a cost of about £5,500.
The court-house, at the comer of Guy and Fitzroy Streets
is a commodious and ornamental building, with a clock
tower. The town-hall, in the centre of the town, is a very
fine building of stone, two stories high, surmounted with
a clock tower; behind the main building is a large room,
with stage, scenery, <fec., for theatrical and other performances,
concerts, &c. The tower is fitted with a large four-dial clock
which strikes the hours ; the bell, which came from
St. Mary’s Cathedral, Sydney, is on the outside top of the
tower, weighing nearly 3 cwt., being some 30 feet above
the clock itself. The Masonic Hall is a pretentious structure,
and the lodge-room is admitted to be one of the most complete
in the Colonies. Four banks, the Australian Joint-Stock,
New South Wales, Queensland National, and Royal, also
a branch of the Government Savings Bank, are established
here, and nearly all the Home and Colonial insurance com-
panies have agents in the town and district. All the bank
buildings are substantial structures in the centre of the town.
The principal hotels are the Royal, Commercial, Cosmopolitan,
Criterion, Sovereign, and several smaller ones. The district of
Warwick has long been famous for its wheat-growing capabi-
lities ; in favourable seasons a return of 40 or 50 bushels to the
acre has been harvested off some of the best land. The annual
output of maize amounts to about 300,000 bushels. The district
is also famous for grape-growing, and the cultivation of the
grape is extending. The making of the wine is an industry
which finds occupation for a large number of people. The
Warwick wines are known all over the country as being
sound and good. Bacon curing, quarrying, tanning, flour
milling, and cheese and butter making are carried on. The
district is famous for its general agricultural produce; potatoes,
oats, lucerne, and other farm products are largely grown, and its
gardens have the fruits of a temperate clime growing side by
side with those of a hot climate. Tobacco is also grown in
the district. It has long been known that auriferous reefs
existed to the west of the town, in the localities of Talgai,
Thane’s Creek, Leybum, and other places. Mining popula-
tion estimated at 250, all of whom are reported to be making
money in a quiet way. The wheat, flour, and wool from this ;
district have carried off the highest honours where ex- j
hibited. Stock of all descriptions can be raised with great |
success. Glengallan, North and South Toolburra and Canning
Downs, the principal stations in the district, are noted for their [
excellent stock. There are three State schools (Nos. 116,225,258),
one boardingschool,aschoolin connection with the Roman Catholic I
church,besides two or three others of a private character. Mercan-
tile offices are well represented, several large and substantial stores, '
some built of brick, and some of stone, supply the wants of the
districts. There are in the town two lodges of Oddfellows,
(whose hall is the second finest building in the town), j
! town two steam flour mills, one built of brick, the other of
stone, both substantial buildings, and possessing machinery
with the latest improvements. There is also a saw-mill,
there being a plentiful supply of timber to work upon, and
a foundry near the railway station. Warwick returns one
member to Parliament, being until the Hon. T. J. Byrnes’ sudden
death represented by the Premier. The town is furnished with
an unlimited supply of excellent water from the Condamine, and
gas illumines the streets and houses. Coal is found in large
quantities in various parts of the district and is now fast
becoming an important feature in the industries of the district.
A great drawback to the progress of the town has been the
| aggregation of the several largo estates in the vicinity. The
) Government, however, during July, 1895, purchased 18,000 acres
from these stations, within a few miles of the town, for close
] agricultural settlement; of this area the whole has since been
I selected, and the bulk of it is now under cultivation. A further
i area on Glengallan of 6,000 acres was recently re-purchased for
j close settlement. Agriculture is the backbone of Warwick,
1 and with good land available close handy, with good markets,
j the progress of the town is certain. In fact, during the past
two years the progress of Warwick has been noted, new build-
ings of a substantial nature following the increased settlement
on the land that has manifested itself. There is a commodious
railway station at the east side of the town. Population of
the town, by census of 1891, 3,402, now about 4,200; of the
neighbourhood, 6,800. Warwick has two newspapers, the
Argus and the Examiner and Times (published twice a week).
Formation : Sandstone and limestone.
WATAWA, sometimes known as the Thirty Mile, is a
I settlement and railway station on the Bundaberg and Mount
i Perry line, 31 miles from Bundaberg, with a public-house and
store attached, a blacksmith and wheelwright’s shop, and Pro-
, visional School (No. 460). The neighbourhood is well timbered.
WATERFORD (27° 46' S. lat., 153° 4' E. long.), a small
; township with post-office, in the county of Ward, on the Logan
1 River and Dairy Creek. Communication with Brisbane, 22 miles
NW., daily by the South Coast line, which was opened in 1885.
i Products of district : sugar, maize, cattle, and dairy produce.
State school (No. 130). Churches: Roman Catholic and Lutheran.
Hotels : Waterford Arms and Morning Star. There is a saw
mill in the vicinity. Population, 133 (census 1891).
WATSONVILLE (17° 23’ 8. lat., 145° 11' E. long.), co.
Chelmsford, Herberton police district, electorate of Wootha-
kata, a tin-mining locality with post office, about 7 miles
NW. from Herberton, situated on Jamies Creek, a tributary
of the Walsh river, on a sandy flitt at the base of the Great
Western Hill. The town owes its founding to the discovery
of tin here on February 19,1881, by Mr. R. H. Watson. Hotels :
Family, Commercial, and Royal. It has two stores, a State
school (No. 220), with teacher s residence, a court-house, police-
statiou, and school of art, with library of 936 vols. Church
of England and other services are held in the school of arts;
Roman Catholic chapel. Coaches run via Herberton, to Mareeba,
the present terminus of the Cairns-Herberton railway; coaches
also run to Montalbion and Irvinebank. A powerful machine
belonging to Hugh Dempster, known as the Blschoff, driven by
a turbine, with all the best appliances for saving tin, is here.
The principal mines formerly were the Great Western and
North Australian. Lodes containing silver and copper, which
assay well, have been opened. The tin-mines in the vicinity com-
prise the Ben Lomond, King of the Ranges, T Claim, Glencairn,
Wild Irish Girl, the Pioneer Tin Mining Company, the New North
Australian, and several other claims. At Eureka are the Glad-
stone, Ivanhoe, Young Australia, Blackrock, and Great Eastern
claims. From the T Claim good tin has been obtained at a depth
of 350 feet. Copper is also plentiful in the district.
The Great Western claims are on the top of a very pre-
cipitous mountain, forming a portion of the divide between
the Wild river and the Walsh, the former being eastern and the
latter western (or Gulf) waters. The country between Herberton
and the Western is particularly rugged, and the Great Western
Hill is estimated to be 3,500 feet above sea-level. At Bakersville
about four miles from Watsonville, on the Irvinebank dray
track, rich tin lodes have been discovered, particularly in the
Tourmaline claim. Various tin mines are at Eureka Creek,
Irvinebank, and Cumming’s Camp. Silver centres are Montalbion
and Orient Camp. Copper has been discovered in the Tait
district, about 60 miles distant. Formation : Primary chiefly
granite or porphyry. Population, 142 (census 1891); now about
350.
WESTWOOD (23° 37' S. lat., 150° 8' E. long, a money-
order, savings bank, telegraph, and post - town, in the Port
Curtis district, and station on the Central Railway, 30 miles
SW. of Rockhampton. Inns ; Westwood and Railway. It has
two places of worship, Wesleyan and Catholic (St Bridget’s),
school of arts, and a school (No. 119). Both copper and gold
have been found in the neighbourhood, and claims have been
worked. Population, 114 (census 1891) ; of district, 1,602.
WILD RIVER. See Herberton,
WINDORAH. See Stoney Point.
WINTON (22° 33' S. lat., 143° 3' B. long.), co. of Ayrshire,
electorate of Gregory, police district of Marathon, a post town
with money-order, telegraph, and savings bank office, situated on
the Pelican Waterholes (on the north side of the Western River),
also of Masonic, Orange, Protestant Alliance, Good Templars, ' the Pelican Waterholes (on the north side of the Western River),
and Hibernians, a Ladies’ Benevolent Society, a Convent ( 143 J miles from Hughenden, 130 miles from Longreach, the nearest
of Sisters of Mercy, an Agricultural Society (the Eastern ' railway station, and about 1,018 miles (vid Rockhampton) NW.
Downs, whose annual show is held in February), two turf clubs, of Brisbane. It has five hotels, the North Gregory, the Royal Mail,
a coursing club (there being plenty of hares in the district), Commercial, Imperial, Cosmopolitan, and Tattersall’s; five stores,
a rifle club, tennis, football, and cricket clubs, fire brigade, post and telegraph office, hospital, court-house, water supply office,
and a company of the Mounted Infantry. There are in the : branches of the Queensland National, Australasia, and N. 8,
61
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.
War —Win]


Wales Banks, quarters for Inspector of Police, Roman Catholic 1 worship, Church of England. The surrounding district is
church, Winton Divisional Board offices, many tradesmen’s j occupied for grazing and wheat-growing purposes. A pro-
premises, soap factory and aerated bread factory. State school visional school did exist here, but it has been removed to
(No. 478), School of Arts. Lodges: Oddfellows, Loyal Winton Millmerran, a new town centre which has sprung up seven miles
M.U.I 0.0. P., Masons, Thomas Barnett Feltham (8.C.). Coaches distant from Yandilla.
run to Longreach, Hughenden, Boulia, and Cloncurry. The | YATALA (27° 45' S. lat., 153° 10' E. long.), a small town-
water supply is derived from Government tanks and from water- i ship on the Albert River, 2 miles from Beenleigh, in the county
holes in Western River and Mistake Creek. Water has been jof Ward, with hotel, ferry, and Roman Catholic chapel. Corn-
found at a great depth by boring, and the outflow is estimated
at 647,000 gallons per day. Between Winton and Muttaburra,
and Winton and Hughenden, several large water tanks and
dams have been formed. Surrounding country is reported to
be good and soil rich, and if adequately watered would produce
large and valuable crops of fruit and agricultural produce.
Around Winton is some of the richest pastoral country in
Queensland. It is the centre for twelve large stations, and is
also on the principal stock route in the colon}’. Population, 625
(census 1891), now estimated at 786. Local paper: Winton
Herald.
WITHERSFIELD a station on the Central Rail
munication with Brisbane, 26 miles distant, is by rail and weekly
| steamer. The Stapylton railway station is about half a mile
distant. Several sugar mills are in the vicinity. Population,
81 (census 1891); with district about 150.
YENGrARIE (25° 32' S. lat., 162° 34' E. long.), (county March,
I Burrum electorate, Maryborough police district), a township on
j Graham’s Creek, a tributary of the Mary River, and touched by
I the railway between Gytnpie and Maryborough, about 5 miles
from the latter port by road and 9by rail; about 120 miles NW.
; from Brisbane. Hotel : the Mary River. It owes its existence to
I the Yengarie Sugar Refinery, owned by Messrs. B. Cranand Co.,
which employs about 150 Europeans when in full work. There
way, 203 miles W. of Rockhampton. About 12 miles is a post and telegraph office in connection with the railway
NNE. from hero is Retreat Creek, where sapphires, 1 station (telephonic communication between the refinery and
zircons, and other precious stones in large quantities Maryborough), and in the village is a State school (No. 121), and
have been found. There are three reward claims held by I public hall, one store, a butcher’s, and a baker’s shops, &c. A brick
Richardson and Fisher, and ten other holdings. The former are
reported to be the most promising; the “finds” so far have
been sapphires of every shade of blue, green, yellow, and some
red (ruby), spiral crystals and zircons, and also a true ruby, the
first ever found in Australia. Many of the stones have been cut
and polished in Brisbane, and are reputed to be of great value.
The stones are found in a gravelly drift; the source is unknown,
but believed by the Government geologist to be from the desert
sandstone, probably on the divide between the Barcoo and
Burdekin water, where there is a large area of desert sand-
stone.
WOOLGAR (co. Rupert), a gold-field adjacent to the
er are Divisional Board room has been erected about three-quarters of a
have I mile distant. The Antigua Board meets here once a month. The
some refinery is supplied with cane-juice by underground pipes from
y, the neighbouring plantations, by floating tanks from other sugar
m cut plantations on the Mary River, and by long cylindrical tanks
,’alue. which are conveyed in the season twice daily by rail from differ-
iown, ent parts of the district. Coasting vessels can proceed up
lesert the river and berthe at the refinery wharf. It is lit by
i and gas, a branch of the railway runs to the works. Roman Catholics
sand- hold services every two months. A Lay service (Church of
England) is held every Sunday evening. There is a ferry punt
) the working on the Mary River near the Mary River Hotel. Land
Etheridge, on the Woolgar River, fa tributary of the Flinders, ; is very suitable for wheat and other cereals as well as green
about 80 miles north of Richmond, and about 150 miles S. of crops, and transit to market easy both by rail and road. Popu-
Georgetown, 150 miles W. of N. of Hughenden railway station, | lation, 168 (census 1891).
to which a coach runs vid Richmond, reported to be rich in YETJIiBA (26° 43' S. lat., 149“ 24' E. long.), sometimes
mineral and auriferous deposits, with reefs well defined. Silver
and galena lodes with a percentage of gold exist here. The
reefing places are Lower Camp, Middle Camp and Cattle Camp.
Early in 1897 the Warden reported that it was practically
deserted, but there was a prospect of some of the most promising
mines being worked in the near future. Population of district,
60.
WOOLLOONGABBA. See Brisbane South.
WONGAORRA (24° 50' S. lat., 152“ 25' E. long.), is a south, Wallurnl
village in county Cook, lying some six miles from Bundaberg. ; Mail. leulba
It contains Primitive Methodist, Episcopal and Apostolic worship, and
(German) churches, and a State school. The land about is very Presbyterian
fertile in some narts. and sucar is lartrelv crown, also corn, sea-level. As
fertile in some parts, and sugar is largely grown, also corn.
There are many plantations and mills in the surrounding dis-
trict. In the neighbourhood of Woongarra rises the singular
mountain known as the Sloping Hummock, the only elevation
near the town of Bundaberg. Formation: volcanic. Soil red
chocolate and sandy loam.
WYANDRA, the present terminus of the Western line
up to October, 1898, is 544 miles W. of Brisbane, and is becoming
written as Yuleba, Yuelba, and Yulebah, is a post town, with
savings bank and money-order office, telegraph and rail-
way station on the Western Line, 281 miles W. from Bris-
bane, in the county of Waldegrave, electorate of Murilla,
and police district of Roma, on the creek of the same
name. Coaches run to Surat and St. George : fares,
Surat, 15s. ; St. George, 40s. The stations in the neigh-
bourhood are Bendemere, 8 miles north, Moongool, 12 miles
south, Wallurnbilla, 12 miles west. Hotels ; Royal, and Royal
, has Anglican and Roman Catholic places of
is visited by Anglican, Roman Catholic and
ministers. It lies about 986 feet above
this is expected to be the point to which the
traffic from Surat and St. George will converge, and the depdt
from which stock will be forwarded by rail, the necessary
stock yards and other conveniences for the traffic have been
erected. It is reputed to be one of the most important stations
for carrying traffic, as it supplies the country south to
N.S. Wales border and north to the Dawson river.
Business places are three stores, two butchers, two blacksmiths,
one saddler, and saw-mill. Police station and court-house.
a place of some importance. There are three hotels, wholesale ' ™ lce .nation ana court-nouse
and retail stores, blacksmith’s and other shops, and carrying ... , ; The country is rather heavily timbered
agent’s premises. There is a provisional school; with an attend- ' <P ln6 and well
'ince of 40 j supplied with water. The Experimental Farm is in the neigh-
awv a /oq° k' « V , bourhood, about a mile from the railway station. It has an area
YAAMBA (23° 5' S. lat., 151“ 25' E. long.), (county of
Livingstone), a township, with telegraph and money-order office
on the Fitzroy River, about 20 miles N. of Rockhampton and
450 NW. of Brisbane. State school (No. 120), and two hotels.
Pastoral district. Population, 136 (census 1886).
YANDIIiLA (27° 50' S. lat., 151“ 22' E. long.) is on the
Qrasstree Creek, 150 miles SW. of Brisbane, and has a telegraph
station. Communication is by the Pittsworth Railway Station,
from which it is about 13 miles distant. It has one place of
of 400 acres, all fenced in, but it has been turned over to the
Police Department; 200 acres are now used as a police paddock,
and 200 acres are used by the Rabbit Board. Good agricultural
district, only medium grazing not being well suited for sheep.
Yeulba is the post town for the following stations: Warkon 35
miles SE., Muggleton 28 miles NW., Clifford 35 miles NW.,
Bundi 42 miles NE., Wallabilla 18 miles 8., and Tinawan 25
miles S. Population, 233 (census 1891). Formation : sandstone
ridges, red loam, brown and black soil flats.
62
[Wit—Yeu
TOWNS IN QUEENSLAND.




0 ■


/ QUEENSLAND.'
GOVERNMENT LAND has recently been thrown open to
Selection in all parts of the Colony, in
AGRICULTURAL HOMESTEADS.— The area to be selected varies with the quality of the land,
from 160, 820, to 640 acres, at 2s. 6d. per acre, payment extending over 10 years.
AGRICULTURAL FARMS. —Area up to 1,280 acres at 1 Os. per acre upward, payment extending
over 20 years.
GRAZING SELECTIONS.- Farms and Homesteads in areas up to 20,(XX) acres, on 14, 21, and 28
years’ lease, at annual rout of per acre upwards
SCRUB SELECTIONS.— These are divided into four classes (according to quantity of timber on
land to he cleared), area of each up to 10,000 acres, lease for 80 years ; no rent for first 5, 10, 15, or
20 years according to class, remaining periods Jd. and Id. per annum per acre.
UNCONDITIONAL SELECTIONS. -Up to 1,280 acres, the purchase of the freehold being from
13s. 4d. per acre upward, payable in 20 annual instalments.
AGRICULTURAL LANDS PURCHASE ACT.— Large Freehold Estates of choice agricultural
land are also being bought by the Government, surveyed into Farms ranging from 40 to 640 acres, in
various favoured localities, for the purpose of bringing about close settlement. These lands are sold
on an extended payment of 20 years, and become the freehold by payment practically of £7 19s. a
year for every £lOO of the purchasing price. Should the purchaser desire to secure his freehold
* earlier, he can do so by paying the remaining instalments of principal, together with \ per cent, for
interest.
Free Passages to Queensland are now granted to Farm Labourers and
Female Domestic Servants from. 17 to 35 years for Single, and to 45 years
for Married Persons, who have never been otherwise employed. Applicants
must be seen by an authorised agent, and must pay £1 for shipkits.
RATES OF PASSAGE BY QUEENSLAND LINE OF STEAMERS.
Agents, Messrs. GRAY, DAWES, & CO., 23, Great Winchester Street, London, E.C.
>pen Berths, each, including Shipkits - £l3 13 0
losed Cabins, four Berths, each - - 16 16 0
Closed Cabins, two Berths, each - - 17 17 0
STEAMERS LEAVE LONDON FORTNIGHTLY FOR QUEENSLAND.
For Pamphlets and all other Information, apply—
AGENT-GENERAL, 1, VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, B.W.


MESTEA
TURAL FA
;electio
DITIONAL SELECTION
• NOTE. —The Agent-General
has received instructions from
the Government of Queensland
to suspend free emigration.
November, 1900.
