

INFORMATION
FROM
VAN DIEMEN ’ S LAND,
CONTAINED IN A
LETTER FROM MR. JOHN KING,
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMPANY’S LAND AGENT,
CIRCULAR HEAD, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
TO HIS BROTHER, MR. GEORGE KING,
FARNBOROUGH HILL, NEAR BANBURY, OXON.
PUBLISHED BY PERMISSION OF THE HONOURABLE THE DIRECTORS
OF THE VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMPANY.
LONDON:
J. CROSS, 18, HOLBORN.
BANBURY:
WILLIAM POTTS, PARSON’S LANE.
1833.


ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC.
The following Letter from Van Diemen’s Land
was intended for private information, but from
the extensive acquaintance of the writer, and the
great reliance placed on the authenticity of the
information it contained, such has been the pub-
lic anxiety to obtain copies of it, that I have
been prevailed upon to publish it; I regret, how-
ever, that it has not devolved upon abler hands
to recommend its perusal to the Public; but
should my humble efforts to add my mite to the
general stock of information from those interest-
ing Colonies, prove in any way serviceable to the
Public, it will be a source of gratification to their
Obliged and Obedient Servant,
G. KING.
Farnborough Hill, October, 1833.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Address to the Public 3
Various Prices of Land depending upon situation and
circumstances 7
Different qualities and descriptions of Land . . 8
Best method of managing fresh Land . . . . ib.
Convict Labour, with their Allowances . . . ib.
Indented Servants 9
Cattle, Wild, their nature and uses . . . . ib.
— bred up by Hand.—Comparative Prices . .10
Working Bullocks, their Prices and comparison with
Horses ib.
Working Bullocks, Method of working them . . ib.
Horses, different Breeds and method of working .• « . 11
Sheep, different Prices according to Breeds.—Opinion
as to Treatment.—Liable to Losses and Disorders . ib.
Rot in Sheep unknown . . . . . .12
Prices of Meat Produce ib.
lmported Articles ib.
Agricultural Produce—Average Prices for the last three
years ib.
Wheat, Average Produce of, Small quantity attributed
to bad management 13
Dram Drinking, a great impediment in the manage-
ment of Land . . . ... . ib.


I’ACiK
Profits charged on all kinds of Property, excessive . 14
Stores kept by almost all People of Property . . ib.
High Prices of Labour.—Mechanics’Wages, &c. . Id
Fencing, cost of ...... ib.
Implements, Prices of, would pay Capitalists well to take
out ib.
Opinion of prospects presented to Industrious People . 1C
Comparative comforts with England .... ib.
Dangers and Difficulties, all experienced, with advice
under them . . ib.
Separation from Friends, a severe trial, resolution re-
quired, &c. 18
Advice to Persons intending to Emigrate, what Provi-
sion is requisite to be made, &c. . . . ib.
Best and Cheapest way of obtaining Passage . . 20
Steps to be taken on Arrival.—Advice on the choice of
Land, &c. . . ib.
Application must be made for Men to Government - 21
Recommendation of Mr. Bischoff’s work on Emigration ib.
Conclusion 22
Notes 23-24


INFORMATION
FROM
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
Circular Head, October 8, 1832.
Dear Brother,
You will doubtless feel surprised at not
hearing from us sooner, but as I could not
get all the information I wanted, was under
the necessity of postponing writing till now;
I shall without further preface, communicate
all I can learn, as also what falls under my
own observation.
There is abundance of useful land in this
country yet unlocated, which is now sold by
auction, by government; the price is consi-
derably higher than it was three years back,
varying from ss. to 25 5. per acre, according
to situation and circumstances, such as con-
tiguity to markets, settled districts, and open
or clear land, this circumstance alone speaks
Prices of
land.


volumes for the prosperity of the country,
as land three years ago made only 3s. or 4s.
an acre; it however seldom happens that
more than one-tenth of clear land, in a
block of one thousand acres can be met with,
but that quantity is a great advantage, as du-
ring the time it is cultivated and cropped,
more will be cleared and brought into cultiva-
tion, and the estate rapidly increased in value.
The land I have seen is of great variety,
the upland consisting mostly of fine deep
sandy loam, capable of producing any crop
in great abundance; the lower land of
alluvial soil, clay, sandy heaths, &c,, but
principally covered with vegetation, and
generally most luxuriant.
The best method in my opinion, of man-
aging fresh land, after grubbing the trees and
scrub, is to pare with the plough, as thin as
possible,, and burn the surface, by that
means all the insects are destroyed when
the surface is burnt, and the land fit for any
crop with one ploughing; which must be
performed with bullocks, they being much
steadier than horses.
Labour is principally performed by con-
victs, who are assigned by government to
the purchaser of crown lands, he providing
them with sufficient food, clothes, and lodg-
Different
qualities of
land.
Manner of
managing
fresh land.
Convict
labour.


ing, the scale of which, as ordered by govern-
ment when they are assigned, is 10 Jib. of
flour, 10Jib. of meat, 7 oz, of sugar, 3J oz.
of soap, 2 oz. of salt, and a little tobacco,
per week; the cost is calculated at about
Is. 2 d. per day; 2 suits of clothes, 2’pairs of
shoes, and 1 hat, each year ; but no money,
making the annual cost about £25 for each
man, while free labour costs more than
double that sum.
Indented servants are generally a bad
speculation, as any agreement or indenture
entered into with them in England is not
binding here, and they almost invariably
leave their service before half their term is
expired, several of the men who came out
with us have run away, and I expect more
will soon follow ; leaving the company the
only alternative, of sueing them for the a-
mount of passage money, in an action for
debt. “Sue a beggar, and catch a louse.”*
The cattle in this country are nearly all
suffered to run wild in the bush or open
country, —calves sucking till the cows calve
again, they are so wild as to be almost use-
less for dairy purposes, butter and cheese
are consequently dear; butter, generally.
Indented
servants.
Wild cattle.
* See note (a.)
B


2s. Qd. per lb., cheese, Is. 6</., few people
taking the trouble of making either, or per-
haps not knowing how to do it.
Dairy cows bred up by the hand, sell at
'about £l5 each, this is rather a high price,
but considering the price of dairy produce,
and that sort of cattle being the only ones
lit for the purpose, makes up the difference
between them and hush bred cattle, the lat-
ter varying from £3 to £6 each.
Working bullocks cost from £4 to £6
eachj when broke to the yoke; they are very
useful stock, and after working them three
or four years, would, if well fed, weigh from
80 to 120 stories each; they do not: get over
so much work as horses, but the cost of
keeping makes up for the deficiency,: for
after the day’s work is done, they are un-
yoked and turned out to get food where they
can find it, except, perhaps three months in
winter, some people give them a few turnips
with straw; while horses, in corn alone, cost
10s. per week, each.
The method of working bullocks . here, is
by yoking them double, with a stout piece
of wood over the necks of each pair, and
iron bows, with one strong chain running
the length of the team, betwixt them, which
hooks to the rings in the crop pieces ; carts
Cattle bred
up by hand.
Compara-
tive prices.
Working
bullocks
compared
with horses.
Method of
working
bullocks.


or waggons used with them have only one
shaft or pole.
Horses are about the same price as in
England, they are principally of the Cleve-
land and blood breeds, or crossed. The
Cleveland, or draught horses, are worked in
pairs, abreast. A man with a pair of horses
will plough from an acre, to an acre and a
quarter per day.
Sheep vary in price from 10s. to 50s.
each, according to the breed, and fineness of 1
the wool.* Ido not think this country can
at present produce wool so fine as Saxony,
or Spain, the excessive rains in winter keep-
ing the wool continually wet, and chilling
such delicate animals as Merino sheep very
much, unless sheds or cots are provided;
which is seldom the case; to this however
there can be no difficulty, as materials are
in great abundance, but till the plan is
adopted of housing sheep in winter, We
must be content with wool of a secondary
quality. Sheep are principally kept in the
bush or open country, and of course very
liable to losses and disorders; very few
flocks are free from scab; to this, bush feed-
ing is a great encouragement, as sometimes
Different
breeds of
horses.
Price of
■ slieep.
Disorders.
* Sec note ( b.)
B 2


part of the flock stray from their companions
and are not found for perhaps several weeks.:
Rot in sheep is never experienced in this
country, this is rather surprising, as they
are suffered to feed promiscuously on wet
marshes with the drier soils, indeed most of
the land is very wet during winter.
Good fat beef makes from 6d. to 9d. per
lb., I mean stall fed, or well made up beasts,
while bush bred cattle are sold at about Ad.
per lb. Fat mutton, bd. to 6d., pork, Gd.
per lb., fowls, 3s. to 6s. per couple, eggs, 2s;
per dozen.
Amongst imported articles, the following
are the prices; moist sugar, bd. per lb., tea,
2s. 6d., starch, 35., blue, 55., soap, B d., mus-
tard, 65., pepper, Is. Ad., candles. Is. Qd.,
vinegar, Is; 6d. per quart.
Agricultural produce averaged, for the
last three years, about 6s. per bushel, wheat,
oats, barley, and peas, selling at about the
same price. It appears strange that more
attention is not paid to the growth of oats
and barley, as the produce per acre is full
30 per cent, more than wheat, such, however,
is the case, very little of either being grown;
perhaps the circumstance of caterpillars be-
ing injurious to barley crops in some sea-
sons, may, in some measure, account for it.
Rot
unknown.
Prices of
meat
produce.
Prices of
imported
articles.
Average
prices of
agricultural
produce.


The average produce of wheat is stated at i
only 20 bushels per acre, which, to a super-'
ficial observer, would appear a small quan-'
tity, but considering the wretched manage-'
ment, (the same land being sown with wheat,
15 or 20 succeeding years,) not so little as at
first sight appears; many thousand acres
having perhaps, 40 stumps of trees standing
on every acre 3 or 4 feet above ground,
which, with the space taken up in avoiding
them with the plough, leaves nearly one
fourth of the land untilled, and a nursery
for weeds; while land well cleared and culti-
vated, has produced from 50 to 60 bushels
per acre; your astonishment will, in some
measure cease, when I tell you there is not
one practical farmer amongst twenty occupi-
ers of land, I might say one in fifty, and those
detached over a large surface, so that but
little opportunity of receiving instruction
by seeing the example a good farmer sets,
presents.
Another great impediment in the manage-
ment of land, exists in the dissolute habits
of most of the old settlers; the low price of
spirits a few years ago, and the facility with
which they were obtained, have introduced
dram drinkiny; and to such excess is this
detestable vice carried, that many who
Small
average
quantity
of wheat
attributed
to bad
manage-
ment.
Dram
drinking.


might have lived in comfort and independ-
ence, have ruined both fortune and consti-
tution, and entailed poverty and depravity,
in the most hideous forms on their posterity.
The profit charged on the sale of all kinds
fof property, is excessive. I shall only men-
tion a few things as specimens. The aver-
age price of barley, for instance, is ss. per
bushel, but it is difficult to obtain malt at
10s. per bushel; you must bear in mind
that no excise duty or restrictions are im-
posed, the profit, therefore, is enormous, full
cent, per cent. A gentleman who is here,
sent to Launceston, for cloth to make a top
coat and trousers; a serviceable drab was
sent, such as you get for 125., or 14s. per
yard; the price was 245. per yard ; the
same individual sent for flannel, the price
was 6s. per yard; for such in England 2s.
would be a high price; hats, which cost
in England, 20s. each, are charged 50s. each,
indeed it is a, general rule to charge 50 per
cent, upon cost price, in addition, to freight
and insurance, and in many cases 50 per cent.
more is added.
Almost every person of property is a
storekeeper for all kinds of goods; farmers
keeping a store from which they supply all
who work for them, and if they happen not
Excessive
profits on
all kinds of
property.
Stores.


to have any article that is wanted, they pro-
cure it, and charge the consumer a profit
upon the colonial price. This state of things
necessarily keeps up the price of labour, and
a free mechanic or labourer makes his agree-
ment according to the price he is charged
for what he wants; however, at the lowest
prices charged for goods, labourers get 4s.
or ss. per day; mechanics, such as carpen-
ters, joiners, blacksmiths, &c., from 6s. to
10s. per day; sawyers get 10s. per 100 feet,
splitting posts and rails, 7s, per 100 of 5
score. The price for washing is from 3s. to
ss. per dozen; a good washerwoman will
earn 6s. or 7s. per day.*
The cost of fencing here is from £4O to 1
° ]
£5O per mile, yet no attempt is made to
grow quickset fences, although the native
resources are abundant, a species of thorn,
very similar to hawthorn plants, growing
singly in woods, would, I think, answer the
purpose; I have met with them 30 feet high,
they: are easily raised from seeds.
The price of a new cart is £26; a waggon, j
£5O; a plough, £10; it would pay a person ’
well, to bring swing ploughs, made very
strong , for breaking up fresh land, wheels
High price
of labour.
Mechanics'
wages.
Cost of
fencing.
Prices of
implements
* See note (h.)


and axle-trees for carts, portable thrashing
machines, winnowing machines, and all sorts
of implements and tools of the best make
and quality, as of the large quantites annu-
ally sent here from England, many are
almost useless, like Hodge's razors, made
“to sell,” not for use.
The opinion I always entertained of the
prospects presented to an active, industrious,
sober man, in this country, is fully borne
out by what I see and hear around me; I
leave others to draw their own conclusions,.
from the facts before stated, only requesting
all to bear in mind, the great drawbacks an
English farmer has to encounter, in rates,
tythes, and indirect taxes upon a farm, leav-
ing rent and direct taxes out of the question,
while here, all the produce of the land is
clear profit; ive haveno rates, tythes, taxes,
&c., to drain the pocket, or irritate the mind,
and every thing done for permanent im-
provement, is done on the farmer’s own es-
tate, to benefit himself and family, without
risk of rent being raised, or turned out of
occupation, by knavery, or the avarice of a
capricious or needly landlord.
You must not, however, suppose a person
can be as comfortable here as in England,
many privations must be endured, and many
Opinion of
prospects.
Dangers
and
difficulties.


difficulties encountered, to which, the set-
tler ought to make up his mind before start-
ing, this object once obtained and acted
upon with resolution and perseverance, pri-
vations and difficulties dwindle into insigni-
ficance; the wants of nature are but few,
and easily supplied; with these a new settler
must be content for a few, (say three or
four) years, after which* time he may confi-
dently expect to enjoy many comforts and
luxuries, at comparatively little cost, which
are in England very expensive, with greater
satisfaction in the enjoyment than he ever
before experienced ; conscious of having
earned them by his own exertions, and of
being able to transmit them unimpaired to
his posterity ; this is an object not to be lost
sight of.
Dangers and difficulties, in all probability
deter many from leaving their country , the
land of their birth, endeared to them by so
many ties; I have many ties and endear-
ments, many calls upon my gratitude, which
direct the attention of the wanderer to the
land of his birth, to his native home, and
it is absolutely impossible ever to efface
from my memory feelings implanted there
by Nature. To the timid and irresolute, I
say, place your dependence on Providence;
c


the same watchful eye which guards you in
England, protected me and my family on
our voyage to this distant part of the world ;
and still vouchsafes to continue that protec-
tion.
I have felt the pangs of separation from
father, mother, brothers, sisters, and beloved
friends ; let no one suppose that, because I
did not show whaf I felt, my heart was
callous to those feelings so honourable to
human nature; I reflect, with satisfaction,
upon the resolution I took and acted upon,
when I left my native home; had I shewn
my feelings, it would only have increased
the distress of those “we’ve left behind us.”
The first object of a person intending to
emigrate should be preparing at home
whatever he is likely to want here, having
experienced some of these wants myself,
perhaps I can give a little information. The
foremost of all requisites is clothing, of
which a good quantity should be provided,
of every sort and kind, and materials for
making more, particularly sole leather for
shoes. Clothing and' bedding should be
provided in London for assigned servants;
this consists of fustain jackets and trousers,
shirts, strong shoes, hats, wool mattresses,
blankets and counterpanes, or rugs. For
Separation
friends
Provision
to'bfTmade
by persons
emigrate* t 0


domestic purposes, cooking, dairy and brew-
ing utensils, form no inconsiderable part;
but more should not be provided than are ne-
cessary, as a warehouse, or, as they are here
called, a store, must be rented to place them
in security from the weather, depredations,
&c. For out door purposes the want is of
greater variety, and such as a person who
has not experienced it, will be more at a loss
to provide for. I gave an opinion before of
some implements, in addition to them, spoke
chains for working bullocks, light harness
for horses, such as are used in vans, with
stout traces and thiller’s gears; collars of
different sizes, saddles, bridles, and head-
stalls ; barn tackle, bushel, peck, and gallon
measures, seives, scuttles, &c.; forks of all
sorts, spades, shovels, picks, mattocks, fal-
ling axes, and bill-hooks, plenty of each sort;
cross-cut saws, with teeth to cut both ways ;
pit saws, with plenty of files for both; car-
penters’ tools, nails, spikes, wood and nut
screws, iron work for carts, gate irons, door
and shutter hinges, locks, bolts, &c. Bel-
lows, anvil, vice, screw tackle, &c., for a
blacksmith; a colonial oven, with one dozen
of tins for baking bread ;* for all these, take
* See note (d.)
c 2


a trip to Birmingham, and get them made to
order of the best materials ; window sashes,
glass cut to fit them, soap, candles, starch,
blue, a good quantity of each sort; powder,
shot of the largest size, red and white paint,
ready ground; some household furniture, &c.
You will reasonably suppose the freight
and insurance for so many things will be
great, but the best and cheapest way is for
a party to join, and charter such a sized
vessel as will suit their purpose, by so doing
they will get out for half the money they
would otherwise have to pay ; and find on
their arrival, that a great saving in the ex-
pence of an outfit has been made.
On the emigrant’s arrival here, after plac-
ing his family and property in security, his
next object must be to look for, and pur-
chase a spot for his future home ; in doing
this the selection should be made as near as
possible to a river, navigable for small craft,
at least such as would admit a boat of ten
tons burthen, to convey his produce to the
shipping ports, or markets; no objection
should be taken to a considerable part hea-
vily timbered, if the timber is valuable, as
sending it to England pays very well, and
would supply him with money to carry on
operations on the estate.


He must make 1 immediate application for
men, to government, and be sure to ask for
enough, as he may not get more than half
the number he wants; he will find some
difficulty in learning the men to do their
work, they make a point of not knowing
how to do any thing, and a greater number
are required to do the same work than in
England; he will soon find out their capa-
bilities by giving them a little encourage-
ment; if I could choose, I should prefer
poachers to any other.*
I cannot but recommend to your perusal,
a work on emigration to this country, by
Mr. James BischoflT, one of our directors; it
is, I am informed, the most useful work ex-
tant. Mr. Bischoff being in constant com-
munication with this country, and in pos-
session of a vast quantity of information,
has compiled it in a small volume; I believe
it is not published, but have no doubt Mr.
Ewen would get it for you.
Hoping soon to hear from you, and that
all friends in England are well, I must con-
clude, for if you will not be tired of reading,
I am of writing.
Present our united love to father, mother,
Application
must be
made for
men to
government.
Recommen-
dation of
Mr. Bisch-
off’s work
on emigra-
tion.
* See note (e.)


brother, and relatives, and best respects to
all enquiring friends, and believe me tore-
main,
Your affectionate brother,
J. KING.


NOTES.
(a.) For explanation of this paragraph, read the Van Die -
men’s Land Company’s Report, published March Bth, 1833,
page 12. “The other cause of disappointment has arisen
from the conduct of some of the indented servants. In the
month of January, 1832, two of them absconded; they were
taken before magistrates at Launceston, and after having
ineffectually urged as an excuse for their conduct, that they
had not been properly supplied with provisions, &c., con-
sulted a solicitor there, who took an objection to the form
of their agreements, contending that they were invalid, as
not within the strict letter of, the Act of Parliament, which
authorizes the ‘binding of servants for any period not ex-
ceeding seven years from the day of the date of the in-
dentures,’ whereas the agreements in question were for the
period of seven years from the day of the arrival of the parties
in Van Diemen’s Land, when in fact, their service commen-
ces. The magistrates would not take upon themselves to
decide the point of law, as to the validity of the agreements ;
but upon proof of the servitude and absconding, convicted
the offenders. After, however, this doubt had been thrown
upon the validity of the indentures, Mr. Curr found the
people at all times ready to avail themselves of it, and
abscond. *****
“The Directors, upon receiving information that the ler
gality of the indentures had been questioned, took the opinion
of the then Attorney General, and now Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of King’s Bench, and also of Mr. Coote, the
Conveyancer. Both these high authorities are decidedly of
opinion that, notwithstanding the term of servitude is made
to commence from the day of the arrival of the party at Van
Diemen’s Land, instead of from the day of the date of the
indenture, the agreements are still perfectly valid and binding
for the space of seven years from the date, and that all the
remedies given by the Act of Parliament, attach during that
time; when their opinion is received by Mr. ,Curr, (and it
was sent in September,) he will find that his power over the


men who have so shamefully broken their engagements re-
mains in full force.”
(b.) The great value set upon pure bred sheep, such ns
the Saxon, Nigretta, and Cotswold, is strikingly exemplified
in the Van Diemen’s Land Company’s Report, dated March
13th, 1832, page 9.
“ It is not, however, wool alone, by which profit is derived,
the stud flocks become valuable from the annual sale of ram
lambs.
During the last spring,
51 Saxon Ram Lambs were sold at £l2 per head
29 Nigretta 8 do.
3 Cotswold 8 do.
And Mr Curr writes, “The rams which have been delivered
are so highly thought of, that I feel confident they will ensure
the sale of a much larger number next season, indeed it is
probable we shall not be able to supply all that will, be
wanted.”
(c.) The following extract from Mr. Curr’s despatch,
dated Launceston, May 4th, 1831, and inserted in the Van
Diemen’s Land Company’s Report for 1832, page 14, will
fully substantiate, the rate of wages stated.
“It has been a source of sincere satisfaction to me, in
which I am sure the court will participate, to find all the
old indented servants of the Company who went out per the
Tranmere and Caroline doing extremely well, with not more,
I believe, than one exception, and with the same one excep-
very well spoken of. The farming men are generally
in places, at wages of from 30 to 50 guineas a year, with a
maintenance; the shepherds, £SO to i,'CO a year; the me-
chanics are chiefly in this town, and earning 10s. per day,
and upwards ; these latter have got town allotments, and are
about to build good brick cottages for themselves.”
VS* The above note it referred to in page 15, and was there , by mistake , marked (h.)
(i.) The description of a colonial oven, as contained in a
former letter, is as follows:—“ Our oven in the kitchen is a
raised hearth, with an iron bottom, and flue underneath to
heat the hearth; our bread is baked in tins in the oven with a
constant fire under and on the top, all the time it is baking,
which takes about an hour and a half; the oven holds 12 tins.”
(e.) Poachers are preferred, not because they are poach-
ers, but because they are men conversant with country life,
therefore so much more valuable than men accustomed only
to towns.
W. POTTS, PRINTER, BANBURY.
