

Information on Australian
Red Cross Work
IN EGYPT AND FRANCE
ERIC LLOYD-JONES
Commissioner of the Australian Red Cross in Egypt
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers, Sydney


I


Information on Australian Red Gross
Work in Egypt and France.
Stock in Egypt as on May 7th, 1916, was, on
the whole, large, particularly in articles which can
be made by Red Cross workers, such as Socks,
Pyjamas, Shirts and Mufflers, of which there were
abundant quantities then at our Central Stores in
Cairo. A fair stock to commence with had been
forwarded to France to our Depots at Marseilles
and Rouen. At the same time, the Stock, although
large, will all be needed should the Australian
Troops shortly participate in the expected general
offensive on the Western Front, for the casualties
are certain to be extremely heavy, and up to the
present time, it must always be borne in mind since
the Red Cross organisation in Egypt was initiated,
the Australian casualties have not been really
heavy, consequently the demands upon Stock have
not been anything like what they will probably be
in the near future.


Besides this fact, any surplus goods can always
be most profitably employed in eking out the all too-
slender supplies of the French Red Cross, so that
workers can safely continue their labours, feeling
that their efforts will be of real use, either to our
own sick and wounded, or to those of our gallant
Allies. Up to the time of my departure from
Egypt, on May 13th, approximately 4,000 cases of
Red Cross Goods had been sent from the centres in
Egypt to those in France, and more will be follow-
ing every few weeks until the great bulk of our
Stock will be at Marseilles and Rouen, and probably
the major portion at Rouen, around which centre
practically all the Clearing Hospitals, Casualty
Stations and Field Ambulances are situated. The
only Australian Hospital of which I know as being
near Marseilles is the No. 2 General Hospital, in
command of Colonel Morgan Martin. No. 1 General
Hospital is near Rouen, which is, of course, practi-
cally behind the lines at present occupied by the
Australian Troops. Our main centres of opera-
tions in regard to distributing goods in Egypt
prior to my departure were Cairo and Ismailia.
There is, or was, a large camp of Australians at
Tel-el-kebir, but this was always supplied from our
Cairo centre, the troops on the Suez Canal being
supplied from Ismailia, where we had a beautifully
situated little Store on the banks of the Canal, and


a Motor Launch which carried our Supplies over
to the Clearing Hospitals or Field Ambulances on
the other side of the Canal.
We also had a small distributing centre at Suez.
Although the number of Australians in Hospital
was small, it was necessary for us to have a Stock
there, as well as a Representative, to supply ships
returning to Australia with Sick and Wounded with
all the articles necessary for their comfort en route.
There are also two Convalescent Homes near
Alexandria, both of which, however, we supply
latterly from Cairo, there being not enough work
in Alexandria since the evacuation of Gallipoli, and
the comparatively small number of Australians in
Malta to warrant a Representative being kept in
that centre, although we have a Store in Alexandria
which is now being used as a Clearing Centre from
which goods are shipped to France every two or
three weeks.
The Australian Hospitals around Cairo early in
May were No. 3 General Hospital, situated at
Abassia, in what were formerly Barracks, which,
after a few alterations, now form an admirable
Hospital; No. 1 Auxiliary Hospital, commonly
known as Luna Park, situated at Heliopolis; No. 3
Auxiliary Hospital, usually known as the “Sport-
ing Club,” also at Heliopolis; the No. 4 Auxiliary
Hospital, used for Infectious Diseases, Abassia;


and the Ist Australian Dermatological, also at
Abassia. At Alexandria there were the Ras-el-tin
Convalescent Depot, and the beautiful Red Cross
Convalescent Home at Mantazah, overlooking the
waters of the Mediterranean. This latter was a
former palace of the Khedive, which has been taken
over by the British Red Cross and the Australian
Branch (jointly), and very much extended and im-
proved, until it now forms a delightful spot, capable
of accommodating about 1,200 convalescents. Of
course, in addition to the Hospitals named, there are
also all the Field Ambulances, Casualty Clearing
Hospitals, and Casualty Clearing Stations attached
to the various units of the Australian Army, which
were still in Egypt in May. But there is very little
doubt that the Red Cross Work in Egypt will, from
now onwards, very materially decrease, although it
seems likely that there will always have to be some
Stock and some form of Representation there.
As to the work in France, I regret that I am not
in a position to give you any first-hand informa-
tion, but I feel quite sure that it has been well
initiated by the Red Cross Representatives who
were first there, including Mr. Murdoch, one of
my Fellow-Commissioners. A large Store has been
secured on the Wharf at Marseilles, where practi-
cally all the incoming Troops are landed from
Egypt, and practically the first thing they see is


the large Red Cross Sign outside our Stores, so
that they are not likely to be ignorant of the fact
that the Australian Red Cross is in France, and
ready to offer them every possible service. We
have also, I understand, secured fine accommoda-
tion in Rouen, which appears practically certain to
be our main distributing centre; in fact, it seems
likely that if the Australian Troops are to be sent
to England for their convalescence and final treat-
ment in Hospital, and from there to be returned to
Australia, the No. 2 General Hospital from Mar-
seilles will probably be moved up north, in which
case the Red Cross Store at Marseilles would only
be required for the reception and forwarding of
goods to Rouen.
In regard to the Enquiry Work, there is no doubt
that this Section of the Red Cross organisation
has amply justified its existence, and the thousands
of reports sent in by the diligence of our Searchers
have gone far towards easing the anxiety of many
minds. Wherever there are Hospitals or Camps
with Australian Soldiers in them outside England,
where the British Red Cross Society Searchers act
for us, the Searchers of the Enquiry Section of the
•Australian Red Cross have been at work amongst
them, including Malta and Lemnos, and the kindly
and ready manner in which their enquiries have
always been answered by the men shows beyond
doubt that their efforts are appreciated.


Finally, I can assure the Workers for the Red
Cross that the goods they make, and the time and
money they have lavished on behalf of the Sick and
Wounded, are not wasted, and are fully appreciated
by the men. This I can say from personal experi-
ence, and without fear of contradiction. There
must, obviously, be a few cases of extravagance, and
also of dishonesty on the part of some men in
getting goods from the Red Cross which they do
not really need, but, as a whole, the work of the
Red Cross is now on strictly business lines, and is
being administered by a very competent and
thoroughly conscientious and keen body of Repre-
sentatives.


AUSTRALIAN RED CROSS.
ITS WORK IN EGYPT.
One of the most valuable works in connection
with the War in this particular part of the Globe
has been carried out by the Australian Branch of
the British Red Cross Society, which, under the
joint commissionership of Messrs. Norman E.
Brookes, E. Lloyd Jones, and J. A. Murdoch, has
its spacious Egyptian Headquarters at Shepheard’s
Hotel, and has, moreover, recently opened up
operations in a new sphere. The quiet and definite
labour accomplished by the band of workers of this
branch is only seen at its best by a visit to one of
the huge stores which exist —almost unknown to
most of us—in the various thoroughfares through
which we pass daily, namely, Sharia Emed-
el-Din, Sharia Abbas, and other streets in the
vicinity. In any one of these may be seen
cases by the thousands of all kinds of goods
calculated to bring comfort to and alleviate
the condition of the sick soldier, whose special
needs, like those of his wounded mate, the Society
makes it its business to meet by setting in motion


a generous and unceasing stream of supplies of
every imaginable description. As an indication of
the broad scope of the Society’s activities, it may
be mentioned that the provision of a tin of peaches,
or a musical instrument for a hospital, has become
merely a matter of organised routine.
While the Australian is in Hospital his require-
ments are every bit as important in the eyes of
those who are working for the Australian Red
Cross, as are those of his compatriot who is being
transferred to another base hospital, or invalided
home. To this end, the Society has established a
Red Cross Store in nearly every Australian Hos-
pital, which is in the charge of an Australian lady,
who issues whatever articles the men may require
to the ward sister or orderly, by whom it is con-
veyed to its proper destination.
A department of the organisation of which it
could be impossible to speak too highly, is the dis-
tribution of gifts at Cairo Station by Australian
ladies. The presentation of the gifts takes place
before the departure of a hospital train for Suez—
containing hundreds of sick and wounded men
bound for Australia. A thoroughly efficient system
is adopted, whereby the ladies who have volunteered
for this work give to every man on the train a neat
cardboard box, which has been packed with good
things, such as pipes, cigarettes, tobacco, playing


cards, shaving brushes, chocolate, soap and station-
ery, and tucked away inside is a touching little
message from the packer in far-off Australia. The
recipient, it has been found, seldom fails to express
his delight and thanks to the donor on the papers
so thoughtfully included in the packet.
In regard to these men everything possible is
done at Suez to ensure their comfort during the
voyage. Each man, as he steps on board the trans-
port is given a well-filled kit bag, containing
numerous articles of the greatest utility, comprising
two suits of pyjamas, one shirt, one undershirt, two
pairs of socks, two face washers, four envelopes,
six sheets writing-paper, one tin of tooth powder,
one pair of deck shoes, ten packets of cigarettes, one
lead pencil, seven handkerchiefs, one towel, one cake
of soap, and half a pound of tobacco. These bags,
which are totally unexpected by the men, naturally
come as a great surprise to them. Later on, they
are further supplied with deck chairs, cushions,
extra food delicacies, and fruit. They are thus ade-
quately set up for the four weeks’ voyage home,
a journey which will terminate amidst wonderful
scenes of joy and patriotism, as the great vessel
steams slowly into harbour, where thousands of
eager mothers, wives, and sisters are looking
forward to catch the. earliest glimpse of their kith
and kin.


ASSISTING THE HOSPITALS.
The Australian Red Cross has done much to help
in the equipment of the Australian Hospitals.
Necessities of all kinds have been issued to them,
consisting of toilet requisites, tooth powder, razors,
shaving soaps and goods, such as Horlick’s, Allen-
bury’s, Benger’s and Lactogen, together with tin-
ned fruits of every description. Nor does the
assistance rendered stop at gifts in kind, for mone-
tary grants are also bestowed upon them through
the medium of the Hospital O.C. In many Oases,
too, surgical instruments and other clinical neces-
sities have been presented, so that many of the
splendidly equipped operating' theatres which have
been in such constant use these many months past
owe much to the Australian Red Cross for the com-
pleteness of their arrangements.
As regards clothing and other utilitarian com-
modities, thousands of suits of pyjamas, shirts and
other garments have been issued to the patients
through the quarter-master’s stores, and such arti-
cles as do not appear in the Red Cross schedule
have been purchased by the officer commanding,
who is given discretion to expend in this manner
the funds placed at his disposal by the Society.
Now that mental recreation is a recognised prin-
ciple of the art of healing, and has received the sane-


tion of the highest medical authorities, every society
professing to interest itself in hospital work has
striven to the utmost to provide relaxation and
entertainment for surgical or medical cases recover-
ing from wounds or shock. Recreation sheds—well
sheltered from the sun and wind by grass mat
roofs —have been erected by the Australian Red
Cross Society, and these have been lavishly stocked
with books and newspapers.
Much has been accomplished in the way of enter-
tainment by the Society, which has organised
concert parties, engaged professional orchestras for
regular performances, provided orchestral instru-
ments, pianos, and gramaphones for hospitals, and
whatever could be sent in the way of musical instru-
ments to the Field Ambulance sections.
Men in Hospital have been taken for excursions
by the Convalescent Outings Society, to which the
British and Australian Red Cross Societies both
contribute equally a monthly sum, and, in addition,
the Australian Red Cross provides motor cars every
afternoon in the week for excursions for the men.
For patients who are sent down to recuperate by
the sea, a beautiful Convalescent Home has been
established at Mantazah, near Alexandria, which is
maintained by the two Societies for the joint benefit
of the Convalescent Australian and English
Soldiers, where accommodation is available for a


thousand men. Various Convalescent Nurses’
Homes in Cairo and Alexandria are also equipped
and supported by the co-operation of the two
Societies.
A great boon has been conferred upon the men
in Hospital by the excellent arrangements which
have been made for providing them with free hair-
cutting and shaving in comfortable kiosks, or other
appropriate buildings, often expressly built for
the purpose.
Sports play an important part in the life of the
convalescent, and here again the Society steps
forward, and by a generous distribution of cricket
and other sporting and gymnastic outfits, enables
him to indulge in those health-giving pursuits to
the top of his bent.
THE ENQUIRY BUREAU.
Possibly no department of the Red Cross organisa-
tion so thoroughly repays the efforts of the workers
as the Enquiry Section, which does so much to
relieve the anxiety and suspense of the many
relatives who have soldiers belonging to them in
hospitals in Egypt and elsewhere. Missing men are
happily often traced with complete success, and the
welcome news despatched by cable to their anxious
relations at home. Thousands of enquiries from the


various States of the Commonwealth are dealt with
at the Bureau, where, by means of its very com-
plete research system, either a satisfactory result
is obtained, or else it is established that all likely
sources of information have been fully investigated.
In conclusion, it may be said that there are many
aspects of this wonderful organisation which have
not been touched upon, and much silent work has
been done anonymously. It is through such untiring
efforts as these that the Australian Branch of the
British Red Cross Society has earned for itself the
gratitude and admiration of all those who have
come in contact with it.
