

INFORMATION for the early detection and
care of Cases of Typhoid Fever and
Diphtheria, especially for Residents in
Districts where Medical Attendance is not
immediately available.
TYPHOID FEVER.
Commences generally with feelings of weakness, weariness, pains in the
back and limbs, chilliness, loss of appetite, headache, and disinclination
to exertion of any kind. As the disease advances the tongue becomes
foul, and then dark and glazed; purging is generally present, and
sometimes blood is mixed with the motions. Occasionally the bowels
are confined ; pain is frequently felt round the navel, and in a direction
to the right of it; small rose-coloured spots may be seen over the
stomach. In severe cases these symptoms become more urgent, and low
muttering delirium, with general prostration, are present. The usual
duration of the disease is about thirty days.
On the first appearance of such symptoms as these the patient
should never attempt to “shake them off.” The effort to do so
frequently converts mild cases into fatal ones. The patient should at
once go to bed, and should not be allowed to sit up or make any
exertion whatever. He should be kept separate from everyone except
one attendant, who should be of middle age. The room must
be warmed and well ventilated by a fire both night and day.
Disinfectants to be used, and precautions to be taken according to the
accompanying printed Rules. Light nourishment to be frequently
given, i.e. milk, and broths of mutton or fowl. If diarrhoea is present
a small proportion of lime water, one part to six, may be added to the
milk : no solid heavy food should be allowed. No purgative medicines
nor stimulants should be given without medical advice ; and this advice
should, if possible, be obtained in all cases in the very earliest stages of
the illness, as at this period the greatest amount of benefit can generally
be effected by proper treatment.
DIPHTHERIA.
Commences generally with feverishness and sore throat; more or less
difficulty in swallowing, with pain at angle of jaws; stiffness and pain
on side and back of neck; feeling of general exhaustion, with shivering,
sickness, and loss of appetite. On looking into the mouth the tonsils
(small swellings on each side of the throat at the root of the tongue)
are seen to be red and somewhat enlarged. At first small white specks or
patches appear on the tonsils; these gradually increase till in bad cases
the entire back of the throat is covered with a membrane like wash-
leather : this sometimes extends back to the windpipe, producing
difficult breathing, and symptoms of Croup. The nostrils are sometimes
blocked up with discharge, and the breath in severe cases is generally
very offensive.
On the very first appearance of such symptoms as these the
patient should be put to bed immediately, and medical advice sought
without loss of time. Meanwhile the patient should be kept entirely
separate from all the family, except one grown-up attendant. The
room to be kept moderately warm and well ventilated by a small fire
night and day. Disinfectants, such as Sulphur, &c. to be used according
to the accompanying printed Rules. Light food, i.e. broths, milk, and
very slightly-cooked eggs, &c. to be given if possible, even in spite of
the dislike to food which is generally felt. Hot poultices to be applied
from ear to ear. r I he throat to be occasionally steamed by inhaling the
vapour of boiling vinegar and water, or decoction of gum leaves ; but
it must not be touched by an unskilled person with caustic or applica-
tions of any kind.
When one case of the disease shows itself in a family, the throats
of the other members should be frequently examined, as the symptoms
in the first stage of the disease are sometimes so slight as to be over-
looked, yet this is the time when most good can be done by judicious
nursing.
E. SWARBRECK HALL, Officer of Health.
Hobart Town, 1 6th July, 1880.
