

; f'CJy 4? NsjJ.fy
INFORMATION
AUSTRALIAN EMIGRANTS.
WILLIAM FORSTER,
AGENT-OENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES.
‘ ■ I
S.V>aU»UCK:^3
Printed and Published by
GORDON & GOTCH, 15, ST. BRIDE STREET, LONDON, E.C.


*
'■' ■ '■ r t 4 r ■
ffiUZtS.
'fr'; /■ • |J|S| 4 ' •■,...’ .''
’C? ' M '-t I r ■'■ Jf
■■■Hi I ■ . W&:b.


INFORMATION
AUSTRALIAN EMIGRANTS.
WILLIAM FORSTER,
AGENT-GENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES
Printed and Published by
GORDON & GOTCH, 15, ST. BRIDE STREET, LONDON, E.C.


PREFACE.
This treatise was originally prepared for The Globe , at the Editor’s
request, with the object of disseminating, in a cheap and easily-
accessible form, certain information—obviously for the benefit
of the class indicated—upon matters about which there was
reason to believe much ignorance and misconception prevailed.
In order to accommodate such a publication to the space available,
of course more brevity and condensation were necessary than in
the form in which it now appears. Believing that the information
thus afforded might be beneficially extended, I have accordingly
supplemented the original matter with some additional observa-
tions, and have slightly altered the arrangement. But even in this
forrii,there is-no pretention to complete or exhaustive treatment;
and were it not for the danger of unduly detracting from its
portability and practical value by increase of bulk, the little
volume might have been doubled with advantage to the class for
whom it is intended.


INFORMATION
AUSTRALIAN EMIGRANTS
NEW South Wales, or Cooksland —to which it was most
appropriately proposed by the late Rev. Dr. Lang to change
the name—is the oldest, or first-settled, of the Australian group, in
which Tasmania is commonly, and New Zealand ought to be, for
obvious reasons of convenience, and seems to be naturally,
included. New South Wales was discovered by Captain Cook
in 1770 ; and very recently its inhabitants have erected to the
memory of their great discoverer a monument, designed and
executed by Mr. Thomas Woolner, R.A. New South Wales, on
its first settlement by Governor Philip, originally embraced all the
habitable portion of the eastern side of the great island, or
continent, of Australia. Its size has been since reduced more
than half by the separation from it of two colonies, Victoria and
Queensland, South and North, in 1851 and 1859 respectively.
Its area now consists of 323,437 square miles—say, about three
times the size of Great Britain and Ireland. greatest length,
between 28° and 37 0 of south latitude, is 900, its average 500,
miles; its greatest breadth,between 141 0 and 154 0 of east longi-
tude, is about 850, its average 500, miles. Its population, by the
last census in 1871; numbered 503,981 inhabitants, who have
since probably increased to about 700,000. New South Wales
abounds in excellent harbours, pre-eminently so, as compared
with the other neighbouring colonies. On the finest of these,
Port Jackson, which, for beauty, safety, variety, extent, convenience
and facility of accommodation, is scarcely surpassed by any harbou
in the world, is situated Sydney, the metropolis of the Colony


Sydney, with its suburbs, occupies, in somewhat straggling but
highly picturesque fashion, an area of about 40 square miles, with
a population, by the last census in 1871, of about 136,483 inhabi-
tants, who have since probably increased to about 150,000, There
are also in New South Wales many other towns of metropolitan
pretensions, which will undoubtedly advance in importance as the
colony developes, so as, in some measure, to become rivals of
Sydney.
The central position of New South Wales, the circumstances of
her being the oldest and most settled colony of the Australian
group, and even in some degree the acknowledged superiority of
her harbour, and its accommodations, give her certain advantages
over the neighbouring colonies as a place of embarkation for emi-
grants in general, but especially for that undecided and indefinite
class, who must obviously be always in a considerable majority,
who have no peculiar reason or motive for selecting any one colony
in particular, and who accordingly want information to direct their
choice, and are often puzzled where to settle in the first instance.
From Sydney emigrants can best, as it were, look round them and
survey the other colonies as a whole. In Sydney they will find
more facilities than elsewhere for obtaining information, not only
about New South Wales, but also about the other colonies. From
Sydney the means of transport to and fro are more generally avail-
able. In Sydney the probabilities and opportunities of meeting
or hearing about friends or relatives whose movements and resi-
dences are uncertain, are better than in any other colony. It is
quite safe, therefore, to advise all emigrants to Australia, generally
speaking, to seek Sydney first before they determine what shall be
their next step.
There can be no doubt that the Australian colonies as a whole,
and New South Wales in particular, offer a more advantageous
field, or, as it is commonly phrased, “ a better opening,” for labour
or capital, or for industry, enterprise, investment, or speculation of
any sort, than any old country; but especially to the young and
energetic, who have life before them, and their fortunes to make.
But only a better opening, be it understood. There is no certainty
of success in Australia, more than elsewhere—no royal road to
fortune —no good genius or benevolent fairy to help the idle,
careless, unthrifty, or improvident, more than in other parts of the
world. Nor can any one be rightly recommended to give up good
prospects, or an assured competency, in the hope of bettering his
condition in Australia. Yet, if he take the risk after fair warning,


his pluck must stand him in good stead, and whether or not he
succeed in all his aspirations, which is the lot of few anywhere,
that quality alone is likely to make him a valuable colonist, while
the very sacrifice he makes must redound to his honour and credit,
if not to his pecuniary advantage. And unless his previous circum-
stances were of a very superior class, he may have no reason to regret
the change even upon pecuniary grounds. “La carriere ouverte
aux talents ” is peculiarly a colonial motto, and everyone knows
that “ Nothing venture, nothing win,” is true all the world over.
But above all, let the Australian emigrant beware of too confident
reliance upon a speciality or idiosyncrasy of any sort, whether of
professional, mechanical, or intellectual skill or talent, as an
immediate or certain means of fortune or employment. Let him
not expect to be assisted by monopoly or privilege—of which one
of the forms, by the way, is “ protection to native industry,” but
which does not always necessarily, from a colonial point of view,
include new industry—in the exercise or turning to account of any
exclusive craft, faculty, or function. The sort of man most wanted
in the colonies, generally speaking, is the man who can turn his
hand to anything, and who does not think himself above labour of
any sort. It must be remembered that in these new countries
skill and industry are mainly employed, and that accordingly the
work of Australian colonisation may in particular be roughly sum-
marised as consisting, in the production of raw material. To this,
all other occupations are more or less subsidiary. And among
raw material the superior quantity, value, and importance of pastoral
produce, that is to say, of wool and tallow, but of wool especially,
give it immeasurably the first place. Wool, in fact, occupies in
relation to other Australian marketable commodities, the position
once attributed to corn in England by Adam Smith and the old
political economists. Its price affects and in a great measure rules
all other prices, inasmuch as it principally determines the amount
of disposable profits or income available for the purchase or
exchange of other commodities. When wool falls, trade is corre-
spondingly dull, and vice versa. It follows, of course, that the
quantity and value of labour and capital employed or invested, and
accordingly that wages, are from time to time similarly affected by
the same cause. But the skill and industry engaged in pastoral
pursuits, though for the most part simple, and easily mastered in a
short time by any industrious and intelligent man, is very various
and multiform. In “ the bush,” as it is colonially termed, the
enterprising emigrant or workman often tries many sorts of em-


ployments before he suits himself, or finds the one to his taste.
But so loud and incessant is the demand for labour from pastoral
employers, that neither good character nor experience is ever
strongly insisted on by that class in the servants they employ.
Indeed, in any part of the Australian colonies, masters, as a rule,
are too glad to get hold of a willing hand at any rate of wages
going, to be very particular upon other points. This state of things
may be objectionable both on moral or economical grounds ; but
it obviously offers a fair, and often deserved, additional chance to
many who, having made a slip in early life, require only time and
opportunity to recover themselves, and achieve success and good
character in the long run. But, on the other hand, it is certain
that, in the rural districts especially, many more industries might be
developed, and even more saving made of raw material, which is
frequently wasted for mere want of labour to gather and store, if
servants were less scarce. But the labour mostly required is of
that indefinite sort which can be, as it were, improvised and put
to immediate use in an emergency. Let the Australian emigrant
accordingly disabuse himself of that vulgar and irrational prejudice,
which prevails among foolish people, against being engaged to be
“ generally useful.” There is no medium on this point. The man
or woman who objects to be generally useful in the Australian
colonies is very apt to end by being generally useless.
Not that special skill or talent, or that any profession, is without
due honour in the Australian colonies, in its proper place, and
according to fitting opportunities. Everything of the sort, as else-
where, has at any rate its market value, and is often the more
readily recognised for not being too strongly insisted on. Even if a
profession be not immediately available, it is always an excellent
resource to fall back upon in difficulty; and is often a great
assistance in combination with investment and speculation. The
squatter or pastoral settler is all the better for having had the
benefit of a professional education. The shepherd is none the
worse for being, or having been, bred a carpenter or blacksmith.
It has often been remarked that sailors make the best shepherds.
But the professional man, or professor of any special skill, talent,
or capability, has only to bide his time in the Australian colonies,
where he has unquestionably a better prospect of making his way,
and of receiving adequate recognition and remuneration, than in
Great Britain, for the same reason as in the case of labour generally
—namely, that it is in greater demand, proportionately, to similar
articles elsewhere. Many of the complaints from disappointed


or discontented emigrants, of not being able to find employment
immediately on arrival —-an expectation which is in any case obvi-
ously unreasonable —and the pictures drawn of starvation and
destitution in the streets of Australian towns, are explained by
what has been above said. It is manifestly absurd for emigrants
to expect the same early or immediate demand for special capa-
bility, as in the case of those who are willing to undertake any sort
of work, or that the community or the government are bound to
create, or extend, a monopoly for their especial benefit. It cannot
be laid down as an axiom that any trade, profession, or manufac-
ture, is absolutely necessary to the existence or the welfare of any
community, still less of a community which has grown up under
the conditions above indicated. Whereas labour of some sort is
always more or less necessary everywhere. The best advice which
can be given to the alleged sufferer by such a grievance is to put
his speciality, as it were, in his pocket for better times, and in the
meantime to work at anything which offers. The true test of
starvation or destitution of unemployed labourers is the offer of
something under the rate of wages quoted in newspapers. It is a
notorious fact that such offers have be€h frequently refused in
Sydney by labourers complaining of want of employment. For
every such complaint which finds its way into print, thousands of
letters come across the seas from Australian emigrants urging
friends and relatives to follow them, which are seldom or ever,
because they are not intended to be, printed, and of which many
may be seen at Australian Government offices. From what has
been said above, it may be inferred that Australian labourers and
servants have much more of their own way, and are not only more
independent of, but far more on an equality with, their employers,
than in the old country. Labour and capital are put into the same
category by political economists, under the term “ hoarded labour.”
Accordingly, both have an equal chance, and are equally welcome,
in the Australian colonies. But this very equality implies, in effect,
a higher position for labour than it enjoys in the mother country’.
There, unquestionably, money is more thought of, and held in
higher respect than in the colonies, where it is more easily made,
and therefore less respected. In the Australian colonies, by a
parity of reasoning, labour is more respected, weredt for no other
reason than simply that it is of higher market value than elsewhere.
Every working man instinctively feels, the moment he lands in
Sydney, that, by the change of scene, he has become a more
important personage, commercially, socially, and politically. And


whether the reduction of the suffrage, or the adoption of what is
called universal suffrage in the Australian colonies be an effect, or
only one of the causes, of the general equality; and, moreover,
whether it be regarded as right in principle, or generally beneficial,
or the reverse, it is evident that, in a country where every one,
even the poorest or meanest of Her Majesty’s subjects, can acquire
the right to vote for the election of members of the Local Parlia-
ment, and consequently to have a voice in public affairs, and to
influence the Government of the country, by a mere residence of
six months, and where even a foreigner can become naturalized
in two years, the rights and claims, whatever they be, of the poor
man, and of the working classes, have a better chance of being
recognized and provided for ; and that a working man stands on
a very different footing than in a country where multitudes of his
class can exercise no direct influence upon government and legis-
lation.
But probably there is no class of emigrants more desired, or more
desirable, or to whom generally, with judicious conduct, the Australian
colonies offer more attractions or better opportunities, than the middle
class of small capitalists. What can be done, generally, with
small capital—say a few hundreds or thousands—in Great Britain?
What, in a great many cases, but to put it out at very low interest,
which gives no saving or return worth speaking of for a life-time,
or to live upon, or use, or waste it, till it is all gone? No doubt
this process may be adopted in the Australian colonies, and often
is, though perhaps not quite so unprofitably as elsewhere, because
in the meantime experience is acquired, which, although the phrase
“ learning colonial experience ” often conveys a sneer at the follies
of new-comers, is really worth something in Australia, as in every
new country. The colonist who rushes into speculation, or invest-
ment, immediately upon landing, might in general just as well fling
his money into the sea. It is almost sure in such cases to be sunk
in unprofitable enterprises and speculations, -which of course are as
common in the colonies as elsewhere. No doubt there are good
as well as bad bargains, in mines, farms, stations, and so forth ;
but all investment is a mere lottery to the inexperienced. The
wisest plan for capitalists of this description is to enter into some
employment, keeping their capitals locked up, or at interest, which
is readily procurable upon good security at from 6 to 7 per cent,
and sometimes even upon bank deposits at a very little lower rate,
and thus to give themselves time and opportunity to look about
them, and judge for themselves. Better for them even to work at


low wages, or to help a friend for nothing, than to attempt too
soon the luxury of being their own masters. No greater mistake
than for emigrants to plunge at once into farming, as the word
is understood in England. In Australia, generally speaking, farming
means and is something very different from the English notion of
the term. Even if it were the same in itself, it is obvious that
differences of soil, climate, and seasons would have to be studied,
and taken into account. But in New South Wales, agriculture
proper, or the pure and simple cultivation of the soil, has seldom,
if ever, proved profitable ; and to become so, it requires to be com-
bined with some other sort of farming or business—generally with
the depasturing of stock. In New Zealand, and in South Australia,
agriculture is said to be carried on under more favourable con-
ditions in places not far from water carria£ e. But even in these
grain-exporting colonies, and throughout the Australian colonies
generally, wherever the small capitalist or farmer has entered into
competition with the large capitalist or squatter in pastoral produc-
tion, although the operations of the former may have been in many
cases and in a measure successful, there is yet good reason to doubt
whether in most cases he might not have turned his time, labour,
and resources to still better account, if, instead of working for
himself, he had been all the time in the service of, and managing
or working for another. The number of men who, beginning with
small or comparatively no means, have made their way to wealth
or fortune in the Australian colonies, as overseers, superintendents,
or managers of the estates or property of others, as compared
with those who, from similar beginnings, have succeeded exclu-
sively on their own account by independent enterprise or exertion,
forms a remarkable feature in colonial history or experience.
New South Wales, as compared with other, and even with the
neighbouring colonies, possesses special advantages and attractions
for the agricultural settler, in its differences of temperature and
climate, consequent upon an extent of territory ranging through
so many degrees of latitude and longitude, from temperate south
to semi-tropical north, from the comparative moisture of the coast
to the prevailing dryness of the interior, and from sea-level to
elevations of from 4,000 to 6,000 feet above the sea. Some of the
highest mountains reach a height of nearly 8,000 feet. Cultivation
and stock breeding have accordingly a large field of choice. All
English fruits, grain, and other productions, as well as English trees,
flourish on the Southern, Western and Northern table-lands.
While to the Northward, especially in the Clarence River District,


sugar is grown with profit, while cotton, coffee, and other tropical
productions are known to be capable of successful cultivation.
The obstacles to success in agriculture, in which I include culti-
vation of the soil in all its forms, are partly physical and partly
economical or social, some being of such a character, as, although
easily explained and obvious enough to ordinary observation, are
yet apt to impress themselves but feebly upon ardent or enthusi-
astic farmers or lovers of rural pursuits, unless in the shape of
disagreeable and dearly-bought experience. One of the former
consists in peculiarities, or what might almost be termed, eccentri-
cities, of climate. Australian meteorology is as yet very little
understood, and has scarcely yet taken place as a distinct branch
of science, though its study has been begun, and has advanced
considerably of late years at the Sydney Observatory, and in other
parts of the colony, under the able auspices of the Government
Astronomer, with occasional assistance from private quarters. One
marked feature of Australian climate is its variability, another its
tendency to severe extremes. Every one has heard of Australian
droughts, but the other opposite extreme of incessant and excessive
rain and atmospheric moisture is not so notorious. Nevertheless,
this characteristic, although neither so permanent in its duration, nor
so injurious in its effects, is yet nearly, if not quite, as constant and
regular in its periodicity. There is in Australia neither annual
rainfall nor annual drought. There is no regular annual succession
of wet and dry seasons even in the more tropical parts —and con-
sequently not the same exact or tangible distinction of seasons—
that is to say between summer and winter •as in Europe or
America, or in other older countries. Still in approaching the
tropics, particularly along the coast, a greater degree of regularity
of season and climate, as well as of approximation to a tropical
rainfall, is observable, as is indicated oddly enough by the larger
proporti~n of deciduous trees in that direction. But it is an as-
certained fact that in a given period, say of five or ten years, the
rainfall in Australia is much greater than in the British Islands, or
any part of Europe, and the recurrence of heavy rains and moist
seasons, which, however, has not been long or accurately enough
observed to furnish positive or indisputable evidence, or warrant
precise calculation, appears to exhibit a certain regularity within
long periods or cycles. It is evident, therefore, that the best agri-
cultural experience of other countries must be completely at fault
in Australia. No doubt the effects of variable and uncertain
climate might be, and one day or other probably will be, partly


obviated by irrigation, but, whether from imperfect appreciation of
its advantages, the large expenditure required, the high prices of
labour, the superior attractiveness of other modes of investment,
or from whatever other cause, the large rainfall in Australia has
hitherto been put to very little practical use in the way of storage
or distribution. Of course, too, as in other new countries, agricul-
tural, and especially horticultural, and other gardening, operations
are harassed and impeded by the depredations of wild animals,
including birds and vermin of various kinds, and it is melancholy
to be obliged to add that this evil has been greatly aggravated by
the effects of that amiable, but often most inconsiderate and inju-
dicious form of sentimentalism, known by the ambiguous name of
acclimatization, by means of which rabbits, hares, sparrows, and a
number of other British and European pests have been deliberately
added to, and have in some cases proved more destructive than
indigenous destroyers of the same type. On the other hand
it is fortunate and encouraging for the farmer that in Australia there
are no game laws except such as are intended for the preservation
of valuable or innoxious animals, although it must be admitted that
even these laws appear to have sometimes overshot their mark.
Other obstacles of an economical or social kind also stand in the
way of agriculture considered as an investment for capital, especi-
ally on a large scale, but these of themselves are really such as not
only not to deter, but such as must rather operate toginduce, the
emigration of labouring men and small capitalists. One of these
is of course the well-known high cost and difficulty of obtaining
labour, particularly when it is most urgently and immediately re-
quired, as at seed-time and harvest. Another of these obstacles,
which is obviously involved in the one just mentioned, is the high
cost and difficulty of carriage to and fro. This difficulty does not
interfere much with pastoral or mineral production, because the
high price of such produce in foreign markets covers any probable
cost of carriage in their case. But from its very nature, and be-
cause it can be in general so cheaply produced in other countries,
it is evident that agricultural produce for the most part de-
pends in a great degree for sale and profitable return upon a
home, and often upon an exclusively local, market. This
feature may account for the seeming paradox that often increased
facilities of communication, and sometimes even the introduction
of railways, may be fatal to agricultural production, or
other local industry, by bringing foreign or extraneous, to compete
with and undersell local produce—a consequence which has been-


frequently exemplified in the Australian colonies. It may serve
also to show why wheat and other agricultural produce may be
more profitably grown, and more largely exported, from certain
localities near the coast in South Australia and New Zealand, than
in New South Wales, where the best agricultural lands are more
remote from water-carriage. Another of these latter obstacles has
also a paradoxical look, arising, as it does, out of that very facility
for the acquisition of land which is one of the great motives and
attractions to emigration. This facility brings into existence and
keeps up a large number of small farmers and landowners, who,
whether consciously or unconsciously, seem to take up and culti-
vate land as an end, and not as a means, and who subordinate all
considerations of profit and personal aggrandisement, to a desire
of independence, or, in other words, of being their own masters. Of
this class many, from the very nature of the case, begin improvi-
dently, making bad bargains or injudicious selections in the first
instance, most of them with insufficient means, and, of course,
with a very slender stock of knowledge or experience. But still,
under difficulties of one sort or other, which no capitalist or specu-
lator would face, because they would fatally interfere with profit,
these small farmers*continue their occupation for years, with more
perseverance than industry, and more zeal than diligence, obtaining
from time to time a return which, however it may fall short of profit,
enables thereto sustain a somewhat precarious independence, and
always to provide themselves, and often their large families, with
abundance of food, and with such scanty raiment as is sufficient for a
genial climate, and in a country where firewood generally costs
only the labour of cutting and carrying it a short distance. It need
scarcely be added that with farmers or landowners of this class,
money, as a rule, is never plentiful, while a considerable number
are generally in embarrassed circumstances, and frequently in debt
to some neighbouring storekeeper or money-lender, who commonly
holds a security, equivalent to mortgage or bill of sale, over his
debtor’s immature or anticipated crops. In order, therefore, to
enable them to hneet their immediate and incessant liabilities,
these farmers or settlers are constantly compelled to bring into
the market, and sell at reduced rates, produce which is inevitably
depreciated by the circumstances under which it is sold, and the
natural consequence of such a state of things is that the local
market is generally, or is apt to be, stocked with such produce at
rates which cannot possibly afford capitalists or speculators such a
margin of profit as to tempt or justify investment or speculation


for purposes of profit. Of course, alf emigrants may, and ought
to be, warned against the temptations which tend to the creation
and perpetuation of such a class of farmers or colonists, and which
might induce themselves to add to the number. But all the
warnings in the world cannot prevent the class from being
numerous, where land is so easily acquired, and so long as human
nature remains what it is. Still the very existence and perpetuity
of such a class, and the comparative ease and prosperity they
enjoy as compared with many who have to work much harder in
other countries for a far more precarious subsistence, must operate
strongly as an encouragement and inducement to emigrants more
capable of thrift, industry, and self-denial, and accordingly possessed
of higher qualifications for the work they undertake. Nor is it pos-
sible to refuse some credit to the man who deliberately, and with
his eyes open to all the consequences, prefers a certain amount of
desultory freedom and independence to pecuniary considerations,
or to deny the great public benefit derived from any large class of
even the least prudent or thrifty cultivators of the soil, who attach
themselves for years to a pursuit they love, and who support
themselves and their families by the work of their hands upon a
small estate in a particular neighbourhood. These are among
your true settlers and colonists, who turn landed property to its
direct purpose, and who live and die like soldiers at their posts.
For, after all, the prosperity of every country has its root in the
soil, and the aggregate revenue and profits, upon which all occu-
pations depend, must be drawn out of the land, from which pas-
toral and mineral, no less than agricultural, produce are derived.
The popularity of the Land Laws of New South Wales has
been emphatically acknowledged by their imitation and partial
adoption in all the neighbouring colonies. By their advocates
they are regarded as the model, and by their opponents admitted
to be the neplus ullra, of liberal legislation in the matter of public
lands. These laws may or may not be in violation of the prin-
ciples of political economy—they may or may not produce a con-
trary effect to what was professed or intended by their framers, by
affording indirect facilities, and being, in fact, made available, for
the extension or creation of large estates. But tire advantages
they hold out on the face of them for the classes of working men
and small capitalists can scarcely be denied. They offer a selection
from about 18,000,000 of acres of waste lands, of tracts of lands,
surveyed or unsurveyed, and varying from 40 to 640 acres, at the
option of the person selecting, in any part of the colony, at an


almost nominal price of 20s. per acre, payable in the form of a
deposit of ss. per acre, the balance being allowed to remain unpaid,
as a debt to the State, for a certain number of years, again at the
option of the person selecting, afid at the low annual interest of 5
per cent., with entry and occupation in the meantime, and right of
practical freehold after residence of three years, which becomes
actual on full payment, and of alienation after twelve months’
residence, accompanied by improvements upon the land selected,
to the value of the total price per acre. The offer of these advan-
tages has already operated so strongly on the Anglo-Celtic hunger
for land and hearth, that about 12,000,000 acres have been thus
alienated in New South Wales to “ conditional purchasers,” as
they are technically termed. It is true that much of this land has
gone to the increment of large properties. But still these con-
ditional purchasers form in the aggregate a considerable body of
small landowners, in whom the conservative instincts of that
species of property cannot fail to develop themselves sooner or
later • and who, at this moment, by their obvious opportunities of
local organisation, and the cohesion of common interests, aided
by the general and equal distribution of political rights above
adverted to, are able, whether for good or evil, greatly to affect
their own fortunes as debtors and tenants of the public estate, as
well as the political welfare and progress of the community.
Questions of women’s rights, and of the moral, social, or legal
equality of the sexes, are happily, in a manner, merged in the
superior privileges and position necessarily enjoyed by women in
a community where, upon the very lowest grounds, their scarcity,
as in the case of labour, enhances the demand, and endows them
with greater social and commercial value. It is scarcely necessary
to point out that, in such a state of things, the chances of marriage
for single women, and consequently, not to speak of domestic
happiness—which, everyone knows, may or may not be the result
of marriage—but of extended usefulness and influence in the
sphere they occupy, are proportionately increased. Surely it is
not too much to say that a country, in which these advantages for
the sex are associated with a constant demand for labour and good
wages, must be, as Australia has been often figured to be, the very
Paradise of young women, and especially of female servants. One
may add —Sna si bona norint.
A general impression prevails that the Australian colonies offer
no encouragement or adequate remuneration for literary genius,
or intellectual talent or labour of any sort. This view must not


be accepted without some allowance and explanation. It can
hardly be expected that genius, which looks, or ought to look, for
its reward in fame and honour and public estimation, and not in
mere worldly, much less in pecuniary, success, and which appeals
to the widest possible arena of human judgment and opinion,
should have due recognition in new countries, where such a thing
as public opinion scarcely exists, or exists only in an immature
state, and where general interests are inevitably narrowed to
material considerations. Be it ever so true that “ man shall not
live by bread alone,” it is equally true that without bread, or its
equivalent, man cannot live at all. The belly must be filled to
enable the mind to act, and in colonization the business of pro-
viding for material wants must precede, and for a considerable
time predominate over, every other. Everyone knows that public
opinion, even in Great Britain, and all over the literary world, is
generally slow to recognise new manifestations of intellectual
excellence. Moreover, literary labours are, as a rule, never
adequately rewarded anywhere in the aggregate, and only in very
rare cases to the satisfaction of the individual, partly because the
reward is too indefinite to be the subject of contract, and partly
because it cannot well be divided or distributed, but must neces-
sarily be confined to the highest class of competitors, consisting,
as it does in great degree, of intangible distinctions. But the fact
is, that true genius and intellectual worth are nowhere more cor-
dially welcomed or appreciated than in Australia, when they
come certified from other quarters, and when their value has been
determined by competent judges. The difficulty in Australia is
that literary merit cannot be fairly judged for want of a sufficient
element of literary opinion. This is why native prophets are often
not honoured there. And it must be remembered that much of
the complaint comes from a disappointed class, of whom many,
and especially the lesser lights, are very apt to estimate their own
capacity too highly.
On the subject of climate, it may suffice to mention that invalids
from the two extremes of Northern Europe and tropical Asia are
constantly recommended by medical men to seek the temperate
medium of Australia, and that such invalids are to be found in
numbers through its length and breadth, many of whom have ended
their convalescence, not by dying, but by permanently adopting
and settling in the colony which gave or restored them health.
But as in the case of agriculture, New South Wales offers invalids,
delicate or infirm persons, and valetudinarians in general, a wider


choice of climate and temperature in comparison with those of
other countries, and even of the neighbouring colonies, in its
large extent of territory and differences of elevation' above the
sea. It is well known that pulmonary complaints are eradicated
or alleviated by the milder or more genial climate, or less artificial
life of the Australian colonies. Hydrophobia is unknown. And it
is evident that, as a matter of course, the comparative sparsity of
population and isolation from the rest of the world must secure a
certain degree of exemption from many zymotic diseases, which
are, or have been, the scourge of older and more populous countries.
The expenses of living in the Australian colonies are less than in
England, probably in the proportion of 2 to 3. Much of this
difference arises from, and much more saving may be effected by
sensible people, through the colonial lesson of doing without a
number of things which are regarded as necessaries of life in
England. If the colonist insist on surrounding himself in Sydney,
much more in the interior, with all, and with exactly the same sort
of comforts and luxuries, and with living up to the same style as
in England, he would find the expense much greater. But the
discovery is soon made not only that he can dispense with all
manner of imaginary necessaries, and of conventional or fictitious
extras, but moreover, which is a great matter to some, that he is
not so generally expected in the colony, as in England, to burden
himself with, or waste his means upon, unnecessary articles, and
is not thought the worse of for being economical. Thus a moral
as well as social lesson is taught by emigration. Among luxuries,
dispensed with may be included domestic servants, who are not
generally so numerous in Australian as in English households.
But they work harder, and are not so luxuriously lodged or fed.
Clothing and furniture cost nearly the same as in England, but
neither the climate nor social usages require the same provision to-
be made. Rent is lower, but houses are not so good or so com-
plete in accommodation. But an inferior house in the colonies is
found to answer the same purposes as a better in England. Meat
and other articles of common consumption are on the whole
cheaper than m England, but are consumed in larger quantities,
and with greater waste and profusion. This is the exception
to the custom of dispensing with unnecessary things, and is caused
in a great measure by the scarcity of labour, and the difficulty of
inculcating upon servants a discipline of economy. In the country
living is easier than in Sydney, but house accommodation is
inferior, and less a matter of consideration; while meat becomes


cheaper—and its consumption increases ; the supply of vegetables
being scanty and irregular, in proportion to distance from the
coast, and facilities of carriage. In all parts, however, of the
Australian colonies, absolute necessaries may be easily procured
at a reasonable advance upon metropolitan prices.
To the attractions of social independence, and complete political
economy, may be added others of a mixed social and political
character, of which the liberality cannot easily be disputed, what-
ever exception may be taken from a religious or political point of
view. In Australia thorough religious equality prevails among all
churches and denominations. No established church is recognized
by, or connected with, the State, although a slight and rapidly
expiring assistance is afforded from public funds to four denomina-
tions, originally selected on the ground of superior numbers.
Public instruction is given in schools distributed all over the
Australian colonies, to children of all classes, persuasions and
nationalities, without distinction, on very easy terms, and to the
children of the very poor, gratuitously. In Sydney there is a well-
endowed and flourishing university; and a free public library, a
museum, and an academy of arts, are open to public use or in-
spection at stated times, and subject only to general regulations for
admission. Mechanics’ institutes and schools of art,.assisted by
the government, are numerous. Hospitals, infirmaries, lunatic,,
and other charitable asylums and institutions, more or less supported
by public funds, abound everywhere. There is a decided colonial,
if not democratic tendency in Australia, towards absorption into
the hands of Government, and maintenance by public funds of
these, and other similar institutions and undertakings, which in
England are generally left to, and mainly depend upon, private
enterprise and benevolence. Indeed, so much are Australian
colonists accustomed to look for Government assistance or co-
operation and supervision in such cases, that, exclusively private
charities scarcely exist anywhere on any large scale, and private
institutions of the sort, when attempted, fail to obtain public
confidence, or awaken any abiding public interest. And whatever
may be the political or economical objections or disadvantages,
it must be a clear gain in many respects to the working
classes to be able in some measure to regard, and to insist on as a
public right, in age, infirmity, or destitution, that relief which in
England, however generously, is doled out by the private charity
or compassion of rich classes or individuals. ,
It may be partly gathered from the above that if well-being be


measured by luxury and leisure, by abundant social intercourse,
by recreation and amusement, and by exemption from extremes
of hardship and laborious work, the lives of many domestic
servants in London, superior artisans and mechanics, persons
employed by large trading or manufacturing establishments, in any
part of England, and the like, and certainly of most wealthy
persons above the necessity of caring about minute expenses, are
in many respects preferable, and perhaps enviable, as compared
with similar or superior classes in Australia. Accordingly, none
possessed of competence in the mother country, with fair prospects
of its continuance, and who value an easy and comfortable life,
can be advised to convert themselves into Australian colonists.
On the other hand, all who desire to exchange a condition of
virtual or comparative poverty for a moderate competence, with
fair prospects of wealth into the bargain, or to turn their labour or
capital to better use, or to obtain higher wages or profits from the
ordinary run of industry or investment, or who are not afraid to
venture their time and means upon reasonable chances of success,
will do well to try their luck, and are not unlikely to have their
hopes fulfilled and aspirations satisfied, in the Australian colonies.
To omit from a treatise on Australia, however limited in design,
all special mention of gold, would appear to most people, who
have heard of its marvels, something like the play, without the
character, of Hamlet. And unquestionably, like other glittering
commodities and qualities, gold has had, and is destined to have,
a greater effect upon emigration, and has brought Australia more
into notice and estimation, than many other more notable and
estimable productions. Probably not a few emigrants propose to
themselves to dig or search for gold the very moment of their
arrival in Sydney, and expect to find the precious metal waiting to
be picked up like pebbles, on the shore or in the streets. These
may require to be told that the places where gold is found —gold
fields or districts, as they are called —are some distance from the
coast, and often have to be reached by troublesome journeys ;
that to obtain gold in marketable form and quantities, or to make
its production a profitable occupation, generally involves
considerable labour and preparation, often a great deal of hardship,
risk, and anxiety; that, as a rule, gold is seldom found on the
surface, but has to be dug and lifted from great depths, or crushed
and sifted out of masses of the hardest rock, or washed and
winnowed out of large accumulations of rubbish. The successful
gold-miner often cuts a prominent figure in the streets, and shines


in books and newspapers. He may dwell in a fine house. He
may live in sumptuous and. extravagant fashion. He may ride
fine horses, and drive in superb carriages. He may even enter
the legislature, and whether or not highly qualified, may become a
mayor, a magistrate, or minister of the crown. But success is the
exception, not the rule. For one successful gold-miner, hundreds
are doomed to continual toil and poverty —some barely earn a sub-
sistence—many never emerge from the condition of a wanderer
and wayfarer, while for the most who earn a good living, such as can
generally be earned in New South Wales, at this or any other occu-
pation, by a steady, industrious, persevering man, it is still a life of
hard work, privation, exposure, danger, and disappointment, as com-
pared with almost any other occupation in the colonies. Notwith-
standing the fact of exceptional large fortunes every now and then
achieved by some, and of a competency attained by many of this
class, such as probably would have been quite beyond their reach
in the old country, it has been calculated that the average of wages
distributed among all engaged or concerned in the pursuit and
production of gold, is far less than the average rate earned in most
other occupations. And this estimate is quite in accordance with
the fact of the enormous value of gold as compared with other
commodities, one of the main elements of this value being diffi-
culty of production. And if the capital, as well as labour wasted
be reckoned, the contrast will appear stronger still. In short, gold
mining, in all its forms, has more of the essence of gambling than
other modes of investing labour and capital. But it must be
owned that so great is its effect on wages—and notwithstanding
that this effect is subject to local limitations, and therefore neither
so general nor so permanent as the effect of pastoral industry and
occupation—it not only tends to impart to all other employments
and investments in the Australian colonies something of the same
speculative and uncertain character, but also to render them all
reckoned by wages, more remunerative, than they might otherwise
have been or have appeared, to the working classes. However,
all things considered it is better for emigrants to avoid trying their
hands at gold-digging or seeking, until they have become fully
acquainted with colonial ways, and ascertained their own fitness for
other less laborious and adventurous work. It is said that so great
are the attractions or compensations of the pursuit of gold, that few
once engaged in it ever return to other pursuits. The gold-digger
belongs to an important, and in some respects an isolated class,
who, whether by their exceptional position, or their superior intelli-


gence, organization, or clamour, or the greater ability of their re-
presentatives, or in consequence of peculiar privileges conferred
upon them by legislation, have contrived to impress themselves
upon public affairs, and to produce a larger influence upon Govern-
ment and Legislation, in proportion to their wealth and numbers,
than any other class in the Australian colonies. It has perhaps
been more or less in consequence of this influence that branches
of the Royal Mint have been established in Sydney and Melbourne.
For although both colonies may have good reason to value and to
be proud of these institutions for the general benefits they confer,
and the evidence they afford of the extent and importance of gold-
mining industry, it is well understood and acknowledged by the
miners themselves, that the special benefits they derive from having
a certain price and market for their produce is out of all proportion
to that which is enjoyed by the community at large.
But gold is only one among many other minerals which abound
in Australia, and have, or ought to have, equal attractions for
capital and labour. The production of both copper and tin, which
are found in large quantities in certain localities, has already ab-
sorbed capital and labour only less extensively than gold, and has
involved profits and losses, fortunes and disappointments, of a
similar character and in proportionate amounts with perhaps some-
what larger probabilities of success in favour of the less valuable
minerals. Silver, lead, quicksilver, pure or mixed with other
metals, are also abundant. Lead ore is frequently found which
contains gold, silver, and copper. There is no lack of many of
the inferior metals. Iron exists everywhere, but has not yet proved
a profitable investment in production, though the quality of Aus-
tralian iron is rated very high. Coal is distributed abundantly
throughout New South Wales, and northward along the eastern
coast. It has become a considerable article of export to the
neighbouring colonies, and other parts of the southern world.
Diamonds, sapphires, and other precious stones, but especially the
two former, are widely distributed through the Australian colonies,
may be picked up by chance anywhere, and are often found in large
quantities in the mineral districts.
These colonies hold out great inducements for scientific explora-
tion and research in geology, mineralogy, palaeontology, ethnology,
and other kindred sciences. Australia is apparently the oldest
land on the face of the globe, and seems to have been longest of
any uncovered by the sea, or by any diluvian submergence.
Until a very recent period it has remained isolated from the rest


of the earth. It bears evidence of having originally existed in the
form of a ring of volcanic, or volcanically-produced, peaks and
islands, surrounding a central sea, which, after various alternations
of terrene elevation and submergence, has at last dried into a
barren desert of sand and ironstone, portions of which are said to
be below the level of the sea. The main elevations, and accord-
ingly the greater part of the mountainous and hilly country occur
along the line of, and at no great distance from, the eastern coast,
in what are called the barrier ranges or backbone, forming wide
plateaux or plains, which spread away and lose themselves in the
level western interior, while the barrier ranges divide and dwindle
into forks towards the north-eastern part of the continent. It is a
marked and invariable feature of the Australian continent that the
atmospheric moisture gradually diminishes, and consequently that
the aridity of the climate increases from the coast inwards. This
feature is both proved and exemplified by the corresponding
characteristics of the vegetation—making, of course, due allowance
for local elevations—which always appear to attract and influence
the accumulation and concentration of moisture. It is probably
an effect of the peculiar mountain formation, that the largest
rivers, measured by length, watershed, and occasional volume of
water, flow over the continent from east to west, but the quantity
of water generally contained in these western streams is compara-
tively scanty, while many of them for long periods degenerate into
mere chains of ponds, often with miles of empty and sandy channel
between, or become absorbed by the sandy wastes of the interior,
while some become perfectly salt. It is an odd characteristic of
these western streams that eels are not found in any of them,
while in the streams running in a contrary direction towards the
eastern coast eels are abundant. The animal life of the western
streams differs from that of the eastern in many other important
and essential respects, and is characterised by peculiarly local,
and which may be properly called Australian, features, which
separate it, not only from the rest of the world, but, in a manner,
from existing and recent eras. The same may be said indeed of
Australia generally, which everywhere exhibits on, or at no great
distance beneath, the surface, marks of its remote antiquity and
connection with primeval periods, and especially in its peculiar
flora and fanna, as well as human inhabitants. Among other
innumerable instances these peculiarities include gigantic tree-
ferns, arborescent cycads and liliaceous forms, proteads, sarsapa-
rillas, native oaks or casuarinse, distributed generally over the


entire continent and in most of the neighbouring islands, and an
equally universal and almost infinite abundance and variety of
epacrids, from tall trees to smallest shrubs and creeping plants,
while among them not a single species of heath is found. The
animal kingdom consists of a multitude of exclusively marsupial
forms, the native dog, or dingo, being regarded by naturalists as
of comparatively recent Malay importation. Its waters are peopled
by the strangest amphibia, and by wonderful reptilian and other
fishes, akin to no existing species, of which the most remarkable
as well as notorious instances are the ornithoryncus paradoxus , or
duck-billed platypus, and the ceratodus. But, above all, the
primeval character of Australian antiquity is indicated by its
peculiarly autochthonous race of Aborigines, which, more than
any other existing aboriginal race, seems to link modern man
with his earliest ancestors. The identity of race extends through-
out the continent of Australia. They obviously represent a phase
of the “ stone age,” and their imperfect development is marked
by certain rude arts and manufactures, which have no affinity
with those of other existing nations. Their languages, multiform
and differing from each other in expression, all exemplify in their
construction and terminology, that stage of complexity which
arises from the necessity of slightly diversifying a limited stock of
root words or sounds in order to adapt them to a larger number
of cognate ideas. Their equally complex rules of relationship and
marriage correspond with that period of social growth and deve-
lopment which is largely influenced by rude ideas of property in
women. Further observation of these people promises to solve
many a tough problem in ethnology. The timbers of Australia
are still an unexplored field for the naturalist and practical artist.
Much the same may be said of Australian minerals, of many of
which, although the values and precious uses are tolerably well
known, and form the chief attractions to scientific and industrial
enterprise, yet of many others unquestionably the valuable qualities
yet remain to be ascertained, and their masses unearthed by the
labour, and for the benefit of, future generations.
But already upon the very threshold of discovery, as it were,
some useful products have been culled, and curious phenomena
elicited, from the Australian vegetable kingdom. Among these
the eucalyptus globulus of Tasmania has attained a somewhat
unfair prominence and notoriety for its hygiepic and antiseptic
virtues. Thousands of species of Australian myrtacese, including
not only numberless forms of eucalyptus, but also syncarpus,


tristania, melaleuca, leptospermum, and metrosiderus, possess
beyond a doubt precisely similar qualities. Most of these
myrtaceous plants are in the highest degree available for all sorts
of marine or land architecture, from ships and palaces to cockboats
and wheelbarrows. All of them, by their density, hardness, and
durability, are far more suitable than, and it is to be hoped, will
one day take the place of, pine and other soft wood, in paving the
streets of towns. They are all invaluable for railway purposes.
There is no better wood than Tristania for boat-knees, and cross-
fastenings, The native turpentine or syncarpus of Eastern, and the
jarra of Western Australia, are the only timbers in the world, which
have been ascertained to possess the power of resisting perforation
by the Teredo Navalis. The eucalyptus citricodorous of Northern
Australia sheds a perfume from its leaves, similar to that of the
lemon verbena. The Australian cedar, so called, a species of the
Cedrdcz, allied to Honduras mahogany, is the darling of house-
decorators and cabinet-makers, as it combines the generally
incongruous qualities of softness, and facility of working, with a
capacity for exquisite polish, great beauty of grain, and amazing
durability. But after all said and done, and in spite of the
multitude of books and newspapers, Australia still remains, and
must for a long time remain, a mystery not only to the naturalist,
artist, and philosopher, but even to the speculator, trader, and
adventurer. Her vast undeveloped resources, as of many other
new countries, constitute, and will continue to constitute, some of
the strongest motive and creative forces of colonization. And in
this great work of colonization, or conquest of wild lands, the
noblest and meanest influences combine. Colonization conquers
and extends more, and more durable, empires than British or
Roman —than any in a political sense—namely the empires of art,
science, commerce, and civilization. And it is possible that the
few preliminary facts above roughly put together, may serve as a
spark to light some torch of exploration or research, or to fire the
passion of enterprise and adventure, in some who might otherwise
have suffered their energies and capabilities to waste or stagnate
among the redundant manhood and crowded populations of
Europe, where the conflict of extreme competition, reduces to a
minimum the chances of profit and remuneration, and even of
credit and honour.




i M
Mi s EMI I ■
I * A '% , v ' ,-- s v #’ :
|f?i - *. ■ 1 ■
I \ ®f? «*' ; mt '
I* I*l f m „
■ ■ v '? te. vJ'’ ' ',
(■■BMP Wmm SR Ml i


v ' f*r' • ■■■ ;-.-V ,' - jf
’
h; ; v ... ■■ , ■ . • ; ': ;vA# :■ '■ %
.
■
