

I n s c v i p H o n b ® coffin s in $ q g I e y 0 j cl \/ a. v If- j
ftrroiv Ckurcf\ t Wav' wicK Shirf ; cop ltd by tkrcl
Sav <xj e c*- /i af p n n -f € al w • i~ h e Jo £ r yy\ i s S_it) y\ 0 £
f K € M <vr <| i/ / s oj We rfjc r &( . Lc iy cl o /i M .f * // j I Sr £ i




Inscriptions on Coffins
IN
“RAGLEY OLD VAULT,” ARROW CHURCH.
WARWICKSHIRE.
COPIED BY RICHARD SAVAGE, ESQ., JANUARY 1871,
AND PRINED WITH THE PERMISSION OF THE
MOST HONOURABLE MARQUIS OF HERTFORD.
LONDON:
MITCHELL AND HUGHES, 140 WARDOUR STREET, W.
1888.




z^— -J^/^ J
« c <» Cg,
<£*-"2, aJL /<?rf.








“CONWAY” ARMS.
FROM SOUTH WINDOW, ARROW CHURCH, WARWICKSHIRE.




Inscriptions on Coffins
IN
“RAGLEY OLD VAULT,” AEEOW CHUECH, WARWICKSHIRE.
bottom Slabs.
1.
Coffin entire, with arms and inscription on brass plate.
(Arms. - )
Lady Anne Horatia Seymour
Wife of Lord Hugh Seymour
Daughter of
James Earl of Waldegrare
Born Nov 1 ' Bth8 th 1762. Died July 12 th 1801.
Burial Register. —lBol. July 22. Lady Horatia Seymour.
2.
Coffin entire, with inscription on brass plate.
William Chatham Eichard
Seymour
fourth son of the Eight Honorable
Vice Admiral
Lord Hugh Seymour
Died 31 st July 1801.
Aged 8 Years.
Burial Register. —lBol. Nov. 22. Wm. Seymour.
3.
Lead coffin, in very good state, with two inscriptions upon it, one in the lead,
and one upon a loose brass plate.
Miss
Eloisha Anne
Conway Daughter
of y e Eight Hon We
Lord Yicount Beauchamp
Died 26 Aug st 1771
Aged 7 weeks
& 2 days.
Burial Register. —l77l. Aug. 31. Hon. Alicia Anne Conway Daughter of Francis
Lord Sf Lady Alice Elisaleth Beauchamp.
A


4.
Lead coffin, in good state, with two inscriptions, one in the lead, and one (with
arms) upon a loose brass plate.
(Arms.)
The Right Hon ble
Alice Elizabeth Lady
Yicountess Beauchamp
Born May 10 th 1749
Died Feb r y 11 th 1772
Aged 22 Years & 9 months.
Burial Register. —1772. Feb. 20. Right honourable Alice Elizabeth Lady Beau-
champ.
5.
Lead coffin, in a very good state, with an inscription in the lead only.
The Right Hon ble
Henry Seymour Conway
Field Marshal of his Majesties
Forces
Colonel of the Royal Regiment
of Horse Guards Blue
Governor of the Island of Jersey
& one of the Lords of his
Majesty’s most Hon ble
Privy Council
Obiit 9 July 1795
ißtatis Suae 75.
Burial Reqister. —l79s. 20 th July. The Honble. Field Marshal Henry Seijmour
Conway.
6.
Lead coffin, with a portion of the top fallen in at the foot about 1 foot long
by 5 inches wide. An inscription in the lead only.
The Hon ble
& Rev d
Edw d S. Conway
Died 29 th August
1785
Aged 28 Years.
Burial Register.—The Honb u $ Rev d Semour Conaway of the Parish of Arrow was
buried 18 th September 1785.
7.
Lead coffin, with two inscriptions, one in the lead, and one upon a loose brass
plate.
The Hon ble
Jane Conway
Died May sth5 th 1749
Aged 38 Years.
2


Burial Register. —l 749. May 13. Was Buried the Hon lle M rs Jane Conway ,
Daughter of y' late , & Sister of y Present
R‘ Hon bll! L d Conway. She was Daughter
of the late L d by His second Lady Jane.
May 13. The forfeiture was paid for Her not having
been Buried in woollen.
8.
Lead coffin, in a very good state, but has no inscription whatever.
9.
Lead coffin, very much fallen in on the left-hand side, but still entire. It has
no inscription upon it.
10.
Lead coffin, in a very good state, but has no inscription. A portion of the
wood still remains upon the top, and upon the foot lie two skulls.
11.
Lead coffin, in very good condition. The only inscription upon it is cut in a
loose piece of lead.
Popham Seymour
1699.
Burial Register. —l 699. Jun. 23. Was Buried the Hono ile Popham Conway al's
Seymour Esq.
Memorand. that information was made June 30 of y e Hono ble Popham Conway
being buried contrary to y e Act ty y t y e 5 1 forfeiture was paid & distributed
according to y e Act directs viz. 2 1 10 s to y 6 poor & the rest to the informer.
12.
Lead coffin, in very good state, but has no inscription upon it.
13.
Lead coffin, in excellent condition. Upon the top of this coffin (as if done by a
nail) are scratched the words :
Quaker Lady.
If any reliance may be placed upon this simple inscription, this coffin undoubtedly contains
the remains of Anne, Viscountess Conway, wife of Edward, Viscount Conway, who died 11 Aug.
1688 (see No. 26), and mother of Heneage Conway, who was buried 23 Oct. 1660 (see No. 27).
Her Ladyship died at Eagley 23 Feb. 1678, and was buried at Arrow 17 April 1679.
At the time of her death, Lord Conway being in Ireland, the famous Baron Francis Mercury
Van Helmont preserved her in her coffin above ground, in spirits of wine, having a glass over
her face, in order that her husband might see her before her interment.
Lady Conway having, through many years of most severe bodily pain, sought relief in
intense mystical devotion, she was led to admire the patient quietude of the Quakers ; and with
the opinions of this sect (at that time flushed with all the fervour attendant on novelty, persecu-
tion, and success) she was eventually induced to comply.
Burial Register. —1679. Apr. 17 was buried Anne Vicountess Conway.
Affidavit for Anne Vicountess Conway was brought Apr. 23.
3


14
Coffin entire, excepting handles, which were taken when vault was broken into
in 1861. Arms and inscription on brass plate :
(Arms.)
The Most Noble
Francis Charles Seymour Conway
Marquis of Hertford
Earl of Hertford & Yarmouth
Yicount Beauchamp
Baron Conway
& Baron Conway of Killultagh in Ireland
Knight of the Most Noble
Order of the Carter
and Lord High Warden
of the Stannaries
Born 11 th March 1777
Obiit Ist1 st March 1842.
Burial Register.
1842. Name: Francis Charles Seymour Conway , Marquis of Hertford , Knight of
the Garter, dec., &c.
Abode: Dorchester House, London.
When Buried: March 19.
Age: Years 64.
By whom the ceremony was performed: H. C. Garleton, Rector.
15.
Coffin entire, excepting handles. Arms and inscription on brass plate. Prior
to the robbery there was a coronet upon this and No. 16 coffins.
(Arms.)
The Most Noble
Francis Ingram
Marquis of Hertford
Earl of Hertford & Yarmouth
Yicount Beauchamp
Baron Conway & Baron Conway of
Killultagh in Ireland
Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Carter
Lord Lieutenant of the County of Warwick
&c. &c. &c.
Obiit 17 th June 1822.
iEtat. 79.
Burial Register.
1822. Name: The Most Noble Francis Ingram Seymour Conway, Marquis of
Hertford, <Sfc., Knight of the Garter, L d Lieut, of this County.
Abode: London Ragley, died in London.
When Buried: Died June 17, Buried June 28.
Age: Years'll.
By whom the ceremony was performed: H. G. Garleton, Rector.
The beautiful cenotaph (by Chantrey) in Alcester Church was erected “ To the memory of
her justly and deeply lamented husband Francis Ingram Seymour Conway, Marquis of Hertford,
Earl of Yarmouth, Viscount Beauchamp, Baron Conway of Ragley and Killultagh, Knight of the
Most Noble Order of the Garter, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Warwick, Isabella Anne
Ingram, Marchioness of Hertford, has dedicated this Monument. He was born February 1743,
and died June 1822.”
4


16.
Coffin entire, excepting handles. Arms and inscription on brass plate. Coronet
gone.
(Arms.)
The most Noble
Isabella Anne Ingram
Dowager
Marchioness of Hertford
Relict of
Francis the second Marquess
and Daughter of
Charles Ingram
Yicount Irwin
Died 12 th April 1831
Aged 74 Years.
Burial Register.
1884. Name: Isabella Anne Ingram , Marchioness Dowager of Hertford.
Abode: Died in Manchester iSq., London.
When Buried: Buried Apt. 26.
Age: Years 64.
By whom the ceremony was performed; H. G. Garleton, Rector.
17.
Lead coffin, in very good state, with two inscriptions upon it, one in the lead and
one upon a loose brass plate.
Inscription in the lead.
The Most Noble
Francis Seymour Conway
Marquis of Hertford
Died 14 June
1794
Aged 76 Years.
Inscription on loose brass plate.
The Most Noble
Francis Seymour Conway
Marquis & Earl of Hertford
Yicount Beauchamp
Lord Conway, Baron of Ragley
& Baron Conway of Killultagh in Ireland
Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter
& Custos Rotulorum of the County of Warwick
Died 14 th June 1794
Aged 76 Years.
Burial Register. —l 794. 23 June. Marquis of Hertford.
a 2
5


2Tojj Slabs.
18.
Lead coffin, in very good state, bearing two inscriptions, one in the lead and one
(with arms) upon a loose brass plate,
(Arms.)
The Eight Hon ble
Isabella Conway
Countess of Hertford
Died 10 th November
1782
Aged 56 Years.
Burial Register. —l7B2. 20 Nov. Isabella, Countess of Hertford.
19.
Lead coffin, in very good state, excepting there being a small hole in the top on
the right-hand side of the head. Upon this coffin lies a broken piece of brass plate
which undoubtedly belongs to the small coffin (No. 20) lying upon the foot, as it
bears the following words, which agree with those in the lead of that coffin :
M iss Charlott
Daughter of the
Francis
This coffin, I conclude, contains the remains of Charlotte, the third wife of the Eight
Honourable Francis Seymour Conway. Her burial register is as follows :
1783. ffehr. 23 was Buried Charlotte Relict of the late R l Hono hle ffrancis Seymour
Conway, Baron Conway of Ragley.
Mar. 1. ffifty Shillings was paid upon account of y e late R l Hono lle Lady
Comedy's being Buried contrary to the Act fyc. and distributed soon
after among the poor of Arrow by James Round, Overseer.
Richard Jennings, Rector.
20.
Lead coffin, in very good state, bearing an inscription in the lead only.
M iss Charlott
Daughter of the R*
Honb le Francis L d
Conway by his
Third Wife died
Aug 1 y e 12 th 1717
age 3 weeks.
Burial Register.
1717. Aug. 17. ivas Buried Charlotte the Daughter of the R l Hono Ue ffrancis L d
Conway Baron of Ragley & Charlotte his Lady.
Memorand. y e 50 s was paid for the use of the poor being the forfeiture for Charlotte
Conways being Bur d not according to the Act for Bur. in Woollen, & that was distri-
buted accordingly p. Henry Roberts overseer.
6


21.
Lead coffin, in very good state, with loose brass plate upon it, bearing the
following inscription:
(Arms.)
The Hon We Catherine
Conway : Died
June y e 14 th 1737
Aged 28 Years.
Burial Register.
1737. Jun. 19. Was Buried the Hono Ue M rs Catharine Conway. 50 s paid <£• dis-
tributed to the poor of y e p'ish Jun. 27.
22.
Lead coffin, in very good state, with the following inscription in the lead only :
M C
Died
Jan the 25
1708
Aged
30.
Burial Register.
1708. ffehr. 4. was Buried the Right Hono Ue the Lady Mary, wife of the Right
Hono ble jfrancis Lord Conway Baron of Ragley & Daughter of
the Right Hono ble Lawrence Earl of Rochester & affidavit for the
Lady Mary Conway that shee was not buryed in woolin wax
made before Mr. Fra: Sheldon one of her Mo ties Justices of the
pease feb: th 10. & the 50 s forfeiture paid (j- distributed to the
poor Sep. 16.
23.
Lead coffin, in a very good state, bearing a loose piece of lead with the following
perforated in it:
Lord Conway
1732.
There is no entry of the burial of this nobleman in Arrow Parish Church Registers.
24.
Lead coffin in excellent state, with arms and inscription raised in the lead.
The whole of the inscription is composed of Roman capitals and figures as used at
that period upon monumental brasses, etc., but without the usual stop between the
words.
(Arms.)
Elizabeth second Wife
of Edward Earl of Con
way, Daughter of Ge
orge Lord Delamer
by the Lady Eliza
beth his wife, died
in child-bed of
her first child
July the 4
Anno Dom
ini 1681.
7


Burial Register.
1681. July 21 was Buried the Right Honourable Elizabeth Countess of Conway,
the wife of the Right Honourable Edward Earl of Conivay. And
her still-born son was then also buried, but he without the use of
the Burial-Office.
Memorandum: Nov. 3. five pounds were paid for the Right Hon. Elizab.
Countess of Conway's burial contrary to the Act: whereof fifty shillings was given to
M r ffr. Parsons the Informer , and fifty shillings distributed among the poor by
Richard Standly overseer.
25.
Lead coffin, in very good state, with inscription in raised capitals, etc., as No. 24,
covering the whole top of the coffin.
The son of
Edward Ea
rl of Conw
ay by the
lady Eli
zabeth
his sec
ond wi
fe was
still
born J
nly t
he 3 a
no Do
1681.
For Burial Register see No. 24.
26.
Lead coffin, in a very good state, with a beautiful loose brass plate upon its centre,
and upon the foot a small lead shell, shaped to the body and features of a child.
When in the vault, 11 Jan. 1871, I found the brass plate lying between the coffin
and the wall, entirely out of sight, and why I should have been led to look for any-
thing there has ever since seemed somewhat mysterious to me.
Heare . lyeth . the .
body . of. the .
Right Hon 1)le
Edward Earle of Conway, Yicount Conway and of
Killulta in the Kingdome of Ireland Baron Ragley Lord
Lieffi of the County of Warwick. Lieutenant Generali of the
Horse in the Kingdome of Ireland and one of his
Ma tles most Hon ble Privy Councill w ch died the 11
of August 1683 & in hope of a Blessed resurrect! 011 .
Burial Register.
1683. Aug. 25 was buried the Right Honourable Earl of Conway.
Mem. Sept. 13 fifty shillings ivere then distributed to the poor, and fifty more
given to M r Constantine Magenis , being the forfeiture for the Earl of Conivay's burying
contrary to the Act.
8


27.
Body and feature-shaped lead shell (in good condition) which (1 believe) un-
doubtedly contains the remains of Heneage, son of Edward Viscount Conway (No. 26)
and Anne his wife (No. 18), whose baptismal and burial registers are as follow :
Baptism. 1658. Henneag Son of Edward Viscount Conway & Killultah was
Baptized ffeb : the 17 An 0 1658. Dan: Whitbee vid Register
Westmonastery.
Burial. Henneg Conway the sonn of the Right hono ble Lord Conway was buried
October 28, 1660.
28.
A very fine lead coffin, in excellent preservation, with inscription in Roman
capitals of the period, stops between each word, also two shields of arms, all raised
in the lead.
Heare : lyeth : the : body :
of : the : right : honorable :
the : Lady : Dowager : Fran
ces : Yicountese : Conway :
Daughter : of : Sir : Fran-
cis : Popham : she : dyed :
the : Seaventh : day :
of : May : 1671 :
being : the : 74 :
yeare : of :
her : age :
Burial Register.
1671. The Right Hono hle Frances Viscountess Dowager of Conway departed this life
may Ith1 th and was buried June \A th 1671.
29.
Lead coffin, in a very good state, excepting there being two small holes in the
lead on the top, one on the left side of the head, and one towards the foot on the
right side. An inscription appears to have existed and been torn off. Upon the
head lies a helmet in a somewhat rusty state.
Enclosed Vault at S.E. corner of “ Ragley Old Vault.”
There is a brass plate upon the west wall of this vault with the following
inscription upon it:
Here Lies
That Excellent Man
Lord Hugh Seymour
Vice Admiral of the Blue
Who having died
in the West Indies
of the Yellow fever
Posterity is cautioned
at no future period
of time
however distant
to bring into activity
So baneful a disease
By.
Disturbing what is here enclosed
12 th September 1801.
Burial Register.— lBol. Nov. 22. Lord Hugh Seymour.
9


Enclosed Yault at N.W. corner of “ Eaglet Old Vault.”
Up to the present time I have been unable to learn definitely whose remains lie within this
vault, but from information obtained I am inclined to believe they are those of the Honourable
Harriet Conway, whose burial register runs thus :
1771. May 14. Hon. Harriet Conway (from Chichester),
Registers of Burial of Members of the Eaglet Familt who were buried
at Arrow, but whose resting-places cannot be identified.
1588. November 6. The Lady Elinor Conway wife unto the right worshipfull
S r John Conway K.
1608. December 1. The right worshipfull S r John Conway Knight.
1604. Jan. 30. Dennis Conway gent.
1609, Octob r 20. m r John Conway gent.
1612. March sth.5 th . The Ladye Dorothy Conway wife to the Eight worshipfull
S r Edward Conwaye.
1680. February the 12 th . Edward Lord Viscount Conway.
1630. March the 18 th . Alice Conway.
1715. ffebr: 26 was Buried the R* Hono We Jane Lady Conway second wife to the
E* Hono ble ffrancis L (l Conway Baron of Eagley.
The fifty shillings forfeiture paid March y e 9 th & distributed according
to y e Act amongst the Poor of the p’ish p, John Green Overseer,
1716. Apr. 8 was Buried Edward the Son of the E 1 Hono ble ffrancis L d Conway
Baron of Eagley & Jane his Lady.
Apr. 23 was paid the fifty shillings forfeiture for Edward the son of the
E* Hono We ffrancis L d Conway, being Buried not according to the Act for
Burying in Woollen to be distributed among y e poor p. by John Smyth
Overseer.
Burial. June 16, 1655. The Lord Viscount Conway at Lyons in ffrance.
Within the vault are deposited the remains of the Eev. Gavin Millar, to whose
memory the tablet in the church was erected, bearing the following inscription :
To the Memory of
the Rev d Gavin Millar
late Rector of Binton in this Neighbourhood
this Monument is erected as the only mark of Gratitude
I now am enabled to shew for his uniform Friendship &
unremitted attention in the Education of my Son.
The Remains of this valuable Man
are deposited in the Vault, which is destined
hereafter to receive my own
Hertford.
26 th November 1794.
10


A Copy op Entries in Arrow Parish Church Registers relating to
Ragley’s Noble Families.
Christenings.
1593. Feb. 15 th John Conway the sonne of the right worshipfull Edward Conway
gent.
1594. Aug. 10 th Edward Conway the sonne of the right worshipfull Edward
Conway gent.
1G22. Noyemb r y e 15 th John the sonne of S r Edward Conway Knight borne
Octob 1 ' y e 18 th and baptized Novemb r the 15 th at Littlecot 1622.
1707. March 8 was baptized Katharine the Daughter of the R 4 Hono ble ffrancis
Lord Conway and the Lady Mary his Consort,
vid Register de Blockley in Comtu. Wigorn.
1714. Nov. 2 was baptized Jane the Daughter of the R 4 Hon ble ffrancis L d Conway
& Jane his Lady.
1715. ffebr. 28 was Baptized at Sandiwell in the p’ish Dowdeswell in the County
of Gloucester Edward the Son of the R 4 Hono ble ffrancis L d Conway
& Jane his Lady.
vid Regist de Dowdeswell
p. me B. E. Garfield minister
de Charleton-Abbots.
1718. July 5 was Born and Aug. 2 was Baptized at Chelsea neer London ffrancis
the Son of the Right Hono ble ffrancis L d Conway Baron of Ragley &
Charlotte his Lady, vid Registr. Ibid.
1719. Aug 4 12 was baptized at Ragley Henry the son of the R 4 Hon ble Francis
Lord Conway and Charlotte His Lady.
Weddinge.
1618. August 4 th Willia m Wellam Esquire to m™ ffrancis Conway daughter of S r
Edward Conway.
Anno Domini 1654. Septem. the 4. George Rawdon of Rawdon in the parrish of
Guisley and County of Yorke Esquier And m 4ris Dorothy Conway daughter
to the Right hono ble Lord Yiscount Conway and Cilultar of Ragly in the
parrish of Arrow and Oountie of Warwicke were married by me
I\/T t rnTT . T 5 T» TT\n THO
MATH: BRIDHGES.
EXTRACT FROM "THE STRATFORD-ON-AVON HERALD' FOR FRIDAY, 29 NOV. 1861.
“ Sacrilege at Arrow. —On Sunday morning, the 17th inst., when Mr. Ingram, parish
clerk of Arrow, was about to enter the church previous to the morning service, he discovered
that the burial vault of the ancient family of Conway, now represented by the Most Noble the
Marquis of Hertford, had been sacrilegiously entered by burglars, and the coffins of the noble
dead despoiled of a portion of their ornaments, and otherwise injured and defaced. The family
vault of the Conways is of considerable extent, and is situated at the east end of the church,
immediately under the chancel and communion table. The legitimate entrance to this receptacle
of the dead is within the church, which, however, is closed up by masonry, and is only opened for
the purpose of its receiving a fresh occupant; but on the outside of the east wall of the church
is an aperture of an oval shape, which, however, is secured by transverse iron bars, within which
is a latticework of strong wire, in addition to which, projecting from the wall of the church, is
a massive semi-circular iron railing of above five feet in height, the top of which is again secured
by horizontal bars of iron of considerable thickness. Notwithstanding all these impediments,
the marauders managed to effect an entrance. Two bars of the outside railing were, by the
exertion of considerable force, so bent as to enable a man to pass through, thus giving them
access to the aperture in the wall of the church. Across this opening, in a horizontal direction,
was a strong bar of iron, the two ends of which were let into and firmly fixed in the wall; across
11


this were three iron bars placed perpendicularly, and the depredators contrived to break off and
force out the upper part of the central perpendicular bar above mentioned, and by that means
obtained an entrance to the vault. To do this, very great force must have been used. The stone-
work on the left side, though a foot in thickness, has been actually split, apparently by a crow-
bar being placed against it in forcing out the iron bar in the centre of the opening, which is but
small, and only sufficient to admit a man of moderate dimensions. The thieves were probably
incited to these sacrilegious proceedings by the expectation that the coronets placed upon the
coffins, together with the handles and other ornaments, were of the precious metals. The coffins
and coronets were distinctly visible in the daytime from the churchyard; and when the sun was
shining upon them, presented a remarkably glittering appearance. The rascals appear to have
tested the coffin plates and handles, and finding that ‘ all that glitters is not gold,’ and that they
were for the most part only plated, did not think them worth carrying away. It was at first
supposed that only some of the coronets were missing, but the vault being again examined, it was
found that not only five coronets but two coffin plates have been carried away.”
12








