

1938.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Inspection of Machinery
Act, 1921
REPRINTED WITH AMENDMENTS
TO 28th FEBRUARY, 1933
with
Compilation of Regulations, Etc.,
in Force on Ist July, 1935
i' 4100/38.
PERTH;
BY AUTHORITY : FEED. WM. SIMPSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1938.


ARRANGEMENT.
Section
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.
3. Bepeal.
First Schedule.
4. Non-application of Act.
Administration.
5. Districts.
6. Chief Inspector and Inspectors.
7. Inspectors’ certificate of appoint-
ment.
8. Impersonating Inspectors.
9. Powers and duties of Chief In-
spector.
10. Inspectors to keep minutes, and re-
port to Chief Inspector.
11. Powers and duties of Inspectors.
12. Inspector may call in aid.
13. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.
Machinery subject to Act.
11. Machinery to which Act applies.
Second Schedule.
Employment of Young Persons or
Females.
15. Young persons not to be employed
in certain cases.
Lift attendants.
Provisions affecting Machinery.
16. Persons having machinery subject
to this Act to notify Inspector,
and suppliers of current for power
to notify new connections.
Third Schedule.
17. Guards and safety appliances.
Lifts. Winding engines.
18. Notice of machinery requiring guard-
ing.
Fourth Schedule.
Defective Machinery.
19. Faulty or defective machinery.
Provisions affecting Boilers.
20. Certain provisions of the Act ap-
plied to boilers.
21. Persons having boilers subject to
Act to notify Inspector.
Fifth Schedule.
22. Boilers to be fitted with certain
fittings.
Section
23. Boilers not to be worked unless
fitted with two safety valves.
24. Setting of boilers.
25. Standards and appliances to be pro-
vided.
26. Record of first inspection.
27. Subsequent inspections.
28. Records of inspections.
29. When boilers to be inspected.
30. May be inspected at any reasonable
time.
31. Aid to be given by owner for pur-
pose of inspection.
32. Notice to owner of faulty boiler.
Sixth Schedule.
33. Authorised working pressure of
boilers coupled together.
34. Owner to notify Inspector of repairs,
35. Increasing pressure in boiler.
Concealing defects.
Fees for Inspection.
36. Fees for inspection of boilers and
machinery.
37. Fees. How determined.
38. Inspector receiving excessive fees.
Certificates of Inspection.
39. Certificate of inspection.
Seventh Schedule.
40. Certificate to be exhibited in con-
spicuous place.
41. Duration of certificate of boiler.
42. Duration of certificate of machinery.
43. Stamping official registered number
on boiler.
44. Working without a certificate.
Duties and Liabilities of Owners of
Boilers and Machinery.
45. Notice of sale of boiler or machin-
ery, accidents to boilers or
machinery to be notified.
46. Liability of owner in first instance.
47. Proceedings against actual offender.
48. Notice of intention to prosecute.
49. When owners and mortgagees not
liable.
Inquiries as to Accidents to Persons.
50. Inspector to be notified of accident.
51. Inspector to inquire and report.
52. Inquiry into accident. Inspector to
be notified as to coronial inquiries.
The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
No. 11 of 1922.


Certificates for engine-drivers, crane and
hoist drirers, dial boiler attendants.
Section
53. Drivers in charge of engines, cranes,
and hoists, and boiler attendants.
54. Board of Examiners, and classifica-
tion of certificates.
55. Certificates of service.
56. Privileges of ccitificates.
57. Restriction of certificates.
58. Examinations.
59. Applications for certificates, and ob-
ligation to take up certificates.
60. Reciprocity certificates, or recogni-
tion of certificates from other
States.
61. Interim certificates.
Protection of Engine-drivers’ Certifi-
cates in force prior to the passing of
this Act.
62. Protection of existing certificates,
and equivalent values of such cer-
tificates under this Act, service
certificates, and transfer certifi-
cates.
63. Recognition of Marine Engineer's
certificates.
64., Disqualification of holders of certifi-
cates.
Section
65. Acting without a certificate.
66. Obtaining certificate improperly.
67. False testimonials.
68. Chief Inspector may require engine
and its boilers to be in charge of
separate persons.
Miscellaneous.
69. Reporting boilers or machinery likely
to cause injury.
70. Notice of removal of boiler (r
machinery'.
71. Power to enter and inspect certifi-
cates.
72. Responsibility of owners, etc., main-
tained.
73. Removing safety devices.
74. Documents may be written or
printed.
75. Service of notices, etc.
76. General penalty.
77. Summary procedure for recovery of
fees and penalties.
78. Expenses of administration.
79. Protection of Inspectors from lia-
bility.
80. Appeal.
81. Annual report.
82. Regulations.
Schedules.
Arrangement of Sections- -continued.


INSPECTION OF MACHINERY.
12° Geo. V., No. XLV.
No. 11 of 1922.
(As amended by No. 42 of 1923 and No. 34 of 1924.)
AN ACT to provide for the Inspection and Regulation
of Boilers and Machinery.
[Assented to 10 th February, 1922.]
BE it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, by
ami with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council and Legislative Assembly of Western Australia, in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, as follows: —
1. This Act may be cited as the Inspection of Machinery
Act, 1921, and shall come into operation on a day to be fixed
by proclamation, provided that such proclamation shall not
issue before the first day of July, 1922.*
2. In this Act, if not inconsistent with the context—
‘'Boiler” means and includes —
(a) any boiler or vessel in which steam is generated
above atmospheric pressure for working any
kind of machinery, or for any manufacturing
or other like purposes;
(b) any vessel used as a receiver for compressed air
or gas, the pressure of which exceeds 301bs. to
the square inch, and having a capacity exceed-
ing five cubic feet; but does not include con-
tainers used for transport;
(c) any vessel used under steam pressure as a
digester, and
(d) any steam jacketed vessel used under steam
pressure for boiling, heating, or disinfection
purposes.
It al so includes the setting, smoke stack, and all fittings
and mountings, steam and other pipes, feed
pumps and injectors, and other equipments
necessary to maintain the safety of the boiler.
Proclaimed in the Government Gazette of the Ist .Inly, 1922, to come into
operation on the 3rd July, 1922.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


“Building” means any manufactory, mill, shop, shed,
building, or place, whether above the ground or
underground, in which any boiler or machinery is
erected, or where the same is kept, used, worked, or
in operation.
“District” means any district proclaimed under this Act.
“Inspector” means any person appointed to be an in-
spector of machinery under this Act acting within
a district or districts for which he is appointed.
“Machinery” means every steam engine, motor, or
other source of motive power, and every machine,
shaft, belt, gearing, pulley, flywheel, lift, crane, con-
trivance or appliance driven by the same for any
purpose, but does not include hand, treadle, wind or
animal power, or the machines and appliances driven
by such sources of power.
“Motor” means any electric motor, or any gas, oil,
petrol, or any compressed air engine, or any other
engine or source of motive power not being a steam
engine, but does not include hand, treadle, wind or
aniinal power, or the machines and appliances driven
by such sources of power.
“Magistrate” means a police magistrate or a resident
magistrate.
“Minister” means the responsible Minister of the Crown
charged for the time being with the administration
of this Act.
“Owner” means and includes the person being the owner
of any boiler or machinery, as also the hirer, bailee,
or mortgagee in possession thereof, and any man-
ager, engineer, overseer, foreman, agent, or person
in charge or having the control or management of
any boiler or machinery.
“Premises” includes any house, building, structure,
yard, or place, and any mine, timber area, farm,
paddock, field, road, or place, and any punt, raft,
boat, ship, or vessel not propelled by its own motive
power or machinery, and which is not exempted from
the operations of this Act, in which a boiler is kept
or used, or any machinery is kept, worked, used, or
is in operation.


“Prescribed” means prescribed by this Act or the
regulations thereunder.
“Regulations” means the regulations made under this
Act.
“Winding engine” means any engine used for raising or
lowering men or materials in any vertical or inclined
shaft on any mine, sewerage, or other works, whether
erected on the surface or underground.
3. The Act mentioned in the first schedule is hereby
repealed: Provided that—
All regulations, orders, and notifications made under the
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1904, and in force at
the time of the repeal, shall be deemed to have been
made under this Act.
All certificates granted under the said Act, and in force
or use at the time of the repeal, shall continue in
force and use for the purposes of this Act.
All proceedings in respect of offences against the said
Act may be instituted, prosecuted, and completed
thereunder in like manner in all respects as if the
Act were not repealed.
4. This Act shall not apply to any boilers or machinery—
(l) used on or employed in the working of the Govern-
ment railways or trajmways under the control of
the Commissioner of Railways; or
(2) of any ocean-going ship or steamship; or
(3) of any ship or steamship engaged in making any
coasting voyage within the meaning of the Colonial
Passengers Ordinance, 1861, or Navigation Act,
1904; or
(4) of any steam or oil launch or motor car, or motor
lorry, other than a motor car or motor lorry driven
by steam and used for carrying goods or passen-
gers for reward; or
(5) of any traction engine driven otherwise than by
steam and used solely 7 for traction purposes; or
(6) if such machinery is driven by a motor as defined
of which the power is less than one horse-power;
or


(7) driven by an oil or petrol engine not exceeding six
horse-power, and which is used exclusively by an
agriculturist, pastoralist or pearler in pursuit of
his calling as such.
Administration.
5. The Governor may, by proclamation, from time to time
divide the State into districts, with such boundaries as lie
thinks convenient, and may assign to any district a name by
which it shall be known for the purposes of this Act; and
may, in like manner, from time to time, alter the boundaries
of any district.
6. (1.) The Governor may, from time to time, appoint a
Chief Inspector of Machinery, and for each district one or
more inspectors of machinery.
(2.) The Chief Inspector of Machinery and the inspec-
tors appointed under the Inspection of Machinery Act, 1904,
shall be deemed to have been appointed under this Act.
(3.) Every applicant for the position of inspector of
machinery shall on application pay the prescribed fee, and
shall before appointment pass the prescribed examination or
otherwise give evidence of his competency, to the satisfaction
of the Chief Inspector, and must produce evidence that he
has served an engineering apprenticeship of at least five
years, during which time he has been engaged in the actual
manufacture and repair of engines, boilers, and machinery,
and that he has had engineering experience of a satisfactory
character subsequent to his apprenticeship.
(4.) An inspector may be appointed for one or more dis-
tricts.
(5.) Any duly appointed inspector of machinery may
exercise any or all of the powers of an inspector of mines
under the Mines Regulation Act of 1906, or any amendments
thereof, subject to such conditions or restrictions as the
Governor may think fit to impose.
(6.) Any competent person who is permanently employed
in any department, and who has given evidence as to his
competency as provided by subsection three hereof, may be
appointed by the Governor as an inspector, and may exercise
the powers of an inspector in any district subject to such
conditions and restrictions (if any) as the Governor may
think fit to impose.


7. Every inspector shall be furnished with a certificate, in
writing under the hand of the Minister, of his appointment
for the district named therein; and on his entering into or
upon any building or premises for any of the purposes of this
Act, he shall, if required, produce such certificate to the
owner.
8. Any person who falsely pretends to be an inspector
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to imprisonment, with
or without hard labour, for not exceeding six months.
9. The Chief Inspector shall, within every district, have
all the powers of an inspector in such district, and he may
exercise such powers alone or in conjunction with any in-
spector.
10. Every inspector shall keep minutes of all his proceed-
ings, and shall from time to time report the same to the Chief
Inspector, with such particulars and information as the Chief
Inspector requires.
11. An inspector may enter into or upon any building or
premises where any machinery is placed or erected, or is in
use, or working, or is kept, and may inspect and examine such
machinery and the appliances connected therewith or belong-
ing thereto, to ascertain whether the provisions of this Act
have been complied with.
Such entry may be made at any time in the day-time,
whether such machinery is in operation or not, or at night-
time if such machinery is in operation.
12. In making such inspection the inspector may call to
Ids aid any person he may think competent to assist therein,
and may require the owner of the machinery to explain the
working thereof, and may examine him as to the compliance
with this Act in any particular.
13. Any person who—
(a) wilfully impedes an inspector in the execution of his
duty; or
(b) being the owner of machinery refuses, when required
by an inspector to explain the working thereof, or
to give such information as aforesaid,
s hall bo liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
Machinery subject to Act.
14. The machinery mentioned in the second schedule shall,
save as is mentioned in section four, be deemed to be mach-
inery for the purposes of this Act.
Inspector’s certifl*
cate of appoint-
ment.
Impersonation,
of Inspector.
Powers and duties
of Chief Inspector.
Inspectors to
keep minutes and
report to Chief
Inspector.
Powers and duties
of Inspectors.
Inspector may
call in aid.
Penalty for
obstructing
Inspector.
Machinery to
which Act ap-
plies. Second
Schedule.


The Governor may by Order in Council published in the
Gazette from time to time declare that any kinds of machinery
shall cease to be machinery subject to this Act.
Restrictions on employment of young persons or females.
15. (1.) No young person under fourteen years of age
shall be employed in working or assisting to work any mach-
inery.
(2.) No male person under eighteen years of age and no
female shall be allowed to clean any part of any machinery
in motion.
(3.) No boiler shall at any time be left in charge of any
person unless he is a male of at least eighteen years.
(4.) No person under twenty-one years of age or between
that age and fifty shall be employed in the control of a pas-
senger lift unless he (a) has served the Empire in any war,
and (b) is physically incapable of undertaking more exacting
or more laborious work: Provided that no person so employed
shall be paid less than the minimum wage prescribed for
adult labourers:
Provided also that any person not being under the age
of eighteen years, who at the commencement of this Act was
employed in the control of a passenger lift, may continue to
be so employed.
(5.) No female shall be allowed to effect any repairs to
any part of a lift or its appliances.
(6.) In case of a breach of any of the provisions of this
section, the owner of the machinery shall be liable to a pen-
alty not exceeding twenty pounds.
Provisions affecting machinery.
16. (1.) Every person who becomes the owner of any
machinery subject to the provisions of this Act shall, within
one month thereafter, send to the inspector of the district
where the same is, or in which it is intended to use, keep, or
work the same, a notice in writing in the form of the third
schedule, stating the name of such owner, the place where
such machinery is erected, kept, or intended to be used, the
kind of machinery and the motive power.
(2.) All suppliers of electrical current for power pur-
poses for working machinery subject to this Act shall for-
ward written notification to the Chief Inspector of any new
connections made during each quarter; such notifications to
Young persons
not to be em-
ployed in certain
cases.
As amended by
No. 42, Section
2 of 1923, and
No. 34 of 1924,
Section 2.
Lift attendants.
Persons having
machinery sub-
ject to this Act
to notify Inspec-
tor.
Third Schedule.
Suppliers of
electrical current
to notify new
connections.


be at the office of Chief Inspector on last day of March, June,
September, and December each year.
(3.) All machinery shall be inspected at least once a year
except lifts, which shall be inspected at least twice a year,
and agricultural machinery which may be inspected only once
in two years, at the discretion of the inspector. All mach-
inery driven otherwise than by a steam engine shall, for the
purposes of inspection and the granting of certificates, be
divided into groups, each group to consist of one motor as
defined and the machinery driven by such motor.
17. (1.) Any part of any machinery deemed by an inspec-
tor to be dangerous, and so certified by him, shall be suffi-
ciently guarded, renewed, or repaired as directed by him;
and while the machinery is in motion the guards shall not be
removed.
(2.) The previous subsection shall apply to machinery
of every kind to which this Act applies.
(3.) Before commencing the erection of any lift attached
to or in any building or structure, after the passing of this
Act, working plans must be submitted for the approval of
the Chief Inspector of Machinery, and must comply with the
regulations prescribed.
(4.) Every lift shall be provided with doors, locks, and
other safety appliances approved by an inspector; Provided
that the owner of every lift not so fitted shall be allowed six
months after the commencement of this Act to comply with
the requirements of this section. Inspectors may apply any
test to lifts as may be prescribed, whenever deemed neces-
sary.
(5.) Every winding engine erected after the passing of
this Act shall be provided with indicators for each drum as
may be prescribed. Every winding engine used for raising
or lowering men shall, within six months of the passing of
this Act, be provided with such starting valves, and other
safety appliances as may be prescribed.
(6.) In case of a breach of any of the provisions of this
section, the owner shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
twenty pounds.
18. Where an inspector is of opinion that any machinery
subject to this Act, which he deems likely to cause bodily
injury to any person engaged in the working thereof, is not
Guards and
safety appliances.
Lifts
Winding engines.
Notice of
machinery re-
quiring guarding.


sufficiently guarded, he shall serve notice in writing upon the
owner, specifying the part of the machinery he considers
dangerous, in the form of the fourth schedule, or to the effect
thereof; and the owner shall, if required by the inspector,
sign a duplicate of such notice in acknowledgment of his
having received it.
If the owner does not comply with such notice within the
period mentioned therein, he shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding fifty pounds.
Defective Machinery.
19. Where any machinery subject to the provisions of this
Act, or any appliance or contrivance connected or used with
such machinery, or any part thereof, is or appears to an
inspector to be faulty or defective in any particular, or so
dangerous as to be likely to cause loss of life or bodily injury
to any person, or where the ventilation of any engine-room
where any steam or internal combustion engine is erected and
used is defective, he may serve notice in writing to that effect
(upon the owner of such machinery, and such notice may
either require the owner —
(1) to wholly desist from working or using such mach-
inery, or any appliance or contrivance used or
connected therewith, from a date to be fixed in
such notice, until certain repairs or alterations to
be stated in the notice have been effected; or
(2) to have the arrangement of such machinery, appli-
ance or contrivance so altered or placed or the
faulty or defective part thereof repaired or re-
newed within a certain time to be stated in such
notice so as not to contravene this Act,
Any person upon whom such notice has been served, who
fails to comply with the terms thereof, shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding fifty pounds.
Provisions affecting Boilers.
20. All the powers of entry and inspection and other
powers and authorities conferred upon inspectors, and all
other powers, rights, duties, and authorities conferred upon
or given to any person or persons, and all penalties imposed
on any owner of machinery or other person under the preced-
ing sections of this Act shall, subject to the provisions here-
inafter contained, be applicable and may be enforced in carry-
ing into effect the succeeding sections of this Act relating to
boilers.
Fourth Schedule.
Faulty or defec
tive machinery.
Certain pro-
visions of the Aot
applied to boilers.


21. Every person who becomes the owner of any boiler
shall, within one month thereafter, send to the inspector of
the district where the same is, or in which it is intended to
use, keep, or work the same, a notice in writing, in the form
of the fifth schedule, stating the name of such owner, the
place where such boiler is erected, kept, or intended to be
used, the type and description of boiler, and the grate bar
area thereof.
22. Every boiler, air receiver, digester, or steam-jacketed
vessel registered or re-erected after the passing of this Act
shall be fitted with the following fittings and mountings of a
quality suitable for the authorised working pressure. All
fittings shall be flange-jointed unless otherwise approved by
the Chief Inspector.
(1) One steam pressure gauge capable of registering, in
pounds per square inch, up to one and a half times
the authorised working pressure, fitted with a cock
to enable the gauge to be disconnected for testing
while the boiler is under steam;
(2) One gun-metal feed check valve and one gnn-metal
stop cock or valve, fitted to the boiler between the
check valve and the boiler;
(3) One stop-valve fitted with gun-metal valve and seat-
ing, to be fixed between boiler and steam-pipe;
(4) One gun-metal blow-off cock;
(5) A suitable pump or injector or both, or other
approved boiler feed apparatus;
(6) A fusible plug of approved design in the crown of
the fire-box, or other suitable position, when
necessary;
(7) Two safety valves, each of ample area, one of which
shall be encased, fitted with easing gear, and of
lock-up design approved by the Chief Inspector.
The key of the latter valve shall be the property
and remain in possession of the owner, who shall
be responsible for the maintenance and proper
adjusting of the valves to relieve at the authorised
pressure within the limits laid down in section
twenty-three;
(8) Two glass water gauges fitted with cocks complete,
except in the case of boilers under six horse power
where one glass water gauge if supplemented by
two trv cocks shall be deemed sufficient. Every
Persons having
boilers subject
to Act to notify
Inspector.
Fifth Schedule.
Boilers to b©
fitted with cer-
tain fittings.


glass water gauge shall be fitted with protectors
of approved design, except such cases as the Chief
Inspector may see fit to exempt;
(9) One half-inch gas thread cock with female end suit-
able for connecting the inspector’s test pump, the
cock to be fixed in the most convenient position
as approved by the inspector;
(10) An intermediate stop valve or approved isolating'
valve shall be fitted on the branch pipe leading to
, the main steam pipe, in every case where two or.
more boilers are connected together, or in such
other position as may be approved of by the in-
spector; providing always, that such valve be
placed so as to be between the main stop valve
on any boiler and any other boiler or steam pipe
under pressure;
(11) Provided that in the case of air receivers, the fol-
lowing fittings be deemed sufficient:—
(a) one pressure gauge, as defined in section
twenty-two (1),
(b) one safety valve of ample area,
(c) one stop valve,
(d) one blow-off or drain cock,
(e) one half-inch cock for inspector’s test pump
as defined in subsection (9);
(12) Provided also that, in the case of digesters, the fol-
lowing fittings be deemed sufficient:—■
(a) one stop valve,
(b) one safety valve of ample area,
(c) one blow-off cock,
(d) one reducing valve of approved design fitted
to the steam pipe connecting the digester
or digesters to the steam boiler in every
case where the authorised working pres-
sure of the steam boiler exceeds that of
tue digester or digesters. In such cases
a pressure gauge as defined in section
twenty-two (1) is to be fitted on the low
pressure side of the reducing valve.


(e) one non-return valve between the digester
and the boiler,
(f) one half-inch cock for inspector’s test pump
as defined in subsection (9) :
(13) Provided also that, in the case of steam-jacketed
vessels for heating or boiling or disinfecting, the
following fittings shall be deemed sufficient:—
(a) one stop valve,
(b) one reducing valve approved design fitted
to the steam pipe connecting any such
vessel or vessels to a steam boiler, if the
authorised pressure of such boiler be
greater than that of the vessel or vessels
to which it is connected. A suitable pres-
sure gauge as defined in section twenty-two
(1) and a spring-loaded safety valve of
ample area to be fitted on the low pressure
side of the reducing valve,
(c) one blow-off or drain cock,
(d) one half-inch cock for the inspector’s test
pump as defined in subsection (9):
(14) Provided also that the owner of any boiler erected
before the commencement of this Act shall be
allowed six months to comply with the provisions
of this section, and in the meantime shall not be
liable to any penalty hereunder:
(15) Provided also that subsection (10) shall only apply
to new boilers or those erected or re-erected after
the commencement of this Act;
(16) Any owner failing to comply with the provisions of
this section shall be liable to a penalty not exceed-
ing twenty pounds.
23. No boiler shall, after the commencement of this Act, ;
be worked unless fitted with two safety valves, as provided :
in section twenty-two, subsection (7), each of sufficient area
to relieve the boiler without increasing the authorised pres-
sure more than ten per centum; such safety valves may be on
one boiler seat, provided that the area of the opening to the
boiler be not less than one and a-half times the area of one
of the valves. This section does not apply to air receivers,
digesters, or steam-jacketed vessels.
Boilers not to
be worked unless
fitted with two
safety valves.


Any owner failing to comply with the. provisions of this
section shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds.
24. All boilers set in brickwork or other material erected
after the passing of this Act shall be provided with flues and
doors, where necessary, of sufficient size, to the approval of
the inspector and in accordance with the regulations.
25. The Chief Inspector shall provide each inspector with
proper standards and appliances by which all pressure gauges
can at any time be compared and tested, and with all other
appliances necessary for carrying into effect the succeeding
sections of this Act relating to boilers, and shall from time to
time issue to each inspector such instructions (not inconsist-
ent with this Act or the regulations) as he thinks fit.
26. On the first inspection of a boiler the inspector shall
obtain and record the maker’s name, date of construction,
type, design, and all measurements thereof in order to deter-
mine the safe working pressure. He shall also record the
state and condition of the boiler and of all its accessories and
the fitness thereof for the particular purpose for which it is
used. Such records and computations shall be included in
his first report to the Chief Inspector.
27. On each subsequent inspection of a boiler the inspector
shall carefully make a comparison with such standards as
aforesaid, and shall record the changes (if any) since the
previous inspection.
If any change or alteration has been made in such boiler,
of any repairs effected thereto, he shall duly record the same
in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations.
If no change, or no material change, has occurred in the
state and condition of such boiler, he shall also record the
fact in manner aforesaid.
28. (1.) Every inspector shall keep inspection records of
each boiler in his district in such manner as shall be deter-
mined by the Chief Inspector.
(2.) Such records as may be prescribed shall be open to
inspection, without charge, at the office of the inspector for
the district, by the owner of the boiler, or his representative
Setting of boilers.
Standards and
appliances to be
provided.
Records of first
inspection.
Subsequent
inspections.
Records of in-
spection.


authorised as such in writing by the owner, but not by any
other person.
Any other person authorised in writing by the owner may
also inspect the inspection records on payment of the pre-
scribed fee, and the owner or any person authorised by him
may obtain a copy of any such records on payment of an ad-
ditional prescribed fee.
29. All boilers shall be inspected at least once in every
year, or oftener, as occasion may require.
30. Inspection of boilers may be made at any time in the
day-time at all reasonable.hours, but an inspector shall give
the owner at least seven days’ notice in writing, of the date
on which such inspection will be made.
If through any unavoidable cause an inspector cannot
attend on the date arranged, the inspection, subject to the
Chief Inspector’s approval, may be made by any competent
persmi together with an engine-driver who is the holder of at
least a first-class certificate recognised under this Act. A
report signed by these two persons shall be forwarded by the
owner to the inspector for the district, and such report may
be accepted in lieu of an inspection by himself, and a certifi-
cate under section thirty-nine may be granted for any period
not exceeding six months, on payment of the proscribed fee.
31. For the purpose of inspection the owner shall, if
inquired, cause every boiler to bo emptied, cooled, and dried,
and all man-hole doors and mud-hole doors to be taken off,
and all furnace bars and brick or stone bridges to be taken
out, and the interior of the boiler freed from incrustation,
and when required by the Chief Inspector, all brickwork or
other material in which a boiler is set, the removal of which
Way be necessary for the purpose of inspection, shall be
taken down.
The owner shall render such assistance as required bv
the inspector, and shall cause all furnaces, flues, and uptakes
connected with such boiler to be swept clean, and, if required,
all safety-valves to be taken to pieces.
The inspector may test any boiler by hydraulic pressure,
ff he considers it necessary to do so, and shall record the
Results in his report to the Chief Inspector. The owner shall
When boilers to
be inspected.
May be inspected
at any reasonable
time.
Aid to be gives*
by owner for
purpose of in,-,
spection.


for such purpose have the boiler completely filled with water,
and all valves and joints so adjusted and secured that, if
necessary, they will withstand a pressure of 50 per cent, in
excess of the approved working pressure.
32. (1.) If, upon inspection, it appears to the inspector
that any boiler is unsafe, or that it would be dangerous to
life or property if it were to continue to be used in its then
state, he may serve a notice, in writing, in the form of the
sixth schedule, upon the owner, requiring him—
(a) to wholly desist from working or using the boiler; or
(b) to desist from working or using the boiler until cer-
tain repairs or alterations stated in the notice have
been effected; or
(c) to desist from working or using the boiler at a
greater presure than that stated in the notice; or
(d) to desist from working or using the boiler at a
greater pressure than that stated in such notice,
until any repairs or alterations mentioned in such
notice have been effected.
(2.) The person upon whom such notice is served shall,
if required by the inspector, sign a duplicate of the notice in
acknowledgment of his having received it.
(3.) Any person upon whom such notice has been served
who fails to desist from working such boiler, according to
the exigency of the notice, shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding one hundred pounds.
33. When two or more boilers are coupled together, and
the authorised working pressure of the boilers is not the same,
the working pressure of the boiler having the greater author-
ised working pressure shall not exceed the working pressure
of the boiler having the lesser authorised working pressure,
unless a reducing valve, approved by the Chief Inspector, is
fitted.
34. (1.) Where the owner proposes to effect any repairs
to, or in any manner to alter the main structure of the boiler,
or to add to or to take away from a boiler any fittings or
appliances, or in any manner to alter the construction thereof,
he shall forthwith give notice, in writing, to the inspector of
the district specifying the intended repairs or alterations.
Notice to •wner
of faulty boiler.
Sixth Schedule
Authorised work-
ing pressure of
boilers coupled
together.
Owner to notify
Inspector of re-
pairs.


(2.) .Any person having effected repairs to any boiler
shall furnish a report to the inspector of the district, giving
full particulars of the nature of the work done and any other
particulars as may be required by the inspector.
(3.) This section shall not apply where repairs have been
effected in accordance with a notice to effect repairs given by
an inspector under the powers hereinbefore contained.
35. (1.) Every person who by any means knowingly does ,
anything to increase, or that tends to increase, the pressure 1
in a boiler beyond that stated in the certificate granted by an
inspector and then in force, or any notice served under
section thirty-two, and every person who aids or abets in in-
creasing the pressure as aforesaid, or procures such pressure
to be increased, or who in any manner whatsoever tampers
with any fitting or valve so as to interfere with the proper
and efficient working thereof, or who knowingly conceals from
the inspector any defect or any bad workmanship or defec-
tive fittings of which he may be aware, shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable to imprisonment with or without
hard labour for a period not exceeding six months, or to a
fine not exceeding fifty pounds.
(2.) Any person in ehai'ge of a boiler at the time such
increased pressure is discovered, or who finds the boiler in
a state of increased pressure and allows it to continue at such
increased pressure, shall be deemed primd facie to have com-
mitted an offence under this section.
Fees for Inspection.
36. There shall be paid to the inspector on behalf of His
Majesty, or to such other person as may be approved of by
the Chief Inspector, after making an inspection of any boiler,
winding-engine as defined, or any group of machinery driven
otherwise than by steam, and before the granting of any
certificate or report, the fees prescribed in the regulations.
In the case of machinery driven directly by steam with the
exception of winding-engines, a certificate shall be issued
without charge.
37. For the purpose of determining the fees to be charged
for inspecting any boiler, three-quarters of a square foot of
the fire-grate surface shall be deemed equal to one horse-
power for boilers of the multitnbular and locomotive types,
and one square foot of fire-grate surface for other classes of
boilers.
Increasing pres-
sure in boiler.
Conceding de-
fects
Fees for inspec-
tion of boilers
and machinery.
Fees—How de*
termined.


Inspector receiv-
ing excessive fees
38. (1.) No inspector shall make any charge for any
inspection over and above the amount prescribed in respect
of the kind of boiler or machinery for the inspection of which
the same respectively is payable.
(2.) Every inspector who knowingly accepts or charges
any fee or commission or receives any sum of money over
and above the charges allowed by law shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding fifty pounds, and, in addition, to forfeit
his office.
Certificate of Inspection.
39. AVhere an inspector has inspected any boiler or mach-
inery, and is satisfied—
(l) in the case of a boiler, that it is in good repair, and
may be safely used for the purpose for which it
is intended; or
(2) In the case of machinery, that it is sufficiently
guarded, and is also in good repair, and may be
safely used for the purpose for which it is
intended,
he shall thereupon and after payment of the prescribed fee
in the case of boilers, winding-engines, and machinery driven
otherwise than by steam, but without fee in the case of mach-
inery worked directly by steam (other than winding-engines
as defined), grant and issue to the owner thereof a report or
a certificate in one of the forms numbered one, two, and three
in the seventh schedule, and report to the Chief Inspector
accordingly.
40. The certificate granted to the owner of any machinery
or boiler shall be exhibited in a frame in some conspicuous
place, to bo determined by the inspector, where it can he seen
by all persons working at or with any boiler or machinery;
and every owner who neglects so to exhibit such certificate
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
In any proceedings under this section, it shall be a suffi-
cient defence if the defendant satisfies the magistrate—
(l) that owing to the size of the boiler or machinery, the
locality where it was working, or other sufficient
cause, there was no conspicuous place in which the
certificate could reasonably be affixed;
(2) that, at all reasonable times, he kept the certificate
available for inspection by all persons working at
or with the boiler or machinery, and also by the
inspector and any member of the police force; and
also
Certificate of in*
spection.
Seventh Schedule.
Certificate to be
exhibited in con-
spicuous place.


('.'>) that the attendant in charge was provided with a
copy of the certificate.
41. The certificate granted to the owner of a boiler shall
remain in force for such period, not exceeding one year, as
the inspector may think fit, which period shall be stated on
the certificate:
Provided that the inspector may at any time cancel or
suspend any certificate where he deems it necessary in the
interests of safety so to do.
42. The certificate granted to the owner of machinery
shall remain in force for one year, or for such shorter period
as the inspector may deem expedient, if during that period
no material alteration or addition is made in or to the same,
and the machinery is at all times kept sufficiently guarded
and in good repair, and fit to be safely used for the purpose
for which it is intended:
Provided that, in the case of machinery used solely for
threshing, chaff-cutting, grain-crushing, sheep-shearing, irri-
gation or other purely agricultural purpose, other than trac-
tion engines driven by steam, and not worked for more than
six months in any one year, the certificate may remain in force
for two years at the discretion of the inspector:
Provided that the inspector may at any time cancel or
suspend any certificate where he deems it necessary in the
interests of safety so to do:
Provided also that a certificate may be gx*anted by the
Chief Inspector, on payment of a prescribed fee, extending
the duration of any such certificate, on a declaration in writ-
ing in the prescribed form signed by the owner of the mach-
inery to the effect that during the currency of such certificate
no material alteration or addition has been made in or to the
machinery, and that the machinery has been at all times kept
m good repair and fit to be safely used for the purpose for
■"■lnch it was intended.
43. At the first inspection of every boiler the inspector
K h:dl legibly stamp the official registered number of the boiler
°n sonic conspicuous part of the boiler. The registered num-
shall he kept clean and distinct by the person actually in
‘■barge of the boiler.
Any person who disfigures, destroys, conceals, or attempts
disfigure, destroy, or conceal such registered number shall
h (i liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
Duration, of certi-
ficate of boiler.
Duration, of certi-
ficate of macbin
ery.
Stamping official
registered number
on boiler.


Working without
a certificate.
44. Every owner who works or uses a boiler or machinery
in respect of which a certificate has not been issued, or for
which a certificate is not in force, shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding fifty pounds.
Proceedings for a breach of this section shall not be com-
menced or prosecuted except by an inspector or other person
duly authorised by the Chief Inspector.
Duties and liabilities of owners of boilers and machinery and
of the manufacturers thereof.
45. (1.) Where a person sells or absolutely disposes of a
boiler to any person within or without this State, or any
steam engine, or any motor for use in working machinery
to any person within this State, the seller shall, within
fourteen days, give notice to the inspector, stating the name,
occupation, and abode of the person to whom such sale or
disposition has been made.
(2.) Where a boiler or prime mover as above described
is let on hire or loaned, a similar notice shall, in every case,
be given to the inspector by the owner in the manner afore-
said, and, on return of the boiler or prime mover to the
owner, notice thereof shall be duly given to the inspector by
the person to whom such boiler or prime mover was lent
or hired.
(3.) All new boilers registered after twelve months from
the commencement of this Act shall be provided with a
maker’s name plate, on which shall be legibly cast or stamped
the maker’s name, shop number of boiler, and the date of
construction.
The manufacturer or his agent shall also furnish to the
Chief Inspector—
(a) a maker’s test certificate giving the maximum work-
ing pressure for which the boiler was designed,
the pressure to which it was hydraulically tested,
the date of such test, and brand of plates used,
together with the tensile strength thereof;
(b) a sun print of the boiler which shall indicate all
leading dimensions, thickness of plates, size of
stays, diameter and number of tubes, particulars
of riveting and any other particulars necessary
for computing the strength of the boiler.
(4) Where an accident occurs to any boiler or machinery
to which this Act applies, whether causing accident to person
Notice of sale,
etc., of boiler or
machinery.


or not, but of such a nature as to necessitate structural alter-
ation or extensive repairs, the owner shall within twenty-four
hours notify the inspector for the district, giving particulars
and cause of the accident and the probable repairs or altera-
tions necessitated. Every owner who neglects to send such
notices as aforesaid shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
fifty pounds.
46. (1.) The owner of a boiler or machinery in respect of
which an offence has been committed against this Act, and
for which a penalty may be imposed, shall in every case (save
as hereinafter provided) be deemed in the first instance to
have committed the offence, and be liable to pay the penalty;
but an owner who has been proceeded against by an inspec-
tor shall be entitled, upon complaint or information duly
made by such owner, to have any agent, servant, or workman
brought before the magistrate at the time appointed for
hearing the complaint made against him by the inspector.
(2.) If, after the commission of the offence has been
proved, the owner proves to the satisfaction of the magis-
trate that he used due diligence to enforce the execution of
this Act, and that the said agent, servant, or workman com-
mitted the act in question without his knowledge, consent, or
connivance, the said agent, servant, or workman shall be
convicted of the offence, and shall pay the penalty instead of
the owner.
47. Where it appears to an inspector, at the time of dis-
covering the offence, that the owner had used all due diligence
to enforce the execution of this Act, and also by what person
the offence was committed, and that it had been committed
without the personal knowledge, consent, or connivance of
the owner, and in contravention of his orders, then the in-
spector may proceed against the person whom he believes to
be the actual offender in the first instance, without first
proceeding against the owner.
48. Where an inspector intends to prefer a complaint j
against an owner of machinery under section seventeen of ‘
this Act, or on the ground that any part of any machinery to
which this Act applies is not sufficiently guarded and pro-
tected, he shall give ten days’ notice previous to the day fixed
for hearing the complaint; and if the party complained
against intends to bring forward any person skilled in the
Liability of
owner in first
instance.
Proceedings
against actual
offender
Notice of inten-
tion to prosecute.


construction of the machinery as a witness at the hearing
of the case, he shall give notice of such intention to the inspec-
tor at least forty-eight hours prior to the hearing of the ease.
49. No person shall be liable to the provisions of this Act
as an owner of machinery or a boiler, unless the same is under
his immediate power or control; nor shall any mortgagee of
machinery or boiler be liable as hereinbefore mentioned,
unless he is in actual possession thereof or has the same under
his immediate power or control.
For the purposes of this section the words “immediate
power or control” moan where the machinery or boiler is
worked or used by the owner of such machinery personally,
or by his agents, servants, or others, under his orders or
directions, and for his benefit or profit.
Nothing herein shall exempt any corporate body from
liability under this Act by reason only that any such mach-
inery or boiler is under the control of any manager or other
person employed by such corporate body.
Inquiries as to accidents to persons.
50. (1.) Where loss of life or serious bodily injury to any
person by reason of the explosion of a boiler, or by reason of
an accident caused by machinery, occurs in any building or
premises where there is a boiler or machinery of any kind
(whether subject to the provisions of this Act or not), the
owner of the boiler or machinery shall, within twenty-four
hours thereafter, send notice to the inspector, at his office or
usual place of residence, specifying the cause of the accident
and the name and residence of the person or persons killed
or injured.
(2.) For the purpose of this section, “sei’ious bodily in-
jury” shall be such injury as results in the injured person
being disabled from following his or her ordinary occupation
and earning his or her usual rate of remuneration for a period
of two weeks or more.
(3.) Every owner who neglects to send such notice as
aforesaid shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty
pounds.
51. The inspector shall, immediately on receiving such
notice, proceed to the building or premises and inquire into
the cause of the accident, examine the boiler or machinery,
and may examine the owner of the boiler or machinery and
When owners
and mortgagees
not liable.
Inspector to be
notified of acci-
dent.
Inspector to in-
quire and report.


all persons employed in or about tlio building or premises,
and shall report thereon to the Chief Inspector, who shall
thereupon report to the Minister in the case of all fatal acci-
dents, or as the Minister may direct.
62. (1.) In the event of an accident happening to mach-
inery or a boiler (whether such machinery or boiler comes
under the provisions of this Act or not), where by reason of
such accident any loss of life or serious bodily injury to any
person has occurred, the Minister may direct an inquiry to
be held before a magistrate, together with a person skilled in
the use and construction of such machinery or boiler, to be
appointed by the Minister.
(2.) The magistrate, together with such person, shall
have power to hold such inquiry at such times and places as
the Minister appoints, and shall report on the cause of such
accident to the Minister.
(d.) With respect to the summoning and attendance of
witnesses at or upon any such inquiry, and the examination
of such witnesses upon oath, every such magistrate shall have
all the powers which we would have or might exercise in any
case within his ordinarv jurisdiction under the Justices Act,
1902.
(4.) In the case of fatal accident necessitating a coronial
inquiry, the inspector of machinery for the district shall, after
making his examination, confer with the coroner as to the
advisability of allowing the boiler or machinery which caused
the accident to resume work.
(5.) "Whenever a coronial inquiry is held, the coroner
shall, if practicable, give the inspector of machinery for the
district notice of the date on which it is intended to open or
continue the inquiry, to enable the inspector to attend. The
inspector shall have the right to examine any witness, to call
any witness whom be may think desirable in the interest of
justice, and in addition shall have the right to give evidence
himself.
(6.) A representative of the person killed and a repre-
sentative of the workers’ association in the district or any
industrial union of workers, or a representative of the major-
ity of the workmen employed in the works appointed in writ-
ing by such workmen, and a representative of the owner, may
examine the locality of such accident and be present at an
inquest, and may examine any witness as to the cause of the
accident, subject, nevertheless to the order of the court.


Certificates for Engine-drivers, Crane and Hoist-drivers, and
Boiler Attendants.
53. (1.) Every person employed or acting as a driver in
charge of any steam engine or engines, or of any engine or
engines driven by compressed air, or of any crane or hoist,
or of any internal combustion engine or engines, to which this
Act applies, shall hold the required certificate under this Act.
(2.) If required by the Chief Inspector or his represent-
ative, and subject to section fifty-six, any person employed
or acting as a boiler attendant in charge of a boiler or boilers
used for generating steam shall hold a boiler attendant’s
certificate, unless he is already the holder of a steam engine-
driver’s certificate; provided that, in the case of a range of
boilers, it shall only be necessary that the responsible fire-
man on each shift shall be the holder of such certificate.
(3.) This section shall not apply—
(a) to any steam engine, or any internal combustion
engine, or any boiler owned or hired by any bond
fide agriculturist, and used exclusively on any
farm for agricultural or dairy purposes; and not
worked for more than six months in any year;
(b) to any boiler of less than six-horse power;
(e) to any pump erected on any mine or premises not
capable of pumping more than 6,000 gallons per
hour;
(d) to any engine used exclusively for domestic pur-
poses;
(e) to any “Holman” hoist or any similar small winding-
engine used in a mine for temporary winding pur-
poses underground, and only for hauling material r
(f) to any internal combustion engine or engines having
an area of cylinder or combined area of cylinders
not exceeding two hundred square inches.
54. (1.) For the purposes of this Act there shall be a
Board of Examiners, appointed by the Governor, consisting
of the Chief Inspector of Machinery, who shall be chairman,
and two qualified persons, one of whom shall hold a winding
engine-driver’s certificate under this Act, or a certificate
equivalent thereto.
(2.) Any two members of the Board shall form a quorum.
(3.) The Board shall meet at such times as may be neces-
sary for conducting its business, or as may be prescribed by
regulations.
Drivers in charge
of engines or
cranes and hoists.
Boiler attendants.
Board of
'Examiners.


(4.) The Board shall have the power to grant the fol-
lowing certificates, viz.: —
(a) Winding engine-driver’s certificate.
(b) First-class engine-driver’s certificate.
(c) Second-class engine-driver’s certificate.
(d) Third-class engine-driver’s certificate.
(e) Locomotive and traction engine-driver’s certificate.
(f) Crane and hoist-driver’s certificate.
(g) Internal combustion engine-driver’s certificate.
(h) Boiler attendant’s certificate.
55. The Board may, at any time within one year from the
commencement of this Act, grant, without examination, an
internal combustion engine-driver’s certificate of service, or
a boiler attendant’s certificate of service, or a crane or hoist
driver’s certificate of service, to any person of good repute,
producing a satisfactory medical certificate in the prescribed
form and on payment of the prescribed fee, provided—
(a) that he produces satisfactory evidence that he has
been in charge of and driving an internal combus-
tion engine, the area of the cylinder or cylinders
of which exceeds two hundred square inches, for at
least one year, within a period of two years prior
to the commencement of this Act;
(b) that he produces satisfactory evidence that he has
been continuously in charge of a boiler and its
accessories for at least one year, within a period
of two years prior to the commencement of this
Act;
(c) that he produces satisfactory evidence that ho has
been in charge of a crane or hoist (as defined in
subsection six of section fifty-six) driven by elec-
tricity for at least one year within a period of five
years prior to the commencement of this Act.
56. (1.) A winding engine-driver’s certificate shall entitle
the holder thereof to drive and have charge of any winding
engine and of any stationary steam engine to which a first-
class engine-driver’s certificate applies; but the holder of an
Unrestricted first-class certificate granted under any Act in
force before the commencement of this Act shall be entitled
to drive any engine other than a locomotive.
Classification of
certificates.
Certificates of
Service for in-
ternal combus-
tion engine-
drivers, boiler
attendants, and
electric crane
drivers.
Privileges of
certificates


(2.) A first-class engine-driver’s certificate shall entitle
the holder thereof to drive and have charge of any stationary
steam engine or engines, including steam turbines, other than
a winding engine by which men are raised or lowered at the
time he is in charge, and of its or their boilers; provided that
such engines and boilers are so situated that the Chief
Inspector or his representative is satisfied the engine-driver
can efficiently discharge his duties without danger to any
person or liability of accident to such engines and boilers.
(3.) A second-class engine-driver’s certificate shall en-
title the holder thereof to drive and have charge of any
stationary steam engine or engines other than winding en-
gines, the area of the cylinder or cylinders of which does not
exceed seven hundred and fifty square inches, and of its or
their boilers; provided that such engines and boilers are so
situated that the Chief Inspector or his representative is satis-
fied the engine-driver can efficiently discharge his duties with-
out danger to any person or liability of accident to such
engines and boilers.
(4.) A third-class engine-driver’s certificate shall entitle
the holder thereof to drive and have charge of any stationary
steam engine or engines, other than winding engines, the
area of the cylinder or cylinders of which does not exceed
one hundred and fourteen square inches, and of its or their
boilers.
(5.) A locomotive and traction engine-driver’s certificate
shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge of
any locomotive or traction engine and of its boiler to which
this Act applies, propelled or moved from place to place by
its own motive power, and of any stationary engine or en-
gines, and of its or their boilers of third-class requirements
as prescribed in this Act.
(6.) A crane and hoist-driver’s certificate shall entitle
the holder thereof to drive and have charge of any stationary
or travelling crane, hoist, or other appliance of a like kind
operated by power other than hand or animal power used
for the purpose of raising material, and, in the case of steam-
operated appliances, of its boiler.
This subsection shall apply only to such cranes or hoists
as are fitted with jibs.
(7.) An internal combustion engine-driver’s certificate
shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge of
any internal combustion engine or engines to which this Act
applies, other than winding engines as defined.


Where internal combustion engines are used for the pur-
pose of raising and lowering men or materials in any vertical
or inclined shaft on any mine, the engine-driver in charge
must hold a winding engine-driver’s certificate, or one equi-
valent thereto, issued within this State, in addition to the one
required to take charge of an internal combustion engine.
(8.) A boiler attendant’s certificate shall entitle the
holder thereof to take charge of any boiler or boilers in which
steam is generated to which this Act applies, together with
its or their accessories.
(9.) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section
to the contrary, the holder of an unrestricted first or second
class steam engine-driver’s certificate granted under any Act
in operation at any time before the commencement of this
Act may, by virtue of such certificate, drive and have charge
of any engine to which, except for this Act, such certificate
would have applied, including an internal combustion engine,
other than a locomotive.
57. (1.) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
the Board may restrict or extend the privileges conferred by
any certificate as it may deem advisable; such restriction or
extension shall be endorsed on the face of the certificate.
(2.) Any such restriction may be cancelled by the Board
upon production of satisfactory evidence of further experi-
ence, and payment of the prescribed fees. No application for
a higher grade certificate shall be entertained until such
restriction has been cancelled.
58. (1.) Subject to this Act, all certificates of competency
shall be granted by the Board, after examination.
(2.) Examination for certificates of competency shall be
conducted by the Board with the exception of boiler attend-
ants’ certificates, the examination for which shall be con-
ducted by such person or persons as the Board may depute.
(3.) Examinations may be held at such times and places
as may be prescribed.
(4.) On an applicant passing the prescribed examination,
and upon the Board being satisfied of his fitness in all other
respects, the Board may grant a certificate of competency of
the appropriate grade or class.
(5.) The Board may grant or refuse a certificate on any
grounds it deems advisable.


59. (1.) All applications for examinations shall be for-
warded to the Chief Inspector of Machinery, at Perth, accom-
panied by the prescribed fee, and before the issue of any
certificate the candidate must produce the certificate of a
duly qualified medical practitioner on the form prescribed in
the regulations.
(2.) Every applicant for a certificate shall be a British
subject, and shall satisfy the Board that his knowledge of the
English language is sufficient to enable him to perform the
duties required as the holder of a certificate.
(3.) It shall be obligatory on the part of any successful
candidate to at once take up the certificate awarded him.
Should he fail to take up his certificate within a month, it
shall be cancelled.
60. (1.) On payment of the prescribed fees the Board may,
without examination, grant any certificate to any person who
satisfies the Board that he is a resident in the State of West-
ern Australia, and is a person of good repute, and is the
holder of a corresponding certificate of equal grade, granted
after examination by any duly constituted and recognised
authority within the Commonwealth:
Provided that, in the case of a winding engine-driver’s
certificate, the Board may, before issuing the certificate, re-
quire the applicant to furnish satisfactory evidence as to his
knowledge of the provisions relating to winding, and of the
signal code under the Mines Regulation Act, 1906, and satis-
factory evidence as to his qualifications and character.
(2.) On payment of the prescribe fees the Board may,
without examination, grant to any person who satisfies the
Board that he is resident in the State of Western Australia,
and is a person of good repute, and is the holder of a certifi-
cate granted without examination by any duly constituted or
recognised authority within the Commonwealth, a certificate
of such class as the Board thinks fit:
Provided that, in the case of a winding engine-driver’s
certificate, the Board may, before issuing the certificate, re-
quire the applicant to furnish satisfactory evidence as to his
knowledge of the provisions relating to winding, and of the
signal code under the Mines Regulation Act, 1906, and satis-
factory evidence as to his qualifications and character.
Applications for
examinations, and
medical certifi ■
cates.
Section 57
amended.
Obligation to take
np certificates.
Reciprocity com-
petency certifi-
cates.
Reciprocity ser-
vice certificates.


Grade.
Granted under :
Equivalent Certificates
under this Act.
Engine-driver’s ” Certifi-
Mines Regulation Act,
Winding Engine-driver’s Cer-
cate, Unrestricted
1895
tificate.
“ Engine-driver’s ” Certifi-
Mines Regulation Act,
First Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
cate, Restricted
1895
tificate.
“ First-Class ” Certificate,
Mines Regulation Amend-
Winding Engine-driver’s Cer-
Unrestricted
ment Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
tificate.
“ First-Class ” Certificate,
Mines Regulation Amend-
Winding Engine-driver’s Cer-
Restricted
ment Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
tificate (subject to any re-
strictions endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate or recorded
in the office of the Chief In-
spector of Machinery).
Second-Class ” Certificate
Mines Regulation Amend-
First-Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Unrestricted
ment Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
tificate.
Second-Class ” Certificate
Mines Regulation Amend-
First-Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Restricted
ment Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
tificate (subject to any re-
striction endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate or recorded
in the office of the Chief In-
spector of Machinery).
First-Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
Winding Engine-driver’s Cer-
t Unrestricted
Act, 1904
tificate.
First-Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
Winding Engine-driver’s Cer-
Restricted
Act, 1904
tificate (subject to any re-
striction endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate or recorded
in the office of Chief In-
spector of Machinery).
61. Notwithstanding anything contained in preceding sec-
tion, where any person being the holder of an engine-driver’s
or boiler attendant’s certificate granted within the Common-
wealth makes application to the Board for a corresponding
certificate, pending such application being considered, the
chairman of the Board or his deputy may, on payment of the
prescribed fees, issue to him an interim certificate which shall
be returned to the Board at its next sitting.
Prolection of Engine-drivers’ Certificates in force prior to
the passing of this Act.
62. {].) The holders of the certificates of competency or
service mentioned hereunder and granted in this State under
the Acts referred to shall be deemed to be the holders of
certificates under this Act as tabulated.


tirade.
Granted under:
Equivalent Certificates
under this Act.
“ Second-Class ” Certificate.
Inspection of Machinery
First-Class Engine-driver’s Ccr-
Unrestricted
Act, 1904
tificate
“ Second-Class” Certificate.
Inspection of Machinery
First-Class Engine-Driver's Cer-
Restricted •
Act, 1904
tificate (subject to any re-
striction endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate or recorded in
the Office of Chief Inspector
of Machinery.)
“ Third-Class ” Certificate.
Inspection of Machinery
Third-Class Engine-driver’s
Unrestricted
Act, 1904
Certificate
“ Third-Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
Third-Class Engine-driver’s
Restricted
Act, 1904
Certificate (subject to any
restriction endorsed on ori-
ginal Certificate or recorded
in the office of Chief Inspec-
tor of Machinery).
“ Locomotive and Trac-
Inspection of Machinery
Locomotive and Traction and
tion ” Certificate, Unre-
strioted
Act, 1904
First-Class Engine-driver’s
Certificate.
“ Locomotive and Trac-
Inspection of Machinery
Locomotive and Traction En-
tion ” Certificate, Re-
stricted
Act, 1904
gine-driver's Certificate (sub-
ject to any restriction, the
equivalent of the restriction
endorsed on original Certi-
ficate or recorded in the
office of the Chief Inspector
of Machinery).
“ Marine Engine-driver’s ”
Inspection of Machinery
First-Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Certificate, Unrestricted
Act, 1904, or the Boat
Licensing Act of 1878,
if issued before 1st
March, 1903
tificate under this Act, in
addition to Marine privileges
granted under Act specified.
“ Marine Engine-driver’s ”
Inspection of Machinery
Second-Class Engine-driver’s
Certificate, Restricted
Act, 1904, or the Boat
Licensing Act, 1878, if
issued before 1st March.
1903
Certificate under this Act,
in addition to Marine pri-
vileges granted under Acts
specified (subject to any
restriction endorsed on ori-
ginal Certificate or recorded
in the office of Chief In-
spector of Machinery).
Cnuio and hoist
driver’s certifi-
cate of service
to be granted to
certain holders of
existing certifi-
cates.
(-.) The holder of any certificate ,granted under the
aforesaid Acts who produces to the Board satisfactory evi-
dence that he has been in charge of and driving a crane or
hoist for a period of at least one year within five years prior
to the passing of this Act, shall he granted a crane and hoist-
driver’s certificate of service under this Act, within one year
after proclamation of same, on payment of the fees prescribed.
(3.) The holder of any certificate under the Acts herein-
before mentioned, being a resident in the State of Western
Australia, and being a person of good repute, may, on appli-
cation, payment of prescribed fees, and on delivery of his
original certificate for cancellation by the Board, obtain an
Transfer certifi-
cate?.


equivalent i under this Act, and such certificate shall
be called a transfer certificate.
(4.) Notwithstanding anything contained in tliis section
to the contrary, the holder of an unrestricted first or second-
class steam engine-driver’s certificate granted under any Act
in operation at any time before the commencement of this
Act, may. by virtue of such certificate, drive and have charge
of any engine to which except for tliis Act such certificate
would haw applied, including an internal combustion engine
other than a locomotive.
63. On payment of the prescribed fees, and on proof that
the applicant is a resident in the State of Western Australia,
and a person of good repute, and on production of satisfactory
testimonial', and a certificate granted after examination by
the Board of Trade of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, or by any Board in His Majesty's Dominions
having authority from the said Board of Trade to grant
certificates, the Board may grant, without examination, the
following certificates of competency:—
(a) To the holder of a first-class or second-class marine
engineer’s certificate—a first-class engine-driver’s
certificate.
(1)) To the holder of a third-class marine engineer’s cer-
tificate—a third-class engine-driver’s certificate.
64. i 1.) Where it appears to the Board that the holder of
any certificate under this Act, or any person deemed to he the
holder of a certificate under tliis Act, is guilty of any offence
or mi-cimdiicf or negligence, or who develops any symptom
of (!pi] ( ..p>y or other serious complaint which would render
him unfit to lie trusted to efficiently perforin his duties as such
holder, the Board may call upon him to return his certificate
to the chairman, and appear before it or before such persons
as the Mini-dor may appoint to show cause why he should not
he disqualified.
(2. ! The evidence taken at such inquiry shall he on oath
°i' affirmation, which the chairman, or any person appointed
as aforesaid or any member of the Board, may administer,
and the Board or such other authority shall have the power
of a p..lie e magistrate sitting in a court of petty sessions to
summon witnesses.
(3. ) In the ease of persons appointed bv the Minister to
hold an inquiry, they shall report to the Board of Examiners.
. (4.1 If it appears to the Board, as the result of any such
lll quiry, that the person has failed to show good cause why
f 410 H—3
Recognition of
Marina Engin-
eers’ certificate*.
Disqualification
of holder of cer-
tificates.


Jie should not be disqualified, the Board shall advise the Min-
ister accordingly, or if he should fail to appear at the inquiry
without reasonable excuse this shall be held by the Board to
be equivalent to failure on his part to show cause why he
should not be disqualified.
(5.) The Minister may thereupon, by notice in the Gov-
ernment Gazette, disqualify him for such period as he thinks
fit, and during the period of disqualification he shall be
deemed not to be the holder of a certificate, or the Minister
may alter, suspend, or cancel such certificate, and may, on the
recommendation of the Board, require the engine-driver
against whom any offence has been proved to defray all or
part of the expenses of the inquiry.
65. (1.) Any person who acts in the capacity of driver or
is in charge of any engine or crane or hoist or boiler referred
to in section fifty-three to which this Act applies, without a
proper certificate, where a certificated person is by law
required, and every person who knowingly employs such
uncertificated person so in charge as aforesaid, is liable to a
penalty not exceeding five pounds for every day or part of a
day during which he so acts.
(2.) Proceedings for a breach of this section shall not be
commenced or prosecuted except by the authority of the Chief
Inspector.
66. (1.) Any person who obtains or attempts to obtain
any certificate under this Act by fraud shall be guilty of an;
offence and liable to imprisonment, with or without hard'
labour, for not exceeding six months, or to a fine not exceed J
ing twenty pounds.
(2.) Every certificate improperly obtained, whether ob-
tained before or after the passing of this' Act. may be
cancelled by the Minister on the recommendation of the
Board; and the holder thereof shall, when called upon by the
Board, return such certificate.
(3.) Any person who fails to return such certificate, or
who uses any such certificate, after notice by the Board that
it has been cancelled, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding!
twenty pounds.
67. Any person who gives to any applicant for a certificate
under this Act a false testimonial as to service shall be liable
to a .penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.


68. ,i f ;i])on the report of an inspector the Chief inspector
is of opinion that it is impracticable, and therefore danger-
ous, for any certificated engine-driver to take sole charge of
any steam-engine and its boiler or boilers at the same time,
he shall serve the owner with notice, in writing, requiring
him, on and after a date to be stated in such notice, to place
the boiler in charge of some person other than the certificated
engine-driver in charge of the engine.
Any person upon whom such notice has been served who
fails to comply therewith commits a breach of this Act.
Miscellaneous.
69. Every person employed in connection with any boiler
or machinery shall use ordinary and reasonable precaution
to ascertain that the said boiler or machinery is not unsafe;
and any such employee knowing of anything likely to cause
injury to person shall forthwith report to his manager,
engineer, or other person in immediate authority over him,
whose duty it shall then be to see that the inspector of the
district is notified of the danger and the steps taken to avert
it.
70. Any person who removes any boiler or machinery as
prescribed from any part of a district to another part in the
same district, or from one district to another district, for a
longer period than one month, shall, within seven days after
the removal, notify the inspector of the district, or if not in a
district, to the Chief Inspector, particulars of such removal.
In either of the cases hereinbefore mentioned, if default
shall 1m made in giving such notice, the person offending shall
he liable to a penalty not exceeding ten pounds.
71. Any member of the police force, or other person auth-
orised by the Minister, may enter upon any building or pre-
mises in or upon Avhich machinery is working, and inspect the
certificate in respect of machinery and boiler respectively,
and the certificate of the person in charge of an engine or
holler.
72. Nothing in this Act, or in any certificate granted under
ds provisions, shall relieve the owner of any boiler or mach-
inery from liability to any action or suit, or from liability to
any civil or criminal proceeding; but all rights of parties and
all liabilities of owners of boilers or machinery, or of any
others person or persons in respect thereof, shall remain
Unaffected by this Act.
Chief Inspector
may require
engine and its
boilers to be in
charge of separ-
ate persons.
Reporting boilers
or machinery
likely to cause
injury.
Notice of removal
of boiler.
Power to enter
and inspect certi-
ficates.
Responsibility of
owners, etc.,
maintained.


73. Any owner, manager, engineer, engine-driver, or other
person who renders inoperative any safety device attached to
or used for governing the speed of any engine or any safety
device used in connection with any engine or boiler or mach-
inery whatsoever, shall he guilty of an offence under this Act,
and shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds,
and, in the case of the person being the holder of an engine-
driver’s certificate, he shall be liable to have his certificate
suspended or cancelled.
74. Every certificate, notice, order, or other document
'required by this Act may be either written or printed, or
partly written and partly printed.
75. (1.) Any notice, order, or other document required by
this Act or the regulations to be served upon any person may
be served—
(a) by delivering the same to such person; or
(b) by leaving the same at his usual or last known place
of residence or business; or
(c) by forwarding the same by post in a prepaid letter
addressed to such person at his usual or last known
place of residence or business.
(2.) Where any such document is required to be served
upon any owner, service as aforesaid on the manager, fore-
man, conductor, or agent of such owner shall be good and
lawful service.
76. Any person who commits any breach of, or neglects to
comply with, any of the provisions of this Act or the regula-
tions for which no other penalty is imposed, shall be liable for
each offence to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
77. All offences against this Act may be prosecuted, and
all fees payable and all penalties incurred under this Act or
the regulations may be recovered summarily before a magis-
trate in a court of petty sessions.
78. All moneys paid to inspectors by way of salary, and
all the costs and charges of carrying this Act into execution,
shall be paid out of the moneys appropriated for that purpose
from time to time by Parliament, and all fees and penalties
received under this Act shall be paid into the Treasury and
form part of the Consolidated Eevenue.
Removing safety
devices.
Documents may
be written or
printed.
Service of
notices, etc.
General penalty.
Summary pro-
cedure for re-
covery of fees
and penalties.
Expenses of
administration.


79. No matter or thing done by any inspector bond fide
in the execution of this Act shall subject such inspector or
the Crown to any liability whatsoever in respect thereof.
80. The owner of a boiler or machinery shall have the
right of appeal to the Minister against the decision of the
local inspector with respect to any boiler or machinery coming
within the provisions of this Act.
81. An annual report of the operation of this Act shall
be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
82. The (Jovernor may from time to time, by Order in
Council, mate regulations not inconsistent with this Act—
(l) regulating the duties of the Chief Inspector and of
inspectors;
(2) prescribing the forms of notices to be given under
this Act in any case where the same are not herein
provided for;
(3) prescribing the time and place in each district at
which fees shall be paid to an inspector, or to some
other officer or person other than an inspector;
(4) regulating the examinations for certificates, and pre-
scribing the fees to be paid by applicants for
certificates, the forms of such certificates, and the
nature and amount of experience required by
applicants;
(5) prescribing how and under what circumstances cer-
tain engines and boilers may be in charge of un-
certificated persons;
(6) prescribing the fees to be charged for inspection of
boilers and machinery subject to the provisions of
this Act;
(7) prescribing the fees to be charged for any special
work carried out by the officers employed under
this Act when no fee is otherwise provided for;
(8) regulating the erection and working of passenger and
goods lifts; and
(9) generally for carrying this Act into execution;
(10) all such regulations shall, upon being published in
the Government Gazette, be of the same effect as
if they were enacted in this Act;


Date.
Short Title.
1904, No. 53
The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1904.
(11) all such regulations shall he laid before both
Houses of Parliament within fourteen days after
the publication thereof, if Parliament is then sit-
ting, or, if not, within fourteen days after the
commencement of the next session thereof.
First Schedule.
THE INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
Second Schedule.
THE INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
MACHINERY SUBJECT TO ACT.
All machinery, except such as is specially exempted by this Act, worked
by steam, water, electricity, gas, oil, compressed air or by any other powei
(other than machinery driven by hand, treadle, wind, or animal power), and
used in any manufacturing or industrial process.
Third Schedule.
THE INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
NOTICE OF OWNERSHIP OF MACHINERY.
To the Inspector of Machinery
for the District.
I [or we] hereby give you notice that I am [or we are] the owner of
the machinery mentioned below; —
1. Description of machinery
2. Nature and amount of motive power
3. Place where the machinery is erected, kept, or intended to b<
used
I [or we] declare the above particulars to be substantially true and
correct in every respect.
Dated this day of ,19 .
Owner’s signature
Address • •
Official registered number


Fourth Schedule.
THE INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
Section 18.
NOTICE TO OWNER THAT MACHINERY IS DANGEROUS.
To (name of Owner), of
I hereby give you notice that the following parts of the machinery
registered under No viz.; (here name and describe the machine
and the parts requiring to be guarded) in your possession at.
appear to mo to be dangerous, and likely to cause bodily injury to persons
engaged in the working thereof, and I am of opinion that the same ought
to be (here describe what is required).
Dated this day of ,19 .
Inspector of Machinery District.
Section 2t.
Fifth Schedule.
THE INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
NOTICE OF OWNERSHIP OF BOILER.
To the Inspector of Machinery
for the District.
I [or we] hereby give you notice that I am [or we are] the owners of
boiler, particulars of which are hereunder described: —
1. Place where boiler is erected
2. Purpose for which used [or proposed to be used]
3. Maker’s name
4. Maker’s No
5. Where constructed
6. When constructed
7. Description and dimensions of boiler
8. Materials used in construction
9. Age of boiler on date hereunder
10. Area of fire-grate in square feet and horse-power under Section
37 (h.p. to be filled in by Inspector).
11. Working pressure for which boiler was constructed lbs.
per sq. inch.
I [or we] declare the above particulars to be substantially true and
correct in every respect.
Dated this day of ,19 .
Owner’s signature
Address
Official registered number


Section 32.
Sixth Schedule.
THE INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
NOTICE TO OWNER THAT BOILER IS DANGEROUS.
To (name of Owner), of
I hereby give you notice that on the day of ,19 ,
I inspected a boiler, Official Registered No , of which the following
is a description and that the same appears
to me to be (unsafe or as the case may be).
You are therefore required (to desist from working or using boiler, as
the ease may he), until the following repairs or alterations are effected,
namely (here set out repairs required), or to desist from working or using
the boiler at a greater pressure than , or to desist from working
or using the boiler at a greater pressure than ’ until the
following repairs are effected, namely )■
Dated this day of ,19 .
Inspector of Machinery District.
Section 89.
Seventh Schedule.
Form No. 1.
THE INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
CERTIFICATE FOE BOILER.
This is to certify that on the day of , 19
I inspected, in accordance with “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,
the boiler mentioned at the foot hereof, and that I consider the same is in
good repair and fit to he used for the purposes stated below until the
day of , 19 .
Dated this day of ,19 .
Inspector of Machinery District.
Official Registered No Where stamped
Description of boiler
Maker’s name
Authorised working pressure in lbs. per sq. inch
Purpose for which it is used
Owner’s name and address


Form No. 2.
The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
CERTIFICATE FOR MACHINERY NOT DIRECTLY STEAM-
DRIVEN, AND FOR WINDING ENGINES AS DEFINED.
Official Registered No
This is to certify that on the day of 19 ,
I inspected, in accordance with the provisions of “The Inspection of Machin-
ery Act, 1921,” the machinery mentioned at the foot hereof, and consider
that the same was that day sufficiently guarded, in good repair, and fit to be
used for the purpose intended.
Dated this day of ,19 .
Inspector of Machinery District.
Particulars relating to the Machinery.
Description of the machinery
Motive power
Name and address of owner (if a lessee or temporary owner it should be so
stated)
Form No. 3.
The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
CERTIFICATE FOR MACHINERY ATTACHED TO STEAM
BOILER No
Official Registered No
This is to certify that on the day of ,19 ,
I inspected, in accordance with the provisions of “The Inspection of Machin-
ery Act, 1921,” all direct steam-driven machinery (other than winding
engines as defined), on the premises of , and consider
the same was on that day sufficiently guarded, in good repair, and fit to be
Used for the purpose intended.
Dated this day of ,19
>
Inspector of Machinery District.


Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
PROCLAMATION
Western Australia, \By His Excellency Sir Robert Furse McMillan, Knight,
TO wit. f Lieutenant-Governor and Administrator in and over the
R. F'. McMillan, State of Western Australia and its Dependencies in the
Lieutenant-Governor Commonwealth of Australia,
and Administrator.
[L.S.]
Corres. 1028/22.
WHEREAS by “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” it is provided
that the said Act shall come into operation on a day to be fixed by Procla-
mation: Now therefore I, the said Lieutenant-Governor and Administrator,
do hereby, with the advice and consent of the Executive Council, proclaim
that “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” shall come into operation
on the 3rd day of July, 1922.
Given under my hand and the Public Seal of the said State, at Perth,
this 21st day of June, 1922.
By His Excellency’s Command,
J. SCADDAN
Minister for Mines.
GOD SAVE THE KING ! ! !
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
Districts.
PROCLAMATION
Western Australia, \By His Excellency Sir Robert Furse McMillan, Knight,
to wit f Lieutenant-Governor and Administrator in and over the
R. F. McMillan, State of Western Australia and its Dependencies in the
Lieutenant-Governor Commonwealth of Australia,
and Administrator.
[L.S.]
Corres. 1028/22.
WHEREAS by the provisions of Section 5 of “The Inspection of Machin-
ery Act, 1921,” it is enacted that the Governor may by Proclamation from
time to time, divide the State into Districts with such boundaries as he may
think convenient, and may assign to any District a name by which it shall be
known, for the purposes of the said Act, and may in like manner from time


to time alter the boundaries of any District; Now therefore I, the said Gov-
ernor, in exercise of the powers so vested in me, and of all other powers
enabling me on that behalf, by and with the advice and consent of the Execu-
tive Council, do hereby proclaim the several districts named in the Schedule
hereto, with the boundaries therein stated, as Districts within the meaning
and for the purposes of the said Act.
Given under my hand and the Public Seal of the said State, at Perth,
this 21st day of June, 1922.
By His Excellency’s Command,
J. SCADDAN
Minister for Mines.
GOD SAVE THE KING ! ! !
THE SCHEDULE.
SOUTH-WESTERN.
Bounded by lines starting from the mouth of the Murchison River and
extending Easterly along the left bank of said river to its intersection with
the Western boundary of the Yalgoo Goldfield; thence South along said
boundary to Tailoring Peak, a general South-Easterly direction to Survey
Mark D6B, and Easterly passing through Trig. Station KBB on Mounjt
Churchman to the 100-Mile Post on the Northern section of No. 1 Rahbit-
proof Fence; thence along said fence Southerly to Burraeoppin and South-
Easterly to a point due West of Mount South Ironcap; thence East passing
through Mount South Ironcap to a point on the Western boundary of the
Dundas Goldfield; thence South and East along the West and South bound-
aries of the said goldfield and prolongation of same to the Southern Coast;
thence by the coastline in a general Westerly direction to Cape Leieuwin,
and a general Northerly direction to the starting point at the mouth of the
Murchison River; including all islands adjacent thereto.
CARNARVON.
Bounded by lines starting from the mouth of the Murchison River and
extending along the left bank of said river in a general Easterly direction
to a point due North of Bompas Hill; thence in a North-Westerly direction
to a point on the Western coast due West of the South-West comer of the
Ashburton Goldfield; thence along said coast in a general Southerly direction
to the starting point at the mouth of the Murchison River.
YILGARN.
Bounded by lines starting from a point North of Cairn H 26 on Koora-
rawalyee Rock and West of Cairn NBI at Wangine Soak, and extending
South along the West boundary of the Coolgardie and Dundas Goldfields,
and passing ihrcngh Cairn H 26 at Koorarawalyee Rock to a point East of


the summit of Mount South Ironcap; thence West passing through the sum-
mit of Mount South Ironcap to a point on the Southern section of the No. 1
Rabbit-proof Fence, near the 113-Mile Post; thence North-Westerly and
Northerly along the fence to the 14-Mile Post on the Northern section of the
fence; thence East 20,833 links, North 24,000 links, and West, 20,833 links
to the 17-Mile Post on the fence; thence Northerly along the fence to the
158-Mile Post; thence Easterly about 75 miles to a Cairn marked ANII on
an island at the Eastern end of Lake Barlee; thence Southerly about 11 miles
to a Cairn marked GRD4O on Mount Elvire; thence South-South-Easterly
about 41 miles to Johnson’s Rocks; thence South-Easterly about 26 miles to
starting point.
COOLGARDIE.
Bounded by lines starting from a point North of Cairn H 26 on Koorara-
walyee Rock and West of Cairn NBI at Wangine Soak, and extending
South through said H 26 to a point West from the summit of the Granite
Rock, near the 50-Mile Soak, on the Coolgardie-Norseman Road; thence
East, passing through the said granite rock to a point South of Trig. Station
M 5; thence North to a point East of the South-East comer of Location 48;
thence West to the South-East corner of Location 48; thence along the
boundaries of Location 48, Westerly 443 chains 19 links, and Northerly 564
chains 87 links to the South-East corner of Location 51; thence along the
boundaries of Location 51 Westerly 160 chains, Southerly 60 chains, and
Westerly 119 chains 87 links to the South-West corner of Location 51;
thence Northerly 400 chains along the West boundary of Location 51 and the
Eastern boundary of Location 53 to the North-East corner of Location 53;
thence North-Westerly partly along the Western boundary of the East Cool-
gardie Goldfield 36 miles 14 chains 81 links, and again North-Westerly about
11% miles to the 2-Mile Post on the South boundary at the Cashman’s State
Forest Reserve; thence West about 13% miles; thence North about 20 miles
to Cairn marked NBI near Wangine Soak; thence West about 50 miles along
part of the Southern boundary of the North Coolgardie Goldfield to the
starting point.
DUNDAS.
Bounded by lines starting from the South-West corner of the Coolgardie
Goldfield, being a point South of Cairn H 26 on Koorarawalyee Rock, and
West from the summit of the Granite Rock near the 50-Mile Soak on the
Coolgardie-Norseman Road; thence East along the South boundary of the
Coolgardie Goldfield, passing through the said Granite Rock to a point
South of Trig. Station on Simon Hill; thence South to a point East of the
75-Mile Post on the Esperance-Dundas Road; thence West, passing through
the 75-Mile Post to a point South of the starting point; thence North to the
starting point.
EAST COOLGARDIE.
Bounded by lines starting from the North-East corner of Location 53;
thence along the surveyed Eastern boundary of the Coolgardie Goldfield, at
a bearing of 324 degrees 46 minutes, for a distance of 26 miles 62 chains 37
links to the 40-Mile Post; thence along the South-Eastern boundary of the
Broad Arrow Goldfield, at a bearing of 54 degrees 50 minutes, for about 14%


miles to the South-Eastern corner of the Broad Arrow Goldfield; thence
along a surveyed line at a bearing of 141 degrees 35 minutes, for about 13
miles 53 chains to the 18-Mile Post on the said surveyed line; thence, at a
bearing of about 57 degrees, about 6 miles to Survey Mark B 5; thence, at
a bearing of about 08 degrees 45 minutes, about 20 miles to Survey Mark
810, near the Kanowna-Kurnalpi Road; thence South-South-East about 15%
miles to the North-West corner of Location 40; thence South to the South-
West corner of Location 40;- thence South-Easterly to Trig. Station M 5;
thence South to a point East of the South-East corner of Location 48; thence
West to the South-East corner of Location 48; thence along the boundaries
of Location 48 Westerly 443 chains 19 links and Northerly 564 chains 87
links to the South-East corner of Location 51; thence along the boundaries
of Location 51 Westerly 160 chains, Southerly 60 chains, and Westerly 119
(hains 87 links; thence North along the East boundary of Location 51, and
the West boundary of Location 53 to the starting point.
NORTH-EAST COOLGARDIE.
Bounded by lines starting from a point on the South boundary of the
North Coolgardie Goldfield, situated about 17 miles 30 chains East from.
Survey Mark R 3; thence South along the East boundary of the Broad Arrow
Goldfield about 29 miles 70 chains; thence along a surveyed line, at a bearing
of 141 degrees 35 minutes for about 12 miles 53 chains to the 18-Mile Post;
thence, at a bearing of about 57 degrees, about 6 miles to Survey Mark B 5;
thence, at a bearing of about 68 degrees 45 minutes, about 20 miles to Survey
Mark BIG near the Kanowna-Kurnalpi Road; thence South-South-East
about 15% miles to the North-West corner of Location 40; thence South to
the South-West corner of Location 40; thence South-Easterly to Trig. Sta-
tion M 5; thence South to a point East from the summit of the Granite
Rock, near the 50-Mile Soak on the Coolgardie-Norseman Road; thence
East to the 125th meridian of East longitude; thence North passing along
that meridian to a point East of Survey Mark R 3; thence West to' the start-
ing point.
BROAD ARROW.
Bounded by lines starting from a Cairn marked NBI near Wangine
Soak, and extending, about 87 degrees, 20 miles 22 chains to Survey Mark
R 3; thence East along the South boundary of the North Coolgardie Gold-
field about 17 miles 30 chains to the North-West corner of the North-East
Coolgardie Goldfield; thence South along part of the Western boundary of
the North-East Coolgardie Goldfield, about 29 miles 70 chains to the most
Northerly corner of the East Coolgardie Goldfield; thence along the North-
West boundary of the East Coolgardie Goldfield, 234 degrees 50 minutes,
about 14J miles to the North-Western corner of the East Coolgardie Gold-
field; thence North-Westerly along a surveyed line, 324 degrees 46 minutes,
9 miles 3,244 links, and again NorthANesterly about 11% miles to the 2-Mile
Post on the South boundary of the Cashman’s State Forest Reserve; thence
West about 13% miles: thence North about 20 miles to the starting point.
Containing 1,040 square miles.
NORTH COOLGARDIE.
Bounded by lines starting from the point North of Cairn H 26 on Koora-
rawalyee Rock, and West of Cairn NBI at Wangine Soak, and extending


North-West about 2b miles to Johnson’s Bock; thence North-North-Westerly
about 41 miles to a Cairn marked GBD4O on Mount Elvire; thence Northerly
about 11 miles to a Cairn marked ANII on an island on the Eastern end of
Lake Barlee; thence North-North-Westerly about 7 miles to a Cairn marked
N 833 on Yeedie Bulgar Hill; thence North-North-Easterly about 13 miles to
a Cairn marked NB31; thence North-North-Easterly about 24 miles to a point
South of the 43-Mile Post on the Lawlers-Birrigrin Road, and W r est of Trig.
Station E 57 on Peperill Hill; thence East passing through Trig Station E 57
to a point South of the 24-Mile Post on the Lawlers to Leonora telegraph
line; thence South about 32% miles to a point West of Survey' Mark 882 at
Brickey’s Soak; thence East about 51 miles to a point North of Survey Mark
R 43; thence South about three miles to the North-Eastern shore of Lake
Raeside; thence South-Eastward along the North-Eastern shore of the lake
about 80 miles to a point East of Survey Mark 35, at Edjudina Soak; I hence
East 15 miles and South about 25 miles to a point East of Survey Mark
R 3 near Cane Grass Swamp; thence West about 97 miles to Survey Mark
R 3; thence Westerly to Cairn NBI at Wangine Soak, and West about 50
miles to the starting point.
EAST MURCHISON.
Bounded by lines starting from the 158-Mile Post on the No. 1 Rabbit-
proof Fence; thence North-Easterly along the Rabbit-proof Fence to post
marked D 1 at about 281% miles (one mile South of Barrambie);' thenoe
West 8% miles; thence North about 19% miles, passing through a point
about 2% miles West of Erroll’s Business Areas to a point West of the
302-Mile Post on the Rabbit-proof Fence; thence East about 13% miles to the
302-Mile Post; thence along the fence North-North-Easterly to the 320-Mile
Post; thence East 338% chains and North 441 chains to the 333-Mile Post;
thence North-Easterly along the fence to the 2b degree of South latitude
near the 403-Mile Post on the fence; thence East about 111 miles; thence
South along part of the West boundary of the Mount Margaret Goldfield
about 90 miles to the South-East corner of the Wiiuna Mining District;
thence West about 42 miles along the Southern boundary of the said district
to a point due North of Survey Mark AN7B; thence South about 04 miles
passing through Survey Mark AN7B to a point due West about 7 miles from
Survey Mark ANO2; thence West about 20 miles; thence South through the
24-Mile Post on the Lawlers-Leonora telegraph line about 23 miles to a point
about 6 miles East of Trig. Station E 57, Peperill Hill; thence West, passing
through Trig. Station E 57 about 50 miles to a point due South of the 43-Mile
Post on the Lawlers-Birrigrin Road; thence South-South-Westerly about 24
miles to Cairn marked NB31; thence South-Westerly about 13 miles
to Cairn marked N 833 on Yeedie Bulgar Hill; thence South-South-Easterly
about 7 miles to Cairn marked ANII on an island on the Eastern end of
Lake Barlee; thence Westerly' about 75 miles to the starting point.
MOUNT MARGARET.
Bounded by lines starting from the point on the 26th parallel of South
latitude, North of a point nine miles West of Trig. Station JHRSB on the
summit of Mt. Waite; thence East about 200 miles to the 125th meridian of
East longitude; thence South about 286% miles to a point East of Survey
Mark R 3, near Cane Grass Swamp; thence West along the North boundary


of ihe North-East Coolgardie Goldfield, about 131% miles; thence North
about 25 miles, and West 15 miles to a point on the North-Eastern shore of
Lake Raeside, situate East from Survey Mark E 35 at Edjudina Soak; thence
North-Westerly along the North-Eastern shore of the lake to a point North
of Survey Mark R 43; thence North about 3 miles to a point West from
Survey Mark 882, at Brickey’s Soak; thence West about 51 miles; thence
North about 55% miles, passing through a point about 6 miles East of Trig.
Station E 57 on Peperill Hill and through the 24-Mile Post on the Lawlers-
Leonora telegraph line; thence East about 20 miles; thence North about 64
miles passing through Survey Mark AN7B to the Southern boundary of the
Wiluna Mining District; thence East about 42 miles to the South-East corner
of said District: thence North along the East boundary of the East Murchi-
son Goldfield about 90 miles to the starting point.
MURCHISON.
Bounded by lines starting from the 199-Mile Post on the No. 1 Rabbit-
proof Fence near Wyemandoo Hill, and extending in a general North-West-
erly direction along the North-Eastern boundary of the Yalgoo Goldfield,
and passing through the summit of Wyemandoo Hill, through a Trig. Sta-
tion K4O, through a Trig. Station K 6 on the summit of Coonahmoudey
Range, through a Trig. Station on the summit of Mount Charles, passing
near the 137-Mile Post on the Mullewa-Cue telegraph line to a Trig. Station
on the summit of Mount Luke, to a Trig. Station on the summit of Mount
Murchison; thence, at a bearing of 315 degrees, to the Murchison River;
thence North-Easterly and Easterly along the river to Survey Mark Y 39
situate about 12 miles Easterly from the crossing of the Nannine-Peak Hill
telegraph line; thence East-North-Easterly about 25 miles to Survey Mark
R 24 near the source of the South branch of the Gascoyne River; thence East
about 55% miles to about the 421-Mile Post on the No. 1 Rabbit-proof
Fence; thence Southerly along the fence to the 333-Mile Post; thence South
441 chains and West about 338% miles to the 326-Mile Post on the fence;
thence South-South-Westerly along the fence to the 302-Mile Post; thence
West about 13% miles; thence South about 19J miles, passing through a
point about 2% miles West of Enroll’s Business Areas; thence East 8%
miles to Post D 1 on the Rabbit-proof Pence at about 281% miles (one mile
South of Barrambie); thence South-South-Westerly along the fence to the
starting point.
YALGOO.
Bounded by lines starting from the 199-Mile Post on the No. 1 Rabbit-
proof Fence, and extending Southerly along the said fence to the 100-Mile
Post; thence Westerly passing through Trig. Station KBB on Mount Church-
man, and continuing through Survey Mark D 76 and along the Northern
boundaries of Victoria Locations 533, 407, and 406 to Survey Mark D6B on
the Eastern shore of Lake Monger; thence along the Eastern shore of Lake
Monger for about 30 miles to Survey Mark D6O; thence North-Westerly to
the North-East corner of Water Reserve 10264; thence West to its North-
West corner, near the 159-Mile Post on the Western Rabbit-proof Fence;
thence in a North-Westerly direction passing through Trig. Station BAS on
Ninghanboun Hill, and points situate about 111 miles West of Berbo Hill,
12 1 5 miles West of Mugga Mugga Hill, and about 5% miles East of Pindar
Siding, on the Geraldton-Yalgoo Railway; a distance of about 112 miles to


a Trig. Station on Tailoring Peak; thence due North to the left bank of the
Murchison River; thence North-Easterly along the said bank of the Murchi-
son River to a point bearing 315 degrees from a Trig. Station on the summit
of Mount Murchison; thence, at a bearing of 135 degrees, to the said Trig.
Station on Mount Murchison; thence in a general South-Easterly direction
along the South-Western boundary of the Murchison Goldfield about 39
miles to a Trig. Station on the summit of Mount Luke; thence about 51
miles to a Trig. Station on the summit of Mount Charles; thence about 43
miles to the summit of Coonahmoudey Range; thence about 54 miles pass-
ing through Trig. Station K4O, and the summit of Wyemandoo Hill, to the
starting point.
PEAK HILL.
Bounded by lines starting from a point near the 421-Mile Post on the
No. 1 Rabbit-proof Pence situate East from Survey Mark R 24, near the
source of the South branch of the Gascoyne River; thence West about 55£
miles to Survey Mark R 24; thence West-South-West about 25 miles to Sur-
vey Mark Y 39, on the Murchison River, about 12 miles East from Peak
Hill-Nannine telegraph line; thence along the Murchison River Westerly to
a point at its junction with a line between the Trig. Stations on Mounts
Hale and Gascoyne; thence North-North-Westerly about 79 miles to Trig.
Station on Mount Gascoyne; thence in a general North-Easterly direction
along the South-Eastern boundaries of the Ashburton and Gascoyne Gold-
fields, about 48 miles to Trig. Station K2O, on a prominent peak near the
source of the Lyons River; thence North-Easterly to a point on the Ash-
burton River, in a direct line to Mount Bresnahan Trig. Station: thence
South-Easterly and Easterly along the said Ashburton River to Survey
Mark ANI3S, situated near the head of the said Ashburton River; thence
Easterly to the 150-Mile Post on the Peak Hill-Nullagine telegraph line;
thence Easterly to the 560-Mile Post on the Rabbit-proof Fence: thence
South-Westerly along the said fence to the starting point.
[Extract from Government Gazette of 14 th September , 1934.]
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
Districts.
PROCLAMATION
Western Australia, \By His Excellency Sir James Mitchell, K.C.M.G., Lieutenant
to wit. f Governor in and over the State of Western Australia and
Jambs Mitchell, its Dependencies in the Commonwealth of Australia.
Lieutenant-Governor.
[L.S.]
Corres. No. 569/05.
WHEREAS by the provisions of Section 5 of “The Inspection of Machin-
ery Act, 1921,” it is enacted that the Governor may by Proclamation, from
time to time, divide the State into Districts, with such boundaries as he may
think convenient, and may assign to any District a name by which it shall
be known, for the purposes of the said Act, and may in like manner from
time to time alter the boundaries of any District; Now, therefore I, the said
Lieutenant-Governor, in exercise of the powers so vested in me and of all
other powers enabling me on that behalf, by and with the advice and consent
of the Executive Council, do hereby proclaim the District named in the
Schedule hereto, with the boundaries therein stated, as the District within
the meaning and for the purposes of the said Act.


Schedule.
WYNDHAM DISTRICT.
Bounded by lines starting from Trig. Station Cl, on the Wedge Hills,
near Wyndham (as shown on Lands Lithographic Plan 143/300) and ex-
tending South about 20% miles to a point in prolongation Eastwardly of the
Southern boundary of Reserve 416869; thence IVest about 10J miles and
along the Southern boundary of Reserve 416869 to its South-Western
corner; thence North along the Western boundary of said Reserve 416869 to
its North-Western corner; thence East along the Northern boundary of Reserve
416869 to the King River; thence Northerly along the King River and the
West arm of the Cambridge Gulf to a point due West of the starting point;
thence East about 6 miles to the starting point.
Given under my hand and the Public Seal of the said State, at Perth,
this 12th day of September, 1934.
By His Excellency’s Command,
S. W. MUNSIE
Minister for Mines.
GOD SAVE THE KING ! ! !
At a 111661111" of the Executive Council, held in the Executive Council
Chamber, at Perth, this 21st day of June, 1922, the following' Order in
Council was authorised to be issued: —
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
ORDER IN COUNCIL.
Corres. No. 1151/22.
WHEREAS by Section 11 of ‘‘The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” the
Governor may, by Order in Council published in the Government Gazette,
from time to time declare that any kinds of machinery shall cease to be
machinery subject to the said Act: Now, therefore, His Excellency the Ad-
ministrator, by and with the advice and consent of the Executive Coumcil,
hereby declares that from and after the date hereunder mentioned, the fol-
lowing machinery shall cease to be machinery subject to the said Act; —
(a) All machinery used for domestic purposes only, which is not used
in the production, preparation, or manufacture of any article
or product for pecuniary profit or in any way connected with
any business carried on by the owner thereof;
(b) Direct acting pumps worked by compressed air and used on mines
for sinking or other purposes;
(c) Electric tram cars, railway carriages, and wagon rolling stock
used on privately-owned railways and tramway systems;
(d) Ropes and cages used in mining.
It is further declared that from and after the date hereunder mentioned
the following Orders in Council made under “The Inspection of Machinery
Act, 1904,” are hereby cancelled and revoked: —
Order in Council dated 9th May, 1917, published in Government
Gazette dated 11th May, 1917, at page 754;
Order in Council dated 28th July, 1909, published in Government
Gazette dated 30th July, 1909, at page 2316.
This Order shall come into operation and take effect from 3rd day of
July, 1922.
BERNARD PARKER
Clerk of Executive Council.


[Extract from Government Gazette of 29 th September , 1922.]
At a meeting of the Executive Council, held in the Executive Council
Chamber, Perth, this 28th day of September, 1922, the following Order
in Council was authorised to be issued: —
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,
ORDER IN COUNCIL.
Corres. No. 79/22.
WHEREAS by Section 14 of “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” the
Governor may, by Order in Council published in the Government Gazette,
declare that any kinds of machinery shall cease to be machinery subject to
the said Act: Now, therefore, His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor and
Administrator, by and with the advice and consent of the Executive Council,
hereby declares that from and after the date hereunder mentioned, the follow-
ing machinery shall cease to be machinery subject to the said Act, viz.:—
Electrical motors used exclusively by agriculturists, pastoraiists, or-
chardists, and dairymen, and used for irrigating or dairying
purposes only, in pursuit of the owner’s calling, upon which
no labour other than that of the owner is employed, and which
are not used for driving circular saws, corn-crushers, refriger-
ating plants, ammonia compressors, or other dangerous
machinery.
This Order shall come into operation and take effect from the Ist day
of September, 1922.
BERNARD PARKER
Clerk of Executive Council.
[Extract from Government Gazette of 1 6th April ; 1937.]
At a meeting of the Executive Council held in the Executive Council Chamber,
at Perth, this 14th day of April, 1937, the following Order in Council
was authorised to be issued;—
The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
ORDER IN COUNCIL.
WHEREAS by Section 14 of “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” the
Governor may by Order in Council, published in the Government Gazette,
declare that any kinds of machinery shall cease to be machinery subject to
the said Act: Now, therefore, His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, by
and with the advice and consent of the Executive Council, hereby declare*
that as from and including the Ist day of November, 1930, the mjachinery
hereinafter specified shall be deemed to have ceased to he machinery subject
to the said Act, and also that the machinery aforesaid shall until this Order
in Council is revoked, continue hereafter to cease to be machinery subject to
the said Act, that is to say:—With the exception of refrigerating machinery
exceeding 5 ton capacity, all machinery driven other than by steam which is
used on banana or pineapple plantations situate on the banks or within
a distance of two miles from the banks of the Gascoyne River.
(Sgd.)
H. T. STITFOLD
Acting Clerk of the Executive Council. 1


A COMPILATION OF THE
REGULATIONS
IN FORCE ON 1st DAY OF JULY. 1935.
For the Regulations as originally published, see Gazette Ist July, 1922 ;
and for the amendments incorporated in this
Departmental compilation, see the Gazettes
referred to in the margin.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.


A. Page
Alterations to Lifts to be notified ... ... ... ... 18, 28
„ „ Winding Engines, loads, etc. ... ... ... 10
Ammonia Fumes (Hints) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74
Applicants for Engine Drivers’ Certificates to be Naturalised British Subjects 34
Application Forms for Inspectors of Machinery ... ... ... ... ... 5
„ „ „ Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... ... ... ... 58
„ „ „ Interim Certificates ... ... ... 61
„ „ „ copy of lost Certificate ... ... ... 63
„ „ „ Transfer Certificates ... ... 64
~ „ „ Reciprocity Certificates ... ... ... 65
Automatic Passenger Lifts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
B.
Board of Examiners ... ... ... 1,32,51-54
Boiler Attendants’ Certificates ... 47
Boilers (charges) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Boiler Setting ... ... ... ... ... 12
Brakes ... ... 7,8, 9
C.
Certificates of Competency (list) ... ... ... ... 35
„ Reciprocity ... ... ... ... 48
„ Service ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
Charges (all fees) Engine Drivers’ Certificates, etc. ... ... 67
Complaints (Engine Drivers) ... ... ... ... 52
Conditions when applying for Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... ... ... 32
„ under which Transfer Certificates may be granted ... ... 51
Continual Supervision by Engine Drivers ... ... ... ... ... ... 35
Copies of lost Certificates, Machinery and Boilers ... ... ... ... 15
„ „ „ Engine Drivers 52
Crane and Hoist Certificate ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
„ General arrangement, drawing ... ... ... ... 29
„ Load Indicator ... ... ... ... 30
„ Rope Test Certificate ... ... ... ... ... 29
„ „ Testing 30
Cranes, definition ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
„ fees for ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
„ Test Certificate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Cylinder diameters and areas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 79
D.
Declaration by Owner (Extension Certificates) ... ... ... ... ... 12
~ Forms (re lost Engine Drivers’ Certificates) ... ... ... 52, 63
Definitions, Lifts and Hoists ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
~ Jib Cranes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Depth Indicators ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Digesters ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
E.
Electro-Mechanical Locks (Lifts) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Electric shock—Notes on First Aid ... ... ... ... ... ... 72
Engineers’ Record Book 10
Engine Drivers’ Engine Room Record Book ... ... ... ... ... 10
Equivalent Engine Drivers’ Certificates (Table) ... ... ... ... ... 50
Evidence of qualifications (Inspector of Machinery) ... ... ... ... 1
Evidence to be taken on Oath (Engine Drivers’ Complaints) ... ... ... 53
Examination of Inspectors of Machinery ... ... ... ... 1
Examination, Engine Drivers’ (Advertisement) ... ... ... ... ... 32
Expenses of Engine Drivers’ Inquiries 54
Extension of Machinery Certificates ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO REGULATIONS, ETC.


F. Page
Failure to appear at Engine Drivers’ Inquiry ... ... 53
Fees for Cranes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
Fees and Expenses, special inspections ... ... ... 15
„ for Passenger and Goods Lifts ... ... ... ... 28
„ „ Hoists ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
„ „ Inspecting Lift Plans ... ... ... 28
„ „ application and granting Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... ... 67
„ „ copy of lost Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... 67
„ „ making copies Testimonials ... ... ... 67
„ „ copy of Engine Drivers’ Regulations ... ... ... 67
„ „ „ Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921 ... ... 67
First Class Drivers’ Certificates ... .. ... 37
G.
General arrangement, drawing (Cranes) ... 29
Goods Lifts ... ... ... 25
H.
Hints on First Aid ... 72, 74, 76
„ to Boiler Attendants ... ... 68
„ re Electric Shock, Ammonia Fumes, and CO poisoning ... 72, 74, 76
Hoists, maker’s Test Certificate for ... ... 27
„ fees for ... 28
I.
Inhalation Ammonia Fumes ... ... ... ... 7^
Inquiries, complaints re Engine Drivers ... 52, 53
Inspection of Records (Boilers), Fees for ... ... ... 15
Inspectors of Machinery, examinations and qualifications 1
Interference with Lift Mechanism ... ... ... 26
Internal Combustion Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... 46
Interim Certificates ... ... 49
Internal Combustion Drivers wishing to qualify for Certificates on small engines 79
J.
Jacketed (Steam) Vessels ... ... 13, 14
Jib Cranes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
L.
Lifts, alterations to ... ... ... ... 18, 28
„ cage doors ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23, 25
„ definitions of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
„ Electro-Mechanical Locks for ... ... ... ... ... ... 24, 25
„ Electric Contracts for Goods ... ... ... ... 26
~ enclosures of ... ... ... ... ... 22, 23, 25
„ Fixed Ladders for ... ... ... ... ■ 19
„ fees for ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
„ General Regulations for ... ... ... 17
„ Goods 25
„ interference with mechanism of ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
~ Limit switches ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
„ loads 18, 24, 26
~ maintenance of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
~ over-run clearance for... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
„ passenger ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
„ Permit to erect ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17, 18
„ repairs, upkeep, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27, 28
~ reporting accidents to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
„ safety grip gear for ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
„ shaft doors of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23, 24, 25
~ speed of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
„ tests of ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
„ Wire Rope Certificates for ... . . ... ... ... ... ... 21


L— continued.
Page
Lifts, wire rope tests ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
„ working of ... ... ... ... ... 26
Load indicators ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Locomotive and Traction Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... ... 42
M.
Machinery not worked by steam ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
„ driven by steam ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Marine Engineers’ Certificates ... ... ... ... 51
Maximum Load (Lifts) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24, 26
Medical Certificate Form ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
Method of conducting Engine Drivers’ Examinations ... 56
N.
Notice re erection (Lifts) 17
„ to be posted on Lift doors 27
Notification of alterations 10
O.
Obtaining Certificate (Engine Driver’s) by false pretences ... ... ... 34
P.
Passenger Lifts 23
Penalty for non-compliance with Regulations (Lilts) 28
Penalty for non-compliance with Regulations (Cranes) ... 31
Permit to erect (Lifts) ... ... ... ... 18
Persons authorised to operate Lifts ... ... ... ... 26
Plans setting Cornish and Lancashire Boilers 16
„ (Lifts) to be submitted 17, 18
Poisoning, Producer Gas (Hints) ... ... ... ... ... 76
Power to restrict Engine Drivers’ Certificates 52
„ of Board re Witnesses ... ... 53
Prescribed application forms (Inspectors) *.. 5
Pressure gauges, testing ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Protection of Engine Drivers’ Certificates under old Acts 50
Provisions re Interim Certificates ... ... ... ... 49
„ „ time and place of Inquiries 53
Q-
Qualifications of Inspectors of Machinery ... 1
R.
Receivers, Air or Gas ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Reciprocity Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
Recognition of Marine Engineers’ Certificates 51
Record Books ... ... ... 10
Reporting Accidents (Lifts) 22
Request for special inspections ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Restricted Certificates ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
Rope Tests 30
Rope Test Certificate ... ... ... ... 29
S.
Safety grip gear and governor ... ... ... ... 19
Schedules, Engine Drivers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 to 67
Search Fees ... ... ... ... 15
Second Class Drivers’ Certificate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38
Service Certificates ... ... ... ... ... 48
Shaft doors 23
Special Work ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15, 16
Speed of Lifts 20
Starting Valves ... ... ... ... ... 8, 9
Statutory Declaration re lost Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... ... ... 52, 63
Steam Jacketed Vessels ... ... 13, 14
Syllabus of Inspectors’ Examinations ... ... 3
„ Engine Drivers’ Examinations ... ... ... 54


T.
Page
Table—Equivalent Certificates ... ... ... 50
Testing Winding Engines after repairs ... ... ... ... 9
Test Certificate (Crane) ... 29
Third Class Certificates ... ... ... 40
Traction Engine Certificates 42
Transfer Certificates ... ... ... 51
V.
Vulcanisers ... ... ... 14
W.
Winding Engine Appliances 7
„ „ worked other than by steam ... ... ... ... ... 14
„ „ worked by steam ... 14
„ Engine Drivers’ Certificates ... ... ... ... 35
Wire rope certificates ... ... ... 21
„ „ tests ... ... ... 21
Working of Lifts 26


REGULATIONS RELATING TO THE EXAMINATION
AND QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS FOR
THE POSITION OF INSPECTOR OF MACHINERY.
1. The Official Application Forms, as prescribed herein,
can be procured from the Public Service Commissioner, Perth,
from whom any further reasonable particulars can be ob-
tained. No application will be entertained unless sent in on
official form. Application must be accompanied by copies
of all original references relating to practical engineering
experience, dealing with the construction, design, and main-
tenance of engines and boilers; also as to character and
educational attainments. These will be retained for record
purposes. Original testimonials must be produced if required.
2. Each candidate, before he can be considered eligible
for examination, must lodge an examination fee,of 20s. and
furnish satisfactory evidence—
(a) that neither his hearing nor his eyesight is defec-
tive ;
(b) that his health is good; affections of the heart or
chest will disqualify;
(c) that he is not under the age of 28 years, or over the
age of 45;
(d) that he has served an Engineering Apprenticeship
of at least five years, during which time he has
been engaged in the actual manufacture and repair
of engines, boilers, and machinery, and that he
has had engineering experience, of a satisfactory
character, subsequent to apprenticeship.
3. The examination will be held in Perth on a date which
the Minister shall from time to time determine, and such
examination shall be conducted by a Board of Examiners
consisting of the Chief Inspector of Machinery, who shall be
Chairman, and two qualified persons appointed by the Minis-
ter. Any two members of the Board shall be a quorum.
4. The Board may, at its discretion, reject any candi-
date prior to examination who, in its opinion, is not in posses-
sion of the necessary qualifications.


5. Each candidate shall receive at least seven days'
notice of the date and place appointed for the examination;
such date shall also be duly advertised in the Government
Gazette.
6. The examination will commence at 10 a.m. on the
date appointed, and all candidates are required to appear at
the examination room punctually five minutes before the
appointed time. Each candidate is requested to have with
him his original references for the Board’s perusal.
7. Each candidate will be supplied with the stationery
required for the examination, hut shall provide himself with
drawing instruments.
8. Candidate’s attention is particularly drawn to the
following:—
(a) Each answer must be numbered in the margin to
correspond with that given on the question paper.
(h) All answers must be legibly written in ink and work-
ings must be shown, otherwise no marks will be
allowed.
(c) One side of the paper only to be written on.
(d) The candidate must affix his signature to the top of
each sheet of paper containing his answers, and
sheets must be consecutively numbered.
9. No candidate will be allowed to bring into the exam-
ination room any book or paper.
10. No person will be allowed into the room during the
examination other than those whose duties require them to
be present.
11. Silence is to be observed during the examination,
and any candidate found copying or communicating in any
way with another, or who behaves in a disorderly or improper
manner in or about the room, will be requested to leave the
building and will be debarred from appearing at the same
examination.
12. Opposite each question appearing on the set paper
the full number of marks allowed will appear.
13. No candidate shall, during the examination, leave
the room without permission.


14. The syllabus of examination shall he as follows:
(a) Arithmetic, including vulgar and decimal fractions,
extraction of square and cube roots, calculations
of areas, volumes, etc., elementary algebra includ-
ing simple and quadratic equations, and the appli-
cation of formulae relating to power, efficiency and
economy of engines, boilers, pumps, and such other
mechanical structures as this Act may apply to.
(h) Mechanical drawing to scale, also freehand working
sketches of one or more of the principal parts of
any piece of machinery or boiler with the necessary
dimensions.
(c) Construction and working of different kinds of steam
engines, including steam turbines, and internal
combustion engines used for railway, marine, min-
ing, or factory purposes, including different fit-
tings and valve gears, and the relative merits of
each.
(d) Surface condensation, superheating, and working of
steam expansively.
(e) The indicator, its purposes and parts, and how T to
arrive at the deductions to he drawn from Indica-
tor Diagrams. The setting and adjustment of
admission and exhaust valves.
(f) The various standard designs of boilers now in gen-
eral use. Methods of modern setting, and the
disadvantages of inferior setting.
(g) The formulae relating to the design of boilers for
giving maximum working pressures, the construc-
tion of riveted seams, the stresses on stays, the
resistance of pressure of flat and curved surfaces.
The construction and object of the various fittings,
valves, etc., used in connection with steam boilers.
(h) Description and causes of corrosion, pitting and
grooving as found in various types of boilers, and
the methods generally in use for the prevention of
such defects.
(i) The causes leading to formation of scale, the precipi-
tation of salts and other foreign matter; the effect
of scale, oil or other fatty substances on heating
surfaces and the precautionary measures usually
adopted in respect thereto.


(j) A general knowledge of the construction and manage-
ment of electric motors, dynamos, internal com-
bustion engines, suction gas producers, and steam
turbines.
(k) The direct, torsional, and bending stresses of round
and rectangular sections. The breaking or work-
ing loads of chains and ropes, and the application
of the necessary formuhe.
15. The Board may, in addition to the foregoing sylla-
bus, require any candidate to submit to a viva voce examina-
tion, and to write a complete report on the condition, repairs,
and alterations necessary to any machinery or boiler erected,
to which the provisions of ‘ ‘ The Inspection of Machinery Act,
1921,” apply.
16. The Minister, on the recommendation of the Board,
may reject any candidate upon any ground he deems advis-
able.


f Insert “Cash,” “Money Order,” “Cheque,” or “Postal Note.”
—
(These particulars are to be filled
in by applicant.)
1. Name in full.
2. Date and place of birth.
3. Where educated.
4. State for what subjects school certificates or
diplomas held.
5. To what particular branch or branches of Mech-
anical Engineering were you trained ?
6. State if you were indentured. Where and by
whom were you trained ? For what period ?
Give dates.
7. Present occupation and in what capacity. Give
name of employer.
8. Give precisely to date your experience, and in
what capacities employed from expiration
of apprenticeship, also state responsible
positions you have held. This information
to be supported by documentary evidence
if possible.
9. State if ever employed in a Drawing Office, and
if so, where, and for what period.
APPLICATION FORM FOR POSITION OF INSPECTOR OF
MACHINERY.
Place
Date
The Public Service Commissioner,
Perth.
Sir,
I beg to apply for a position as an Inspector of Machinery under the
above Act, and I append hereto the undermentioned particulars for the
information of the Board of Examiners.
I enclose herewith f for 10s., the amount of application fee.
Western Australia.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.


—
(These particulars are to be filled
in by applicant.)
10. Submit samples of your drawings and sketches,
if available, giving number and list.
H. State if ever employed as an Inspector of
Machinery and Boilers, if so, by whom, and
for what period.
12. Quote and submit copies of any certificates held,
either for Mechanics, Mathematics, Freehand,
Mechanical Drawing, etc.
Give list of testimonials as to character, etc., in
space provided below.
13. State if ever directly in charge of machinery,
including management of steam engines,
boilers, electric generators and motors, and
internal combustion engines, either on land
or sea. Full particulars to be given.
No.
Description.
No.
Description.
I declare the above particulars to be substantially true and correct in
every respect.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Yours obediently,
(Signature of applicant)
(Address)
LIST OF TESTIMONIALS, ETC., ENCLOSED.
N.B. —All copies of testimonials and certificates will be retained for
record purposes.


REGULATIONS RELATING TO WINDING ENGINES.
(Section 17, Subsection 5.)
The following Regulations shall not apply to Holman
oists. The Regulations shall also not apply to other similar
rail winding engines with cylinders not exceeding six (6)
ehes in diameter used for hoisting less than two hundred
00) feet, except when required by the Inspector, by notice
writing, that they shall so apply in whole or in part as
ecified by him.
New Winding Engines.
1. Every new winding engine erected after the Ist
,‘bruary, 1924, shall be capable of raising the maximum
balanced load from the greatest depth required, with the
anks in the worst starting positions, and shall be fitted with
e following:—
Depth Indicators.
(a) An efficient depth indicator, approved by the Inspector,
shall be fitted to his satisfaction to each drum with
marks spaced in such a way that the engine-driver
can have no doubt when the cage or skip is within
one revolution of the drum from the desired stopping
place.
Provided that in the case of engines having one
drum fixed and a loose one, not used for winding,
one indicator on the fixed drum shall suffice.
And provided also that any winding engine as
defined, operating from one level only, may be
exempted from being fitted with an indicator at the
discretion of the Inspector.
Brahes.
b) Each drum shall be fitted with a brake capable of hold-
ing double the maximum gross load, when men are
carried, without any slip.
c) Post brakes shall be fitted to all winding engines, the
cylinders of which exceed eight (8) inches in dia-
meter.


(d) All engines operating at a depth greater than one
thousand (1,000) feet shall be fitted with gravity
brakes so arranged that they can be released by the
engine-driver by the application of steam, air, or
electricity, as the case may be, and that they will
automatically apply in the event of total or partial
failure or cessation of operation from any cause of
the power used for driving the winding engine.
Valves.
(e) Starting valves (or switches in the case of winding
drums operated by electricity) of an efficient type
shall be fitted to all winding engines used for raising
or lowering men.
(f) As the retardation of a winding engine by steam (or
air) is of vital consequence in view of brake failure,
the cut-off of such engines shall be arranged so as to
effectually retard the engine’s maximum descending
load. The cut-off may be made variable as the speed
of the engine increases, but must be so governed
that in cases of emergency the full cut-off shall be
immediately available.
Note. —Any second-hand winding engine imported
into the State after Ist February, 1924, shall be
considered as a “New Winding Engine,” and any
winding engine which was registered in the State
prior to the above date, and which is to be re-erected
on another lease, may, if the conditions under which
it has to work with regard to depth, load, etc., are in
the opinion of the Inspector more severe than where
it formerly worked, be considered as a new winding
engine.
Neiv and Existing Winding Engines.
Brahes.
2. (a) Foot brakes shall be so fitted and adjusted that
there is at all times ample clearance between the end of the
foot lever and the platform or floor, and such lever shall be
provided with a satisfactory device, operated by the engine-
driver’s foot only, which will ensure the lever being retained
in position when the brake is fully applied and the driver’s
foot is removed.
(b) Brakes applied or released by steam or compressed
air shall be so adjusted as to prevent contact between the
piston and the cylinder end, and ample clearance shall be
provided in the cylinder to allow for normal wear of the brake.


(c) Every brake shall be so arranged that, whether the
engine is at work or at rest, it can be easily and safely
manipulated by the engine-driver when standing at the levers
controlling the engine.
(d) It shall be the duty of the certificated engine-driver
on each shift to see that the brakes on his engine are in proper
working adjustment before handing over to his successor on
the next shift. It shall also be the duty of the engine-driver
taking over to satisfy himself thoroughly that the brakes are
in such proper adjustment.
(e) The brakes on every winding engine shall be tested
by an Inspector at least once yearly. In the case of engines
erected after Ist February, 1924, one brake on each drum
shall be capable of holding twice the maximum gross load
when men are carried, without slip, and in the ease of engines
erected before above date, one and a-half times the maximum
gross load when men are carried. (In computing this load
one man to be taken as equal to 150 lbs.)
Starting Valves.
(f) Starting valves (or switches in the case of winding
drums operated by electricity) of an efficient type shall be
fitted to all winding engines used for raising and lowering
men, within three (3) months of the coming into operation
of these Regulations.
Clutches.
(g) The operating gear of the clutch of the drum shall
be provided with locking gear to prevent inadvertent with-
drawal of the clutch.
(h) The driver of a winding engine shall not unclutch
a drum from which men may be suspended. Lowering men
or material from an unclutched drum is prohibited.
Testing Winding Engines after Repairs.
(i) After any stoppage for ordinary maintenance re-
pairs which might by any possibility affect the safe running
of a winding engine, the engine shall not be used for raising
or lowering persons until a satisfactory trial has been made
by the engine-driver.
General.
(3.) (a) In case of all winding engines coming under the
provisions of these Regulations, it shall be obligatory on the
Manager or some competent person appointed by him to
examine all reasonably accessible mechanism carefully at
f 4lHO—3


least once a week. The condition in which such appliances
are found, any repairs or adjustments carried out, etc., shall
be entered in ink in the Engineer’s Record Book, and signed
and dated by the responsible person who made the inspection.
This Record Book shall be open at all reasonable times to the
examination of the Inspector, and of the winding engine-
drivers employed on the mine, and of any other person auth-
orised by the Minister.
(b) Such bolts, pins, and other fittings of drums, brakes,
and clutches, as might be a source of danger in the event of
their becoming loose, shall be rendered secure b) T means of
suitable locking devices.
(c) All winding engine gear shall be kept as clean as
practicable to the satisfaction of the Inspector.
(d) In the case of existing plants and new winding
engines, an uninterrupted view of the shaft at the surface
brace should bo provided wherever practicable, and where
impracticable such approved indicators shall be fitted in lieu
thereof, as in the opinion of the Inspector will efficiently
provide for safety.
(e) During the currency of a certificate granted for any
winding engine, if the owner desires to increase the load or
make any structural alterations to the said engine, the
District Inspector of Machinery shall be notified in writing
and full particulars given of the intended alterations.
(f) In the event of any overwind, or any accident to a
winding engine, including any failure of motive power, engine
running out of control, fracture of any part, failure of brake
efficiency, any overwinding prevention device or depth indi-
cator, the Manager shall report in writing within (24)
twenty-four hours to the District Inspector of Machinery.
4. A printed copy of the Regulations dealing with wind-
ing engines shall be posted in the engine room of every
winding engine by which men are raised or lowered.
ENGINE-DRIVERS’ ENGINE ROOM RECORD BOOK.
1. In every engine room where steam or internal com-
bustion engines are used, the owner shall supply a Record
Book, in the form prescribed, in which the certificated engine-
driver in charge on each shift shall record any peculiarities in
the running of the engine, or defects in either engines, boilers*
or their accessories under his charge which he considers war-
rant repairs or alterations. Each and every entry shall bft


Date.
Renewals or
repairs required
and general
remarks.
Certificated
Engine-drivers’
Signature.
Remarks re repairs
etc., by Manager or
Engineer, and date
when repairs com-
pleted .
Signature of
Manager or
Engineer
properly signed and dated by the certificated engine-driver
in charge of each shift. The manager, engineer, or other
responsible person shall examine any entry that shall be made
daily, and record in a suitable manner any repairs or altera-
tions that have been effected; such entry shall be signed and
dated by the manager, engineer, or other responsible person.
This Regulation shall also apply to locomotives, and the
Record Book shall be kept in the running shed and such
entries as above indicated made by the responsible persons
aforesaid.
2. In the case of winding engines, in addition to the
provisions contained in Regulation 1, every driver shall at
the end of his shift make an entry in the Engine-driver’s
Engine Room Record Book regarding any defects in the work-
ing of the engine, brakes, clutches, reversing gear, depth
indicators, and control generally.
Provided that where two or three drivers are employed
on the same engine in rotation of shifts, any defect in the
working of the machinery recorded in the Record Book shall
be confirmed or otherwise by the driver or drivers who fol-
lowed the driver making the original entry.
‘I. The Engine-drivers ’ Engine Room Record Book shall
at all times be available for perusal by the Inspector of the
District and shall be kept in the following form;—
Owner’s name
Name of Factory, Mine, etc Locality
Name of Engine Room
Main particulars of Engines, Condensers, Pumps, etc.,
therein
{<•.<!.. Battery Engine Compd., lOiu. and 18in. x 36in. Makers
Electric Lighting Trip. Expn. Eng. Allen & Co
Condensers, Pumps, etc )


EXTENSION OF MACHINERY CERTIFICATES.
(Section 42.)
Applicants for extension of duration of any certificate
issued for machinery shall make their application and de-
claration on the form prescribed hereunder. (Such forms
can be obtained from the office of the Chief Inspector of
Machinery, Perth.)
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION OF MACHINERY CERTIFICATE.
(Section 42.)
Place
Date
To the Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Mines Department, Perth.
Sir,
I hereby declare that the machinery registered under No and
for which a certificate, No , was last issued on
has not been materially altered or added to, and that it has been at all times
kept in good repair, efficiently guarded, and fit to be safely used for the pur-
pose for which it was intended.
I therefore request that the duration of the certificate be extended as
provided in Section 42 of “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.”
I enclose * for the amount of the prescribed fee of
Yours faithfully,
(Signature)
(Address)
* Insert Cash, Money Order, Cheque, or Postal Note.
Note. —lf payment is made by cheque please add neces-
sary hank exchange. All cheques, money orders, and postal
notes to be crossed and made payable to the ‘ ‘ Chief Inspector
of Machinery,” not to any individual.
BOILERS.
(Section 24.)
1. Every boiler having external flues shall have suitable
doors fitted to such flues to facilitate cleaning and inspection.
The doors must be fitted to metal frames built in the encasing
material, and must be of such a size that a man of average
build can pass through them easily.


2. All external flues must be built in such a manner as
to permit an average sized man passing through them for
-leaning or inspection purposes.
Xolc. —For plans for the setting of Cornish and Lanca-
shire boilers, sec prescribed fees.
STEAM JACKETED VESSELS.
All steam jacketed vessels used under steam pressure
for boiling, heating, or disinfection purposes, the owner shall
cause to have a metal plate affixed thereto with the official
registered number legibly stamped thereon, to the approval
of the Inspector, providing that it is impracticable to stamp
the vessel itself without damaging its structure.
REGULATION CHARGES.
{Section 36.)
Boilers.
For evory inspection of a “ Boiler,” and before the granting of any certificate
cr report, the following fees shall be paid :
£ s. d.
For every Boiler, not otherwise defined, and not exceeding 6 h.p. ... 1 0 0
For every Boiler, not otherwise defined, over 6 h.p. and not exceeding
12 h.p I 10 0
For every Single Boiler, not otherwise defined, over 12 h.p. and not
exceeding 20 h.p. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 5 0
For every Single Boiler, not otherwise defined, over 20 h.p. ... 3 0 0
When two or more Boilers over 12 h.p. and not exceeding 20 h.p.
are directly connected to one another by the same main steam
pipe, and form part of same nest of boilers, and are inspected on
the same day, the full fee shall be charged on the first (viz.,
£2 55.), and for every additional Boiler ... ... ... ... 1 15 0
When two or more Boilers over 20 h.p. are situated and connected as
above, and are inspected on the same day, the full fee shall be
charged on the first (viz., £3), and for every additional Boiler ... 2 5 0
ior every Locomotive, Traction Engine or Road Roller Boiler—
Xot exceeding 8 h.p. ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 10 0
Over 8 h.p. and not exceeding 15 h.p. ... ... ... ... 2 10 0
Over 15 h.p ... ... ... ... 3 0 0
Digesters,
For every “Digester” under steam pressure, used for Trade pur-
poses, and not exceeding 50 cub, feet capacity ... ... ... 1 0 0
For every “Digester” under steam pressure, used for Trade pur-
poses, and over 50 cub. feet capacity ... ... ... ... 1 10 0


Vulcanisers.
£ s. d.
For every Vulcaniser used under steam pressure and used for Trade
purposes 0 10 0
Steam-jacketed Vessels.
For every “ Steam-jacketed Vessel ” not exceeding 18in. diameter ... 0 10 0
For every “Steam-jacketed Vessel” over 18in. diameter and not
exceeding 36in. diameter 0 15 0
For every “ Steam-jacketed Vessel ” over 36in. diameter 1 0 0
Receiver for Compressed Air or Qas.
For every “ Receiver ” over 5 cub. feet capacity and not exceeding
20 cub. feet 0 10 0
For every “ Receiver ” over 20 cub. feet capacity and not exceeding
40 cub. feet ... ... 1 0 0
For every “Receiver” over 40 cub. feet capacity 1 10 0
Note. —“ Containers used for Transport ” are not considered as “ Receivers.” See
Act., Section 2, Subsection (b).
Machinery (not worked by Steam).
For every inspection and before the granting of any certificate for any group of
machinery to which the Act applies, worked other than by steam power, with the
exception of winding engines and lifts hereinafter provided, the following fees shall
be paid;—
For every group of machinery the motive power of which— £ s. d.
does not exceed 5 h.p. ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
is over 5 h.p. and not exceeding 10 h.p. 0 7 6
is over 10 h.p. and not exceeding 20 h.p. ... 0 10 6
is over 20 h.p. and not exceeding 40 h.p. ... 0 15 0
is over 40 h.p. and not exceeding 60 h.p. ... 1 2 6
is over 60 h.p. and not exceeding 100 h.p ... 1 10 0
is over 100 h.p. and not exceeding 200 h.p ... 117 6
is over 200 h.p. ... ... 2 5 0
For winding engines as defined worked other than by steam no fee shall be charged,
except the tee chargeable in the above Schedule for the “ motor ” driving the engine,
whether this motor drives the winding engine only, or other machinery in addition,
except in the case of Holman Hoists and similar air-driven winches used for raising and
lowering men or material, the fees for which shall be as follows:
£ s. d.
For every Holman Hoist or similar air-driven winch the cylinders
of which do not exceed 6in. in diameter ... 0 10 0
For every such hoist, the cylinders of which are more than 6in. in
diameter ... ... ... 0 15 0
When certificates for boilers and machinery driven otherwise than by steam are issued
for periods of three, six, and nine months, to suit the convenience of the department,
the fees shall be one-quarter, one-half, and three-quarters, respectively, of the fees for
one year.
Extension Certificate (Section 42).
For every extension certificate approved by the Chief Inspector for any machinery
used for agricultural purposes as provided by Section 42, the fees payable for any
particular horse-power shall be as follows: —•
(а) First extension certificate, quarter of the prescribed fee.
(б) Any subsequent extension if immediately following the expiration of the firs!
extension, half the prescribed fee.
£ s. d.
Provided that in no case the fee be less than 0 2 6
Machinery driven by Steam.
There shall be no charge for the inspection and granting of any certificate loti
machinery driven directly by steam, with the exception of winding engines.


For the inspection and before granting of any certificate for any winding engine,,
as defined, and driven by steam, the following fee shall be paid :
£ s. d.
For ever} 7 winding engine with cylinders not exceeding Sin. diameter 015 0
For every winding engine with cylinders over Sin. diameter and not
exceeding 12in. diameter ... ... ... ... ... ... 110 0
For every winding engine with cylinders over 12in. diameter and not
exceeding 18in. diameter ... ... ... ... 2 5 0
For every winding engine with cylinders over ISin. diameter ... 215 0
Sole. —No certificate shall be deemed to be granted until full payment has been
made. When payment is made by cheque, the necessary exchange must be added. If
this is not done the certificate will be held until the amount of exchange is paid, and
the boiler or machinery affected will meanwhile bo deemed to be uncertificated.
SPECIAL WORK.
(Section 82.)
Boilers and Machinery .
When any owner desires a special inspection of any boiler or machinery at a time
not synchronising with the Inspector’s regular visit, and which therefore necessitates a
special trip, the owner shall make his request for such inspection in writing, and shall
pa}', in advance if demanded, in addition to the fees prescribed, all expenses, including
the Inspector’s salary for the time ho is engaged on such special trip.
When any trading firm, manufacturer, owner or other person requires a special
inspection and report on any new or second-hand boiler or machinery for sale or other
purposes, he shall make his request in writing, and shall pay, in advance if demanded,
in addition to the prescribed fees, all expenses including the Inspector’s salary for the
time he is engaged on such special inspection and report.
Xofe. —Ko certificate or report shall be deemed to be granted until full payment
has been made. When payment is made by cheque the necessary exchange must be
added. If this is not done the certificate will be held until the amount of exchange is
paid, and the boiler or machinery affected will meanwhile be deemed to be uncertifi-
catod.
Testing Pressure Gauges.
£ s. d.
For the special testing of any pressure gauge at any time other than
the usual time of inspection of a boiler ... ... 0 2 6
For the same service when adjustments are found to be necessary ... 0 5 0
Xofe. —All testing and adjusting will be done at the owner’s risk.
Lost Certificates for Boiler or Machinery.
£ s. d.
For supplying a copy of the certificate for any boiler or machinery, the
original of which has been lost or destroyed ... 0 2 6
SEARCH FEES.
{Section 28.)
£ s. d.
For the perusal of inspection records of any one boiler by any person
other than the owner or his direct representative, authorised in
writing by the owner ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
For the supply of precis of any such records 0 5 0
Xote. —Such inspection records shall mean and include the last notice of ownership and
Inspector’s report with any instructions as to alterations or repairs issued in
therewith.


SPECIAL REPORTS, VALUATIONS, ETC.
Fees for special reports, valuations, engine indicating or
other special inspection work not defined in these Regulations
shall be assessed by the Chief Inspector, subject to the
approval of the Minister.
PLANS OF SETTING CORNISH OR LANCASHIRE
BOILERS. s. d.
For supplying blue print showing plan of setting,
size of flues, etc., for either of above types of
boilers .. .. .. .. .. .. ..50
Note. —For all fees remitted by owners or other persons*
a receipt on the official machine numbered form should be
obtained in every instance, and no other will be recognised.


REGULATIONS RELATING TO LIFTS AND HOISTS.
Definitions.
“Lift” means any mechanical contrivance running in a
vertical shaft or well, within or attached to any building,
worked by any 'power other than hand or animal, and which
comprises a cage or platform, and is used for the purpose of
raising or lowering persons or goods. It also includes the
machinery necessary to operate the lift and all doors, en-
closures, safety devices, ropes, and any part of the structure
which is stressed by the working of the lift.
“Goods Lift” means a lift used for carrying goods or
materials, and in which only the attendant and the persons
required to load and unload the lift travel.
“Hoist” means any mechanical contrivance (other than
cranes, for which see Crane Regulations), whether stationary
or travelling, worked by any power other than hand or animal,
comprising a rope or chain with a hook at the end thereof,
which is used for raising or lowering goods or materials. It
also includes the machinery necessary for the working of
the hoist and any part of the structure which is stressed by
the working of the hoist.
“Passenger Lift” means a lift which is intended for the
carriage of passengers and in which it is permissible under
these regulations to carry passengers.
“Service Lift” means a lift, the car of which has a floor
area not exceeding 9 square feet, and a height not exceeding
4 feet, and which is designed to carry goods or materials only
and is controlled from without the lift well.
“Escalator” means a moving stairway which is used for
raising or lowering passengers, and includes the machinery
supports and enclosures required therewith.
Note. —Wool elevators, grain conveyors, bucket eleva-
tors, and other types of similar; continuous running contri-
vances may be classed as ordinary machinery, and not as lifts
or hoists, and inspectors may, subject to the ruling of the
Chief Inspector of Machinery, exercise their discretion as to
the classification or exemption of any doubtful cases.
“Act” means “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.”
GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL LIFTS.
1. Where it is intended to erect or re-erect any lift after
the proclamation of “The Inspection of Machinery Act,
1921,” notice to that effect must be given to the Chief In-


spector of Machinery, accompanied by plans drawn to scale
and specifications showing correct measurements, and fully
describing the whole lift, its enclosures, and its position in
the building in which it is to he placed.
The maximum load for which the lift is designed must
also be stated. When submitting plans and specifications,
these must be accompanied by a fee of £1 Is. for examining
them and granting a permit to proceed with erection. No
erection work shall be commenced until permit has been
granted.
2. These plans and specifications will be filed in the
office of the Chief Inspector for record purposes.
3. In the case of any material alteration or repairs being
contemplated it will be sufficient if the intention is notified
and the alterations fully described.
4. (1.) Before granting a permit to erect a lift, the Chief
Inspector may require any alterations in design to be made,
which in his opinion are necessary for the safe working and
use of the lift, and, notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained elsewhere in these regulations, the Chief Inspector
may refuse to grant a permit in any case where the design
and construction of the lift for the erection whereof the per-
mit is required, does not comply with the provisions of the
Lift Code issued by the Standards Association of Australia
and for the time being in force.
(2.) Where the Chief Inspector is satisfied that all neces-
sary provisions for safety have been provided and that a
permit to erect a lift may properly be granted, he shall grant
the permit to erect the lift in the following form:—
INSPECTION OF MACHINERY ACT, 1921.
(Regulations.)
Permit to erect a Lift.
I hereby authorise the erection (or re-erection) of a....
Lift at , in accordance with
the plans and specifications lodged at my office by
on the day of ,
193 .
Dated this day of , 193
Chief Inspector of Machinery.


5. No lift shall be erected in such a position as will leave
a road or passage for persons to pass under the cage, plat-
form, or balance weights.
6. The winding gear and all other mechanism of all
lifts shall be made easily accessible for inspection, oiling, and
repairing. Wherever considered necessary by the Inspector
efficient lighting facilities shall be installed and adequate fixed
ladders, gangways, and hand-rails shall be provided in order
to insure safe access to all working parts.
7. All overhead construction shall be of sufficient
strength to bear at least four times the maximum load it Avill
have to carry.
8. In order to provide for over-running, every lift shaft
shall have at least three feet clearance between the top of
cage yoke or bow, or any equalising bar or other structure
which projects above the yoke or bow, and the underside of
the ceiling or overhead joists, when the cage is at the top
floor, and the same distance between the lowest part of the
cage bottom and any projecting gear thereon, and the bottom
of the shaft when the cage is at the lowest floor.
Provided that this regulation shall not be enforced in the
case of lifts already installed before the proclamation of the
Act, if the Inspector considers that sufficient space for ordin-
ary safety requirements is provided.
9. Safety grip gear to the satisfaction of the Inspector
is to be provided in the case of every suspended lift, except
in the case of service or other small lifts in which it is impos-
sible for any person to travel. The grip gear must be auto-
matic and positive in its action, and must be able to hold the
cage or platform securely in case the suspending ropes break
or become detached. The grip gear must also be operable by
the action of an adjustable speed governor, in case any undue
acceleration occurs through overloading or in consequence of
the failure of any part of the winding gear.
Provided that this regulation be not enforced in the case
of lifts already installed before the commencement of the
Act, at the discretion of the Inspector.
10. Such safety gear may be tested at any time and in
such manner as the Inspector may direct, and the work in
connection with the test shall be carried out at the expense of
the owner or his contractors under the supervision of the
Inspector.
11. All electric lifts except those in which no person
travels shall be fitted with an automatic device which shall


immediately cut off the current should the cage ropes become
slack from any cause.
12. All lifts shall be provided with an efficient brake
gear as approved by the Inspector.
13. In all electric lifts erected after the proclamation of
“The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” the control gear
in motor room must be of an efficient type and must automatic-
ally and satisfactorily accelerate, cut off current, and apply
brake at either limit.
In the case of existing lifts erected before the proclama-
tion of the said Act, the Inspector may exercise his discretion
with regard to acceleration.
14. Emergency automatic switches must be fitted to all
electric lifts, which will instantly cut off the current, and in
the ease of electrically operated brakes, apply the brake,
should the cage over-run the floor level more than 12 inches
at top or bottom. These switches must be operated by the car
independently of the control gear, and must open the control
circuit.
15. Lifts shall be so constructed that they are incapable
of travelling at a greater speed than 300 feet per minute
when controlled by an attendant, and 200 feet per minute in
the case of automatic lifts.
Provided that —■
(i) the Chief Inspector may by writing under his hand
authorise the working of any lift at a speed in ex-
cess of the speed hereinbefore prescribed in rela-
tion to such lift, but not exceeding a maximum
speed to be specified in such authority in any case
where the Chief Inspector is satisfied that the
safety provisions, including ample top and bottom
over-run are adequate for the working of the lift
at the speed so authorised by him as aforesaid:
and
(ii) where the Chief Inspector has specified a maximum
speed in any authority given by him under para-
graph (i) of this proviso, the lift in respect of
which such authority has been given shall not in
any event be worked at a speed greater than such
maximum speed; and
(iii) the Chief Inspector may at any time cancel and re-
voke any authority given by him hereunder by a
notice in writing under his hand given to the owner
of the lift.


16. Every suspended lift should be provided with not
less than two metallic lifting ropes. Each rope when new
shall have breaking stress of not less than five times the
maximum load to which it will be subjected. If more than
two ropes be used their total factor of safety should not be
less than ten.
Where only one rope is provided, as in the case of cer-
tain goods lifts installed before the proclamation of the Act,
the factor of safety should not be less than ten. Balance
weight ropes must he similarly proportioned to their load.
17. No cage or balance weight rope shall be installed
until a certificate from the maker, or a copy thereof certified
to by the user or his contractor, has been lodged at the office
of the Chief Inspector. Such certificates should give the
following information: —
Name and address of manufacturer.
Length of each rope in feet.
Diameter or circumference of rope in inches.
Weight per foot in lbs.
Construction of rope—•
Number of strands.
Stylo of lay.
Class of core.
Construction of strands —
Number of wires.
Diameter of wires (decimals of an inch).
Class of core of strand.
Material of which wire is made.
Breaking stress of material in tons per square inch
(tons of 2,240 lbs.).
Breaking load of rope in tons per square inch (tons
of 2,240 lbs.).
18. If the Inspector has any reasonable doubts at any
time as to the quality or strength of any lift rope, he may
demand that a sample of the rope shall be tested at the
Engineering Laboratory of the University of Western Aus-
tralia, and that such test piece be cut off in his presence, and
any expense incurred in connection with such test shall be
borne by the owner of the lift.
19. The minimum diameter of any drum sheave or
pulley shall not be less than 45 times the diameter of the rope
for which it is used, wherever possible.


20. In the case of drum drives all ropes must be securely
anchored to the drum, cage, and balance weights to the satis-
faction of the Inspector, and there shall not be less than one
and a half turns of rope on the drum when the cage or balance
weight has reached its limit of travel.
In the case of vee drives in single purchase the ropes
shall be securely anchored to the cage and balance weights
to the satisfaction of the Inspector.
In the case of vee drives, with ropes in double purchase,
the ropes shall be securely anchored to some part of the over-
head structure which is amply strong to carry the load on the
ropes, to the satisfaction of the Inspector.
21. Every part (other than a lifting or balance weight
rope) of a suspended lift shall, when new, have sufficient
strength to carry a load of at least—
(a) ten times the maximum load where cast iron is used;
(b) eight times the maximum load where wood is used;
(c) five times the maximum load where wrought iron,
steel, or brass is used.
22. The Inspector may, when considered necessary,
cause the whole or any part of the machinery and lift shaft
of any lift to be enclosed in such manner as hereinafter pro-
vided.
23. Whether personal injury is incurred or not, par-
ticulars of the following accidents shall be reported to the
Chief Inspector of Machinery without delay by the person at
the time in charge of the building where the lift is situated:—•
(a) Fracture or failure of any essential part of the wind-
ing gear.
(b) Fracture of any rope or its attachment.
(c) Fracture of any sheave, or shaft, spindle, or bearings
of same.
(d) Jambing of the cage in lift shaft.
(e) Failure of brake efficiency.
(f) Failure of safety grippers to act when required, or
their accidental action when not required.
(g) Failure of overwinding limit switches to act when
required.
Hi) Failure of any enclosure door, lock, or electrical in-
terlock to act correctly.


Every lift shall be inspected twice yearly in accordance
with Section 16 (3) of the Act, and the owner shall provide
any labour or material necessary to facilitate inspection.
24. All metal work in connection with cages or metal
work enclosures shall be efficiently earthed.
PASSENG-EE LIFTS.
(See also “General Eegulations” 1 to 24.)
25. The lift shaft of every passenger lift shall be with-
out projection on any side on which there is a cage entrance,
and the enclosure shall on these sides be as close to the cage
as possible consistent with clearance.
26. On the cage entrance side the shaft shall be com-
pletely enclosed, to the satisfaction of the Inspector, through-
out the travel of the cage, or so much thereof as the Inspector
may direct, unless there is a door to the cage and this door
is provided with electric contacts so arranged as to break
circuit should the door be left open or improperly closed.
27. The enclosures and doors on cage entrance side
shall be flush throughout the travel of the cage and have no
permanent openings greater than iy± inch diameter or width.
28. The enclosures and cage panels on that side on which
the balance weights pass, if close enough to balance weights
to bo a danger to fingers, must be screened by fine wire work
or solid panels.
29. If there be more than one entrance to any cage, at
least one entrance shall be supplied with a door fitted to the
cage, and such door shall be equipped with electric contacts
so arranged as to render control inoperative unless cage door
is properly closed.
30. The shaft doors may be either sliding or hinged,
and preferably self-closing. If sliding doors are used, guides
or runners must be fixed both at top and bottom of the doors
and so arranged that the doors cannot be lifted off the
runners.
31. Collapsible gates will not be approved excepting as
cage doors where it is not possible to fit sliding doors, owing
to the large openings in them being a source of grave danger
and owing to the difficulty of fitting efficient locking gear to
them and keeping them in efficient order.


32. Electro-mechanical locking gear shall be fitted to all
shaft doors. The locking gear shall be so arranged that it
will automatically lock the doors when the cage is not more
than 9 inches away from any floor, and should be of such
description that the making and breaking of electric contact
is positive, and that the control is rendered inoperative if
any door be left open or improperly fastened.
All locking gear and electric contacts must be of sub-
stantial construction, and must be protected as far as possible
from outside interference, to the satisfaction of the Inspector.
Each enclosure door of all new or re-erected automatic
lifts, and (as far as it is practicable in the opinion of the
Inspector) each enclosure door of all existing automatic lifts
shall be fitted with two mechanical and two electrical inter-
locks so operated that the enclosure doors can only be un-
locked when the lift car is stationary and within nine inches of
the landing, or, in the case of lifts fitted with self-levelling
devices, within the levelling zone and under the control of the
levelling devices of that landing.
Provided that the owner of any existing automatic lift
shall be given not less than three months’ notice in writing
under the hand of the Chief Inspector to comply with the
requirements of this paragraph when the Chief Inspector is
satisfied that such requirements can be complied with in
relation to such lift.
33. The width of the permanent opening of the cage
should not exceed 30 inches, and the control switch or buttons
should be placed in such a position that the lift attendant can
efficiently control the ingress and egress of passengers.
34. Every passenger cage shall be adequately roofed to
the satisfaction of the Inspector, and no part of the roof shall
include glass.
35. Every passenger lift-cage shall be efficiently lighted,
and (with the exception of full automatic lifts) fitted with
signal bells worked from each floor and connected to an indi-
cator in the cage.
36. The Inspector shall fix on the maximum number of
persons, including attendant, allowed to travel in the cage of
any passenger lift; this number will be endorsed on the cer-
tificate, and must not be exceeded. (The average weight per
person to be taken as 150 lbs.)


37. The starting lever in the case of lifts controlled by
an attendant to be so arranged that it automatically flies back
and cuts off current, if the attendant loses his grip of the
lever.
The push button control of all automatic lifts shall be
so arranged that—
(a) The lift cannot move until every shaft door is pro-
perly closed, and door locks shall be so designed
that it is impossible to open them from the outside
unless the cage is opposite.
(b) As soon as any push button in the cage is operated
the cage shall be beyond the control of any person
not in the cage until it has completed its trip and
the door at the floor at which it stops has been
opened and closed again.
(c) A special “stop” button in the cage shall be pro-
vided to enable the lift to be stopped anywhere.
(d) Lifts not wholly automatic, i.e., lifts which are some-
times worked by an attendant, shall have an
efficient switch cutting out the automatic control
while attendant is in charge, and such switch shall
he under the charge of the attendant or caretaker,
and shall be locked or placed in such a position as
to be inaccessible to the public.
GOODS LIFTS.
(See also “General Regulations” 1 to 24.)
38. All enclosures, doors, or gates shall, where possible,
be at least sft. 6in. in height and of such a design as to pre-
vent damage to a person by accidental contact with the cage
or balance weight. All vertically sliding gates should close
to within one inch of the floor. Collapsible gates will not be
approved if it is possible to adopt any other type.
39. On cage entrance side the lift shaft shall have no
projections, or if, as in the case of existing old buildings, the
nature of the building is such that these cannot be avoided,
the projections must be protected by bevelled screens or
panels so as to minimise the risk of such projections catching
persons or goods in the lift cage or on the platform.
40. Any electric goods lift erected after the proclama-
tion of “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” shall have
its shaft gates or doors fitted with electric contacts so designed


that the cage cannot be moved unless all doors or gates be
properly closed.
In the case of lifts erected prior to the proclamation of
the said Act, such contacts may be ordered by the Inspector
wherever he considers them necessary.
41. When goods lifts are operated by pull ropes,
whether from inside or outside the cage, such ropes must be
fitted with stop buttons so arranged that, on the cage coming
into contact with them at either limit, it is automatically
stopped. i
If operated by a hand lever control in the cage, the start-
ing lever shall be so designed that it automatically flies back
to neutral position and cuts off the current if the attendant
releases his grip of the lever.
If operated by push button system, a special stop button
in the cage shall be provided to enable the attendant to stop
cage anywhere.
42. Any lift used both as a passenger and goods lift
shall be considered a passenger lift, as regards its equipment.
43. Where considered necessary by the Inspector the
cages of goods lifts shall be efficiently lighted and shall be
provided with signal bells operated from the various floors
and communicating with the cage.
44. The Inspector shall fix the maximum load for every
goods lift, and such load will be endorsed on the certificate
and must not be exceeded at any time.
WORKING OF PASSENGER AND GOODS LIFTS.
45. No person other than those specially empowered
by the owner, as defined in the Act, shall operate any lift
unless such lift is automatically controlled.
The name or names of such persons authorised to operate
the lift shall be posted conspicuously in the cage.
46. No person other than an Inspector, or a workman
engaged in erecting or repairing a lift, shall operate any lift
from the control board, or in any manner other than by the
proper means provided for the purpose, nor shall any person
(except as above provided) at any time improperly interfere
with any part of the lift mechanism or any enclosure, door,
gate, or fastening, or attempt to work a lift in any manner
other than the manner in which it was designed to work,
except in case of an accident or extreme emergency.


47. In the case of automatic lifts, the owner shall cause
the following notice to be exhibited at the lift shaft doors on
each floor: —“Persons using this lift are cautioned to see that
the cage is at this floor, and stationary, before attempting to
open this door.”
HOISTS.
48. In the case of self-contained electric hoists the
manufacturer or his agent shall furnish—
(a) a maker’s test certificate, stating clearly the maxi-
mum load for which the hoist was designed. This
load shall be legibly cast or stamped on the
maker’s name plate, and securely affixed to the
hoist; and
(b) a certificate relative to the wire ropes used, in
accordance with “General Eegulation” No. 17.
49. Every self-contained electric hoist must be provided
with an efficient overwind device which will cut off the current
and apply brakes when the hook is at its maximum allowable
height.
In the case of other types of hoists an overwind device
shall be fitted when considered necessary by the Inspector.
50. All openings in floors for hoists shall be provided
with flap doors or rolling platform covers, and these openings
must be kept closed except when the hoist is actually in use.
51. Where a hoist is suspended outside a building over
any thoroughfare, no load shall be slung on it unless there is
a lorry or other vehicle below and ready to receive the load,
or failing this, a person stationed in the thoroughfare to warn
the public of the danger overhead.
52. Hoists are for the raising or lowering of goods and
materials only and, under no circumstances, are to be used for
raising or lowering any person.
MAINTENANCE OP LIFTS AND HOISTS.
53. The whole operating mechanism of any lift or hoist
must be kept in a state of efficiency.
Any damaged doors, fastenings, or enclosures must be
at once repaired.
All parts of the lift or hoist gear requiring lubrication
must be properly oiled.


Lift shafts and all other parts in connection with any
lift must be kept clean and free from accumulations of rub-
bish, dust, and dirt.
54. If any part of any lift or hoist, or any rope, whether
lifting, balance, or controlling, should show signs of excessive
wear or distortion, it must at once be renewed and the Chief
Inspector notified accordingly.
Any person or firm who is responsible for the carrying
out of lift repairs, and who makes any material alteration
to mechanism or appliances used in connection with any lift,
shall immediately notify the Chief Inspector in writing of
any such alteration.
55. Where any of the above regulations affect any pas-
senger or goods lift erected before the proclamation of the
Act, six months shall be allowed to bring them into conformity
with the regulations.
56. Except and unless where otherwise provided by
“The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” any person who—
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of the preceding
regulations; or
(b) obstructs any Inspector in carrying out the provi-
sions of the .above regulations; or
(c) neglects or refuses to comply with the lawful direc-
tions of the Chief Inspector or any Inspector,
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding Twenty pounds.
REGULATION CHARGES—SECTION 30.
57. For every inspection, and before the granting of any
certificate for a lift, the following fees shall be paid:—
£ s. d.
For every passenger lift .. . . . . 110 0
For every goods lift .. .. .. ..100
For every hoist . . . . . . . . 0 10 0
For every service lift . . .. .. ..050
For inspecting working plans submitted to
the Chief Inspector of Machinery before
the erection of any lift and granting of
permission to erect .. . . . . ..110
Note. —For all fees remitted by owners or other persons
a receipt on the official machine numbered form should be
obtained in every instance, and no other will be recognised.


REGULATIONS RELATING TO ALL TYPES OF POWER-
DRIVEN CRANES FITTED WITH JIBS.
Definition.
“Jib Craiu 1 ” means any mechanical contrivance (with
the exception of mechanical diggers or excavators), whether
travelling or stationary, which is fitted with a jib either fixed
or movable, and is worked by any power other than hand or
animal, and is nsed for raising or lowering goods or
materials. It also includes the machinery necessary for the
working of tin* crane, and all ropes, stays, pulleys, etc., and
any part of the structure which is stressed by the working
of the crane.
1. In the case of every new power-driven jib crane
erected after the Ist day of December, 1924, the manufacturer
or his agent shall supply to the Chief Inspector of Mach-
inery ;
(a) A complete general arrangement drawing to scale,
giving all leading dimensions, and the weights and
centres of gravity of the component parts of the
crane, which are necessary for computing the
stability of the structure for the maximum load
for which it was designed.
(hi A certificate stating the maximum safe working load
at maximum radius of jib, and the safe working
loads at various radii (where the jib is not a fixed
one), and the load to which crane was tested by
the makers, giving the radius at which such load
was supported.
(e) A certificate from the maker of the ropes used both
for hoisting and derricking purposes, or a certified
copy thereof. Such certificate shall provide the
following information:—
Name and address of manufacturer.
Diameter or circumference of rope in inches.
Construction of rope—
Number of strands,
Style of lay,
Class of core.


Construction of strands—
Number of wires.
Diameter of wires (decimals of an incli).
Class of core of strand.
Material of which wire is made.
Breaking stress of material in tons per square
inch (tons of 2,240 lbs.),
Breaking load of rope in tons per square inch
(tons of 2,240 lbs.).
2. If the Inspector has any reasonable doubt at any time
as to the quality or strength of any crane rope, he may demand
that a sample of the rope shall be tested at the Engineering
Laboratory of the University of Western Australia, and that
such test piece be cut off in his presence, and any expense
incurred in connection with such test shall be borne by the
owner of the crane.
3. All cranes fitted with jibs and designed to work at
variable radii shall be provided with a reliable metal indicator
(pendulum type or otherwise) showing the safe-working
loads at various radii for the guidance of the operator.
4. In the case of cranes with fixed jibs, a metal plate
shall be securely attached in a conspicuous position stating
the maximum safe working load.
5. The driver in charge of each crane shall keep the
reading on the metal load indicator or plate clean and legible
whilst the crane is in use.
Any person who disfigures, destroys, conceals, or at-
tempts to disfigure, destroy, or conceal the readings on the
said metal plates shall be guilty of an offence under the above
Act.
6. Every jib crane shall be inspected at least once a year
in accordance with Section 16 (3) of the Act, and the owner
shall provide any labour or material necessary to facilitate
inspection.
7. Except and unless where otherwise provided by the
Act any person who—
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of the preceding
regulations; or
(b) obstructs any Inspector in carrying out the provi-
sions of the above regulations;or


(c) neglects or refuses to comply with the lawful direc-
tions of the Chief Inspector or any Inspector, shall
be liable to a penalty not exceeding Twenty pounds.
Fees payable for Inspection.
8. The fees payable for the inspection of any power-
driven crane fitted with a jib (other than steam cranes) shall
be in accordance with the fees prescribed for ‘ ‘ Machinery not
worked by steam.”


REGULATIONS RELATING TO THE CONDUCT OF
EXAMINATIONS, QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLI-
CANTS, AND THE GRANTING OF CERTIFICATES
TO ENGINE DRIVERS, CRANE AND HOIST
DRIVERS, AND BOILER ATTENDANTS.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1. The Board of Examiners appointed under “The In-
spection of Machinery Act, 1921” (hereinafter termed the
“Board”), shall examine or cause to he examined, on the
subjects hereinafter specified, applicants for certificates of
competency under Sections 53, 54, and 56 of the said Act. At
all meetings of the Board any two members shall be a quorum.
2. The Minister may, in a like manner, appoint any
official person employed in the Inspection of Machinery De-
partment to act as Secretary to the Board of Examiners, and
such person shall act under the Board’s direction.
3. Examinations will be conducted by the Board at such
times and places as may from time to time be determined, such
examinations to be advertised when practicable in a news-
paper or newspapers published or circulated in the locality
or districts concerned. Notwithstanding the above, an exam-
ination will not be held at any advertised centre unless there
be at least (7) eligible candidates.
4. Persons desirous of obtaining a certificate of com-
petency must forward to the Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Perth, notice in writing, in the form of the First Schedule
annexed hereto, of his intention to present himself for exam-
ination ; such notice to be lodged on or before the date adver-
tised for closing of applications, and shall clearly state the
class of certificate desired, and place of examination.


5. The notice mentioned in Regulation 4 must be accom-
panied by—
(a) Cash, money order, postal note, or cheque to the value
of ten shillings (10s.), which shall be paid to Con-
solidated Revenue, and such fee shall admit of one
examination only. If a candidate absents himself
from an examination and fails to furnish the Board
with a satisfactory explanation of his absence on
or before the day of examination, his application
fee shall be forfeited.
<b) In the case of Drivers of Steam Engines, testimonials
from his employer or two persons of good repute
(whoso addresses shall be given) and from a cer-
tificated engine-driver, as prescribed in Regula-
tions 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, and 30. Such documents
must specify clearly and distinctly the class of
engines (giving the internal diameter of cylinders)
that he has driven or assisted to drive.
(c) In the case of Drivers of Cranes and Hoists, whether
driven by steam or other power, testimonials from
his employer or two persons of good repute, and
from a certificated crane and hoist driver, as pre-
scribed in Regulation 32. Such documents must
specify the class of crane or hoist, size of cylinders
in case of steam cranes, and the horse power of
any crane driven by electricity, and the maximum
load of the crane that he has been in charge of for
six (6) months within a period of three (3) years
prior to the date of examination.
(d) In the ease of Drivers of Internal Combustion En-
gines, testimonials from his employer or two per-
sons of good repute and from a certificated in-
ternal combustion engine-driver, as prescribed in
Regulation 34, that he has driven or assisted to
drive an internal combustion engine, the area of
the cylinder or cylinders of which exceeds 100
square inches, for at least one (1) year within a
period of three (3) years prior to the date of the
examination.
(ei In the case of Boiler Attendants, testimonials from
his employer and a certificated engine-driver, as
prescribed in Regulation 36, that he has been con-
tinuously employed as a fireman for a period of
at least six (6) months within three (3) years of
the date of the examination.


Provided that in any case where a candidate is unable
from any sufficient cause to produce satisfactory testimonials
from his employer, the Board may accept a statutory declara-
tion or other sufficient proof that such candidate has driven
or assisted to drive, or had charge of such engines, cranes or
hoists, internal combustion engines, or boilers, for such time
as required by these regulations, within a period of three (3)
years immediately prior to the date of examination as evi-
dence of his having had the necessary experience to entitle
him to be examined. A copy of the testimonials must be for-
warded along with the originals; and the latter will be
returned by the Secretary to the last-known address of the
candidate after the examination.
6. Prior to the issue of any certificate, each successful
candidate, except in the case of Boiler Attendants, shall be
required to furnish the Board with a medical certificate, in
the form of Second Schedule hereto, that he is not subject to
any physical infirmity likely to interfere with the efficient
discharge of his duties as an engine-driver. This certificate
will be permanently retained by the Board.
7. If in any ease the Board does not deem the evidence
of experience, ability, sobriety and general good conduct pro-
duced by the applicant in compliance with these regulations
to be satisfactory, it may refuse to allow such applicant to
present himself for examination.
8. If a candidate fails to pass the examination pre-
scribed, he shall not again present himself until a period of
not less than three (3) months shall have elapsed from the
date of his last examination.
9. Any person who obtains or attempts to obtain any
certificate under this Act by means of fraud or false pretences
or any false document, or who effaces, mutilates or adds to,
in any manner, the certificate issued by the Board, shall be
liable to the penalties contained in Section 66 of the Act; and
shall not practise as an engine-driver, crane or hoist-driver,
or boiler attendant. Any certificate obtained by any such
means shall be returned to the Board, and may he cancelled
by the Minister.
10. No person under the various ages prescribed m these
regulations, and who has not had the required practical ex-
perience, and is not a British subject, or a person who has
been naturalised as such, shall be accepted as a candidate for
any examination.


11. No application shall be considered, and no certificate
shall be issued, unless full payment of the fees as prescribed
by these regulations shall have been made to the Chief
Inspector of Machinery, Perth.
12. No applicant for examination shall pay, give, or
offer any gratuity or remuneration whatever to any member
of the Board, or to any officer of the Department, and
any applicant who shall offer to give remuneration shall be
regarded as having failed in his examination, and shall be
ineligible to present himself for a period of at least six (6)
months, and any fees which may have been paid by the appli-
cant shall be forfeited and paid into Consolidated Revenue.
13. Every certificate issued under these Regulations
shall bear the impress of the seal of the Board, and shall con-
tain the signature of the grantee on the space prepared on the
face of the certificate.
14. Every holder of any class or grade of certificate
granted under these Regulations (or certificate equivalent
thereto) shall, in the event of a higher grade certificate being
granted, and prior to its issue, surrender to the Board his
former certificate for cancellation.
15. Any person in charge of any steam engine, or any
internal combustion engine to which this Act applies, used for
mining, factory, or other purposes, shall not, under any pre-
text whatever, unless relieved by a competent person holding
the required certificate, absent himself or cease to have con-
tinual supervision of such engine. Any person so offending
shall be deemed guilty of a breach of these Regulations.
CERTIFICATES OF COMPETENCY.
16. The certificates of competency to be issued by the
Board of Examiners shall be of eight classes, viz.: Winding,
First, Second, and Third Class Certificates for stationary
engines: Locomotive and Traction, Crane and Hoist, Internal
Combustion Engine, and Boiler Attendants’ Certificates.
WINDING- ENGINE DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.
17. An unrestricted Winding Engine Driver’s Certifi-
cate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge
of any winding engine, and of its boiler or boilers, and of any
stationary engine and its boiler or boilers to which a first class
engine-driver’s certificate applies, provided that such engines


and boilers are so situated that the Chief Inspector or his
representative is satisfied that the engine-driver can efficiently
discharge his duties without danger to any person, or liability
of accident to such engines or boilers.
An applicant for a Winding Engine-driver’s Certificate
must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence:—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he can read and write the English language
and is conversant with the elementary rules of
arithmetic.
(c) That he has been the holder of—
(i) an unrestricted First-class Engine Driver’s
Certificate granted under “The Inspec-
tion of Machinery Act, 1921,’’ or a Cer-
tificate which, in the opinion of the Board,
is equivalent thereto; or
(ii) an unrestricted Second-class Engine Driver’s
Certificate granted under the said Act,
which the Board is willing to regard as
sufficient,
for a period in either case of not less than nine
months, and that he has during six months of that
period been actually assisting to drive a winding
engine under the supervision of a certificated wind-
ing engine-driver or of the holder of a certificate
equivalent thereto, issued in this State for at least
twelve hours in each and every week of such period
of six months aforesaid.
(d) As to his winding engine experience and general good
conduct, supported by testimonials signed by his
employer or the engineer, and by a certificated
winding engine-driver under whom the applicant
has been practising. The testimonial from the
certificated engine-driver shall state the number
and date of issue of his certificate, and shall be
signed and declared by the said engine-driver be-
fore a Justice of the Peace, or a Commissioner
for taking Affidavits, to be true and correct in
every particular.
(e) That he is at the date of examination not under the
age of twenty-two (22) years and not over the age
of fifty (50) years.


A candidate over fifty years of age who satisfies
the Board that the necessary experience in driving
winding engines had been gained prior to attaining
the age of fifty years may, at the discretion of the
Board, be considered eligible for examination.
Should any doubt exist as to the applicant’s age,
he will be required to produce a certificate of birth
or baptism.
18. The applicant must pass a creditable examination as
to the construction of winding engines and various stationary
steam engines, condensers, and boilers in general use; the
details of different working parts, external and internal; be
able to explain how to detect defects, and what action is neces-
sary in the ordinary emergencies which may arise in connec-
tion with winding and other steam engines, etc., and be able
to work out certain elementary arithmetical questions.
FIRST CLASS ENGINE-DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.
19. An unrestricted First Class Engine-driver’s Certifi-
cate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge
of any stationary engine or engines, including steam turbines
other than winding engines, by which men are raised or low-
ered at the time he is in charge, and of its or their boiler or
boilers, but not to drive a locomotive or traction engine, or
a crane or hoist, or an internal combustion engine, provided
that such engines and boilers are so situated that the Chief
Inspector or his representative is satisfied that the engine-
driver can efficiently discharge his duties without danger to
any person or liability of accident to such engines or boilers.
An applicant for a First Class Engine-driver’s Certifi-
cate must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence;—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he can read and write the English language and
is conversant with the elementary rules of arith-
metic.
(c) That he has been the holder of an unrestricted
Second-class Engine Driver’s Certificate granted
under “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,”
or a Certificate which, in the opinion of the Board,
is equivalent thereto, for a period of not less than
nine months, and that he has during six months of
that period been actually assisting to drive a


stationary steam engine the area of the cylinder
or cylinders of which exceeds 500 square inches,
under the supervision of a duly certificated engine-
driver for at least twelve hours in each and every
week of such period of six months aforesaid.
(d) That he is at the date of examination not under the
age of twenty-one (21) years, nor over the age of
fifty (50) years. An applicant over the age of
fifty years, who satisfies the Board that the neces-
sary experience in driving stationary steam
engines had been gained prior to attaining the age
of fifty years, may, at the discretion of the Board,
be considered eligible for examination. Should
any doubt exist as to the applicant’s age, he will
be required to produce a certificate of birth or
baptism.
20. An applicant must pass a creditable examination and
be conversant with the working parts of various stationary
steam engines, including turbines, condensers, pumps, and
boilers in general use, the different parts and uses of same,
including the feeding of boilers, proper maintenance and
running of engines, and be able to explain how to detect
defects, and state what action is necessary in the ordinary
emergencies that may arise in the management and main-
tenance of such engines, etc., which a First Class Engine-
driver’s Certificate entitles him to take charge of, and to work
out certain elementary arithmetical questions.
SECOND CLASS ENdINE-DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.
21. An unrestricted Second Class Engine-driver’s Certi-
ficate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge
of any stationary engine or engines, the area of the cylinder
or cylinders of which does not exceed 750 square inches, and
of its or their boiler or boilers, provided that such engines
and boilers are so situated that the Chief Inspector or his
representative is satisfied that the engine-driver can efficiently
discharge his duties without danger to any person or liability
of accident to such engines and boilers, but does not entitle
him to take charge of any winding engine or of any loco-
motive or traction engine, or of any crane or hoist, or any
internal combustion engine.


An applicant for a Second Class Engine-driver’s Certifi-
cate must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence:—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he is able to read and write the English
language and is conversant with the elementary
rules of arithmetic.
(c) That he has been the holder of an unrestricted Third
Class Engine-driver’s Certificate granted under
“The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,” or a
certificate which, in the opinion of the Board, is
equivalent thereto, for a period of not less than
nine months, and that he has during six months of
that period been actually assisting to drive a sta-
tionary steam engine, the area of the cylinder or
cylinders of which exceeds 114 square inches, under
the supervision of a duly certificated engine-driver
for at least twelve hours in each and every week
of such period of six months aforesaid.
Provided that the Board may, at its discretion, reduce
the probationary period of six (6) months to three (3)
months if the candidate can produce a certificate from a
Technical School or School of Mines showing that he has had
a course of instruction on the management and construction
of steam engines and boilers.
This clause shall not apply to any applicant who has
served an apprenticeship of at least five (5) years in an
engineer’s workshop as a fitter on the making and repairing
of steam engines, boilers, pumps, etc., or if the applicant has
Hot served an apprenticeship as aforesaid, he must prove that
for not less than five (5) years he has been employed as a
journeyman fitter in an engineering workshop on the making
or repairing of steam engines, boilers, pumps, etc.
Provided that such applicant must produce satisfactory
evidence that he has assisted to drive for not less than twelve
(12) hours per week, for a period not less than three (3)
months, a steam engine, the area of the cylinder or cylinders
of which is not less than 114 square inches.
(d) That he is on the date of examination not under the
age of twenty (20) years, nor over the age of fifty
(50) years. An applicant over the age of fifty
years, who satisfies the Board that the necessary
experience in driving stationary steam engines had


been gained prior to attaining the age of fifty
years, may, at the discretion of the Board, be con-
sidered eligible for examination. Should any doubt
exist as to the applicant’s age he will be required
to produce a certificate of birth or baptism.
22. An applicant must pass a creditable examination as
to the use of the principal parts of stationary steam engines,
condensers, pumps, and boilers in general use, and be able to
describe the various fittings and working parts and their uses;
also state what action is necessary in the ordinary emer-
gencies which may arise in connection with such engines, etc.,
which a Second Class Engine-driver’s Certificate entitles him
to take charge of; and be able to work out certain elementary
arithmetical questions.
THIRD CLASS ENGINE-DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.
23. An unrestricted Third Class Engine-driver’s Certi-
ficate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge
of any stationary engine or engines, the area of the cylinder
or cylinders of which does not exceed 114 square inches and
of its or their boilers, provided that such engines and boilers
are so situated that the Chief Inspector or his representative,
is satisfied that the engine-driver can efficiently discharge his
duties without danger to any person or liability of accident
to such engines and boilers: Provided that such engine is not
a winding engine, locomotive, traction engine, crane or hoist,
or internal combustion engine.
An applicant for a Third Class Engine-driver’s Certifi-
cate must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence:—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he is able to read and write the English
language.
(c) That he has been the holder of an unrestricted Boiler
Attendant’s Certificate granted under '‘The In-
spection of Machinery Act, 1921,” or a certificate
which, in the opinion of the Board, is equivalent
thereto, for a period of not less than six months
and that during that period he has actually been
assisting to drive a steam engine with a boiler and
accessories connected therewith for at least twelve
hours in each and every week of such period under
the supervision of a duly certificated engine-driver.


Provided that the Board may accept evidence
that the candidate has had the practical experience
aforesaid during a period of three months, instead
of six months as aforesaid, if the candidate pro-
duces a certificate from a Technical School or a
School of Mines stating that he has had and satis-
factorily passed through a course of instruction in
such school in and relating to the management and
construction of steam engines and boilers.
(cl) As an alternative to paragraph (c) above,
but subject to the approval of the Board, that he
has had for a period of not less than nine months,
and for at least twelve hours in each and every
week of such period of nine months practical ex-
perience in the firing and care of various classes
of boilers and their accessories and in the driving
and working of a steam engine by actually assist-
ing therein during the period and times aforesaid
under the supervision of a duly certificated engine-
driver.
Provided that the Board may accept evidence of
such experience during a period of six months, in-
stead of nine months as aforesaid, if the candidate
produces a certificate from a Technical School or
a School of Mines stating that he has had and
satisfactorily passed through a course of instruc-
tion in such school in and relating to the manage-
ment and construction of steam engines and
boilers.
(d) That he is on the date of examination not under the
age of nineteen (19) years, nor over the age of
fifty (50) years. An applicant over the age of
fifty years who satisfies the Board that the
necessary experience in driving stationary steam
engines had been gained prior to attaining the age
of fifty years may, in the discretion of the Board,
be considered eligible for examination. Should
any doubt exist as to the applicant’s age, he will
be required to produce a certificate of birth or
baptism.
24. An applicant must pass a creditable examination as
to the use of the principal parts of stationary steam engines,
Pumps, and boilers in general use, and be able to describe the
f 41 no—4


various fitiings and working parts and their uses; also to
state what action is necessary in the ordinary emergencies
which may arise in connection with such steam engines,
pumps, and boilers which a Third Class Engine-driver’s
Certificate entitles him to take charge of; and other matters
dealing with the safety and proper working of boilers.
LOCOMOTIVE AND TRACTION ENGINE-DRIVERS’
CERTIFICATE.
25. An unrestricted Locomotive and Traction Engine-
driver’s Certificate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive
and have charge of any locomotive or steam traction engine
and of its boiler, propelling itself, or moving from place to
place, by its own motive power and machinery, and of any
stationary engine and boiler, which it is lawful for the holder
of a Third Class Certificate to be in charge of. An applicant
for a Locomotive and Traction Engine-driver’s Certificate
must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence: —
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he can read and write the English language
and is conversant with the elementary rules of
arithmetic.
(c) That for a period of not less than eighteen (18)
months and for not less than six (6) hours per
day, he has been actually employed in firing and
assisting to drive a locomotive engine. A testi-
monial signed by his employer and by the certifi-
cated engine-driver with whom he has been firing
and assisting to drive, to the above effect, must
accompany the application. The locomotive engine-
driver, when signing the testimonial, must state
the number and date of issue of his certificate.
Provided that the above period of eighteen (18)
months be reduced to nine (9) months in the case
of the holders of unrestricted Winding or First
Class Certificates.
(d) That he is on the date of examination not under
twenty-two (22) years of age, nor over the age of
fifty (50) years. An applicant over the age of
fifty years who satisfies the Board that the neces*
sary experience in driving locomotives and traction
engines had been gained prior to attaining the age
of fifty years may, at the discretion of the Board)


be considered eligible for examination. Should
any doubt exist as to the applicant’s age, he will
be required to produce a certificate of birth or
baptism.
(e) That he understands the meaning of all the different
lights and signals used on the Government Rail-
ways in Western Australia, and that he is conver-
sant with the rules of the road and the conditions
under which traction engines are allowed to travel
on public roads and highways.
26. An applicant must pass a creditable examination as
to the details of the different parts of locomotives and traction
engines, and of such stationary engines as are referred to
in Regulation 23, to which an unrestricted Locomotive and
Traction Engine-driver’s Certificate applies. He must be able
to explain the staff system, the mechanism of brakes, and the
uses of the various cocks, gauges, valves, and connections on
boilers, and state how temporary repairs could be effected in
case of derangement to engine or boiler. He must under-
stand the effects of impurities in water used in such boilers,
and the methods adopted to keep the boiler clean, and to work
out certain elementary arithmetical questions.
27. In addition to furnishing the Board with the medical
certificate as required under Regulation No. 6, every suc-
cessful candidate who is actually in charge of any locomotive
engine, to which “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921,”
applies, shall present himself for medical examination at
intervals of not more than two (2) years, and a medical cer-
tificate in flic form of Second Schedule hereto, but specifying
a locomotive engine, shall be forwarded by him to the Chief
Inspector of Machinery, Perth, for record purposes.
28. If any duly qualified medical practitioner should
certify that an engine-driver’s health or eyesight is seriously
defective, and in consequence of such certificate the Board
is of the opinion that be is no longer fit to be in control of
a locomotive engine, he shall immediately discontinue to take
charge of such engine, but may drive and take charge of any
stationary engine for which his certificate qualifies him, sub-
ject to the sanction of the Chief Inspector being first obtained.
29. Any certificated locomotive engine-driver having
charge of any locomotive engine, and whose medical certificate
on the Ist day of August, 1922, is more than two (2) years-
old, must comply with Regulation No. 27 before the thirty-
first day of August, 1922, and as required thereafter.


TRACTION ENGINE-DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.
30. If an applicant desires to obtain a certificate as a
Steam Traction Engine-driver, without locomotive privileges,
the Board may permit him to sit for examination for such
certificate.
An unrestricted Steam Traction Engine-driver’s Certifi-
cate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge
of any steam traction engine and its boiler, and also of any
stationary engine and boiler, which it is lawful for the holder
of a Third Class Certificate to drive.
An applicant for a Steam Traction Engine-driver’s Cer-
tificate must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he can read and write the English language.
(c) That —
(i) for a period of not less than twelve months and for
at least twelve hours in each and every week of
such period he has been firing and assisting to
drive a steam traction engine under the super-
vision of a duly certificated engine-driver; or
(ii) he is the holder of a boiler attendant’s certificate
granted under “The Inspection of Machinery
Act, 1921,” and for a period of not less than
six months, and for at least twelve hours in each
and every week of such period, he has been actu-
ally assisting to drive a steam traction engine
under the supervision of a duly certificated en-
gine-driver :
Provided that the holder of a Winding, or
First Class, or Second Class, or Locomotive En-
gine-driver’s Certificate may, with the approval
of the Board, be deemed eligible to sit for exam-
ination.
(d) That he is on the date of examination not under the
age of twenty (20) years nor over the age of fifty
(50) years. An applicant over the age of fifty
years, who satisfies the Board that the necessary
experience in driving steam traction engines had
been gained prior to attaining the age of fifty
years, may, at the discretion of the Board, be
considered eligible for examination. Should any
doubt exist as to the applicant’s age, he will be re-
quired to produce a certificate of birth or baptism


(e) That lie is conversant with the rules of the road and
the conditions under which steam traction engines
are allowed to travel on public roads and highways.
31. An applicant must pass a creditable examination as
to the details of the different parts of steam traction engines,
and of such other engines to which an unrestricted Traction
Engine-driver’s Certificate applies. He must be able to
explain the uses of the various cocks, gauges, valves, and con-
nections of boilers, and state how temporary repairs could
be effected in case of derangement to engine or boiler. He
must also understand the effective methods adopted to keep
the boiler clean.
CRANK AND'HOIST DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.
32. An unrestricted Crane and Hoist Driver’s Certifi-
cate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive and have charge
of any stationary or travelling crane, hoist, or other appliance
of a like kind, fitted with a jib, and operated by power other
than by hand or animal power, used for the purpose of raising
material, and, in the case of a steam-operated appliance, of
its boiler.
An applicant for a Crane and Hoist Driver’s Certificate
must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he can read and write the English language.
(c) That for a period of not less than six months and
during that period for at least twelve hours in each
and every week of such period he has been assist-
ing to drive a crane or hoist under the supervision
of a duly certificated crane and hoist driver or the
holder of a certificate equivalent thereto.
(d) That he produces a testimonial covering such period
from the certificated crane and hoist driver under
whom he has been practising, and that such certifi-
cated driver shall state the type of crane, how
driven, and the maximum lifting capacity. He
shall, when signing the testimonial, give the num-
ber and date of issue of his certificate.
(e) That he is on the date of examination not under the
ago of nineteen (19) years nor over the age of
fifty (50) years. An applicant over the age of fifty
years, who satisfies the Board that the necessary
experience in driving cranes or hoists had been
gained prior to attaining the age of fifty years,


may, at the discretion of the Board, be considered
eligible for examination. Should any doubt exist
as to the applicant’s age, he will be required to
produce a certificate of birth or baptism.
33. An applicant must pass a creditable examination as
to the various parts and uses of —
(a) a steam crane, including its boiler, fittings, and con-
nections ;
(b) or an electric crane, including its motor switches and
other accessories.
He must also be able to give a practical explanation as to
what action is necessary in the case of any emergency which
may arise in the operating of such cranes.
INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE-DRIVERS’
CERTIFICATE.
34. An unrestricted Internal Combustion Engine-
driver’s Certificate shall entitle the holder thereof to drive
and have charge of any internal combustion engine or
engines, and its or their accessories, to which the Act applies,
other than winding engines by which men are raised or
lowered.
An applicant for an Internal Combustion Engine-driver’s
Certificate must produce to the Board satisfactory evidence—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he is able to read and write the English lan-
guage and is conversant with the elementary rules
of arithmetic.
(c) That for a period of not less than twelve months, and
during that period for at least twelve hours in
each and every week of such period he has been
actually assisting to drive an internal combustion
engine having an area of cylinder or combined
area of cylinders exceeding 100 square inches and
accessories connected therewith, under the super-
vision of a duly certificated engine-driver.
(d) That he is on the date of examination not under the
age of twenty-one (21) years nor over the age of
fifty (50) years. An applicant over the age of
fifty (50) years, who satisfies the Board that the
necessary experience in driving internal combus-
tion engines had been gained prior to attaining the
age of fifty years, may, at the discretion of the


Board, be considered eligible for examination.
Should any doubt exist as to the applicant’s age,
he will be required to produce a certificate of birth
or baptism.
35. An applicant must pass a creditable examination as
to the use of the principal working parts of internal combus-
tion engines, their general principles, the different classes of
producers and accessories, and be able to describe the various
fittings' and their uses; also to state what action is necessary
in the ordinary emergencies and dangers which may arise in
connection with such engines and producers, and other mat-
ters dealing with their safety and proper working; and be able
to work out certain elementary arithmetical questions.
Note. —lf an internal combustion engine be used to drive
a winding engine used for raising and lowering men, the
driver thereof must hold a "Winding Engine-driver’s Certifi-
cate, or one equivalent thereto, issued within this State, in
addition to the certificate required to be held by him as the
driver of such internal combustion engine.
BOILER ATTENDANT’S CERTIFICATE.
36. An unrestricted Boiler Attendant’s Certificate shall
entitle the holder thereof to take charge of any boiler or
boilers in which steam is generated, and to which this Act
applies, together with its or their accessories, such as feed
pumps, injectors, economisers, superheaters, etc.
An applicant for a Boiler Attendant’s Certificate must
produce to the Board satisfactory evidence:—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That he can read and write the English language.
(c) That for a period of not less than six months, and
during that period for at least twelve hours in each
and every week of such period he has had practical
experience in or in connection with various classes
of boilers as a boiler attendant under the super-
vision of a duly certificated engine-driver or boiler
attendant, or during the period and times afore-
said has had such other practical experience,
whether within or outside the State, as the Board
may deem to be sufficient.
(d) That he is on the date of examination not under the
age of eighteen (18) years. An applicant over the
ago of fifty (50) years, who satisfies the Board


that necessary experience as a boiler attendant had
been gained prior to attaining the age of fifty
years, may, at the discretion of the Board, be con-
sidered eligible for examination. Should any doubt
exist as to the applicant’s age, he will be required
to procure a certificate of birth or baptism.
37. An applicant must pass a creditable examination on
all classes of boilers in common use in the State, and be able
to describe their internal construction, staying, etc. He must
also prove to the Board that he understands the proper
methods of washing out, making manhole, mudhole, and other
joints on a boiler, and that he knows the correct procedure
in testing glass water gauges, packing them, and renewing
glasses.
He must also have a working knowledge of the various
fittings required by Section 22 of this Act, the construction
and capabilities of feed pumps and injectors in common use,
and must understand the best methods of firing and blowing
down boilers, regulating feed water, and all other matters in
connection with the safe and economical working of a boiler.
CERTIFICATES OF SERVICE.
38. The holder of a Certificate of Service granted under
any of the Acts mentioned in Section 62 of “ The Inspection of
Machinery Act, 1921,” or in Regulation 43, may, under Regu-
lation 44, obtain a Transfer Certificate under this Act.
39. A Certificate of Service granted in accordance with
Sections 55 and 62, Subsection 2, of “ The Inspection of Mach-
inery Act, 1921,” shall entitle the holder thereof to the same
privileges as a Certificate of Competency of the same class.
RECIPROCITY OF ENGINE-DRIVERS’
CERTIFICATES.
40. Upon production of a satisfactory medical certifi-
cate in the form of Second Schedule, and payment of the pre-
scribed fee, the Board may grant to any person making appli-
cation in the form of Sixth Schedule hereto, who satisfies the
Board that he is a resident in the State of Western Australia,
and is a person of good repute and is the holder of a Winding
or a First or Second Class Mining Engine-driver’s Certificate
issued in any other State of the Commonwealth, a certificate
of equivalent grade without examination, and such certificate
shall entitle the holder to the same privileges that he was,
entitled to under his certificate in the State wherein it was
issued:


Provided always that the applicant has not been previ-
ously refused the same grade of certificate by a Board of
Examiners duly appointed under “The Inspection of Machin-
ery Act, 1921,” or “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1904,”
or “Coal Mines Regulation Act, 1902,” or “Mines Regula-
tion Act, 1895,” and amendments.
Provided that in the case of a "Winding Engine-driver’s
Certificate the Board may, before issuing the certificate, re-
quire the applicant to furnish satisfactory evidence as to his
knowledge of the provisions relating to winding, and of the
signal code under “The Mines Regulation Act, 1906,” and
satisfactory evidence as to his qualifications and character.
And further provided that the Board, at its discretion, may-
issue without examination, any certificate of such grade as it
deems fit to the holder of a certificate granted by any properly
constituted authority, upon the production of such certificate,
and of a satisfactory medical certificate in form of Second
Schedule thereto, and payment of the prescribed fee.
INTERIM CERTIFICATES.
41. Any person holding a certificate issued by some
recognised authority outside the State, and who has not had
an opportunity of presenting himself for examination, may
obtain an interim or temporary certificate, which shall remain
in force and entitle him to the same privileges as an ordinary
certificate of similar grade issued in this State, until the date
appointed for the next examination, upon satisfying the Board
or any member thereof as to the following;—
(a) Of his respectability of character.
(b) That on the date of making application the certificate
presented by him is still valid in the State or coun-
try in which it was issued.
(c) That such certificate has been forwarded to the Chief
Inspector of Machinery, Perth, for retention dur-
ing the currency of the interim or temporary
certificate.
42. All applications for Interim Certificates mentioned
in the preceding Regulation must be in the form of Third
Schedule hereto, and must be accompanied by the prescribed
fee, and medical certificate in the form of Second Schedule,
in the case of "Winding, First Class, and Locomotive Engine-
drivers’ Certificates only.


Grade.
Granted under:
Equivalent Certificates under
this Act.
“ Engine-driver’s ” Certi-
Mines Regulation Act,
Winding Engine-driver’s Certi-
fioate. Unrestricted
1895
ficate.
“ Engine-driver’s ” Certi-
Mines Regulation Act,
First-Class Engine-driver's Cer-
fioate. Restricted
1895
tificate.
“ First-Claas ” Certificate,
Mines Regulation Amend-
Winding Engine-driver's Certi-
Unrestricted
raent Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
ficate.
“ First-Class ” Certificate,
Mines Regulation Amend-
Winding Engine-driver’s Certi-
ficate (subject to any restric-
tion endorsed on original Cer-
tificate, or recorded in the
office of the Chief Inspector
of Machinery).
Restricted
ment Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
■“ Second Class ” Certificate,
Mines Regulation Amend-
First Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Unrestricted
ment Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
tificate.
“ Second Class ” Certificate,
Mines Regulation Amend-
First Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Restricted
ment Act, 1899, or Coal
Mines Regulation Act,
1902
tificate (subject to any re-
striction endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate, or recorded
in the office of the Chief In-
spector of Machinery).
“ First Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
Winding Engine-driver’s Certi-
Unrestricted
Act, 1904
ficate.
First Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
Winding Engine-driver's Certi-
Restricted
Act, 1904
ficate (subject to any restric-
tion endorsed on original
Certificate, or recorded in
the office of the Chief In-
■“ Second Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
spector of Machinery.)
First Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Unrestricted .
Act, 1904 ■
tificate.
■“ Second Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
First Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Restricted
Act, 1904
tificate (subject to any re-
striction endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate, or recorded
in the office of the Chief In-
spector of Machinery).
Third Class Engine-driver’s
“ Third Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
Unrestricted
Act, 1904
Certificate.
■“ Third Class ” Certificate,
Inspection of Machinery
Third Class Engine-driver’s
Restricted
Act, 1904
Certificate (subject to any
restriction endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate or recorded
in the office of the Chief
Inspector of Machinery).
“ Locomotive and Trac-
Inspection of Machinery
Locomotive and Traction, and
tion ” Certificate, Un-
restricted
Act, 1904
First Class Engine-driver’s
Certificate.
PROTECTION OF ENGINE-DRIVERS’ CERTIFICATES
IN FORCE PRIOR TO THE PASSING OF THIS ACT.
43. The holders of the certificates of competency or
service mentioned hereunder and granted in this State under
the Acts referred to shall be deemed to be the holders of
certificates under this Act as tabulated;—


Grade.
Granted under:
Equivalent Certificates under
this Act.
“ Locomotive and Trac-
Inspection of Machinery
Locomotive and Traction En-
tion ” Certificate, Re-
stricted
Act, 1904
gine driver’s Certificate (sub-
ject to any restriction, the
equivalent of the restriction
endorsed on original Certifi-
cate, or recorded in the office
of the Chief Inspector of
Machinery).
“Marine Engine-driver’s”
Inspection of Machinery
First Class Engine-driver’s Cer-
Certificate, Unrestricted
Act, 1904, or the Boat
Licensing Act of ]878,
if issued before 1st
March, 1905
tificate under this Act, in
addition to Marine privileges-
granted under Acts specified..
‘Marine Engine-driver’s”
Inspection of Machinery
Second Class Engine-driver’s
Certificate, Restricted
Act, 1904, or the Boat
Licensing Act, 1878, if
issued before 1st March,
1905
Certificate under this Act,,
in addition to Marine privi-
leges granted under Acts,
specified (subject to any
restriction endorsed on origi-
nal Certificate, or recorded!
in the office of Chief In-
spector of Machinery).
TRANSFER CERTIFICATES.
44. The holder of any certificate under the Acts men-
tioned in Regulation 43, being a resident in the State of West-
ern Australia and being a person of good repute, may, on
making application in the form of Fifth Schedule hereto, pay-
ment of prescribed fee, and on delivery of his original certifi-
cate for cancellation by the Board, obtain an equivalent
certificate under this Act, and such certificate shall be called
a transfer certificate.
RECOGNITION OF MARINE ENGINEERS'
CERTIFICATES.
45. On making application in the form of First Schedule
hereto, the payment of the prescribed fees, the production of
a satisfactory medical certificate as prescribed in Second
Schedule, and on proof that the applicant is a resident in
the State of Western Australia, and a person of good repute,,
and on production of satisfactory testimonials, and a certifi-
cate granted after examination by the Board of Trade of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or by any
Board in His Majesty’s Dominions having authority from
the said Board of Trade to grant certificates, the Board may


grant, without examination, the following certificates of com-
petency :
(a) To a holder of a first-class or second-class marine
engineer’s certificate—a First Class Engine-
driver’s Certificate.
(b) To a holder of a third-class marine engineer’s certifi-
cate —a Third Class Engine-driver’s Certificate.
RESTRICTED CERTIFICATES.
46. Nothwithstanding anything contained in the preced-
ing Regulations, the Board may restrict the privileges con-
ferred by any certificate as it may deem advisable. Such
restriction shall be endorsed on the face of the certificate. The
restriction may be cancelled by the Board after further oral
examination and upon production of satisfactory evidence of
further experience and payment of the prescribed fees. No
application for a higher grade certificate will be entertained
until such restriction has been cancelled.
COPIES OP CERTIFICATES.
47. If any certificate granted in this State and recog-
nised under the provisions of “The Inspection of Machinery
Act, 1921,” is lost or destroyed, the owner of such certifi-
cate may make a statutory declaration in the form of Fourth
Schedule hereto, with respect thereto; and the Board, if
satisfied with such declaration, may issue a fresh certificate
which shall be a true copy of the original, and made on same
forjn as the original issue, on payment of the prescribed fee.
Such certificate shall be endorsed with the reasons for
the issue thereof, and thereafter shall be available as if it
were the original certificate.
COMPLAINTS.
48. If an owner or responsible person under him, or any
Inspector appointed under the Acts mentioned in these Regu-
lations, represents at any time in writing to the Board that
any person deemed to be the holder of a certificate under this
Act, is guilty of any offence or misconduct or negligence, or
who has developed any symptoms of epilepsy or other serious
complaint, which would render him unfit to be trusted to
efficiently perform his duties as such holder, the Board may
call upon him to return his certificate to the Chairman of the


Board and to appear before it or before such persons as the
Minister may appoint to show cause why he should not be
suspended, reduced, or disqualified. The persons appointed
as aforesaid to conduct such inquiry may call such evidence
as is deemed necessary, and such evidence shall be on oath
or affirmation, which the Chairman or any person appointed
as aforesaid or any member of the Board may administer, and
the Board or such other authority shall have the power of a
Police Magistrate sitting in a Court of Petty Sessions and to
summon witnesses.
In the case of persons appointed by the Minister to hold
an inquiry, they shall report to the Chairman of the Board,
and shall furnish the depositions taken at such inquiry.
If it appears to the Board as the result of any such
inquiry that the certificated person has failed to show good
cause why he should not be suspended, reduced, or disqualified
the Board shall advise the Minister accordingly.
If the certificated person should fail to appear at the
inquiry without reasonable excuse this shall be held by the
Board to be equivalent to failure on his part to show cause
why he should not be suspended, reduced, or disqualified. The
Minister may thereupon, by notice in the Government Gazette,
disqualify him for such period as he thinks fit, and during the
period of disqualification he shall be deemed not to be the
holder of a certificate, or the Minister may alter, suspend, or
cancel such certificate, and may, on the recommendation of
the Board, require the engine-driver against whom any
offence has been proved to defray all or part of the expenses
of the inquiry.
49. With respect to any inquiry held under these Regu-
lations the following provisions shall have effect: —
(a) The inquiry shall be held at such time and place as
the Board may appoint, and the engine-driver
shall have the right to be represented by any per-
son duly certificated in this State, whom he may
select. He shall receive fourteen (14) days’notice
of the Board’s intention to authorise the holding
of an inquiry, and if the certificated person intends
to employ a representative he shall give at least
seven (7) days’ notice of such intention to the
Chairman of the Board.


(b) Any person shall, upon receipt of notice of the inten-
tion of the Board to hold an inquiry with reference
to a complaint which has been lodged against him,
deliver his certificate to the Chairman of the
Board, which shall be returned to him should the
complaint or charge not be sustained.
(c) The Board shall furnish to the certificated person,
not less than fourteen (14) days before the com-
mencement of the inquiry, a statement of the case
upon which the inquiry is instituted.
(d) The certificated person shall, at his own expense,
attend such inquiry, and may produce such evi-
dence as he may consider necessary.
SYLLABUS.
50. Applicants for certificates shall have a knowledge of
the provisions relating to engines and boilers under:—
(a) “Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.”
(b) “Mines Regulation Act, 1906,” and Regulations.
(c) “Coal Mines Regulation Act, 1902.”
(d) Any other Act and Regulations relating to engine-
drivers’ certificates in force for the time being.
51. Applicants for certificates in addition to the afore-
said requirements shall be examined in such parts of the
following syllabus as may be applicable to the class of certifi-
cate desired:—
(a) The various types of winding engines in use in West-
ern Australia, and their component parts.
(b) The handling of winding engines, and how to act in
case of emergency.
(c) The various types of brakes and clutches, how oper-
ated, and how adjusted.
(d) The various types of depth indicators, and the work-
ing and adjusting of same, with special reference
to changing levels.
(e) The various types of head gears and hoisting ar-
rangements in shafts, and usual safety appliances.
(f) How ropes are attached to and coiled on drums;
defects relating thereto.
(g) The various signalling arrangements used in connec-
tion with winding engines, with special reference
to safety signals.


(h) The various types of steam engines, air, and other
compressors and condensers, air and circulating
pumps used in connection therewith, and the vari-
ous methods of dealing with the exhaust steam
from engines.
(i) The various valve gears applied to steam engines,
the action of them in starting, stopping, and revers-
ing ; how dangerous defects may be recognised and
readily remedied in some cases.
(j) The various types of governors and steam-throttle
valve arrangements of steam engines, and the
regulating of the same.
(k) How the various parts of engines, shafts, and drums
are connected up or geared.
(l) Auxiliary starting valves, by-pass valves, and relief
valves.
(m) Lubrication and lubricators for bearings and cylin-
ders.
(n) The various types of boilers in use iu Western Aus-
tralia, and their component parts; feeding and
firing arrangements; effect of high and low water;
grease, deposit, scale, and how to act in cases of
emergency.
(o) All boiler mountings and fittings, their names and
uses, also methods of setting various types of
boilers.
(p) The draining of stop valves and steam-pipes, and
how to connect boilers under steam pressure.
(q) Dangerous defects relating to boilers and fittings,
how observed, and how dealt with.
(r) The safe and economical management of locomotives
and traction engines, the various types of valve
gears and brakes used. The usual methods adopted
in case of break-downs, the various signals in use
on railways in Western Australia, and the usual
methods adopted to secure safe running.
(s) A general knowledge of the various types of sinking,
feed, and other pumps.
(t) Generally the proper maintenance and economical
working of all engines, boilers, and pumps.
(u) The various mechanisms in use in steam or electric
cranes used for hoisting, slewing, and travelling.


(v) The various kinds of internal combustion engines
and their working parts, whether worked by oil,
town gas, or suction gas, and in the latter case the
construction, maintenance, and working of pro-
ducers and all their accessories, including fittings.
EXAMINATIONS.
52. The examination shall be conducted partly by means
of written or printed papers, and partly viva voce, at the
discretion of the Board of Examiners.
The examination shall be essentially of a practical char-
acter.
In the examination papers the possible number of marks
obtainable for each answer shall be stated.
53. The following instructions will be rigidly en-
forced:—
(a) Examination shall commence at 9.30 a.m. on the ad-
vertised dates. Candidates shall be in their places
five minutes before the time fixed. After this time
no candidate shall be admitted unless under very
exceptional circumstances, and by express permis-
sion of the examiners. Provided always that no
person who has seen the examination paper shall
have previously left the room. No candidate shall
under any circumstances whatever be permitted to
leave before the expiration of one half-hour from
the time of the examination paper being given out.
No writing paper, blotting paper, books, or manu-
scripts are allowed to be brought into the examina-
tion room.
(b) Any candidate who arrives at the examination room
with books, papers, or manuscripts in his posses-
sion, whether referring to the subject of examina-
tion or not, must give them up at the door of the
examination room before taking his place.
(c) Silence shall be maintained, and no communication,
by word or otherwise, between candidates will be
allowed during the examination. If any candidate
wishes to communicate with the examiners he must
stand up in his place.
(d) Any candidate violating any of these Regulations, or
behaving in a disorderly manner in or about the
examination room, will be required to immediately


leave the building; and the Board may subse-
quently consider the candidate to have failed in
his examination.
(e) The candidate must write on one side only of the
paper provided and lay each sheet when finished
face downwards, and must take care that no other
candidate shall have any opportunity of copying
therefrom. Candidates will be held responsible if
their written papers are exposed in such a manner
that they may be copied by any other candidate. If
the examiners are convinced that copying or col-
lusion has taken place between two candidates,
both candidates shall be liable to be disqualified.
(f) On the first page of each paper a candidate must
write the date and place of examination. He must
also write on every sheet his name in full. When
he has completed his written answers, he is to
fasten them together at the left-hand top corner,
number them consecutively, and hand them to one
of the examiners.
(g) In answer to arithmetical questions all workings
must be shown, and no credit will be given where
this is not done.
(h) Warning will be given ten (10) minutes before the
time fixed for giving up papers. When the papers
are called for, everyone is to cease work imme-
diately.
(i) Places will be allotted to the candidates by the exam-
iners. All writing materials and paper fasteners
for connecting the written papers will be provided
by the Department.
54. Candidates will be allowed to cancel or revise any
part of their work during the time allotted for examination.
55. The members of the Board shall have equal juris-
diction as to the questions set, and shall be equally respon-
sible for those set.
56. The minimum marks required will be stated on each
examination paper.


Reed
Regd. No
First Schedule.
Western Australia.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
(office use only.)
APPLICATION FOR A* CERTIFICATE OF
COM PETENCY.
Date 19
To the Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Perth.
Sir,
1. I beg to apply for a* Certificate of Com-
petency and hereby give notice that it is my intention to present myself
at the next examination at (subject to the approval of
the Board of Examiners) and I hereby desire to be notified of the exact date
of such examination.
2. I enclose herewith! for the sum of Ten shillings
being the fee required by the Regulations for this application. I also enclose
evidence of my experience, sobriety, and general good conduct.
3. Copies of Certificates and Testimonials are attached hereto for
record purposes, and originals of same are forwarded for perusal and return.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Signature of Applicant
Postal Address
Noth. —ln order to save inconvenience and delay, each applicant is re-
quested to carefully peruse and rigidly adhere to the Regulations relating
to the certificate applied for before forwarding his application.
* Insert here “Winding Engine-driver’s,” “First Class Engine-driver’s,”
“Second Class Engine-driver’s,” “Third Class Engine-driver’s,” “Locomotive
and Traction Engine-driver’s,” “Locomotive Engine-driver’s,” “Traction
Engine-driver’s,” “Crane and Hoist-driver’s,” “Internal Combustion Engine-
driver’s,” or “Boiler Attendant’s.”
t Insert here “Cash,” “Money Order,” “Postal Note,” or “Cheque.”


STATEMENT OF PARTICULARS.
1. Xame of Applicant (in full)
i
2. Place of Birth of Applicant (town and
country)
Date of Birth
2
3 Indicate your most recent experience with
the class of Engine or Boiler for which
you require a certificate, giving brief
description, maker’s name, internal
diameter of cylinder, and, in the case
of a Boiler, maker’s name, type, and
leading dimensions and the place whore
Engine or Boiler is erected
3
4. Xame and address of any person to whom
reference may be made, if necessary, for
verification of above particulars
4
5. Have you previously failed for the certifi-
cate for which you are now applying ?
No.
Class, and whether
Competency or
Service.
Date.
Where granted.
By whom granted.
(To be carefully filled in and signed by Applicant.)
Applicant to state hereunder particulars of Certificates granted him by any
duly constituted authority.
STATUTORY DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY APPLICANT.
I, , of in the State of
VYestern Australia, do solemnly and sincerely declare that the above is a true
and faithful statement of the particulars required, and I make this solemn
declaration by virtue of Section 106 of “The Evidence Act, 1906.”
Made and signed before me, at 1
this day of {-Signature
19.... I
IMPORTANT.
Is. Revenue Stamp
tx) to be affixed by
Magistrate or J.P. J
a applicant.


Second Schedule.
Western Australia.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE.
To tlie Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Perth.
(Place)
(Date) 19
I, being a duly qualified Medical Practitioner registered in this State,
have this day examined Mr and I am satisfied
that his
Hearing is
Eyesight is
‘Colour Vision is
and that he is not subject to any disease or physical deformity likely to in-
terfere with the efficient discharge of the duties of an engine-driver.
Further remarks
Signature of Medical Practitioner
Address
* This item only necessary in case of Locomotive Engine-drivers.


Third Schedule.
Western Australia.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
Kecd
Regd. No
(OFFICE USE ONLY.)
APPLICATION FOR AN INTERIM CERTIFICATE
To the Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Perth.
Sir,
1. I beg to apply for a* Interim Certificate
which will entitle me to the same privileges as a certificate of the same
status under “The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.”
2. I enclose herewith) for the sum of Ten shillings,
being the prescribed fee for this application and the granting of an interim
certificate. I also enclose evidence of my experience, sobriety, and general
good conduct.
3. Copies of certificates and testimonials are attached hereto for record
purposes, and originals of same are forwarded for perusal and return.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signature of Applicant)
Postal Address
Note. —In addition to the particulars required over the leaf, the applicant
must furnish satisfactory evidence that he is still competent to
practise as an Engine-driver or Boiler Attendant within the State
or Colony wherein certificate or certificates were granted.
* Insert here class of certificate required.
t Insert here “Cash,” “Money Order,” “Postal Note,” or “Cheque.”


STATEMENT OF PARTICULARS.
1. Name in full
2. Place of Birth (town or country)
Date of Birth
3. Name of Mine, Factory, or other place
where applicant has been acting as an
Engine Driver or Boiler Attendant
3
4. Length and nature of service of applicant
No.
Class, and whether
Competency or
Service.
Date.
Where granted.
By whom granted.
(To be carefully filled in and signed by Applicant.)
Applicant to state hereunder particulars of certificates granted him by
any duly constituted authority outside the State.
STATUTORY DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY APPLICANT.
I, ,of ,'in the State of
Western Australia, do solemnly and sincerely declare that the above is a true
and faithful statement of the particulars required; and I make this solemn
declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue of
Section 106 of “The Evidence Act, 1906.”
Made and signed before me, at ]
this day of
19.... J
Magistrate or J.P. important.
Is. Revenue Stamp
to be affixed by
applicant.


Xo.
Class, and whether
Competency or
Service.
Date.
Where granted
and under what
Act.
Place and Date
of Birth of
Applicant.
Fourth Schedule.
Western Australia.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
Reed
Regd. No
(OFFICE USE ONLY.)
APPLICATION FOR COPY OF CERTIFICATE.
Place
Date 19....
To the Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Perth.
I beg to apply for a copy of my engine-driver’s certificate, particulars
of which are appended hereunder; —
PARTICULARS OP LOST CERTIFICATE.
I hereby declare that such certificate has been*
I enclose herewith) for the sum of Seven shillings and six-
pence (10s. 6d. if a copy has been previously issued), being the fee pre-
scribed by the Regulations for this application and the granting of a copy.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Signature ..
STATUTORY DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY APPLICANT.
I, (Pull Name) , of (Postal Address) ,
iu the State of Western Australia, do solemnly and sincerely declare that
the above is a true and faithful statement of the particulars required, and
I make this solemn declaration by virtue of Section 106 of “The Evidence
Act, 1906.”
Made and signed before me, at ,1
this dav of }■ Signature
19.... ‘ J
Magistrate or J.P. important.
Is. Revenue Stamp
to be affixed by
applicant.
* Here state whether certificate was lost, stolen, or destroyed by fire or
otherwise, and give circumstances in connection with such loss.
f Insert here “Cash,” “Money Order,” “Postal Note,” or “Cheque.”


Particulars of Certificate now held.
Place and Date
of Birth of
Applicant.
No.
Class and whether
Competency or
Service.
Date.
Where granted
and under what
Act.
Reed
Regd. N0..'....
(office use only.)
Fifth Schedule.
Western Australia.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
APPLICATION FOR A TRANSFER CERTIFICATE.
To the Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Perth.
Place
Date 19....
I, (Name in Full) , Engine-driver of (Postal
Address , in the State of Western Australia, do hereby make
application for a Transfer Certificate under Section 62, Subsection 3, of
“The Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.”
I enclose herewith my original Engine-driver’s Certificate for cancel-
lation, particulars of which are appended.
I also enclose herewitht for the sum of Ten shillings,
being the fee prescribed by the Regulations for this application, and the
granting of an equivalent certificate under “The Inspection of Machinery
Act, 1921.”
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Signature of Applicant
f Insert here “Cash,” “Money Order,” “Postal Note,” or Cheque.”


Sixth Schedule.
Western Australia.
Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921.
Reed
Regd. No
(OFFICE USE ONLY.)
APPLICATION FOR A RECIPROCITY CERTIFICATE.
(Under Section 60.)
Date 19....
To the Chief Inspector of Machinery,
Perth.
Sir,
1. I beg to apply for a* Certificate, and I enclose my
existing certificate as herein described, together with documentary evidence
of experience, and testimonials as to sobriety and general good conduct.
2. I also enclose herewith) for the sum of One pound
being the prescribed fee for this application and the granting of a Recip-
rocity Certificate.
3. Copies of Certificates and Testimonials are attached hereto for re-
cord purposes, and originals of same are forwarded for perusal and return.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Signature of Applicant
Postal Address
Note. — In order to save inconvenience and delay, each applicant is requested
to carefully peruse and rigidly adhere to the Regulations relating
to the Certificate applied for before forwarding his application.
* Insert here class of Certificate required.
t Insert here “Cash,” “Money Order,” “Postal Note,” or “Cheque.”


STATEMENT OF PARTICULARS.
1. Name of Applicant (in full)
1
2. Place of Birth of Applicant (town and
country)
Date of Birth
2
3. State class of engine or boiler you have
driven or been in charge of, giving
internal diameter of cylinder
If a winding engine, state whether first
motion or geared, and type of brakes.
In the case of a boiler, mention type
and approximate dimensions
State where above were erected
3
i. Name and address of any person to whom
reference may be made, if necessary,
for verification of above particulars
Xo.
Class, and whether Com-
petency or Service.
Date.
Where granted.
By whom granted.
(To be carefully filled in and signed by Applicant.)
Applicant to state hereunder particulars of Certificate submitted herewith.
STATUTORY DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY APPLICANT.
I, of , in the State of Western
Australia, do solemnly and sincerely declare that the above is a true and
faithful statement of the particulars required, and I make this solemn de-
claration by virtue of Section 106 of “The Evidence Act, 1906.”
Made and signed before me, at ,1
this day of Signature
19.... J
IMPORTANT.
Is. Revenue Stamp
' ‘ ‘''''' " ’ ’' to be affixed bv
Magistrate or J.F. ~
® applicant.


Seventh Schedule.
FEES.
£ s. d.
Fee to be paid with application for any certificate, other than an
Interim, a Transfer, a Reciprocity Certificate as defined in
Regulation 40, or a Copy which are provided for hereunder .... 0 10 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of a Winding, or First Class Certi-
ficate of Competency .... .... .... .... .... .... 1 10 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of a Second Class Certificate of
Competency .... .... .... 10 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of a Third Class Certificate of
Competency .... .... .... .... .... 0 15 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of a Locomotive and Traction
Engine-driver’s Certificate of Competency (or Locomotive
Engine-driver’s Certificate only) .... .... 1 10 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of a Traction Driver’s Certificate
(only) of Competency .... .... .... .... .... .... 10 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of a Crane and Hoist Driver’s
Certificate of Competency or Service .... .... .... .... 10 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of an Internal Combustion Engine-
driver’s Certificate of Competency or Service .... .... 1 0 0
Fee to be paid on the granting of a Boiler Attendant’s Certificate
of Competency or Service .... .... .... 0 10 0
Fee to be paid for application and the granting of a Reciprocity
Certificate as defined in Regulation 40 .... .... .... 1 0 0
Fee to be paid for application and the granting of an Interim
Certificate .... .... .... .... .... .... 0 10 0
Fee to be paid for application and the granting of a Transfer
Certificate .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 0 10 0
Fee to be paid for application to have a restriction removed from
any restricted certificate .... .... .... .... .... .... 0 10 0
Fee to be paid for granting of a certificate in lieu of the restricted
one .... .... .... 0 10 0
Fee to be paid for granting of a first copy of any lost or destroyed
certificate .... .... .... .... .... .... 0 7 6
Fee to be paid for granting of any subsequent copy .... .... 0 10 6
Fee to be paid for making a true copy of testimonials (if re-
quired) .... .... .... .... .... .... 0 2 6
Fee to be paid for copy of Engine-driver’s regulations, including
postage .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 0 10
Fee to be paid for copy of Inspection of Machinery Act, 1921, and
Regulations .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 0 2 6
Note.—For all fees remitted, a receipt on the official machine-numbered
form should be obtained in every instance, and no other will be
recognised.
If fee paid by cheque bank exchange must be added.


HINTS DEALING WITH THE DUTIES OF A BOILER
ATTENDANT.
Keep the water in boiler at a uniform level; a varying
water level tends to uneconomical results. Water gauges
should be tested every morning before starting, or after any
stoppage. They should also be frequently tested while boiler
is at work. Every cock should be used at each testing.
If water rises slowly in the glass, passages should be
cleaned out with a piece of wire.
These should have constant attention so that there may
be no risk of shortness of water. Pumps should be kept going
slowly all the time so as to keep water at a uniform level.
If from any cause it is suspected that the water has be-
come so seriously low that there is danger of the furnace
crown being uncovered, first close the damper, or shut off the
fuel supply in the case of boilers fired by oil or pulverised
fuel; then close the stop valve to prevent further loss of
water by evaporation, also, where the boiler is one of a nest
not fitted with self-closing isolating valves, to minimise the
danger should the furnace collapse; it is not advisable to ease
the safety valves as this would further lower the water level.
If the furnace crown is not visibly red, the fire may be
smothered with sand, earth, ashes or even slack coal, attempt-
ing to draw the fire may often increase the temperature,
though it might be necessary in the case of wood fuel to draw
some of it to permit the fire being smothered effectively. Do
not make any sudden change in the feed supply, but
gradually increase it to the full amount available.
If the furnace crown is red and likely to collapse, shut the
damper, isolate the boiler if one of a nest, then warn all per-
sons in the vicinity to seek a place of safety.
In any case, send for the engineer or other person in
charge of the steam plant, as early as possible.
Fusible plugs must be kept clean from soot on fire side
and scale on water side. The fusible metal should be renewed
if at any time it appears to be getting brittle when scraped
with a knife. It is generally a good practice to renew the
metal yearly.
See that all fittings are kept in good and efficient working
order. Care should be taken to see that blow-off cocks are
properly closed after using them, and are not leaking. All


fittings should be taken apart and thoroughly overhauled
twice a year’, when the connecting bolts, studs, etc., should be
carefully examined and renewed if corroded or otherwise
defective.
Manhole and mudhole joints should be kept scrupulously
tight. Very slight leakages from these doors can cause
serious corrosion of the surrounding plates.
The interior of all boilers should be kept as free from
scale and deposit as possible, and the plates in external flues
and flue tubes kept free from soot. A dirty boiler is a waste-
ful boiler, and is always more difficult to fire than a clean one.
It is important that cleaning should be very complete
when preparing a boiler for inspection. It is impossible to
detect defects through thick scale or a layer of soot.
The principal fittings, such as safety valves, should, if
required, be taken to pieces for inspection, and shall be
thoroughly overhauled, when found necessary, before restart-
ing the boiler.
The boiler should not be emptied under steam pressure.
Whenever possible the water should be allowed to remain in
the boiler till everything, including the brickwork setting, is
cool. This prevents the comparatively soft scale being baked
hard on the plate and makes it much more easily removable.
Never close a boiler until satisfied that no bags, tools,
etc., are left in, and always see that all openings such as
blow-off, safety valve, stop valve, check valve, and passages
to glass water gauges are clear.
When once the safety valves have been properly adjusted
to relieve at the authorised working pressure, no extra
weights must be hung on levers, nor must a direct spring-
loaded valve be screwed down. If the valve leaks it should be
ground in or otherwise repaired.
The fuel should be evenly spread, special care being taken
to avoid “holes in the fire,” i.e., bare patches of grate
bars. Any cracks in the brickwork or other casing material
should be luted up with fireclay or otherwise stopped. Such
cracks allow cold air to enter, and tend to destroy the
draught and greatly interfere with economical firing. Larger
charges of fuel are not so effective as smaller quantities in-
troduced more frequently.
Bars should be kept clear of clinker or they will quichly
burn out. The clinker also prevents proper supply of air to
that part of the grate it forms on.


Every intelligent boiler attendant should remember that
the fuel for a large boiler runs into several hundred pounds
a year, and that careless stoking may easily increase this
amount very considerably and is perfectly certain to throw
a lot of extra work on himself. The actual firing should be
done as rapidly as possible, and of course judiciously, and
the fire door kept open for the shortest possible periods.
Fires should be regulated by the damper, and not by open-
ing the fire door. Dense smoke is always a sign of uneconom-
ical firing. Entire absence of smoke may, on the other hand,
mean that too much air is being admitted through the grids in
doors. The best results with the least labour are obtained
when the boiler is discharging a light smoke. Most fuels
require some extra air through the grids after firing. This,
however, should be reduced as soon as the fresh charge is
properly alight.
Grease of any kind should be carefully excluded from
boilers. Serious overheating of furnace plates is likely to
occur if even a very little grease finds it way into the boiler.
If grease is carried over from the condenser into hotwell and
thence to boiler and is detected in the boiler while cleaning,
the matter should be reported to owner so that he may take
means to prevent it.
The proper place to treat feed water is before it enters
the boiler, but if there be no means of doing this great care
should be used in the choice of a boiler fluid or composition.
Some of these are not only ineffective but injurious in their
action.
Where feed water is very sedimentary or corrosive,
efforts should be made to procure a purer supply, or, failing
this, the water should be analysed, with a view of finding the
best way of treating it.
Generally speaking, it is quite safe to introduce a few
handfuls of common washing soda (or a lesser quantity of
soda ash) per day with a view of softening the scale and
neutralising any acidity in the water. The effect of any given
quantity should be noted and the supply regulated accord-
ingly.
Opening steam valves should be done carefully, other-
wise serious damage may occur through “water hammer.”
All drain cocks on cylinders and any drain cocks on low-lying


parts of the steam pipes or at stop valves should be opened,
and when all water has ceased running from them the stop
valve on the boiler may be slowly opened a little, gradually
increasing the opening as cylinders and pipes become warm
enough to prevent excessive condensation.
If a stop valve is suddenly opened to a range of pipes
containing a lot of condensed water a series of violent ex-
plosive knocks is heard, and these frequently result in the
destruction of joints and sometimes split the pipes. All
steam pipe lines should be efficiently drained, and it should
be remembered that “steam traps,” though quite efficient for
this purpose when pipes are in use and full of steam, are
entirely inoperative when the pipes are closed and have a lot
of water in them.
A boiler attendant has many opportunities to either
waste or save considerable sums in the course of a year for
his employer, and it should be his aim to take an intelligent
interest in his work and become as efficient as possible, and
having done so he will find that his work is less arduous than
if performed in a careless or indifferent manner, and in
addition to this, his services will be fully appreciated.


HINTS ON FIRST AID IN CASES OF ELECTRIC
SHOCK.
1. If the victim is still in contact with the live conductor,
separate him as quickly as possible, and in doing so avoid
receiving a shock yourself.
2. If there is a switch near the scene of the accident,
the quickest and safest way to break the circuit is to open
the switch.
3. If no switch be handy, use a dry rope, coat, stick, or
any other dry non-conductor, to move either the victim or
the live wire. Be careful not to use any metal instrument or
moist clothing. If necessary to use your hands cover them
with rubber gloves, if handy, a mackintosh coat, or any other
dry clothing, and, if possible, use only one hand; and seize
victim by the coat tail, or other loose part of his clothing.
Avoid touching boots; the nails are dangerous. If it he neces-
sary to cut a live wire, if possible use an axe. If ordinary
cutting pliers have to be used insulate hands thoroughly, and
stand on a rubber mat or dry board.
4. Send for the nearest doctor as soon as the accident
occurs.
5. If breathing has ceased, as soon as victim is clear of
conductor, feel with your finger in his mouth and remove any
foreign body, such as false teeth. Then begin artificial
respiration at once. Every moment of delay is serious.
6. Lay the patient on his belly with his arms stretched
out before him as far as possible. Place his head slightly to
one side, so that the nose and mouth are free, and get some
one to draw forward the patient’s tongue. Keep the crowd
off, as they diminish the fresh air supply.
7. Kneel on the ground straddling the patient’s legs,
and facing his head. Place the palms of your hands on the
muscles of the small of the back, with thumbs nearly touching
each other, and fingers spread round the lower ribs. Then,
with the arms held straight, swing forward slowly from the
knees so that the weight of your body is brought to bear on
the patient gradually (take from two to three seconds for this
movement). This action compresses the chest and abdomen,


and forces air out of the lungs. Then immediately swing hack,
releasing all pressure, but keeping your hands in place. The
elasticity of the ribs, etc., causes the chest to expand and the
lungs are filled with air.
8. Repeat these operations about 15 times per minute, so
that a complete respiration is made every four or five seconds.
An assistant in the meantime should rapidly loosen all
clothing round neck, waist, and chest. Keep patient covered
with loose warm clothing, and place hot water bottles along
each side, being careful to see that these are not in contact
with the skin or severe burning may result.
9. Continue above process if necessary for at least an
hour without interruption, until natural breathing is restored.
When this occurs, watch the breathing carefully, and if there
are any signs of it stopping start the operations again.
10. Do not on any account give the patient any liquids
until he is fully conscious.


HINTS ON FIRST AID IN CASE OF BEING OVERCOME
BY AMMONIA FUMES.
On going to the rescue of a person overcome by ammonia
fumes, remember that ammonia gas is lighter than air, and
therefore the closer to the floor you can keep the better. Place
a wet sponge or cloth over the mouth and nostrils before going
into the room where gas has escaped.
Get the patient out as quickly as possible into fresh air.
Inhalation of ammonia gas causes severe spasm of the
glottis, and often prevents respiration. In case breathing has
ceased or almost ceased send at once for a doctor, and place
the patient’s head over a vessel of boiling water, in which a
teaspoonful of acetic acid or, failing this, some very strong
vinegar has been poured, or if there is a branch steam pipe
available turn on a small jet so as to create a steamy atmos-
phere, sprinkle a little acetic acid over the steam jet, and try
and get patient to inhale this.
If there is still difficulty in breathing, oxygen may be
administered and artificial respiration should be resorted to
at once. (For instructions re method of producing artificial
respiration see below.)
If the eyes are badly affected pour a one per cent, solu-
tion of pure boric acid into them, instructing the patient to
open and close the lids so as to flood the whole eye, and after
this apply vaseline under the lids.
If the skin be severely “burnt” apply lint or muslin
soaked in carron oil (pure linseed or olive oil and lime water
mixed in equal proportions and well shaken).
If the patient is not badly gassed, and is able to breathe
freely, relief will be obtained by sniffing very dilute acetic
acid or vinegar up the nose.
As the effects of inhaling ammonia gas may seriously
affect the lungs, it is always advisable to consult a doctor,
even in cases where the effects do not appear to be imme-
diately serious.


Directions relating to the best method of producing
Artificial Respiration.
1. Lay the patient on his belly with his arms stretched
out before him as far as possible. Place his head slightly to
one side, so that the nose and mouth are free, and get some
one to draw forward the patient’s tongue. Keep off the
crowd, as they diminish the fresh air supply.
2. Kneel on the ground straddling the patient’s legs,
and facing his head. Place the palms of your hands on the
muscles of the small of the back, with thumbs nearly touching
each other, and fingers spread round the lower ribs. Then,
with the arms held straight, swing forward slowly from the
knees so that the weight of your body is brought to bear on
the patient gradually (take from two to three seconds for this
movement). This action compresses the chest and abdomen,
and forces air out of the lungs. Then immediately swing back,
releasing all pressure, but keeping your hands in place. The
elasticity of the ribs, etc., causes the chest to expand and the
lungs are filled with air.
3. Repeat these operations about 15 times per minute, so
that a complete respiration is made every four or five seconds.
An assistant in the meantime should rapidly loosen all
clothing round neck, waist, and chest. Keep patient covered
with loose warm clothing, and place hot water bottles along
each side, being careful to see that these are not in contact
with the skin or severe burning may result.
4. Continue above process if necessary for at least an
hour without interruption, until natural breathing is restored.
When this occurs, watch the breathing carefully, and if there
are any signs of it stopping start the operations again.
5. Do not on any account give the patient any liquids
until he is fully conscious.


HINTS ON FIRST AID IN CASE OF POISONING FROM
PRODUCER GAS.
■ The poisonous constituent of “producer gas” is carbon
monoxide (CO) before it is burnt to carbon dioxide, and care
must be taken that unburnt gas is not inhaled.
As the gas has little or no smell the greatest care should
be taken to prevent any possible source of leakage from
joints, or cocks on engines or producers, or from pipes con
veying the gas.
Special care should be taken not to enter any part of the
plant before the gas has been completely expelled. When
cleaning and repairing engines, opening up scrubbers, etc.,
sufficient time must be allowed for all gas to escape before
working near any possible source of danger.
Perfect ventilation should be provided in all engine-rooms
or sheds where producers are erected.
No person should be allowed to work single handed where
exposure to poisonous gas is anticipated, and, in case of
accident, rescue work should be done by a man round whose
waist a rope is attached, and the other end of which is held by
a mate.
The first symptoms produced by breathing carbon mon-
oxide are throbbing of the blood vessels of the head, giddi-
ness, palpitation of the heart, and weakness in the legs.
These symptoms become greatly aggravated after any exer-
tion. Owing to the insidious onset and the cumulative effect
of the gas, leg weakness may come on without attracting
notice, and the person affected may not be able to make his
escape. If any such symptdms are felt the person affected
should at once be moved into fresh warm air, when in slight
cases the symptoms will quickly disappear. Exposure to cold
must be avoided, as this aggravates the symptoms. Walking
or other physical exertion should not be undertaken too soon
after recovery.
If any person becomes insensible or seriously ill through
gas he should at once be removed into fresh warm air, and a
medical practitioner should be sent for.


The First Aid Remedies are fresh air, warmth, artificial
respiration (if breathing has ceased), and administration of
oxygen. In bad cases artificial respiration should be per-
sisted in for at least an hour. Cases have occurred where
respiration has been restored after much longer periods than
an hour. It is therefore necessary to provide relays of
workers, so that the process of artificial respiration may be
continuously kept up until recovery takes place or until the
doctor pronounces the case hopeless. (For instructions re,
method of producing artificial respiration see below.)
Headache, anaemia, and defective nutrition may result
from the long continued breathing of this gas in quantities
too small to procure immediate serious effects. In such a case
the affected person should place himself under medical treat-
ment, and if possible get a change of work.
Many manufacturers send out routine instructions with
a view of minimising danger. These are usually worded
somewhat as follows: —
(1) Starting.—The main stop valve must be shut and
the chimney valve opened, otherwise the gas will
escape into the room owing to the pressure set up
by the fan.
(2) Stopping.—As soon as the stop valve of the engine
is shut the chimney valve must be opened at once
so as to allow the gas to escape into the open air.
(The chimney should be carried well up and out-
side the building, and should be so placed as to
avoid the chance of gas being blown through win-
dows of factories or adjacent dwellings.)
(3) Charging.—The operator’s head must never be
placed immediately above the hopper opening.
(4) Testing.—All air must be drawn out of the scrubbers
and pipe before any light is applied, so as to avoid
risk of explosion; the testing cock, which should
be protected with fine wire gauze, should always
be kept closed between tests.
(5) Cleaning and Repairing.—After the fire is quite out
air must be blown through by the fan and genera-
tor doors left open; the plant must be then left for
several hours before any cleaning is done. Clean-
ing should be performed by daylight, and no fire,
naked light, or smoking should be allowed near the
plant.


Directions relating to the best method of producing
Artificial Respiration.
1. Lay the patient on his belly with his arms stretched
out before him as far as possible. Place his head slightly to
one side, so that the nose and mouth are free, and get some
one to draw forward the patient’s tongue. Keep off the
crowd, as they diminish the fresh air supply.
2. Kneel on the ground straddling the patient’s legs,
and facing his head. Place the palms of your hands on the
muscles of the small of the back, with thumbs nearly touching
each other, and fingers spread round the lower ribs. Then,
with the arms held straight, swing forward slowly from the
knees so that the weight of your body is brought to bear on
the patient gradually (take from two to three seconds for this
movement). This action compresses the chest and abdomen,
and forces air out of the lungs. Then immediately swing back,
releasing all pressure, but keeping your hands in place. The
elasticity of the ribs, etc., causes the chest to expand and the
lungs are filled with air.
3. Repeat these operations about 15 times per minute, so
that a complete respiration is made every four or five seconds.
An assistant in the meantime should rapidly loosen all
clothing round neck, waist, and chest. Keep patient covered
with loose warm clothing, and place hot water bottles along
each side, being careful to see that these are not in contact
with the skin or severe burning may result.
4. Continue above process if necessary for at least an
hour without interruption, until natural breathing is restored.
When this occurs, watch the breathing carefully, and if there
are any signs of it stopping start the operations again.
5. Do not on any account give the patient any liquids
until he is fully conscious.


NOTES FOR THE GUIDANCE OF EMPLOYEES
AND ENGINE-DRIVERS.
“750 square inches area” is the nearest equivalent of a
cylinder 31 inches in diameter, or of two cylinders each 21%
inches diameter. (Limit of Second Class Certificate.)
“114 square inches area” is the nearest equivalent of a
cylinder 12 inches diameter, or of two cylinders each
inches diameter. (Limit of Third Class Certificate.)
“200 square inches area” is the nearest equivalent of a
cylinder 16 inches diameter, or of two cylinders each 11%
inches diameter.
“100 square inches area” is the nearest equivalent of a
cylinder 11% inches diameter, or of two cylinders each 8
inches diameter.
If the area of the cylinder or combined area of the cylin-
ders of any internal combustion engine does not exceed 200
square inches, it is not compulsory under the Act that the
driver should hold an Internal Combustion Engine-driver’s
Certificate.
If, however, a driver of an internal combustion engine
with lesser cylinder area desires to obtain a certificate, he can
do so, provided he can produce evidence as required, that he
has practised on an engine the area of the cylinder of which
exceeds 100 square inches. (See Regulations 5 (d) and 34
(c).)
Reprinted by Authority: Pbed. Wm. Simpson, Government Printer, Perth.
