

INSTRUCTIONS
ISSUED BY
The Geographical Society of Australasia
FOR THE GUIDANCE OF
THE NEW GUINEA EXPLORATION
EXPEDITION.
Sydney, June 12tii, 1885.
SYDNEY;
F. CUNNINGHAMS & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
146 Pitt Street.
1885.




INSTRUCTIONS
ISSUED BY
The Geographical Society of Australasia
FOR THE GUIDANCE OF
THE NEW GUINEA EXPLORATION
EXPEDITION.
Sydney, June 12th, 1885.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAMS & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
146 Pitt Street.
± S S 5.




INSTRUCTIONS
ISSUED BY
THE GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA
FOR THE GUIDANCE OF
THE NEW GUINEA EXPLORATION EXPEDITION.
Sydney, June 12th, 1885.
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA,
142 Phillip Street,
Sydney, 10th June, 1885.
Captain Everill, Leader of the Expedition to New Guineao f
the Geographical Society of Australasia.
Dear Sir —lt is with much pleasure that I announce to
you, previous to your departure in command of the very
important exploratory expedition to New Guinea, that you take
with you the full confidence of both Councils of the Victorian
and New South Wales branches of the Society, as to your fitness
for the office to which you have been appointed. Their confidence
is based chiefly upon the excellent certificates which you have
produced, the high character which you bear in this community,
and your experience in tropical exploration.
Addressing myself now to you, as the mouthpiece of the
Councils already alluded to, I wish you clearly to understand that,
whilst we are unwilling to hamper you with many detailed
instructions, yet, bearing in mind the great power placed in your
hands over those associated with you in the expedition, and over
the property and interests of the Society, we feel sure that you
will hereafter afford proof, by the success of the expedition, that
our confidence is not misplaced, and that you are well able to bear
the heavy burden of responsibility which you have undertaken.


In so far as the united funds available to us have permitted,
we have supplied you liberally with experienced scientific and
other assistance, all subject to your own approval, and with stores
selected also at your suggestion ; the steam launch has also been
specially chosen by you, as well as the whale-boat, which, it is
hoped, may prove a valuable addition in the work of exploring
rivers or creeks.
Thus liberally supplied with men and all necessary means to
carry on the work of exploration, the Society looks forward with
some certainty to a great success, and abundant additions to our
present limited knowledge of New Guinea, geographically and
otherwise.
The Society is of opinion that the acquiring of accurate
knowledge of tlm geography of the new country you are about to
enter is of primary importance ; it will therefore be your duty to
map out with care all the new country through which you may
pass, noticing the physical formation of such country, such as the
rivers, mountains, and other important features.
An ample supply of material requisite for the preservation
of specimens of Natural History and Botany, has been furnished
to you, and as it will be impossible to replenish such materials
whilst away from civilization, they should be husbanded with
great care. The same economy will be exercised in regard to all
stores placed under your charge, and it will be your duty to
watch over the expenditure of all stores and supplies with a very
watchful eye, and to impress upon every one serving under your
orders the necessity of the practice of strict economy. This
economical and conservative spirit should be enforced from the
very day of starting, and it should never be lost sight of that it
may easily occur that the whole success of the expedition may
become dependent upon the advice now given being acted upon
in its true spirit and reality. A scale of rations should be laid
down before } r ou embark, and this should be strictly adhered
to, except under medical advice or pressing emergency, the
reality of each case being left entirely to your decision.
To one accustomed to command men, it can hardly be neces-
sary to refer to the imperative necessity of using the authority
placed in your hands at all times with equal firmness and discre-
tion. I feel an inward conviction that there is not one amongst
those who have volunteered to serve under you who will not be
ready himself to yield an implicit obedience to your just orders,
and to encourage in others the same spirit, and all will recognise
at all times the danger to the whole expedition if ever any
departure is permitted from this great golden principle.


More formal instructions will be given to you in another
paper, the object of this somewhat informal communication beino-
to place before you briefly the leading features of the important
duties and responsibilities which have fallen to your lot, and to
impress upon you some points which my own experience has
taught me, may, though small of themselves, be made to exercise
m the aggregate a great influence over the future of the expe-
dition, if neglected or treated lightly.
Your Journal and Log-book will both be looked for
great anxiety by the Society, and I anticipate much pleasure in
publishing them, and thus securing to our Society an abundant
mead of praise, and to you a highly creditable place in the ranks
of English explorers, who have done so much to promote the
science of geography all over the world.
As regards your correspondence, you should take every
possible care to ensure the Society receiving information as
frequently as possible of your progress and proceedings. You
will receive instructions on this point officially. lam myself of
opinion that the missionaries on the spot, and the Government
Resident at Thursday Island, will be the best channels through
which to keep your expedition in communication with Australia
I hope very much that you may meet Mr. Forbes at Thursday
Island or Port Moresby, or elsewhere. It cannot fail to be of
great consequence to the ultimate success of the efforts about to
be made by Mr. Forbes and yourself in the interests of geography,
if you can meet and confer together, with a view to establish
if possible, a co-operative action, before you actually commence
the task of exploration,
It will be very necessary that it be clearly explained to all
under your command, that all specimens collected are the property
of this Society, and they are not authorized to appropriate to
themselves, or to dispose of to others, any portion of what has
been collected by the expedition whilst in the service of the
Society.
Very strict rules should be laid down with reference to the
use of fire-arms, and in preparing these rules one cardinal point
must always be held clearly in view, i.e., it must be insisted upon
that a native must never be fired upon except the life of a
member of the party is in danger. Everyone belonging to the
expedition should be made to feel the necessity of adopting the
spirit of this rule, and putting it in practice himself and enforcing
its practice upon others—one shot fired with a fatal result would


make me feel very despondent as to the success of the expe-
dition, certainly it would immensely increase the difficulties of
exploring. No precaution, therefore, should be omitted to
avoid any such untoward event.
In the matter of trade, a liberal or rather a generous spirit
should, as far as possible, be shewn, thus utilizing the infancy
of commerce as means to advance civilization. Every oppor-
tunity should be availed of to establish a friendly feeling
between the members of the expedition and the natives; efforts
should be made to amuse them, and you cannot impress it too
earnestly upon all under you that the safest and the most
profitable treatment to adopt towards the natives is one of
conciliation, treating them always as children, as Nature’s
children. I am perfectly aware that circumstances may easily
occur where a very opposite course of treatment may be forced
upon you: in such a case I can only counsel firmness and all
forbearance that is consistent with your own safety.
I will conclude this, my farewell letter to you, by reminding
you that a grand field of action is opened to you, a glorious
opportunity is offered to you of acquiring great fame, which
ought, and I am sure will, call for every energy of your nature,
and the vigorous exercise of every ability that God has given
you which may tend to the accomplishment of a triumphant
success, no matter how perilous and apparently insuperable
may be the obstacles opposed to you.
"Of course you clearly understand that nothing in this
informal letter is to be interpreted as cancelling or superseding
the detailed instructions which will be furnished to you and the
members of the party. Each member of the party should,
durum the voyage to New Guinea, make himself thoroughly
intimate with those instructions, as ignorance of orders will not
be accepted as an excuse for neglect of the same.
Believe me to be, Dear Sir,
Very faithfully yours,
(Signed) EDWARD STRICKLAND,
President of the Administrative Council


(seogra{)(rical Soctctn of gjrstralasm.
New South Wales Branch
Sydney, June 12th, 1885
Captain Henry Charles Everill,
Sir, — On the 7th of May yon were advised that this Society
had elected you “to the important position of Leader of the
Society’s New Guinea Exploration Expedition.” Since that date
the preparations for the expedition have been continued carefully
energetically. A scientific staff, including a thoroughly
efficient surgeon, has been chosen; competent sub-leaders have
been selected, as well as several supernumeraries; and eleven
Malays (picked men) have been brought from Java. The
principal appointments have been made after advertising for
applicants in South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and
Queensland, and careful enquiry as to the ability and character
of those selected, and in the selection the Melbourne branch of
the Society has co-operated.
The A. S. N. Company’s steam launch “ Bonito ” has been
chartered for the party, after being selected by you as specially
fitted for the purpose. The Expedition will start well provided
with stores, provisions, trade, firearms and ammunition, scientific
instruments, medicines and medical comforts, all carefully
selected by competent men, and in the purchasing, packing, etc.,
of these articles you have been fully consulted.
Considering the limited funds at the command of the Society’
the Council is well satisfied with the equipment of the Expedition,
and has no doubt, that it is fully equal to the work that is before
it. The “ Bonito ” will be towed to Thursday Island by a steamer
of the A. S. N. Company. On the way you will spend a short
time at Brisbane, and you are furnished with a letter of introduc-
tion to the Colonial Secretary of Queensland, on whom you will
please call, and you are requested to give him any details of the
Expedition that may be of interest to him; and you will thank him
for the consent given to the request made by the Society, that the
Queensland Government would kindly grant the Expedition the
assistance and the honor of the convoy of the steamer “ Advance,”
from Thursday Island to New Guinea. You will also call on


the Postmaster-General, and urge him to grant the request made
to him by letter, that telegrams for, from, or relating to the
Expedition, may have free transmission over the Queensland lines.
You will further arrange with the proper authority that the
Customs Officials at Thursday Island he requested to forego any
formalities that would hamper the Expedition, If at Brisbane, you
find yourself in want of coal, or any other essential article, you will
please obtain it through or of the Agent of the A.S.N. Company,
and for the amount of any such purchase, you will give an order
on the Society. Should necessity of any kind drive the expedition
into any other port before reaching Thursday Island, you will
avail yourself of the presence of the agent of A. S. N. Company
at such port, and reimburse him in the same way for any needful
outlay. Arrived at Thursday Island, you will please call on the
Government Resident, the Hon. J. Douglas, whose good offices
on behalf of the Expedition have already been solicited by the
President, Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.B. Mr. Douglas, being
a member of the Society, you will be likely to receive valuable
assistance from him, should any emergency arise. The 8.1.5. N.
Company’s steamer “ Westminster,” bringing the Malays from
Batavia, will probably have arrived about a week before you.
Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co., kindly instructed their
representatives to take charge of these men, and they will
debit us direct with any expense incurred in relation to
them. It will be advisable for the doctor to examine the
Malays, and should any of them be found physically unfit for
the expedition you will not take them, but will make some
equitable arrangement for their return to Java. In the event of
any of these men being found unfitted for the expedition you
are at liberty to take other men in their place. The agents of
the A.S.N. Co. will supply you with coal and any other necessary.
Before leaving Thursday Island you will (1) make an examina-
tion of the Bonito, her machinery, &c., and make sure that all is
in satisfactory order. (2) You will also arrange with the
Government Resident for letters, news, &c., from, for, or relating
to the Expedition, being forwarded as opportunity may permit.
Mr. Douglas will perhaps kindly consent to undertake to see this
important duty performed. (3) You will see that the stores, &c., &c.
are carefully transhipped to the “ Bonito,” and that the ammuni-
tion is stowed in two or more separate places, protected against
climatic influences or salt water, with waterproof wrappings ; and
you will have the magazines built into the ship, but not so as
to be immovable. (4) You will endeavour to see the captain of
the schooner “ Elsea,” and obtain from him any information he can


give about the Coast of New Guinea, he having had great
expenenee thereof. (5) You will complete arrangement? for
agamS , t hre ' ( 6 l You Wlll g iv e the Nautical Sub-
check them mVentones of all stores > &c -’ &c -> and request him to
You will earnestly impress upon him the serious responsibility
attaching to the position conferred upon him. His duties at all
mes will combine those of chief officer and purser, whilst during
your absence he will also act as master ; he will then have in
ins custody valuable property and records which could not be
replaced and more important still, the stores of various kinds
on which the health and safety of the party may depend. A few
moments o± carelessness on his part might cause a disaster that
would be irreparable. At your early convenience you will give
him a copy of these remarks. 6
On the return of the expedition you will dispose of the
unused stores, provisions and trade, at Thursday Island, if you
can do so to advantage. J
O
You will be good enough to bear in mind that the charter
and insurance of the “ Bonito ” expire on the Bth December ; it is
tlieref ° re that y° u should be back in Sydney before that
The Council has caused the enclosed instructions to be
drawn up and printed, and you are requested to hand at once to
each of the members of the party a copy thereof, with reference
to his special as well as general duties, and to observe the special
v^ ews which have been adopted in connection
with the duties which devolve upon yourself as Leader.
By direction of the Administrative Council.
Your obedient servant,
EDWARD PULSFORD, Secretary.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR LEADER.
The object of the expedition is to ascertain and fix the
geographical features of New Guinea and the nature of its fauna,
flora, geology, and climate, and to illustrate the same by speci-
mens, sketches, photographs and written descriptions. And it is the
primary duty of the Leader to facilitate in every way the accom-
plishment of this object by consulting as far and as frequently
as possible with the members of the Expedition referred to in
regard to the country to be explored, and in all cases of import-
ance and emergency. Nevertheless he is authorized to act at any
time independently of their judgment, but shall enter in his diary
his reasons for so differing.
Should the Leader at any time be incapacitated from duty,
or, if in his discretion it may appear necessary to divide the party
for the purpose of exploration in different directions, he is to
assign his position on board to the Nautical Sub-Leader, and to
Mr. Creagh on the land. The Council, however, desire that such
division of the land party shall not be made except in case of
absolute necessity. In the event of the total incapacity or death
of the Leader, the Nautical Sub-Leader shall assume command;
but Mr. Creagh shall be the leader of any expedition on land.
The Council having decided to make, if possible, the Aird
River the basis of operations of the Expedition, requests the
Leader to proceed thither from Thursday Island.
The Leader shall proceed up the Aird River until he finds a
convenient landing place near to a hill marked on the Admiralty
Chart as Aird Hill.
After leaving a party in charge of the steamer sufficient fo r
its safety and protection, the Leader shall proceed with the rest of
the party, including the scientific staff, to Aird Hill; and if it
be found that that hill forms part of a spur from the Main
Dividing Range in the interior of New Guinea, he will follow up
that spur as closely as he can to that Range. Should he, however,
discover a more practicable route from Aird Hill to the Dividing
Range than by following such spur, he shall take it: the first
named route is suggested to him as the Council desires him to
leave the low lying country, and to direct his attention chiefly to
the exploration of the high lands.
In the event of Aird Hill not forming part of a spur from the
Main Range, the Leader should ascend the first spur that he meets
with on the same side of the river, and follow it up to that
Range.


The Leader will make arrangements for keeping open a
communication in his rear to the steamer as a depot, so that he
may be enabled to make his movements known, transmit from
time to time the scientific objects collected, and receive any stores
required.
The Leader is responsible for the organization and carrying
out all vigilance arrangements in camp and field on which
the safety of the party will so much depend.
He is to endeavor to promote friendly relations with the
natives and to avoid any possible collision with them ; never
resorting to the use of fire-arms for defence except in case of
extreme necessity : as it will be a source of great satisfaction to the
Society if the objects of the Expedition should be attained with-
out loss of life.
The Leader is requested to obtain and note information
regarding the language, habits and customs of the natives ; the
character of their implements and utensils; and, in reference to
their modes of sepulture, what implements, if any, or food, are
buried with their dead, also, whether periodic feasts are held at
the graves, and the traditional object of such customs.
In the event of the route by the Aird River proving im-
practicable, the Leader will choose the first available estuary to
the eastward thereof, and from the depot there formed will proceed
with his land expedition on a similar basis to that laid down in
the case of the Aird—namely, to ascend the first available high
land and work thence to the Main Dividing Range ; to attain
and explore to the furthest possible limit of that range within
the boundary of the British possession beino- the principal object
of the Expedition. J
He is to note the distance and course travelled, and to
describe and fix the position of all the principal physical features
of the country along the line of route, and on either side of it, as
far as practicable : and daily to complete, from his observations, a
feature map of the country traversed, a copy of which may be
furnished to the scientific officers of the party, if desired. He is
to note the number, character, distance apart, and general trend
or fall of all water courses, or drainage channels crossed: the
quality of water, if any, in such courses or channels : the mode
of occurrence of water : springs, lakes, pools, or running streams,
with average depth of the same ; the indications relative to pro-
bable permanence or otherwise of the same: also 'of periodical
floods.
As it is very desirable that the route should be so marked
as to be readily distinguished from those of other expeditions.


the Leader shall mark or cause to be marked on the nearest
large tree at each camp the initial E., with the number of each
camp and the date. This is to be done by removing a sheet
of bark, taking care not to injure the tree, and then by means of
a chisel to make the required mark. Thus, E.—B will indicate
the eighth camp ; 5 | 10 j 85 the date ; the word “ Dig ” will of
course refer to a message buried near the tree.
The Leader is to mark the routes as permanently as
practicable, by building cairns, and marking trees and rocks, at as
many points as possible, consistently with his various other duties;
a record being kept of the marks made in all the more important
places.
Every opportunity should be taken to ascertain the geogra-
phical position of the party by referring it to some well-marked
point, as afforded by an easily recognizable mountain, the junction
of rivers, creeks, etc.
This should be done by astronomical observations, as well as
by dead reckoning. The dead reckoning always to commence
with the last good, reliable astronomical observations made.
The altitude of all the principal hills and valleys crossed to
be noted from aneroid observations.
At every camping place a systematic registration of the
pressure and the temperature of the air should be carried out
The hours of registration are to be as numerous as possible. The
hours 6 a.rn., 9 am., 3 pm., and 9 p.m. being obligatory. The
state and changes of the weather, storms, direction of the wind,
etc., should be daily recorded.
The Leader is to make arrangements for an exact account
# * . .
being taken of the stores and their expenditure, by the persons
in charge of them.
The Leader is to address all his communications, on subjects
connected with the exploration, to the Secretary of the Society,
and all persons acting with him are to forward their communica-
tions through him.
He will cau:e full reports to be furnished on any subject of
interest, and forward them to Sydney as often as may be practi-
cable without retarding the progress of the Expedition.
On the completion of the exploration of the Main Dividing
Range as previously proposed, the Expedition shall return to
Thursday Island for the purpose of delivering under seal into
safe keeping of the Government Resident there, all specimens
and records in their possession. And should time allow of further
exploration of New Guinea, the Leader, after consultation with
the members of the Expedition, shall decide upon the course to be
adopted.


Instructions for the Nautical Sub- Leader.
He shall have charge of and be responsible for the safe
keeping and properly authorised issue of the stores, provisions
trade, arms, ammunition, &c., on board the steamer, and shall keep
a clearly written record of the disposal thereof, so as to be able at
any time to tell the quantities remaining. He shall keep an
account of expenditure. In the absence of the leader, he shall
have sole control of the steamer, and he must carry out to the
smallest detail, the instructions left by the leader. He shall never
relax that vigilant watchfulness, or cease to observe those needful
precautions, which alone can be relied on to effectually prevent a
surprise.
The Nautical Sub-Leader, during absence of Leader and land
party when carrying out any system of river exploration which
may have been determined upon by the Leader, shall leave in a
cache previously pointed out to the party, a clear explanation of
date, direction, and probable duration of 'his absence, in case of
the unexpected return to the depot of any of the party:
Instructions for Mr. Creagh, Sub-Leader on Land.
He shall prepare the equipment of the land party. He shall
assist the Leader in carrying out the details of camping, travellino-
etc, and te responsible that the Leader’s instructions for the safety
and health of the party are carried out. The condition of the
firearms and the safe packing of stores, etc, shall be his special
care. He shall also assist the Leader by his example and vigilance
in preventing surprises by the natives. When on the steamer, in
the absence of the Leader, he will assist the nautical sub-leader in
maintaining discipline, acting in these circumstances under his
orders.
Instructions for the Surgeon.
The duties of the Surgeon shall be to place himself at the
orders of the Leader in reference to station; to have exclusive
charge of the medicine chest and medical comforts of the sick •
and be at liberty to select, with the consent of the Leader’
necessary assistance from among the Malays. In case of necess-
ity the Surgeon shall have the right to claim assistance from any
member of the party, the Leader consenting. The Surgeon shall
keep a clinical record of each case of illness. He shall direct
the work of the botanical collector.


Leader’s Assistant and Photographer.
He shall enter in his note-hook under a given number, a
description of each view taken, with the time of exposure of the
photographic plate: on the plate he is to affix a number corres-
ponding with the number entered in his note-book. He shall
act specially as Leader’s Assistant, as directed from time to time.
Instructions for Zoologist.
The Zoologist is to direct the work of the geological and
zoological collectors, and to receive from them a complete inven-
tory of all specimens collected (the inventory to he kept in dupli-
cate) ; to furnish each collector with numbered labels to affix to
each specimen where possible, the number of each label so affixed
to be entered by the collector in his own note-book ; to see that
the specimens are all properly cured, labelled, packed and stored.
Geology.
Note the occurrence of all rocks, their character and extent,
or the distance travelled over them ; note the nature of the soil
both where rocks occur at the surface, and where they are not
seen.
Where slate, granite, or diorite formations occur, prospect the
gravel where it rests on the bed rock, in the gullies, or beds of
streams for gold, tin ore, gemstones, &c. Collect samples of all
metals and gemstones found.
If quartz reefs, or ironstone, or other metalliferous lodes are
met with, break up some of the stone and wash it for metals,
which, if found, save small samples. Note the compass direction
that the quartz reefs, &c. run in; and whether they traverse
slate, granite, or other formations.
In beds of streams flowing from a locality to which you
have not access, take note of the different kinds of pebbles
that occur; and if possible, collect samples.
Where basalt rock is seen resting upon slate or other forma-
tions, examine if any quartz pebble drift occurs between them;
if it does, wash some of it for gold or tin ore, &c.
If crystalline particles be seen in basalt rock, collect small
samples of them.
If shales or sandstone rocks contains impressions of fossil
leaves, examine the locality for coal. Note the direction in which
the strata dip, and take the angle of dip.


Note the occurrence of all rocks containing fossil plants or
marine shells ; if possible, collect some of the fossils.
In limestone country particularly, fossils are likely to be
seen in the rocks. If caves occur, examine the earth on the floors
tor bones.
Of fossil animals, if any should be noted, it would be very
desirable to secure characteristic specimens.
Collect specimens of different kinds of rocks, and duplicate
specimens if possible. All specimens to be numbered consecutively
and entered with a corresponding number in a book kept for that
purpose, with the locality, height above the sea level, and date of
collection and a short description of each. The numbers also to
be entered in the diary on the day of collection thus :—August
22nd 1885, specimens 1 to 20, stating whether rock, mineral, or
fossil. Describe the surface features, whether undulating preci-
pitous, rocky, mineral, character, &c. of the different formations
Dach specimen to be wrapped separately in paper. The locality
and date of collection to be written in pencil on the wrapping
paper. The specimens not be larger than 2xlxl inches. °
. As geological specimens are difficult to transport owing to
their weighty character, it is desirable that only such as are new or
doubtful should be collected. In all cases the gross weight of the
specimens that are taken must be subject to the approval and
control of the leader. Should it be found necessary to abandon
any specimens, they should be marked off in the catalogue, and
the date and cause of their being so abandoned stated. If fossils,
sketches of them should, if possible, be obtained.
r^.°^ e le P r °bable thickness and relative geological position
of different formations (conformable or otherwise) of igneous
rocks, whether intrusive or contemporaneous. the
different rocks or geological formations crossed on the line of
route, should be marked on a map, to be supplied by the leader.
Collect samples of stone tomahawks (specially to show the
different kinds of stone that they are composed of) and ascertain
f possible, where the natives originally obtained them, or where
the stone came from.
Ascertain whether the natives of one tribe trade with other
tribes for stone-chips, tomahawks, &c., and whether the natives
possess any metals.
Zoology.
The Zoologist, in addition to all general observations which
he may be able to make on all classes of animals that may occur
to him, illustrated by sketches; is particularly required to


ascertain, when possible, the fishes, shells, or articulata occurring
in any stagnant or running waters met with, as these are of
the highest interest in connection with questions of the
geographical distribution of animals.
The larger fishes may be skinned by the removal of one-half
of the fish, leaving the fins of the mid-line perfect. If then
washed with a solution of corrosive sublimate in spirit, the
specimen can be packed flat between papers without injury.
The soft Annelida and small Crustacea, as well as the soft
parts of Mollusca, should be enclosed in vessels of spirits, the
specimens separated by portions of linen cloth to prevent their
being injured by shaking. Paper labels, written with black
lead pencil, will remain uninjured with specimens so packed. As
a general rule every specimen collected should receive one of a
consecutive series of numbers (irrespective of the natural series
of the objects) by which it should be indicated in the journal of
the day, in which the particulars observed about it or illustrative
sketches should appear.
Of Mammalia, the nocturnal ones, as bats, and the small
murine forms (rats, &c.) are specially interesting, and should
receive particular attention.
No opportunity should be lost to obtain, through the officer
in charge of depot, or through reconnoitring parties, additional
specimens of rocks, fossils, minerals, and natural history.
It will be of vast importance to ascertain as extensively as
possible, what relation the vegetation bears to its geological
formation.
The accompanying general directions have been drawn
up to assist the taxidermists in the collection and preserva-
tion of specimens, and should be given to the zoological collectors,
and to each member of the expedition who may be able to
render ssistance to the Zoologist.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE PRESERVATION OF
SPECIMENS OF NATURAL HISTORY.
The Human Race.
In cases where skeletons of aborigines cannot be procured,
the skulls, along with the lower jaw, will prove of great interest
and value to Museums. Any apparent malformation or pecu-
liarities in the formation of the cranium of the various tribes


should be carefully noted; obtain all the information possible re-
specting such occurrences, and whether produced by artificial
means or otherwise.
Mammalia.
Remove all blood-stains if possible, and plug any shot holes
or other bleeding wounds with tow, wadding, or rag; put a plug
of moss or tow in the mouth to keep any blood or other matter
from exuding. Note the shape and colour of the eyes and the
fleshy parts, and the sex. Slit the skin open from about the
centre of the belly downwards to the vent, but in the case of
female marsupials, take care not to cut into the pouch ; or this
may be avoided, by cutting from the chest, between the fore arms
downwards, and making an opening, in all cases large enough to
extract the body; loosen the skin round it with the fingers, or
handle of the knife, being careful not to use the blade more than
is absolutely necessary ; generally the skin will be found to be
easily separated ; now sever the leg from the pelvis bones at the
body, leaving the tail attached to the body, by which it may
be more easily slipped out of the skin ; turn the" skin back, out-
wards, and slip the tail out entire, the skin will then draw ofi
over the back with ease ; sever the fore limbs from the body
with tlce shoulder blades attached to them, and the neck close up
to the back of the skull (at the atlas vertebra); skin the head as
far as the tip of the nose, remove all the flesh from it, take out
the eyes, and remove the brains by enlarging, if necessary, the
opening at the back of the skull; anoint it well, inside and out,
with arsenical soap, and fill out the orbits with tow or wadding,
&c.; clean the limbs, stripping the, skin back as far as the paws :
anoint all the bones and roll a little tow round them to make
up for the amount of flesh removed; the tail often strips easily
enough, but in some animals (as in the Platypus) requires literally
to be cut out, making an incision along one side of it. Anoint
the skin inside well all over with arsenical soap, and dust it well
with the powdered burned alum, now turn the skin back, and pull
the limbs and tail into their original position ; open the palms of
the hand and soles of the feet, remove the fleshy parts and rub
in some soap and alum, remove the testes and fill up the skin to its
natural size—if a female marsupial, fill out the pouch with a
little tow. Allow the skin, after it has been prepared as directed
to remain for a few hours, or a day, if the time can be spared,
before filling it out, afterwards fill out* the skin to about the
* Tow, dry grass or moss, cocoanut fibre, unravelled rope, or the refuse tow
from the rope works.


natural size, and sew up the opening; tie the mouth shut, and
pull up the wadding in the orbits, and adjust the eye-lids, but do
not distend them. Anoint the eye-lids, face, ears, the fleshy parts
of the feet, and the pouch, &c., with a solution of mercuric
chloride and camphor in spirits of wine ;*f* hang the animal up in
a dry airy situation, not in the sun, until quite dry, when, if
required, to save space in packing the filling may he removed
from the body, and the feet and tail folded over the belly, and the
skin doubled up.
The smaller mammals, such as mice, rats, bats, and even the
smaller species of native cats and bandicoots, are best preserved,
entire, in strong spirits of wine, to which a little arsenic has been
added, taking care to make an opening in the abdomen to allow
the spirits to enter freely. The body should be well covered with
the spirit, and care taken that the stopper or cork of the vessel
be made air-tight. A very good contrivance for large vessels is
that known as a “ man-hole fastening,” used for steam boilers, &c.
Birds.
When first obtained, push a small piece of cotton wool, tow,
or moss into the throat, to prevent any liquid from escaping, and re-
move any blood from the feathers. Note the colour of the eyes, bill,
legs, and feet. If the weather be hot and the bird cannot be
skinned at once, it is advisable to brush the bill, eyelids (being
careful to note the colour of the eyes first), the inside of the
mouth, and other fleshy parts, as well as the abdomen under the
feathers, and the vent, with the solution of mercuric chloride and
camphor ;* this will prevent those parts being blown by flies, and,
to a great extent, arrest putrefaction.
Before beginning to skin, for convenience sake dislocate or break
the first hone (the humerus) of the wings about the middle, and
then, after separating the feathers on the abdomen, open the skin
from the lower end of the breast-bone, or from a little above it,
down to the vent, being careful not to cut into the intestines ; if
there is much moisture or fat, dust these parts well with powdered
lime, or better, plaster of Paris; detach the skin from the flesh on
either side until you come to the knee-joints, which push up
inside the skin, and cut through the exposed joints carefully;
draw the legs back again, and detach the skin round on either
side to the tail, cut through the vertebra at the tail, taking care
not to injure the skin, which is very thin about this part; draw
+ Solution No, 1, see p. 15. * Solution No. 1.


skin over the back, holding the feathers clear of the body
which may be powdered well with plaster of Paris to keep it
from soiling them. The skin will now easily stip off* as far as
the wings, which must be cut through at the broken part or at
the first joint ; pull back the skin carefully over the neck until
you come to the skull, and ease it gently over the head with your
nails; detach the head, cutting the neck off with a small 'portion
of the skull attached ; pinch up the skin over the ears and pull it
carefully over them as far as the eyes, the tough skin round which
cut through, when it has been eased over the orbit, taking care not
to cut the eyelid, detach the skin as far as the base of the bill,
remove the eyes and flesh from the head, and the tongue, &c., and
take out the brains through the opening enlarged at the back of
the skull; anoint the head well with arsenical soap inside and
out; till up the orbits with a plugget of cotton wadding for eyes ;
roll up a piece of tow or wadding and plug the end of it tightly
into the back of the skull, leaving a piece out of sufficient length
to form the neck.f Now turn to the legs—remove the flesh from
the bones, anoint them, and roll a little cotton wadding round
them, leaving some of it over the end of the bone ; clean the wing
bones, but put no wadding round them, cut off the humerus, or
the broken part of it, tie them a little apart by passing a string
between the bones and drawing the wings together, but not too
close, leaving a space of about one quarter of an inch in a bird as
large as a thrush, and proportionately greater or less for other birds,
as the case may be (in very small birds the wing bones may be tied
close, just leaving room enough for them to play); clean the tail
carefully and remove the fat and oil glands, anoint it well with the
soap, and turn it back into its place with a small piece of wadding-
over it; soap the legs and wings and adjacent skin, and turn them
back as near as possible into their original position ; soap the
remainder of the skin well all over, especially the neck, ease' it
carefully back over the skull, pulling the head through, assisted
by the string previously passed and left through the nostrils;
in some birds, as the larger cockatoos and parrots, and the
stilts and avocets, &c., the neck being very small, the head
cannot with safety be drawn through, it is advisable to open
the skin at the back of the head or along the throat, and turn
out the head through the opening, which can be sewed up
afterwards.
Having turned the skin back, and pulled the head, legs,
and wings into their original position, arrange the feathers of
fSome taxidermists prefer to put the neck in after the skin is turned back ;
it is immaterial at what stage it be done, provided a good neck be formed.


the head and ears as neatly as possible, with the point of a
long needle, lifting up the skin here and there, and getting all
smooth, pull up the wadding in the orbits to till out the eyes,
taking care not to distend it or bulge the eyelids out ; shorten
the neck by pulling the false neck of wadding down a little
inside, place a piece on either side near the wings, and thrust a
small piece up from the breast as far as the throat, to fill it out,
and close the bill on the end of it to hold it in position, or by
pulling the end of it the neck can be shortened at will; fill the
body out to about its natural dimensions, or a very little more, to
allow for the shrinking of the skin in drying, and arrange the
wings closed on the sides, in the natural position; pull the legs
down to their proper length, and take care not to elongate the
neck ; see that the bird is filled out enough, and sew up the
opening—small birds need not be sewed up. Cross the legs, the
tarsus of one over the tarsus of the other, and tie them ; the right
leg, as the bird lies on its back, should be crossed over the left, if
the bird is a male, and vice versa for a female. The legs and feet,
margins of the wings, the bill, orbits and nostrils, should be
brushed over with the solution of mercuric chloride,* which may
be repeated two or three times as the skin dries, if the specimen
be a large one. _ Having settled the feathers, and affixed a ticket,
with date, locality, sex, colour of eyes, hill, and legs, and a number
referring to the note book, in which particulars should be entered
as to the contents of the stomach, &c., the skin should be carefully
pushed, head first into a cylinder of stiff paper (not funnel
shaped) made just wide enough to contain it, and not small enough
to cramp the bird—this keeps the wings together and the feathers
smooth whilst drying.
Carefully ascertain the sex of each specimen by dissection.
On removing the intestines the ovaries (if a female), resembling
a small cluster of round seeds or beads, may be plainly seen,
situated on the inner surface against the back bone; if a male,
two small (usually yellowish) o/al bodies will be found near the
same place. Large birds require to have the last joint of the
wings opened from without, along the inner margin, and any flesh
removed, and the bone and skin well anointed with the soap, after
which the incision may be sewed up, and the margins and joints
of the wings and legs well brushed with the solution of mercuric
chloride; should the legs (tarsi) of the birds be fleshy, as in some
of the larger ducks and geese, and some of the eagles, or puffed
out by decomposition, it will be necessary to slit them open along
* Solution No. 1, p.


the under portion, down to the soles of the feet, and rub in
arsenical soap or dry arsenic, bind the legs round tightly with
strips of rag or tow, to bring the skin into its original position,
until quite dry. Ihis is, however, seldom necessary with the
Australian species, except when decomposition has set in.
Fishes.
These are best preserved in strong spirits of wine (methylated
spirit will do). Care must always be taken to have close air-tight
fitting stoppers to the vessels containing the spirits. The
specimens may be plunged in whole, after first having a small
opening made in the abdomen, to allow the preserving fluid to enter
the intestines. If they can be put in alive, all the better. If spirits
cannot be obtained, strong brine may be used, to which a little
alum may be added with advantage, and after the specimens have
been in soak for two or three days, they may be taken out and
well salted inside, and packed between layers of coarse salt, and
fastened up tightly in a box or keg. In all cases where small
specimens are placed among larger ones, or when they are packed
for transit in fluid, each one should be rolled up separately in cloth
or paper to prevent friction, without which precaution the fins
and spines are likely to get broken, and the fish damaged.
Specimens too large to be conveniently preserved whole may
be skinned, and the skin, with the head attached, be placed in the
preserving fluid, or salted, or they may be only partially skinned
—an opening being made in the abdomen (the intestines pushed
aside but not removed), and as much as possible of the back bone
and flesh should be taken out; this greatly reduces the bulk, and
permits of a long fish being doubled up into a comparatively small
compass.
Some of the larger fishes, rays, sharks, &c., may be preserved
dry, after skinning. Make an opening in the skin below the
pectoral fins, large enough to extract the body through, remove
the intestines, cut through the back bone and flesh all round, until
the skin is reached; remove each portion of the body by cuttino-
through the fin bones inside, and pulling the skin back, after the
manner of skinning eels; when doing the head portion, the cleaning
of the gills and removing of the brain, and all fleshy parts, must be
carefully attended to, and the whole of the skin, skull, and any
bones that may be left, well anointed inside with arsenical soap,
and powdered with burned alum ; the skin may be then sewed up
and the body filled out to its original proportions with dry sand or


dry sawdust, which, when the skin is dry and ready for packing,
may be shaken out to save room. Any parasites or intestinal
worms, eggs or young found inside, should be preserved in spirits
of wine.
The colour of the eyes and fins, and the general colouration
of the specimens should always be noted ; any information as to
their capture, &c., or respecting their habits will be valuable.
Reptiles.
Lizards, Snakes, Frogs, Turtles, Crocodiles, &c. —These
animals, when not too large, are best preserved in strong spirits ;
a small incision should be made in the abdomen to allow the
spirit to enter. The larger specimens of lizards may be skinned
in the manner described for mammals, but in filling out the tail,
feet and limbs, the material should be cut up fine, to allow its
being pushed into the small recesses, or dry sand or sawdust
may he used. Care must be taken in skinning the tail —which
cannot be stripped hack, as in most cases with mammals —the
skin of the under side must he carefully slit up to the tip and the
tail removed, which can be replaced by an artificial one made of
tow wound round two or three rushes. In skinning lizards,
particularly the glossy species of Tropidolepisma, Gyclodus, &c.,
care should be taken not to break the tails, which are
particularly brittle.
In preserving large specimens in spirits, the bodies can he
skinned out through an incision made down the belly, the hones
of the legs, arms, tail and head being left attached to the skin.
Snakes are always best preserved in spirits, but if it he
desirable to skin some of the large boas and pythons common in
the north, it may be done by making an opening in the skin
just below the neck, a few inches in length along the belly, sever
the vertebra through to the skin, and turn out the body after
the manner of skinning eels ; do the same with the head portion,
leaving the skull attached to the skin, removing as much of the
flesh as possible, the eyes and the brains; anoint the head and
the whole of the skin on the inside with arsenical soap, and
powder it with burned alum ; turn the skin back and fill it out
with dry sand, &c., as directed for fishes ; curl the body into
shape.
Tortoises and Turtles may be preserved dry, the breast-
plate being more or [less severed along the sides, laid back, and
the head, limbs and tail skinned and cured as before described
for animals; the carapace (back) should be well cleaned and


anointed with soap and burned alum, and the breast-plate
returned to its original position, may be sewn or wired on, and
the specimen set out to dry on a board ; in the smaller specimens
the bones within the body need not be removed, but cleaned
carefully and left in their places.
In the case of large Alligators or Crocodiles, &c., the entire
skeleton should be preserved, if possible. The flesh may be
easily removed from the bones, and the head carefully cleaned;
and after drying a little, may be packed in dry sawdust, grass or
seaweed ; if the whole cannot be secured, obtain the head at least.
INSECTS.
Beetles, Bugs, Cockroaches, Centipedes, &c., in fact almost
all insects except Moths and Butterflies, are best killed in
spirits of wine. Procure a wide-mouthed bottle with tight-
fitting cork or stopper, half filled with methylated spirits of
wine, and plunge the insects in as soon as captured. For
killing beetles hot water may be used, if no spirits can be
obtained. Wasps, Hornets, and Flies may be killed in the
same way. Some beetles with powdery, hairy backs or thread-
like appendages on their wing-covers, should not be put in
spirits—they should be killed by chloroform, as advised in the
case of Moths and Gnats, &c.
Insects, when killed, may be taken out of the bottles and
dried on blotting paper or cloth, and then packed away with
dry sawdust previously soaked in weak carbolic acid and well
dried, in layers, in boxes, with a little crushed camphor
sprinkled through the sawdust. The boxes should be fastened
up tightly, and strips of strong paper pasted over the cracks.
They will keep this way for months. Small packages thus
prepared may be transmitted by post.
Lepidoptera, &c.
Butterflies, Moths, and soft-winged insects in general,
should be killed by chloroform after first squeezing them
across the thorax and pinning them to the bottom of a cork-
lined collecting box. Most of the Butterflies, however, are
easily killed, and a slight pressure under the the wings
between the finger and thumb, is sufficient. Fat-bodied Moths,
&c., should be stuffed; make a longitudinal cut on the under
side of the abdomen, remove the intestines carefully and
replace them by a small piece of wadding, and bring the


edges together again. Small Lepidoptera may be first pinned
against the substance they are found resting on, and then put
in a box with chloroform, or a wide-mouthed bottle containing
cyanide of potassium, inverted suddenly over them ; the cyanide
may be kept at the bottom of the bottle by a piece of
gummed paper or wadding. Insects killed in this
way must be pinned aud “ set out ” as soon as
possible, as they dry and become brittle very quickly
after death. Moths and Butterflies, Gnats, &c., may be kept
for transmission, folded with their wings and the feelers between
them together and laid in triangular shaped pockets of paper
made by doubling a suitable sized square of paper into a trian-
gular form, turning over and gumming together the edges.
LAND SHELLS.
Look on the leaves and stems of trees and large foliaged
plants, especially after a shower of rain, under leaves by the sides
of logs and fallen timber, sometimes burrowing the rotten timber
or in the ground beside it several inches deep.
INSECTS.
Many may be taken by having a bright light burning in the
tents at night, and can be caught on the canvas, &c., or they may
fly inside.
If large caterpillars are found at the depot, they should be
kept in a box with gauze over it and fed on the plant on which
they are found, until they turn to the chrysalis.
LAND SHELLS
Are found most abundantly in the alluvial wooded regions,
especially upon hill-sides, where during the day they are concealed
under fragments of fallen trees, bits of bark, stones, &c., some-
times under leaves or in the tufts of rank growths of moss. Some
are found on the trunks of standing trees, also on the under sides
of the leaves, others found burrowing in the soft earth.
FRESH-WATER SHELLS
Are found along the banks of rivers and creeks sticking to logs,
stones, leaves and aquatic plants; also in small pools, swamps and
rivulets. All species or specimens must be killed with boiling


water poured over them, then extract the animal with fine bent
wire. All bivalves must be tied together when dry, then put
away in with any packing, such as moss, so as to prevent
them from getting broken. 1
Shells.
Shells, or the calcareous coverings of molluscous animals, only
require cleaning. The animals should be allowed to come partially
out of the shell, and then suddenly dash boiling water over them,
and leave them in the water for a few minutes, or more according
to the size of the specimen and thickness of the shell, the animal
can then easily be picked out with a pin or bent wire. The
horny or calcareous mouth pieces, or opercula, which close the
openings of certain shells, should always be preserved and
gummed inside the shells to which they belong. Bivalve sheila
may be scalded with hot water and then cleaned, but in no case
allow the animal to rot out, as in most instances during decompo-
sition an acid is formed which corrodes and disfigures the pearly
lining of the shell. They may also be packed up in dry sand
without removing the animal, which will dry up, but may after-
wards, at a more convenient time, be softened in water and
removed.
General Remarks.
W ounded birds and animals may be easily killed by pressino-
them tightly across the windpipe, In the case of smaller birds,
place the thumb and second finger under the wings on either side
and the forefinger in the hollow of the chest, just over the wind-
pipe, press all tightly together for a minute or so, until you find
that respiration has ceased.
The collector should always be careful to note down the
color of the eyes and fleshy parts as soon as possible after the
specimen is captured. The locality and situation in which ihe
animal is taken, with a few remarks as to the .style of the country
and the nature of the vegetation, geological characters, and
elevation, &c.; also the vulgar, local or native name, and the
rarety or commonness of the animal, and any information
respecting its habits, &c., being particular about the dates and
season of the year. The color and shape of Seals, Porpoises,
Whales, Dugongs, &c., should be carefully noted, and a sketch
made of their forms, whenever opportunity offers. In cases where
the skins of these animals cannot be cured, the skeleton or at
least the skull should always be preserved, being careful to note
the sex—the females should be carefully opened in search of the
foetus, which should be preserved in spirits.


White Arsenic
... 1
lb
Common or Hard White Soap* ...
... 1
lb
Salts of Tartar ...
... 4
oz.
Lime in Powder ...
... 3
oz.
Camphor ...
... 2
oz.
Should the collector obtain what he believes to be a scarce or
rare animal the skull should not be cut or the opening at the back
part enlarged ; with a little trouble the brains may be extracted
through the natural opening.
In preparing skeletons of animals for transmission to
Museums, if you have a choice of the animals, select the largest
and oldest, discarding those with fractured bones, if
you can get better. All the flesh should be carefully cut off, and
the bones made as clean as possible, the head, arms, legs, and tail
may be severed from the body, the back disjointed in convenient
sized pieces, and the parts thrown into a tank or tub of cold
water, with a few handfuls of salt, or about two or three ounces
to the gallon, the salt and water renewed every second or third
day for about a week or so; the remainder of the flesh can then
be removed, and the brains extracted through the opening at the
base of the skull, which must not be enlarged or cut in any way,
and the bones when dried packed up.
When none of the chemicals aforementioned can be obtained,
the specimens may be skinned in the way described, the skin and
the bones carefully cleaned, and the bodies filled out with fresh
dry charcoal, or wood ashes, crushed into a coarse powder, to
which may be added with advantage grated or bruised “ galls”
the excresences found on the twigs and leaves of many of the
gum trees ( Eucalypti ); hang the specimens up in a dry airy place
till quite dry.
Receipt for making Arsenical Soap.
Cut the soap into thin slices and melt it in a saucepan over a
slow fire, when melted add the Salts of Tartar which will reduce
the mass into a creamy consistency, take it off the fire and put in
the arsenic, and stir it up well, add the lime, and then the camphor
either reduced to a fine powder or dissolved in a small quantity of
strong methylated spirits of wine, stir the whole up well, and pour
out into earthenware jars to cool; if it is required very hard to
pack up for travelling with, it may be poured out into porous
* Soft Soap must not be used.


Solution No. 1.
Mercuric Chloride*
... f
oz.
Camphor
... 1
oz.
Spirits of Wine
... 1
pint
vessels, when cold it may he cut out and pressed together into
cakes like common soap, and when wanted for use, softened with
a brush in a little water.
General Remarks.
Dissolve the camphor in methylated spirits with the mercuric
chloride, shaking it up occasionally until it is all dissolved.
The brains of many of our Australian animals are interest-
ing and valuable to many of the naturalists, and should therefore
be collected whenever opportunities occur.
Having removed the head of the animal with at least two
of the neck vertebrae attached, make a straight cut from the
back of the head over the forehead and down to the nose,
throw the skin back on either side as far as the upper row
of teeth, remove the ears and any flesh that may be in the way,
but not the eyes; take a small sharp dissecting saw, or a tenon
saw and cut carefully and not quite through, the bone of the
skull round the upper part and across behind the ears and orbits
completing the circle ; now with a sharp strong knife, held as if to
cut a pencil, finish cutting through being careful not to stick the
point into the brain, prise up the piece from time to time as you
cut along to ease the cap off the brain and skin just under the
bone, when the cap is removed either in one or more pieces, a
membraneous covering called “ dura mater ” will be seen. Cut
this through carefully over the centre and sides of both hemi-
spheres, so as to allow the spirit to enter freely, now immerse the
whole in the spirit or preserving fluid to harden it; after a few
hours (10) remove it again, take off the dura mater carefully and
slightly open the hemispheres, shake the brain a little forward
from the base of the skull to allow the liquid to penetrated
behind to the very base where the cerebellum is situated; as the
brain will be a little shrunken and hardened you may remove the
thin membrane called the “ pia mater,” which will be found
immediately over the brain and between it and the first covering
called dura mater, replace the cap of bone, tie it in its place again,
and keep the whole covered in strong spirit.
* Corrosive sublimate.


The brains of aborigines so prepared would be of great
value.
Skeletons of the aborigines are much wanted, and for th e
benefit of the collectors, annexed is a list of the separate bone B
of a complete human skeleton.
Bones in the Human Skeleton.
Vertebral Column
Neck, 7 (cervicals) .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Back, 12 (dorsals) .. .. .. .. ..12
Loins, 5 (lumbra) .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Sacrum and coccyx, 2 ~ .. .. .. .. ~ . 2
The twenty-two (22) bones of the head or skull are considered here as one
piece (1), and the lower jaw as another Cl). In the upper and lower jaws, there
should be 32 teeth in all.
3 3
Molars .. ~ g_ g Three on either side, above and below.
2 2
Bicuspids .. .. - _-g Two on either side, above and below.
Canines .. ~ | * One ditto ditto ditto, ditto ditto ditto
2 2
Incisors .. .. ~ Two ditto ditto ditto, ditto ditto ditto
Tongue bone (Hyoid) shaped something like the letter U .. 1
Breast bones (Sternum). —Two large and one small piece, ossified
with age .. ~ .. .. ~ .. ~ 3
Ribs, 24—'Twelve on each side .. .. .. ~ ..24
Collar bones (2) one on each side .. ~ .. .. .. 2
Shoulder blades (Scapula) 2 .. .. .. ~ .. ~ 2
Arm bones, 3 each (humerus, ulna (2), radius (3) .. .. ..6
Bones of the nand —Wrist or carpal bones, Bin each wrist.. ~ 16
Middle of the hand, or Metacarpal bones, 5 each .. .. .. 10
Fingers, 3 each =121,. oc
Thumb, 2 .. 2/ ~ 14 28
Under the thumb joint 2 sesamoid bones .. .. ..2
PpJ.ni.s nr 9 brmoa o
Pelvis or hips, 2 bones .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 2
(In the young divided into 3 pieces.)
Leg Bones —
Femurs, 1 each .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 2
Tibia, 1 2
Fibula,! „ .. .. ~ .. .. ..2
Kneecap,! ~ ~ ~ .. .. .. .. ..2
Foot Bones —
Ankle, 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..14
Metatarsus, 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
Sesamoid bones under the joint of the great toe* .. .. 2
Toes.— Great toe 2, 4 other toes, 3 each—l 2 .. .. 14 =2B
* The sesamoid bones are very small, and easily overlooked.


Skulls of aborigines found around native dwellings are of
little value, but authentic skulls may be obtained from the graves
of the natives of each tribe.
Crustacea.
The larger kinds, such as lobsters, crabs, crayfish, &c,, and
some of the large swimming species, are usually obtained in deep
water by means of lobster pots or baskets, and traps of various
kinds, nets, &c., &c.: also by dredging and trawling, and in the
seine and trammel nets. They should have an incision made
under the carapace to allow the spirits to penetrate into their
bodies.
Many may also be obtained in fresh water, or even on land,
as the robber crabs, and hermit crabs, or in the streams, as the
freshwater crayfish, &c.
Small crabs, prawns, shrimps, &c., are obtained both from
shallow and deep water—in the former situation by wading and
turning over stones at low tides on the reefs; in the later by
means of the dredge. Many small Crustacea are found burrowing,
or in the canals of sponges &c.; others in the sand on the shore,
—under stones and masses of decaying seaweed or dead bodies ;
some burrow in mud also, others live in seaweed on the rocks,
or under them ; others (Pinotheres) inhabit large shells (living),
such as the large Tridachna or clam shells, and the Pinna ; some
few in the interior of large sea urchins : a few small forms inhabit
dead medusae.
Small species inhabit stagnant pools, both in fresh and salt
water.
All may be preserved by throwing them into strong spirits
of wine. The smaller ones should be put into separate tubes or
bottles. In every case attach a label written with a lead pencil
on strong paper, or a tin-stamped number. Enter in your note-
book a corresponding number and as much information as possible
about each species, and the nature of the locality, and circum-
stances under which it is found. Also, its native name if that can
be ascertained.
Sponges
On the contents of the dredge being emptied, if the sponges
are mixed up with the mud, rinse them out in salt water, slightly
shaking, but not squeezing them. Put them into strong spirits
as soon as possible. On no account let them get dry, unless you
want them for the skeleton only, when the horny kinds can be
washed and squeezed out in fresh water, put in a shady, airy
place to dry, and packed in boxes.


Echinodermata.
All these, such as sea eggs, sea urchins, sea stars, &c., &c.,
may be thrown into spirits alive. If no spirits are to be had,
wash them in fresh water to get the salt out, and let them soak
an hour or so ; dry them in the wind. Care must be taken to get
all the salt out of them, otherwise they will usually fall to pieces
and become useless.
Sea eggs, in the absence of spirits, should have the “ lantern ”
or mouthpiece containing the teeth, &c., cut round and taken out
carefully ; then the inside should be washed and the contents
shaken out. Replace the “ lantern ” and set the specimen away
to dry. In packing carefully protect the spines with paper or
shavings, rubbed grass or any soft substance, or roll them in
paper and pack in sawdust.
Sea worms, &c, &c., ascidians, sea anemones, &c., &c., and all
soft marine animals should be washed out carefully if mixed with
the mud or debris of the dredge, and placed for a few minutes—
-8 to a saturated solution of corrosive sublimate in water to
harden; then take them out and wash them in weak spirits for a
few minutes ; afterwards put them in strong spirits and cork them
up tightly.
All marine specimens should have the labels of strong paper
written on with deep black lead pencil, and put in the bottle with
the specimen— do not use metal labels for these.
Large specimens of sea-stars, &c., which cannot conveniently
be put in spirits, can easily be cured by washing out the salt and
drying as above advised; pack up carefully and keep dry, in
m£-proof boxes. (A little spirit poured over them will help to
dry out the water.)
In dredging, respecting every haul, note the depth and locality,
and bottom and surface temperature of the water, and the time of
day; also the nature of the bottom, whether sandy, mud, mud
and clay, shells and sand, etc., etc., as the case may be; and keep
always some of the fine shell sand and debris for future examina-
tion : this can be put in small half-bushel bags, and let dry.
Marine Mammalia.
Whole Skeletons or the skulls and lower jaws of all species
of whales should be collected. These are frequently found
washed up on the sea beaches.
Skeletons of porpoises and seals, &c„ are also desiderata.
The smaller kinds can be skinned, and the skins salted and
packed in strong brine, the skeleton cleaned and dried.


In the case of seals, prepare in the same way as any other
mammal and save the skeletons also. Use plenty of burnt alum
and paint the face, flippers and feet well several times while
dying with a strong solution of corrosive sublimate in spirits
of wine.
The following are among the special desiderata of the Austra-
lian Museum.
6. Look for small marsupial rats and allied forms. There
are several small “ native cats ” and small kinds of opossums, &c.
Authentic skulls of aborigines from the graves of the natives
of each tribe, also the ivhole skeleton if possible.
Birds.
1. Long curved billed paradise birds.
2. Golden orioles.
3. Twelve wired bird of paradise.
4. Nests and eggs of any species with the birds belonging to
them.
5. Very small parrots feeding in fig-tree, &c.
6. Cassowaries, their eggs, and their skeletons.
Fishes.
Particular attention should be paid to fresh water fishes, such
as are obtained from inland water-holes, lakes and lagoons
Those of the sea are not of so much importance.
Hawks and Owls of all kinds.
Long-tailed honey-eating Parakeets.
There are some very small Parrots, about three inches long,
worth looking for. They creep about the stems of the fig and
other fruit trees, and being all green on the back, are not easily
seen.
Be careful about sexing all birds.
Large Landrail—can scarcely fly.
Black Hawk, with some white markings on breast; very
thin, weak bill.
Nests and eggs of Paradise birds.
Nests and eggs of Bower birds.
Mammals.
Skins and skeletons whenever both or either can be obtained.
1. “ Hedgehogs ”or “ porcupines,” (Echidna). There are two or
three species. Cut open the belly and put the whole animal in a


large quantity of strong spirits. If plentiful, others may be
skinned and cured in the ordinary way. Always save the
skeletons. Look for a large species with a very long snout,
it is much larger than the N. S. Wales species.
2. A large bandicoot (Perameles Broadbenti).
3. Tree kangaroos and small scrub wallabies.
4. Skin and skeleton and some skulls of the wild pig of the
inland tribes.
5. Skins, skulls, and skeletons of Aborigines, males and
females.
6. Skulls with the hair left on of any mammals.
INSECTS.
By A. Sidney Olliff.
Assistant Zoologist, Australian Museum.
The following method of preserving coleoptera or beetles, is
the one generally adopted by collectors who are travelling from
place to place, as it not only kills the insects but preserves them
in excellent condition as soon as they are captured. The specimens
when collected, should be placed in a wide-mouthed bottle, about
one-third filled with sawdust, containing a small piece of cyanide
of potassium, which, it should be recollected, is a deadly poison;
they will then die instantly, and without injury to themselves.
The sawdust should be sifted through muslin, and the chips
rejected, and should if possible, be of some light wood containing
little colouring matter. When the day’s collecting is over, the
insects contained in the collecting bottle, should be transferred to
a tin canister or stock bottle, which has been prepared by placing
a layer of sawdust at the bottom, similar to that used in the
collecting bottle. The sawdust should be slightly damped, not
soaked, with a mixture composed of nineteen parts of methylated
spirit or benzoline, and one part of carbolic acid. Another layer of
sawdust should then be added, then another layer of beetles, and
so on alternately until the tin is full. Tin canisters are to be
preferred on account of their being free from the danger of break-
age, but any kind of wide-mouthed bottle, such as a pickle jar, will
answer every purpose if it is provided with a tightly-fitting bung.
If this plan is from any reason found to be impracticable, the
beetles may be killed by being placed in a bottle with a drop of
chloroform on a piece of blotting paper or cotton wool. Lastly,
the beetles, with any other insects possessing any hard integu-
ments, can be preserved in alcohol.


Butterflies should be killed without removal from the net by
a sharp nip applied to the muscles which are situated at the base
of the wings with the finger and thumb. If this is done when
the wings are over the back of the butterfly, very little evidence
of the rough usage will be left. Thick-bodied species are best
killed by means of a killing bottle, which may be made by
taking a wide-mouthed bottle with an air-tight bung and placino-
three or four pieces of cyanide of potassium at the bottom, and
over this a thin layer of plaster of Paris, mixed with a sufficient
quantity of water to make it of about the consistence of thick
cream. A few pieces of cyanide with a pad of blotting paper
tightly pressed down over them will answer very well if the
plaster of Paris cannot be obtained. Small moths can also be
killed in the fumes of ammonia, chloroform or benzine. Butter-
flies should be placed in paper envelopes, folded in a triangular
form, but care must be taken that their wings are brought in con-
tact over their backs. A number of these envelopes packed in a
biscuit or similar tin, will travel any distance with perfect safety.
All moths should be pinned through the centre of the thorax, and
large species should have the contents of the abdomen removed.
This is readily done by making a longitudinal incision on the
underside of the body, removing the contents, and substituting a
little cotton wool.
The small moths (Micro-Lepidoptera), to which I would draw
particular attention, must be pinned. They should be brought
home in pill-boxes and killed in the cyanide bottle, or the boxes
having previously had a small hole bored in the bottom), may be
placed in a tin canister with a small piece of sponge or blotting-
paper moistened with chloroform or strong liquid ammonia and
left until the following morning, when they should be pinned.
The best way of collecting these little moths is to disturb leaves
and low-growing plants, securing them as they fly out and
placing each specimen in a separate pill box.
Diptera (flies), Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, &c.), Neuroptera
dragon flies, mayflies, &c.), and all pubescent insects should be
pinned. They may be killed in the same manner as the moths.
Orthoptera (grasshoppers, walking-stick insects, &c.) and
Hemiptera (bugs) are best preserved in spirit, although the latter
may with safety be packed in sawdust with the beetles.
February 16th, 1885.


Instructions for Botanist.
For the purpose of elucidating to the fullest extent the
phytology of the country to be explored, the Botanist should
keep a diary, in which the principal botanical features of the
country should be noted, and into which any plant, either
remarkable or observed for the first time, should be introduced
under the same number or designation by which it is
distinguished in the herbarium.
To the specimens which will be collected, and which should
be pressed into paper always immediately, and dried as speedily
as circumstances will permit, a label should be fixed, containing
a note of the day of collecting, the habitat of the plant, the soil
of the locality, the color and perhaps odor of the flower, the nature
of the bark and of the wood of any arboreous species, the size of
the plants, and any other characteristics which cannot be derived
from the examination of the dried specimens.
These, when dried, it will be desirable should be well secured
against pressure and moisture, and the thus formed collections
should be forwarded to the Hon. Secretary of the Exploration
Committee, always at the very earliest opportunity afforded for
transmission.
To such selections of botanical specimens might be added
any well-matured seeds collected on the journey, which should
either be numbered corresponding to the specimens in the
herbarium, or be accompanied by leaves, flowers and seed vessels,
for the purpose of recognizing the species.
Samples of gums, resins, barks, and any other vegetable
substances, likely to be technical, or economical, or of medicinal
use, should be gathered and labelled in such a manner as to
facilitate specific determination.
No opportunity should be lost to obtain, through the officer
in charge of depots, or through reconnoitring parties, additional
specimens of plants and seeds.
Particular attention is directed to the necessity of closely
examining the Pandani and Palms which are likely to be met with
within the tropics; and since it will be difficult to procure the
large fruits of the former, and since the determination of the
species greatly depends on the habit of the plants, it would be of
great advantage to have, through the artist of the expedition,
sketches of the outlines of these rare trees secured, and the flowers
and fruits fully delineated.
Of any plants suspected to have been deleterious to animals,
such a quantity should be dried as will suffice for chemical analysis,
and any experiments to be instituted thereafter.


Of plants which may be of utility for food, or otherwise, or
which are drawn into use by the natives, more particularly,
information is sought.
The following general directions, which have been drawn up
by Baron Sir Ferd. Yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., F.R.S., M.D., &c., &c.,
for the collection and preservation of botanical specimens, should
be given to the Botanical Collector, and to each member of the
expedition who may be able to render assistance to the Botanist.
1. To endeavour to secure as many different kinds of plants
as circumstances _ will permit, in order that the fullest insight
into the vegetation of any of the districts, traversed by the
expedition, be obtained.
2. To collect each phanerogamous plant, as well in flower as
in ripe fruit, whenever and wherever possible, and under no
circumstances, to miss collecting a plant when in fruit only.
3. Not t) pass even the minutest plants, but in the case of
mosses, to endeavour to obtain fruiting specimens.
4. Not to miss collecting seaweeds and fresh-water weeds,
whenever the opportunity presents itself.
5. For securing proper material of palms, it will be needful
to preserve a leaf or portion of the leaf with part of the stalk,
but to add a flower-spike or a portion of it, also some ripe fruit.
Leaf, flower, and fruit of each species, to be carefully packed
together in strong paper, and then to be dried in the sun-warmth
or at a fire ; each sort of palm to be numbered, and a note to be
added at once to each species regarding height, nature of stem,
place of flowers, between or belmu the leaves, and any other
striking peculiarity, such as could not be ascertained from the
dried specimens.
6. To secure in the same manner, specimens of any bamboos,
which might happen to be in flower. A small piece of the stem
in these cases also to be gathered, and some leaves with basal
sheet.
7. To secure of very bulky specimens only, 1, 2 or 3, in all
other cases, several.
8. For hastening the drying of plants, so as to save time, the
specimens, after being put and pressed in paper, to be laid out
soon, in thin sets (plants and paper together with cross strino)
in the open air or near a fire, to halve the set (as in shifting of
cards) after an hour or two, so that that the moist inner specimens
and paper come outward, and the outer drier portion inward ; this
process to be repeated till the specimens are quite dry. Time and
convenience for shifting plants from moist into dry paper being,
during travelling, rarely available. Under no circumstances to
allow specimens to rot.


9. Paper used for drying seaweeds cannot be used subse-
quently for drying any other kinds of plants.
10. Large dry fruits to be wrapped up carefully in strong
paper, and to be numbered correspondingly to the flower and
foliage specimens in the general collection; large succulent fruits
to be preserved in methylated alcohol, small labels to be attached
to them indicative of the number to be assigned to the flowering
and leafy specimens in the general collection.
11. Parcels of specimens, when 'perfectly dry, to be wrapped
up at once into wax cloth or some other fabric impervious to
moisture, of which material a large quantity, as well as of
printing and packing paper for drying plants, should be provided.
12. Some kerosene to be dropped between the dried
specimens before packing the parcels into wax cloth, with a view
of keeping off insects of all sorts, and such parcels, if possible,
to be packed into water-tight boxes, which might be provided
purposely at the outset of the expedition.
13. All smaller plants, including ferns, to be collected with
their roots; of ferns, fruiting specimens only to be gathered and
no preference to be given to ferns for filling the collecting paper,
as they will mostly prove identical with Indian species, though
each kind should be present in the collection, with the object
of proving which of the South Asiatic species do occur in New
Guinea. Also tree ferns (or fern trees; to be marked as such on
the accompanying label, and to be noted what are the particular
characteristics of their stems.
13. On the labels to be noted, in the case of any specimens,
their precise locality, the date of collecting, the color of the fresh
flowers, any scent of the flowers. Further, the color of fresh
fruits, should they be succulent; also, in the case of trees, their
approximate height, the outer appearance of their bark, and
should a tree be felled, the nature of its wood.
14. When firewood for the engine, &c., is cut, a piece of
wood to be secured of any kind of tree, from which flowering or
fruiting branchlets can be obtained for identification. Timber
specimens without accompanying such flowering or fruiting
branchlets, will prove of little or no value.
15. When from friendly natives wood implements, wood
weapons, nets, cloths, fishing lines, &c., are obtained, an endeavor
to be made to trace these articles to the trees, shrubs, bamboos,
grasses, rushes, &c., affording the material, and a corresponding
label to be fixed both to the article in the ethnological collection,
and to the explanatory botanic set of specimens.


16. When steep mountains are to be ascended, or jungle to be
traversed, baskets to be carried, into which all sorts of specimens
in flower and fruit are to be put expeditiously, without paper, as
such specimens will keep for about a couple of days particularly,
if collected in dry weather. This will save the trouble of carrying*
much paper, which can be left at the camp : and if men are
available as carriers, they could carry each a basket on their back
tied with straps. Provisions could be carried in such baskets up
the mountains; and the empty baskets to be filled with plants as
specimens on the way down: convenient baskets would require
purposely to be made in Sydney.
17. It is of the greatest importance to muster as many
different kinds of distinct species of plants as ever possible, as the
result of the expedition, so that a creditable enumeration can be
published therefrom; thus all sorts of fungi should also be
collected, the hard kinds requiring simply drying : the soft kinds
will need quickly to be immersed into methylated alcohol, from
which they should be removed after a few hours, and then be
simply dried, a note of the fresh colour to be attached to each
kind.
18. Seaweed of tender or gelatinous structure should be
floated out on writing paper, and only be pressed and covered by
blotting paper when nearly dry : rough kinds of algae need merely
be dried on a sunny place, or near a fire, till quite crisp, and can
then be simply tied together into a parcel, as they will be re-
soaked and prepared here afterwards, so that no time needs
necessarily' be spent on rough seaweeds in preparing them during
the Expedition. Even green slimy masses in rivers, brooks, and
swamps can be floated out on writing paper like tender seaweeds.
19. Careful inspection of bark and roots should take place
for lichens in fruit : some are mere little specks of various colour,
each sort representing, however, microscopic characters of its own.
20. In a wet tropical country blotting paper can only
exceptionally be used for drying botanic specimens, as the mere
getting wet of one corner of the paper will draw by capilarity,
quickly, the humidity through the whole. A good kind of
printing paper is the best for drying plants in the tropics : of this
several reams should be available, and one ream or two of strong
packing and writing paper. To spin out the supply of paper as
far as possible during the journey’s operations, it will be needful
to pack closely together the dry plants whenever ready for
wrapping up into parcels, so that a portion of the paper could be
used again. Pasteboards should also be available to some extent,
for pressing and packing botanic specimens,


21. It is a mistaken notion to rely on bulbs, tubers, seeds,
and living plants to be carried away instead of dowering and
fruiting specimens. Such tubers, seeds, seedlings, shoots, &c.,
may, in conservatories not flower for years, and seldom ever
produce mature fruits in culture.
22. When the land-party reaches the temperate and cold
zones of the higher mountain regions the most strenuous efforts
should be made by all members of the party to make as large a
collection of dowering and fruiting specimens of the various trees
(probably oaks, cypresses, junipers, &c. among them), also
of the various shrubs (whether ornamental, as rhodendrons, &c., or
not showy), so also of all rushes (in fruit), grasses, herbs, &c.; the
approximate elevation of each of their places of growth to be
carefully noted on the label. If, under the urgency of circum-
stances, only small specimens of each sort can be brought, it will
suffice, provided the specimens are so selected that a photogra-
pher can work with them. The higher the elevations in the
ranges, the more numerous and interesting will be the new forms.
23. If any particular insect or bird &c. lives on any particular
plant, a note to that effect should be made on the label. Entries
of such kind in the diary should, as speedily as possible, be copied
out, and placed with the specimens at once, as otherwise, subse-
quent confusion is sure to occur.
24. Even on the sea-shores or river-banks specimens of
the common mangroves in dower and fruit should be secured, as
well as of any other widely distributed series of plants, inasmuch
as such common plants may not yet have been recorded from New
Guinea ; and as the specimens, if properly labelled, will adbrd us
the means of recording new particular localities, which will
always bedone under the dnder’s name.
General Instructions.
The Leader, officers and scientific staff shall each keep a
diary in duplicate for the Geographical Society, and shall each
record not only matters concerning his own special department
but all that he deems of interest. The duplicate copies should
be placed with the camp equipment, and never be taken out when
making explorations away from camp.
The diary is to be kept regularly, and all observations made
during the day are to be entered before the next day, and as soon
as possible after the camp is pitched for the night, and the neces-
sary duties connected with camping, attention to stores, &c., are
completed. This is to be in all cases determined by the leader.


Tracings or plans of the route should be obtainable from the
Leader, upon which to mark the position of observations. To
effect this rapidly, the daily observations in the journal should be
numbered, and a corresponding number placed on the map at the
point where the observation was made, or to which it refers.
The Nautical Sub-Leader shall keep a similar diary, record-
ing his daily work and experience.
Observations upon the natives, and the physical features,
geology, fauna and flora of the country, should be copiously
illustrated by sketches and photographs, with the number of
specimen or observation in the journal to which they refer
attached. ' J ’
All views should be numbered and dated with the time of
day, the position whence they were taken marked on the map,
and the compass bearing, and estimated distance, given of the
extreme points embraced in each view.
Scientific observations, or work that would cause hindrance
or otherwise interfere with the progress or necessary work of the
Expedition, must never be undertaken if contrary to the instruc-
tions of the Leader.
All specimens, journals, sketches, photographs, maps, or other
documents to be exclusively the property of the Geographical
Society, and on no pretence whatever are either specimens or
copies of the said documents, &c., to be given away or forwarded
privately to any person, _ or even officially, except through the
Leader ; although it is intended that each observer should, on
publication of the results of the Expedition, receive the credit
due to him for his observations.
All scientific or other documents, journals, &c., relatin'? to
the Expedition to be at all times accessible to the Leader. °
In the event of any occurrence by which a member thinks
himself aggrieved, it shall on demand be entered in the Leader’s
diary, with the attested statements or the member in 'Question as
soon as possible. All such matters shall be dealt with by the
Administrative Council after the return of the Expedition to
Sydney. Every member of the party shall abide by the decision.
Each member of the Expedition shall receive a copy of the
above instructions, and he is expected to render every assistance
in his power to his colleagues when opportunity offers.


Special Memoranda.
Always make natives march in front.
Never land in face of a party of natives, who are without
their women and children.
In making a movement, or marching before natives, always
have a covering party.
11
F. Cunninghame & Co., Printers, 146 Pitt-street, Sydney




