

K.L. TRACTORS
LIMITED
INSTRUCTIONS FOR
OPERATING & MAINTAINING
THE
K.L. BULLDOG
CRUDE OIL TRACTOR
K. L. BULLETIN




INSTRUCTION
BOOK
for
K. L. BULLDOG
CRUDE OIL TRACTOR
The strict observance of the contents of this instruction
book will assure the owner of long and satisfactory service from
the K. L. Bulldog Tractor.
It is therefore imperative that the tractor owner or operator
should become thoroughly acquainted with the construction, oper-
ation and maintenance of the tractor by carefully following these
instructions and recommendations.
ISSUED BY
K.L. TRACTORS LTD.
SPRINGY ALE
VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA




CONTENTS
SECTION 1 PAGE
DESCRIPTION & ACTION OF ENGINE 6-11
Starting the engine 9
If engine refuses to start 11
SECTION 2
COOLING SYSTEM 12 - 16
Cooling 13
Refilling while engine hot 13
Hot water in winter • 13
Danger from frost 13
Safety plug 13
Radiator shutter 15
Removing scale 15
Cleaning radiator . L6
Fan belt adjustment 1-6
Fan shaft bearing adjustment 16
SECTION 5 ,
LUBRICATION 17-31
Oil . . . 17
Handling oil. 17
Oil tank. . . 17
Points of lubrication 17
Oiler 19
Adjusting lubricator pumps 19
Adjustment of the regulator shaft 23
Priming with oil 23
Renewal of oil and cleaning the lubricating system. . 23
Oil return pump 25
Gauze strainer for return oil 25
Return oil cleaner .25
Care of return oil cleaner 25
Gear lubrication 27
Grease. 27
Lubricating chart for K.L. Bulldog Tractors ..... 29-31
SECTION 4
FUEL SYSTEM 32 - 41
Filling up fuel .33
Cleaning fuel tank. . . 33
Fuel strainer and stop valve 33
Fuel lever 33
Fuel lever setting for idling . > . . 33


Governor and fuel lever settings. . 33
Priming with fuel . 35
Removing air from pipe line 35
Testing valves 35
Fuel pump . . . 36
Checking and adjustment of pump stroke 36
Gland packing 37
Atomizer ,39
Setting atomizer 39
Testing atomizer 39
Care of atomizer 41
SECTION 5
ENGINE 42-53
Hot bulb 43
Cleaning combustion chamber 43
Cleaning engine 43
Piston rings. 45
Gudgeon pin 45
Gudgeon bush. 45
Cleaning oil conduits in crankshaft 45
Replacing piston 47
Big end bearing 47
Compression 47
Flushing socket 47
Seizing of piston 47
Air cleaner 49
Cleaning air cleaner. . 49
Air flaps 50
Exhaust 51
Trouble chart 52
Causes and remedies 53
SECTION 6
CLUTCH 54-58
Clutch general 55
Action of 3-shoe clutch 55
Adjustment of 3-shoe clutches 56
Adjustment of sliding collar 57
Adjustment of linkage of 3-shoe clutches 57
Adjustment of 3-shoe clutch brake 58
SECTION 7
TRANSMISSION 59 - 65
Transmission general 59
Intermediate idler gear ,59
Gear shifting general -59
Care of transmission 63
Care of differential and rear axle bearing 63
Assembling transmission ...... 65
CONTENTS (Continued)
PAGE


SECTION 8 PACE
WHEEL & TIRE MAINTENANCE 66-75
Front wheels 67
Steering knuckle 67
Front wheel toe-in 58
Wheel camber . • • 58
Steering linkage 68
Tyre maintenance and repairs 69
Inflation 69
Proper air pressure for mounting tyres 69
Checking air pressures 70
Care of tyres 70
Repairs 70
Methods of adding extra weight 71
Methods of getting water into a tube 71
To water inflate tyres 71
To remove water from tyres 73
Anti-freezing precautions for tyres 73
Hitching tractor ploughs 73
To find centre of load •. 73
Wheel loading 74
Load and inflation tables 74
Method of changing rear tyre 75
SECTION 9
BRAKES 77
SECTION 10
POWER TAKE-OFF 79
Belt work 79
SECTION 11
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 80 - 81
SECTION 12
BLOW LAMP 82-85
Fuel ' 83
Filling 83
Heating 83
Lighting 83
Regulating 83
Extinguishing 83
Troubles 85
CONTENTS* (Continued)


(21 ) Crank shaft.
(22) Transmission oil bath.
(23) Swinging draw bar.
(16) Atomizer.
(17) Safety plug.
(18) Hot bulb.
(19) Front axle beam.
(20) Engine piston.
(11) Fuel tank.
(12) Silencer.
(13) Cooling water header tank.
(14) Radiator units.
(15) Cylinder head.
(6) Brake lever.
(7) Clutch pedal,
(8) Air cleaner.
(9) Oil container.
(10) Return oil filter.
(1) Sprung haulage hitch.
(2) Tool box.
(3) Inspection plate.
(4) Secondary gear lever.
(5) Primary gear lever.


SECTION I.
DESCRIPTION & ACTION OF
ENGINE
Fig. 2. Sectional view of the engine.
A Exhaust ports
D Cylinder head
E Air intake ports
G Hot bulb
J Cylinder
K Piston
L Air channel
P Air valve flaps
S Connecting rod
U Crank case
W Crank shaft
The engine is of the horizontal, single cylinder, 2-cycle, hot
bulb type with crankcase compression to take care of induction and
scavenging. In the 2-cycle type of engine the piston not only performs
its conventional duty in the cylinder, but also creates crankcase compression.
FIRST CYCLE - During the power stroke the air in the crankcase M U",
Fig. 2, is compressed by the backward movement of the piston. Just before
the termination of the power stroke the piston uncovers the exhaust ports
"A” on the near, and, a little later, the air intakes ports "E w on the
off-side of the cylinder. Air under pressure from the crankcase rushes
through the channel "L” and intake ports "E" and, guided by the deflector
type piston head, fills the cylinder with pure air.
SECOND CYCLE - The piston moves forward, sucking air into the
crankcase through the air cleaner, and at the same time, compressing the
fresh air in the cylinder, while fuel in a finely atomized 'spray, is in-
jected through the atomizer by the fuel pump into the combustion chamber.
The charge is not exploded, but by a combined action of the hot bulb and the
subsequent compression a gradual combustion takes place, resulting in
smooth, consistent power very similar to that of the steam engine.
7


Fig. 3. Fuel, oil and water tanks.
1. Oil for lubricator.
2. Fuel.
B. Cooling water.
Fig. 5. Taking off steering wheel.
Fig. 4. Heating the bulb.
Fig. 6. Opening fuel stop valve;
8


SIGHTING THE ENGINE
The hot 'bulb is heated by the blow lamp for a few minutes, while
the operator is greasing and tanking up. A few strokes are given to the
fuel pump-hand lever and a swing on the starting wheel starts the engine.
STARTING PROCEDURE - Fill radiator to one inch from top of gauze
filter with soft water, preferably rain or boiled water, Fig. 3 - 3.
Fill fuel tank, Fig. 3-2.
Fill fresh lubricating oil tank and continue to add oil until oil
flows into return oil tank and reaches a level from top of division,
Fig. 3-1.
Three-quarters fill blow lamp with petrol and light, Fig. 90.
Place blow lamp under hot bulb, care being taken to open air flaps
on hot bulb cover, Fig. 4.
Place fuel lever in fully forward position, Fig. 35. This ensures
adequate supply of oil to piston and gudgeon pin when priming lubricator,
Page 22, Fig. 23.
Remove steering wheel and place in crankshaft on right hand side,
Fig. 5.
Place gears in neutral.
Turn crankshaft so that key is in rearmost position.
Place fuel lever in starting position, namely, 3 notches ahead of
the idling position, Fig. 35.
Open fuel stop valve 4 full turns, Fig. 5.
Turn atomizer three full turns from right down position.
Prime fuel pump by giving priming handle three short, hard strokes,
See Page 35.
Start engine by rocking the steering wheel sharply anti-clockwise,
Fig. 7.
Remove steering wheel with a short sharp pull, holding-it by means
of the loose knob, Fig. 8.
See that engine is running in the correct direction.
Remove and extinguish blow lamp.
Replace steering wheel.


Fig. 7. Cranking of engine by
steering wheel.
Fig. 8. Removing the steering wheel
after engine starts.
Fig. 9. Operating levers on
K.L. Bulldog Tractor.
B. Fuel (ever.
D. Engine direction indicator.
G. Primary gear change lever.
H. Hand brake lever.
K. Clutch pedal.
O. Plough line ring.
S. Secondary gear change lever.


IF ENGINE REFUSES TO START. A small quantity of fuel oil may have
accumulated in the pocket of the hot bulb, due to excessive hand pumping,
and, when starting by blow lamp, this must be removed before the engine
can be started.
Remove safety plug and heat up bulb thoroughly. Turn engine
round a few times slowly with fuel lever in closed (rear) position. Turn
flywheel into starting position, key in crankshaft upwards, replace safety
plug, and attempt to start again.


Fig. 10. Cylinder head with safety plug.
Fig. 11. Ring cover removed for
inspection of cylinder head.
Fig. 12. Radiator shutters open and closed positions.


SECTION 2.
COOLING SYSTEM
The cooling is accomplished by a thermosyphon system assisted by
a double radiator and fan. The water circulates by rising through the
water riser and returning to the cylinder jacket and head through the
radiator.
Keep tank filled within one inch of the top of the gauze filler
with soft water, preferably rain or boiled water, free from impurities.
Water containing lime forms scale in the cooling system, thus re-
ducing the cooling effect and causing overheating.
Inspect water level occasionally when working and replenish when
necessary. Never remove gauze when filling. Never use oily vessels, for
filling up cooling water, because oil in connection with scale forms an
effective heat insulating material.
REFILLING VHILE ENGINE HOT - Never pour cold water into an empty
or nehrly empty water system when engine is hot, otherwise the cylinder or
head might be damaged. Wait until engine cools. Take care not to scald
hands or face by steam or hot water when opening filler cap while engine
is hot.
HOT WATER IN WINTER - In cold weather fill cooling system with hot
water. This thins down the congealed oil between piston and cylinder and
makes the engine easy to turn. A few turns, given to the flywheel will
show if every thing moves freely. Any part stiffened by cold should be
warmed slightly and carefully with the blow lamp.
DANGER FROM FROST - On no account must water be left in cooling
system if there is the least sign of frost, otherwise serious damage might
result by bursting of cylinder, head, radiator or tank. To drain water,
open drain cock under engine, (handle in tool box), and drain plug on
cylinder head and filler cap on water tank;. Make sure that the drain cock
is clear by passing a wire through it. Leave cock open. Re-use drained
water.
SAFETY PLUG - As a precaution against overheating caused by lack
of water, scale etc., a safety plug, Fig. 10, is fitted in the cylinder
head. The core of this is filled with a melting fuse (a) consisting of a
fusible alloy, v;hich melts at a certain temperature. Never use lead or
iron as a substitute.
Keep a number of spare fuses on hand, obtainable from our Agents.
These are knocked in with a hammer. The hole, Fig.lo (b) and the thread
for the safety plug must be often cleaned. After replacing a fuse due to
overheating prime with oil.
13


Fig. 18. Tightening of fan belt.
Fig. 14. Section of fan pulley.
1 Outer pulley plate
2 Ring nut
3 Key
4 Nut
5 Inner pulley plate with hub
6 Felt holder
7 Spring washer for belt adjustment
8 Ring nut
9 Fan belt
10 Packing ring
11 Lock pin
12 Felt ring
13 Fan shaft
14 Fan shaft housing
15 Tapered roller bearing
16 Shim
17 Spacer


Oil iflust be pumped through the oil pipes until lubricating points
are amply supplied. In order that the oil should reach the gudgeon pin and
big end bearing during hand priming, set fuel lever in foremost position
and turn the flywheel by cranking wheel, so that key, Fig. 28 (a), in
crankshaft shows to the rear.
To ensure engine remaining in this position remove safety plug.
Then fit crank supplied to the pumpshaft, Fig. 18(2l), press into the
lubricator and turn in a clockwise direction for 180 turns, at a speed not
exceeding 60 turns a minute, Fig. 23. Then turn twice in an anticlockwise
direction to disengage dog clutch and withdraw.
This priming is necessary before starting the engine and after a
fuse has been replaced, due to overheating.
RADIATOR SHUTTER - For reducing the cooling effect of the radiator
shutters are provided.on the off-side of the tractor, Fig. 12. Keep
shutters closed until cooling water temperature is near boiling point,
which is necessary in order to obtain good combustion and smokeless exhaust
In very cold weather cover the header tank and radiators with a blanket or
hessian.
REMOVING SCALE - From time to time remove ring cover, Fig. n, on
cylinder head and ascertain whether any scale has formed. If this is so,
it must be removed in the following way: drain water, take out the
atomizer and safety plug and remove cylinder head. Then remove water
jacket base plate, chip and scrape scale as far as possible from cylinder
and from cylinder head after removing the ring cover.
T 0 remove scale from parts not accessible to hand tools, replace
the base plate and plug water holes in cylinder, remove radiator units and
water tank. Then fill up with commercial hydrochloric acid and let stand
for 4to 6 hours, when scale will have dissolved. Now drain off the
sludge, assisting by stirring up with a wire, and flush several times with
hot vfater. The cylinder head is to be treated in the same way.
CARE MUST BE TAKEN TO PREVENT ACID GETTING INTO THE CYLINDER, ON
THE PISTON, ON HANDS OR ON CLOTHES.
Having removed the scale from the cylinder, head, riser and
header tank, the radiator units must be attended to. Assemble cooling
system. Fill with soft water, in which 5 lbs. of soda have been dissolved.
Hun engine for half an hour to cause circulation. Stop engine for an hour,
then run it again for an hour. When cold, drain and flush until all
sludge is removed. T 0 make sure that all scale is removed, repeat the
whole procedure after 20 working hours.
As a substitute for a scale preventative, a few handfuls of
caustic soda should be added to the cooling water.


To keep up the efficiency of the radiator, the outside of the
radiator units must be kept free from dust and oil and must not be painted
as this would reduce the cooling effect. If dirty, wash with a water jet,
if oily, remove and clean with hot water and soda or paraffin.
FAN BELT ADJUSTMENT - The fan belt must be correctly tensioned.
If too tight, bearings will overheat and wear out quickly, if it slips by
being too loose, the water will overheat, causing steam to issue from the
filler cap. To tighten belt, remove a spacing washer, Fig. 13 (e), from
between the inner and outer pulley plate and place it between the latter
and ring nut (c). If the belt is still insufficiently tightened, shift
another washer from inside to outside (C spanner in tool box). KEEP THE
BELT lEEE FROM OIL AND GREASE.
FAN SHAFT BEARING ADJUSTMENT - The fan shaft is running on
tapered roller bearings. Increased humming of the fan usually indicates
that adjustment of the bearing is needed. It is adjusted by shims,
Fig.l4{l6) between bearing cup and ring nut (8) which is removed after
removing nut (4), pulling off the complete pulley with belt, when key (3)
will fall out, and removing lock pin (ll).
At the same time inspect the felt ring (12) and that on the
opposite shaft end, for which purpose the R.H. radiator and fan must be
taken down.


POINTS OP
LUBRICATION
Served
Points of Lubrication
.
with
Crank pin and main bearings
Fresh Oil
Mechanical
Piston, cylinder and gudgeon pin
Circulating Oil
Oiler
Transmission and rear axle housing
Gear Oil
Oil Bath
All points of lubrication enumerated
Grease
Grease Gun
in lubricating chart
and Oil Can
SECTION 3.
LUBRICATION
OIL - The life and efficient working of the tractor depend on
proper lubrication; neglect in this direction will cause serious trouble,
excessive wear and breakdown.
Only high grade mineral oil should be used, i.e., an odorless oil,
free from water, acid and other impurities. It should not, after
exposure in thin films to the atmosphere, become resinous or dry up to a
varnish-like layer.
HANDLING OIL - When handling oil scrupulous cleanliness is
absolutely essential. Prior to opening the oil drum, dust and dirt must be
removed from its cover. No open can should be used for storage, and the
oil should preferably be poured into the oil tank straight from the drum,
in which it is purchased. Under no circumstances must the strainer be re-
moved during filling. Thick oil should be thinned down by warming.
OIL TANK - The oil tank, Pig. 15, is divided by a partition wall
(6) into two compartments: (5) for return and (4) for fresh oil, which is
filled daily by filler (2). When compartment (4) is filled up to the top
of partition (6) the fresh oil gains access to compartment (5) where it
mixes with the return oil. Continue filling up until the oil level exceeds
the partition wall (6) by not more than smm inch) in order to avoid
overflowing and spilling when,on starting the engine, the oil
accumulated in the crankcase is suddenly returned to the container. The
fresh oil compartment (4) is connected by suction pipe (7) to the pump
units for lubricating the crank pin and main bearings, while compartment
(5) is connected to the piston lubricating pump by suction pipe (17).
I
The level in the two compartments should be checked at least
twice a day by the dip rods, screwed into each compartment, Fig. 16, and
replenished with fresh oil if it is getting low.


Fig. 15. Lubricating system, fuel and automatic oil control
through fuel lever.
1. Fuel lever.
2. Oil filler screen.
3. Return oil filter.
4. Fresh oil container.
5. Circulating oil container.
6. Partition wall.
7. Fresh oil suction pipe.
8. Fuel operating rod.
9. Oil operating rod.
Fig. 16. One dip rod for each compartment.
10. Oil control adjusting fork.
11. Joint pin.
12. Lock nut.
13. Tappet adjusting nut.
14. Plunger.
15. Oil regulator shaft.
16. Oiler.
17. Circulating oil suction pipe.
Fig. 17. Mechanical lubricator
and pipes
1 Mechanical lubricator
2 Return pump (gear type)
3 Regulator shaft for piston
lubrication
4 Fresh oil suction pipe
5 Circulating oil suction pipe
6 Delivery pipe to R. H. main bearing piston, cylinder
and gudgeon pin L.H. main bearing crank pin
7 Delivery pipe to R. H. main bearing piston, cylinder
and gudgeon pin L.H. main bearing crank pin
8 Delivery pipe to R. H. main bearing piston, cylinder
and gudgeon pin L.H. main bearing crank pin
9 Delivery pipe to R. H. main bearing piston, cylinder
and gudgeon pin L.H. main bearing crank pin


Quarter turns to adjusting
screw, Fig.20 (3) of the pump
Number of
quarter turns
Fig. 17 (7) for cylinder
lubrication
2
Fig. 17 (8) for L.H. main bearing
8
Fig. 17 (6) for R.H. main bearing
8
Fig. 17 (9) for crank pin
lubrication
16
OILER - Main bearings, big end and piston including gudgeon pin
and cylinder walls are served by the mechanical oiler, which is fixed to
the main bearing cover behind the left flywheel and driven from the crank
shaft by a skew gear and shaft as shown in Fig. 17. The oiler consists of
4 plunger pumps, the barrels of which are bored into the pump body,
Fig. 18 (6). A separate oil pump is provided for each point, requiring
lubrication, and the action is as follows
The pump plunger, Fig. 18 (4) is actuated by the rotation of the
swash plate (17), rigidly fixed to the driving spindle (25), whilst at the
same time the oil suction and delivery conduits are alternately connected
with the pump chamber by apertures, provided in the rotating spindle 05)•
If the pump plunger (4) is raised by the swash plate (17), a connection
between the pump chamber and the suction opening is established by a bore
in spindle (15). The oil is thus drawn in by the upward stroke of the pump
plunger. As the plunger descends, the spindle (15) rotates and establishes
a connection by means of a channel between the pump barrel end the delivery
pipe.
ADJUSTING LUBRICATOR PUMPS - The lubricating pump units must be
checked for correct adjustment, since faulty adjustment will lead to
serious damage or heavy oil consumption. Each pump has an individual ad-
justing screw’, Fig. 18 (3) , adjusting the length of the plunger stroke and
consequently the quantity of lubricating oil, supplied to each point.
This screw; has a left hand thread. Turning to the left increases, to the
right decreases the oil supply. To check or adjust the pump units, unscrew;
the lubricator cap as showm in Fig. 19, and turn the aforementioned ad-
justing screw;, Fig. 18 (3) to "No Stroke" position by turning it to the
right as far as it will go. Then turn to the left for the number of
quarter turns given below;.
Note that the adjusting screwis (3) and (22) , Fig. 18, (4) in
Fig. 20, are rather hard to turn, because each quarter turn is arrested by
a catch.
The lubricator cap (20) Fig* 18, contains a check (2) preventing
the pump plunger being pushed beyond the maximum stroke by oil pressure.


Fig. 18 Sectional views of the mechanical lubricator. Upper view
shows a pump unit for big end and main bearings, lower views show the
pump unit and compensating plunger for cylinder lubrication
1 Spring cover
2 Plunger check ring
3 Plunger adjusting screw
4 Pump plunger
5 Fresh oil delivery pipe
6 Pump body
7 Disengager
8 Lubricator drive housing
9 Spring for disengager pin
10 Disengager pin
11 Worm gear
12 Worm
13 Mixed oil suction pipe
14 Fresh oil suction pipe
15 Driving spindle
16 Dog clutch
17 Plunger swash plate
18 Disengaging fork
19 Clutch spring
20 Screw cap
21 Clutch connecting shaft
22 Plunger stroke adjusting
screw to piston
lubrication
23 Pump plunger
24 Mixed oil delivery pipe
25 Threaded stud for puffing
compensating plunger out
of action
26 Compensation plunger of
automatic cylinder oil
regulator
27 Regulator shaft
28 Regulator spring housing
29 Regulator spring


Therefore, THE SCREW CAP MUST BE TIGHTLY SCREWED UP AND SECURED BY A TORE.
The oiler pump (23), Eig. 18, for supplying lubricating oil to
piston and cylinder is also actuated by swash plate (17) and adjusted by
its adjusting screw (22) in a similar way to the other three pumps by their
adjusting screws (3). It differs, however, from these pumps in so far as
it is primarily adjusted at the Works to supply a quantity of oil equal to
twelve quarter turns of the adjusting screw (22), which quantity cannot be
reduced by adjusting screw (22). For this purpose this pump is provided
with a two-way adjustment illustrated in Fig. 20, i.e., the primary adjust-
ment by sleeve (2). Adjusting sleeve (2) is secured against turning
circlip (3) and should not be touched by any unauthorized person, since its
readjustment requires expert knowledge.
Although adjustment by secondary adjusting screw (4), Fig. 20,
does not permit cutting down the oil supply below the setting of the
primary adjustment sleeve (2), the oil supply is, in fact, cut down
automatically by the setting of the fuel lever when the tractor is idling
or operating on a light load, in order to economize oil consumption and to
prevent overoiling and smoky exhaust.
This is attained by altering the capacity of the pump chamber
through the medium of the compensating plunger (26) Fig. 18.
The compensating plunger in its turn, is dependent on the
regulating shaft (27) Fig. 18, connected to the fuel lever by rods (8) and
(9) in Fig. 15 and rotated round its own axis by the fuel lever.
The compensating plunger (26) Fig. 18, and the regulating shaft
(27) are interlocked with each other by slots as shown. The cam, provided
in the slot of the regulating shaft, limits the length of the stroke of
the compensating plunger.
When the fuel lever is set for full load, the compensating plunger
(26) is drawn back into the barrel, so that it does not interfere with the
pump chamber and the maximum quantity of oil, to which the pump is
primarily adjusted is delivered to the pistons. When the fuel lever is
set for lighter loads, the compensating plunger is proportionately released
by the movement of the fuel lever, Le., by the changed position of the con
on the regulating shaft and is pushed by the coil spring (29) into the
pump chamber thus reducing its capacity.
As shown in Fig. 18, the heads of the two plungers are slanted so
that the compensating plunger (26) is pushed back into its barrel by the
delivery stroke of the pump plunger. During the suction stroke the pump
plunger (23) the compensating plunger (26) is pushed again into the pump
chamber by spring (29), thus closely following up the suction stroke of
the pump plunger, partly compensating its stroke and consequently reducing
the oil quantity in proportion to the load on the engine.
21


Fig. 19.
Adjustment of lubricator pumps.
Fig. 21.
Adjustment of regulator shaft of piston lubrication
G: Mark on oiler bousing
Z: Pointer on regulator shaft
Fig. 23. Priming lubricating oil
Fig. 20. Adjustment of lubricator pump for cylinder lubrication
3 Circlip for locking the
pump stroke adjusting sleeve
4 Adjusting screw for secondary
adjustment of the pump stroke
Fig. 22. Position of piston for priming with oil.
Key in crankshaft showing to the rear
Fig. 24. Drain plugs for oil tanks.
1 Pump plunger head
2 Threaded adjusting sleeve
for primary pump stroke
adjustment in the Works


ADJUSTMENT OF THE REGULATOR SHAFT - With fuel lever set to mark (1)
Fig. 35, the engine idling at 300 r.p.m., the pointer (Z) Fig. 21, on the
regulator shaft must coincide with mark (G) on the oiler housing. Adjust-
ment is effected by fork (10), Fig. 15, on link (9). This adjustment is
always necessary when the fuel pump tappet has been readjusted.
The automatic lubricating oil supply (i.e. cutting down when
idling), controlled by the fuel lever, can be put out of action by placing
a nut on the threaded stud (25), Fig. 18, fixed to the compensating
plunger (26) and by tightening the nut to prevent the compensating
plunger being pushed into the pump barrel by spring (29) when released by
the regulating cam.
PRIMING WITH OIL - Oil must be pumped through the oil pipes until
lubricating points are amply supplied. In order that the oil should reach
the gudgeon pin and big end bearing during hand priming, set fuel lever in
foremost position and turn the flywheel by cranking wheel, so that key (s),
Fig. 22, in crankshaft shows to the rear. To ensure engine remaining in
this position remove safety plug. Then fit crank, supplied to the pump
shaft (21), Fig. 18, press into the lubricator and turn in a clockwise
direction for 180 turns, at a speed not exceeding 60 turns a minute
Fig. 23. Then turn twice in an anti-clockwise direction to disengage dog
clutch and withdraw.
This priming is necessary before starting the engine and after a
fuse has been replaced, due to overheating.
RENEWAL OF OIL AMD CLEANING LUBRICATING SYSTEM - After the first
100, and subsequently every 300 working hours the oil must be drained from
the oil tanks by the drain plugs (M) and (A 2) , Fig. 24, and replenished
with fresh oil after carefully mopping up all sediments from the
containers.
The lubricating system should be cleaned every 1800 working hours
at the same time as removing the tanks for cleaning the fuel tank. To
do this, drain oil from tanks when level is low by unscrewing the drain
plugs, Fig. 24.
Remove oil tank cover with filter attached to it and wash both
compartments (4) and (5), Fig. 15, with kerosene, remove all sediments by
mopping with a lintless cloth (not cotton waste) end re-connect suction
pipes.
Then unscrew cap (20), Fig. 18, from lubricator and wash
thoroughly both cap and oiler with kerosene without taking the latter down
from the tractor. Clean the inside mechanism and pumps by pumping
kerosene through the lubricator by means of the crank handle.
For this purpose disconnect oil delivery pipes at their


Fig. 25. Front view of gauze strainer
in crankcase base plate.
1 Crank case
2 Crank case base plate
3 Radius rod
4 Return oil pipe
5 Pipe union screw
6 Gauze strainer
Fig. 27. Gear oil level control plug.
Fig. 26. Oil cleaner for return oil.
1 Return pipe from pump
2 Overflow valve ball
3 Overflow valve spring
4 Felt ring holding spring
5 Centre tube
6 Filter felts
7 Nut
8 Filter housing
9 Return oil conduit
10 Oil tank cover
12 Gauze strainer
13 Dip rods
14 Spring seat
15 Felt ring
16 Washer
Fig. 28. Filler plug for gear oil.


lubrication points after marking them with tags. Pour a little kerosene
into each compartment of the oil container and turn crank handle until no
more kerosene comes out of any of the delivery pipes. Wipe the oil
container carefully out with a dry lintless cloth and fill with fresh oil.
Then continue pumping by crank handle until clean oil comes from all
delivery pipes without air bubbles.
If, after turning the crank handle about 100 times and no oil
comes out, this is a sign that air is contained in the suction line, which
must be removed by temporarily increasing the pump plunger stroke by
several quarter turns by turning adjusting screw (5), Fig. 13, to the left
Then continue hand pumping. After all air has been removed, readjust pump
plunger. Then reassemble and do not omit to secure the tightly screwed up
lubricator cap by wire. The oil chamber containing the skew gear drive
of the oiler, must be drained every 1000 working hours by drain plug,
Fig. 19, on the left main bearing cover and refilled with half a pint of
lubricating oil through the hole of the oil pipe reduction socket on top
of the main bearing cover after removing the oil pipe and the said socket.
OIL RETURN PUMP - The geared type oil return pump (2), Fig. 17,
returns the oil accumulating in the crankcase by pipe (I), Fig. 26, to
the circulating oil compartment (5), Fig. 15.
GAUZE STRAINER FOR RETURN OIL - During its circulation, the oil
is cleaned first, from coarser impurities by the gauze strainer, built into
the crankcase base plate, and then thoroughly by the oil cleaner attached
to the underside of the oil tank cover.
The gauze strainer, Fig. 25, must be cleaned weekly, or every
50 hours: Remove sludge from crankcase, using a brush, and flush with
kerosene. Replace gauze screen if damaged. Make sure that return pipe
(4), Fig. 25, is clear, otherwise take down and blow through with an
air pump.
RETURN OIL CLEANER - After passing through the gauze strainer,
the return oil enters through pipe (I) and conduit (9), Fig. 26, into
the chamber between filter housing (8) and filter felts. It is pressed
through the felts (6), in which all impurities are retained, into the com-
partment, encircling the perforated centre tube, through which it flows
down into the return oil compartment (5), Fig. 15.
Should felts become choked through want of cleaning, the oil
passes unfiltered from pipe (I) through valve (2) Fig. 25, direct into
the centre tube.
CARE OF THE RETURN OIL CLEANER - The cleaner must be cleaned at
the same time when renewing the oil, i.e., after the first 100, and
subsequently every 300. working hours in the following way:


Fig. 29. Sectional view of transmission.
1 Upper oil bath
compartment
2 Drain plug for 1
3 Drain plug of lower
oil bath compartment
4 Oil level control plug
Fig. 30. Lubricating with grease gun.


Unscrew the 6 oil tank cover holding screws and remove the cover
with the cleaner attached to it. Then remove the filter by removing nut
(7) Fig. 26. Wash the felts, all filter parts as well as the interior of
the oil tank and conduit (S) and (l) thoroughly with kerosene, and re-
assemble after the felts have thoroughly dried.
Do not use Felts other than those supplied from the K.L. Tractor
works. Keep spare felts on hand.
Take care not to lose the ball valve (2), which is apt to jump
out when pipe (5) is being unscrewed from oil tank cover (10) for the
purpose of cleaning the oil passages.
GEAR LUBRICATION
The gear case of the tractor is provided with a filler hole,
Fig. 28, and oil lever control plug, Fig. 27, and (4), Fig. 29, and 2
drain plugs (2) and (3), Fig. 29. After the first 100 working hours the
gear oil must be drained and removed. Drain the oil immediately after’
stopping the tractor, while the engine is still warm and the oil in liquid
state, by removing plugs (2) and (3), Fig. 29. Replenish, taking care
that the oil level in the housing is not higher than up to the control
plug (4), Fig. 27, otherwise it might leak out and damage the rubber tyres
Therefore, before filling gear oil through the filler hole,
remove the oil level control plug and all gummy oil sediments by which
the oil level control hole may be choked.
"When filling the gear case the oil must flow, directed by means
of a funnel, into the smaller upper compartment (1), Fig. 29, arranged
sideways within the gear box so that the compartment is filled to
capacity before the oil flows into the lower main compartment.
Subsequently, the gear oil is to be renewed every 1,500
working hours.
GRIA.SE
All points, provided with nipples are lubricated as indicated
in the lubricating shart, Fig. 31, by the grease gun supplied with
tractor. The grease lubrication.is of as much importance as the oil
lubrication. A very soft, high grade grease of mineral base is to be
used, free from water, acid and other impurities, as well as not being
resinous nor rancid.


When using grease gun, piece it on nipple end push barrel towards
nipple, then allow it to slide back, and repeat several times until a
resistance is felt, or grease oozes from the bearing points. When the large
plunger goes entirely into the barrel the grease gun is empty. If grease
oozes from between nipple and nozzle, renew grease gun nozzle and/or nipple.
Grease emerging from the joints must be removed, otherwise it would collect
grit and dust.
When greasing fan spindle, care must be taken not to over-grease
as excess grease is thrown by the fan into the radiator cores causing over-
heating. Two or three strokes of the grease gun daily should be sufficient.


LUBRICATING
CHART
FOR
K.L. BULLDOG
CRUDE OIL TRACTOR


Fig. 31. Lubrication points on
K.L. Bulldog Tractor.
30


LUBRICATING CHART BOR
K.L. BULLDOG TRACTORS
j KEY NO.
NUMBER OF
BLR VICH
ON CHART
NIPPLES
QUANTITY
TWICE DAILY;
SERVE WITH GREASE GUN
Clutch, sleeve under R.H. flywheel
cover flap.
19
1
6-8 strokes
SERVE WITH LUBRICATING OIL
Mechanical force feed lubricator
32
Fill as directed
in text.
Eccentric strap and lubricator
29
drive - use oil can
30
Approx. 6
squirts with can.
ONCE DAILY:
SERVE WITH GREASE GUN
Wrist pin bearings L.H. & R.H.
1, 3
4
2-3 strokes
Front wheel bearings L.H. & R.H.
2
2
2-3 '•
Track rod bushes
4
2
1-2 ’»
Eccentric sheave (under L.H.
flywheel cover flap)
6
1
2-3 "
Steering sector shaft
7
1
2-3 '•
Pivot pin, swinging draw bar
9
1
2-3 "
Rear bearing, power take-off
13
1
1-2 »
Steering column
14
1
1-2 «
Side rod of steering gear (front
and rear)
15, 2V
2
1-2 **
1st. gear shaft bearings
16, 54
2
2-3 "
Stay rod pivot bearing
17
1
1-2 "
Clutch sliding collar
20
1
2-3 ”
Clutch operating shaft (lower end)
22
1
1-2 "
Idler gear
23
1
2-3 "
Rocker shaft
24, 28
2
1-2 "
Fuel pump tappet
25
1
1-2 "
King pin, centre of front axle
26
1
1-2 •»
Roller pin of swinging draw bar
33
1
2-3 '»
ONCE WEEKLY;
SERVE WITH GREASE GUN
Fan bearings
5
1
3-4 strokes
Clutch pedal cross shaft beamings
8
2
2-3 *
Spring hitch
11, 12
2
3-4 "
Clutch shoe pivots (under R.H.
flywheel cover)
21
3
2-3 "
ONCE MONTHLY:
Gear oil-replenish to correct level
(see Instruction Text)
18 :
As required
ALL JOINTS NOT PROVIDED LTTH NIPPLES LUST BE SERVED FROM TIMS TO TIME LTTH
OIL CAN AFTER THOROUGH CLEANING
31


Fig. 32. Fuel supply system.
1. Fuel control rod.
2. Oil control rod.
3. Fuel supply regulating wedge.
4. Governor rocker arm shaft.
5. Pump tappet.
6. Fuel pump.
7. Fuel suction pipe.
8. Fuel strainer.
9. Fuel stop valve.
10. Atomizer.
11. Fuel delivery pipe.
12. Eccentric strap.
13. Engine rotation governor.
14. Fuel tank.
15. Crank shaft.
16. Fuel pipe to strainer
Fig. 34. Outside view of fuel supply.
A Fuel stop valve
B Atomizer
F Fuel strainer
D Pump casing
P Fuel pump
V Fuel pump handle
d Fuel delivery pipe
s Fuel suction pipe
Fig. 33. Fuel strainer and stop valve.
Fig. 35. Fuel lever setting.


SECTION 4
FUEL SYSTEM
FILLING UP FUEL - When filling with fuel filler (2) , Fig. 5, the
gauze strainer must never be removed, and careful attention should be paid
to cleanliness, as engine stoppages are often caused by dirty fuel. Do not
use the dregs of storage tanks, as they contain sediment.
CLEANING FUEL TANK - The fuel tank should be completely drained
and cleaned every 600 working hours. To drain the tank, unscrew the plug
at the bottom of the fuel strainer, Fig. 33, and open stop valve, and re-
move the air cleaner cowling, disconnect the tank fastening screws and all
pipes on the tank including the oil suction pipes (7) and (17), Fig. 15,
remove the tank and wash thoroughly with kerosene.
This opportunity should be taken to clean the lubricating system.
STOP VALVE AND FUEL STRAINER - The fuel strainer (F) Fig. 34, is
placed in the pipe line (16) and (7), Fig. 32, between the tank and pump.
This is provided with a stop valve (A), Fig. 34, vhich is opened 4 turns.
The strainer should be cleaned every 100 working hours by unscrewing the
plug at the bottom, as shown in Fig. 53.
Take care that the inlet and outlet openings and fuel pipes are
perfectly clear.
Clean the fuel filler gauze at the same time.
FUEL LEVER - The operator controls the fuel supply to the engine
by setting the fuel lever Fig. 35. If the engine load is increased, the
supply of fuel to the engine must be increased by moving the lever for-
ward, if the load is decreased, the fuel supply must be decreased by
moving the lever backwards.
FUEL LEVER SETTING 1"0R IDLING - The engine commences to knock
when the temporary permissible peak load is reached. There is no danger
in temporary knocking of the engine but continuous knocking must be
avoided.
For idling, set the fuel lever on mark 1, when the engine will
idle at 350 r.p.m. Do not put the lever below this mark to idle, or in-
sufficient lubricating oil will be supplied to the piston and cylinder.
Do not alter the lever operating rods, for dismantling withdraw
only the pins from the joints.
GOVERNOR & FUEL LEVER SETTINGS - The two speed governor, Fig. 36,
acting with the fuel lever settings, is mounted on the left hand flywheel
and crankshaft, and keeps the two engine speeds, i.e., the idling speed


Fig. 37. Air pocket trap.
1 Air chamber
2 Center tube
3 Pipe Union
4 Accessibility plug
5 Air discharge plug
6 Suction valve
7 Delivery valve
8 Pump body
Fig. 36. Governor.
1. Lock nut.
2. Adjusting screw for maximum speed.
3. Governor spring for high speed.
4. Fly weight.
5. Inner (fast) eccentric.
6. Outer (loose) eccentric.
7. Adjusting screw for minimum speed.
8. Lock nut.
9. Governor spring for low
speed.
10. Governor housing.
11. Eccentric strap.
12. Adjusting nut.
13. Lock nut.
14. Dead play before action
of governor.
Fig. 38. Sectional view of fuel pump valves. D Delivery valve;
S Suction valve.
1 Fuel priming handle
2 Pump casing
3 Gland adjusting nut
4 Pump body
5 Pump plunger spring
6 Gland distance piece
7 Gland packing
8 Pump plunger
9 Fuel delivery pipe
10 Fuel suction pipe
11 Delivery pipe union screw
12 Delivery valve housing
13 Delivery valve spring
14 Delivery valve
15 Delivery valve ball
16 Suction valve spring
17 Suction valve
18 Suction valve ball
19 Suction valve housing
20 Suction pipe union screw
34


of 350 r.p.m. end the normal speed of 500 r.p.m., approximately, constant
under all normal load conditions, providing the fuel lever is correctly-
set. V/ith fuel lever on mark (1), Fig. 35, only serine (9) Fig. 36, is
active, and the speed is limited to 350 r.p.m. T'Jhen the fuel lever is
advanced beyond mark (2), spring (3) is brought into action, and the com-
bined action of both springs keeps the engine speed nearly constant at
600 r.p.m.
The governor is correctly adjusted at the works and neither
the adjusting nuts 1,3, 12 and 13, nor the centre bolt (2) for pre-
compression of spring (5) should be altered.
The dead play at (14) before the governor begins to act at
normal speed is necessary.
PRIMEITG V.TTri FUEL - On the pump casing (2) Fig. 38, a handle
(1), is fitted, by which the hot bulb is primed rith fuel for starting.
Open the fuel stop valve 4 turns, and push priming lever to the left until
the resistance of the pump plunger spring is felt, then give priming lever
2to 3 short hard strokes. Do not overprime, otherwise the engine rill
refuse to start. After priming is finished be sure to push lever back
until it engages rith the catch.
REMOVING AIR FROM PIPS HITS - Before first starting the engine,
and after the fuel strainer, pipes, or atomizer have been removed, or the
engine has stopped due to rant of fuel, the air pockets in the pipe line
must be removed.
Open the fuel stop valve 4 turns, loosen pipe union on
delivery valve, disconnect fuel pipe at the atomizer and unscrer plug (5)
Fig. 37, until air is expelled and fuel flors freely from the plug,
tighten plug (5) and operate the pump rith the priming lever until fuel
flows freely, without air bubbles, from the end of. the delivery pipe.
Make sure that fuel line unions, such as gland nuts, valve
housings and pipe unions are tight to avoid sucking of air, and retighten
if necessary.
TESTING VALYBS - In order to test the efficiency of valves,
disconnect suction and delivery pipes and unscrer valve housings. Examine
valve rith balls removed to see if their cones fit tightly in their
seatings by pouring a little gasolene into the housings, and this should
not seep through. If it does, the valves must be'ground in, as
follows;
Place the valve housing in a vice, apply a very fine
grinding compound to the valve cone and place it in the valve seating. By
means of a small stick turn the valve by quarter turns alternately to the


right and left in the seating applying a little pressure, lifting the cone
occasionally to let the grinding compound get between the cone and the seat.
Continue in this manner until the surface of the seat and cone show an even
surface all the way round. If the valve seating is badly worn, it must be
milled before reseating the valve or a new one must be fitted.
It is advisable to keep a set of spare valves on hand.
■Whilst the suction and delivery pipes are out, make sure that the
ball valves seat tightly by inserting the balls and testing. Should the
seatings be leaky, place a brass drift on the ball in the housing and give
a few light taps with the hammer. Damaged or rusty balls must be replaced.
When re-assembling be careful to fit the proper valves and springs.
Each valve goes with the housing, into the seating of which it has been
ground. The stronger spring belongs to the delivery valve. The springs
must be correctly fitted and air pockets removed from pipe line before
tightening the pipe unions.
FUEL PUMP - The plunger type fuel pump (6), Fig. 32, is operated
by an eccentric strap through governor rocker arm (4), pump tappet (5) and
and pump plunger. Between rocker arm (4) and tappet (5) the regulating
wedge (3) is interposed, and this is operated by the fuel lever, thus
varying the stroke and consequently the amount of fuel delivered to the
engine.
In order to avoid over-heating of the engine by overcharging it
with fuel and consequently giving a smoky exhaust, caused by the inertia
of the governor fly-weights in case of sudden changes of load, the stroke
of the fuel pump is limited and the excess movement caused by action of the
fly-weights cancelled out in the following way:
The movement of the collar, integral with the tappet (7),Fig. 40,
is limited on one (minimum) side by the inner shoulder of the adjustable
tappet guide (9), and on the other (maximum) side by the adjustable, slotted
tappet check screw (14), screwed into the tappet guide. Thus the movement
of the tappet and the stroke of the plunger are limited. The excess move-
ment of the rocker arm (2), governed by the governor strap, in case of
sudden changes of load is taken up by the buffer (4) and its spring (3),
for which purpose the anchorage stud of the buffer is carried in the bore
of the rocker arm in a sliding fit with a certain amount of axial play under
the control of the buffer spring (3).
CHECKING AND ADJUSTMENT OF PUMP STROKE - With the fuel lever set
to mark (1), Fig. 35, the engine must idle at 350 r.p.m. checked with a
revolution counter. If this is not so, adjust the engine speed to this
number of revolutions by screwing the tappet guide (9), Fig. 40, in or out
while engine is running after loosening the lock nut (8). After adjustment,
tighten the lock nut but not to such an extent that the tappet will stick.
Then check the minimum idling speed once more. Then check the pump stroke
which must be 2.0 mm.


To do this, proceed as follows:
mtr Stop engine, remove pump casing, Fig. 39, set fuel lever on mark
(3)*for maximum load and remove safety plug to facilitate turning of fly-
wheel. When turning the flywheel slowly, the tappet (7), Fig. 39, will be
moved in forward direction, and after it has come to a standstill in fore-
most position, measure the distance (e) as shown in Fig. 39, with a
calliper. Then turn the flywheel half a revolution until the backward
movement of the tappet comes to a standstill and measure the distance (e)
again. The difference between the two measurements indicates the maximum
tappet (or pump) stroke, which must be as stated above. The maximum
limitation of the pump stroke is adjusted by screwing the tappet check
screw (14) Fig. 40, in (for decreasing the pump stroke) or out (for in-
creasing it) after loosening tab washer (13) and lock nut (10) until the
difference of the measurements (e) is not more or less than started above.
A greater stroke would cause overheating of the engine and smoke. Then
draw lock nut tight and check the stroke once more. Secure by bending one
tab of the lock washer (13) over the tappet check screw and the other over
the lock nut.
Note that the checking and adjustment of the minimum limitation
is with engine running and fuel lever on mark (1) Fig. 35, and that of the
maximum limitation with engine at rest and fuel lever on mark (3).
DO NOT ADJUST PUMP STROKS SO 'THAT ENGINE IDLES WITH TUEL LEVER
PLACED LOWER THAN MARK (I) ON FUEL QUADRANT AS LUBRICATING OIL SUPPLY TO
CYLINDER IS THEN ELIMINATED.
GLAND PACKING - Should fuel leak from the gland, Fig. 33, while
the engine is running, slightly tighten gland nut (3), but not to such an
extent that the pump plunger sticks. If this tightening of the nut (3)
is not sufficient to stop leakage of fuel, then a new gland packing is
required and should be inserted as follows:
Remove fuel pipes from the pump, also the valves and valve
housings, take off the pump by removing the two nuts and levering the
plunger past the tappet.
With the pump removed, withdraw the plunger and remove the
spring, when the gland nut can be token off and the old packing removed.
Thoroughly clean all parts in kerosene, then place the pump body
lightly in a vice, with stuffing box uppermost. Insert the pump plunger
with gland nut and gland in their correct positions on it, hold'the nut
and gland up and place one round of graphited string (previously cut to
correct length) round the pump plunger. Push this round home into the
stuffing box by means of the gland and repeat this operation with other
rounds of pocking until the stuffing box is filled to within about f-" of
the top.
In putting the rounds in, keep the gaps of adjacent ones
diametrically opposite.


Carefully remove the plunger, oil well and fit the spring, then
reinsert plunger with spring gland and gland nut on it into the pump body.
Particles of packing which may have become detached should be
carefully removed from the pump body.
Replace pump on the cylinder block and adjust gland nut so that
it contacts gland but does not cause plunger to stick.
Reassemble valve housings, valves and pipes to the pump body, re-
place pump cover and then proceed to remove air from pump and fuel lines
as previously instructed.
Fig. 39. Measuring the pump stroke.
Fig. 40. Fuel pump tappet adjustment.
1 Nut
2 Rocker arm
3 Buffer spring
4 Rocker arm buffer
5 Fuel supply regulating wedge
6 Crank case
7 Fuel pump tappet
8 Lock nut
9 Tappet guide
10 Lock nut
11 Pump plunger
12 Plunger spring
13 Lock washer
14 Slotted tappet check screw.


Fig. 41. Atomizer.
1 Hand wheel
2 Spindle
3 Gland screw
4 Gland packing string
5 Fuel pipe union screw
6 Fuel pipe
7 Water jacket
8 Nozzle
9 Copper washer
10 Ring cover screw
11 Ring cover
12 Rubber packing ring for ring cover
13 Atomizer body
14 Spindle stop
ATOMIZER
The Atomizer, Fig. 41, must be handled carefully, special
attention being paid to nozzle (8), and grooves at the end of spindle (2)
which are carefully ground at the factory. The fuel spray for various
loads is regulated by screwing the spindle up or down. Fig. 42, according
to requirements, but this adjustment does not alter the quantity of fuel
injected, only increasing or decreasing the degree and angle of
atomization, with which the fuel is sprayed on the heating plate or into
the pocket of the bulb, Fig. 45.
SETTING ATOMIZER
When the estimated load ■ . .
is over 12 H.P. (full load) . . . close the spindle - Fig. 43.
is 6 - 12 H.P. . . . 1|- turns open, (to the left).
is 0 - 6 H.P. , and when starting ... 3 turns up - Fig. 43.
When spindle is screwed right down, Fig. 41, to stop (14), this
is full load position, and "turns up" are counted from this position,
Fig. 42. Above settings are only approximate. Do not apply force when
screwing spindle down for full load and return slightly when it reaches
the bottom. Adjustment should be carried out immediately after stopping
the tractor or any change of load. If the atomizer spindle is unscrewed
too far on a heavy load, the bulb will become over heated, end irregular
running will result, the engine will knock and pull badly. If it is
screwed in too far on a light load, misfiring and smoking from the exhaust
will result and perhaps ignition will cease altogether.
TESTING OF ATOMIZER - For testing unscrew the atomizer from
cylinder head and connect it up to delivery pipe, leaving the unions
loose. Now pump by priming handle, Fig. 44, in order to expel all air
from pipe; when fuel flows freely, tighten the union nut and pump again.
The correct shape of the spray is tested in the following way:


Fig. 42. Position of spindle.
V, at full load. L, when idling.
Fig. 43. Action of atomizer.
V, at full load. L, when idling.
Fig, 45. Fuel spray.
V, at full load, L, when idling.
Fig. 44. Fuel spray.
V, at full load. L, when idling.
Fig. 46. Dismantling atomizer.
a. Nozzle hole.
b. Nozzle.
c. Groove in spindle.


A piece of paper is held horizontally underneath the atomizer at
a distance of sg" from end of the nozzle, and one or two short hard strokes
are given to the priming handle. If the spindle is screwed right down,
the spray crown should show in a perfect circle of 4?-" diameter, Fig. 44.
If unscrewed 3 turns (no load), it will show a practically straight spray.
If fuel leaves in blobs, air is present in the pipe or nozzle and
must be expelled by further pumping. Replace atomizer in cylinder head
and fit delivery pipe loosely so that the air may be pumped out, and then
tighten up.
Perfect atomization is of special importance for efficient tractor
operation under light loads, therefore, satisfy yourself that at atomizer
settings for half load and idling (spindle screwed lg and 3 turns up) the
atomization is perfect, although the spray crown diameter is smaller.
When testing the spray, the hits on the priming handle must be as sharp
and short as possible in order to establish natural working conditions.
CARS OF ATOMIZER - Under correct conditions, the nozzle remains
clean for weeks, but it may become choked by badly filtered fuel.
If the atomizer nozzle requires cleaning, one, or a combination
of the following faults, will ensue:
Lack of power, smoky exhaust, bulb incandescent on one side,
pump stiff to operate by priming handle, engine steps, spray incorrect
or one-sided.
Remove nozzle (b), Fig. 46, unscrew spindle and clean the grooves
(c) carefully, using a chip of wood. Clean the inside of the nozzle,
being careful not to enlarge the hole (a).
When fitting atomizer, do not use unnecessary force to tighten
and do not attempt to keep it tight in the cylinder head by using any
other packing than copper washers (9), Fig. 41, which can be had in
different thicknesses to assure correct position of the atomizer for
connecting to fuel pipe. Use only one washer of proper thickness.
Efficient operation of the K.L. Bulldog Tractor depends on
correct atomization of the fuel. It is of primary importance to keep the
atomizer in perfect condition. First of all, it is necessary to re-
condition and, if necessary, to renew the nozzle, because its jet hole
may be worn by rapid passage of the ejaculated fuel. A defective
atomizer must be sent for repair to the Works or Agents and replaced by a
new atomizer ’which should always be kept in stock for such a case.


Fig. 47. Cleaning the hot bulb.
Fig. 49. Cylinder head removed.
Fig. 48. Drawing off the cylinder head.
Fig. 50. Removing air cleaner base.


SECTION 5.
ENGINE
HOT BULB - The hot bulb must be clean, since accumulation of
carbon impairs combustion, and when in the pocket, prevents the engine
running properly without load. If the engine has been running for some
time, with the nozzle dirty or the atomizer spindle wrongly adjusted,
carbon may have accumulated in the bulb and pocket, and this must be
removed. Mineral ingredients, contained in many kinds of fuel oils, are
deposited in the bulb in the form of yellow ash, which must be scraped
off, Fig. 47.
Before removing the bulb, its position, as well os that of the
copper ring and bulb cover with reference to the cylinder head, should be
marked so that these parts can be put beck in exactly the same position.
The threads of the studs in the cylinder head should be brushed
over with graphite supplied to prevent the nuts burning on during working,
and thus tearing the thread when next loosened. The nuts must be evenly
and firmly tightened a little after the engine is warm. If the leakage
continues due to the copper ring having become hard, it must be annealed
by heating to cherry red and quenching in water.
CLEANING- COMBUSTION CHAMBER - The combustion chamber must be
cleaned from time to time as follows:
Remove bulb cover and bulb, remove atomizer, the two bulb cover
holding studs at rear and unscrew cylinder head fastening nuts; draw
cylinder head off by means of draw bolts as shown in Fig. 48. Scrape
deposits from cylinder head without injuring copper ring seat. Then re-
move carbon also from the cylinder wells and wash with kerosene.
VJhen replacing cylinder head, see that it is perfectly tight by
fitting it evenly. If the copper ring joint is renewed, all rubber packing
rings must be renewed at the same time.
CLEANING ENGINE - The engine should be cleaned periodically
according to the amount of work done. Particular care must be taken to
thoroughly remove all carbon deposits from the outside and inside of the
piston. Carbon, being an efficient insulating material, is apt to cause
overheating of the engine if permitted to accumulate in the skirt or on
the head of the piston. Remove cylinder head. Then remove air cleaner
and air cleaner base thus giving access to the crankcase. The big end
nuts are unscrewed, Fig. 51, and bearing cap taken off. Remove shims,
taking care to replace in same position when reassembling. The piston and


Fig. 52. Removing piston rings.
Fig. 51.- Unscrewing big end nuts.
Fig. 53. Removing gudgeon ring from piston.
Fig. 54. Drawing bush from connecting rod.
Fig. 55. Inserting piston into cylinder.


connecting rod are then carefully removed by pushing them towards'the
cylinder head, taking care that the crank pin and the cylinder walls do not
get damaged end that the connecting rod does not knock against the edge of
the piston skirt. A piece of copper or rubber tubing placed on the big
end bolts, safeguards the crankpin and the cylinder from scores. All parts
must be thoroughly cleaned with kerosene, using firm cloth and not cotton
waste, which is apt to choke lubricating lines.
PISTON RINGS - Piston rings should fit loosely in the grooves,
and if a ring is bedded in, it must be carefully loosened by tapping
gently all round with a mallet, or the whole piston placed for one hour in
kerosene. The piston rings being very fragile, should be handled care-
fully. For.removing them, use 3 thin strips (use discarded air flaps),
Fig. 52, and mark the rings to ensure their reinsertion in same order and
groove.
GUDGEON PIN - To remove gudgeon pin: Remove the lock wire from
the lock screw head. Then unscrew the lock screw taking care not to lose
the spring washer under its head. The gudgeon pin end, away from the lock
screw, being slightly bigger in diameter than the other end, must be
driven out from the lock screw side as shown in Fig. 53. If the gudgeon
pin be worn on one side only, it may be re-used after turning it by half
a turn, and if badly worn it must be replaced by a new one. uhen re-
assembling the gudgeon pin, take care that the holes for the lock screw
are in exact alignment, otherwise it would be impossible to fit the screw.
Do not omit to place the spring washer under the lock screw head and
secure the head with the lock wire.
GUDGEON BUSH - To remove gudgeon bush from connecting rod, first
remove the locking grub screv; (S) , Fig. 54. Use a press or a simple
withdrawing tool, as shown in Fig. 54. When fitting new bush do not omit
fitting the locking grub screw.
CLEANING OIL CONDUITS IN CRANKSHAFT - At the opportunity of
removing the piston end connecting rod, the crankshaft and crankcase
should be cleaned out, for which purpose the radius rods (3) and crankcase
base plate (2), Fig. 25, must be removed. The banjo ring taking care of
crank pin lubrication and now accessible through the hole of the removed
air cleaner base, must be thoroughly cleaned end freed from the gummy oil
sediments by alternately squirting kerosene into their grooves end turning
the crankshaft with the starting wheel.
The lubricating hole in the crankshaft is first cleaned with a
wire as far as accessible and then blown through with an air pump, or
cleansing oil is pumped through by means of the grease gun. Turn the
crank pin to its lowest position so that the kerosene drains out and
leaves the oil hole perfectly clear. Then wash the inside of the
crankcase.


Fig. 56. Big end bearing shims.
Fig. 57. Socket for flushing the cylinder with kerosene.
46


WHEN CLEANING THE ULTERIOR OF THE ENGINE NEVER USE COTTON WASTE,
ONLY FIRM CLEANING CLOTH.
REPLACING PISTON - When replacing the piston, it must be v;ell
lubricated and the same care must be taken as when dismantling. Push
each ring into the same groove from which it was taken and the piston,
carefully, without force, into the cylinder. Do not use a hammer. To
facilitate the work, a piston ring clamp should be used, consisting of a
wire ring, the ends of which are bent to form a handle. This is first
placed round the back piston ring, Fig. 55, the latter being pressed into
its groove by tightening the clamp.
The part of the piston containing the ring can then be pushed
into the cylinder, the ring clamp sliding automatically to the next ring.
This is repeated with the second, third and fourth ring. ■
BIG END BEARING - The big end bearing cap and shims ere then re-
placed and nuts tightened. If bearing is too loose, remove shims evenly
from each side, Fig. 56, until clearance of 0.004” is obtained. To
avoid confusion, the connecting rod, bolts and nuts are numbered. When
bearing nuts are finally tightened and split pins securely fitted, make
sure that crankshaft turns freely.
COMPRESSION - Before starting the engine, the flywheel should be
moved to and fro by means of the starting wheel to ensure that all
moving parts work freely and the engine has compression. If the engine
can be turned beyond the dead centre more easily than usual the piston
rings may be jammed or broken, cylinder head or hot bulb faulty, allowing
the compression to escape. Cylinder head or bulb nuts to be tightened
or the joint ring replaced.
FLUSHING SOCKET - Immediately after stopping the engine for
night, place the piston in rear dead centre with key in crankshaft showing
up, pour a little kerosene into the cylinder flushing socket (2), Fig. 57,
after removing the plug, allow’ the kerosene to draw into the cylinder,
then move piston backward and forward. This prevents the oil in the
cylinder from congealing and makes the engine easy to turn when next re-
quired. Leave the crankshaft key showing up. Before restarting, prime
with oil.
SEIZING OF PISTON - If the piston happens to seize due to
gumminess, pour a little kerosene into the cylinder through the flushing
socket, Fig. 57, then after a few; minutes, it will be possible to move
the flywheel, although w.’ith difficulty at first, until finally it moves
freely. Just before restarting the engine, pump some lubricating oil by
the mechanical lubricator to ensure the piston being amply lubricated
from the start.


Fig. 58. Sectional view of air cleaner.
1 Cowling cover
2 Air cleaner fastening nut
3 Air cleaner cover
4 Air cleaner centre rod
5 Inner screen cylinder
6 Coir padding
7 Outer cage
8 Hinge pin
9 Air cleaner housing
10 Base with air flap valve
11 Air flaps
12 Cowling
Fig. 59. Removing the clogged fibre.
Fig. 60. By means of a narrow strip of wood,
the fibre Is pressed between the cage and
the screen cylinder.
Fig. 61. Removal of air flaps.
a Air cleaner base
b Air flap fastening screw
c Air flap seat screw (square headed}
e Air flap
f Air flap check


AIR CLSAHSR - It is of primary importance that the air, dram in
by the engine should be absolutely clean, as sand and dust, combined with
lubricating oil set up friction in the engine and cause rapid wear.
Therefore, an air cleaner is mounted under the cowling immediately above
the air intake valve on the crank case.
It consists of coir padding, moistened with oil and inserted be-
tween the inner screen cylinder (5), Rig. 58, and the outer cage (7), in
which the dust is deposited.
CLEANING AIR CLEANER - The choking of the fibre padding in the
cleaner depends on the amount of dust and air. Vflien choked up, it must be
cleaned or replaced. After the tractor has been out of use for some time,
examine padding and moisten with oil, if necessary, by coating the outside
of the filter with oil (about 1 pint), which by the action of the engine
will be sucked into the fibre padding.
Do not open the filter while the engine is running.
To clean the sir cleaner, open cowling cover (i), Fig. 58, un-
screw air cleaner fastening nut (2) and lift the air cleaner out of its
housing.
Thoroughly sluice the cleaner in a suitable container, using
power kerosene. (A 12-gallon drum vjith top removed and three quarters
filled with kerosene is suitable).
Place two straps across the top of the container and support air
cleaner on them after sluicing. Allow it to drain for several hours,
then smear about 1 pint of engine oil over the outside of the cleaner and
replace it on the engine.
V/hen new fibre is being used to replace fibre which has become
choked, it should be first washed with water to remove dust and other
impurities. Then it is well loosened and spread out to dry. For one
filling about 2 lbs. are required. By means of a narrow strip of wood
the well dried fibre is then pressed between the cage and screen cylinder,
and distributed evenly over the entire surface, Fig. 60. The fibre must
not be packed too tightly, but on the other hand, no spaces must be left
in the filling, through which air might pass unfiltered. It is essential
that the cleaner be filled right to the top, as the fibre settles some-
what during running. Finally, smear about 1 pint of oil over the outside
as outlined previously.
Under ordinary conditions it will suffice'to clean the cleaner
every 100 working hours, on the other hand, in very dusty districts, it
will be necessary to clean it 2 or 3 times a day.- Under such conditions
it is advisable to keep one or two spare filters ready for use in order
to ahoid loss of time in cleaning.


The K.L. Bulldog Tractor coir padding air cleaner is very efficient and
gives lOOfo clean air if properly attended to. It cannot be overemphasized
to do so as the life of the tractor, especially the life of the cylinder and
piston depends on it.
AIR FLAPS - If flaps of the air inlet valve under the air cleaner
are bent or broken, not enough air is supplied for scavenging end filling
the cylinder, resulting in loss of power of the engine.
After taking off the air cleaner, remove air cleaner base (10),
Fig. 61, to which the flap valve is attached and replace damaged flaps by
new ones. Take care that the flaps do not bear with a pressure upon their
seating, but a clearance of about .5 mm is left between their free end and
air cleaner base.


Fig. 62. Exhaust and spark arrester.
1 Baffle box
2 Outer baffle
3 Centre baffle
4 Inner baffle
5 Gasket
6 Pipe dip
7 Exhaust pipe
8 Drain pipe
9 Exhaust elbow
EXHAUST
To avoid loss of power, the ex-
haust should be kept free of carbon
deposits, caused by over oiling and
incomplete combustion. Therefore, it
is of primary importance to keep the
fuel lever as low as possible,
consistent with the load, especially
when idling.
The inside of the exhaust pipe
must be cleaned thoroughly once a
fortnight. The whole of the exhaust
piping and the silencer must be taken
to pieces and its parts cleaned with
a scraper and steel brush. If, after a
a long period of working, considerable
carbon has been deposited, which can-
not be removed with a scraper, the
parts can be burned off over a light
paper fire. This must be done with
care to prevent the sheet metal ,being
burnt by the high temperatures,
produced by the deposits.
DURING HARVEST OR MEN DANGER OF
FIRE IS PRESENT, DO NOT OPERATE
TRACTOR WITHOUT BAFFLE PLATES AND DO
NOT OMIT THEM WHEN ASSEMBLING.
The exhaust ports in the cylinder
must be cleaned out with a scraper and
wiped out with a cloth moistened with
kerosene. Close exhaust ports by
turning piston to top dead centre so
that no carbon gets into the cylinder.
Tractors are equipped with an upright
exhaust as shown in Fig. 62.


TROUBLE CHART
SYMPTOMS
CAUSE NOS. (See
Opposite)
Engine
vail not start
1, 2, 3, 5, 16,
17, 19,
20, 21, 22.
Engine
stops after starting.
15, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21,
22.
Engine
runs irregularly
15, 17, 19, 20,
22, 26,
28, 29, 30.
Engine
stops while working
1, 4, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 22, 23,
24, 26, 27, 28, 29.
Engine
stops while idling
1, 4, 5, 8, 14,
20, 22, 25, 26,
15, 16,
27, 28,
17, 18, 19,
29.
Engine
knocks
4, 7, 8, 9, 11,
28, 30.
19, 20,
22, 23, 24,
Engine
smokes
5, 12, 15, 19,
20, 22,
28, 30.
Engine
pulls badly
5, 15, 17, 18,
26, 28, 29, 30.
19, 20,
22, 24, 25,


CAUSES
1. Lack of fuel
2. Bulb insufficiently heated
3. Fuel supply shut off
4. Lack of water (fuse melted)
5. Water too cold
6. Congealed oil
7. Cooling system fouled
8. Scale (fuse melts)
9. Fan belt incorrectly tensioned
10. Lubricator incorrectly adjusted
11. Lack of oil
12. Return oil line choked
13. Broken or blocked gears
14. Fuel line choked
15. Fuel lever incorrectly set
16. Air in fuel line
17. Fuel pump fouled
■ i
18. Gland packing-leaky
19. Atomizer incorrectly set
20. Atomizer dirty
21. Hot bulb flooded
22. Hot bulb dirty
23. Water in cylinder
24. Cylinder dirty
25. Piston rings jammed and broken
26. Lack of compression
27. Piston seized
28. Air cleaner padding dirty or
too tight
29. Air flap bent or broken
30. Exhaust or exhaust ports dirty
REMSDI ES
Fill fuel tank.
Heat by blow lamp.
Open fuel stop valve 4 turns.
Fill up water, renew fuse.
Use hot water, close radiator
shutter.
Use hot water and warm up by
blow lamp.
Clean cooling system.
Remove scale, renew fuse.
Adjust fan belt.
Adjust lubricator.
Replenish oil container.
Clean return oil strainer and
filter.
Inspect gears.
Clean fuel strainer.
Set the fuel lever correctly.
Remove air and prime.
Clean and test valves.
Renew gland packing.
Set atomizer correctly.
Test spray and clean nozzle.
Remove excess fuel.
Remove carbon from bulb.
Remove packing between cylinder
and head.
Clean cylinder.
Inspect piston rings and test
compression.
Test compression.
Flush with kerosene.
Clean air cleaner.
Renew air flap.
Clean exhaust.


Fig. 64, Shoe expansion unit.
a. Sliding collar,
b. Shoepressure coil spring.
c. Floating spring seat.
d. Adjusting bolt lock nut.
c. Ball joint with adjusting
bolt,
f. Clutch shoe.
g. Spring cage.
Fig. 66. Clutch brake adjustment.
Fig. 63. Clutch assembly.
a Sliding collar
b Shoe pressure spring
c Floating spring seat
d Adjusting bolt lock nut
e Ball joint with adjusting bolt
f Clutch shoe
g Spring cage
k Spider
I Bracing plate
m Belt pulley on farm and
dual purpose tractor
p Flywheel
r Engaging spring
s Clutch connecting rod
t Adjusting fork lock nut
u Adjusting nut
Fig. 65. Sliding collar assembly,
a Bronce thrust pads
b Outer sliding collar ring
c Spacers
d Ring locking rivet
e Ring with stubs
g Inner sliding collar ring


SECTION 6.
CLUTCH
CLUTCH GENERAL - The clutch interposed between the engine and the
transmission enables the operator to cut off the power flow from the engine
to transmission at any moment when required, i.e. for gear changing, by
depressing the clutch pedal (K) Fig. 9. A further downward pressure brakes
the pulley, clutch and Ist gear shaft. T/hen releasing the pressure on
pedal, first the brake is released and then the clutch is engaged.
The clutch must engage smoothly, therefore, release the pressure
on the clutch gradually. Never drive downhill with the clutch disengaged.
Declutch immediately the engine tends to stop due to overload or want of
fuel, otherwise engine will reverse. This is of greatest importance when
driving uphill, in such case, disengage clutch and brake the tractor
immediately, otherwise the tractor might be pulled backward by the weight
of the trailer. Before re-engaging the clutch, control correct engine
rotation by knob (D), Fig. 9. Avoid riding the foot on the clutch pedal,
as even a slight pressure exerted on the pedal when the tractor is pulling
will cause the clutch to slip, wearing out the clutch linings.
ACTION OF THE 5-SHOE CLUTCH - On K.L. Tractors the rotary motion
of the crankshaft is transmitted to the driving wheels and driving pulley
by an expanding 3-shoe clutch consisting of the spider, the clutch shoes
with pressure unit and sliding collar, and the throw-out unit.
The spider hub is carried by the R.H. crankshaft extension on
sleeves interposed between shaft and hub. On the inner end of the spider
hub the ring gear is keyed on, transmitting the motion through the trans-
mission to the driving wheels; on its outer end, it carries three spider
arms, to which the driving pulley is bolted in such a manner that it em-
braces the flywheel, which is running inside the pulley rim.
The transmission of power is established and interrupted by the
clutch shoes pressed into or lifted out of the groove provided on the
inner circumference of the flywheel.
The 3-shoe clutch is actuated by the clutch pedal through the
axial movements of the clutch sliding collar on the spider hub.
Each shoe (f), Fig. 64, is firstly pivoted on a pin passing
through the web of the pulley bolted to the spider, and secondly, it is
connected with the clutch sliding collar (a) by a pressure unit consisting
of spring cage (g), coil spring (b), built into this cage with a certain
amount of compression, and the adjusting bolt, connected with the shoe
ball joint {e).
The ball headed adjusting bolt (e)' is screwed into the floating
spring seat (c) and locked from rotation by lock nut (d). When clutch


is "in" (engaged), the spring (b) thus exerts pressure on the clutch shoe
through the floating seat and ball joint bolt. Due to its expansion being
limited by the cage apex, it is most important to adjust the ball joint
bolt (e) in the spring seat (c) so that - with clutch engaged - a clearance
of not less than .5 and not more than 1. mm, which is guided by a hole in
the cage apex.
ADJUSTMENT OF 5-SHOE CLUTCHES - It is of utmost importance that
all three shoes engage simultaneously. To ascertain that this is so, de-
press clutch pedal until the shoes just begin to disengage. By nosmoving
each shoe separately by hand, it can be easily felt, whether they engage
simultaneously or not and re-adjust if necessary. Repeat this test twice
more after turning every time the spider by one third of its circumference.
If, in spite of the fact that the engine is turning at normal
speed, it no longer pulls properly, and if the clutch shoes drag, the
clutch must be re-adjusted. When the tractor is new, the clutch shoes must
be frequently re-adjusted, as, when new, the linings are settling down, so
that the shoes are not sufficiently pressed into the flywheel groove.
To gain access to the clutch, remove the flywheel cover and the
clutch guard plate on the off-side of the engine.
Unscrew lock nut (d), Fig. 63, on all three shoes by holding the
ball joint bolt at its square section with another spanner. Disengage
clutch and unscrew ball joint bolt on one shoe by one or two quarter turns,
thus increasing the pressure of spring (b) and adjust the other two springs
accordingly. Then tighten lock nuts (d) while holding the ball joint bolt
with another spanner.
Note that the spring clearance being equal is no proof of correct
adjustment, the clearance on the three springs may differ within the limits
of .5 to 1. mm, although the shoes are correctly adjusted.
Should one of the springs become dead and no replacement spring
be at hand, a washer must be inserted between the spring and adjusting nut
(c) instead, unscrewing the ball joint bolt so far that the clearance
amounts to more than 1 mm.
On release of the clutch pedal, the clutch must engage completely
on its own accord. If it does not, the clutch springs are exerting too
much power (i.e. the ball, joint bolts having been unscrewed too far), or
the clutch connecting rods require adjustment, due to being bent, or wear
of the joint pins and/or sliding collar bronce thrust pad.
When the tractor is warm, the belt pulley should slowly run out
after the clutch has been disengaged (without actuating the clutch brake).
There should be a certain amount of movement on the clutch pedal between


disengagement and brake actuation. Should the pulley continue running
after declutching, this is a sign that the ball joint bolt has been un-
screwed too far. Grease and dirt, accumulating on the clutch shoes and
in the groove, should occasionally be washed out with kerosene.
ADJUSTMENT OF CLUTCH SLIDING COLLAR - If the clutch pedal shows
slackness before being depressed, and the stub ring (e), Fig. 65, shows
side play, which can be ascertained after removing the clutch rod joint
pin, this is a sign that the sliding collar needs adjustment due to wear
of the bronce thrust pads (a). To do this the sliding collar must be
taken down after taking down the complete clutch assembly and removing
the clutch ring gear; Drive the ring locking rivet (d) out from the in-
side, insert pins of suitable size into the 2 holes, provided in the inner
collar ring, and by means of these pins and a lever, screw the inner ring
(g) down from the outer ring (b). Remove -in accordance with the play
ascertained - one or more spacers (c) (which are obtainable in thicknesses
of 0.015" and 0.030". After reassembling,'the stub ring (e) must turn
freely without showing any side play. Then secure ring (b) and (g)
against turning by inserting rivet (d) from the outside through the
apertures provided in the rings and spacers and secure it by riveting it
in the inner countersink.
ADJUSTMENT OF LINKAGE OF 5-SHOE CLUTCHES - When adjusting 5-shoe
clutch, do not alter setting of the linkage. Should it become necessary,
for any reason, to remove the rod, withdraw the pins (u), Fig. 53, in the
joints without removing the lock nuts and adjusting forks. The clutch
linkage must be so adjusted that the clutch pedal is stopped by the plat-
form when clutch is fully engaged, otherwise the clutch sliding collar
will run hot.
The rod is too long if clutch is engaged before the pedal is
stopped. It is too short if pedal is stopped before the clutch is en-
gaged. Before altering the adjustment of the rod, ascertain if the clutch
shoe adjustment is correct. For adjusting the length of the connecting
rod, withdraw the pin (u) and then screw the fork in or out, as the case
may be, to such on extent, that the joint pin is slack when clutch is
fully engaged and the pedal lever firmly rests against the platform.
Make sure that the joint pin is still slack when the end play (of 2 mm.)
of the crankshaft is on the governor side. To do this, declutch, take
the off-side flywheel arms by your hands and push the flywheel in the
direction of the near side.
The clutch spring (r), Fig. 63, must have enough tension to'en-
gage clutch smoothly; adjustment is only necessary after dismantling.
ADJUSTMENT OF 5-SHOE CLUTCH BRAKE -' For stopping the three-shoe
clutch and pulley, clutch brakes (b), Fig. 66, is provided. If it fails


to act, it must be adjusted by means of the clutch brake adjusting screw
(k), each half turn of which is arrested by a catch. Access to this screw
is gained by turning the pulley on the off-side until the semi-circular
indenture in the inner edge of the pulley rim coincides with that in the
crankcase ledge.
Through the aperture formed thereby insert box spanner supplied
and turn the adjusting screw one turn. After adjustment, the brake must
be tested with the engine running. The brake must be so adjusted that
after disengaging the clutch, there is a certain amount of play between
declutching and braking to allow for clean changing of gears. The coil
spring (f) on the brake hand serves only to actuate the catch of the brake
adjusting screw. The brake itself is unsprung. Worn brake linings must
be replaced.


SECTION 7.
TRANSMISSION
TRANSMISSION GENERAL - The transmission consists of the clutch
ring gear, the intermediate idler gear, the speed change and reduction
gear, the differential with rear axle halves and with rear wheels rigidly
fixed to them. The movement of the tractor is made possible by the grip
of the rear or driving wheels on the ground, which, therefore, form part
of the transmission.
The clutch hub interposed between the crankshaft and the ring
gear, carried by it, enables it to establish a rigid connection between the
crankshaft and ring gear or to interrupt it.
The transmission is of the sliding mesh type with spur gears,
ball and roller bearings throughout. The gear box contains four gear
shafts. The Ist and 3rd gear shafts carry each one sliding double pinion,
controlled by the gear change levers through selector forks.
INTERMEDIATE IDIER GEAR - The intermediate idler gear Fig. 69,
transmitting the engine effect from the ring gear to the transmission, is
running on tapered roller bearings, which must be inspected should the
overhauling of the clutch take place. For taking up end play,, the lock
wire must be removed from the adjusting screws (6), Fig. 69, and Fig. 70,
and these screws alternately and evenly tightened.
GEAR SHIFTING GENERAL - The K.L. Tractor has six gears or
travelling speeds. The various gear changes are effected by gear shift
levers (1) Fig. 72 and (16) Fig. 72. All gear changes must be made with
clutch disengaged. Rough handling when shifting gears will inevitably
lead to damaged gears. Correct gear changing is silent. To avoid
"crashing" adopt the following procedure:
TO CHANGE UP: 1. Declutch by slightly depressing the clutch
pedal and slide lever to neutral.
2. Press clutch slightly harder to actuate brake.
3. Slide lever into higher gear.
4. Release clutch pedal.
TO CHANGE DOWN: 1. Declutch slide lever to neutral and release
clutch pedal.
2. Wait until tractor is travelling at correct
speed.
3. Declutch.


Fig. 67. Sectional view of transmission.
Fig. 68. Diagramatic section of transmission.


4. Slide to lower gear.
5. Release clutch pedal.
If the lever is slid across gently, and the change be misjudged,
no damage will result when the teeth are felt rubbing each other. In
such a case, and if difficulties are encountered in gear shifting on a
downward grade, stop tractor and start in required gear. The gears must
always be put in neutral immediately after stopping the tractor.
K.L. Tractors have two gear shift levers, the primary lever (1)
and the secondary lever (16) Fig. 72. When changing gear, first set the-
secondary lever (16) movable in two directions, and then the primary lever
(1) which can be placed in four different positions, as shovm in Fig. 71.
Looking forward, the secondary lever (16) is moved from neutral:
to the left for Ist, 2nd, 3rd speed forward
and Ist reverse,
to the right for 4th, sth 6th speed forward and
2nd reverse.
Then set the primary lever from neutral position as follows:
For first and 4th speed forward - backward and to
the left,
For 2nd and sth speed forward - forward and to the
left,
For 3rd and 6th speed forward - forward and to the
right,
For Ist and 2nd speed reverse - backward and to the
right.
In order to shift from Ist to 4th, from 2nd to sth, from 3rd to
6th, end from Ist to 2nd reverse or vice versa, only the secondary gear
shift lever need be pushed to the opposite side, but only when the tractor
is stationary. When engaging Ist or 4th speed or reverse the primary
lever will spring forward half an inch, thus automatically locking itself
into position, therefore, MOVE THE LEVER in the direction indicated by
the arrow, Fig. 71, UNTIL THE SNAPPING OF THE ANCHORAGE CLIP (10) OR (11)
FIG. 72, IS DISTINCTLY FELT ON THE LEVER. Then let in the clutch. For
disengaging, pull lever back, thus unlocking it and slide into neutral.
In case of 2nd and sth, 3rd and 6th gear, the locking action takes place
when the primary lever springs backwards, therefore push forward to
disengage. The secondary lever locks itself by springing forward and is
disengaged by being pulled back. If, due to obstruction of the gear teeth,
the primary lever cannot be shifted, place lever in neutral, disengage
and engage clutch again, when the obstruction will be overcome. In case
the secondary lever cannot be shifted, set primary lever first, disengage
and engage clutch again, when it will be possible to shift the secondary
lever.


Fig. 70. Adjusting idler gear bearing.
Fig. 69. Intermediate idler gear.
1 Intermediate idler gear between
clutch ring gear and transmission
2 Lock ring
3 lapered roller bearing
4 Distance piece
5 Stud shaft
6 Bearing adjusting screw
Fig. 71. Gear selection.
Fig. 72. Diagramatic gear selection.
1 Gear shift lever
2 Spring dust cover
3 Spring
4 Dust seal
5 Ball joint
6 Swivel pin
7 Gear case
8 Selector rod (1st & R)
9 Selector rod (2nd & 3rd)
10 Anchorage clip
11 Anchorage clip
12 Anchorage clip spring
13 Selector fork
14 Sliding mesh pinion
15 Gear locating plate
16 Secondary gear shift lever
17 Spring dust cover
18 Spring
19 Ball joint dust seal
20 Ball joint
21 Swivel pin
22 Secondary selector rod
23 Anchorage clip
24 Clip spring
25 Secondary selector rod
26 Secondary sliding mesh pinion


When driving on a downward grade use the same speed as would be
required for driving on the same grade upwards; if difficulties in changing
gear are encountered on a downward drive, the tractor must be stopped for
changing t.he speed gears. The gears should always be put in neutral
immediately after stopping the tractor.
CARE OF TRANSMISSION - Every six months (1500 working hours) the
transmission must be cleaned and the gearing inspected. Drain the gear
oil from gear case immediately after stopping the tractor while the engine
is still warm and the oil in liquid state. Before removing the gear case
inspection plate as shown in Fig. 73, its adjoining parts must be thoroughly
cleaned and the platform with fenders must be removed before getting
access to the inspection plate. Then carefully wash all shafts, gear
wheels and bearings, remove sludge from gear case using a brush and flush
with kerosene.
At this opportunity, the gear shaft bearings should be inspected
and end play taken up. The Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th gear shafts are running
on tapered, roller bearings. The end play is taken up by shims inserted
between outside bearing race and gear shaft cover as illustrated in
Fig. 74. These shims are found in part lists under Nos. 5121, 5122 and
5123.f0r Ist.gear shaft, under Nos. 5130, 5131 and 5132 for 2nd, under
Nos. 5110, 5111, 5112, 5113 and 5114 for 3rd and under Nos. 5100, 5101,
5102 and 5103 for the 4th gear shaft.
Remove shims evenly from each side when adjusting to keep shaft
in central position.
CARE OF DIFFERENTIAL AND REAR AXLE BEARING - For inspection and
cleaning the differential and the rear axle bearings, proceed as follows:
1. Jack up tractor rear under differential.
2. Unscrew bolts and nuts holding the wheels to the rear axle
flange (1) Fig. 76 and remove wheels.
3. Remove rear axle with bearing housing (9), Fig. 76, after
unscrewing nut.
4. Remove brake band of gear brake.
5. Unscrew ring nut and drive the stay rod out to the left
while holding the tubular space. When taking out this,
attention must be paid to spacing shims or washers which
may be inserted between the tubular spacer and the gear
case web in order to replace them properly when re-assembling.
6. Draw off the gear brake drum by means of a puller.
7. Remove the 4th gear shaft which is to be driven out to
the left.
8. Draw off the rear axle tubes by means of draw bolts
supporting the differential to prevent it from falling down.
Now take out the differential from above. If bevel gears have
more than .5 mm play, the bronce thrust pads (9) and (10), Fig. 75, must
be renewed. Assemble the differential by the identification numbers
stencilled on the respective parts.


Fig. 73. Gear case with inspection plate removed.
Fig. 75.
Differential spider shaft. Differential and ring gear,
1 Ring gear
2 Differential bevel gear
3 Rear axle bevel gear
4 Differential housing
5 Ground bolts with nut
6 Ball bearing
7 Bevel gear cross pin
8 Lock pin
9 Bronze washer
10 Bronze washer
Fig. 74. Adjustment of gear shaft bearings
by shims between outside of roller
race and shaft cover.
Fig. 76. Rear axle bearing.
1 Rear axle flange
2 Ring
3 Spacer
4 Tapered roller bearing
5 Shims
6 Lock key
7 Felt ring
8 Pin for driving out tapered
roller bearing
9 Roller bearing housing
10 Bush
11 Axle tube
12 Nut


If there is any end play in the tapered roller bearings of the
rear axle, this must be taken up as follows:
Place the rear axle vertically on two wooden blocks with the flange
of the bearing housing (9), Fig. 76, resting upon these blocks and axle
flange (1) hanging down and the inside roller bearing turned upward.
Nov; drive the outside ring (cup) of the inner tapered roller
bearing (4), Fig. 76, down as far as it will go by lightly tapping with
a hammer on the circumference of this race with a drift. When all play
in the bearing has disappeared, ascertain the distance between the outer
ring (cup) and the edge of the bearing housing, then measure also, the
height of the collar on the axle tube going into this recess. The
difference between the two measurements plus the thickness of paper
gasket (12), Fig. 76, indicates the clearance which must be filled either
by shims (5) inserted between axle tube and tapered roller bearing, or by
gaskets between axle tube and roller bearing, which must turn freely
without showing any end play.
ASSEMBLING- TRANSMISSION - Before assembling lubricate all
bearings. Renew stuffing box packing of steering spindle if necessary,
using a length of 24 inch asbestos string of inch diameter.
When fitting the differential, care must be taken that the high
rim of the ring gear is on the off side. Before replacing the inspection
plate, cleansing oil trapped in wells and pockets of the transmission
housing must be dried with a lintless cloth. Then re-install all parts
in reverse order being sure that all gaskets are intact and all screws
drawn tight and retightened after the engine is warm. Refill gear oil up
to the control plug but not more.
Repeat test of rear axle bearing, for which purpose the gear
shift lever must be placed in neutral. The rear wheel must still turn
freely without showing end play. If it turns too stiffly, dismantle
again and remove one shim.


Fig. 77. Sectional view of steering knuckle assembly.
1 Front wheel
2 Grease nipple
3 Forked front axle beam
4 Axle housing
5 Front wheel fastening screws
6 Stub axle
7 Large tapered roller bearing
8 Inner labyrinth seal ring
9 Outer labyrinth seal ring
10 Axle bearing guard
11 Screw
12 Screw
IB Small tapered roller bearing
14 Adjusting ring nut with hole
15 Lock plate
16 Lock washer
17 Inside hub cap
18 Lock nut
19 Lock pin
20 Felt ring
21 Thrust washer


SECTION 8.
WHEEL & TYRE MAINTENANCE
While the rear wheels form part of the transmission, the front
wheels are an independent unit. The heavy strains to which this unit is
subject is apt to cause trouble and even break down if the bearings are
not properly attended to and the position peculiar to the front vjheels is
neglected, because the front wheels are not parallel, but the extension
of their horizontal and vertical diameters meet in front and underneath
the tractor. The inclination to the front is called toe-in; that towards
the ground, wheel camber.
If wheels wobble or difficulties in steering are encountered,
these are signs that the front wheels and their steering linkage have not
been properly cared for.
Sl'klißlNG KNUCKLE - The steering knuckle bearing must be inspected
frequently for end play by moving it axially to and fro after jacking it
up. Slightest signs of end play must be taken up immediately by adjusting
ring nut (14), Fig. 77, secured by lock plate (15) and lock pin (19).
To get access to this nut, the front wheel must be jacked up and turned
on full lock. -Then remove hub cap (17), felt ring (20), lock nut (15),
lock washer (16), lock plate (15), and lock pin (19).
For adjusting the bearing, lock the front wheel by tightening
the adjusting nut (14). Then release this nut again by about one-sixth
of a turn, but so that the hole in this nut for taking up the lock pin
(19) is in alignment with one of the holes in lock plate (15), placed on
top of ring nut (14). Then strike a short hard blow against the inner end
of the stub axle, thus releasing the bearing cone and the wheel, which
must turn freely without showing any end play. Re-assemble and repeat
test after tightening lock nut (18).
Should, by neglect of attendance, the play has become .020 ins.
or more, it is necessary to dismantle the whole assembly in order to re-
place any part which may have worn or been broken. Remove front wheel,
unscrew the three screws (11) holding the outer labyrinth seal ring (10)
to the hub casing and, by means of a drift, knock the stub axle from the
inner race of the small roller bearing (13). Wash the roller bearings
and all other parts with kerosene and replace any defective parts. Renew
felt ring (20) if necessary. Fill the hub with grease and reassemble.
By means of a socket of suitable size drive the cone of the small bearing
on the stub axle. Then adjust the bearings as described.
67


The wheel fastening nuts must be re-tightened from time to time.
FRONT WHEEL TOE-IN Before checking or adjusting the front wheel
toe-in, make sure that the track rod joints are not worn out, otherwise
the bushes in the track arms must be renewed.
The front wheels must be adjusted so that when the wheels are
aiming straight ahead, the distance between the inner side of the wheel
rims at axle height must measure from 2 to 4 mm (.08-16”) less at the
front, than at the rear of the rims. This adjustment is effected by
screwing the fork (g), Fig. 78, on track rod (s) out to cause greater
toe-in.
WHEEL CAMBER - The distance between the front wheel rims at their
lowest points must be smaller than that at their opposite highest points.
This inclination or camber of the front wheels is maintained by the wrist
pin brushes, the wear of which is checked by jacking the front wheels up
and lifting them slightly. If the wear is excessive the axle beam yokes
must be rebushed, as this wear causes loss of wheel camber and therefore,
difficult steering.
STEERING LINKAGE - Wear of tyres and difficult steering is
further caused by wear in the drag link joints, which must be taken up by
removing one or two shims (w) as shown in Fig. 79.
Fig. 78. Track rod adjustment.
Fig. 79. Taking up wear in steering linkage,
s drag link d drag link ball joint cap
w shims in drag link ball joint
68


TYRE MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS
The proper care of tractor tyres is essential resulting in longer
life, better ground grip and economy. These instructions have been
prepared to provide tractor owners with information so that they may re-
ceive all the service originally built into the tyres.
INFLATION - Use of proper air pressure is the most important
factor in the satisfactory performance and maintenance of tractor tyres.
Following are brief tables showing recommended pressures for all tractor
tyres.
TRACTOR TYRE .INFLATION
Front - All sizes.
1. 4 ply tyres 28 lbs.
2. 6 ply tyres 36 lbs.
Rear - All sizes.
3. Minimum inflation pressure. ... 12 lbs.
4. When ploughing, increase pressure in
tyre on furrow wheel by 4 lbs.
5. When special heavy wheels are used, or
heavy loads are carried on the tractor,
inflation pressure must be increased.
Both over-inflation and under-inflation ere harmful. Under-
inflation will damage the cord body of the tyre. It will cause a series
of diagonal breaks in the cord fabric in the sidewall area. This usually
occurs on the inner sidewall of the furrow wheel tyre. Under-inflations
will result in repeated buckling of the sidewall and the constant buckling
will break the cord fabric.
Inflation should always be high enough, especially in the furrow
wheel tyre so that the tyre will not buckle. The buckling can be seen,
especially on hard pulls, by the driver or someone who walks alongside
of the tractor.
If the tyre buckles or wrinkles, the air pressure should be in-
creased to the point where the sidewalls remain smooth while the tyre is
pulling. Under-inflation may also allow the tyre to slip on the rim which
in turn, will tear off the valve stem of the tube,
Over-inflation should also be avoided. It causes loss of traction
which results in excessive slippage, causing tyres to wear more rapidly.
The inflation of tyres on new tractors should be watched carefully
Tractors are despatched from the factory with very high air pressure in
order to prevent bouncing of the tractor during delivery. The air should
be dropped to the recommended pressure before the tractor is put to work.
PROPER AIR PRESSURE FOR MOUNTING TYRES - After rear tyres are
mounted on the rims, they should be inflated to 30 pounds air pressure in
order to force the tyre beads firmly onto the rims. The rim and tyre are


tapered so this pressure is necessary in order to force the beads firmly
into place.
The tyre should be inflated to 30 pounds air pressure every time
the tyre bead is pushed away from the rim seat at any point. Then the
air pressure should be dropped to the recommended pressures.
This practice should always be followed, as otherwise the tyre
will slip on the rim and shear off the valve stem.
CHECK AIR PRESSURES FREQUENTLY - Air pressures should be checked
every 2 to 3 weeks and should not be allowed to drop below the recommended
levels. A low pressure gauge, with one pound graduations, is necessary
in order to get accurate inflation.
If tyres are partly filled with water, see that valve in tube is
in topmost position (12 o'clock) before testing pressure. Always use
caps on the valves as this prevents loss of air.
CARE 0E TYRES - Never leave your tractor standing idle in direct
sunlight for any length of time. 'When not in use and not housed, cover
the tyres with bags.
Do not allow tyres to come in contact with grease or oil as both
destroy rubber.
REPAIRS - Proper attention to repairs prevents premature tyre
failure. If the rubber on the sidewall or tread is cut through, exposing
the fabric, it should be washed out with petrol and filled with Tread
Cut Repair Gum to prevent dirt_ and moisture from working into and
damaging the fabric.
When a puncture is made by a large nail or similar object, a
rubber plug should be inserted from the inside.
If an injury results in the body fabric being broken for a
space up to 2 inches, it can be repaired with a Cemented Cord Patch or a
Quick Applying Criss Cross Patch. The injured area is cleaned with petrol
and roughened up with a rasp for a space the size of the patch to be
used. A heavy coat of Cold Patching Rubber Cement is applied and allowed
to dry thoroughly.
The injury should be filled with Tread Cut Repair Gum from the
inside, and the patch pressed down tightly over the injury. The outside
of the injury should be filled in with Tread Cut Repair Gum to seal it
against dirt and moisture.
Any injury to the fabric over 2 inches long requires a permanent
vulcanized repair. The nearest tyre manufacturer will supply further
information. After repairs, the instructions for remounting tyres should
be strictly adhered to.
70


METHODS OF ADDING EXTRA. WEIGHT - Addition of weight to the driving
wheels may be provided by bolting weights to the wheels, but the use of
water in the tyres for weight is less expensive and less difficult to
handle. No objectionable operating effects are encountered when water
weight is used at tractor speeds as high as 20 miles per hour.
From an operating standpoint, tests have shown no appreciable
difference in the effect of solid or liquid weights.
AIR CUSHION TAKES SHOCK - K.L. Tractors Ltd. recommend 75 per
cent water inflation, that is, the tyre should be inflated with water to
three-quarters of its air capacity. The remaining 25 per cent or quarter
will then act as an air cushion, having the effect of a spring. Water is
not compressible, but air isl Therefore, the air left in the tyre 25
per cent or one-quarter of the normal air volume at correct pressure
acts as a cushion, Fig. 80. When the tyre passes over a sudden projection
in the ground, the indention causes the water to rise above its normal
level in the tyre and compresses the volume of air in the "air chamber"
or "air cushion". The air compresses it gives like a spring, and the
tyre travels over the projection in the ground, unharmed. This "air
cushion" takes the shock, acts as a spring-like shock absorber to local
impact and - its most important function - prevents fracture or abnormal
casing growth.
METHODS OF GETTING WATER HTTP A TUBE (FIG. 81) - There are three
methods explained here by which water can be forced into the tubes.
1. By line pressure
2. Gravity method
3. Hand force pump method
NOTE: Two types of tube valves and hose couplings are available
at any tyre manufacturers for getting water into tubes.
TO WATER-INFIATE TYRES (F1G.82)
1. Jack the tyre to be water inflated clear of the ground.
2. Remove core from valve stem. In the case of Special Water
Inflation Valve, unscrew and remove valve stems and allow
air to completely expel itself from the tyre.
3. Revolve tractor wheel until tube valve is in the 12 o’clock
position, that is, directly above the wheel hub.
4. Connect water hose to tyre valve with water valve coupling.
5. Fill the tyre with water up to the valve level while it is
in the 12 o'clock position.
6. Remove water valve coupling from the tyre tube valve from
time to time to "bleed" the remaining air in the tube,
otherwise, this remaining air will act as back pressure and
prevent the water from entering the tyre.
71


FIG. 80. ACTION OF AIR AS CUSHION AGAINST SHOCK.
FIG. 81. WATER INFLATED TRACTOR TYRES TO 75% CAPACITY.
FIG. 82. INTRODUCING WATER INTO TYRES.
FIG. 83. REMOVING WATER FROM TYRES
FIG. 84. CORRECT VERTICAL HITCH ADJUSTMENT FOR TRACTOR-
DRAWN PLOUGHS.
72


7. To ensure that you have the correct amount of water inflation,
continue to fill the tyre with water, with valve still in
the 12 o’clock position, until water flows out of the valve.
Allow the surplus water to drain off still keeping the valve
in the 12 o'clock position.
8. When surplus water has ceased to flow from the valve, replace
the valve core or insertion piece.
9. Now inflate the part water-inflated tyre with air to the
correct pressure.
Minimum: Front tyres - 28 lbs.
Minimum; Rear tyres - 12 lbs.
10. Replace valve dust cover firmly and remove jack.
TO REMOVE WATER FROM TYRES (F1G.85)
1. Jack the tyre to be drained of water clear of the ground.
2. Remove core from valve stem. (With special water inflation
valve, unscrew and remove insertion piece.)
3. Revolve tractor wheel until tube valve is in a 6 o'clock
position, that is, directly below the wheel hub.
4. With valve in the 6 o'clock position, allow the water to
drain.
WARNING: Do NOT, under any circumstances, run
part water inflated tractor tyres before they
have been inflated to correct air pressure
recommended.
ANTI FREEZING PRECAUTIONS - In certain areas, in extremely cold
weather, there is always the possibility of water in tractor tyres freezing
To prevent this, we recommend that 1 lb. of Calcium Chloride be added for
each gallon of water. This will provide an efficient anti-freezing
solution.
Tyre size:- 13.50 - 28. when 75 per cent, full of water contains
37 gals, of water - 370 lbs.
Tyre size:- 13.50 - 32. when 75 per cent. full of-water contains
39 gals, of water - 390 lbs.
HITCHING TRACTOR PLOUGHS (FIG. 84) - Correct hitching of your
plough to tractor is important. For best work and easiest handling, the
correct hitch at "A 1 ' is the place where "A" is in a true line between
point of hitch "B" and the centre of the load "C" on the plough.
TO FIND CENTRE OF LOAD - First, find total cut of plough. Half
of total cut is centre of cut. Measure to the rear side of centre of
cut, one quarter the width of cut of one bottom, to get centre of load.


LOAD AND INFLATION
TABLES
REAR TRACTOR TYRES
(Conventional Type)
Tyre
Size
Ply
Rating
Recommended Inflation Pressure (lbs.)
12
14
16
18
20
Recommended
Load per Tyre (lbs.
9.00-24
6
1520
1670
1820
1970
2120
9.00-36
6
1825
2000
2175
2330
2470
10.00-36
6
2120
2320
2510
2690
2860
10.50-20
6
1550
1700
1850
2000
2150
11.25-24
6
2000
2200
2375
2540
2710
11.25-28
6
2140
2340
2530
2710
2880
12.75-24
6
2620
2870
3100
3325
3540
12.75-28
6
2800
3060
3300
3540
3760
12.75-32
6
2960
3240
3510
3750
4000
13.50-24
6
2970
3250
3520
3760
4010
13.50-28
8
3170
3460
3740
4010
4275
13.50-32
6
3360
3660
3950
4230
4500
When mounted implements are used on tractors, loads may be
increased up to 20$ with no increase in air
pressure.
WHEEL LOADING
When checking the wheel loading of tractor rear tyres, take the
rear end weight of your tractor including wheels, divide this weight be-
tween the two rear tyres and you will obtain the gross weight carried by
your tyres. Then, by comparing this figure with the Tyre Load and
Inflation Schedule below you will be able to ascertain if any more weight
can be applied within the load carrying capacity of the tyres.


FIG. 85. METHOD OF CHANGING REAR TYRE.
CAUTION: The nuts at the inner circle shown at (5-A) retain the wheels on the
hubs. It is important that the nuts at (1-8) in the outer circle are not loosened
while any air pressure exists in the tyre. The wheel is in two sections which are
bolted together by the nuts and bolts in the outer section.
Should these be loosened when air is retained under pressure in the tyre, injury to the
operator is possible.
REMOVAL:
1. Place the wheel on the ground with the handles of the outer rim upwards
and with the tool provided release the air pressure from the tube by the
removal of the inserts from the valve in the tube.
2. Remove all nuts from the bolts in the outer circle (1-8).
3. Taking great care not to injure the beads of the tyre insert a blunt lever
between the bead and rim (2), hammering the lever around the entire
circumference of the rim thus freeing the bead from the tapered bead seat.
Once the tyre is loosened removal is easy.
4. Turn the tyre over and repeat the previous levering and hammering operation.
5. Remove Tube (3).
TO REASSEMBLE:
1. Replace valve core and place tube inside tyre. Inflate tube with sufficient
air to support the tube walls but not enough to stretch them.
2. With the studded portion of the wheel uppermost, lower the tyre over the
wheel and work tyre down into position.
3. Standing inside, and holding the retaining rim by the handles (4) lower in
position over the two sets of studs, making sure to face the valve stem which
is pushed through the slotted portion of the upper rim.
Tighten nuts one turn at a time, working opposite nuts in succession until alt
nuts are pulled down tightly. Inflate to proper pressure and replace on Tractor.
FRONT WHEELS: Fitting is the same as normal well-base car or truck wheel
procedure.




Fig. 86. Gear hand brake with ratchet.
6 Brake drum
H Brake operating lever
S Ratchet
f Spring
m1 Adjusting nut
m2 Adjusting nut
p Tension bolt
SECTION 9.
BRAKES
TRANSMISSION BRAKE - The L.H. gear brake, Fig. 86, operated by-
hand lever (H) with ratchet is used for holding the tractor on inclines
or for belt work. It is adjusted by loosening lock nut washers and
screwing the adjusting nuts up to such an extent that the brake band holds
the drum after three ratchet teeth, and the spring (f) is compressed to a
length of Zjg" with lever in foremost position.
WHEN DRIVING DOWNHILL USE THE ENGINE AS A BRAKE BY SELECTING A
LOW GEAR. This saves the brake, which is therefore, always ready for an
emergency. A hot brake drum has not the efficiency of a cold one. IT
GOES WITHOUT SAYING THAT TRAILERS MUST HAVE THEIR OWN INDIVIDUAL BRAKES,
WHICH MUST BE APPLIED IMMEDIATELY WHEN DRIVING DOWN HILL, IT BEING
IMPOSSIBLE TO HOLD UP THE WEIGHT OF TRAILERS BY BRAKING THE TRACTOR.
TRAILERS WITHOUT BRAKES WOULD INVARIABLY LEAD TO ACCIDENTS.


Fig. 87. Power take-off.
1 Splined shaft end
2 Felt ring
3 Rear cover
4 Crease nipple
5 Main casing
6 Power take off shaft
7 Tapered roller bearing
8 Nut
9 Dog clutch, loose
10 Bevel gear
11 Ring
12 Ist gear shaft
13 Tapered roller bearing
14 Clutch shaft
15 Bevel gear
16 Drive casing
17 Tapered roller bearing
18 Operating lever pin
19 Accessibility screw
20 Operating fork
21 Cover
22 Spring
23 Operating lever rod
24 Crease nipple
25 Segment
26 Operating lever
Fig. 88. Clutch locking bar.
Fig. 89. Z, Rear shaft of power take-off.
H, Power take-off operating lever.


SECTION 10.
POWER TAKE-OFF
The power take-off, Fig. 87, consisting of a shaft running on
two pairs of tapered' roller bearings and fully protected from dust and
dirt, is driven from the Ist gear shaft by bevel gears (10/ and (15) ,
which are therefore always running when the engine clutch is engaged.
The power take-off is engaged or disengaged by means of lever H, Fig. 89,
located within easy reach of the operator. This lever should only be
operated with engine clutch disengaged.
The power take-off will transmit full engine power and runs at
the same speed, regardless of the forward speed of the tractor.
BELT WORK - VJhen it is desired to use the tractor for belt work,
remove the off side flywheel cover, apply hand brake and chock the wheels
For putting on the belt while the engine is running, stop the pulley by
depressing the clutch pedal and holding it in this position by hooking it
to the dash by the clutch locking bar, supplied with the tools, Fig. 88.
DO NOT ALLOW THE ENGINE TO RUN FOR ANT LENGTH OF TIME WITH
CLUTCH DISENGAGED IN ORDER TO PREVENT THE CRANKSHAFT RUNNING IDLE IN THE
CLUTCH SLEEVES, UNDULY WEARING THEM.
Rubber tyred tractors must be earthed to avoid accumulation of
static electricity caused by belt friction.


SECTION 11.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
All tools, special spanners and pullers mentioned in this
instruction book are standard equipment of the tractor and contained in
the tool box.
When dismantling a unit the order of the component parts should
be carefully noted to ensure correct assembly. Special attention should
be paid to thin spacing washers, which, when stuck up by thick oil to one
or the other adjoining parts, are easily overlooked and lost. These and
similar small parts, such as washers, lock plates, wires, nuts and cotter
pins though they may seem to be negligible, must on no account be omitted,
and if lost should be replaced by original K.L. Bulldog parts.
Before removing adjustable parts a note should be made with.re-
gard to their position which should also be marked with relative part.
All removed parts should be cleaned immediately and carefully stored.
When removing adjusting nuts of precompressed springs or adjusting screws
the number of turns should be noted. As a rule the fitting or reassembly
of a unit is not described in the instruction book because the procedure
of dismantling, which, as stated above, should be carefully noted, is
simply reversed.
When tightening nuts and bolts, their size must be taken into
consideration and no excessive long spanner or spanners with defective
jaws should be used.
Tools should only be used for their proper purpose. Machined or
ground parts or castings should only be struck with a copper, lead or
wooden hammer or by inserting a piece of wood between them and the hammer.
When applying a puller the draw bolts must be tightened gradually and
alternately. When a unit is to be screwed on by several screws or nuts,
these nuts or screws should be tightened gradually, evenly and alternately
passing from one screw or nut to one on the opposite side. The nuts must
be secured by cotter pins or lock wire.
Lubricating and fuel oil should be poured into the tractor tanks
direct from the original containers, in which they are purchased. If
that is impracticable, separate vessels should be used for oil and fuel
as well as for cooling water and cleansing oil or kerosene. These vessels
should be kept clean and never used for any other purpose nor interchanged
with each other.
For cleaning the interior parts of the machine, use only a firm
lintless cloth, never cotton vjaste, the fibres of which are apt to choke
the pipes and cause trouble.


When removing adjustable connecting links, only remove the clevis
pin from the joint without touching the adjusting fork and its lock nut.
When removing pipe lines a tag should be fixed to every end of
the pipe marking its point of connection in order to avoid confusion when
re-assembling. Before connecting an oil or fuel pipe, all air contained
therein must be removed. Therefore, first connect the intake end of the
pipe and let the fluid pass through until it leaves the other end without
air bubbles. Then connect the delivery end, at first loosely so as to
allow the air contained in the union to escape also.
Plain roller bearings must have a certain axial play, the limits
of which are specified in each individual case. The axial play of the
crankshaft (main) bearing must be about 2 mm. Excessive play is taken up
by inserting shims between the outer race and the bearing cover.
Tapered roller bearings must turn freely, unless their free
motion is somewhat retarded through a felt washer, without showing any
perceptible axial play whatsoever when moved by hand. The slightest signs
of axial play must be taken up immediately, therefore, tapered roller
bearings should be inspected more or less frequently, according to the
strain to which they are subjected. The adjustment is effected by shims
or screw adjustment. When adjusting a roller tapered bearing, it is a
good plan to tighten the bearing so that the wheel stops revolving and
then to remove a .1 mm shim or to back off the adjusting nut by one-sixth
of its circumference and to strike a short hard blow against the opposite
shaft end to cause the bearing cup to take up the slack.
To adapt a felt ring: A well fitted felt ring will give a
perfect seal after it has expanded through saturation of oil. If too
loosely fitted, the sealing will be imperfect, and if too tightly seated,
the washer will be damaged by excessive friction. Before inserting a
new felt ring into its retainer flatten it a little with a hammer, then
insert and drive it with light taps into its groove. Then insert a round
piece of wood, i.e., a hammer handle into the hole of the ftlt and pass it
under slight pressure along the inner circumference, thus enlarging the
inner diameter of the felt ring and increasing its bearing face. Should
a loose enough fit not be attained in this way, the inner circumference
should be carefully worked with a rasp.
Labyrinth seals require no other attention than forcing grease
through the grease nipple until the old grease oozes out of the joints of
the labyrinth rings expelling all impurities.


Fig. 90. Blow lamp (sectional view)
1. Burner
2. Screw plug
3. Nozzle
4. Wire coil
5. Vapouriser gauge
6. Closure screw
7. Heating tray
8. Vapouriser tube
9. Valve body
10. Valve cork
11. Valve cone
12. Stuffing box packing
13. Stuffing box nut
14. Regulating spindle
15. Safety valve
16. Valve cork
17. Packing
18. Filling cap
19. Air pump
20. Pump cap
21. Pump packing
22. Filling level
23. Pump barrel
24. Pump leather
25. Container


SECTION 12.
BLOW LAMP.
This is an important accessory and must be handled carefully
and kept ready for use. The arrangement and dimensions of the individual
parts are such that the fuel in the container is completely vapourised
and burns with an intense blue flame, with a greenish tint in the centre.
A yellow flame, falling off or diminishing of the flame, or if the fuel
comes out in sprays, indicates an irregularity, which must be remedied
at once.
FUEL - Clean white spirit or benzole should be used.
FILLING - The container (25), Fig. 90, holds about one pint, but
it should be filled only about once inch from the top.
HEATING - Close filling cap (18) and regulating spindle (14) and
give pump two or three strokes. Fill heating tray with spirit, light and
place wind screen on top of lamp.
LIGHTING - Open the spindle (14) slowly one or two turns shortly
before the flame from the heating spirit dies down, and if the vapour
coming through the burner does not ignite, it should be lit with a match
at the top (1).
REGULATING - In a few minutes the burner will be sufficiently
hot and a little more pressure can be applied, but only just sufficient
to enable the pump to move with difficulty. Adjust flame by opening
spindle. As the lamp burns, the pressure in the container will decrease,
and must be raised by pumping.
EXTINGUISHING - Close regulating spindle (14) and release air
from container by drawing the projecting valve rod (15) in filling
cap (18) for a moment, Fig. 92.
TURNING - It is dangerous to expose the lamp to the heat of a
coal fire or the container to a bare flame.


Fig. 91. Unscrewing the nozzle.
Fig. 93. Cleaning the nozzle.
Fig. 92. Releasing air from container.
Fig. 94. Cleaning the vapourized ducts.
Fig. 95. Blow lamp stored under cowling.


TROUBLES
Dirty or unsuitable spirit
Unsufficient heat before starting
Nozzle (3), Fig. 90, choked up
Filling cap (18) or pump cap (20) are
not tight enough.
Packing (17) in filling cap (18) or
packing (21) in the pump cap (20)
defective.
Leaky stuffing box (13)
Pump fails to work properly.
Should the plunger be forced out and
fuel enters the pump barrel (23),
valve (11) does not fit tightly.
REMEDIES
Remove and refill with fresh
spirit.
Increase supply of spirit in
heating tray.
Pass the cleaner through the
hole in nozzle, taking care not
to enlarge same, Fig. 93.
Tighten up.
Renew.
Tighten up slightly or renew
asbestos packing (12). New
packing should be coated with
graphite.
Plunger should be withdrawn,
the leather cup (24) slightly
opened out and coated with grease.
The lamp must be extinguished
at once or it will catch fire.
Valve (11) must be cleaned and
if necessary, renewed. Valve
cone (11) is tightly fitted to
the valve body (9) by means of
a cork gasket (10).
After a long time in use, the burner part (1) and particularly
the vapourizer gauze (5) may become choked up. It should be unscrewed
from the container, the ducts cleaned out with a wire hook, and nev;
gauze inserted, Fig. 94. Before refitting, the thread (8) should be
coated with soft soap.
Safety valve may be leaky. If this is so, unscrew the cover on
the filling cap and insert a new cork. If the spring of the safety valve
is broken or slack, it should be replaced by one of the same thickness.


Distributors of
K.L. BULLDOG TRACTORS
&
TRACTOR SPARES
in Australia
VICTORIA K.L. Tractor Sales Fty. Ltd.,
304 Spencer St., Melbourne.
Telephone MU7181
Telegrams "Keltractor” Melb.
N.S.W Dangar, Gedye & Malloch Ltd.,
10-14 Young St., Circular Quay,
Sydney.
Telephone B 6095
Telegrams "Dangers” Sydney.
QUEENSLAND K.L. Tractor Sales Pty. Ltd.,
, TT . i * . 304 Spencer St., Melbourne.
Telephone MJjifll
Telegrams "Keltractor" Melb.
SOUTH AUST Elder, Smith. 5 & Co. Ltd.,
27-31 Currie Street, South Aust.
Telephone C 3001
Telegrams ”Eldersmith” Adelaide.
WESTERN AUST Kelly & Lewis (W.A.) Ltd.,
349 William Street, Perth.
Telephone, B 7640, B 3034
Telegramd 1 *Diesengine” Perth.
TASMANIA K.L. Distributors Pty. Ltd.,
233 Elizabeth St., Hobart.
Telephone Hobart 6322-6292
Telegrams "Diesengine” Hobart.
NEW ZEALAND A.C. Harrison & Co. Ltd.,
155 Victoria Street, Christchurch.
Telephone 33 - 743
Copyright
■K.L. TRACTORS LTD. SPRINGVALE, VICTORIA.




