

INSTRUCTIONS
FOR THE GUIDANCE OF
THE COMMANDERS OF HER MAJESTY’S
SHIPS OF WAR
EMPLOYED IN
THE SUPPRESSION OF THE KIDNAPPING TRADE.
LONDON;
I’EINTED BY GEOEGE E. EYRE AND WILLIAM SPOTTISWOODE,
PRINTERS TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.
1873.




Instructions for the Guidance of the Commanders of
Her Majesty’s Ships of War employed in the
Suppression of the Kidnapping Trade.
By the Commissioners for executing the office of
Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland.
1. The object of these Instructions is to guide you
in the exercise of the powers which are committed to
you as the Commander of one of H.M. Ships of War
employed in the suppression of the kidnapping trade,
and of other criminal outrages upon natives of the
islands in the Pacific Ocean not within the jurisdiction
of any civilised power.
2. It will he your duty to make yourself familiar
with the Imperial Statute called the Kidnapping Act,
1872 ; the Queensland Act, cited in the Bth section of
that Act; and any other Act of a like kind which may
hereafter be passed by any of the Australasian colonies.
You will also bring the provisions of the above Statutes
to the notice of every commissioned officer under your
command. The Kidnapping Act and the Queensland
Act are printed in the Appendix to these instructions,
marked A. and B.
3. With respect to the government newly constituted
in Piji, you will, so long as it exercises actual authority,
deal with it as the de facto government of the districts
which acknowledge its rule; but you will bear in mind
that Her Majesty has not yet duly recognised it.
4. With reference to “ British subjects ” and “ British
vessels ” you will bear in mind, —
{a.) That British subjects cannot by assuming the
nationality of an uncivilised state or of one
not yet duly recognised, as Piji, or by dwelling
within any such state, withdraw themselves
from British jurisdiction; on the contrary,
they remain amenable to British laws for acts
subsequently committed by them or by their
directions against such laws :
( b .) That British subjects who claim to have assumed
the nationality of an uncivilised state or of
one not yet duly recognised, as Piji, cannot
divest vessels owned by them of their British
nationality by placing those vessels under the
flag whose nationality they claim.


5. Yoa will show the utmost diligence in the sup-
pression of the kidnapping trade ; at the same time you
will be careful to observe moderation in the exercise of
the powers with which you are entrusted.
6. You will afford all functionaries, whether British
or foreign, with whom you may have to deal, every
assistance which the exigencies of the public service
permit.
Powers oyer Vessels ; and where to be exercised.
7. The powers with which you are invested over
vessels suspected of violating the Kidnapping Act are
those of visit, search, and detention.
8. These powers are over British vessels* only. Over
such vessels they may he exercised in British jurisdic-
tion, on the high seas out of foreign territorial waters,
or in waters adjacent to islands not within the jurisdic-
tion of any duly recognised state.
9. You are not authorised to detain any British vessel
whilst she is in the territorial waters of any duly recog-
nised state, without the express permission of the local
authorities. You will ask such permission if you have
reason to believe that the vessel is violating the Kid-
napping Act.
10. The territorial waters of any state are the waters
within three nautical miles of any part of her terri-
tory.
11. You are not authorised to exercise the powers of
visit, search, or detention over any vessel which you
positively know to be not a British vessel, even though
she is actually engaged in the kidnapping trade. You
will generally conclude that a vessel belongs to the state
whose flag she shows ; hut if from previous information
or from circumstances affording just grounds of sus-
picion you have reason to believe that she is fraudulently
assuming a flag to which she is not entitled, you are
authorised to visit her for the purpose of verifying her
nationality. If the vessel shows the Prench flag you
will observe the Instructions contained in the Appendix
hereto marked I).
Visit.
\The following Articles do not apply to Vessels showing
the French Flag.~\
12. When you meet with any vessel whose nationality
you may consider it your duty to verify, or any vessel
showing the British flag which you may consider it
your duty to visit, you will proceed to visit her. In
* See Article 4. of these Instructions.


doing this you will he careful to occasion to the vessel
no more delay or deviation from her course or business
than can be avoided, and generally to conduct the visit
in a manner as little vexatious as possible.
13. You will not in any case require a boat to be sent
from the vessel, or any person or papers to be brought
from her on board your ship.
14. If at sea, and the state of the wind and weather
permit, you will communicate your intention to visit
by hailing, and then cause your ship to go ahead of
the suspected vessel, and drop a boat alongside of her.'
15. If the state of the wind and weather render such
a course impracticable, you will require the vessel to
be brought to. For this purpose you will give warning
by firing successively two blank guns, and then, if
necessary, a shot across her bow's; but before firing,
you will be careful to hoist the British ensign and
pendant.
16. If these measures fail to cause the vessel to bring
to, then, but not till then, you will be justified in
resorting to coercion.
17. When the vessel has been brought to, you will
send a boat alongside of her.
18. The visiting officer shall in every case, if possible,
be a commissioned officer. A second officer shall (if
possible) accompany him, and shall be instructed to
observe carefully every thing that occurs during the
visit, in order that, if required, he may be able to give
his testimony.
19. The visiting officer and the officer by whom he is
accompanied shall be in proper uniform, and the boat
shall display a British ensign and pendant.
20. The only persons who shall in the first instance
go on board the vessel are the visiting officer and the
officer by whom he is accompanied. .None of the crew
are to be allowed to quit the boat, unless expressly
ordered. If found necessary, they should be ordered on
board.
21. If the visiting officer, upon boarding, is at once
satisfied that the vessel is not liable to detention, he
should immediately quit her.
22. If not so satisfied he should demand, but with all
proper courtesy, to see the vessel’s papers. If the
master decline to produce the vessel’s papers on the
ground that the vessel belongs to a foreign state,
the visiting officer will, if he suspects that she is
fraudulently assuming a flag to which she is not entitled,
insist on the production of her papers. In demanding
the production of the papers he will be careful to
observe all proper courtesy, and to state that his only
object is to verify the vessel’s nationality.
23. The visiting officer will, if necessary, use co-
ercive measures to enforce his demand to see the vessel’s
papers, but not until all other means have failed.
24, Every British vessel is bound to carry a certificate
of registry. If engaged in lawful commerce she will also
have a log book and articles of agreement with the
30027. u


crew, and if she has cargo, hills of lading and invoices.
If carrying labourers (not being part of the vessel’s
crew) who are natives of any island or islands in the
Pacific Ocean, the master is hound either to have a
license given by a Governor of one of the Australasian
colonies, or by a British consular officer, in the form
contained in the Schedule B. of the Kidnapping Act;
or to have the license and the certificate required by
the Queensland Act, forms of which are annexed to
that Act marked C. and I.
25. The visiting officer is to be careful to obtain the
name, and if British, the port of registry and official
number, of the vessel correctly. He should not be
content with taking these from the mouths of the master
and crew, but should observe how the name and port
of registry are written in her papers and marked on her
bows and stern or on her boats, and how her number is
marked on her main beam.
26. If, after examining the vessel’s papers, the
visiting officer is satisfied that she is a foreign vessel, or
being a British vessel, is not liable to detention, he shall
immediately quit her.
27. Before quitting the vessel the visiting officer is
to ask the master whether he has any complaint to make
of the manner in which the visit has been conducted, or
on any other ground. If the master makes any com-
plaint the visiting officer is to request him to specify
the particulars in writing.
28. The visiting officer shall also offer to enter on
the log book of the vessel a memorandum of the visit;
if the offer is accepted he will specify the date and place
of the visit, the reason of the visit, the exact time that
was occupied in the visit, and the name of Her Majesty’s
ship and of the Commander, and will sign the memo-
randum, adding his rank in the navy. In no case,
however, shall any entry be made in the log book of the
vessel without the consent of the master.
29. Immediately on his return to his ship the visit-
ing officer shall draw up a statement of his proceed-
ings whilst the facts are fresh in his memory, specifying
whether any complaint was made by the master or any
other person on board the vessel, and, if so, what the
complaint was. He shall also deliver to you any com-
plaint which the master may have made in writing, and
you will thereupon carefully investigate the case, and
lose no time in applying such remedy as circumstances
may admit.
30. The officer who accompanied the visiting officer
shall also draw up in detail and deliver to you a state-
ment of all the facts which he witnessed.
31. You are to see that a proper entry of all the
necessary particulars is made in the boarding book, and
also in the log book of the ship. Both the boarding
book and the log book shall be signed by the officers
by whom the visit was made.
32. In any case when you shall deem it necessary,
you will, by the first opportunity, forward a full report
of the circumstances, together with your remarks there-
on, to the senior officer on the station; and a duplicate
thereof to the Secretary of the Admiralty.


Search.
33. If, after an examination of the papers of any
British vessel, the visiting officer is not satisfied that she
is not liable to detention, he shall proceed to search her.
34. When the search has been authorised, the boat’s
crew shall be called on hoard to assist, and, if required,
further assistance shall be obtained from the ship.
35. The visiting officer will also be justified in making
inquiries from the master and crew, but he shall abstain
from all threats or intimidation.
36. During the search neither the master nor any
other person shall be removed from the vessel without
his own consent.
37. Care shall be taken to prevent any irregularity or
damage to the cargo.
38. If in the course of the search the visiting officer
is satisfied that the vessel is not liable to detention, the
search shall be immediately discontinued; every thing
that has been removed shall be replaced as quickly and
carefully as possible, and the vessel allowed to pursue
her course without delay.
39. If the visiting officer finds on board any vessel
papers relative to another vessel already captured, but
not adjudicated upon, he will, with the consent of the
master, take possession of them, and forward them to
that port to which such other vessel has been sent in
for adjudication.
40. Before quitting the vessel the visiting officer shall
ask the master whether he has any complaint to make
of the manner in which the search has been conducted,
or on any other ground. If the master makes any com-
plaint, the visiting officer shall request him to specify
the particulars in writing.
41. The visiting officer shall also offer to enter on the
log book of the vessel a memorandum of the search ; if
the offer is accepted, he will specify the date and place
of the search, the exact time that was occupied in the
search, and the name of Her Majesty’s ship and of the
Commander, and will sign the memorandum, adding his
rank in the navy. In no case however shall any entry
be made in the log book of the vessel without the
consent of the master.
42. Immediately on his return to his ship the visiting
officer shall draw up a statement of his proceedings
whilst the facts are fresh in his memory, specifying
whether any complaint was made by the master or any
other person on board the vessel, and if so what the
complaint was. He shall also deliver to you any com-
plaint which the master may have made in writing, and
you will thereupon carefully investigate the case, and
lose no time in applying such remedy as circumstances
may admit.
43. The officer who accompanied the visiting officer
shall also draw up in detail and deliver to you a state-
ment of all the facts which he witnessed.
44. You will see that a proper entry of all the neces-
sary particulars is made in the boarding book and also


in the log hook of the ship. Both the hoarding book
and the log hook shall he signed by the officers by whom
the search was made.
45. In any case when you shall deem it necessary,
you will, by the first opportunity, forward a full report
of the circumstances, together with your remarks there-
on, to the senior officer on the station, and a duplicate
thereof to the Secretary of the Admiralty.
Detention.
46. The 9th section of the Kidnapping Act is as
follows:
If a British subject commits any of the following
offences ; that is to say,
1. Decoys a native of any of the aforesaid islands
for the purpose of importing or removing
such native into any island or place other
than that in which he was at the time of the
commission of such offence; or carries away,
confines, or detains any such native for the
purpose aforesaid, without his consent, proof
of which consent shall lie on the party
accused:
2. Ships, embarks, receives, detains, or confines,
or assists in shipping, embarking, receiving,
detaining, or confining, for the purpose
aforesaid, a native of any of the aforesaid
islands on board any vessel, either on the
high seas or elsewhere without the consent
of such native, proof of which consent shall
lie on the party accused :
3. Contracts for the shipping, embarking, re-
ceiving, detaining, or confining on hoard any
vessel for the purpose aforesaid any such
native without his consent, proof of which
consent shall lie on the party accused :
4. Pits out, mans, navigates, equips, uses, em-
ploys, lets, or takes on freight or hire any
vessel, or commands, or serves, or is on
hoard any such vessel with intent to commit,
or that any one on hoard such vessel should
commit, any of the offences above enu-
merated :
5. Ships, lades, receives, or puts on board, or
contracts for the shipping, lading, receiving,
or putting on hoard of any vessel money,
goods, or other articles, with the intent that
they should he employed, or knowing that
they will be employed in the commission of
any of the offences above enumerated;
he shall for each offence be guilty of felony, and
shall be liable to be tried and punished for such
felony in any Supreme Court of justice in any of
the Australasian colonies, and shall, upon convic-
tion, be liable at the discretion of the court to the
highest punishment other than capital punishment,
or to any less punishment, awarded for any felony
by the law of the colony in which such offender
shall be tried.


47. If in the course of the search you find reasonable
grounds for suspecting that the vessel being a British
vessel*—
Is being employed in the commission of any of
the offences enumerated in the said 9th section of
the Kidnapping Act; or
Has been fitted out for such employment; or
Has been employed in the commission of any such
offence during the voyage on which such vessel is
met, such voyage to he deemed (except in circum-
stances showing the contrary) to have commenced
when the vessel last received a clearance from a
British port or a British consul,
You will, whether the master holds any license or not,
detain the vessel.
You will also detain the vessel if you find that she is
carrying native labourers of the islands in the Pacific
Ocean, not being part of the crew of the vessel, either
without a license granted to the master according to
the Kidnapping Act, or in contravention of the terms of
any such license, excepting where the vessel is exempt,
under the Bth section of the Kidnapping Act, from de-
tention on either of these grounds, as having complied
with the regulations and conditions imposed by the
Queensland Act, or any Act. of the like kind which may
hereafter he passed by any of the Australasian colonies.
48. The authority for the formal detention of a vessel
shall in all cases proceed from yourself alone. But any
officer under your command, who, whilst at a distance
from you, falls in with a vessel, and after visit and
search has reason to believe that she is liable to deten-
tion, will hold possession of her till he has communicated
with you.
49. As soon as you have come to the determination to
detain the vessel, you will give notice to the master, and
may state to him the ground on which the detention is
made; you will then secure possession of the vessel.
50. You may, for the purpose of enforcing the deten-
tion of the vessel, call to your aid any constable or
officers of police, or any officers of Her Majesty’s army,
or any excise officers or officers of customs, or any
harbour-master or dock-master, or any officers having
authority by law to make seizures of vessels, and may
put on board the vessel any one or more of such officers
to take charge of the same and to enforce the provisions
of the Kidnapping Act.
51. You will endeavour to obtain from the master,
crew, or other persons on board, exact information con-
cerning the kidnapping trade, especially upon the fol-
lowing points:
(1.) The names and residences of the owners and
charterers of the vessel:
(2.) The name of the port from which the vessel cleared
out and of the port to which she was bound :
(3.) The name of the place where the natives
were shipped or were intended to have been
shipped :
(4.) The name of the place where the natives were
to have been delivered, and to whom;
* See Art. 4 of these Instructions.
30027.


(5.) Whether the master had in that or any other vessel
shipped natives; and, if so, when and where.
52. If there are any natives on hoard you will send
the senior medical officer of your ship, accompanied by
another officer, to make to you a special report upon
their health and condition.
You will then draw up a certificate in the Form No. 1.
hereto, showing the state in which you found the vessel
at the time of the detention.
You will cause all the vessel’s papers to he numbered
or lettered consecutively, and will draw up a certificate
as to the papers in the Form No. 2. hereto, distinguishing
therein those that were voluntarily delivered up and
those that were found concealed; and in case papers
have been thrown overboard or destroyed you will, so far
as you may he able to do so, describe them.
53. You will cause an account to he taken of all
money and valuables found on hoard the vessel, and
will draw up a certificate thereof in the Form No. 3.
hereto, and you will in all cases deliver a copy thereof,
signed by yourself, to the master.
54. Should the vessel appear to you not to he in a
sufficiently seaworthy condition to he sent in for adjudi-
cation, you will cause a survey of her to he made by the
officers of your ship best qualified for the duty; and if
you should thereupon determine to destroy her, you will
draw up a certificate in the Form No. 4. hereto.
55. If you have determined to destroy the vessel, as
in the next preceding article mentioned, or if at the
time of the detention she has been run on shore and
wrecked, it will he important that you should secure
evidence of the vessel having been liable to detention
under the Kidnapping Act.
56. In every case where you destroy a vessel, you
will, by the first opportunity, forward a full report of the
circumstances, together with your remarks thereon, to
the senior officer on the station, and a duplicate thereof
to the Secretary of the Admiralty.
Sending to Port of Adjudication.
57. After you have detained the vessel, you will, with
as little delay as possible, forward her to the proper port
of adjudication.
58. If, however, there should come to your knowledge
any further facts, tending to show that the vessel has
been improperly detained, you will immediately release
her, taking care to replace, as far as possible, everything
in its original condition.
59. The proper port of adjudication will, in general,
he the nearest or most accessible port in the Australasian
colonies having a Vice-Admiralty Court, hut any Vice-
Admiralty Court in any of Her Majesty’s dominions
will have authority to adjudicate.
60. You will send in the vessel to the port of adjudi-
cation all the cargo, natives, passengers, the master,
mate, or boatswain, the cook or other person belonging
to the vessel previously charged with feeding the
natives, and, if practicable, the whole of the crew. If,
however, it is impracticable for you to send in the
vessel the whole of the crew, you will send at least two
or three of them, and forward the remainder by the first
convenient opportunity.


61. You will have no power to compel any person
not being on board or not belonging to the vessel
to go in her to tbe port of adjudication for the purpose
of appearing as a witness at the trial; but you will take
every measure in your power to procure the attendance
of all necessary witnesses ; and if you think it desirable
you will, if possible, provide an interpreter for native
evidence.
62. Should it from any cause be necessary to remove
the master, or any of the crew, passengers, natives, or
cargo from on board the vessel before sending her in for
adjudication you will draw up a certificate in the
Form No. 5. hereto.
63. You will appoint an officer of the requisite rank
to take charge of the vessel to the port of adjudication,
and will place under his command a crew sufficient for
the safe conduct of the vessel, and will furnish him with
provisions for the voyage. In circumstances of urgency
arising from the number or sickness of the natives, you
will also send in the vessel some medical officer, if he
can properly be spared from your ship.
64. You will deliver to the officer who is appointed to
take charge the vessel’s papers and all the certificates
relating to the case, to be produced before the court.
65. You will furnish the officer with written instruc-
tions for the voyage.
66. You will direct the officer to draw up, imme-
diately on going on board, an inventory of the stores,
furniture, and cargo of the vessel, so far as it can be
ascertained without disturbing the stowage, in the Form
No. 6. hereto. He will invite the master to assist him
in drawing up the inventory, and shall in all cases
deliver a copy thereof, signed by himself, to the master.
67. You will instruct the officer to keep a log of his
proceedings from the time he goes on board until his
arrival at the port of adjudication, and to note therein
any changes that may take place on the voyage in
regard to the vessel, her crew, passengers, natives, or
cargo.
68. You will instruct the officer to endeavour by
every proper means to obtain additional information as
to the case ; and if he succeeds in finding any additional
papers, to make and sign a list thereof, and carefully to
preserve them to be produced before the court.
69. You will give the officer strict orders for the
preservation of the vessel, her cargo, and everything on
board, and for the prevention of embezzlement or
irregularity of any kind; and you will direct him to seal
the hatches if it be practicable.
70. You will instruct the officer not to treat the
master and any persons who may have been left on
board with any undue severity, nor to subject them to
any further restraint than may be necessary; and you
will at the same time warn him to be upon his guard
against any attempt at recapture.
71. You will instruct the officer, when there are
any natives on board, to make every effort to alleviate
their sufferings and to improve their condition by a
careful attention to cleanliness, ventilation, and exer-
cise; to separate the sickly from those who are in


health; and to encourage them to feel confidence in
Her Majesty’s officers and men.
72. You will instruct the officer that, if absolutely
necessary, hut not otherwise, he will he warranted in
removing the master, crew, passengers, natives, or cargo,
and in transferring them to other vessels; hut that in
all such cases it will he his duty at the time to draw up
a certificate of the circumstances in the Form No. 5.
hereto.
73. All persons and articles that may have been re-
moved from any vessel detained, wrecked, or destroyed,
shall, together with the necessary witnesses, papers, and
certificates, he forwarded with as little delay as possible
to the port of adjudication in charge of an officer of the
requisite rank, whom you will furnish with instructions
in writing.
74. You will by the first opportunity send a full
report of the case, together with your own remarks
thereon, to the senior officer on the Station, and a
duplicate thereof to the Secretary of the Admiralty.
Proceedings at Port oe Adjudication.
75. The officer in charge of the captured vessel, or
the officer in charge of any persons or articles from her,
shall, immediately on his arrival at the port of adjudica-
tion, place himself in communication with the Queen’s
proctor, or the person discharging the duties of that
office.
76. He shall as soon as possible after his arrival
deliver up the vessel, cargo, and natives, and any money
or valuables found on board, to the persons authorised
to take charge of them.
77. The person authorised to take over charge of the
vessel, natives, cargo, and property found on board is
usually the marshal of the court before which the case
is to be adjudicated, but if there should not be any
person so authorised the naval officer in charge will
apply to the Queen’s proctor for advice.
78. Such naval officer shall, as soon as possible after
his arrival, deliver up the master, crew, and passengers
at the port of adjudication to the civil authorities to
whom the jurisdiction over them belongs, taking advice,
if necessary, of the Queen’s proctor.
79. He shall also take care to deliver into court, duly
verified on oath, all the documents he has brought with
him, and all the certificates in his possession relative to
the case, together with a certificate, to be drawn up in
the Form No. 7. hereto, stating the changes, if any, that
have taken place in respect of the vessel, her crew,
passengers, natives, or cargo, up to the time of her
arrival in the port of adjudication.
80. It will be his duty to see that no undue delay
occurs in instituting the proceedings before the court.
He shall diligently watch the proceedings throughout,
and shall be careful to show all proper deference to the
court, and to afford it all the information and assistance
in his power.
81. He shall, before leaving the port, send to his
commanding officer, in writing, a detailed report of the


case, stating the result of the trial, whether the vessel
has been condemned or not, and if restored, whether
with or without costs and damages, and he shall in
every case cause an official copy of the whole of the
proceedings to he forwarded to the Secretary of the
Admiralty.
Proceedings against British Subjects.
82. If in any case you shall find in British juris-
diction, or on the high seas out of foreign territorial
waters, or in any island in the Pacific Ocean not within
the jurisdiction of any duly recognised state, any British
subject * whom you shall on reasonable grounds suspect
of having committed any of the offences enumerated in
the ninth or tenth sections of the Kidnapping Act, or
of having committed in British jurisdiction or on the
high seas out of foreign territorial waters, or in any
island in the Pacific Ocean not within the jurisdiction
of any duly recognised state, any other felony (as, for
example, murder or wilful maiming) upon any native of
any such island, then (unless such British subject be in
a foreign vessel, in which case you will have no power
over him) you will act in accordance with the following
instructions.
83. If immediate steps are necessary to prevent the
person’s escape, you may at once arrest him. You will
have no power to take any evidence on oath, hut you
will in general, before taking the step of arresting,
require information in writing.
81. If any colonial municipal officer should he on
the spot, you should communicate the facts to him, and
render him such assistance, if in your power, as he may
request. If such officer should decline to arrest the
suspected person, you may yourself arrest and prosecute
such person, hut you should not do so without grave
consideration.
85. If any British consular, officer should he on the
spot, you should communicate the facts to him, and
should confer with him as to the desirability of your
holding a naval court under sections 260-266 of the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1851, or of proceedings being
taken by him under the 268th section of that Act ;f you
will then decide on your own responsibility as to the
course you should pursue, whether to hold a naval
court, or to arrest the suspected person, or to abstain
from taking action.
86. If no municipal or consular officer be on the spot,
you will, according to your discretion, determine which
of such three courses you will adopt.
87. If in any case you shall, upon the requisition of
the consular officer or of any naval court, or upon your
own responsibility, take the suspected person into your
custody, and determine to convey him in your ship, or
to cause him to be conveyed in any other ship of war,
to a British possession for trial, it will be your duty to
convey or cause him to be conveyed accordingly, as soon
* See Article 4. of these Instructions.
f This Act is printed in the Appendix to Pritchard’s Admiralty-
Digest, Vol. 2.; and the above-named sections are printed, Appendix C.
to these Instructions.
30027. D


as the exigencies of the service may permit, to the
nearest or most accessible of the Australasian colonies.
On arrival at such colony he is to he at once deln ered
up to the proper municipal authority.
88. You will have no power in any case to put any
restraint on any person for the purpose of compelling
him to appear as witness upon the trial of the suspected
person arrested by you or by any naval court, but you
will on such occasion take every means in your power
to procure the attendance of all necessary witnesses, and
you will, if you think it desirable, provide, if possible,
an interpreter for native evidence.
89. You will in every case of arresting any person
under the foregoing instructions make a full entry in
the losr at the time, and send a special report to the
senior officer on the station, and a duplicate thereof to
the Secretary of the Admiralty.
Dealings with Native Inhabitants oe the
Islands.
90. In your intercourse with the natives, you will
endeavour to conciliate their good will by kindness and
forbearance, and will take care that the officers and men
under your command shall do the same.
91. You will take special care not to offend the pre-
judices of the natives, and you will make allowance for
any jealousy or distrust with which you may be met,
92. You will make inquiries as to the power and
influence of the several chiefs, and their personal cha-
racter ; the nature of their rule; the habits of the
people j the extent and resources of the islands , the
navigation of the coast and the rivers; and the facilities
of landing.
93. You will make inquiries as to the Kidnapping
Trade: to what extent it prevails ; whether it is in-
creasing or diminishing; by whose agency, whethei
native or foreign, it is prosecuted; and in what mode
it is conducted.
94. Should you be asked to take charge of any persons
who have been kidnapped, or should you fall in with
any such persons derelict at sea, or cast ashore upon a
desert or uncivilized coast, you will take them on board
your ship, and convey or forward them as soon as con-
venient to their own islands, if practicable, or to the
nearest Australasian colony, and deliver them to the
municipal authority.
95. You will rescue any British subjects who may be
detained in slavery or amongst natives against their
will; but, in all such cases, before using force, you will,
if practicable, refer to the senior officer on the station
for instructions.
96. You will inquire into any outrages committed on
British subjects or British property by the natives of
any uncivilised or not duly recognised states*', but you
will not, except in special circumstances, use force
to obtain redress without instructions from the senior
officer on the station.
* See Article 4. of these Instructions,


97. In every case, before using force, you will satisfy
yourself that it is absolutely indispensable, and that the
number of men at your disposal is adequate to effect
the object without incurring undue risk. Generally,
you will bear in mind that it is very undesirable to
employ force on shore. Any force landed should be
withdrawn with as little delay as possible.
98. In every case in which you use force, you will
take care not to inflict greater injury than the circum-
stances appear to you to require.
99. You will, by the first opportunity, forward a full
report of the case, together with your owm remarks
thereon, to the senior officer on the station, and a
duplicate thereof to the Secretary of the Admiralty.
Miscellaneous.
100. If the Governor in Council of any Australasian
colony shall, under the 13th section of the Kidnapping
Act, authorise and empower you to obtain the attendance
as a witness of any native of any of the said islands in
the Pacific Ocean, it will be your duty, if the exigencies
of the service permit, to take the necessary steps ac-
cordingly, reporting the same to the senior officer on
the station.
101. If any officer authorised to seize or detain any
vessel in respect of any offence against the Kidnapping
Act calls you to his aid for the purpose of any such
seizure or detention, it will be your duty under the
17th section of the Act to furnish such aid accord-
ingly.
By command of their Lordships,
Vernon Lushington.
21 March 1873.


POEM No. 1.
and
male and
labourers.
Here insert any And I further certify that
particulars
Commanding Her Majesty’s Ship
Poem No. 2.
18 , being in latitude
of Greenwich, detain the
and longitude
, whereof
if any papers And I further certify that
have been de-
Certificate as to the State of the Vessel at the time of the
Detention.
I, the undersigned, holding the
rank of_ in Her Britannic Majesty’s
Navy, and commanding Her Majesty’s Ship ,
do hereby certify that, in exercise of the authority vested
in me, I did on the day of
18 , being in latitude and longitude
of Greenwich, detain the vessel ,
whereof is master, on the ground that
she was liable to detention under the Kidnapping Act,
1872.
And I further certify that she had on hoard at the
time a crew of persons, passengers,
female native
Certificate as to Tapers found on hoard the Vessel.
I, the undersigned, , holding the
rank of in Her Britannic Majesty’s Navy,
and commanding Her Majesty’s Ship ,
do hereby certify that, in exercise of the authority vested
in me, I did on the day of
vessel
master, on the ground that she was liable to detention
under the Kidnapping Act, 1872.
And I further certify that Annex A. hereto contains a
correct list of the papers which were delivered up to me
at the time of the detention ; and that Annex B, hereto
contains a correct list of the papers found concealed,
together with a statement of the places in which and
the circumstances under which they were so found.


Poem No. 3.
Certificate as to Money and Valuables found on hoard
the Vessel , Copy of which must in all cases he
delivered to the Master.
I, the undersigned, , holding the
rank of in Her Britannic Majesty’s
Navy, and commanding Her Majesty’s Ship ,
do hereby certify that the following is a correct ac-
count of all moneys and valuables found on board the
vessel , detained by me on
the day of 18 ,on the ground that
she was liable to detention under the Kidnapping Act,
1872.
Commanding Her Majesty’s ship
Note.—l do hereby declare that on the_ day
of 18 I delivered a copy, ■ signed
by myself, of the above certificate to the master of
the , and that
Commanding Her Majesty’s Ship
Poem No. 4.
Certificate as to the Destruction of the Vessel.
I, the undersigned,
rank of
, holding the
rank of in Her Britannic Majesty’s
Navy, and commanding Her Majesty’s Ship ,
do hereby certify that on the day of
18 I directed a survey to be held on board the
vessel , detained by me on the day
of 18 on the ground that she was
liable to detention under the Kidnapping Act, 1872,
and that the surveying officers having reported to me that
as from the report of survey hereto annexed will more survey.
fully appear, the said vessel has been destroyed by my
orders.
Signed this day of 18
Commanding Her Majesty’s Ship
80027.


Poem No. 5.
I, the undersigned,
holding the rank of
from the Vessel
detained on the day of
Here state who
cr what was
removed, and the
date, place, and
cause of re-
moval.
Here state the
whether or not
the master
made any ob-
jection, and if
he did, what the
nature of the
objection was.
Of Her Majesty’s Ship
Note.—l do hereby declare that on the day
Of Her Majesty’s Ship
the officer in charge of the
, detained on the
disturbing the stowage;
Signed this day of
Certificate as to Removal of the Master or any of the
Crew, Passengers, Slaves, or Cargo from on hoard
the Vessel.
in Her Britannic
Majesty’s Navy, and belonging to Her Majesty’s Ship
, do hereby certify that I have removed
, which was
18 on the
ground that she was liable to detention under the
Kidnapping Act, 1872, the following, viz,,
of 18 I delivered a copy, signed
by myself, of the above certificate to the master of
Poem No. 6.
Inventory of the Stores, Furniture , and Cargo of the
Captured Vessel, to he drawn up hy the Officer in charge.
, holding the rank of
in Her Britannic Majesty’s Navy, and
irge of the vessel
, detained on the day of
18 ,on the ground that she was liable to detention
under the Kidnapping Act, 1872, by Her Majesty’s
Ship , , Commander,
do hereby certify that the following is a correct inven-
tory of the stores, furniture, and cargo of the said
vessel, so far as the same can be ascertained without


Note. —I do hereby declare that on the da^
of 18 , I delivered a copy, signed
by myself, of the above inventory to the master of
the , and that
Signed this
day of
To he signed hy the Officer in charge, adding his rank
in the Royal Navy.
Form No. 7.
Certificate as to any Changes in the Captured Vessel
subsequent to her Retention.
I, , holding the rank of
in Her Britannic Majesty’s Navy, and
the officer in charge of the
vessel,
detained on the day of 18 ,on
the ground that she was liable to detention under the
Kidnapping Act, 1872, by Her Majesty’s Ship
, Commander, do hereby certify that
the following changes have taken place between the date
of her detention and the present time; viz. :


APPENDIX A.
35 & 36 Viet
Pacific Islanders Protection.
CHAPTER 19.
An Act for the Prevention and Punishment of Criminal
Outrages upon Natives of the Islands in the Pacific
Ocean. [27th June 1872.]
Whereas criminal outrages by British subjects upon
natives of islands in the Pacific Ocean, not being in
Her Majesty’s dominions, nor within the jurisdiction of
any civilized power, have of late much prevailed and
increased, and it is expedient to make further provision
for the prevention and punishment of such outrages :
Be it enacted by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :
Short title. 1. This Act may he cited as “ The Kidnapping Act,
1872.”
Definition of 2. The term “ Governor ” shall include the officer for
terms. the time being administering the government of any of
the Australasian Colonies, and “ Governor in Council ”
shall mean the Governor acting by and with the advice
of the Executive Council of the Colony under his
government:
The term “ Australasian Colonies ” shall mean and
include the colonies of New South Wales, New
Zealand, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania,
Victoria, and Western Australia :
The term “ vessel ” shall include a ship or boat:
The term “ oath ” shall include any affirmation or
declaration taken or made in lieu of an oath:
The term “ master ” shall include any person for the
time being in command or charge of a vessel.
No British 3. It shall not be lawful for any British vessel to
vessel to carry native labourers of the said islands, not being
carry native p ar t 0 f the crew of such vessel, unless the master thereof
mfiess the shall, with one sufficient surety to be approved by the
master has Governor of one of the said Australasian colonies, or
given a bond by a British consular officer appointed by Her Majesty
and received t 0 reside in any of the said islands, or by any person
appointed by either of those officers, have entered into
a joint and several bond in the sum of five hundred
pounds, to Her Majesty, her heirs and successors, in
the form contained in Schedule (A.) to this Act
annexed, or in such other form as shall be prescribed
by the legislature of any of the Australasian colonies in
respect of vessels sailing from the ports of such colony,
nor unless he shall have received a license in the form
contained in Schedule (B.) to this Act annexed from
any such Governor or British consular officer.
Penalty of 4. The said penal sum of five hundred pounds shall
bond, how be due and recoverable notwithstanding any penalty
recoverable. or forfeiture imposed by this Act, and whether such
penalties or forfeitures shall have been sued for and
recovered or not.


5. It shall be lawful for any such Governor or British Power to
consular officer as aforesaid, upon being satisfied that a Governor
bond has been duly given by the master of any British d c(^°^ ular
vessel under the third section of this Act, to grant, if ,r rant
he shall think fit, to such master a license in the form licenses,
contained in the said Schedule (B.)
6. All the provisions of this Act with respect to the Seizure, &c.
detention, seizure, bringing in for adjudication before of> vessels
any Vice-Admiralty Court, trial,- condemnation, or native lB
restoration of vessels suspected of being employed in labourers
the commission of any of the offences enumerated in without
the ninth section of this Act shall, mutatis mutandis, lice ~ se > &c-
-apply to any British vessel which shall be found
carrying such native labourers without a license or in
contravention of the terms of any license which may
have been granted to the master thereof.
7. The master of any vessel carrying such native Penalty for
labourers without such license or in contravention of the carrying
terms of any license which may have been granted to n * tives
him, shall be liable to a fine of not exceeding five license. 1 a
hundred pounds, which may be sued for and enforced
in and by any court of justice of the Australasian
colonies; but nothing herein contained shall be taken
to affect the liability of such master for any offence
committed by him under the ninth or tenth sections of
this Act: Provided always, that the aggregate sum
imposed or recoverable by way of penalty under this
Act shall in no case exceed the sum of "five hundred
pounds.
8. Nothing herein contained shall be taken to affect Vessels com-
the provisions of an Act passed by the legislature of plying with
Queensland, intituled “ An Act to regulate and control P rovi sions of
“ the introduction and treatment of Polynesian la- ActTnot
“ bourers,” nor of any Act of a like kind passed or liable to
which may be passed by the legislature of any of the seizure, &c.
Australasian colonies not being inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act; and the provisions of this Act
in respect of vessels carrying native labourers without
a license or in contravention of the terms of a license,
shall not apply to any vessel which has complied with
the regulations and conditions imposed by the said
Queensland Act or by any other Act of a like kind
passed or which may be passed by the legislature of any
of the Australasian colonies as aforesaid, proof of which
compliance shall lie upon the master of such vessel.
9. If a British subject commits any of the following Colonial
offences; that is to say, courts em-
1. Decoys a native of any of the aforesaid islands for powered to
the purpose of importing or removing such native e^ ain
into any island or place other than that in which ° cn ° ( ' > ’
he was at the time of the commission of such
offence ; or carries away, confines, or detains any
such native for the purpose aforesaid, without his
consent, proof of which consent shall lie on the
party accused :
2. Ships, embarks, receives, detains, or confines, or
assists in shipping, embarking, receiving, de-
taining, or confining, for the purpose aforesaid, a
native of any of the aforesaid islands on board
any vessel, either on the high seas or elsewdiere
30027. F


without the consent of such native, proof of
which consent shall lie on the party accused:
3. Contracts for the shipping, embarking, receiving,
detaining, or confining on hoard any vessel for
the purpose aforesaid any such native without
his consent, proof of which consent shall lie on
the party accused:
4. Eits out, mans, navigates, equips, uses, employs,
lets, or takes on freight or' hire any vessel, or
commands, or serves, or is on hoard any such
vessel with intent to commit, or that any one on
hoard such vessel should commit, any of the
offences above enumerated:
5. Ships, lades, receives, or puts on board, or con-
tracts for the shipping, lading, receiving, or
putting on board of any vessel money, goods, or
other articles, with the intent that they should
be employed, or knowing that they will be em-
ployed, in the commission of any of the offences
above enumerated;
he shall for each offence be guilty of felony, and shall
be liable to be tried and punished for such felony in any
Supreme Court of justice in any of the Australasian
colonies, and shall, upon conviction, be liable at the
discretion of the court to the highest punishment other
than capital punishment, or to any less punishment,
awarded for any felony by the law of the colony in
which such offender shall be tried.
10. Any person who aids, abets, counsels, or procures
the commission of any offence against this Act shall be
liable to be tried and punished as a principal offender.
11. Any offence against this Act may be described in
any indictment, information, or other document relating
to such offence, in cases where the mode of trial requires
such a description, as having been committed at the
place where it was wholly or partly committed, or it
may be ’averred generally to have been committed
within Her Majesty’s dominions, and the venue or local
description in the margin may be that of the county,
city, town, or place in which the trial is held.
12. In all cases of indictment or information laid or
exhibited in the Supreme Court of any of the Austra-
lasian colonies for any offence under this Act, such
Supreme Court, upon motion to be made on behalf of
the prosecutor or accused, may order a commission or
commissions to issue for the examination of witnesses
upon oath, and to receive proof at any place or places
out of the jurisdiction of such court concerning the
matters charged in such indictment or information; and
the said Supreme Court is hereby required and authorised
by the same or any subsequent order or orders to make
such rules and give such directions as to the time, place,
and mode of executing such commission or commissions,
and as to the notice thereof to be given to the party
accused, and as to the proper return of the depositions
taken and the matters done thereunder, as to the said
court shall seem fitting and proper, and the depositions
being duly taken under such commission or commissions
and returned to the said court shall be allowed and read
as if the witness so deposing had been present, sworn,


and examined viva voce at any trial for such offences
as aforesaid in the said Supreme Court, any law or usage
to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.
13. In all cases of indictment or information laid or IWers to
exhibited in the Supreme Court of any of the Austra- ®^ e e o * tten
lasian colonies for any offence under this Act, the liat [ ve w j t .
Governor in Council of such colony may authorise and nesses.
empower the commander of any of Her Majesty’s ships
or vessels, or the master of any ship or vessel trading
with the inhabitants or natives of the said islands, to
obtain the attendance as a witness of any native of any
of the said islands for the purpose of giving evidence
either before the said Supreme Court or before any com-
mission for the examination of witnesses ordered by such
court, and to transport and convey such witness to the
colony in which such offence shall be tried or to the
place where such commission shall be held, and also to
remunerate such witness by such sum of money or other
remuneration as the said Governor in Council shall see
fit to authorise for his attendance to give evidence as
aforesaid, and for his reconveyance back to the island or
place from whence he shall have been so brought.
14. In all cases in which an oath may be lawfully Mode of
administered to any person either as a witness or de- evi *
ponent in any proceeding under this Act, it shall be aence '
the duty of the court or commissioner, or .officer
administering the same, to ascertain, as far as possible,
in what form such oath will be binding on the con-
science of such witness or deponent, and to administer
such oath in such form accordingly; and the court
before which such proceedings shall take place or a
commissioner under any commission as aforesaid may
declare in what manner the evidence shall be taken
of witnesses or deponents who are ignorant of the
nature of an oath, and the evidence or deposition taken
in any such form or manner as aforesaid shall be as
valid as if an oath had been administered in the ordinary
manner.
15. Every person who shall wilfully and corruptly Punishment
give false evidence in any examination, deposition, or of persons
affidavit had or taken in any proceeding under this Act gl !* ng false
• ** • u evidence
shall be deemed guilty of perjury, and upon conviction
thereof shall be liable to the pains and penalties to
which persons convicted of wilful and corrupt perjury
are liable, and every such person may be tried either in
the place where the offence was committed, or in the
Supreme Court of any of the Australasian colonies.
16. Any British vessel which shall upon reasonable Powers to
grounds be suspected: seize sus-
(1.) Of being employed in the commission of any of
the offences enumerated in the ninth section of vessels,
this Act; or
(2.) Of having been fitted out for such employment;
or
(3.) Of having during the voyage on which such
vessel is met been employed in the commission
of any such offence,
may be detained, seized, and brought in for adjudication
upon the charge of being or having been so employed or
fitted out as aforesaid before any Vice-Admiralty Court


in any of Her Majesty’s dominions by any of the
following officers ; that is to say,—
(1.) Any officer of customs or public officer in any
British possession, subject nevertheless to any
special or general instructions from the Gro-
vernor or officer administering the government
of such possession :
(2.) Any commissioned officer on full pay in the
military service of the Crown, subject never-
theless to any special or general instructions
from his commanding officer :
(3.) Any commissioned officer on full pay in the
naval service of the Crown, subject never-
theless to any special or general instructions
from the Admiralty or his superior officer :
(4.) Any consul or consular agent appointed by Her
Majesty to reside in any island not within the
jurisdiction of any civilized power.
17. Any officer authorised to seize or detain any
vessel in respect of any otfence against this Act may,
for the purpose of enforcing such seizure or detention,
call to his aid any constable or officers of police, or any
officers of Her Majesty’s army or navy, or marines, or
any excise officers or officers of customs, or any harbour-
master or dock-master, or any officers having authority
by law to make seizures of vessels, and may put on
board any vessel so seized or detained any one or more
of such officers to take charge of the same and to
enforce the provisions of this Act, and any officer seizing
or detaining any vessel under this Act may use force,
if necessary, for the purpose of enforcing seizure or
detention.
18. The Vice-Admiralty Court before which any
vessel is so brought for adjudication shall have full
power and authority to take cognizance of, and try the
charge upon which such vessel is brought in, and may
on proof thereof condemn the vessel and cargo, or
either, as the case may be, as forfeited to Her Majesty,
or may order such vessel and cargo, or either of them,
to be restored with or without costs and damages, as
to the court shall seem fit; and in any such proceedings
the said court shall have such powers to issue commis-
sions for the examination of witnesses, and to give
directions in respect thereof, as are herein-before vested
in the Supreme Courts of the Australasian colonies; and
the said court shall, in addition to any power given to it
by this Act, have in respect of any vessel or other
matter brought before it in pursuance of this Act, all
powers which it has in the case of a vessel or matter
brought before it in the exercise of its ordinary juris-
diction.
19. When any detention or seizure shall be made
under this Act, and proceedings instituted in any Vice-
Admiralty Court in respect of such detention or seizure,
it shall be lawful for the Lords Commissioners of Her
Majesty’s Treasury, if to their discretion it shall seem
meet, to direct payment to be made of the whole or
any part of the costs, damages, and expenses which may
be incurred in such proceedings.


20. Subject to the provisions of this Act providing indemnity
for the award of damages in certain cases in respect of t 0 officers,
the seizure or detention of a vessel by the Vice-Admi-
ralty Court, no damages shall be payable, and no officer
or local authority shall be responsible, either civilly or
criminally, in respect of the seizure or detention of any
vessel in pursuance of this Act.
21. This Act shall be proclaimed in the several Prodama-
Australasian colonies by the respective Governors thereof, tion of Act
within six weeks after a copy of such Act shall have
been received by such Governors respectively, and shall
take effect in the several colonies from the day of such
proclamation.
22. Nothing in this Act contained shall be taken Act not to
to affect the powers vested in the Supreme Courts of affect
New South Wales and Tasmania under the Act 9 Geo. IV. 9 9eo ‘ 4 ‘
c. 83. c - 83 '
SCHEDULES.
Schedule (A.)
Form of Bond to be entered into by Masters of Vessels
under “The Kidnapping Act, 1872.”
Know all men by these presents, that we A.B. of
and C.D. of are held and firmly bound
unto our Sovereign Lady Queen Victoria, by the Grace of God
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen,
Defender of the Faith, in the sum of five hundred pounds of
good and lawful money of Great Britain, to be paid to our said
Sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs and successors, to which
payment, well and truly to be made; we bind ourselves and every
of us, jointly and severally, for and in the whole, our heirs,
executors, administrators, and every of them, firmly by these
presents.
Sealed with our seals. Dated this day of
187 .
Whereas it is enacted by “ The Kidnapping Act, 1872,” that
no British vessel shall carry native labourers of islands in the
Pacific Ocean not being within the jurisdiction of any civilized
power unless the master of such vessel, together with one sufficient
surety to be approved by the Governor of one of Her Majesty’s
Australasian colonies, or by a British consular officer, or by any
person appointed for the purpose by either of those officers, shall
have given to Her Majesty, her heirs and successors, a bond in
the sum of five hundred pounds for the prevention of kidnapping,
and for the due observance of the requirements of the said Act
and of the license which the said master is thereby required to
obtain.
Now the condition of this obligation is this, that if in respect
of the vessel , whereof the above bounden A.B. is
master, all and every the requirements of the said Act and of the
license issued thereunder to the said master shall be well and
truly performed, and if the above bounden A.B. shall satisfy the
Governor of any of Her Majesty’s Australasian colonies, or the
British consular officer aforesaid, that no kidnapping was allowed
or connived at by any person on board of or connected with said
30027.


vessel during the currency of the said license, then this obligation
is to be void, otherwise to remain in full force.
Signed, sealed, and delivered by the above I (1.5.)
bounden A.B. and C.D. in the presence > (l V)
of J
E.F. of
Schedule (B.)
{Royal Arms.)
License for the Carriage by Sea of Native Labourers.
A. 8., Master of the , the vessel more particu-
larly described below, having duly given to Her Majesty Queen
Victoria the bond required by “The Kidnapping Act, 1872,” for
the prevention of kidnapping and the due observance of the
requirements of the said Act, I (the Governor of the colony
of or Her Majesty’s consul of , as
the case may be,) do hereby, in exercise of the authority for that
purpose conferred on me by the said Act, license the said vessel to
carry not more than native labourers from
to . Should this vessel be found to answer the
subjoined description and appear to be strictly engaged in the
lawful pursuit of the above-mentioned object it is the direction
of Her Majesty’s Government that she shall not be obstructed
in the prosecution of her present voyage nor in the shipment or
landing of her native passengers.
This license shall not be transferable, and shall be available
only for the voyage from to
aforesaid, and for a period not exceeding days from
the date hereof.
Description of the Vessel above referred to.
Tons (registered tonnage),
Eig {i.e. ship, barque, brig, &c.),
How painted,
Name painted on stern,
Whether any poop.
Whether any quarter galleries,
Whether a top gallant forecastle,
Name of chief officer,
Number of officers and crew, including surgeon, if any,
Bound from to , and intending to
call at and
Given under my hand and seall
at this day >
of 187 . J
Governor or Consul, as the
case may be.
(L.S.)
To the respective Flag Officers, Captains,
and Commanding Officers of Her Ma-
jesty’s Ships, ard to all others whom it
may concern.


APPENDIX B.
Polynesian Laborers Act*
Queensland.
Anno tricesimo primo Victorias Beginse.
No. 47.
An Act to regulate and control the Introduction and
Treatment of Polynesian Laborers.
[Assented to 4th March 1868.
Whereas many persons have deemed it desirable and Preamble,
necessary in order to enable them to carry on their
operations in tropical and semi-tropical agriculture to
introduce to the colony Polynesian laborers And
whereas it is necessary for the prevention of abuses and
for securing to the laborers proper treatment and pro-
tection as well as for securing to the employer the due
fulfilment by the immigrant of his agreement that an
Act should he passed for the control of such immigra-
tion Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s most
Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of
Queensland in Parliament assembled and by the autho-
rity of the same as follows— Not lawful
1. It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to to introduce
introduce any Polynesian laborers into the Colony of Polynesian
Queensland unless and except in accordance with the
regulations contained in this Act and the forms there- j n g to regu-
unto attached. lations.
2. Within four months from the passing of this Act Present em-
ail persons who have in their employment any Poly- ployers to
nesian laborers shall make a return to the Immigration
Agent or other authorised agent of all such laborers in months from
their employment setting forth the number and names passing of
of such laborers the nature and duration of their Act.
agreements together with all such particulars as may he
required.
3. Any person employing any Polynesian laborers Penalty for
who shall fail to make a return as required by the failure in
foregoing clause shall on conviction of the same before
any two justices of the peace he subject to a penalty
not exceeding fifty pounds.
4. The provisions of this Act shall so far as practi- Act to apply
cable be applied to all Polynesian laborers introduced to employers
into this colony before the passing of this Act and to and laborers
their employers. _ passing.”
5. The Governor with the advice of the Executive i nspectors
Council shall appoint from time to time such person or to be ap-
persons as shall be found requisite for the proper pointed,
inspection of the said Polynesian laborers and enforcing
the provisions of this Act.
6. All persons desirous of importing laborers from Form of
the South Sea Islands shall make application to the application.
Colonial Secretary at Brisbane in the Eorm A. appended
hereto stating the number required and how they are to
be employed such application to be accompanied by a
bond in Eorm K. signed by applicant and two sureties to
secure the return of the laborers to their native islands
at the expiration of three years or thirty-nine moons
from date of arrival A license in Eorm C. mav then be
%r


issued authorising the applicant to import the number
required.
Vessel to be 7. The owner or charterer of any vessel so licensed
shall provide for the use of the passengers a supply of
medicines medical comforts instruments and other
things proper and necessary for diseases and accidents
incident to sea voyage and for the medical treatment of
the passengers during the voyage including an adequate
supply of disinfecting fluid or agent together with
printed or written directions for the use of the same
respectively and such medicines medical comforts in-
struments and other things shall in the judgment of the
emigration officer at the port of clearance he good in
quality and sufficient in quantity for the probable
exigencies of the intended voyage and shall be properly
packed and placed under the charge of the medical
practitioner when there is one on hoard to be used at
Penalty. his discretion In case of non-compliance with any of
the requirements of this section the master of the ship
shall for each offence be liable to a penalty not exceed-
ing fifty pounds nor less than five pounds sterling.
Master of 8. The master of any vessel arriving with Polynesian
vessel to re- laborers shall he hound to report on arrival at any of
port arrival, ports of Queensland the number of such laborers
and the names of the employers to whom they have
been or are to he indented and shall not he permitted to
land any of the immigrants until he has received the
certificate (Porm L.) of the Immigration Agent or other
officer of the Government empowered to grant same
that the following regulations have been complied
with—
Master of (1.) The production hy the master of the vessel of a
ves ® el t 0 certificate in Porm I. or certificates signed hy
tificate. 0 CBr a consu l missionary or other known person
that the laborers have voluntarily engaged
themselves and entered into their agreements
with a full knowledge and understanding of
the nature and conditions of same and that
when they were embarked they were not
known to he afflicted with any disease and
were neither maimed halt blind deaf dumb
idiotic or insane.
Employers (2.) The production hy the employers or parties to
to produce whom the laborers are or are intended to be
Immigration indented of the certificate in Porm C. autho-
Agent. ' rising them to recruit.
Immigrants (3.) That proper means have been taken since the
to understand arrival of the ship by the Immigration Agent
jheir aTe e e° f 0r °^ ier °ffi cer by explanations questions and
ments! SieC * enquiries amongst the laborers themselves to
ascertain whether they have a proper under-
standing of the’conditions of the agreements
and did voluntarily enter into same That the
agreements have been signed in the form pre-
scribed and the employers bound to observe
the rules laid down for the treatment and man-
agement of the laborers.
Agreements 9. All agreements (Porm D.) shall be completed on
t( leted C on' board the ship if possible and the immigrants taken
board ship fr° m same by their employers and should there arise a
where prac- necessity for taking any of the laborers to the Immigra-
tieable.


tion Depot their maintenance there shall in all cases he
home by the employer.
10. The arrival of the immigrants shall he registered Immigrants
in the Immigration Office Brisbane or at the Custom b ® regxs-
House in any other port and in the latter case a copy a^iva i. n
of the register shall he forwarded by the Customs officer
to the Immigration Office by following mail.
11. The scale of rations and wages shown in Dorm G. Scale of
and printed on the form of agreement shall in no case rations,
he deviated from.
12. A register of hired Polynesian laborers shall he Register to
kept by each employer in Porm E. which shall he open be ke P l b 7
for the inspection of any magistrate or other person em Plo7er-
appointed by Government for the purpose who shall
record his visit therein No entry except the state of
muster at the expiration of each quarter shall be made
in the register of the employer unless from a document
of hiring transfer death or desertion countersigned by
the Immigration Agent or other authorised officer.
13. No transfer of an immigrant shall be made except Transfers
with the full consent of the transferror the immigrant how made,
and the Government in Form E. and no immigrant shall
he allowed to leave his employ ment under transfer until
the same has been recorded in the hooks of the Immi-
gration Office or other appointed office All transfers
shall he signed by the transferror and immigrant in
presence of a magistrate who shall before such signing
explain to the immigrant the full meaning and effect of
such transfer Provided that every transferree shall
enter into a bond similar to that of the transferror prior
to any transfer being consented to.
14. All deaths or desertions shall he immediately Deaths or
reported to the nearest bench of magistrates and to the
Immigration Agent by the employer and in case of immediately,
death a medical certificate of the cause thereof shall be
forwarded if possible.
15. All masters of vessels about to proceed to the Masters of
South Sea Islands in order to obtain laborers therefrom vessels to
shall enter into a bond in Form B. with two sufficient
sureties for the prevention of kidnapping and for the due
observance of these regulations so far as they are con- to hire
Cerned. laborers.
16. No ship shall carry a greater number of passen- Number of
gers than in the proportion of one statute adult to every passengers,
twelve clear superficial feet allotted to their use Pro-
vided that the height between decks shall not be less le&iTVict.
than six feet six inches from deck to deck when the c. 84.)
height of the ’tween decks exceeds six feet six inches an
extra number of passengers may be taken at the rate of
one for every one hundred and forty-four cubic feet of
space. Each ship must be fitted with open berths or
sleeping places in not more than two tiers—the lowest tier
shall be raised six inches from the deck and the interval
between the two tiers of berths shall not be less than
two feet six inches All passengers shall be berthed
between decks or in deck houses.
17. But no ship whatever her tonnage or superficial Proportion
space of passenger decks shall carry a greater number passengers
/» i i ji • j i a • p tO CIeCK 9T6Bi>
oi passengers on the whole than in the proportion ot
one statute adult to every five superficial feet clear for
exercise on the upper deck or poop or if secured and
30027. H


fitted on the top with a railing or guard to the satisfac-
tion of the emigration officer at the port of clearance on
any roundhouse or deck-house.
Length of 18. The length of the voyage to or from the South
voyage. Sea Islands shall be computed at thirty days for sailing
vessels and fifteen days for steamers.
Water on the 19. Three quarts of water daily during the voyage
voyage. shall be allowed to each adult exclusive of the quantity
used for cooking purposes.
Provisions 20. Provisions shall be issued to each statute adult
on the during* the vovage according to the following scale
voyage. namely
Daily Provisions for Statute Adult.
Ibs. oz.
Yams - - - -40
Or rice - - - - TJ 0
Or maize meal - - - 1J 0
Meat (pork or beef) - - 1 0
Tea - - - - 0 OJ.
Sugar - - - - 0 2
Tobacco (during good behaviour)
per week - - - 0 TJ
The undermentioned clothing shall be supplied to
each laborer immediately on embarkation in advance :
1 Flannel Shirt.
1 Pair Trowsers.
. 1 Blanket.
return to be 21. Nominal returns of laborers shall be made by
sent at ex- employers of South Sea Island labor to the Immigration
piration of Agent at the expiration of each quarter in Form H.
eac i quarter. 22. At the end of each quarter the police magistrates
or bench of magistrates in each district where South
to Colonial Sea Island laborers are employed shall forward to the
Secretary Colonial Secretary a return of all cases adjudicated upon
each quarter. j n re i a tion to Polynesian laborers employed under these
regulations such returns to include the names of em-
ployers and laborers and the nature of the offences.
Penalty for 23. All persons harboring or employing Polynesian
harboring laborers otherwise than under these regulations without
runaway reporting the same to the nearest bench of magistrates
laborers. an q to the Immigration Agent in Brisbane shall be
liable on conviction thereof to a penalty not exceeding
twenty pounds.
Breaches of 24. All breaches of these regulations shall be punish-
regulations a l>le by fine to be recovered in a summary manner
punishable p c f ore two justices of the peace for the first offence a
y ne ‘ fine not exceeding ten pounds for second and sub-
sequent offences not exceeding twenty pounds nor less
than five pounds.
Engage- 25. All engagements made or to be made with
ments sub- Polynesian laborers already in the colony or to arrive
iTVict are hereby expressly declared to be subject to the pro-
No. ii. visions of the Act twenty-five Victoria number eleven.
26. A tax of twenty pounds per head for every Poly-
nesian laborer introduced contrary to the provisions of
default of this Act shall be levied on all vessels in which such
compliance, laborers may be brought to this colony and in default of
payment of such tax such vessel shall be absolutely
forfeited to Her Majesty.


27. All expenses incurred by the Government in Expenses
affording hospital relief to sick Polynesian laborers or
by their detention in immigration depbts shall be chargeable
chargeable to the employers of such men and may be to employers
recovered from them by summary process on the in- in certain
formation of Immigration Agent or other authorised cases *
officer.
28. Any person who shall without the consent of the Laborers not
laborer and the written permission of the Government to be re-
remove or attempt to remove any such laborer out of 0
the Colony of Queensland except for the purpose of his w i t h o ut per-
return to his home shall be liable to a penalty of twenty mission ex-
pounds for every such laborer so removed or attempted consent.
to be removed and it shall be lawful for the Government
in any case to prevent the removal of any such laborer
except for the purpose of his return to his home as
aforesaid. p ,
29. Any person supplying Polynesian laborers with
spirits shall be punishable as at present in the case of to be sup-
aboriginals under fifty-first section of “ Licensed Pub - pbed with
licans Act ” twenty-seven Victoria number sixteen. spirituous
30. It shall not be lawful for any employer of Poly-
nesian laborers to charge such laborers with the payment c 0 ° nts not
of any moneys on account of stores supplied or to to be de-
deduct any sum in respect thereof from any wages due ducted from
to them. wages.
31. This Act shall be styled and may be cited as the Short title.
“ Polynesian Laborers Act o/ ? 1868.”
FORM A.
Application jor permission to introduce South Sea Island
agricultural or pastoral laborers.
I request to be allowed in accordance
with the Act now in force to procure from the South Sea Islands
immigrants for agricultural or pastoral purposes to be em-
ployed in the district.
A.B.
Applicant’s signature.
The above requisition lodged with me this day
of 186 .
G.H.
Immigration Agent Queensland.
FORM B.
Bond to he entered into by'Shipmasters.
Know all men by these presents that of
of and of are held and
firmly bound unto our Sovereign Lady Victoria by the grace of
God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen
Defender of the Faith in the sum of five hundred pounds of good
and lawful money of Great Britain to be paid to our said Lady
the Queen her heirs and successors to which payment well and
truly to be made we bind ourselves and every of us jointly and
severally for and in the whole our heirs executors and administrators
and every of them firmly by these presents.
Sealed with our seals.
Dated this day of
one thousand eight hundred and


Whereas by the Polynesian Laborers Act of 1868 it is
amongst other things enacted that all masters of vessels
proceeding to the South Sea Islands in order to obtain
laborers therefrom shall enter into a bond with two suffi-
cient sureties for the prevention of kidnapping and due
observance of the requirements of the said recited Act
Now the condition of this obligation is such that if the
above-bounden J.K. master of ship about
to proceed to the South Sea Islands to procure laborers
shall faithfully observe the requirements of the said
recited Act and shall satisfy the Government of Queens-
land through its officer duty appointed for the purpose
that no kidnapping was allowed countenanced or con-
nived at then this obligation to be void otherwise to
remain in full force and virtue.
Signed sealed and delivered by the above-bounden
[L.B.] and in
the presence of
I hereby certify that the above bond was duly signed sealed
and delivered by the said and in my
presence this day of 18
Immigration Agent.
FORM C.
License to recruit laborers from the South Sea Islands .
This is to certify that [or his agent] is
hereby licensed to recruit immigrant laborers
from the South Sea Islands for Queensland in conformity with the
Act passed regarding such recruiting This license is to remain
in force only until the number mentioned above have been
recruited.
Dated this day of 186 .
Colonial Secretary of Queensland.
Immigration Agent Queensland.
N.B, —This license is to be returned to the Immigration Agent
when the laborers have been received.
FORM D.
Memorandum of Agreement made this day between
of of the first part and
native of per ship of the second part
The conditions are that the said party of the second part engages
to serve to the said party of the first part as a and
otherwise to make generally useful for the term
of calendar months and also to obey all
or overseer's or authorised agents lawful and
reasonable commands during that period in consideration of which
services the said party of the first part doth hereby agree to pay
the said party of the second part wages at the rate of not less
than six pounds {£6) per annum to provide with
the understated rations daily to provide suitable clothing and
proper lodging accommodation and to defray the expense of
conveyance to the place at which
to be employed to pay wages in the coin of the realm at the end
of each year of the agreement and provide them with a return
passage to their native Island at the expiration of three years
No wages shall be deducted for medical attendance.


Daily Ration.
Beef or mutton (or 2 lbs. of fish)
Bread or flour
lbs. ozs.
1 0
1 0
Molasses (or sugar) -
Vegetables (or rice 4 oz. or maize meal 8 oz.)
Tobacco per week -
Salt, per week -
Soap (per week) -
0 5
2 0
o 1*
0 2
0 4
Clothing.
yearly.
Shirts (one of flannel or serge) - 2
Trowsers pairs - - - 2
Hat - 1
Blankets - _ 1 p a i r>
In witness whereof they have mutually affixed their signatures
to this document.
Witness:
The above contract was explained in my presence to the said
immigrants and signed before me by them with their names or
marks and by or his authorised agent at
this day of 186 .
Gr.H.
Immigration Agent or Custom
House Officer.
Registered at the Office Brisbane Queensland
this day of 186 .
Gi.H.
Immigration Agent.
30027.


w
£
P 3
o
p


FORM F.
We [name and designation of employer and names and numbers
of immigrants being respectively the master and ser-
vants under a contract of service made before the Government
Emigration Agent at on the
day do hereby agree that the whole rights
and obligations of the said first party under the said contract shall
be and the same are hereby transferred as at the date hereof
to' [name and designation ] who hereby agrees to accept the said
transfer and the contract hereby transferred with all its rights
and obligations.
XII
A B I gnatures or marks of all
j j the parties.
The above transfer signed by all the parties thereto its nature
and effect having been first fully explained to the immigrants
above-named all in my presence. The said transfer also approved
and concurred in by me as on behalf of the Government.
At this day of 186
G.H.
Immigration Agent [or Justice of the Peace.]
Registered this day of 186
G.H.
Immigration Agent.
FORM G.
Scale of Rations.
Daily.
lbs. ozs.
Beef or Mutton (or 2 lbs. of Fish) - - -10
Bread or Flour - - - -10
Molasses or Sugar - - - - 0 5
Vegetables (or rice 4 ozs, or maize meal 8 ozs.) - 2 0
Tobacco, per week - - -0 1^
Salt, per week - - - - 0 2
Soap (per week) - - - - - 0 4
Wages—Not less than six pounds (£6) per annum, in the
coin of the realm.
FORM H.
Quarterly Return.
Return of South Sea Islanders employed on the Plantation of
in the district of name of Plantation
Post Town for quarter ending
„ „ of Muster T TWr-
No. Name. From on A f f", s Deaths.
81st March ters - tlons *
Remarks.
Recapitulation.
Number at date of last return
Number transferred to plantation during above quarter
Deduct:—
Number died during above quarter -
Number transferred from plantation during above
quarter
Numoer remaining on
Proprietor of
Registered at Immigration Office, Brisbane, on and
acknowledged
Immigration Agent


FORM I.
Whereas duly licensed by the Government
of Queensland to recruit South Sea Island laborers according to
license exhibited to us and natives
of appeared before us this
day of 186 . The said agent has hired the
said natives to serve various employers in Queensland as laborers
for a term of three years and undertakes that they shall be fur-
nished with the under-mentioned rations and clothing that they
shall be paid at the rate of not less than six pounds (P 6) per
head per annum in coin of the realm that they shall be provided
with proper lodging accommodation and that the cost of their
passage to and from Queensland and all other costs and charges
shall be defrayed by their employers and that they shall be re-
turned free of expense to this place at the expiration of three
years and that the Government of Queensland shall exercise su-
pervision over their employers and otherwise protect them during
their term of service and during their passage to and from
Queensland.
Now we certify that this document has been read and its full
meaning and effect explained to the said before-mentioned natives
in the presence of the said agent and of ourselves and that the
said natives have consented to accompany said agent to Queens-
land And we further certify that to the best of our belief none
of the said natives are suffering from any disease or are maimed
halt blind deaf dumb idiotic or insane.
In witness whereof we have hereunto attached our signatures
this day of 186 at
Missionary [or European Resident or Chief
Interpreter].
Agent.
Natives.
Clothing per Annum.
Shirts (one flannel or serge)
Browsers, pairs
Blankets, pair -
Rations per Diem.
lbs. ozs.
Bread - - - -10
Beef or Mutton (or Fish 2 lbs.) - -10
Molasses or Sugar - - - 0 5
Vegetables (or rice 4 ozs. or maize meal 8 ozs.) - 2 0
Tobacco per week - - - -0 1^
Salt - - - - 0 2
Soap per week - - - - 0 4
Countersigned by Master of Vessel.
To be furnished to Immigration Agent or Customs’ officer with
report of arrival.
FORM K,
Form of Bond to he given by Employer,
Know all men by these presents that we A.B. of C.D. and
E.F. of are held and firmly bound unto our
Sovereign Lady Victoria by the grace of God of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen Defender of the
Faith in the sum of ten pounds of good and lawful money of
Great Britain for each Polynesian laborer employed by us to be
paid to our said Lady the Queen her heirs and successors to
which payment well and truly to be made we bind ourselves and
every of us jointly and severally for and in the whole our heirs


executors and administrators and every of them firmly by these
presents.
Sealed with our seals
Dated this tiay of
one thousand eight hundred and
Whereas by the Polynesian Laborers Act of 1868 it is
amongst other things enacted that all persons desirous
of importing laborers from the South Sea Islands shall
enter into a bond with two sureties to secure the return
of the laborers to their native Islands at the expiration
of three years or thirty-nine moons from date of arrival
at the rate of ten pounds sterling for each laborer intro-
duced Now the condition of this obligation is such
that if the above-bounden A.B. shall pay to the Immi-
gration Agent at the rate of fifteen shillings per quarter
for every Polynesian laborer in his employment for the
purpose of providing a return passage for each and every
South Sea Islander introduced by him under his appli-
cation and also all the charges or expenses incurred by
the Government of Queensland in connection with the
same then this obligation to be void otherwise to remain
in full force and virtue.
Signed sealed and delivered by the above-bounden
A.B. C.D. and E.F. in the presence of
[L.S.]
I hereby certify that the above bond was duly signed
sealed and delivered by the said A.B. C.D. and E.F. in
my presence this day of
18
Immigration Agent [or Justice of the Peace.]
FORM L.
I hereby certify that the master of the arrived
from on the day of
186 has produced to me the necessary certificates (Form I)
that the whole of the laborers on board have voluntarily engaged
themselves &c. &c.
2. I further certify that the license (Form C) has been pro-
duced in all cases.
3. I also certify that by careful examination of the laborers I
have ascertained that they appear to have a proper understanding
of the full meaning and effect of the agreements and that they
voluntarily entered into the same and that the agreements have
been signed in the form prescribed (Form D.)
Dated at this day of
186
Immigration Agent [or Officer of Customs].
30027.


APPENDIX C.
17 & 18 Yict. cap. 104.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1854.
Naval Courts. Naval Courts on the Sigh Seas and abroad.
Naval Courts 260. Any Officer in command of any Ship of Her
maybe sum- Majesty on any Eoreign Station, or, in the Absence of
moned for such Officer, any Consular Officer, may summon a Court,
hearmgCom- £ 0 p e termed a “ Naval Court,” in the following Cases ;
plaints, and , . . , , ’ ° 7
investigating (that IS to say,)
Wrecks on (1.) Whenever a Complaint which appears to such
the High Officer to require immediate Investigation is made
abroad 1 to him hy the Master of any British Ship, or hy
any certificated Mate, or hy One or more of the
Seamen belonging to any such Ship :
(2.) Whenever the Interest of the Owner of any British
Ship or of the Cargo of any such Ship appears
to such Officer to require it:
(3.) Whenever any British Ship is wrecked or aban-
doned or otherwise lost at or near the Place
where such Officer may he, or whenever the
Crew or Part of the Crew of any British Ship
which has been wrecked, abandoned, or lost
abroad arrives at such Place.
Constitution 261. Every such Naval Court as aforesaid shall
of such consist of not more than Eive and not less than Three
Courts. Members, of whom, if possible, One shall he an Officer
in the Naval Service of Her Majesty not below the
Bank of Lieutenant, One a Consular Officer, and One
a Master of a British Merchant Ship, and the rest shall
be either Officers in the Naval Service of Her Majesty,
Masters of British Merchant Ships, or British Mer-
chants; and such Court may include the Naval or
Consular Officer summoning the same, but shall not
include the Master or Consignee of the Ship to which
the Parties complaining or complained against may
belong; and the Naval or Consular Officer in such
Court, if there is only One such Officer in the Court,
or, if there is more than One, the Naval or Consular
Officer who, according to any Regulations for settling
their respective Banks for the Time being in force, is of
the highest Bank, shall he the President of such Court.
General 262. Every such Naval Court shall hear and in-
Fuuctions vestigate the Complaint brought before it, or the Cause
and Mode 0 f £p e w rec k or Abandonment, (as the Case may he,)
of such° n and may for that Purpose summon and compel the
Courts. Attendance of Parties and Witnesses, and administer
Oaths, and order the Production of Documents, and
shall conduct the Investigation in such Manner as to
give any Person against whom any Charge is made
an Opportunity of making a Defence.
Powers of 263. Every such Naval Court may, after hearing the
such Courts : Case, exercise the following Powers; (that is to say,)
To supersede
(i.) it may, if unanimous that the Safety of the
the Master : Ship or Crew, or the Interest of the Owner, abso-
lutely requires it, supersede the Master, and may
appoint another Person to act in his Stead; hut
no such Appointment shall be made without the
Consent of the Consignee of the Ship, if then
at the Place:


(2.) It may discharge any Seaman from his Ship :
(3.) It may order the Wages of any Seaman so dis-
charged or any Part of such Wages to be forfeited,
and may direct the same either to he retained by
way of Compensation to the Owner, or to he paid
into the Receipt of Her Majesty’s Exchequer in
the same Manner as other Penalties and For-
feitures under this Act:
(4.) It may decide any Questions as to Wages, or
Pines, or Forfeitures, arising between any of the
Parties to the Proceedings :
(5.) It may direct that all or any of the Costs incurred
by the Master or Owner of any Ship in procuring
the Imprisonment of any Seaman or Apprentice
in a Foreign Port, or in his Maintenance whilst so
imprisoned, shall he paid out of and deducted
from the Wages of such Seaman or Apprentice,
whether then or subsequently earned:
(6.) It may exercise the same Powers with regard to
Persons charged before it with the Commission
of Offences at Sea or abroad as are by this Act
given to British Consular Officers :
(7.) It may order the Costs of the Proceeding before
it (if any), or any Portion thereof, to be paid by
any of the Parties thereto, and may order any
Person making a frivolous or vexatious Complaint
to pay Compensation for any Loss or Delay
caused thereby; and any Cost or Compensation
so ordered shall be paid by such Person accord-
ingly, and may be recovered in the same Manner
in which the Wages of Seamen are recoverable,
or may, if the Case admits, be deducted from his
Wages :
And all Orders duly made by any such Court under the
Powers hereby given to it shall in any subsequent legal
Proceedings be deemed conclusive as to the Rights of the
Parties.
264. All Orders made by any such Naval Court
shall, whenever practicable, be entered in the Official
Log Book of the Ship to which the Parties to the
Proceedings before it belong, and shall be signed by the
President of the Court.
265. Every such Naval Court shall make a Report
to the Board of Trade, containing the following Parti-
culars ; (that is to say,)
(1.) A Statement of the Proceedings, with the Order
made by the Court, and a Report of the
Evidence:
(2.) An Account of the Wages of any Seaman or
Apprentice who is discharged from his Ship by
such Court:
(3.) If summoned in order to inquire into a Case of
Wreck or Abandonment, a Statement of the
Opinion of the Court as to the Cause of such
Wreck or Abandonment, with such Remarks on
the Conduct of the Master and Crew as the
Circumstances require:
And every such Report shall be signed by the President
of the Court, and every Document purporting to be
such a Report and to be so signed as aforesaid shall, if


Naval Courts, produced out of the Custody of some Officer of the
Board of Trade, be deemed to he such Beport, unless
the contrary is proved, and shall he received in
Evidence, subject to all just Exceptions.
Penalty for 266. Any person who wilfully and without due
preventing Cause prevents or obstructs the making of any such
obTucTng 0 ' Complaint as last aforesaid, or the Conduct of any Case
Investiga- & or Investigation by any Naval Court, shall for each such
tion. Offence incur a Penalty not exceeding Eifty Pounds, or
he liable to Imprisonment with or without Hard Labour
for any Period not exceeding Twelve Weeks.
Crimes committed on the Sigh Seas and abroad.
267. All Offences against Property or Person com-
mitted in or at any Place either ashore or afloat out of
Her Majesty’s Dominions by any Master, Seaman, or
Apprentice who at the Time when the Offence is com-
mitted is or within Three Months previously has been
employed in any British Ship shall be deemed to be
Offences of the same Nature respectively, and be liable
to the same Punishments respectively, and be inquired
of, heard, tried, determined, and adjudged in the same
Manner and by the same Courts and in the same Places
as if such Offences had been committed within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England; and the
Costs and Expenses of the Prosecution of any such
Offence may be directed to be paid as in the Case of
Costs and Expenses of Prosecutions for Offences com-
mitted within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of
England. .
268. The following Buies shall be observed with
respect to Offences committed on the High Seas or
abroad; (that is to say,)
(1.) Whenever any Complaint is made to any British
Consular Officer of any of the Offences men-
tioned in the last preceding Section, or of any
Offence on the High Seas having been committed
by any Master, Seaman, or Apprentice belonging
to any British Ship, such Consular Officer may
inquire into the Case upon Oath, and may if
the Case so requires take any Steps in his Power
for the Purpose of placing the Offender under
necessary Bestraint and of sending him as soon
as practicable in safe Custody to the United
Kingdom, or to any British Possession in which
there is a Court capable of taking cognizance of
the Offence, in any Ship belonging to Her
Majesty or to any of Her Subjects, to be there
proceeded against according to Law :
(2.) Eor the Purpose aforesaid such Consular Officer
may order the Master of any Ship belonging to
any Subject of Her Majesty bound to the United
Kingdom or to such British Possession as afore-
said to receive and afford a Passage and Sub-
sistence during the Voyage to any such Offender
as aforesaid, and to the Witnesses, so that such
Master be not required to receive more than One
Offender for every One hundred Tons of his
Ship’s registered Tonnage, or more than One
Witness for every Eifty Tons of such Tonnage;


and such Consular Officer shall indorse upon the
Agreement of the Ship such Particulars with
respect to any Offenders or Witnesses sent in her
as the Board of Trade requires :
(3.) Every such Master shall on his Ship’s Arrival in
the United Kingdom, or in such British Pos-
session as aforesaid, give every Offender so com-
mitted to his Charge into the Custody of some
Police Officer or Constable, who shall take the
Offender before a Justice of the Peace or other
Magistrate by Law empowered to deal with the
Matter, and such Justice or Magistrate shall deal
with the Matter as in Cases of Offences com-
mitted upon the High Seas :
And any such Master as aforesaid who, when required
by any British Consular Officer to receive and afford a
Passage and Subsistence to any Offender or Witness,
does not receive him and afford such Passage and
Subsistence to him, or who does not deliver any
Offender committed to his Charge into the Custody
of some Police Officer or Constable as herein-before
directed, shall for each such Offence incur a Penalty
not exceeding Pifty Pounds; and the Expense of im-
prisoning any such Offender and of conveying him and
the Witnesses to the United Kingdom or to such British
Possession as aforesaid in any Manner other than in the
Ship to which they respectively belong, shall he Part of
the Costs of the Prosecution, or be paid as Costs
incurred on account of seafaring Subjects of Her
Majesty left in Distress in Eoreign Parts.
25 & 26 Viet. cap. 63.
Merchant Shipping Acts Amendment Act, 1862.
23. The following Buies shall he observed with
respect to the Cancellation and Suspension of Certifi-
cates, that is to say :
(1.) The power of cancelling or suspending the
Certificate of a Master or Mate by the 242 d
Section of the Principal Act conferred on the
Board of Trade shall (except in the Case pro-
vided for by the Eourth Paragraph of the said
Section) vest in and be exercised by the Local
Marine Board, Magistrates, Naval Court,
Admiralty Court, or other Court or Tribunal
by which the Case is investigated or tried, and
shall not in future vest in or he exercised by
the Board of Trade :
(2.) Such power shall extend to cancelling or sus-
pending the Certificates of Engineers in the
same Manner as if “ Certificated Engineer ”
or “ Certificated Engineers ” were inserted
throughout such Section after “Master” or
“ Masters ” :
(3.) Every such Board, Court, or Tribunal shall at
the Conclusion of the Case, or as soon after-
wards as possible, state in open Court the
Decision to which they may have come with
respect to cancelling or suspending Certifi-
cates, and shall in all Cases send a full Beport
30027. k


upon the Case, with the Evidence, to the
Board of Trade, and shall also, if they deter-
mine to cancel or suspend any Certificate,
forward such Certificate to the Board of Trade
with their Beport:
It shall he lawful for the Board of Trade, if they
think the Justice of the Case require it, to
reissue and return any Certificate which has
been cancelled or suspended, or shorten the
Time for which it is suspended, or grant a new
Certificate of the same or any lower Grade in
place of any Certificate which has been can-
celled or suspended :
The 434th and 437th Sections of the Principal
Act shall be read as if for the Word “Nautical”
were substituted the Words “ Nautical or
Engineering,” and as if for the Word “Person ’
and “ Assessor ” respectively were substituted
the Words “Person or Persons” and “Assessor
or Assessors ” respectively :
No Certificate shall be cancelled or suspended
under this Section unless a Copy of the Beport
or a Statement of the Case upon which the
Investigation is ordered has been furnished to
the Owner of the Certificate before the Com-
mencement of the Investigation, nor, in the
Case of Investigations conducted by Justices
or a Stipendiary Magistrate, unless One
Assessor at least expresses his Concurrence in
the Beport.


APPENDIX D.
Confidential.
Admiralty,
* 3
Sir,
1. The Treaty with. Prance for the Suppression
of the Slave Trade having been abrogated, I am com-
manded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
to acquaint you that, under an arrangement which has
been adopted provisionally between the British and
Prench Governments, their Lordships desire that all
Commanding Officers of Her Majesty’s Ships will strictly
attend to the following Regulations with regard to
visiting Merchant-Vessels suspected of fraudulently
assuming the Prench Plag.
2. In virtue of the independence of National Plags,
a Merchant-Vessel navigating the high seas is not
subject to any foreign jurisdiction which shall not have
been accepted by Treaty. A Ship of War can therefore
visit, detain, arrest, or seize, only such Merchant-
Vessels as are recognized to belong to her own nation.
3. The Colours of a Vessel being primd facie the
distinctive mark of her nationality, and consequently
of the jurisdiction to which she is subject, it is natural
that a Merchant-Vessel on the high seas, passing within
view of a Ship of War, should hoist her Flag in decla-
ration of her nationality. So soon, therefore, as the
Ship of War has made herself known by the display
of her own Colours, the Merchant-Vessel should also
hoist her National Plag.
4. Should the Merchant-Vessel neglect to do so, it is
admitted by the two Governments that a warning may
be given to her ; first, by firing a blank gun, and should
that be without effect, it may be enforced by a second
gun, shotted, but pointed in such a manner as to ensure
that she is not struck by the shot.
5. Immediately that the Merchant-Vessel has, by
hoisting her Colours, announced her nationality, the
foreign Ship of War can no longer pretend to exercise
the least control over her. At most, in certain cases,
she may exercise the right to speak with her, and
demand answers to questions addressed to her through
a speaking-trumpet, or otherwise, but without obliging
her to alter or impede her course. When, however, the
presumption of nationality resulting from the Colours
which may have been shown by a Mercant-Vessel may
be seriously thrown in doubt, either from positive
information, or from indications of a nature to create a
belief that the Vessel does not belong to the nation
whose Colours she has assumed, the foreign Ship of War
may have recourse to the verification of her assumed
nationality.
6. A boat may for this purpose be sent to the sus-
nected Vessel, after she has been first hailed to give
notice of the intention. The verification shall consist
in an examination of the Papers establishing the
nationality of the Vessel. Nothing can be claimed
beyond the exhibition of those documents. The Papers
to be produced by the Merchant-Vessels shall be, for
30027.


English Vessels the “ Certificate of Registry ” and the
“ Ship’s Articles,” and for Erench Vessels the “ Acte
de Erancisation ” and the “ Congd.” The Officer
charged with the duty of verification should always be a
Commissioned Officer, if there is such an Officer on
board, and should be in uniform. He should proceed
with all possible courtesy and consideration.
7. Any inquiry into the nature of the Cargo, or the
commercial operations of the Vessel, or, in short, into
any other fact besides that of her nationality, is pro-
hibited. Any search or inspection whatever is absolutely
forbidden.
8. Before the Officer of the Cruizer quits the Vessel,
a written statement ( proces-verbal ) shall be prepared by
the Officer of the Cruizer and the Master of the Mer-
chant-Vessel, wherein shall be stated all the circum-
stances attending the verification. It shall be signed
by both parties, each of wdiom is to keep a copy thereof.
If there should be any difference of opinion as to its
terms, the Officer of the Cruizer and the Master of the
Merchant-Vessel are each to prepare a statement and
furnish each other with a certified copy.
9. Except in the case of legitimate suspicion of
fraud, it should never be necessary for the Commander
of a foreign Ship of War to send on board a Merchant-
Vessel ; so numerous are the indications which, apart
from the Colours, are sufficient to show to the practised
eye of a Seaman the nationality of a Vessel,
10. In every case it is to be clearly understood that
the Captain of a Ship of War who determines to board a
Merchant-Vessel must do so at his own risk and peril,
and must remain responsible for all the consequences
which may result from his own act.
11. The Commander of a Ship of War who may have
recourse to that measure should in all cases report the
fact to his own Government, and should explain the
reasons for his having so acted. A communication
of such report, and of the reasons which may have
led to the verification, shall be given officially to the
Government to which the vessel may belong which
shall have been subjected to such verification of her
Elag.
12. If, after examination of her Papers, a Merchant-
Vessel suspected of fraud shall be detained by a foreign
Cruizer, she must, as soon as possible, be taken into a
port, or to an authority of the nationality claimed, in
order that the right to her flag may be verified by the
authorities of the Nation to which that Elag belongs.
If the claim is recognized to be fraudulent, the Vessel
will, of course, remain at the disposal of the captor.
In the contrary case a claim may be made for indemni-
fication as under the circumstances defined in Article 13.
13. In all cases in which the verification of the Elag
shall not be justified by sufficient reasons, or shall not
have been made in a proper manner, a claim may be
made for indemnification.
14. You will clearly understand that the foregoing
Instructions have reference only to Vessels navigating
under the Erench Elag, and are intended to prevent
misunderstanding between the British and Erench
Governments, but cannot affect the Vessels of other


nations with whom Great Britain has Treaties for the
Suppression of the Slave Trade, or deprive Her Majesty
of the right to seize and detain Vessels engaged in the
Slave Trade, when not entitled to the protection of any
National Flag.
I am,
Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
Vernon Lushington.


LONDON:
Printed by Georgb E. Etre and William Spottisttoode,
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
For Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
[265.—150.—4/73.]
