

INSTRUCTIONS
FOR
INSTALLING
AND
OPERATING
Radiolette
■ Jr 71


Alteration of Station Positions
SEPTEMBER 1st, 1935
ON SEPTEMBER Ist, 1935, the wavelengths of all
Broadcast Stations are to be changed.
On the permanent ''Rotovisor” scale of this A.W.A.
Receiver the new station positions are marked.
In addition, a temporary "ring scale” marked with the old
station positions is fitted immediately under the glass of the
"Rotovisor” dial. After September Ist remove this scale.
BEFORE SEPTEMBER Ist, tune to the station names
on the front scale.
AFTER SEPTEMBER Ist, tune to the station names
on the rear scale.
HOW TO REMOVE TEMPORARY SCALE
ALL WAVE RADIOLAS (Models R 241, R 242, R 243).
With a small screwdriver release the binding screws and
remove the two knobs on bezel; also the four screws fixing the
bezel to the cabinet. The temporary ring scale can then be
removed from the bezel and the bezel and knobs replaced.
MEDIUM WAVE RADIOLAS (Models R 146, R 147, Rl4B, Rl5),
R 152).
With a small screwdriver remove the four screws fixing
the bezel to the cabinet. The temporary ring scale can then
be removed from the bezel, and the bezel replaced,
RADIOLETTE CONSOLE (Models R7O, R7l, R 72).
With small screwdriver loosen off the four screws fixing
the plated bezel in position. The temporary scale can then be
slipped out and the screws tightened up again.
RADIOLETTE TABLE (Model R 29).
With small screwdriver release the binding screws and
remove the two knobs from bezel. Next lay cabinet on its
back and remove the four wood screws from the bottom of
cabinet, enabling the chassis to be removed.
This will allow the small brass nuts inside the cabinet to
be held while the four bezel retaining screws are loosened off
and the temporary scale removed. The bezel chassis and knobs
can now be replaced.
IMPORTANT: Do not interfere with Permanent Rotovisor Scale or
Pointer.


Instructions for Installing
and Operating
RADIOLETTE
MODELS 29 AND 71
Read the instructions before proceeding with the in-
stallation of the Radiolette. This instrument operates
from 240 volts supply; therefore, it is not safe to inter-
fere with any of the internal wiring or apparatus unless
the current is switched off at the power point switch
controlling the circuit to which the attachment plug is
connected, and the plug has been removed from the
power point.
VALVES. Installation.
The Radiolette has been designed for the use of Radiotrons
therefore, to ensure consistent good results and to safeguard the
instrument against damage, valves other than those specified be-
low should not be used.
1 Radiotron 6D6 1 Radiotron 6A7
1 Radiotron 42 1 Radiotron 687
1 Radiotron 80
To replace or inspect valves remove the plug from the power
point; also from the underside of the base two screws holding the
chassis in the cabinet. Loosen the grub screws holding the knobs
on the controls.
The chassis may now be removed from the cabinet by
sliding back and lifting out.
When replacing valves be sure to see that they are inserted
in the sockets in the order shown in the diagram.
To replace or inspect the screen grid valves, remove the
valve screen cover, held on by the two screws. See that the grid
lead of the 687 valve is suspended over and the grid lead of the
6A7 valve is taken around the side of the partitions in the valve
screen (through the appropriate notches) as indicated in the
diagram. Be sure that the grid clips are firmly connected to the
top terminals of their proper valves.


Fig. 1.—Showing position of Valves and location of Grid Leads.
LOCATION.
Locate the Radiolette in a convenient position within ten
feet of the power point to which it is to be connected.
AERIAL AND EARTH.
The Radiolette will operate without an earth wire and with
an indoor aerial of about 1 5 feet of wire connected to the aerial
terminal marked “A” located on the back of the chassis. In cer-
tain localities where reception conditions are difficult it may be
necessary to use an earth wire and an outdoor aerial.
If an earth wire is required it should be short and direct, of
not less than 7/22 cable, and efficiently earthed. If an outdoor
aerial is necessary it is recommended that it be 25 to 50 feet in
length.
The aerial and earth wire should be installed and protected
in accordance with the wiring rules of the Standards Association
of Australia.
CONNECTION TO POWER SUPPLY.
The instrument should not be connected to any circuit
supplying other than alternating current within the limits of 190
to 260 volts and 50 to 60 cycles.
This instrument is wired for the voltages of 230 or above.
Should the supply be always less than 230 volts it will be neces-
sary to rewire the power cord connection. Remove the chassis
from the cabinet; turn it upside-down and unsolder the conductor


of the power cord connected to the tag on the power supply
terminal board, marked 230-260, and connect it to the tag
marked 200-230. If there is any doubt regarding the supply
voltage consult the Electric Light Department or Company before
connecting the Radiolette.
OPERATION.
The Radiolette has two operating controls located on the
front of the instrument and one on the back of the chassis.
(1) STATION SELECTOR (right hand knob). By turning this
knob the pointer is seen to move around the calibrated dial indi-
cating the tuning of the instrument between 200 and 550 metres.
(2) VOLUME CONTROL (left hand knob). When the Radio-
lette is tuned to a station the volume will be increased as this
knob is rotated clockwise.
(3) SENSITIVITY SWITCH (the switch on the back of the
chassis). When listening to strong local stations set this switch
to Local (L) to the right, otherwise use the Distant position (D)
to the left.
To operate the Radiolette proceed as follows :
1. Connect the Radiolette to the power point and turn on the
switch controlling the circuit. The station selector should
now be illuminated. An interval of 30 seconds is required
for the valves to heat up before satisfactory operation is ob-
tained.
2. Set the sensitivity switch to Distant (D).
3. Turn the station selector knob with the right hand so that the
pointer indicates the wavelength of the station it is desired
to receive and rotate it through a few degrees on either side
of this setting.
4. At the same time turn the volume control knob with the left
hand so that the station is heard at low volume.
5. Now adjust the station selector to a position midway between
the points where the quality becomes poor, or the signal
disappears.
This adjustment ensures the best quality of reproduction.
6. Finally advance the volume control (clockwise) until the
desired level is obtained. If the volume control does not allow
a sufficiently low minimum volume from a strong local station,
set the sensitivity switch to Local (L).
7. When ceasing listening-in, open the power switch controlling
the circuit to which the Radiolette is connected.
If your Radiolette will not operate, and you have no immediate
success in locating the trouble, enlist the services of the authorised
dealer from whom the set was purchased.


Radiolette Service Data
MODELS 29 AND 71
ELECTRICAL SPECIFICATIONS.
Voltage Rating 190-260 Volts.
Frequency Rating 50-60 Cycles.
Power Consumption 50 watts.
Tuning Range 200-550 Metres.
Intermediate Frequency 175 K.C.
This receiver is a five-valve Superheterodyne designed to be
of compact construction and give good performance.
The Table Model incorporates a Dynamic Speaker as part of
the chassis, while the Console Model includes a larger speaker
connected to the chassis by a plug and cord.
CIRCUITS.
The circuit consists of an R.F. stage using Radiotron 6D6,
a combined oscillator and detector using Radiotron 6A7, a 6,87
operating as I.F. amplifier, detector, A.V.C. and audio frequency
amplifier combined, and a Radiotron 42 pentode output.
The rectifier valve is a Radiotron 80 supplying loudspeaker
field excitation and plate supply for all valves.
CONSTRUCTION.
LOUDSPEAKER MOUNTING. —To remove the loudspeaker
from the chassis disconnect the loudspeaker leads
Red Lead from Filament 80 Rectifier.
Yellow Lead from Screen Grid 42 Pentode.
Blue Lead from Plate 42 Pentode.
and remove the screws holding the loudspeaker mounting straps
to the front of the chassis and loosen the two screws (accessible
from the back of the chassis) holding the speaker on the mounting
bracket,


240
Volts, 50
Cycles
A.C. Supply.
VALVE.
Cath. to Cathode to
Chassis Screen Grid
Volts. Volts.
Cathode
to Plate
Volts.
Plate
Current
M.A.
Heater
Volts.
6D6 R.F.
6.0
45
245
1.0
6.25
6A7 1st Detector
6.0
45
245
0.5
6.25
Oscillator
—
—
170
3.0
—
6B7 2nd Detector
2.5
48
100
1.2
6.25
42 Pentode
14.0
230
215
30.0
6.25
80 Rectifier—600/300 volts,
45 m.a.
total current
4.9
Voltage across Loudspeaker
Field —
72 volts,
VARIABLE CONDENSER AND VOLUME CONTROL
UNIT.
The variable condenser and volume control unit is removed
as follows :
1. Remove the strap across the front of the chassis by taking out
the screws.
2. Disconnect all leads connected to the variable condenser and
volume control.
3. Remove three nuts and washers on the top of the chassis
holding the unit to the chassis.
NOTE.—It is important that the variable condenser unit be
mounted by means of the rubber bushes and kept insulated from
the chassis except for the decoupling resistor of about 2 megohms.
ACCESS TO CHASSIS PARTS.
All parts on the chassis may be made conveniently accessible
by making use of the hinging feature of the chassis ends. To
hinge, remove the two screws nearest the foot and loosen the
other two screws. Unsolder the two or three connecting leads
and hinge the chassis end back. Treat the other chassis end in a
similar manner and all parts on the chassis will then be accessible
VALVE SOCKET VOLTAGES.


Fig. 2.—Circuit Diagram, Radiolette 29 and 71.
