

nstructions
French
Cjioue rfjaliina
MSr J?a < iauia *Si(
'iO
W &A \»
% (SUw, if
'• VW V
’•RADI A MARK
1
6th FLOOR, CULWULLA CHAMBERS,
67 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
SYDNEY.
Copyright.


wmmmmKKmKumKmtm % « uiiiußuuniiiuiiiaimiiHiiuiiiiiuHiiiiuimnnilinmrannDn
*******
J
LESSON 1.
LEATHERS USED FOR GLOVE MAKING.
Kid, calf, pig skin, sheep and kangaroo are most suitable.
Some leathers are finished on the hair or grain side of the
skin, while others, notably suede, are finished on the flesh or
inside of the skin.
CHAMOIS:
Was originally the skin of the Swiss Mountain goat, although
nowadays the chamois used for glove making is nothing more or
less than ordinary sheep skin, which has been specially tanned
and dressed with oil to retain the softness after washing.
Before thinking of cutting your pattern, carefully examine the
skin to find out which way has the bigger stretch. As a general
rule the skin will stretch more across than it will lengthways.
Across the skin is what was round the body of the animal. Some-
times, however, it may be found the stretch is lengthways of the
skin; this is always the case with nappa, and when this, is the case
the pattern must be turned round the opposite way. It will be seen in
this case that the thumb appears to be across the skin, while the
glove is lengthwise. Note, however, that the thumb is being cut
out of the leg piece and across the thumb would be round the leg
of the animal. (See diagram).
Always keep your leather rolled or folded with the right side
in. When you begin the markings out of our gloves remember that
all marks are put on the wrong side of the skin.


FABRIC GLOVES:
Very attractive gloves can be made of various cottons and
woollen fabrics. Wool jersey is ideal.
Gloves made of the same material as your frock or costume
are exceedingly smart, and there is no end to the various em-
broideries and trimmings of applique or tucking you could devise
and thus ensure that your gloves are quite individual.
Tranks of one colour with fourchettes and stitchings of a
contrasting colour are very smart, or you can make the front and
back of the hand in contrasting colours and use a third colour for
stitching. ‘
If material you decide to use has no give or «tretch at all in
it, use a pattern one or even two sizes larger than that usually
worn. You may even find it necessary to widen the fourchettes.
Materials vary so much in texture that it is impossible to lay
down hard and fast rules. Always shrink cotton materials before
making your gloves.
In material with plenty of stretch, wool jersey, for example,
the usual size pattern should be right.
For most fabrics it is best to stitch in Heddibo or Hound
Blanket stitch, otherwise your material may fray, and the edges
look untidy, thus ruining the appearance of your gloves.
HEAD CAREFULLY:
THE PATTERN: Glove patterns consist of three pieces.
TRANK or hand piece.
THUMB
FOURCHETTE
(Pronounced for-shet) the word is taken from the French,
meaning fork.
These are really the side pieces up the fingers which join the
front and back of the fingers together.
When a man has the same sized hand as a woman, the same
pattern may be used, the only difference being that a man’s glove
will be shorter, and will be cut with less of a slant at the sides.
Next select the size you require, making sure that all these
pieces belong to the same sized glove.


Examine the pattern and you will see that all printing is on
one side only of the pieces, the reverse side being quite blank.
When the pattern is used with the printed side uppermost the three
pieces provide a complete pattern for one hand. To cut the glove
for the other hand, all pieces must be reversed so that the blank
side is uppermost. Great care must be taken in this, otherwise
you may find you have cut two gloves for one hand.
Cutting out the cardboard pattern.
Cut carefully on the line using the full length of the blade of
your scissors whenever possible. First cut along the bottom of
the cuff from S. to T. Next cut down each side of the band from
T. & S. to the top of the 4th finger front and back.
Now carefully round all the finger tips. Do not cut along
the lines to the bases of the fingers. Cut out the thumb hole very
carefully, first making a hole with your scissors to get the point
through! Cut round the curve, then along the lines P. to 0., P. to
Q., Q. to R. Be very accurate. Cut round the outline of the
thumb piece also from U. to V. Cut round the outline of the
fourchette.


/ //• 1*
/' I *
/' *
/ / / / '
I I / / \\
f »
1 1
' V >
/ 's.
7 S N V
i ii
Stabbing Stitch
ALTERATION OF f ) ]
THUMB HOLE 1/ I
yrfi
/fi/v v tr-v v —i
I j Heddibo Stitch
\ / Button Hole Stitch
Round Blanket


Vfjy'
\
Neck
<~" "9s
\ (
Herringbone Stitch I yryfC I \
over elastic J • **''h \
/ l'lA \\
Tail Leg
5
BUTTONHOLE AND
BINDING
WRONG SIDE
OF GLOVE
Skin Before Cutting


GLOVE MAKING
LESSON 2.
PREPARATION FOR CUTTING OUT THE GLOVES:
N.B.—No turnings are to be added as these have all been allowed
for on the pattern.
Examine the skin carefully by holding it up to the light, when
any weak or thin places will show. These should be marked round
with pencil on the wrong side. If you are using a dark coloured
skin use white chalk for these marks, which serve as a warning
that they are to be avoided when cutting your gloves.
STRETCHING THE LEATHER:
Take the leather in both hands and stretch it well lengthways
and across. It must be tvell stretched, but do not use force and
risk tearing your skin. If the skin is not well stretched before
cutting your gloves, they will stretch on being worn and be too
large.
The pattern must be arranged on the skin so that the greatest
stretch will be across the hand.
Before arranging the patterns, however, take a coarse needle
or a small stiletto and pierce holes through the pattern exactly
on the dots A, B, C, D. E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, and N.
ARRANGING THE PATTERN:
Place the skin right side down on a clean table. Avoid the
weak places you have marked, but if it is absolutely necessary to
use these bits, arrange it so that the weak places can come where
there is no great amount of wear, say for instance on the cuff or
back of the hand. Usually the patterns are placed lengthways up
the skin, as the greatest stretch is across the skin, and the greatest
stretch must be across the gloves. This cannot be taken as a hard
and fast rule; skins vary and the only way to ascertain which
applies is by trying each individual skin. But it is a hard and fast
rule, with no variation, that the greatest stretch must be across
the trank, thumb and fourchette.
Be very careful with the thumb if you should be cutting it from
the leg piece. The greatest stretch will be round the leg. See
diagram.
Gloves can be easily spoilt by having the thumb cut wrongly,
that is with the stretch running up the thumb, so that in wear it
gets longer and tighter. Now take the trank piece and lay it on the
skin, having due regard to the foregoing warnings and remarks.
See that the printed side is uppermost.
Hold the pattern firmly with the left hand, see that the skin
is perfectly flat and that there are no wrinkles.


LESSON 3.
PREPARATIONS FOR CUTTING OUT THE GLOVES
( Continued )
Be sure that you have plenty of skin left to cut out another
trank, also two thumb pieces, and six pairs of fourchettes. When
you are sure that your pattern has been arranged in the most
advantageous way, keeping your left hand firmly on the pattern,
begin to -mark all round the pattern either with a continuous line
or by a series of dots, right at the edge of the pattern.
For light coloured leather use a pencil, and on dark leather
or dark material use white ink or a white pencil. Your pencil
should be well sharpened with a fine point, otherwise the mark will
be thicker and further away from the edge of the pattern and the
resulting glove will be larger than the pattern. It is a good plan
to flatten one side of the pencil and keep this flattened side next
to the pattern. Never force the pencil down between the fingers
and so spoil your pattern. Just mark round the curves and dots
through the holes you pricked at the base of the fingers. The base
of the finger is £ inch lower on the back of the gloves.
Now mark through all the other pierced dots. Mark round
the thumb hole, lifting the little (lap piece so you can mark from
P to 0.
Now turn the pattern over and trace out trank for the other
hand. There is no need to allow any space between the pattern
pieces, the lines can touch so long as they do not overlap.
Next mark out two thumbs. One with the printed side up, and
one with the plain side up. It is a good plan for the beginner to
mark her pieces so she can distinguish which thumb belongs to
which trank. The same rule applies to the fourchettes.
Next mark out six pairs of fourchettes. Three are required
for each hand, so three must be marked from each side of the
pattern. Next, with your ruler, carefully join the dots at A, B,
C D, E, and Fto the tops of their respective fingers. Rule lines
also between G & H, l '& J, K & L, and also between M & N, so that
now your trank looks exactly like your pattern.
On the fourchettes rule a line between X & Y. Be very careful
and accurate when ruling these lines.


LESSON 4.
CUTTING OUT THE GLOVES:
You are now ready to cut out your gloves. The scissors should
be very sharp and fairly large. Very careful cutting is absolutely
necessary. Bad cutting can ruin the appearance of your gloves.
The most perfect sewing will not cure bad cutting. Cut the
tranks first, beginning at the bottom, and cutting on the pencil lines,
use long sweeping cuts the whole length of the blades. Short snips
or blunt scissors will give jagged edges which the best of sewing does
not hide. Cut down the sides, across the bottom and then right round
the finger tips in a block, thus cutting the trank away from the rest
of the skin.
I ake a little snip out of the thumb hole, near the curve and
the point of the scissors will slip through. Forcing the point of the
scissors through the leather may cause stretch and spoil the shape
of the hole. Cut round the curve from P to R, then along the lines
from 0 to P, P to Q, Q to R. Leave the fingers uncut till you are
ready to stitch them. You may then, if you like, use a smaller pair
of scissors for cutting round the curve at the tips. If you are making
gloves out of a dark skin, the fingers will need to be cut at once, as
the marks disappear very quickly. Never attempt to hurry over the
cutting and planning of your gloves.
A badly cut glove will never fit properly. You are now ready
to think of stitching the gloves.


LESSON 5.
STITCHES USED IN GLOVE MAKING:
N.B.—When stitching gloves the worker will be much handicapped
if she attempts to work without a thimble.
STABBING STITCH is one of the most frequently used in
making gloves by hand, it is more quickly worked than some ol the
others and is the most recommended for the beginner. Place the two
raw edges together evenly, wrong sides facing and hold the work
along the finger, not over it as in ordinary sewing. (See diagram).
The stitches should be about 1/16 inch from the edge of the
skin and should be very even in length, about 7 to the inch is a
<r o od suggestion, but you can make them larger or smaller if you
wish. Note, however, that whatever the length, they must be parallel
with the edge.
Make a knot in your thread and bring the needle through to
the front side of the work. (Use some of the scraps of leather left
from cutting your glove to practise the stitches before you try
working on your gloves).
With your thread on the side nearest you, begin stabbing from
right to left, push the needle through to the other side and draw the
thread taut so that the stitch lies closely on the leather with no
looseness.
Now stab back to the side nearest to you again. The stitches
and the spaces between should be the same length. Do not attempt
to use ordinary running stitch as the resulting stitches would not be
the same length on both sides of the work.
Do not make your stitches 100 small, or they will .look '^ e
mere dots when washed, and they are also more likely to pull out
of a soft skin.
Pull the thread fairly tight, but do not pucker the work.
NEEDLES: The little short needles known as betweens are the
best to use. The size will depend on the thickness of the thread to
be used, but No. 6 or 8 is a good suggestion.
HEDDIBO STITCH OR BUTTONHOLE STITCH can be
used when you want to cover right over the edge of the skin. (See
diagram).
The diagram shows the two edges of the skin placed together
w Jth the edges uppermost, and wrong sides facing as in stabbing
stitch.


LESSON 6.
STITCHES USED IN GLOVE MAKING (Continued)
The needle is taken in from the back of the work and the thread
forms a loop. Then the needle is brought through this loop from
the back, when drawn tight this forms a little knot along the edge
of the work. Stitches should be close together and the finished job
has a very professional appearance.
The stitch is worked from left to right.
ROUND BLANKET STITCH is another variation. In this
stitch the needle is taken straight over the edges then back into the
same hole again. The next stitch will be rather slanting and, re-
member, always go into the same hole twice.
There is really no end to the variations of simple stitches which
could be used for your gloves. Though for the first pair it is wisest
to use the simple stabbing stitch. Thread in a contrasting colour to
the glove is often used and has a very smart effect. Very good
effects can also be obtained by using different stitches for different
parts of the glove. For example, the points could be worked in
stabbing stitch and the fingers sewn in heddibo. This looks very
effective and is often used.
STITCHING THE GLOVES: Stabbing stitch is the best to use
for chamois and leather, and blanket or heddibo stitch for fabric
and felt gloves, and if you have practised the stitches on some odd
bits of skin or material, your stitching will be even from the very
beginning.
THE POINTS are the three tiny tucks on the back of the glove
and these are worked first.
Use a thread about 27 inches long. This should be enough
to work the three points without renewing the thread.
Make a knot and stab through to the right side of the glove at
H. Remember, all your pencil marks are on the wrong side. Pull
the thread up to the knot. Now insert the needle again from the
wrong side at G, but do not pull it through. Remove the needle
again and a tiny hole is left to act as a guide mark. Fold the leather
between G & H and press between the fingers, being very careful
not to stretch it. Now stab along from H to G about 1/16 inch from
the edge of the fold. When you reach the mark at G, turn and come
back to H, filling in the spaces left as you went up.
Finish with a French knot on the wrong side. Do not end the
thread but carry it across to the next point, J. Mark at I and work
like the first point. Work the third point in the same way. Finish
off very securely and cut off thread.
Take care when carrying the thread from point to point that it
is not drawn tight. Be careful to have your stitches even and your
tension not too tight when working the points.


LESSON' 7
THE THUMB is put in next. Use a good piece of skin or
material as the thumb is uppermost in the glove. The stretch
should always be across. Look at your pattern and become familiar
with the look of the thumb piece.
The point W always goes to the back of the hand. Cut out the
thumb belonging to the glove upon which you are working, follow-
ing the rules for cutting the trank and being very careful not to
cut even the nearest fraction beyond the point V. Fold the thumb
in half so that the rounded tips come evenly together.
Knot your thread and begin stitching from the centre of the
fold. Now stab round the curve and down the thumb to U. Next,
apply the thumb to the trank, matching the point U to Q on the
trank. Stab along to V, seeing that V fits exactly on P. When stitch-
ing round corners and angles extra tiny stitches should be made for
strengthening, for here lies the greatest strain. Now begin stitching
round the base of the thumb towards the back of the hand for about
1 inch. Leave this thread and take a new one and go back to where
you began stitching the thumb to the glove. See that W on the
thumb meet R on the glove. Stitch this bit and continue round the
base towards the front for about an inch. Now see if the thumb is
going to fit into the thumb hole. The hole will probably need
stretching a little round the edge. Do this very carefully and keep
trying the thumb to see that you are not making the hole too large.
In some stiff leathers it may be impossible to stretch the leather
enough to fit in the thumb. It may be necessary in such a case to
cut a tiny bit out of the hole to enlarge it.
Begin half way round the hole, starting with the merest shaving
and taking off about 1/16 inch at the base of the thumb hole.
Stretch and measure again. Now finish stitching in the thumb,
taking each thread to the middle of the base and finishing off
securely.
THE ELASTIC: Putting in the elastic at the wrist is the next
step. It is better not to cut off the exact length, but to work with
the elastic lying along the line ruled between N and M.
Sew the ends of the elastic and hem securely at N. Now work
a row of herringbone stitch over the elastic. The stitches should be
close together, and showing as little as possible on the right side.
Pull up the elastic to the required length. Cut off and hem the end
to M.


LESSON «.
SEWING THE FINGERS:
Take a pair of fourchettes. Hule the line from X to \ and cut
right down the line. Lie the two halves together with the right sides
facing, and top-sew firmly from Z to Y, but do not cut off the thread.
This is the only part of the glove, except the elastic, which is sewn
on the wrong side. Now open out the fourchette and you have a
forked piece. If the fingers have not already been cut, do so now.
taking care to cut only as far as the dots, then round the lops and
taper sides slightly. Pick up the fourchette again with the needle
and thread attached and on the trank stab through to the right side
at D. Stitch the fourchette at the first finger, stopping about half-
way up to see if the fourchette is too long. It probably will be, so
should be cut off at just the right length to reach half-way round
the curve at top of finger, then continue stabbing until half-way
round curve, and at the end of fourchette. Finish off thread firmly
on wrong side. Next stitch the other half of fourchette up the back
of the second finger to almost the centre of curve, not forgetting to
cut off fourchette if too long. Finish off thread firmly on wrong side.
Now take another pair of fourchettes and join together. Stitch
up sides of second and third fingers on back of hand as before, and
then the same for third and fourth fingers. Now you have the three
pairs of fourchettes all stitched on to the back of fingers. See that
the fourchettes have all been reshaped after cutting off at the tip.
When a fourchette has been shortened, altmys be careful to
retain its original shape, straight at the back and slightly curved
in front to follow the shape of the finger.
Now join the fingers on palm side to the fourchettes as
follows: Starting with the first finger, fix a thread to fourchette
at Z and bring needle through A, firmly joining A and Z together.
Stitch fourchette up front of first finger to half-way round curve,
which should also be the end of the fourchette, then join hnger tip
together and finish stabbing round top of finger. Finish off thread.
Fasten a thread firmly again at A and stitch up second finger
(pin the back and front of tips together so as to make sure you keep
the back and front of fingers the same length). Join tips together
with about 2 stitches and then continue stitching down hnger
and fourchette to B. The second finger should now be complete.


LESSON 9.
SEWING THE FINGERS (Continued)
Continue stitching third finger from B right round tip and down
to C. Commence stitching again from C, and continue around tip
of little finger, and work right down to the cuff of the glove, being
very careful to see that neither side is stretched.
This completes one glove and the other is made in exactly the
same manner.
The GLOVE SHOULD NOT BE TRIED ON TILL THIS
POINT IS REACHED, or it may be stretched and spoil the fit.
WHEN MAKING SIZE 7 GLOVE FOR LADIES, USE 6A
FOURCHETTES, BUT CUT SLIGHTLY LONGER.
You may, if you wish, finish the bottom of the glove with the
narrowest of hems, turned down and stabbed, or bound as described
in the buttoned glove. There are probably dozens of ideas that will
occur to you to finish or decorate the edge and cuff of your glove.
Punch work could be used, or they could be embroidered according
to the individual taste. (See designs at back of instructions book).
SUMMARY OF POINTS WHICH NEED SPECIAL
ATTENTION:
1. Always be very careful to make the join at base of the
fourchette come exactly to the angle of the finger being
worked, both at the back and front.
2. Always place extra stitches for strengthening in these
places as there is so much strain just there.
3. FOLDING: As each finger is finished the fourcette should
be folded inside the finger and pressed firmly with the
fingers. The finger should be pulled out to its full length.
The top of the thumb should be folded over so that its top
comes'just over the base of the first finger. When folded
thus, the thumb hole should not be seen from the back of
the glove.
PRESSING:
Is done best by simply laying the glove on a flat surface and
putting a heavy book on each separately.


LESSON 10.
BUTTONED GLOVES: A buttoned glove can be made from the
slip on pattern by cutting the sides straight and by cutting up the
palm till level with the lowest part of the thumb hole.
If you are using a very thick skin, nip out a tiny bit at the top
of the slit to allow the binding to lie Hat. With chamois or any
other soft leather, this should not be necessary and should not be
done, as it will stretch into a large hole.
The corners at the wrist should be curved.
Men’s gloves usually have one button and women’s have two
or more.
At the top of the slit a small round bit cut from the thin part
of the leather should be placed on the wrong side and hemmed
invisibly so that the slit will not tear. This bit of leather should
be placed so that the very end of the slit comes to its centre. After
hemming, it can be cut to correspond with slit.
BINDING: Take a long narrow strip of leather or fabric about
£ inch, or a little more in width. This should be cut from a piece
which does not stretch out narrower and longer, and it should be cut
long enough to go right round the bottom of the glove and round
the slit.
If you cannot cut a piece long enough for this, cut several
lengths and oversew neatly and strongly on the wrong side.
Now apply the binding to the glove by sewing the two right
sides together near the edge. Turn over the binding on to the other
side, leaving a piping about £ inch, standing out beyond the edge,
then slip stitch the raw edge of the glove without showing stitches
on the right side.


LESSON 11.
HUTTON HOLES:
These are made next. The position of the top one is at the bend
of the wrist, about inch under the thumb.
They are bound and not worked, choose a very soft pliable bit
of leather about inches by J inch for each hole, though naturally
the size of the hole will depend on the size of the button to be used,
half inch size is a good suggestion.
It is a good plan to practice making a button hole on any old
scraps of leather before beginning on your gloves.
In selecting the leather for your button hole, choose a piece in
which the stretch of the skin comes lengthwise of your strip.
Buttons always go on the thumb side of the glove, so the
button hole must be on the other side of the slit. Having decided
the position of the hole, place your bit of skin on the right side of
the glove, right sides facing and with the end right up to the slit
and at right angles to it. With a pencil mark the required size.
Mark a straight line on the centre of the patch the required size.
Stab stitch round the line as closely as possible, leaving only
about 1/16 inch between the rows of stitching, and one small stitch
across the ends which should be quite square.
Be sure your end stitch is tiny or you will have an ugly hole.
When stitching is done cut the hole with a sharp penknife or
razor blade. Be very careful not to cut the end stitches.
Now push the edges of the patch through to the wrong side
and slightly pull the hole lengthwise, which should close up the
hole, and allow the binding to show as little as possible.
We cut the patch on the large side for safety, and it can now
have the ends furthest from the slit curved off, which will make it
look much neater.
Hem round the edges, making sure that your stitches do not
show on the right side, and that you keep the hole closed.
Next hem the binding into place. It should cover the end of
the button hole patch and on the right side only a narrow piping
should be visible. Place buttons exactly opposite the holes, and
under them, on the wrong side, place a tiny circle of leather and
hem round. This is so that the button may be sewn on the double
material.


LESSON 12.
GUSSETS:
Can be used with good effect.
These are V shaped pieces let into the cuff. They are usually
about H inches across at the top of the V. The length depends on
the length of the glove cuff. It is a good rule not to extend the
gusset above the wrist. It can be inserted in the side seam, on the
back, or on the front of the wrist. In the last two cases, the glove
must be cleanly cut to the length required. Measure carefully and
make the sides of the gusset exactly the same.
TO WASH CHAMOIS GLOVES:
The best results are obtained by using water just slightly
warmer than tepid and make soapy with Sunlight soap. DO NOT
MAKE HEAVY SUDS. Wash the gloves thoroughly, then rinse in
soapy water of the same temperature. Squeeze out all the water
you can and squeeze again in a turkish tow’d. Smooth out the glove
and pull thumbs and fingers gently to the right length. Blow
vigorously into glove to separate skin. Hang to dry in a breezy
place. If the gloves are gently rubbed when nearly dry they will
be beautifully soft. Never dry gloves quickly in front of a hot fire.
The cream shade of the natural chamois fades when w'ashed,
and your gloves will be only a very pale cream or white after tw r o
or three washes. If you like the deeper cream shade, you can
retain it by rinsing the glovtjs in water in which pieces of orange
peel have been boiled. It is best to try a scrap of chamois in the
orange W’ater first, but you will soon learn to tell by the look of it
what is right.
Three-Quarter Length and Long Gloves: Continue
ratting the pattern the required length, and as the sides are sloping,
the longer the glove is cut the wider it becomes. The slit for
opening in the wrist of a long glove should be 4£" long and H"
from the side seam, commencing on the palm of the hand i higher
than the base of the thumb hole.


LESSON 13.
PATTERN ADAPTATK )N:
It is somethimes necessary to alter the patterns a little to fit
your hand.
Place your hand, palm down, on the front of the pattern and
with a fine knitting needle see that the base of your fingers corres-
pond with the base of the pattern at A, B, and C. Place a mark right
at the tip of each finger and recurve the pattern, or adding if the
pattern should be too short. Always follow the original curve.
Lengthen or shorten the backs of the fingers to correspond with the
fronts.
If the fingers are say £ inch too short or too long, take off or
add a similar amount at the tip of the thumb, being careful not to
lose the original curves.
Should the fingers be very thin, the fourchettes may be
narrowed a little‘at the sides, but never alter the base, that is at
YZ.
Conversely, for thick fingers it may be necessary to widen the
fourchettes. For very thick fingers it may even be necessary to
widen a little at the base.
QUARTER SIZES:
To obtain quarter sizes take the half size immediately below
the size you require. Add | inch at T and S and redraw your side
line, coming back to the original line when opposite F and C.
THE THUMB HOLE can also be moved up and down for very
short or long hands. Do not attempt this until you have had some
experience and have made a glove for the hand in question.
If it does require to be altered, trace out the glove in the usual
way, but omitting to trace the thumb hole.
When you have decided upon the amount to lengthen or shorten
the hole, push your pattern up or down that same distance. Now
trace in the ordinary way.
In the diagram the thumb hole is shown moved up \ inch, the
dotted line was the original.


/ 1° °\ \
/ 1 0 °\ \
/ / O 0 \ \
LESSON 14.
VARIOUS DESIGNS FOR FINISHING
CUFF OF GLOVE
n
/ ° ° \
/0 0 \
Long blanket stitch with the straight
stitch pulled tight, gives an attractive finish
around the edge of the glove. Curved Vee
with hand worked eyelets.
The back stitching extended to end of
glove, with a scalloped edge, and hand
worked eyelets. Embroideries can be done
in the same tone as the gloves or contrasting
shades. No. 12 Pearl Cotton is most suitable,
otherwise use Sylko double thread.
Two curved Vees. The Top V is folded
and the bottom V cut. Both are stitched in
blanket stitch.


Ms \
ttt
I
A curved Vee cut rather long, sprays of
small flowers worked and finished with a
small bow of same material as glove. A
spray of flowers instead of usual back stitch-
ing.
This attractive glove is made with a
turned up cuff. Scallops are separated by
blanket stitch from curve to base. For this
glove the trank should be cut 2" below the
bottom of thumb hole.
The back stitching extended is always
smart. Continue the centre line to bottom
edge. Mark Ijj" either side of this line and
join to the other lines.


N
t> t+(p ■ tf- 2
r s'* 3 /
11l
CCKs
Another design for turned up cuff.
Button-hole around scallops and work an
eyelet or bunch of french knots in every
scallop.
This cuff is stitched on to the glove. Is
about 2" wide scalloped and stitched, and
has one button at wrist. Cut cuff about 2
wider than glove and ease on.
The decoration on this glove is formed
with three petals, tucked on the wrong side
and bound with a narrow edge. Finished
with a button covered of same material.


00556273
