

INSTRUCTIONS
for working
MONKEY GRUBBER
TREWHELLA BROS.
Pty. Ltd.
REGISTERED OFFICE:
VICTORIA STREET
TRENTHAM, VIC. 3458, AUSTRALIA


Instructions for Working
Trewhella “Monkey” Grubber
FOR TRANSPORT.
Put the handle on square No. 1, approximately parallel with
the main bars of frame, and pointing past the tail. Draw the
machine by the handle, keeping the tail just clear of the ground.
If moving a short distance the drum rope may be dragged, if
going far the drum rope should be wound full and the balance of
rope coiled over the top of the machine.
When the ground is too rough for wheeling, run the lever
handle through the frame of the machine and carry on the
shoulders of two men. If carrying far remove the drum rope.
The wheels may also be removed for working in rough country,
but not the axle.
In rough country, it can easily
be carried by two men.
In plain country, the “ Monkey ”
runs lightly on its wheels.
The machine comes to you with dram rope fully wound on
drum and hooked to frame. To unwind, press thumbpiece (No.
3on print of machine pp. 7) inwards (to drum) to fullest extent,
with handle on square marked (1), work a full stroke and the
pawls will release contact with the drum and the rope may be
pulled out.
For the proper service and long life of any moving machinery,
regular oiling is essential. Though the machine is just from the
makers, go over the moving parts with an oil can before starting.
Each day the machine is working treat it similarly; should the
work be continuous and heavy, a mid-day oiling will pay. The
main spindle bearings should be oiled from each side, allowing
the oil time to work down to drum; oil also the small grooved
bolt in the frame comer. (See diagram, page 7.)


In pulling trees the pull rope is simply hooked round the tree
at a height from 6ft. to 24ft., according to the conditions. The
winch is anchored by passing the drum rope around the anchor
and hooking it on to the tail of the winch. The snatch block is
inserted and the grab attached to the snatch block. The pull
rope is now pulled up and gripped by the grab, and all is ready
for the pull. The whole operation takes only a few minutes.
To arrange the machine for pulling—Select a suitable anchor,
tree or stump, and with the machine pulled close pass the drum
rope around this anchor and hook into tail of machine.
With the Snatch Block in use keep the machine on the right
hand rope when facing the obstacle being pulled. This allows,
when the strain gets heavy, of turning the machine on its side
where the handle is dear of the ropes and is worked like the
oars of a boat.
Stand the Snatch Block on end, with crossbar hinge towards
the machine, drop in the drum rope, then laying it down push the
grab loop between the plates and the hinged bar will fall back
into place to make a secure fixing. Occasionally ropes will work
in without the use of grab; in such cases the loop connects with
Snatch Block.
THE DRUM ROPE.—When beginning a pull, always run the
rope right out, leaving a bare drum. As the puli proceeds, be
sure the rope is winding straight in the grooves of the drum.
THE PULL ROPES.—These are used with the loop nearest
to machine and the hook end coupled around the tree being
pulled. When placing in position bring the hook right across
the front of stump and catch rope so that it is not kinked under
the hook. Sketch below makes this clear.
Wire ropes should on no account be kinked, and for this
reason care is required when hooking to small timber, roots, etc.
Having placed the pull ropes in position the distance for a
coupling is easily adjusted with the rope grab. Withdraw the
wedge, hy moving the small lever around to a position opposite
that shown in sketch, place the rope around the groove with the
strained side under the curved comer marked PULL. Get as
much slack as possible out of pulling line by gripping the loose
end and drawing the rope through the grab tripping the lever
back to hold the gain.


Here is a “close up”, showing the relation of the Snatch Block
and Grab to each other, with the drum rope leaving to the left
and pull rope to right.
Note how this Pull Rope, carrying the strain, comes from under
the curved rib on long side of gripper. This is correct fixing and
is absolutely necessary to avoid damaging ropes.
This sketch shows exactly how the equipment will appear when
correctly set.
THE FIRST TRIAL.—In starting new machinery follow care-
fully the instructions given in the booklet, beginning on a few
moderate pulls. Confidence is gained in the use of equipment,
while the nature of the rooting system will help to indicate the
best manner of taking the larger ones.
OPERATING THE WINCH.—The thumbpiece (see illustra
tion on page 7), controls whether the winch pulls or reverses.
After pulling this out, work the lever on the lower square till
ropes are taut, then work on the upper square. Put lever on the
right way round—hollow side facing tree to be pulled. Always
work full strokes. For light pulling it is much quicker to work
machine with lever vertical, but when strain gets heavy, turn
winch over and work like rowing a boat.
HOW TO REVERSE.—First push in the thumbpiece. Ob-
serve the direction of the last stroke of the handle, move it further
in the same direction till the pawl clicks out. This will put the
load on the handle, and holding firmly allow the lever to slowly
move a full stroke. When it stops, move it still further until the
second pawl clicks out, putting the load again on the lever. Still
holding firmly allow the lever to return to its starting point
Continue until the strain is off, when both pawls will lift cleat
for pulling out the drum rope after removing the lever. Try this
with a light load to get accustomed to the feel of the reverse
lever movement.
When releasing a heavy load it is absolutely essential
to employ the same number of men as were required to
apply the load.


FOR LIGHT WORK, the ropes may be arranged somewhat
differently, giving double speed but half power. The Snatch
Block is discarded, and the Grab booked direct on the drum
rope. The winch is anchored with the 15ft. pull rope. This
arrangement is clearly shown in sketch below.
NUMBER OF MEN.—One man often works a winch, but two
are better. Two big men can apply quite as much power as is
good for the ropes. On light pulling let the men take it in turns
rather than work together, as they are apt to work against each
other. Don’t grip the end of the lever unless the pull is heavy,
you can work much quicker and easier if you hold it near the
centre.
THE STUMPING HOOK is used to grip small low cut
stumps, and is often useful for rolling butts, logs, etc. It can
sometimes be used on large stumps when their formation will not
permit of the use of the rope.
Some Helpful Tips
TREE PULLING.—Take the pull rope as high as convenient,
usually from 6ft. to 24ft., according to conditions; this gives
immensely greater leverage hence easier working
When the tree begins to move, a log placed crossways in front
and close to the butt will, when the tree falls, wrench out the
last of the roots, and the jar will remove a large quantity of soil
that is clinging to them.
If it is necessary to completely extract a fallen tree before
cross cutting, it should be rolled sideways. Pulling straight for-
ward will kink and damage the ropes.
Hillside pulling is better done down or along the slope, if trees
are pulled up hill they frequently slide back into the root hole
as they fall.
STUMPS.—These are tackled just the same as a tree. Place
the rope as high up as possible; frequently a small scarf with
the axe will hold the rope so that a good extraction is made.
When roots are to be cut it is advisable to cut one or two in front
when greater purchase is applied to the others.


II cut at ground level some means of giving a lift is necessary;
frequently a log rolled close, in front, will be sufficient. If many
low cut stumps are being pulled, a rough trestle to pull over is
worth while. Also a more flexible rope or root hook should be
used to prevent damage to pull ropes.
SAPLINGS AND ROOTS.—These are most effectively dealt
with when using a Root Hook in conjunction with machine. The
Root Hook is shaped to bite into the wood or roots when used
vertically, while for pulling saplings it is used fiat and up two
or three feet. Clean off a piece of bark so that claws can bite
directly into the wood.
Refitting " Monkey” Winch
Ropes
PLAIN HOOK for either Drum rope or Pull rope. To get
the rope out of the old hook, cut rope close to hook, pull out the
hemp core, and drive out wedge with a short piece of iin. round
iron down the centre of the rope.
Put the hook on the rope, small end first; bind the rope about
Bin. from the end with wire or thin string; cut out the core as
far down as possible. Now bend the strands by hand until they
lie straight and parallel—tie them up into two groups of three
each as per sketch. Pull the rope back to its place in the hook
and tap in the wedge. Finally, pull up with the winch as
described below.
Remember, you must retain the twist of the wires forming the
strands; no loose wires anywhere, and above all do not get the
wedge twisted. If both comers of the wedge catch against the
hook, the rope will probably pull out.
LOOP FITTING.—Bind the end of the rope tightly with thin
wire—slip on the loop band socket, small end first, bring the end
of the rope round and push it through the band, taking great


care that the end of the rope goes against the corrugated side of
the band. Leave the loop a little bigger than you want, because
it will pull up.
Oil the smooth side of the wedge and drive it in with its cor-
rugated side against the main part of the rope (the opposite way
to the band). It is impossible to make the loop fitting hold
properly unless it is pulled up with the machine. Rig the winch
and ropes between two trees or stumps, and get a pull on the
loop. As the pull goes on, tap the socket up towards the loop with
a heavy hammer until the wedge gets finally set. Once it is
properly in place, it will tighten frith a greater strain, and with-
out any hammering.
COMBINED HOOK AND LOOP.— This is fitted in exactly
the same way as the loop fitting. When pulling up, take a grip
on the hook not in the loop, and tap the wedge in until it is
thoroughly firm. Leave the loop large, because it pulls up quite
a bit.
DRUM ROPE FERRULE. —Put the ferrule on the rope,
small end first, and bind rope, preferably with wire, about 4in.
from the end; cut the core out as far down as possible—now take
a pair of pliers, and thoroughly untwist the strands one by one
until you have a mass of loose wires. Work the plug into the
centre and drive in tightly with a heavy hammer.
The rope should be so arranged that a little bit of the ends of
the wires can be bent over the end of the plug to keep it from
coming out. It will be noted that the ferrule is different from
all the other fittings in that it is the only one in which any loose
wires can be allowed.


Replacing Springs and General
Overhaul
REMOVING OLD SPRING.—After putting the thumbpiece in the
lowering position, drive in the spring pin (see illustration), using a
slightly bent nail as a punch. It soon clicks round and pulling out this
pin enables you to withdraw the spindle, wiper, thumbpiece and spring.
THE SPRING EYES in the pawls should be inspected, and if badly
worn, replaced. The eyes are commercial 3/16in. split pins obtainable
anywhere. To replace eyes, the pawls must be removed. The ends of the
split pins must be well opened, and then chipped flush with face of pawl,
as before.
REMOVING THE PAWLS. —First you take out the tumbler stop
which lies across the large end of the tumbler (marked 1 on sketch).
The pawl clip pin then will be found right in the centre of the tumbler.
Withdrawing this will release the inside mechanism, which can then be
removed. Replacing the pawls is simply a matter of doing these things
in the reverse order, but you must 'take care to have the pawl clip,
through which the centre pin goes, the right way round.
FITTING NEW SPRING.—Each of the two ends of the spring
should be put through its proper spring eye, and the spring must be put
in the right way up, so that any winding up (NOT unwinding) of the
spring will press the pawls into the teeth of the drum. Now put in the
wiper and the spindle, leaving the thumbpiece out for the present. You
will need a strong nail or a stout piece of wire to go through the hole
in the end of the spindle and wind up the spring. The spring pin is
placed in the hole in the centre of the spindle with the top end (which
must be the one nearest the groove), projecting about half an inch. The
groove must be on the side touching the spring.


TENSIONING THE SPRING. —Wind up by means of your nail or
wire, and by arranging the little pin correctly, you will find that there
is just enough length to enable it to clear both ends. When you see the
other end of the little pin on top, it must be moved up a little bit, by
levering the bottom with a screwdriver until the lower end is only pro-
jecting about i of an inch, while still holding the spring. The total
wind of the spring is only a little over half a turn and is finished when
the end of the spring pin is opposite the hole in the wiper. Push the
pin from the inside with a screwdriver through the hole in the wiper
until it comes level with the outside. Take care that the bevelled inside
end of the spindle will not foul the lever handle. If a corner is project-
ing, take out the spring pin and re-assemble with the spindle turned
half way round.
FITTING THE THUMBPIECE.—This is done by lifting the wiper
as far as it will go, either with the fingers or by means of the nail in the
spindle hole as before. Then the thumbpiece is slipped into place.
When you release the wiper it will come down over the thumbpiece and
hold it in position.
AN IMPROVED THUMBPIECE. part 23, is being fitted to the
Monkey Winch from September, 1935. There is no difference in the
operation of the Winch, but when assembling the parts after repair,
the new thumbpiece must be put in at the same time as the wiper, and
not slipped in last as stated in these instructions. When fitting a new
type thumbpiece in place of an old one, you should make sure that the
wiper moves freely before you tension the spring. You may have to file
the end of the wiper, or cut a bit out of the gear cage with a cold chisel
to give clearance.
CHECKING THE ACTION.—It is advisable now to try the machine
out by pulling and reversing before you actually put it under load, to
make sure all is correct. Get someone to hold a bar in the hole in the
drum where the rope goes, and put enough weight on for you to test
the motion by working the Winch with a spanner.
PULLING.—First of all try it pulling with the thumbpiece pulled out.
See that you get a clear click at each end of the stroke. If not, make
sure the pawls work freely—you may have the pawl clip in the wrong
way round. Wear of wiper or thumbpiece may cause the wiper ends
to foul the pawls. The remedy is to replace these parts. Make sure the
spring eyes have not been closed down tight on the spring. Excessive
wear of the parts may upset the working, particularly if, due to lack of
oil, one pawl has worn much more than the other. If everything seems
correct try bending the ends of the spring a trifle.
REVERSING.—Next try the reverse and see that each pawl in turn
clears the top of the tooth by an equal amount. If one pawl lifts well
clear while the other tends to catch on the point, take out the wiper and
file a bit off the pad which engages the pawl with excessive lift. Then
try again. See that the ends of the wiper do not slip over the ends oi
the pawl inclines. This may happen if there is excessive wear of sector
seat, sector, pawls or tumbler.
RELEASING.—FinaIIy, see that both pawls clear the drum when the
strain is off, so that the drum rope can be freely pulled out. For this
test the tumbler must be near the centre of its movement. Any trouble
here will probably be caused by the spring catching against the inside
of the wiper, and can be cured by bending the spring. Do a little and
try again, lest you upset the shape of the spring at the pawl ends.


DUPLICATE LIST WITH NUMBERS
1. Drum
2. Dram Spindle
3. Frame
4. Handle
5. Gear Cage
6. Sector Seal
7. Long Pawl
8. Short Pawl
9. Fast Motion Lever
9a. Fast Motion Spring
9b. Fast Motion Pawl
10. Pawl Clip and Pin
11. Wheels (pair)
12. Axle
13. Dram Brake
14. Wiper Spindle
15. Lowering Spring
16. Lowering Spring Pin
17. Sector.
18. Frame Strut
23. Thumbpiece
24. Tumbler
25. Tumbler Stop
26. Wiper
43. Drum Rope Hook
44. Dram Rope Wedge
45. Combined Hook & Band
46. Grab Casing
47. Grab Loop
48. Crab Wedge
49. Guide Bar
50. Lever
51. Grab Loop Wedge
52. Link
27. Sheave
28. Side Plates (plain)
29. Side Plates (lugged)
30. Snatch Block Spindle
31. Crossbar
36. Rope Hook
37. Rope Hook Wedge
38. Loop Band
39. Loop Band Wedge
41. Ferrule
42. Ferrule Plug


GUARANTEE
We guarantee to repair or replace free of charge any
parts which can be proved to have failed in service within
six months of purchase under the following conditions:
1. The defective part or parts must be delivered at our
Works carriage paid for examination.
2. The machine must have been worked correctly in
accordance with our Working Instructions and not
overloaded.
3. This guarantee is limited to the repair or replacement
of parts acknowledged to be defective and we are not
responsible for consequential damage or injury of any
kind.
This guarantee shall be deemed to form part and be
a condition of any and every contract for sales of goods
supplied by us and shall exclude all warranties conditions
and liabilities implied by common law statute or otherwise.
TREWHELLA BROS. PTY. LTD..
Trenlham, Victoria 3458
EXCHANGE PRESS PR !N T / 86971/ 1 m/z .70
