

INSTRUCTIONS
FOR WORKING THE
WERTHEIM
PLANET
SEWING MACHINE
Sole Agent for Australasia:
HUGO WERTHEIM
Melbourne
173, William Street.
Adelaide
107, Rundle Street,
R. B. 3. 11. 13,500




INSTRUCTIONS FOR WORKING
THE
WERTHEIM „PLANET“
SEWING MACHINE.
When ordering parts be careful to give the correct number, as
shown on the illustration, or forward old part as a sample.
This Instruction Book should be carefully
read, and kept handy for future reference.
The Wertheim „PLANET“ Sewing-Machine is supplied as
a Treadle Machine, as a Hand Machine, or as a Treadle and
Hand Machine combined, and the instructions contained in this
book apply to each style.
Every Machine before leaving the Factory is carefully
tested, and is competent to perform all the different varieties o
work mentioned in our Circulars and Advertisements. (As a
proof of this inspection it is sent out threaded, and with a sample
of work under the Needle.)


THE WERTHEIM PLANET
SEWING MACHINE
READY FOR WORKING.
Illustration 1.


First part.
1. The Treadle Machine.
The Belt. First of all put on the Belt in order to connect
the upper and the lower Fly Wheels. Place the belt in the
groove behind the upper wheel, draw the ends through the holes
in the table and hook the belt ends together. Then put the belt
upon the lower wheel.
The tension of the belt must be sufficient to drive the machine
properly. At the same time do not put too much strain on it,
as in that case the machine works stiffly. If neccessary, stretch
the belt a little whilst on the wheel. Should the belt become
slack, cut the ends and fasten together again.
Adjustment of stand.
Should the screws or nuts of the stand become loose, (by
frequent removal of the machine or by wear and tear) tighten
them with the screw wrench (illustr. 2).
Illustration 2.
If the screw on the bottom
of the Pitman or wooden Connec-
ting Rod should get loose, tighten
it with the screwdriver.
If the operator be unused to Sewing Machines she should
first become familiar with the
Treadle Motion.
When practising this, keep the Upper Fly Wheel dis-
connected.
After sitting down in front of the machine, place your foot
flat on the treadle, so that you can exercise an even pressure
with heel and toes alternately. Then turn the Upper Fly Wheel
towards you with your right Hand and keep same revolving by
gently working the Treadle. Do the same with the other foot
and afterwards use both feet together continuing, until you hare
complete mastery of the machine.
Never run the Machine without material unless the Presser
Foot is raised otherwise you will wear the Teeth of the F eeder


2. The Hand Machine.
Illustration 3.
The Hand Attachment is fastened at rear of the arm. When
not in use, the handle is folded downwards. To connect it for
use, turn the handle upwards, till it is secured in the groove made
for the purpose. Insert the leathercovered projection, see V,
(illustration 4) between two
spokes of the Fly Wheel
and turn the handle evenly.
Appliances and Parts supplied
with this machine are placed
in a small drawer in the
wooden base. If after using
the Machine you desire to
put the cover on again, pull
the handle of Attachment
downwards after first loose-
ning screw U (illustration 4).
Always keep the Hand Attach-
ment well oiled.
Illustration 4.
3. The Hand and Treadle Machine combined.
Having unpacked the Hand and Treadle Machine, take the
Hand Machine and fix same into the space made for this purpose
in the Table. If you intend using the machine at first as a Hand
Machine, proceed as described in the preceeding paragraph.


Second Part.
Instructions in Sewing and Use ot Appliances.
Illustration 5.
To connect again the
Upper Fly Wheel.
The upper fly-wheel of every
machine is disconnected before
it leaves our depot, so that no
harm can happen to it in transit.
To put the Machine into gear
for working turn the milled nut
on the outside of the upper wheel
away from you. To put it otit
of gear turn the nut over to-
wards you. This contrivance
will save the mechanism from
breakages so common with other
Sewing If a sudden
stoppage occurs from any ob-
struction, it will allow the wheel
to make a turn or two, and thus
prevent any mishap.
l. Remove the Sample
Work from under-
neath the Presserfoot.
To do this, turn the Upper
Fly Wheel, towards you till the
Needle has moved as far upwards
as it will go, then raise the
Presserfootlever a (Illustration 6)
draw out the sample from under
the Presserfoot b and cut the
thread by means of
the Thread cutter
e (Illustration 6). Then
draw the thread out of
the Needle and open the
Illustration 6.


front shuttle slide h. Now turn the Fly Wheel slowly, till the
shuttle carrier lies completely free in the opening.
The Automatic Shuttle Releaser.
At the right in the shuttle-carrier you will find a small button,
which press slowly with the fore-finger to the left, whereby the
shuttle will be lifted, so that it can easily be taken from the
carrier; Having done this, remove the bobbin and replace the
empty shuttle in the Carrier and shut the slide. Now place
beneath the Sewing-foot a piece of linen or paper with lines
drawn on same, lower the presser foot and setting the machine
in motion, begin practising the
2. Guiding of the Material.
Insert the Needle again and again in the lines but without pulling
or shifting the material in any way, as otherwise the needle might
break. When sewing sharp corners, leave the needle in the work,
raise the presser foot and turn the work round the needle; then
lower the foot again and continue sewing. When sewing specially
thick parts or cross seames, turn the Upper Fly Wheel slowly.
The next thing to learn is now to
3. Regulate the Stitch and Sew Backwards
and Forwards,
see Illustration No. 8, Page g.
Turn to the screw k Illustration No. 8.
The more you move this screw downwards from the midst
of the slit, the longer the stitch will become, whilst the machine
is sewing forwards, the more you move this screw upwards, the
longer the stitch will become, whilst sewing backwards. If you
have found the right length of stitch for sewing forwards, turn
the screw until it will touch with its button the slitted plate and
you will then have pushing the screw k upwards the same
length of stitch for sewing backward. The alteration of the
stitch takes place immediately when the screw is shifted, so that
the work need not be interrupted.


No. of the
Needle
Kind of Work
No. of the Thread, Cotton
and Silk
7
Thinnest linen, Cambric etc. . . .
Cotton 100—150, Silk 000 &00
• 8
Fine Shirting, Linen, light Silks
„ 80—100,
* o
9
Shirting, Thicker Cottons, Silks, fine
cloth and all usual Household work
„ 60—80,
„ A and B
10
Heavy Cottons, light Woollen stuffs,
heavy Silks
„ 40—60,
„ c
11 .
Boys Suits. Drawers, Corsets, thin
Capes Woollens, Clothing ....
* 30 — 40,
* D
12
Heavy Woollens, bags, heavy coats
and Capes, heavier clothing . . .
„ 24-30,
linen thread
* E
60—80
4. The Thread and Needle
must correspond with the material and its thickness. As the machine
works however two threads simultaneously, the cotton need not
be so strong as the cotton used for Hand Sewing. Only a fine
needle when working fine material will produce a fine seam. Using
a fine needle with heavy cotton might cause missing stitches.
To avoid any mistake the Number is stamped on the butt-end
of each needle. In order to produce faultless work the Shuttle
Thread should be a number finer than the Upper Thread. The
Thread and Needle should be chosen in accordance with the table
below. Glazed cotton should be avoided, if possible; it breaks
easily on account of its hardness. Bent or blunt Needles should
not be used. Needles which do not fit, must not be used; always
ask for needles Qual. 705. The best machine will not work well,
if needles of inferior quality are used.
Table.
5. To change the Needle.
The Needle is taken out in the following manner. Raise
the Needle Bar g Illustration No. 6- to its highest point, lower
the footlever a take hold of the needle with the left hand and
loosening the Needle Clamp Nut i with the right hand, take the
needle out of the clamp.


When inserting the needle
raise the Needle Bar again and lower the Presser foot. Push the
needle with the flat side of the buttend towards the right
from below into the Needle clamp as far as it will go, till it touches
the top. Then tighten the Clamp-screw and the needle is fixed.
To fix the needle correctly is very important as otherwise the
cotton would break or stitches would be missed etc.
6. How to thread the machine.
This is clearly shown in Illustr. 7.
Place the reel of cotton on the
spindle and draw the cotton from
above through the eye a, guide
it downwards between the two
Tension-Dises b and then again
upwards over the small hook c,
then from below into the slot of
lever d. Now upwards through
the hole of the Threadgiver e and
again downwards through the
hook f. Then put it into the hook
on the Needleclamp g and thread
it finally from left to right through
the eye of the needle h. Leave
about 3 to 4 inches of the cotton
on the other side of the needle.
Illustration 7.
7. Winding the Bobbin.
Remember that the lower cotton should to be finer than
the upper cotton. Choose a reel of Cotton suitable for the lower
thread and fix this reel on pin a. (Illustration 8.)
Now have some of the small bobbins handy (to be found
amongst the accessories) guide the thread to the left and pass
it between the tension discs b and into the hole c on the Winder


fork downwards. Take bobbin e into your hand, draw the thread
from within through one of the holes in the small bobbin disc
and insert the bobbin by pulling out the knob g and letting
it go again into the Winding Apparatus in such a manner that
the little pin on the right side of the bobbin axle f fits into the
small hole of the bobbin disc.
Illustration 8.
Turn the bobbin, if necessary, till the pin catches and thus
jambs the thread tight. Then press the lever h upwards and the
lower part of the Winder-fork will rest against the bobbin, whilst
the Winder itself with its rubber-ring will rest against the Fly
Wheel. After having taken up any loose thread by winding it
back on the reel of cotton, oil the Winder Appliance through
the little hole to the left of the rubber ring as well as the left
point of the bobbin, where same is held by the spindle.
Now set the machine in motion and the thread will be
wound on the bobbin. As soon as the latter is filled, the Winder
will disconnect automatically, falling back from the Fly Wheel.
If the rubber ring gets worn, substitute a new one.


How to disconnect the upper fly wheel.
When winding the bobbin, disconnect the fly-wheel by turning
the large milled disc at the side of the fly-wheel towards you. The
opposite movement connects the machine again with the fly-wheel.
(See page 5).
8. How to place the bobbin in the shuttle
and how to thread the shuttle.
Take the shuttle out of the shuttle carrier, then
holding it with the point downwards, place the bobbin
in the shuttle, taking care that the thread unwinds to
the right side, see Illustration No. 9.
Now press slightly with your left hand upon the
upper bobbin disc and draw the loose end of the
cotton into the slot a, towards the point of the shuttle,
then back again in the direction towards A to the open
end of the shuttle taking care, that the thread is caught
by the hook b and comes out through the hole c.
If the cotton now unwinds evenly the shuttle has been
threaded correctly. For a soft, thin and pliable ma-
terial the shuttle tension should not be too tight. If
the tension of the shuttle becomes too slack, turn
screw e to the right by means of the small
Shuttle screw Driver.
Illustration 9.
Illustration 10.
If the tension be too tight,
turn the screw to the left if it
be too loose, turn to the right.
Place the threaded shuttle now
with its point towards you and
its spring upwards into the shuttle carrier. Before you can com-
mence to sew, it is necessary
9. To bring up the shuttle thread.
Take hold of the end of the upper cotton with your left
hand and turn the Fly Wheel till the needle has reached its lowest
and gone up again to its highest point. The shuttle thread is
thus caught and taken upwards through the Needleplatehole in
form of a loop. Take hold of it now with the fingers or with the
scissors and draw it out, then pass the two threads backwards
under the presserfoot, closing the slide over the shuttle.


Third Part.
Sewing and Regulation of Tension.
1. The Sewing.
The first few stitches done on your sample material will
show you whether the thread tension is right, that is, whether the
tension of the upper and that of the shuttle thread are equally
strong, for only in this case will a faultless stitch be produced,
equal above and below as p. Illustration No. 11.
Illustration 11.
If the stitch should be uneven, the tension must be regulated.
How to regulate the shuttle tension was explained on page 10;
always regulate same first of all.
Regulating the upper thread tension.
This is done by turning the screw m Illustration No. 6 ; if
turned to the right, the tension gets stronger, if to the left, it be-
comes looser. If the material gets drawn together or the thread
breaks or lies flat on the upper side of the material, see Illustr. No. 12,
Illustration 12.
the upper tension is too strong. If knots and loops should appear
on the bottom of the material or if the thread is not drawn in
properly, the upper tension is too loose (see Illustration No. 13).
Illustration 13.


Heavy and hard material requires a stronger tension of the
upper and lower thread than thin and soft materials. A heavy
material likewise demands a stronger pressure of
the presserbar.
To obtain this, turn the Regulating screw f of the presserbar to
the right, see Illustration No. 6, if less pressure be required, to
the left. When sewing thick material with strong cotton and
corresponding strong needle, use
the Stitchplate with large hole,
which will be found among the appliances. When changing the
stitchplate n, (Illustration No. 6) use the screw driver given with
machine, but do not forget, that, when sewing finer material,
such as Silk or Muslin the stitchplate with small hole must be
put back again, and the tension slightly loosened to prevent the
work from dragging.
2. Removing the Work.
This is done in the same way as when removing the sewing
sample, see page 5, that is, by raising the needle and sewing
foot. Pull the material backwards with its two threads and cut
off the threads close to the material. Never pull out the work
any other way, otherwise the needle would get bent.


Fourth Part.
Cleaning and Oiling.
The durability of a machine is increased to a great extent
by regular oiling and cleaning. If a machine is used every day,
it should be cleaned and oiled every day.
The best oil for lubricating is pure thin fish or sperm oil,
but do not use any vegetable oil, which easily clogs and causes
the machine to work heavily, nor kerosene which will corrode the
metal. Use only the Wertheim or other good sewing machine
oil supplied by us. It contains no gelatine or impurities, will
cost you no more than inferior oil and will cause your machine
to run lightly.
Use the oilcan and oil all places marked on the following
Illustrations with an arrow. —->•
Illustration 14.
Take a soft cloth and after removing all dirt and dust first
give a drop of oil on places marked. Too much oil will soil the


thread and consequently the work. Take a cloth after oiling and
wipe away any overflow.
Oil every place where two metals rub each other. Put a
few drops into every hole for that purpose in the upper arm,
also the needlebar, presserbar, checkroller, and little hole on top
next the bar. Oil the bobbinwinder in'the little hole. If you
have a handdriving attachment oil the axle and cogs. Take off
the belt, push back the small bolt and turn up the head so as
to show the underworks.
Illustration 15.
The oiling places of the lower works are marked with an arrow —■ r
Oil every place where there is friction. Oil the axle of the
large driving wheel of the Stand, the treadle and the bearings of
wooden rod. If the machine should run heavily, be sure it needs
oiling or cleaning, or both. If from neglect or long disuse the
machine becomes clogged or dirty, thoroughly oil it in all its
working parts with kerosene or turpentine. Drive it very fast for
a minute or two, carefully wipe off all the dirt and the kerosene
and put the sperm oil on all the moving surfaces. It is a simple
plan and a good one to keep a soft rag for the purpose of wiping
the wearing parts every day (if used constantly), before commen-
cing work. Then oil the machine nicely, using only a few drops.
This can take but a few moments, which are well repaid.
The shuttle slide must be kept very clean and, if the machine
is in daily use, ought to be oiled several times a day.
Moisten a piece of cloth with Oil and, after opening both
shuttle slides, rub the cloth along the roadway of the slide; always
put a drop of oil on the wadding pad placed in the hole below
the front shuttle slide.
This wadding must be renewed from time to time, as it
gets hard.


The places to be oiled in the stand are likewise marked
with arrows on illustration No. 16.
Illustration 16.


NOTICE!
Needles.
Customers are warned against using Needles of
inferior make; these are always troublesome, and
in the end are more expensive than the best. Our
Contracts are with the best Makers only, from
whom the finest steel and most perfect finish are
demanded.
It can be accepted as a reliable axiom that the
BEST results in all Sewing Machines are only ob-
tained with the BEST Needles; perfect in quality
of steel and shape, and finish of the eye and
thread groove.
We Guarantee our Needles as the BEST that
are made, and you will get the best satisfaction by
procuring them direct from our Head Office, or
District Travellers.


General
INSTRUCTIONS
for the
Use and Management
of the
Sewing-Machine
and its
Various Accessories.
R. B. 9. 10. 20 000.




INSTRUCTIONS
in the use of the Various Accessories.
All appliances mentioned in this book are given free of
charge with every Sewing-Machine. The heavy Manufacturing-
machines however are provided with the following accessories
only:
1 ordinary Sewing-foot
1 Edge-Sewer
1 broad Hemmer
1 adjustable Hemmer
1 Straight-guide
1 Quilting-guide.
I, The ordinary Sewing Foot
is fixed to the presserbar by means of the
foot-thumbscrew and is principally used for
plain needlework. It is used besides in connection with:
The Straight Guide (see page 4)
The Adjustable Hemmer (see page 5)
The Binder (see page 8)
The Quilter (see page 9).
To remove the foot from the presserbar, unscrew the
thumbscrew with the screwdriver, place the other foot in position
and screw same on.
Do not lower the presser or sewing foot when you are
not sewing or when no material is underneath otherwise the
feeder gets worn and injured.


2. The Straight Guide
must be screwed on to the machine
plate see Illustration No. 1. If you
desire to make a seam close to the edge
of the material, screw the guide in the
first hole to the right of the needle, if you want it more distant,
use the second hole. This guide (in connection with the
ordinary sewing foot or with
the edgestitching foot) enab-
les you to sew straight seams.
It also enables you to sew
folds. Shift the guide to
the right of the needle
according to the distance
desired from the edge ot
the material. If you want
to sew with the guide very
close to the edge of the
material, use the edgesewer
(see page 7) instead of the
ordinary Sewingfoot for this
work. If you want to use
Illustration 1.
the straight guide for sewing fulds and facings, turn under ihe fold
previously sewn and let your woik run along the guide as before.
3. The Narrow Hemmer
has to be fixed on the
footbar in place of the or-
dinary sewingfoot. Turn
down the end of the Material
as in hemming by hand.
Insert enough of the folded
part in the hemmer for the
machine to feed, keep
the hemmer just full, nei-
ther too much nor too
little of the material being
Illustration 2.


supplied. Insert the material far enough for the needle to catch
hold of the double folded hem.
Soft undressed material presents some difficulty when placing
it into the spiral spring of the hemmer. To succeed, attach a
thread to the end of the Material and so draw the muslin or
Cambric into the spring of hemmer. Now lower the foot by means
of the footlever and begin to sew carefully, but see, that the
material passes evenly into the hemmer and only enough at the
time to fill the aperture of hemmer.
4. The Broad Hemmer
is used in the same way as the narrow
hemmer just described and is well
adapted for heavier linen. For yet
heavier material the adjustable
hemmer must be used.
5. The Adjustable Hemmer
enables you to sew hems of different
widths. It is used with the ordinary
sewing-foot and has to be screwed in
the first hole to the right of the needle
(same as the straight-guide) on the
machine plate (see Illustration
No 3), the pin fixed on the
bottom of the hemmer will
fit into the second hole of
bedplate. In order to prepare
the hemmer for different
widths, loosen the little
frontscrew in the slot, the
plate will then be adjustable.
Tlten move the index to
the width of hem you want
and fasten the screw again
before beginning to sew. To
introduce the material into
the hemmer, turn in the edge
Illustration 3.
of material about 3 Inches long and half the width of the hem. Now
push the material thus prepared sideways into the hemmer in such
a way that the folded part turns upwards and folds once more


in the same width. Put the work under the needle, lower the
foot and set the machine in motion. When sewing, hold the
material in such a manner, that the hemmer is always completely
filled. Should the seam not appear near edge of the hem,
move the hemmer to right or left by loosening the screw.
6. The Feller
must be fixed on the presserbar.
The single seam.
To obtain a felled seam, place the two pieces of material one
on top of the other with the edge of the lower piece projecting
about a quarter of an inch. Then turn this projecting part for
about an inch over the edge of the upper piece. Lower the
footlever and beginning to sew, see, that the material runs into
the feller the same way as when using the hemmer. The material
will then turn over on its own accord and the two pieces
will be sewn together. To
arrive at a faultless flat seam,
you must not run more ma-
terial into the feller, as is
necessary to fill the aperture
of same.
The double Seam.
After making the single
seam, straighten out the work
and insert the fold in the
same foot. The edge will
then be sewn smooth, see
Illustration No. 4.
Illustration 4.
7. The Braider
which is provided with a groove at the bottom, is
fixed to the presserbar and is used for braiding
dresses with cord. After joining the material and


lining by means of a single
seam, spread out the two
pieces of material, taking care
to have the right side on top,
having the material on the
left and the linning on the
right side of Machine. Now
draw the cord under the
groove of the foot and take
care to sew same exactly
between material and lining,
on top of the previously
worked seam, using longer
stitches. Whilst sewing, see,
that the cord does not
shift out of the groove.
Illustration 5.
8. The Adjustable Corder.
This foot is fixed to the presserbar. Place
the first cord between the folds of the cloth. Put
it under the presserfoot with the cord in the groove next
the needle, and take care to
keep it straight. The machine
will stitch it beautifully
parallel, if only you keep the
cord to be sewn-in tight up
to the last one. This may
be best done with the blunt
point of a pair of scissors,
or blunt pen-knife, which will
not soil the work.
Used for hoods, children’s
stays, cuffs, collars, Ladies
Underclothing.
Illustration 6.
9. The Edge Sewer.
The foot just described (8) may also be used as edge sewer
by removing the adjustable tongue or fork. The foot will then be
like an ordinary sewingfoot, enabling you to sew right close to the
edge of the material as mentioned on page 4.


10. The Ribbon Sewer or Trimmer
is used for sewing on cords,
ribbons or braids. Guide
the ribbon (as seen on
Illustration No. 7) into the slot
and take care to keep same
full with the trimming. If you
want to sew the other edge
of the ribbon on to the
material as well, you can
use the ordinary sewingfoot
see page 3.
Illustration 7.
11. The Adjustable Binder.
Most useful for binding anything with
braid or ribbon. Fasten the binder to the
bedplate of the Machine so, that its two
tongues come even with the point of the
needle. Take the binding and pass one edge into • the
upper tongue and the other
into the lower, and place
the material to be bound
between the two. Draw it
about half an inch under
the presserfoot so as to give
the needle and feed a fair
chance of starting the work.
Lower the presserfoot and
commence to sew. If wide
binding is required, move the
inside piece of the binder to
the right, it narrow, to
the left.
Illustration 8.


12. The Quilting Guide
is used with the ordinary Sewingfoot for stitching all kinds of
wadded materials. Fasten the appliance with the thumb-screw as
shown in the engraving, so
that the work may just pass
freely under it. Move it to
right or left, according to
the distance you desire
between the lines of stitching.
Stitch one seam perfectly,
straight to begin with; then
guide the next seam by the
first, as indicated. Adjust
the upper tension rather
loosely until you see that
the work is flat below, nice
and puffy above. By so
Illustration 9.
doing, also you do not need to use silk in the shuttle. Have a
middle-sized stitch.
13. The ruffler or Friller.
Use the foot shown above. It will
produce a beautiful puffing, or shirring, or
gathering, as depicted. To increase the fulness,
lengthen the stitch. It may also be increased
by loosening the upper tension, or lessened
by tightening the tension.
Gathering dress materials
may be done with perfection.
In this you should do one
row of gathering, turn the
material round and go back
the opposite way with the
next row. Thus you may
produce very handsome and
fashionable work with ease
and regularity. Whilst,the
present fashion lasts for
gathered skirts, sleeves and
Illustration 10.


bodies of dresses, this appliance is of great utility. It is certain that
nothing can do such work so well. If you place two pieces of
material on top of each other, this foot enables you to ruffle
the lower material and to keep the top on smooth. Place the
material to be ruffled, which of course must be longer, under
the foot, at the same time inserting the upper material into the
slot on the side of the foot. The stitch must be rather long
the longer the stitches the larger the ruffles. You will find, that
the feeder, shifting the lower material only, ruffles it, whereas
the upper material is held back between the two plates of the
foot. Closer folds can be obtained by holding the upper
material back.
14. The Adjustable Braider
is used for sewing on braids of different withs.
Wind the braid on a reel and place same on
the spindle or allow the ball of braid to rest in
the lap. Thread the braid into the aperture
before the needlehole of the
foot, but see, that the braid
passes between the wires
fixed inside, or if the braid
is too narrow between the
wire at back and the pointed
incision of the foot. Then
loosen the two little screws
on the foot right and left
and shift the wires or if
the braid is too narrow,
only the bankwire so far
backwards or forwards, till
the edges of the braid are
Illustration 11.
firmly held left and right without being pressed together.
The braid must still pass easily through the foot. Now
place the braid under the needle in such a way, that the centre
of the braid lies directly under the needle. Then tighten the two
small screws on the foot and commence to sew, putting underneath
the material upon which the braid has to be sewn and guide the
material according to the drawing. If you wish to avail yourself


of designs supplied with Fashionpapers etc., cut out the design,
attach same to the material and sew on the braid according to
the lines given on the design. When finished, you can easily remove
the paper.
S 5. The Accessories.
Besides the Appliances just described the following
accessories are supplied with every Sewing Machine:
10 Assorted needles,
6 Shuttle Bobbins,
1 Extra Needle-Plate,
1 Large Screw for fastening the guide, quilter etc.,
1 Screw Driver,
1 Shuttle Screw Driver,
1 Oilcan,
1 Extra Rubber Ring,
1 Wrench (only with 'Treadle Machines),


This apparatus is only supplied on special demand
and only for straight-shuttle-machines. =
Illustration 12.
THE BIAS BINDER AND TRIMMER..
SCRKW the appliance to the front-plate (as shown in the engraving),
taking care that it points true to the needle, and so placed that
the stitches come a nice distance from the edge of the binding. The
work depicted is a milliner’s fold. Cut the trimming to a point
and insert it in the binder. Keep the upper and lower curl of the
binder just full of the trimming, which usually consists of narrow
strips of material cut on the bias. Insert the goods to be bound
between the two curls. Scallops can thus be trimmed with any
material easily. When you come to the corner of the scallop lay
the second in a line with the first, then turn the corner and go
on as at the commencement.


This apparatus is only supplied on special demand
Illustration 13.
THE TUCK-MARKER OR GREASER
is fixed to the presser-bar in the same manner as the steel-feed
with a thumb screw (as here shown). Pay attention that, when
the apparatus is attached to the machine, the. needle passes exactly
through the midst of the stitch-hole.
The guide, which is fixed with the small thumb-screw serves
to indicate the breadth of the tucks; for small tucks place the
guide to the left, for broad ones to the right.
To fix the distance between the tucks, loosen the large
thumb-screw of the apparatus and put the scale to the left or the
right, just as you are wanting small or large distances; then have
the two thumb-screws fixed.
Fold the cloth by hand for the first tuck and place it bet-
ween the lower two parts of the apparatus, until the tuck will
touch the curved end of the small guide; then lower the presser-
foot and begin with sewing. Thus you will obtain nicely marked
the place, where to fold the next tuck.


The causes of slight irregularities
of the machine.
In spite of the machine being supplied by the factory after
it has been carefully tested and in good working order, slight
irregularities can be produced by unskilful handling; such irre-
gularities are, however, easily remedied, if the following instructions
are carried out:
1. Heavy running of the machine
can be caused by:
a) its being clogged by fibres of material, dust, cotton ends, etc.,
b) its being choked by the use of bad oil,
c) its not having been oiled for a lenght of time,
d) various oil holes having been overlooked,
e) the driving strap being too long or short.
2. The breaking of the upper thread
can be caused by:
a) the upper tension being too strong or by the machine
being threaded wrongly,
b) the needle being too fine for the material or cotton,
c) the needle being fixed too low,
d) the needle being too blunt,
e) the eye not being sufficiently polished and having
sharp edges,
f) another needle being used, than of the system which is
wanted for the machine,
g) the shuttle being worn at its point,
h) the shuttle having rough or sharp places through long use.
3. The breaking of the shuttle thread
can be caused by:
a) the shuttle tension being too strong or the shuttle being
incorrectly threaded,
b) the stitch plate hole becoming jagged through the needle,
c) the shuttle becoming sharp or rough through constant use.
4. Irregular Stitches
can be caused by:
a) to thick a needle being used for fine material,
b) the needle being too thick in proportion to the thread,


c) the shuttle thread being thicker than the upper thread,
d) the upper tension being too strong or too slack,
e) the tension of the shuttle thread being too strong or
too slack,
f) the stitch plate with large hole being used for fine material.
5. Missed stitches
can be caused by;
a) the needle being fixed too low,
b) the needle being blunt or bent,
c) the needle being to fine for the thread,
d) a wrong needle or one of inferior quality being used,
e) the shuttle being worn at its point,
f) the pressure of the presser foot being too weak.
notice!
Should the machine at any time get out of order so
that the hints given do not suffice to set it working
properly again, do not be induced to take the ma-
chine or any parts of the same to pieces; nothing
is worse than for a novice to attempt to repair
such a complicated piece of mechanism as a sewing
machine. Apply in the first instance to the seller of the
machine or to a capable mechanic.
The greatest care should also be daken to prevent
unknown persons from handling the machine, as it often
occurs, that they alter and change parts of the machine
either from ignorance or from dishonest motives, so that
the machine is completely spoiled.






