





j>n
INTERCEPTED LETTERS
THEIR CONSEQUENCES
BEING
A NARRATIVE
WRITTEN IN A VIEW TO THE
VINDICATION OF CHARACTER,
GORDON SANDEMAN, ESQ.,
OP BURRANDOWAN, IN THE DISTRICT OP BURNETT, NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY, DECEMBER, 1859.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY JAMES W. WAUGH, STATIONER, GEORGE STREET.
1860.




PREFACE.
The incidents which form the subject of the following narrative are of
a nature so remarkable, that an apology for submitting them to the
attention of the reader might, in reliance upon the peculiar interest
attaching to events in real life which border upon the regions of
romance, be deemed superfluous; but as it will be necessary to elucida-
tion of the subject, and that no less an one than the vindication of my
own character from aspersion, that I should introduce the names of
other persons, I feel it due to my own sense of propriety to state, at the
outset, that having traced the origin of the slander to which reference
will be made, to the door of Captain Beadon, the systematic resistance
which has been opposed to the endeavour on my part to obtain at his
hands a recognition of the facts in my own vindication, (of which
opposition ample evidence will be found in the appended correspondence)
has justified to my own mind the step which I now take of putting the
subjoined correspondence in print, with such introductory remarks only
as may, in connecting the letters, suffice to afford an understanding of
the subject.
In adopting, with reluctance, this course—the only one which appears
open to me —I am happy in the moral support afforded by the approval
of those friends whose acquaintance with the facts of the history
during a period of nearly twenty years, has enabled them, from time to
time, to meet and refute the calumnies which have been put forward.
My present object, therefore, chiefly is to remove latent suspicion,
and indefinite surmise, and to silence the whisper which stabs in the
dark—and in firm reliance that the following pages will have such
effect upon every candid reader, I commit my narrative to those who,
in the desire to do justice, may enter upon its perusal.
GORDON SANDEMAN.
Sydney, 12th December, 1859.




NARRATIVE.
In the year 1838, being resident in Sydney, and engaged in
mercantile pursuits there, I formed the acquaintance, which ripened
into friendship, of Lieut. George Beadon, R.N., then an officer of
H.M.S. Conway, on the Indian station, and frequently visiting this
port. In the course of this intimacy, Mr. Beadon, who was anxious
to make investments in the colonies, consulted me from time to
time on subjects of that nature; and various sums of money were
laid out in purchases to which I need not more particularly refer
at this time than to say, that in his absence the management of the
same was committed to myself.
In the month of November, 1839, having in view my friend’s desire
to invest in Sydney, and the Share List of the Sydney Bank being then
in course of subscription, I wrote Mr. Beadon* who was at that time
in India with his ship, apprising him that I had taken, subject to his
approval, two hundred shares for him, of ten pounds each, in the new
hank, and suggesting that if he desired to retain them, he should place
me in funds to the extent of the contemplated calls, (one thousand
pounds) by authorising me to draw on England, and promising that in
the meantime I would pay as required for his account.
This letter went forward by the “ Indus,” which vessel also bore
my letters of the eleventh and sixteenth of November,f to Mr. Evelyn
Gordon, of the Bengal Civil Service, a relative of my own, then in
India ; the forgery committed in relation to the former of these, and
the reference to the house of Walker obtained from the latter, suggest
the means which were open to the perpetrator, of gaining acquaintance
with my correspondence with Mr. Beadon, and thereby, the opportunity
of forging the draft which will presently be mentioned. On the 18th
of July, 1840,1 received Mr. Beadon’s letter of the 3rd March, Jin
which he authorised the firm of which I was a member, to draw on
England upon his account for one thousand pounds.
* Appendix No. 1. t Appendix Nos. 2 and 3. J Appendix No. 4.


In pursuance of this authority a draft was made by the firm in
terms of the letter, on the 20th July, and negociated, the proceeds
being duly carried to Mr. Beadon’s credit; this draft would probably,
in the ordinary course of post, not reach England until about the end of
the year.
While this, however, was going on, a forged letter,* which was in
part a transcript of mine of 11th November, to Mr. Gordon, with the
interpolation of the matter indicated by italics, reached Mr. Gordon in
India, and shortly afterwards that gentleman received the letter dated
Bth January, 1840, signed W. H. Gore,-j- which appears to have been a
second step in the frauds contemplated by the person who under this,
and the other names of Bond, Kemp, and St. Angelo, has figured in
these transactions, and a forged bill of Exchange]; (in which it is
remarkable that the name is wrongly spelt) drawn in a rude
imitation of the authority contained in Mr. Beadon’s letter of
the 3rd of March, 1840, and dated the 27th of the same
month, a day long anterior to the time at which that authority could
possibly have reached Sydney, was concocted (as I surmise) in
Calcutta, and forwarded to England, and paid by Mr. Beadon’s bankers
in the month of October, 1840, without reference to the members of
my firm in London, or so far as lam aware, any enquiry whatever.
Subsequently, when the draft issued by me under authority, was
presented for acceptance, Mr. Beadon’s letters having only authorised
one thousand pounds, some reluctance was manifested in acknowledging
the draft for what was called the “ last thousandthe draft was
forwarded for examination to my firm in London, and pronounced
correct (it does not seem to have occurred to Mr. Beadon’s bankers to
accompany it by the former bill, the forgery, which had been paid
without question as to handwriting, or otherwise, and which was
so irregular an instrument that little scrutiny was needed to ascertain
its worthlessness,) and accordingly what was called the “ last thousand,”
was paid by Mr. Beadon’s bankers, this being in fact the only thousand
pounds ever drawn by me, and the last money received by me from
him.
* Appendix No. 5. t Appendix No. 6. j Appendix No. 7.


In February, 1841, I received from Mr. Gordon the letter of the
18th October, 1840,* which opened my eyes to the existence of some
knavery interfering with my correspondence, hut not disclosing its
extent, and this letter supplies the clue to the mode in which it was
accomplished, and which I will shortly state from the best information
which I have been able to obtain, leaving the letters themselves as
finger posts to point the way, to those who will take the trouble of
perusing them.
It appears then that a person of the class of convicts formerly known
in these colonies as “ special” (persons generally of some little educa-
tional acquirements) being, as was stated, steward of the Indus, or
having other similar facilities for access to the mail bags, which were in
those days forwarded by private ships and insecurely kept, possessed
himself of my letters to Mr. Gordon and to Mr. Beadon, of November
1839 ; that having read these, the opportunity of a return to his ancient
courses was too inviting to be resisted, and accordingly he forged the
letter of the 11th of November, copying over so much of the original
as was sufficient to gain credence for the whole, and introducing the
new matter referring to himself, as a foundation for the plot upon my
uncle, Mr. Gordon, which was followed up by the letter signed W. H.
Gore. Having done this, and having read my letter of the 16th,
which afforded him a knowledge of Messrs. Walker’s name, he must
have suppressed my original of the 11th of November, closed and
restored to the bag that of the 16th November, and placed the forgery
in the same receptacle; closed my letter to Mr. Beadon after having
gained sufficient information to enable him to forge a letter of intro-
duction in my name, which was in course presented to that gentleman,
who, as I have learned, received and entertained the scoundrel as my
friend in the gun-room of H. M. S. Conway, and drove him about
Calcutta on terms of intimacy, in the course of which, with the clue
already obtained, the opportunity would not long be wanting to an
accomplished thief, of learning the particulars of the authority under
which he might afterwards concoct the forged draft.
* Appendix No. 8.


No very great length of time, however, could have elapsed, before
the forger found the limits of the credibility of the gentlemen with
whom he had had the hardihood thus to associate himself, for it appears
by Mr. Gordon’s letter, that before October, 1840, he had been seen
by that gentleman advertised in the Calcutta papers, as a swindler,
who had opened the letter bag of some other vessel in which he had
been a passenger from Calcutta to Penang, (a repetition of the former
device) and thus, one of the plans laid, that for imposing on Mr.
Gordon, fortunately failed of effect.
Mr. Beadon’s money, however, was unhappily lost, and the circum-
stances which I have mentioned, not being at the time before him, he
supposed that I had found opportunity for the employment of a larger
sum, and appears to have concluded, for some time naturally, that it
was for his account; subsequently, when after an indefinite corre-
spondence, extending over a considerable space of time, he had been
unable to comprehend the true position of matters, he seems to have
become impressed with an idea unfavourable to my integrity in relation
to this sum, and his letters complain of want of accounts, a complaint
which, still in the dark myself, I was unable to comprehend.
In January, 1843, I for the first time obtained the meaning of Mr.
Beadon’s reference to “a second thousand pounds,” which was made in
his letter of 28th April, 1841,* (received by me in April, 1842), at
about which time a letter from the London House reached me, in
which I was informed that I “ had not instructions to draw on his
account for the last £1000,” (on receipt of which I had addressed Mr.
Beadon in my letter of the 25th June, 1842),f for in this month of
January, 1843, Mr. Beadon’s solicitors in Sydney applied to me, at his
instance 9 , demanding an account of “ the last £1000.” I had previously
been advised from the House in London, that some question had been
raised about the £lOOO bill, and in addressing Mr. Beadon, my letter
of the 31st August, 1842,+ I had casually referred to the matter as a
misconception by that firm of my want of authority to draw the
last £ L 000” which I had received, I being at the time in ignorance
that a former £lOOO had been drawn, and not seeing the special
* Appendix No. 9. t Appendix No. 10. J Appendix No. 11.


reference, which in the minds of those in London, and of Mr. Beadon,
(who were aware of the payment of two bills of equal amounts) was
to the latter <£looo draft, of two drafts of <£looo each, my view
being limited to the consideration of the moneys received by me, the last
of which happened to be <£looo in amount. I immediately addressed
Mr. Beadon my letter of 28th January, 1843,* and explained all that
I ha l d been able to gather from the different lights then beginning to
break forth, and to tiiis letter I have never received any reply. I
stated at the same time to Messrs. Chambers and Holden, Mr.
Beadou’s solicitors, my utter ignorance of the forged draft. Shortly
after writing this letter, having unfortunately shared in the calamities
which at that time overspread these colonies, I sailed for India, where
I prosecuted further enquiry into the historyjff the forger. In October,
1844, I returned to Sydney, with the late Mr. Fnell, a connection of
my family, and having with his assistance put the matter in a tangible
shape, I instructed my solicitor, Mr. Burton Bradley, to cause enquiry
to be made for the forger, who was reported to have returned to the
colony, and to prosecute him for the offence ; and I placed in his hands
the various papers evidencing the cheat, some of which I had obtained
from Mr. Gordon during my stay in India. Mr. Friell seconded my
endeavours by an authority to expend to the extent of five hundred
pounds, such moneys as might be necessary to obtain a conviction, and
I addressed Mr. Knox, the agent of Mr. Beadon in Sydney, the letter
of the (sth November, 1844,f which I subsequently ascertained had been
duly forwarded, per ship “ Sydney,” to the latter in England, but
which remains unanswered.
I regret to add, that notwithstanding the vigilance of my professional
adviser, who placed himself in communication with Mr. Beadon’s
solicitors, (see letters of 17th of December, 1844, and 3rd of April,
1855, J in appendix) his efforts proved ineffectual to obtain evidence in
the colony sufficient to ensure a committal.
I became aware, on my return from India, that during my absence
in that country, Mr. Beadon having quitted his ship in England, had
revisited Sydney, and instituted a search for the forger, to
* Appendix No. 12. + Appendix No. 13. j Appendix Nos. 14, 15, and 16.


ited, had
* Appendix No. 17. t Appendix No. 18.
; questioned him on the subject, had obtained a statement,
ie particulars of which are mentioned in Mr. Bradley’s letter
id of May, 1855 ;* in this, under the name of Kemp, he
his acquaintance with the forged bill, but asserted it to have
drawn by me for the purpose referred to in the letter of Mr.
Bradley, a purpose which, as that letter shews, could not have had
existence. The story seems, however, to have impressed Mr. Beadon,
whose opinions with reference to my supposed share in these disgraceful
transactions does not appear to have been influenced either by our
previous friendship, by a consideration of the impossibility of my
drawing in Sydney on the 27th of March, 1840, under an authority
dated in India, the 3rd of the same month, and which did not reach
Sydney until July, and evidently could not have arrived here in twenty
four days: or by the reflection that if the first bill had been mine the
second must have been issued by me under a feeling of moral certainty
that it would not be paid; or by the improbability of the statement
respecting my occasion for drawing, which involved the belief that a
person having such a claim as Bond was represented to possess, would
accept so remote and doubtful a satisfaction ; or, by the characterf of
his informant; or, by my collation of the facts of the other frauds
attempted upon Mr. Gordon, and with which it would still be more
difficult to assign any reason for supposing my complicity.
I will pass over, as of little interest to others, the subject of the
deep mortification and annoyance which have fallen to my share, in
consequence of being, even to a limited extent, the victim of unfounded
and degrading suspicions, observing only that, from time to time, as
rumours were made known to me, I have referred various gentlemen
to the correspondence in the hands of Mr. Bradley, for such complete
satisfaction as I was naturally most anxious to impart, on a subject
of such vital import to myself; and that from all who have read those
papers, I have received assurance of complete exoneration from any
blame in the matter.
In the year 1855, in the course of an election in the districts of


Clarence and Darling Downs, in which I was one of the candidates,
the rumour of a complicity on my part with the frauds of
Kemp was brought forward, and I again took steps to obtain the
expression of the opinion of Mr. Beadon’s solicitor, Mr. Chambers, on the
subject; and the letter of Mr. Bradley of the 25th of April, 1855,*
was written with that view: the very cautious and proper letters of
Messrs. Chambers and Holden, of the Btli and 17th of May,f in reply,
however they failed to answer my object at that time, serve to shew
a strong contrast between the feelings of Mr. Beadon in the year 1844,
and those gathered in 1859, from his Solicitor, Mr. Keen, on the
subject of my supposed share in the fraud perpetrated on him.
Relying on meeting the same candid spirit in Captain Beadon, which
the perusal of the correspondence had evoked in my political opponents
—Mr. Hood and his friends —I took opportunity, on the occasion of my
recent visit to Europe, to place myself, through my professional friend
Mr. Murray, in communication with Captain Beadon, and the corres-
pondencej completing the series of the Appendix took place.
I will not trust myself to offer many observations upon it, except in
so far as may be necessary to elucidate the allusion in Mr. Keen’s
letter of 20th June, 1839, to “the purchase of land in New Zealand
in Captain Beadon’s name.”
In the year 1839 various persons in Sydney sought to acquire, by
barter with the native chiefs, lands in Ne w Zealand, and large tracts
were nominally thus purchased by Mr. Wentworth and other persons,
including the firm with which I was connected; but from the subsequent
treatment by the Government of the claims based on these contracts,
the transactions resulted generally, so far as I am aware, and in the
case of my firm certainly, in the loss of the funds so invested. Our
applications were made in the names of various constituents of the
House, whose assent for the purpose was obtained, and although I
have not any recollection on the subject, I gather from what
has subsequently transpired, that Mr. Beadon’s name must have
been one of those used —I presume with the like assent—
Appendix No. 19. t Appendix Nos. 20 and 21.
| Appendix—Series of Correspondence.


memory)
to his
id in this
it “no
its had been
une having been
n that obtained
itever really were the facts, it is quite clear that
not any advantage could be gained by my firm or by myself from
grants to be issued to Captain Beadon, or to any other person, without
the concurrence of the grantee in their disposal, and the deduction is
an easy one, that not any such advantage could have been
contemplated.
I fail to recognise in the matter any ground of claim, honorable or
legal, upon me, still less can I acknowledge that it should justify, to an
officer and a gentleman, the avoidance of an enquiry such as was then
courteously sought at his hands ; an enquiry rendered necessary by his
own conduct and mis-statements (which I am willing to believe the
results of misconceptions of a mind smarting under severe pecuniary
loss), and by his own perseverance in refusing all means of enlighten-
ment.
With these remarks I leave the history of the case to the
consideration of those who, either from cariosity, or a more laudable
motive, may have the patience to peruse these pages.


APPENDIX.
No. 1.
Per “Indus.”
Sydney, 12th November, 1839.
Gordon Sandeman to Lieut. Beadon.
I wrote you on the 30th of last month by the “ Lady
Raffles,” for Calcutta direct. My object in this is to inform you that
within the last ten days a new bank, to be called the Sydney Bank, has
been proposed here, and with every prospect of a most prosperous result.
I have subscribed for shares for Mr. Willis and others, for whom I act
under Powers of Attorney, and myself. I have put down your name for
two hundred shares subject to your approval. The shares are
proposed to be £lO each, and no person is to be allowed to hold more
than two hundred shares. The payments to be £1 per share on
signing the Deed before the end of this year, £1 in January
next, and £1 every three months to end of 1840, making in all £5
per share, or £l,OOO before the end of next year. Now if you wish
me to retain the above shares for you, have the goodness to let me
know as soon after receipt of this as possible, empowering me to
draw upon you in England for the amount that may be necessary, say
at the least £l,OOO ; in the meantime I must pay up upon them
myself for your account: if you should object to the investment, I
can easily dispose of the shares to a profit. I can only say as a friend
that if I had £lO,OOO to spare at the present time, I should not wish
for a better subject of investment. The Union Bank of Australia was
established only in January last. The Shares are £25 each, and £l5
has been paid up, and they are worth, at the present time, £lO per
share premium; within the last three months they have been sold
at auction at £7 10s. per share. The house will render you a proper
account current on receiving the dividend on your Bank of New South
Wales shares in January next; in the meantime I may state the
following:—
Feby. Received dividend on £l,OOO Stock Bank of N.S.W.
at 16 per cent, premium £BO 0 0
July Received dividend on £l,OOO Stock Bank of N.S.W.
at 16 per cent, premium 80 0 0
~ £lOO New Stock paid up, say 5 months.... 6 13 0
166 13 0
Less paid up on new shares .... .... 100 0 0
At your Credit for which we allow you interest at 8 per
cent, per annum. .... .... £66 13 0


The Bank only allows £lO per share to be paid up on the new shares
in the course of the year.
I will take care to pay regularly.
I have been requested to become a Director in the new bank,
but I am so connected with the other banks that I have not made
up my mind on the subject yet.
Did I give you a letter to an uncle of mine in India, Evelyn
Meadows Gordon, of the Bengal Civil Service ? I wish you could
see him; he would be delighted to meet you, having seen me; he
is the Commissioner of Revenue and Circuit of Dacca. If you go to
Calcutta try and make for the Province.
I have not time to add more at present, but that I am well,
and as much reconciled to this country as the circumstances of the
place will admit.
No. 2.
No. 9.—Per “ Indus.”
Sydney, 11th November, 1839.
Gordon Sandeman to E. M. Gordon.
I wrote you last, very fully, on the 28th ultimo by the “ Lady
Raffles,” which vessel sailed from this for Calcutta direct on the 31st
ultimo. My object in this is to inform you that I have sent, under
charge of Captain Clark, the master of the “Indus,” (the present oppor-
tunity), a power of attorney, to be executed by you, to enable me to
invest for your account in any of our Joint Stock Banking Companies,
&c., that may afford eligible prospects for investment, both as to
security and profit. The reason of my having taken this upon myself
has been more immediately occasioned in consequence of the estab-
lishment of a new bank in Sydney within the last ten days, under
the name of the Sydney Bank. You will see the preamble and account
of the first meeting in the Sydney Herald, Alex. Berry, Esq., M.C., in
the chair. In three days 47,000 shares were subscribed for, and the
bank promises to be a most profitable and popular institution. I have
taken shares for Mr. Willis and other friends, for whom I act under
power of attorney, and myself. The largest number of shares that
any one person can hold is 200, which, at £lO each, makes a full
interest of £2OOO ; but I am in hopes that the shares will be increased
to £2O each, nominally, with the privilege of allowing shareholders to
pay up the full amount of their shares, if required. I have put down
your name for 200 shares, of which, I am afraid, I shall only obtain
half. Ido everything, however, subject to your approval. I can only
say, however, that I wish I had £5,000 to invest in the above under-
taking. The Union Bank of Australia shares (this bank was estab-
lished January, 1839,) of £25 each, amount paid-up £ls, are now
worth here £lO per share premium, this in the space of 10 months.


I have also 20 shares in this bank, which I purchased by mere
accident at premium, which I will transfer to your name if you
choose. This bank has not yet declared a dividend. Three months
ago the shares were sold readily at auction at £7 10s. per share. I
hold 50 shares in this bank for account of the house. The Sydney
Bank is not yet actually established, as the time for the general
meeting has not yet expired; but I have thought it advisable for
your interests, under all circumstances, to forward the accompanying
power for execution by you, as it is worded more to the purpose than
it could possibly have been done with you at so great a distance,
where parties could not possibly be supposed to be so well acquainted
with our commercial institutions. I have been requested by parties
who take an interest in the new bank to become one of the Directors,
but I am so connected with some of the other banks that I have not
yet made up my mind on the subject. I have nothing of consequence
to communicate to you on the subject of the sheep, except that the
lambing, up to the date of my last letter, has been a very favourable
one. I think that the prices of sheep and all descriptions of stock
are now likely to improve. The subject of New Zealand is engrossing
the attention of people both in England and here. The New Zealand
Land Company have established their first settlement at Port
Nicholson in Cook’s Straits. Air. Willis is one of the Directors in
London, and we are the Agents of the Company here. Colonel
Wakefield, the Governor, is in New Zealand. There can be little
doubt now of the ultimate colonization of New Zealand as a British
dependency, and it will be a most valuable acquisition to our Colonial
empire.
No. 3.
No. 10.—Per “ Indus.”
Sydney, 16th November. 1839.
Gordon Sandeman to E. M. Gordon.
The “Indus” being detained, I avail myself of the oppor-
tunity to inform you that I have communicated with my friend Mr.
Thomas Walker, of the house of William Walker and Co., at present
perhaps the most extensive in Sydney, on the subject of transmission
of money from India. Their friends in Calcutta are Messrs. J. A.
Walker and Co., and Mr. Walker has promised to write to them
to the following effect at my request, that should you find it to your
interest to remit through them, (I am under the impression, and stated
so to Mr. Walker, that they would grant their bills on Sydney, taking
the rupee at the exchange of the day, without any charge for agency
or commission,) William Walker and Co. will honour their drafts at
thirty days’ sight, or whatever the usual date may be. Should
a 2


Treasury Bills or Company’s Bills be at a premium, and you should
find it a saving to remit through Messrs. J. A. Walker and Co.,
(referring them to my understanding with their friends here), please do
so, as you may rest every confidence in the parties, the house here
being very wealthy and highly respectable; they are connections of my
father’s family, and they are consequently very friendly disposed
towards me.
I send you a copy of the Australian Newspaper of this date,
containing an account of the first general meeting of the subscribers to
the Sydney Banking Company. Although I will now confess myself
one of the original projectors of the new bank, I did not wish, publicly
to take any part in the proceedings, thinking it wiser to leave the formation
of it ostensibly in the hands of older and more experienced persons. The
bank will be a great benefit to the public as well as a most profitable
undertaking to the proprietors. There was, as you can imagine from
the report, a great deal too much said at the meeting, but most of the
speakers were barristers who are fond of talking.
In the power of attorney Mr. Willis’s name was omitted at
the suggestion of our solicitor, he not being resident on the spot. The
insertion of it would have been of no real consequence. You will
observe that the last clause provides for the substitution of another
attorney in case of need, which is of course highly proper.
No. 4.
“ Conway,” March 3rd, 1840,
1 a.m.
George Beadon to Gordon Sandeman.
We sail at daylight for a cruize somewhere in the bay of
Bengal—l believe the Nicobars; but all, as usual with us, is veiled in
mystery.
A Civil servant of the Madras establishment, Mr. Hall, is going in the
“ Indus” for South Australia and Sydney ; he is a very gentlemanly
good style of man, and I should say, both by birth and education. He
takes some horses to South Australia. I advise him to take some Cashmere
goats. lam sure they will be grazed or farmed with much success in
some parts of Terra Australis. I saw at Messrs. Arbuthnot’s here,
some time ago, nine ; they were to be sent to a gentleman in New South
Wales, who was located (as brother Jonathan says) in a situation which,
from long experience in India, he knew were very likely to succeed.
Their hair is long and coarse like other goats; but underneath the wool
is beautifully silky and fine, and from it we get the unrivalled Cashmere
shawls, which are so expensive even in India. The Rajah of Cashmere
will not let them leave the country, excepting they are smuggled, and
such was the case relative to those which I saw. Could not Mr.


Gordon procure you a few, I am convinced they would thrive, and
soon prove a very considerable item of the balance in the shape of
remittance to the mother country.
I do not know Mr. Hall’s intentions, but I hope he may have some-
thing to do in your way.
Nothing is definitively known relative to China; ships are taken up.
They say ten thousand men is to be the force. Todd and all your
friends are well.
In the event of other letters miscarrying, I hereby authorize
the firm, Willis, Sandeman, and Company, Merchants of Sydney,
to draw upon me for the sum of one thousand pounds, in a set or
sets of bills of exchange at thirty days’ sight, payable at Messrs.
Ransom’s, for Messrs Badcock, Bankers, Taunton.
P.S.—I shall write to South Australia per Mr. Hall, or post, about
the land.
No. 5,
No. 9.—Per “ Indus.”
Sydney, 11th November, 1839.
Forgery of the letter from
G. Sandeman to E. M. Gordon.
I wrote you last very fully on the 28th ultimo, by the
“ Lady Raffles,” which vessel sailed from this for Calcutta direct on
the 31st ultimo. My object in this is to inform you that I have sent
under charge of Captain Clark, master of the “ Indus,” a power of
attorney to he executed by you, to enable me to invest for your
account in any of our Joint Stock Banking Companies that may afford
eligible prospects for investments both as to security and profit. The
reason of my having taken this upon myself has been more immediately
occassioned in consequence of the establishment of a new bank in
Sydney within the last ten days, under the name of the Sydney Bank.
You will see the preamble of the first meeting 'in the Sydney Herald'
Alex. Berry, Esq., M.C., in the chair. In three days 47,000 shares
were subscribed for, and the bank promises to be a most profitable and
popular institution. I have taken shares for Mr. Willis and other
friends, for whom I act under power of attorney. The largest number
of shares that any one person can hold is 200, which at ,£lO each
makes a full interest of £2,000; but I am in hopes that the shares
will be increased to £2O each nominally, with the privilege of allowing
shareholders to pay up the full amount of their shares if required. I
have set down your name for 200 shares, but I am afraid I shall only
obtain half. I have done this subject to your approval. I wish I had
£5,000 of my own to invest in the above undertaking. The Union


Bank of Australia shares (established 1839) of £25 each, (<£ls paid
up), are now worth <£lo per share premium, this in the space of ten
months.! IBy mere accident I have purchased twenty shares in this
bank at £6 premium, which I will transfer to your name if you choose.
I hold fifty shares in this bank for account of the house. The Sydney
Bank is not yet actually established, as the time for the General
Meeting has not yet expired; but I have thought it advisable for your
interest, under all circumstances, to forward the accompanying power
for execution by you, as it is worded more to the purpose than it could
possibly have been done with you at so great a distance where parties
could not possibly be supposed to be so well acquainted with our
commercial institutions. I have been requested to become one of the
Directors, but I am so connected with some of the other banks, that I
have not yet made up my mind on the subject. I have nothing
important to communicate on the subject of the sheep, except that the
lambing has turned out a very favourable one. Sheep and all descrip-
tions of stock are improving in prices. I have given William Henry
Gore, Esq., a joint letter of introduction and credit to you; he is'a
gentleman of undoubted respectability, and a great sheep and land
holder in this colony. lam now shipping, consigned to our house, 86
bales of his wool, this season’s clip. It is reported that his object in
visiting India is for the purpose of seeking a matrimonial connection.
Should Messrs. Walker and Co., of Calcutta, not be able to furnish you
with drafts on this Colony, perhaps you might make some arrangements
with Mr. Gore. I have not spoken to him on the subject as he sailed
some time since. His drafts on us will be honoured to any amount, as he
has a considerable sum in our hands. He can give you some valuable
information regarding the colony. The subject of New Zealand is
engrossing the attention of people both here and in England. The
company have formed their first settlement at Port Nicholson in Cook’s
Straits; Mr. Willis is one of the directors in London, and we are their
agents here. Colonel Wakefield, the Governor, is in New Zealand. The
success of this company will increase our prosperity. In haste, as lam
writing in a boat.
No. 6.
Madras, January Bth, 1840.
W. H. Gore to Evelyn Meadows Gordon, Dacca.
Previous to my leaving Sydney Mr. Sandeman particularly
requested me on my arrival in India, to inform you of the same with
the view of my giving you any information you might require relative
to the present state of New South Wales. In accordance with this
desire, I beg leave to inform you that I shall leave this in a few days,
and expect to be in Calcutta about the middle of February.


From enquiries which I have made as regards the distance of Dacca
from Calcutta, I regret to state that I am fearful it will be out of my
power to have the pleasure of an interview with you unless you should
happen to be in Calcutta.
I trust you will acquit me of the least appearance of disrespect, as it
is only the great distance which you are situated that compels me to
forego the pleasure of an acquaintance with a relation of my much
esteemed friend, Mr. Sandeman. My stay in Calcutta must not exceed
two months, and I need scarcely add that it will afford me a secret
pleasure on being honoured with any letters you may wish to forward
to Sydney. I shall be very happy to receive a few lines from you
addressed to me, care of
I have likewise to request you will inform whether you have heard
from Sydney lately, and if so, whether you have received any particular
news relative to the sheep shearing or the prospects of the crops.
P.S. —A few lines addressed, Mr. Gore, care of ,by the
15th February, will no doubt find me in Calcutta.
Address care of Messrs. J. A. Walker and Co., Calcutta.
No. 7.
(copy forged bill.)
18. A.N. 18 Oct,
Sydney, N. S. Wales, March 27th, 1840.
Exchange for <£l,ooo 0 0
Thirty days’ after sight of this our first of exchange (second
and third of the same tenor and due unpaid) pay to the order of
William Henry Bond, Esq., the sum of One Thousand Pounds
Sterling value received, and charge the same to account of
Willis, Sandeman, and Co.
To Lieut. G. Beardon, R.N-
Messrs. Badcock and Co.,
Taunton,
Somerset.
64*411 a 3
Endorsed.
Payable at
Messrs. Hansom and Co., London.
William H. Bond.
Prp. Herries and Co,
W. Brand.


Mymensingh, 18th October, 1840,
E. M. Gordon to Gordon Sandeman.
I wrote to you on the Bth of June last, forwarding the
second of a set of bills for £270, drawn by Messrs. J. A. Walker and
Co., of Calcutta, on Messrs. W. Walker and Co., of Sydney, at fifteen
days’ sight. The’first of the set was sent direct by Messrs. J. A. Walker
and Co. to your address, through Messrs. Arnal P. Cayron and Co. of
Mauritius. I have now the pleasure to forward the third of the set.
I have, since I last wrote to you, made several attempts to procure
bills to make up the £lOOO which I promised to remit, but without
success; I applied to several houses, but I could not get bills from
any of them. The premium on Treasury Bills is so heavy, and then
the discount on them again at Sydney, render this mode of remitting
a very losing one. My wish was to send a thousand pounds to be
invested in a loan on a first mortgage.
Since I last wrote I have discovered that I was the object of a
singular attempt at swindling. In your letter No. 9, per “ Indus ”
dated the 11th November, 1839, there occurs the following passage :
“ I have given William Henry Gore, Esq., a joint letter of introduc-
tion and credit to you ; he is a gentleman of undoubted respectability,
and a great sheep and land holder in this colony. lam now shipping]
consigned to our house, 86 bales of his wool, this season’s clip. Should
Messrs. Walker and Co., of Calcutta, not be able to furnish you with
drafts on this colony, perhaps you might make some arrangements
with Mr. Gore. I have not spoken to him on the subject, as he sailed
some time since ; his drafts on us will be honored to any amount, as
he has a considerable sum in our hands.” The whole letter, of which
the above purported to be a part, is written in a hand not like yours,
but the oddness of the handwriting is attempted to be accounted for
by the circumstance that the letter was written in a boat. About the
time I received the above letter I got one from Mr. Gore, dated
Madras, and saying he expected to be in Calcutta in February. I
confess I was taken in, and wrote a long and civil letter to the black-
guard. I did not, however, ask him for a bill on you, so that he did
not finger my coin. I found out the above fraud by seeing the name
of Mr. Gore, in a Calcutta newspaper, published as a swindler, and of
his having opened the letter bag of a ship in which he was a passenger
from Calcutta to Penang (I think), and of his having called himself a
Bengal civilian. W T hen I saw this, I was tempted to look at your
letters. I found that the duplicate of No. 9, forwarded per “ Cornwall,”
was truly a duplicate of the transcribed original, with the exception of
the above quoted passage. It is evident that he must have possessed
himself of your letters of the 11th and 16th November, and copied the


former, foisting in the passage aforesaid. He must have seen the letter
of the 16th (which, however, I duly received), else he would not have
known of your reference to the house of Walker and Co. When very
narrowly examined, the fraud was clumsily managed, for he contradicts
himself. He says you had given him a letter of “ credit,” and yet he
says you had not spoken to him on the subject of his granting bills to
me. How could he act upon his letter of credit without granting bills?
Still we don’t look out for such attempts at fraud from any other part
of the world , and I may consider myself very fortunate in not having
been done out of some hundred pounds.
No. 9.
H. M. S. “ -Conway,” April 28th, 1841,
Off Whampoa, China.
George Beadon to Gordon Sandeman
As the head of your firm of Willis, Sandeman, and Co., at
Sydney, I write to apprise you that subsequent to closing my letter, per
“ Jane,” and the enclosed, I have received letters from England, dated
29th December, informing me of a second thousand pounds having
been drawn by your firm upon me. As I have received no account
from you of my estate since I requested it in my letter, dated 13th
February, 1840, now more than a twelve month ago, I had not
given Mrs. Beadon directions to honour a bill for more than one
thousand in 1840 ; besides, in your letter of March, 1840, you state
your intention of paying up the remainder for me. Moreover I
desired you, February 12th, 1840, in these words to let me know -
“ If I cannot pay up upon the shares next year—lB4l I shall
direct you to sell a portion, and pay up upon as many shares as YOU
have funds to keep, therefore be punctual in advising me how matters
stand.” Do write to me; direct —H. M. S. “ Conway,” China, or
elsewhere. ’Tis more annoying as Captain Bethune gets advices from
Donaldson. As I had not given my wife especial directions she was
on the point of not accepting the bill; she, however, luckily wrote to
Mr. Willis, and, knowing my confidence in you, honoured the bill. I
have directed her to honour no more. Your letters to me must have
been mislaid. lam very sorry for it indeed.


Sydney, 25th June, 1842.
Gordon Sandeman to G. Beadon.
I have this moment received a letter from Mr. Willis, which
has surprised me much, informing me that you were very much
annoyed by non-receipt of letters from me, and stating that I had not
instructions from you to draw on your account for the last £lOOO.
This is a serious matter, and requires a more deliberate reply than
time will permit me to make in this, as the post is just closing.
I have written to you frequently to India, but only two or three of my
letters (I think two only) appear to have reached you ; this I cannot
account for. I informed you that I purchased for you an allotment in
Melbourne—original cost £560, upon which we have built a cottage
costing £3OO, which is now let at a rental of £l5O per annum
Your shares still remain in the Bank of New South Wales, upon which
I have been paying up regularly as the dividends became due ; but I
shall give you all particulars with your account current, made up to
30th June, by first opportunity. • I am extremely sorry you should
have suffered any inconvenience by the non-receipt of your letters, but
have only in this to assure you that I have not forgotten your interests.
No. 11.
Sydney, 31st August, 1842.
G. Sandeman to G. Beadon.
I am extremely sorry that we have been so busy since I last
wrote to you, that we have not been able to make up your account
current to 30th June last. We are now, however, busy making up all
accounts to that date, and I hope to be able to send it by next vessel via
Bombay. Our friends in London wrote a short time back to say that
you would be glad to receive a certificate of your shares in the Sydney
Bank. When the bank grants certificates of shares it requires such
documents to be given up before the shares can be transferred ; I have
not thought it advisable, therefore, to send you the original document
in case you should at any time wish to sell out of the Sydney Bank
Stock, but I enclose you the accountant’s certificate that the certificate
of shares has been issued to me. The Sydney Bank is at present
paying 11 per cent, per annum, and is doing a very prosperous
business. The Bank of New South Wales is paying at present, at the


rate only of 14 per cent, per annum. Owing to the awfully depressed
state of the times bank profits have fallen, although not in the same
ratio with other colonial interests.
One reason for our not being enabled to make your account up is, tnat
we have not yet received particulars from Port Phillip of the outlay
upon your property in Melbourne. ; 'The partner of our branch house
there, Mr. Jones Agnew Smith, has the management of the property,
and I have acted under his advice in the outlay I have made upon it.
The return upon the investment ought to bring you in, at the present
time, about 15 per cent, per annum, in addition to the fact that the
property is much increased in value, by part of it having been built
upon. I enclose you copy of Mr. Smith’s last letter to me on the
subject. 4
On referring to your correspondence, I perceive that it must have
been a misconception of our London House, supposing that you had not
given me authority to draw for the last £l,OOO.
I intend going to India in a short time, where I shall not remain
more than two months, and intend returning here immediately ; but
before I go I shall place your power of attorney in the hands of
Tingcombe, according to the understanding we had upon this head
before you left this.
You will, upon the whole I think, have reason to feel satisfied with
the investments I have made for you here, and I hope that Mr. Smith,
will before next vessel sails, have sent me the particulars of the account,
in order that you may see the result at one glance.
I have omitted before to congratulate you on your promotion, and
shall be delighted to hear that you have in due time got your post
rank.
You are aware, no doubt, that a commercial panic has been raging
here for the last eighteen months, during which time I have had my
own share of anxieties. I have been almost harassed to death, and am
now more than heartily sick of matters. Things are now, however, I hope,
at their worst, and I sincerely hope a reaction will take place ere long.
Colonial investments are by no means less advantageous than they
were, as far as the safety of the security is concerned, and if we are
only’true to ourselves any diminution of profits, I consider, is only
temporary.
p.S. I mentioned when the Sydney Bank was being formed that I
hoped "to secure for you 200 shares, hut was not able to procure more
than 88. Your Bank of New South Wales Stock amounts now to
£1,300,’14 per cent, dividend; your Sydney Bank ditto, <£352, 11 per
cent, dividend ; and the investment at Melbourne will cost altogether,
£1 300, about 15 per cent, dividend. Premium on Bank New South
Wales shares not more than £25 just now, and Sydney Bank at
par.


Melbourne, 15 th August, 1842
Gordon Sandeman Esq., Sydney.
Bear Sir,
i , * m in /® cei P t of y° ur favour of 2nd May, confirming the
sale of allotment 19 section No. 1, in this town, made by Mr. Arthur
i is o you for Captain Beadon, and also sanctioning a further
expenditure on same of <£3oo. The building which lam now erecting
on this ground, I fear will come to more than that sum. However I
hope in ten days to have all the accounts in, and shall send you the
statements. I was induced to do so by getting a considerable addition
lo the rent and I thmk it was for the interest of the property to do so ;
it is let at <£2oo per annum from Ist October next. The ground is
increasing in value much in that part of the town 8
I remain, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
(Signed) Jones A. Smith.
No. 12.
Sydney, N.S.W., 28th January, 1843.
Gordon Sandeman to G. Beadon.
it. e y es ave J within the last few days only, been opened to
the cause of the frequent reflections you have made upon me through
our London house, relative to the non-advice of either the drawing of,
or the application of the proceeds of a bill purporting to be drawn bv
our firm here for £IOOO, dated Sydney, N.S.W., March 27th, 1840
at thirty days’ sight, in favour of “ William Henry Bond,’ Esq. /’
which bill, it appears, was accepted and paid by Ransom and Co. on
the 18th October, 1840. When I say that you alluded, in particular,
to the above-mentioned bill, I am wrong—for your complaint was,
that I had no instructions from you “ to draw on your account for the
last *1000.” In the hurry of business I did not remember, when
I wrote you on the 25th June last, the exact sum for which you had
drawn yourself when here in the “ Conwayand when the house
w rote to me about the last <£looo, it was associated in my mind in
connexion with the amount drawn by yourself, for as there had no
ninim j su , m k een drawn by me, I could not look upon the last
fb, „ 00 b y me > as referred to by you, as any other than the
bill for £IOOO drawn by the firm, dated the 20th July, 1840, which


was drawn in accordance with your letter of authority, dated 3rd
March, 1840, Calcutta, and received by me by the hands of Mr. A.
Hall, (a Madras civilian,) on the 18th July, 1840. Not dreaming of
the possibility of the existence of what I have lately been made aware
of, I was so perfectly satisfied that there was an error or misunder-
standing some where on your side, that, in my letter to you of the 31st
August last, I merely alluded to the subject by saying—“ On referring to
your correspondence I perceive that it must have been a misconception
of our London house, supposing that you had not given me authority
to draw for the last £1000.” You may judge of my astonishment
then, on my return from a short absence into the interior the other
day, to find a power of attorney in the hands of Messrs. D. Chambers
and Holden, authorizing them to act for you, and demanding an
explanation from me of the application of the bill for £IOOO of which
you had had no account. I examined the copies of the bills paid for
your account by your bankers. The bills for £650 and £630 drawn
by yourself when here, corresponded with our bill book, so did the
bill for £IOOO, dated Sydney, 20th July, 1840 ; but the draft dated
27th March, 1840, for £IOOO, in favour of “ William Henry Bond ,
Esq.” lat once pronounced to be a forgery,as far as the house or
myself were concerned; I never heard of such a bill, neither did I
ever see or hear of such a person as “ William Henry Bond, Esq.
therefore the bill referred to, bearing such a person’s name, I repeat
is a forgery; and I will also state, that there may be no misunder-
standing, that the only bill I ever drew upon you was under your own
authority, as contained in your letter to me, dated Calcutta, 3rd
March, 1840, dated Sydney, 20th July, 1840, for £IOOO, drawn by
Willis, 9 Sandeman, and Co. on Messrs. Badcock and Co., Taunton,
payable at Bansom and Co., London, of which one of the bills in the
hands of Messrs. Chambers and Holden, is an exact copy. It certainly
did appear a very strange thing to me that the true bill for £IOOO,
dated 20th July, 1840, should at first have been refused acceptance ;
and I also did think it very hard that I was reproached by reflections
from our London house for this, and for having drawn without
authority; but the whole mystery is now explained to me, inasmuch
as the first bill of March, 1840, having got home first was paid by
your bankers, according, I suppose, to Mrs. Beadon’s instructions;
but the second bill, the true bill, of 20th July, 1840, was objected to,
as having been drawn without authority or advice—£looo having
been all that you had given me authority to draw for. I cannot help
saying, Beadon, that I did hope you had formed a somewhat better
estimate of me than to suppose that I would have the presumption to
draw upon you for so large a sum as £IOOO, without the slightest
authority, and at the same time not advise it; and I also did expect
that you would have had the courtesy to communicate with me
individually, before taking steps which, in the hands of strangers in such
a place as this, might have been employed to very pernicious purpose.


That you have been forged upon, there cannot be a doubt; but how
to afford any authentic clue to the swindler, lamat a loss. The only
idea that has flashed across my mind is, that you may have been made
the victim, as my uncle, Mr. Gordon, very nearly was, of a scoundrel,
calling himself “ William, Henry Gore,” of whom, you may perhaps
have heard in India. In a letter from my uncle, received in July,
1840, dated 16th February, 1840, (a month before the bill in question
was drawn,) he says: “ I received a few lines from your friend, Mr.
Gore, and have written to him.” Who my friend, Mr. Gore, was, I have
ever been unable to understand, not having ever known any one of
that name, except Mr. Thomas Gore, of Sydney, merchant, always
resident here, and only an every-day acquaintance. I thought no more
of this Mr. Gore until, on the 23rd February, 1841, I received another
letter from my uncle, dated 18th August, 1840, in which he says :
“ Since I last wrote you, I have discovered that I was the object of a
singular attempt at swindling. In your letter, No. 9, per “ Indus,”
dated the 11th November, 1839, there occurs the following passage:
‘I have given William Henry Gore, Esq., a joint letter of introduction
and credit to you ; he is a gentleman of undoubted respectability, and
a great sheep and land holder in this colony. lam now shipping,
consigned to our house, 86 bales of his wool, this season’s clip. Should
Messrs. Walker and Co., of Calcutta, not be able to furnish you with
drafts on this colony,’ (in a subsequent letter of the 16th November, by
same vessel as the letter No. 9 of the 11th, I had suggested the house
of Walker and Co. as being likely to grant bills, from an understand-
ing I had with the house, their agents here,) ‘perhaps you might
make some arrangements with Mr. Gore. I have not spoken to him
on the subject, as he sailed some time since; his drafts on us will be
honoured to any amount, as he has a considerable sum in our hands.’
The whole letter, of which the above purported to be a part, is written
in a hand not like yours; the oddness of the handwriting is attempted
to be accounted for by the circumstance that the letter was written in
a boat. About the time I received the above letter I got one from
Mr. Gore, dated Madras, saying he expected to be in Calcutta in
February. I confess I was taken in, and wrote a long and civil letter
to the blackguard. I did not, however, ask him for a bill on you, so
that he did not finger my coin. I found out the above fraud by seeing
the name of Mr. Gore, in a Calcutta newspaper, published as a
swindler, and of his having opened the letter bag of a ship in which he
was a passenger from Calcutta to Penang (I think), and of his having
called himself a Bengal civilian. When I saw this I was tempted to
look at your letters. I found that the duplicate of No. 9, forwarded
per “ Cornwall,” was truly a duplicate of the transcribed original,
with the exception of the above quoted passage. It is evident that
he must have possessed himself of your letters of the 11th and 16th
November, and copied the former, foisting in the passage aforesaid.
He must have seen the letter of the 16th, (which, however, I duly


received) else he could not have known of your reference to the house
of Walker and Co. When very narrowly examined, the fraud was
clumsily managed, for he contradicts himself. He says you had given
him a letter of credit, and yet, he says, you had not spoken to him on
the subject of his granting bills to me. How could he act upon his
letter of credit without granting bills? Still we don’t look out for such
attempts at fraud from any other part of the world , and I may
consider myself very fortunate in not having been done out of some
hundred pounds.”
I have quoted the whole of the extract, in order that you may
possess all the information that I have as likely to throw any light
upon so extraordinary a fraud. The swindler, whoever he is, is
evidently no ordinary villain. If the same Mr. Gore is referred to,
he must have got hold of the duplicate of your letter, dated the
« Conway,” March 3rd, 1840, for the seal of the original does not
appear to have been broken, and I have not received any duplicate .
how else could he have known of my authority to draw upon you.
You will observe that the forged bill is drawn upon Lieut. G. Beadon,
R.N.; whereas the hill drawn by me in July, 1840, is drawn strictly
according to instructions, viz., on Badcock and Co., payable at Ransom
and Co., London, and on the forged bill the words “ payable at Ransom
and C 0.,” are on the back of the bill —not under Badcock and Co.,
Taunton, on the face of it. The one bill, also, is said to be drawn
on account of Willis, Sandeman, and Co.; whereas my bill, if I
remember rightly, is on account of Lieut. Beadon. Xu the forged bill, also,
I perceive your name is spelt Beardon, with an “ r,” instead of Beadon. The
bill altogether differs in various ways from the form of mine of 20th
July, 1840. I have no doubt that the person alluded to by my uncle
must have been a convict of the class called “ special”—either freed or
escaped from the colony—and probably might have known me by name
here. The annoyance that the circumstance altogether has given me,
has been very great; but more than all, lam deeply sorry that you
should have been exposed to so severe a loss. I have a faint hope,
however, that you may be enabled, to recover from the bankers who
paid the forgery. Of course you will not leave any legitimate means
untried to recover such a loss. I notice the name of Herries and Co.,
the Bankers, of St. James-street, as the last endorser on the bill, and
from them or through some other channel, I sincerely trust you will
be successful in tracing the villain who has too well succeeded in
fleecing you. It is unnecessary for me to say that it will be due to
me immediately to communicate with your law agents, Messrs.
Chambers and Holden, the result of this very unfortunate business.
I have not your account before me at present, but, as it stands now,
the balance will be against you on account of the Port Phillip property.
I will, however, as far as I am concerned, see that everything is
properly arranged, and Messrs. Chambers and Holden will also do
the same.


I have, my dear Beadon, been nearly distracted, for the last twelve
months, from the anxieties and difficulties I have had to undergo in
such an unparalleled prostration of every mercantile and colonial
interest as has existed here for the last two years. * *
I am writing hurriedly for the “ Favorite,” now about sailing. If
you wish to correspond with me, write to me ; I shall be very glad to
hear from you. As soon as I can leave Sydney I intend to go to
India to see my relations there; I must then return here, where I
must begin life again; and my intention is, if I can get sufficient
assistance, to retire into the bush, for, at least, the next ten years of
my life. ***»*#
The abrupt manner in which you have acted has been, in some
measure, explained to me by the mysterious affair of the forgery I have
referred to; and I have little doubt that you will complete the
explanation in acknowledging receipt of this, in anticipation of which
I will still subscribe myself, &c., &c.
P.B,—Chambers and Holden have not given me any formal notice
of their being your attorneys generally; but, of course, under all
circumstances, I would have declined acting for you, and the more
especially after their being in possession of any power at all from you.
No. 13.
Sydney, 6th November, 1844.
Gordon Sandeman to Edward Knox,
Since my arrival here a few days ago, I have learned, with
what feelings it would be difficult for me to express, the manner in
which my name has been assailed by my former friend, Mr. Beadon.
After what has taken place it is out of the question that I should
address Mr. Beadon direct; but having learned that you are his
attorney in this place, it becomes necessary for me thus early to inform
you that in consequence of the extraordinary and very serious manner
in which my character has been attempted to be injured during my
absence, by Mr. Beadon, it will be incumbent upon me to take steps,
the consequences of which I trust Mr. Beadon will see the propriety
of averting by immediately coming out here, or taking such other
measures as shall place beyond even a legal doubt the question of the
unfortunate forgery of which he has been the victim. Apart from any
other consideration I had hoped that my letter of the January,


1843, would have satisfied any reasonable mind of the justness of the
conclusion I had drawn, and which subsequent evidence has confirmed
in my own mind and in the minds of those who are acquainted with
the circumstances, as to the scoundrel whose victim Mr. Beadon has
been ; but since this has not been the case, I am now here after a very
unforeseen detention in India, determined to identify the villain I had
suspected in the first instance as the guilty party, and to compel that
justice which a grossly perverted reason alone could have denied.
When you shall have received any intelligence from Mr. Beadon, I
shall feel much obliged by your doing me the favour of immediately
communicating with me direct, or through Messrs. Lyall, Scott, and
Co.
No. 14.
King-street, 17th December, 1844.
H. J. Chambers to H. B. Bradley.
I have only this moment ascertained from Mr. Holden that
he never saw the depositions of which you spoke to me the other day.
I have no recollection of seeing them myself, but have searched all the
papers to satisfy myself that you were mistaken in assuming that they
had been deposited with us, and I find no such documents among
them.
No. 15
King-street, 3rd April, 1845
H. J. Chambers to G. Sandeman
I was absent from the office the greater part of the day
yesterday, which prevented my replying to your note. I assure you I
was quite vexed to have to disappoint you the day before yesterday;
but I informed Mr. Bradley of it a few hours previously, hoping that
he might communicate with you, and save you the trouble of calling
unnecessarily.
I have now the papers at my right hand, and will be happy to
attend upon yourself and Mr. Bradley at any hour you name ; or if I
am to name the hour, say ten o’clock to-morrow morning, and I will
make it a point to be in attendance. t
b


King-street, 3rd April, 1845.
H. J. Chambers to H. B. Bradley.
I send you the enclosed note in reply to Mr. Sandeman’s
through you, not knowing his address. I could not lay my hands on
the papers the day I last saw you, having put them away in too safe a
corner while we were overhauling the papers in the office some days
ago. Pray read the enclosed, and if the hour named suit you, you
will find me in readiness for you.
No. 17.
Exchange Buildings, Sydney, 2nd May, 1855*
Re Kemp, alias Gore, alias Angelo.
H. B. Bradley to Gordon Sandeman.
Your letter of 6th April, with the accompanying newspapers,
have had my best attention; and I have delivered to Mr. Wm. Wilson
the note enclosed, and have seen and conferred with him at length on
this most romantic, but vexatious plot. We have together perused the
forged letter to your uncle, Mr. Gordon, and an extract from that
gentleman’s letter to yourself, apprising you of his having only escaped
victimizing by some little delay, in the course of which Mr. Gore was
exposed in the Calcutta papers as a swindler who had imposed on
others by having access to the mail bag of some ship in which he was
employed as steward—together with the other papers which have been
in my hands for many years ; in fact, shortly after the occurrences to
which they relate, with a view to the prosecution of the scoundrel to
conviction. Mr. Wilson is fully satisfied that no shadow of blame
attaches to you in reference to the transaction; and so, if I rightly
remember, was Mr. Chambers, whose firm was concerned for Beadon
against Willis and Co., in relation to the bill in question—at least the
frequent conferences which I had with Chambers at the time left that
impression on my mind. I have, however, addressed him at length on
the subject, (he is at Melbourne,) and on receipt of his reply, I will
transmit, duly verified, to you a transcript of my letter to him and his
answer, which, if he feel at liberty to pronounce an opinion, cannot fail
to be very useful to you now. I have addressed Mr. Hood, and
requested him to call and peruse the papers in my hands, but am not


favoured with his reply ; perhaps he is advised to await Mr. Russell's
arrival under the circumstances. I have made application to the
Inspector-General of Police (whom I have also seen and conferred with)
to have search made for Kemp, and to let an eye be kept over hit
movements. You, as an old Justice of the Peace, ought to know that
we cannot have evidence here to conviet him of forgery, many links
are wanting, and unless you can hold him, it would be very useless to
apprehend him and let him go again. I find Mr. Fry had left town
before my receipt of your letters. Mr. Wilson has promised to see and
satisfy him on his return home.
I have perused Kemp’s statement made to Beadon —a most
extraordinary production —in which he attempts to provide what I have
always sought in vain, viz., cui bono could you have had anything to
do with such a villain ? This he explains to the following effect, that
having seduced one Emily Bond, and an action being brought by
herself or brother against you in the Supreme Court for the same, you,
to save exposure, paid £250, and drew this bill on Beadon. ITe
refers to the files of the Court in corroboration of his assertion, and I
have accordingly made diligent search there, where, from long acquaint-
ance with the department, having been, as you know, some seven
years an officer of it, I have peculiar acquaintance with the mode of
keeping the records, and extending my enquiry from the first of October,
1839, to the 31st of March, 1840. (The forged bill bears date 27th
March, 1840.) I have been unable to find any trace of action of any sort
by any person against you. I need not say that I made the search,
not from any doubt on my own mind as to the falsity of the whole
statement, but from this view: here was a whole tissue of lies—some,
perhaps, not easy to negative, because you cannot produce persons who
have not existence; but among the lies was one which I could prove
to be such, and accordingly I seized upon it, and found it to be utterly
without foundation ; of the same character I have not the least doubt
are all the other statements which Kemp made, and I need hardly
point to your own mind this conclusion —that even if Kemp had
succeeded in persuading any person to believe his statement about the
Beadon transaction, he could not disprove the cheat attempted by him
on Mr. Gordon, nor easily evade identification with the “ Gore” of the
Calcutta papers; and what motive could his villainous ability suggest
for your attempting to get your own relative to pay him money for a
bill on your house which would be worthless ? but amidst all this
(which I only write, you know, with the view of your shewing it to any
friends on the spot until I can procure you a more perfect satisfaction)
there can be no disputing that there are, in my hands, the forged letter
addressed by Kemp as from you to Mr. Gordon, and the original from
Kemp nomine W. H. Gore to Mr. Gordon, and that in the former which
seeks to imitate your hand writing, there are traces of similarity of
form of letters with those used by Kemp in writing in the name of
“ Gore ” to your uncle, shewing, beyond a doubt, the aptitude at
b 2


forgery; and this, coupled with the proven falsehood of the averment
of an action by Bond should suffice, were there not other contradictions,
which time does not allow me to detail here, to place a man in your
position clear of such unworthy suspicions. I have just learned that
Mr. Hood has been for some days out of town ; he is, however, shortly
expected, and probably Mr. Bussell and he may meet here ere long
and satisfy themselves.
I have, however, my own doubts about Mr. Hood’s placing himself
in a position of so much delicacy—it would have been better to refer it
to a friend of his, in his place. You may rely on my continued
exertions.
No. 18.
Extract from Book kept at the Penal Establishment of
Port Macquarie.
Ship Lady Harewood ; year of arrival, sth August, 1832.
Name Charles Kemp.
Age 19.
Protestant.
Single.
Native Place... Suffolk.
Merchant’s Clerk.
False Pretences.
Middlesex Jail, Ist December, 1831.
Sentence 7 years.
Height 5 feet h\ inches.
Complexion.... .Sallow.
Hair Dark brown.
Eyes Chestnut.
Lost front tooth in upper jaw, left side,
COLONIAL SENTENCES.
12th August, 1833, on} Absent without leave, and neglect of duty,
loan to Mr. Cross. j 50 lashes.
11th September, 1834,} —stealing a quart pot —7 days cells,
in Govt. j
4th November, 1834, in j p e jg n j n g sickness —25 lashes,
a road gang. ) ° °


Exchange Buildings,
Sydney, 25tli April, 1855.
H. B. Bradley to Hugh J. Chambers.
My friend Gordon Sandeman, whom you well remember in
Sydney many years since, and who is now a sheep holder in the northern
districts, having been lately placed in nomination for the vacant
seat of a representative of the electoral districts of Clarence and
Darling Downs, has had cast in his teeth an implication of complicity
with the convict Kemp, or Gore, or Angelo, as he was variously
termed, whose adroit use of his opportunities of access to the mail bags,
or ships’ bags of one or more vessels between Sydney and India,
enabled him to counterfeit letters, and forge a bill purporting to be
written by Sandeman, and drawn by "Willis, Sandeman, and Co.,
respectively ; by the first of which a cheat of Mr. Sandeman’s uncle
Mr. Evelyn Gordon, of Dacca, in Bengal, was contemplated, .and only
failed of effect from his having been warned, by the publication in an
Indian paper, of some other fraud by the same party ; and by the
second whereof Kemp actually succeeded in obtaining from the
bankers of Lieutenant George Beadon the sum of one thousand pounds.
It appears that the base imputation, now raised in the course of an
election takes its rise from certain statements made by the convict I
have mentioned, on the occasion of his apprehension many years
since, at the instance of Beadon, who, you will recollect, came to
the colony principally for the purpose of investigating that which
for a long time appeared shrouded in mystery, and followed Kemp to
the Clarence, where he had him brought before the Bench.
Beadon as we know, could not have evidence there to detain him,
and of course it was to Kemp’s interest to make good his own tale,
which he naturally did by the help of a scapegoat, who was our friend
Sandeman. There the matter has lain buried ever since—probably
nearly ten years—until recently resuscitated for present use.
Having had the correspondence of Sandeman and Beadon, and
Sandeman and Mr. Evelyn Gordon, with transcript of the forged bill,
(a most illiterate production,) and Kemp’s description and other papers
in m y own hands since 1844, for the purpose of proceeding against
Kemp whenever sufficient evidence might be obtainable in the colony
to enable me to obtain a conviction, I know, as I believe, you yourself
felt, as one of Beadon"s solicitors, that Sandeman was a victim in this
instance, and not a particeps criminis. Now, the object of my present
writing is to obtain from you, with the least possible delay that your
own affairs may require, a letter stating your own impressions, so far


as you can recall them to mind after the lapse of time, of the matter I
have referred to, bearing in mind that the question is complicity or not
with the convict Kemp or Gore in the matter of the bill drawn on
Beadon, and purporting to bear the signature of Willis, Sandeman,
and Co.
You will kindly believe that I would not ask a business man to take
so much trouble, but that being a matter of character, it is one vital to
Sandeman, and that in this instance your letter is intended, with mine,
to be used for a public purpose.
No. 20,
Queen-street, Melbourne,
Bth May, 1855.
Hugh J. Chambeks to H. B. Beadley,
Since receipt of your letter some days ago, I have en-
deavoured to call to my recollection the circumstances connected with
the mysterious transaction to which you refer, and I have been desirous
to give as unqualified and satisfactory an answer as the case justified,
which, however, I regret to say, I cannot do, for several reasons which
I will state: I was acting, at the time, as one of Captain Beadon’s
attorneys, and I know he entertained very strong impressions unfavour-
able to Mr. Sandeman, impressions which I combated at the time, because
of my being personally unwilling to believe Mr. Sandeman capable of being
a party to such a transaction ; but Mr. Sandeman was in India then,
and did not return to the colony for some time after the departure of
Captain Beadon, who had waited in Sydney, a long time, in hopes of
hearing from Mr. Sandeman, or of the latter returning to New South
Wales; during which time Captain Beadon maintained Kemp at his
own expense, in order to have the matter cleared up, but having
waited a long time in vain, he left. Upon Mr. Sandeman’s return, I
recollect his calling upon, or meeting me, and referring to the subject,
and repudiating any knowledge of the matter, but I am not aware of
his having taken any further steps to meet the accusation.
I have had some difficulty in recalling these facts after the lapse of so
many years, and having no means of reference to the papers; and the
more I consider the matter, the more scruples I feel in giving any
opinion of my own which might conflict with Captain Beadon’s, and
compromise him in the position he asserted, and still, for all I know,
maintains in the question.


No. 21.
Castlereagh-street, Sydney, 17th May, 1855.
G. K. Holden to H. B. Bradley.
As the enclosed letter will come to you without the Melbourne
post mark, I think it as well to explain to you that it was sent under
cover to me for perusal, but that no previous communication with me
led to the concurrence of Mr. Chambers’opinion with mine, as to the effect
of our position as precluding us from giving any such declaration of
opinion as you wish to elicit. In allowing you to peruse all the
accusatory statements, for the purpose of detecting any inconsistencies
or other materials for disproof, I have felt that I have only followed
a course which Captain Beadon himself would have adopted, but as, I
believe, he left New South Wales without considering the matter to be
cleared’up, and nothing new has since transpired in the matter to my
knowledge, I do not think we, as his solicitors, are entitled to express
any decided opinion about it.
At the same time, I should be grieved to think Mr. Sandeman could
be injured by this reticence. It will be better to consider that our
opinion has not been, and could not be properly asked.
SERIES OF ENGLISH CORRESPONDENCE.
7, Whitehall Place,
9th, June, 1859.
John Murray to G. Beacon.
Mr. Gordon Sandeman has placed in my hands certain
papers relating to a forged draft for £lOOO, which was paid by Messrs.
Ransom, for your account, so long ago as the year 1840, and to a
similar sum of £l,OOO for which Mr. Sandeman drew upon you under
the authority contained in your letter to him of the 3rd March, 1840,
and which was also paid by your agents.
When it subsequently became known to Mr. Sandeman that you
groundlessly imputed to him a cognizance of the above forgery, he
indignantly disclaimed any such knowledge in letters addressed to you,
two dated respectively, the 25th June, 1842, and the 28th January,
1843, and two written by him in 1844, after his return to the colony
from India.
At the date when the former letters were written you were in
China, and in 1844 Mr. Sandeman addressed to you in England. To
none of these letters did Mr. Sandeman ever receive a reply.


Had Mr. Sandeman’s situation permitted him to leave the colony, he
would certainly have returned to England to compel you, by every
means in his power, to retract so unfounded an imputation against him;
but it was impossible for him to do so, he being actively engaged in
pursuits at a distance of many hundred miles from Sydney, his absence
from the superintendence of which would have been absolute ruin to
him and those connected with him. He was constrained, therefore, to
remain silent, seeking only that consolation which his mind, conscious of
rectitude, afforded.
Matters continued in this state until 1855, when he became the
victim of calumny on the subject of the forgery practised on you.
On this* last occasion a rigid enquiry was instituted, at Mr.
Sandeman’s instance—into the circumstances of Kemp, alias Gore’s case,
by arbitrators appointed, one on the part of Mr. Sandeman, and the
other by his opponents, and all parties to whom the case was submitted
concurred in the most entire conviction that a forgery had been
committed on you by Kemp, alias Gore, but that Mr. Sandeman was
not, and could not have been, in any possible manner, connected either
with the forgery or the perpetration of it.
Upon this verdict Mr. Sandeman was willing, under the advice of
friends, to rest satisfied, and he would have continued to do so, but for
circumstances which have recently transpired.
It has lately come to Mr. Sandeman’s knowledge that you continue
not only to entertain, but to circulate imputations upon his honour in
the transaction in question, and even to suggest that it is incumbent
upon him to recoup to you the loss which you have sustained by the
forgery.
Under these circumstances Mr. Sandeman has applied for my advice,
and with the help of the correspondence and documents, I am preparing
a statement of the facts of the case.
On his behalf I beg now to request the favour of your permitting me
to place before you this statement when complete, feeling sure that the
details will induce you, even at this late period, to do Mr. Sandeman the
justice to which he is so fully entitled at your hands.
I may add that Mr. Sandeman is about to return to the colony, and
it has now become a matter of importance to him to take with him a
statement from you expressive of your concurrence in the unanimously
favourable opinion which his friends entertain regarding this matter.
I trust that you will see fit to make such full amende as the case
requires, and although I conceive it would be highly desirable that you
should in the first place personally inspect all the original documents
now in my possession, yet should you feel any reluctance to enter upon
the examination of the case yourself, may I be permitted to suggest
your requesting some friend, in whose judgment you confide, to meet a
friend of Mr. Sandeman for the purpose of making for your guidance a
joint investigation of the facts.


7, Whitehall Place,
16th June, 1859.
John Murray to G. Beadon.
May I request the favour of a reply my letter of the 9th instant,
if possible, not later than Saturday morning.
7, Whitehall Place,
20th June, 1859.
John Murray to G. Beadon.
I trust that I shall not be thought too urgent when I again
request a reply to mine of the 9th instant. You will readily under-
stand how important it is to Mr. Sandeman that the matter should be
at once disposed of, and especially so, as he has fixed the 12th July
for his departure for Australia.
Let me therefore entreat your early attention.
5, Serjeant’s Inn, Temple, E.C.,
20th June, 1859.
G. Keen to John Murray,
Captain Beadon has placed in my hands your letter to him of
the 9th instant, which I have been unable sooner to reply to.
Before my client will be at all disposed to take any trouble with
reference to the matters contained in your letter, Mr. Sandeman must
explain to his satisfaction, the purchase of property in New Zealand in
his (Captain Beadon’s) name, and which he is now seeking to recover.
It is well to mention that this property has never been mentioned in
the accounts rendered to my client by Willis, and that those accounts
are far from satisfactory.


No. 7, Whitehall Place,
21st June, 1859,
John Murray to G. Keen.
There can be no possible connection between the matter
mentioned in my letter of the 9th instant, and the subjects referred to
in yours of the 20th, and at which Mr. Sandeman, whom I have just
seen, expresses much surprise.
Whilst Mr. Sandeman has no recollection whatever of any transac-
tion connected with property in New Zealand, nor of the alleged
“ unsatisfactory accounts “ rendered by Willis,” he is nevertheless quite
prepared to entertain any matters of that sort whenever they may be
properly submitted to him.
In the meantime, however, I trust you will, on reconsideration, agree
with me that such matters ought n®t to be treated, as in fact, they are
not, in the light of counter claims to that which Mr. Sandeman has
made through me upon Captain Beadon’s sense of justice.
I shall be happy to meet you on these matters at your convenience.
5, Serjeant’s Inn,
25th June, 1859.
G. Keen to John Murray.
I have received a note from Captain Beadon this morning, in
which he states that mine found him in bed with an attack of gout;
but adds, “ If I can come up before Mr. Sandeman leaves, I will.”
His letter is a long one, and I think it will be necessary for me to
see you upon it.
No. 7, Whitehall Place, S.W.,
28th June, 1859.
John Murray to G. Keen.
I have seen Mr. Sandeman on the subject of our interview
yesterday, and reported to him the particulars which you were good
enough to furnish me with, as to the advertisements which appeared in
the New Zealand Gazette in April, 1843, regarding the 15360 acres of
land in that Colony; but he has no recollection whatever of the
circumstance beyond what he stated to you the other day at our
interview, and you may remember that the particulars of that state-
ment were somewhat as follows—


Ist. That at such a distance of time he had no recollection of any
such transaction, nor any means of reference to papers which had been
deposited with the trustees of the firm. That he had some recollec-
tion, however, of a Mr. Cormack having been employed by the house
to purchase land by barter from the chiefs, but the purchases made by
him were never recognised by the Government, and that they fell to
the ground. That partly>s*o facilitate these purchases, and to obviate
the objection of too large a tract being claimed by one person,
applications were made on behalf of various constituents, of whom
possibly Captain Beadon might have been one—that the loss of these
purchases fell entirely upon the house, and that Mr. Sandeman is not
aware that Captain Beadon was charged, in his accounts, for the
purchase of any land in New Zealand.
2nd. That having no access to papers since they were given up to
the trustees in 1843, and his time and attention having been entirely
absorbed in his occupation of a settler in the interior ever since his
return from India in October, 1844, he is in total ignorance of the
state of Captain Beadon’s account'with the firm ; but that if Captain
Beadon sustained any loss in connection house, which, as a
question of honour , it should have been Mr. Sandeman’s duty, as his
attorney, to have protected him from, he desires that he may be made
acquainted with the particulars.
The two last paragraphs contain the substance of Mr. Sandeman’s
statement the other day, and I may say, I am quite sure that he is
prepared to assist Captain Beadon to the extent of his power in
reference to the recovery of any land in New Zealand to which he
may suppose himself to be entitled.
7, Whitehall Place, S.W.,
4th July, 1859.
John Murray to G. Sandeman.
Mr. Keen has again disappointed me, but I shall endeavour
to see him to-morrow morning. In the meantime, I may as well state,
in general terms, the purport of the letter from Captain Beadon, from
which Mr. Keen read extracts to me the other day.
In this letter Captain Beadon distinctly disavowed having, at any
time, or on any occasion, made unfavourable mention of your name in
relation to the affair of Kemp, otherwise St. Angelo, although he
expressed great annoyance at having been subjected to the expense of


prosecuting Kemp without receiving any assistance from you, or from
the firm of which you are a member, and he therefore felt that he was
not called upon to make any amende to you in reference to that
affair.
He admits that he has, on more than one occasion, spoken of the
transaction relating to the land in New Zealand, in regard to which he
fancies himself injured, and he evidently thinks that if any expressions
of his regarding you have reached your ears, they must have had
reference to those transactions, and in no way relating to the Kemp
business. V*
At the time Mr. Keen read me these extracts, I particularly
requested him to obtain, if possible, from Captain Beadon, a letter to the
effect I have stated ; but I have not since seen him nor heard from him,
although he called to day in my absence, and promised either to call
again or to write, and I will endeavour to see him to-morrow
morning.
7, Whitehall Place,
sth July, 1859.
J. Murray to G. Keen.
On a careful consideration of the passages in your corres-
pondence with Captain Beadon which you have been good enough to
read to me, I cannot help coming to the conclusion that Captain
Beadon intends not only to disavow any opinion unfavourable to Mr.
Sandeman’s honour in relation to the forgery of the ,£lOOO bill by
Kemp ; but to assert that he has never used any expressions having
such a tendency, and although it would have been far more satisfactory
to Mr. Sandeman to have had the opportunity of convincing Captain
Beadon of the correctness of this view by the production of documents,
yet as it appears not to be Captain Beadon’s intention to avail himself
of the proffered inspection, you will perhaps not object to write me
such a letter in reply to this, as will show by quotations from your
correspondence, that Captain Beadon does not make, and never has
made, any imputation on Mr. Sandeman in relation to these matters.
Mr. Sandeman is not going to remain in Australia longer than two
or three months, hut before he goes he is anxious to have this question
cleared up, as far as it can be.
On other points I beg to refer you to my letter of 21st June, to
which you have not yet replied.


5, Serjeant’s Inn Temple,
Bth July, 1859.
Burnett and Keen to J. Murray.
Captain Beadon objects to our writing as requested by you in
your letter of the sth instant.
He states now “ provided Mr. Sandeman will guarantee your
“expense of investigation, and the losses I have sustained through his
« ag e n cy, &c.,‘ I would then hand over all my papers to you for an
“ investigation.”
Captain Beadon infers from our letter that Mr. Sandeman is desirous
of indemnifying him against his losses —to the extent, he adds, of say,
.£5OO
When he’agrees to do that, the papers are to be sent us—otherwise,
he will not further enter upon the matter.
No. 7, Whitehall Place, S.W.,
15th July, 1859.
John Murray to Grinham Keen.
It is now five weeks since by my letter of the 9th June, I
annealed on behalf of Mr. Gordon Sandeman, to Captain Beadon’s sense
of iustice, to investigate for himself, or through a friend, the
circumstances of the forgery committed upon him by Kemp, alias Gore,
in 1840 so as to enable him satisfactorily to exonerate Mr. Sandeman
from any supposed knowledge of or connection with that person ; and
after a correspondence with you, during which we have had several
interviews you now state that “ provided Mr. Sandeman will pay your
« costs an d the losses which Captain Beadon” alleges he “ has
« sus tained through Mr. Sandeman’s agency, he will then, and not till
« then empower you as, his solicitor, to examine the papers in his
“ possession,” and with which I take it for granted, you are not at
present acquainted.
It is I am sure, unnecesssary for me to point out to you the extreme
irregularity, to say the least, of such a proposition; nor need I conceal from
vou how utterly impossible it is either for my client or myself, under
such circumstances, to pursue our correspondence ; and m now closing
it I beg to express for Mr. Sandeman and myself our very great


surprise that Captain Beadon should have supposed for one moment
that Mr. Sandeman was capable of entertaining so unworthy a
suggestion as is contained in your letter, and regret that the appeal to
Captain Beadon has not been responded to in a manner more
conducive to the ends of justice, good feeling, and propriety.
I beg to add that, however Mr. Sandeman might have been
disposed (as expressed in my letter of the 21st and 28th June,) to
consider any claims which Captain Beadon might put before him, yet
as your client has not thought fit to do so, Mr. Sandeman can arrive
at no other conclusion than that no such claims exist, and he does not
now feel disposed to take any trouble in the matter.








