





INTERESTING
DISCOVERIES AND NARRATIVES;
CONTAINING
AN ACCOUNT OF THE ULTIMATE FATE OF THE
MUTINEERS OF THE BOUNTY;
VAN SLOETTEN’S
Discovery of an English Colony
OF TEN THOUSAND SOULS;
MAURICE GRIFFITH'S
Discobery of a Nation of Welshmen in America;
THE LOSS OF
THE GROSVENOR EAST-INDIAMAN,
ON THE COAST OF CAFFRARIA,
AND THE
Discovery of Two Ladies who survived that dreadful Catastrophe
now living amongst the Savages;
WITH
Anecdotes, Original Observations, &c.
BY THE
EDITOR OF THE SALOPIAN MAGAZINE.
SHREWSBURY:
Printed and Sold by C. HULBERT.
Price Nine Pence.




INTERESTING DISCOVERIES.
Account o f the ultimate fate of the Mutineers of the Bounty-~of
an English Colony of ten thousand souls—a Nation of Welsh-
.men in America-two Ladies who survived the wreck of the
Grosvenor , now living in Caffraria , #c.
/fIkNE of the most general objections to the Mosaic account
of the Creation, is founded on the supposed improbability
that m6n of such different hues, features, and habits, should
originally proceed from the same parents.
Another objection is, the pretended impossibility, that the
descendants of one pair, so early after the Creation, should be
found in every quarter of the Globe,
Tn answer to the first objection, we briefly reply,—all man-
kind have the same passions and propensities, are affected by
the same calamities, are inspired with the same hope and love
oflife; are equally the subjects of death. This general likeness
in their character, clearly points out a descent from the same
common stock. Not only the degraded condition of the Ethio-
pians, but their colour , we ascribe to the effect of that curse
which fell on the children of Canaan, in consequence of their
father’s guilt. —See Genesis, chap. ix. v. 25.
The rest of the sons of Noah were probably white, and the in-
termixture of their families with the sable children of Canaan,
mav have occasioned all the variety of hue which now exists.
Different habits are the natural consequences of different cir*
cumstances.
In answer to the second objection, we observe, that the vessel
called an Ark,' constructed by Noah, would give to his de-
scendants a perfect idea of the nature of a ship, and the uses of
the sea \ and in the early ages of the world, women, partaking
of the intrepidity of the men, would naturally share their danger.
Ignorant of the compass, when once on the besom of the great
deep, they would become the sport of waves and storms. Driven
from their own to the opposite Continent, nor daring to attempt
VOL. 11. ®


a return. Colonies would in consequence be planted: the de-
scendants of these settlers, in like manner, dispersed and driven
to other Continents and Blands, would eventually, and in no
very long period of time, people the earth.
This reasoning has at various periods received the most direct
confirmation, by the discovery of Colonies descended from ship-
wrecked mariners.
We are particularly led to make these remarks, from what
has lately been published respecting the discovery of a Colony
descended from the Mutineers of the Bounty, with which we
present our readers; and to which we subjoin the account
given by Captain Cornelius Van Sloetten, of a colony of 10,000
English people, descended from a Mr. Pine, who, with three
females, was shipwrecked on an uninhabited island, on the coast
of Terra Australis Incognita;* also the narrative of Maurice
Griffith, a native of Wales,, who discovered a nation of Welsh-
men, in the interior of the western portion of the Continent of
America, with an extract from the Appendix to the Rev. John
Campbell’s Travels in Africa, in which it is stated, that twm
females, who survived the fatal wreck of the Grosvenor Easst
Indiaman, were Irving in Caffraria, surrounded by their children
and grand children : concluding the whole with such observations
as may naturally arise out of the facts themselves.
Editor.
ULTIMATE FATE OF THE MUTINEERS OF THE
BOUNTY.
It is well known that, in the year 1789* his Majesty’s armed
vessel the Bounty, while employed in conveying the bread fruit
tree from Otaheitetr- the British colonies in the West Indies, was
taken from her commander, Lieut. Wm. Bligh, by part of the
crew, who headed by Fletcher Christian, a master’s mate, mutinied
off the island of Tofoa, putting the Lieutenant, with the rest of
the crew, consisting of eighteen persons, into the launch, which,
after a passage of 1200 leagues, providentially arrived at a Dutch
settlement on the island of Timor. The mutineers, twenty-five
in number, were supposed, from some expressions which escaped
them, when the launch was turned adrift, to have made sail
towards Otaheite. As soon as this circumstance was known to the
Admiralty, Capt, Edwards was ordered to proceed in the Pandora
to that island, and endeavour to discover and bring to England
* Unknown Countries, lying between 40 to 50 degrees South Latitude.


the Bounty, with such of the crew as he might be able to secure.
Oil his arrival, in March 17£) 1, at Matavai bay, in Olaheite, lour
of the mutineers came voluntarily on board the Pandora to sur-
render themselves, and from information given by them, ten
others (the whole number alive upon the island) were, in tbe
course of a few days, taken and subsequently brought to England.
No information respecting Christian or bis companions reached
England for twenty years; when about the beginning of the year
IBOj), Sir Sidney Smith, then commander-in-chief on the Brazil
station, transmitted to the Admiralty a paper which be bad re-
ceived from Lieut. Fitzimurice, purporting to be ‘ Extracts from
the log-book of Capt. Folger, of the American ship Topaz,’ and
dated ‘ Valparaiso, Oct. 10, 1808,’ communicating the discovery
of an i-land in the Pacific, peopled by the descendants of the crew
of tire Bounty.
About the commencement of the past year, a further ac-
count of these interesting people was received from Vice-Admiral
D ixon, in a letter addressed to him by Sir Thomas Staines, of
his Majesty’s ship Briton ; and we doubt not, the particulars will
interest our readers as much as they have ourselves.-.-As the real
position of Pitcairn’s island was ascertained to be so far distant
from that in which it is usually laid down in the charts, and as
the Captains of the Briton and Tagus seemed to have still consi-
dered it as uninhabited, they were not a little surprised on ap-
proaching its shores, to behold plantations regularly laid out,
and huts or houses more neatly constructed than those on the
Marquesas islands. When about two miles from the shore, some
natives were observed bringing down their canoes on their shoul-
ders, dashing through a heavy surf, and paddling off to the ships ;
but their astonishment was unbounded on hearing one of them,
on approaching the ship, call out in the English language, “ won’t
you heave us a rope, now ?”
The first man who got on board the Briton soon proved who
they were. His name, he said, was Thursday October Christian,
the first man born on the island. Fie was then about five and
twenty years of age, and is described as a line young man, about
six feet high ; his hair deep black ; his countenance open and
interesting: of a brownish cast, but free from that mixture of a
reddish tint which prevails among the Pacific islands; his only
dress was a piece of cloth round his loins, and a straw hat orna-
mented with the black feathers of the domestic fowl. * With a
great share of good humour,’ says Capt. Pipon, ‘ we were glad


to trace in his benevolent countenance all the features of an honest
English face.’
If the astonishment of the Captains was great on their hearing
their first salutation in English, their surprise and interest were
not a little increased on Sir Thomas Staines taking the youths
below, and setting before them something to eat, when one of
them rose up, and placing his hands together in a jxwture of
devotion, distinctly repeated, and in a pleasing tone and manner,
‘ For what we are going to receive, the Lord make us truly thank-
ful.’
They expressed great surprise on seeing a oow on board the
Briton, and were in doubt whether she was a great goat, or a
horned sow.
The two Captains of his Majesty’s shins accompanied these
young men on shore. With some difficulty and a good wetting,
and with the assistance of their conductors, they accomplished a
landing through the surf, and were soon after nut by John
Adams,f a man between fifty and sixty years of age, who conduc-
ted them to bis house. His wife accompanied him, a very old
lady, blind with age. He was at first alarmed lest the visit was
to apprehend him ; but on being told they were perfectly ignor-
ant of his existence, he was relieved from his anxiety.—Being
once assured that this visit was of a peaceable nature, it
possible to describe the joy these poor people manifested on
seeing those whom they were pleased to consider as their country-
men. Yams, cocoa nuts, and other fruits, with fine fresh eggs,
were laid before them ; and the old man would have killed and
dressed a hog for his visitors, but time would not allow them to
partake of his intended feast.
This interesting new colony, it seemed, now consisted of about
26 persons, mostly grown-up young people, besides a number of
infants. The young men, all born on the island, were very athle-
tic, and of the finest forms, their countenances open and pleasing,
indicating much benevolence and goodness of heart: but the
young women were particular objects of admiration, tall, robust,
and beautifully formed, their faces beaming with smiles and un-
ruffled good humour, but wearing a degree of modesty and bash-
fulness that would do honour to the most virtuous nation on earth ;
their teeth* like ivory, were regular and beautiful, without a sin-
gle ,exception: and all of them, both male and female, hud the
most marked English features. The clothing of the young fe-
t His real name was Alexander Wilson.


males consisted of a piece of linen reaching from the waist to the
knees, and generally of a sort of mantle thrown loosely over the
shoulders, and hanging as low as the ankles; but this covering
appeared to be intended chiefly as a protection against the sun and
the weather, as it was frequently laid, aside—and then the tipper
part of the body was entirely exposed ; and it is not possible to
conceive more beautiful forms than they exhibited. They some-
times wreath caps or bonnets for the head in the most tasty man-
ner, to protect the face from the rays of the surt ; and though, a*
Captain Pipon observes, they have only had the instructions of
their Otaheitan mothers, ‘ our dress-makers in London would be
delighted with the simplicity, and yet elegant taste of the untaught
females.’ .
Their native modesty, assisted by a proper sense of religion
and morality instilled into their youthful minds by John Adams,
has hitherto preserved these interesting people perfectly chaste,
and free from all kinds of debauchery. Adams assured the visi- ‘
tors, that sided Christian’s death there had not been a single in-
stance of any young woman proving unchaste; nor any attempt
at seduction on the part of the men. They all labour while young
in the cultivation of the ground; and when possessed of a suffici-
ent quantity of cleared land and of stock to maintain a family,
they are allowed to marry , but always with the consent of Adams,
who unites them by a sort of marriage ceremony of his ow n.
The greatest harmony prevailed in this little society ; their only
quarrels, and these rarely happened, being, according ter their own
expression, quarrels of the mouth; thfey are honest in their dealings,
which consist of bartering different articles for mutual accommo-
dation. ■ > -
Their habitations are extremely neat. The little village of
Pitcairn forms a prefty square, the houses at the upper end of
which are occupied by the patriarch John Adams, and his family,
consisting of his old blind wife and three daughters from fifteen,to
eighteen years of age, and a boy of eleven ; a daughter of his wife
by a former husband, and a son-in-law. On the opposite side is
the dwelling of Thursday October Christian; ami in the centre
is a smooth verdant lawn on which the poultry are let loose, fenced
in so as to prevent the intrusion of the domestic quadrupeds. All
that was done was obviously undertaken oh a settled plan, unlike
to any thing to be met with on the other islands. In their houses
too they had a good deal of decent fiirbiture, consisting of beds
laid upon bedsteads, with neat covering; they had also cables, and


large chests to contain their valuables and clothing, which is made
f'Gin the bark of a certain tree, prepared chiefly by the elder Ota-
heitan females. Adams’s house consisted of two' rooms, and the
windows had shutters to pull to at night. The younger part of
tiie sex are, as before stated., employed with their brothers, under
the direction of their common lather Adams, in the culture of the
ground, which produces cocoa nuts, bananas, the bread-fruit tree,
yams, sweet potatoes, and turnips. They have also plenty of hogs
and goats; the woods abound with a species of wild hog, and the
coasts of the island with several kinds of good fish.
Their agricultural implements are made by themselves from the
iron supplied by the Bounty, which with great labour they beat
out into spades, hatchets, crows, &c. This was not all. The
good old man kept a regular journal, in which was entered the
nature and quality of work performed by each family, what each
had received, and what was due on account. There was, it seems,
besides private property, a sort of general stock, out of which
articles were issued on account to the several members of the
community ; and for mutual accommodation exchanges of one kind
of provisions for another were very frequent, as" salt for fresh
provisions, vegetables and fruit for poultry, fish, &c. ; also when
the stores of one family were low, or wholly expended, a fresh
supply was raised from another, or out of the general stock, to be
re-paid when circumstances were more favourable: allot' which
was noted down in John Adams’s journal.
But what was most gratifying of all to the visitors was the
simple and unaffected manner in which they returned thanks to
the Almighty for the many blessings they enjoyed. They never
failed to say grace before and after meals, to pray every morning
at sun-rise, and they frequently repeated the Lord’s Prayer and
the Creed. ‘ It was truly pleasing’ says Captain Pipon ‘to see
these poor people so well disposed to listen so attentively to moral
instruction, to believe in the attributes of God, and to place
their reliance on divine goodness.’
The good old man was anxious to know what was going oa
in the old world, and they had the means of gratifying hiscuriosity
by supplying him with some magazines and modern publications.
His library consisted of the books that belonged to Admiral
Bligh, but the visitors had not time to inspect them.
They enquired particularly after Fletcher Christian. This
ill-fated young man, it seems, was never happy after the rash
and inconsiderate step which he had taken ; he became sullen


jiikl morose, and piactised the very same conduct towards his
companions in guilt, whic h he and they so loudly complained
against in their late commander. Disappointed in his expecta-
tions at Otaheite, and the Friendly Islands, and most probably
dreading a discovery, this deluded youth committed himself and
his remaining confederates to the mere chance of being cast upon
some desert island, and chance threw them on that of Pitcairn.
Finding no anchorage near it, he ran the ship upon the rocks,
cleared her of the live stock and other articles which they had
been supplied with at Otaheite, when he set her on fire, that no
trace of inhabitants might be visible, and all hope of escape cut
off from himself and his wretched followers. He soon however
disgusted both his own countrymen and the Olaheitans, by bis
oppressive and tyrannical conduct; they divided into parties, and
disputes and affrays, and murders were the consequence. His
Otaheitan wife died within a twelvemonth from their landing;
after which he carried off one that belonged to an Otaheitan niaii,’
who watched for an opportunity of taking his revenge, and shot
him dead while digging in his own field. Thus terminated the
existence of this miserable, deluded young man, who was neither
deficient in talent nor energy, nor in connexions, and who migiit
have risen in the service, and become an ornament to his profes-
sion, y
1 his island is about six miles long, by three broad, covered
with wood, and the soil very rich : situated under the parallel
of 25 S. latitude, and in the midst of such a wide expanse of ocean,
the climate must be fine, and admirably adapted for the recep-
tion ol all the vegetable productions of every part of the habi-
table globe.
The visitors supplied the inhabitants with some tools, kettles,
and other articles, such as the high surf would permit them to
land.
understand that the relations of Fletcher Christian, are
highly respectable in the North of England, and are warmly in-
teresting themselves in behalf of their young relatives, so unex-
pectedly discovered as above related. We next introduce
.VAN SLOETTEN’s ACCOUNT
Of tlie Discovery of an English Colony, consistingof ten thousand
souls ;
Certain English merchants, encouraged by the great ad-
vantages, arising from the Eastern commodities, in the year
1509, having obtained Queen Elizabeth’s royal licence, furnished
out tor the East ladies tour ships, of which a person named Eng-


fish was chosen factor, who embarked on the 3d of April, with
his wife and family, consisting of a son of twelve years old, a
daughter of fourteen, two maid servants, a female negro slave,
and George Pine, his book-keeper, on board one of the said
ships, called the East India Merchant, of 450 tons, being pro-
vided with all manner of necessaries and conveniencies, in order
to settle a faptory there.
By the 14th pf May, they were in sight of the Canaries ; and
soon after arrived at the Cape de Verd Islands, where they took
in some provisions for their voyage, and steering their course S.
and a point E. about the Ist of August came to the island of
St. Helen ; and having taken in some fresh water, set forward for
the Cape of Good Hope, where, by God’s blessing, they arrived
safe, having hitherto met with no tempestuous or disagreeable
sailing weather. But it pleased God, when they were almost in
sight of St. Laurence (said to be one pf the largest islands in the
world), that they were overtaken by a great storm of wind, which
separated them from the rest of the ships,' and continued with
such violence for many days, that, being driven out of their
knowledge, they lost all hopes of safety.
The Ist of October, about break of day, the sea continuing
very stormy and tempestuous, they discovered land, which ap-
peared high and rocky; and the nearer they approached to it
their fears increased, expecting the ship would suddenly be
dashed to pieces. The Captain, therefore, Mr. English, and
some others, got into the long boat, in hopes, by that means, to
save themselves ; and presently after all the sailors cast themselves
overboard, endeavouring to save their lives by swimming; but,
probably, they all perished in the sea.—Mr. Pine, Mr. English’s
daughter, the two maid servants, and negro girl, were the only-
persons remaining on board the ship; and these five persons were
miraculously preserved : for after the ship had beat three or four
times against the rocks, being now broken, and quite foundered
in the waters, they had with great difficulty gotten themselves on
the bowsprit, which, being broken off, was driven by the waves
into a small creek, wherein fell a little river, which, being en-
compassed by the rocks, was sheltered from the winds, so that
thev had an opportunity, though nearly exhausted, to land.
Mr. Pine getting together some rotten wood, by the assistance
of a tinder-box he had in his pocket, made a fire, by which they
dried themselves; and then, leaving the femalgs, he went to see
if he could find any of the ship’s company that might possibly
have escaped.


Mr. Pine not being able to find any of the ship’s company ;
and, it drawing towards evening, he, with what he could get from
the wreck, returned to his fellow-sufferers, who were very much
troubled for want of him ; he being now all their support in this
lost condition.
They were afraid that the wild people of the country (if there
were any) might find them out; but could distinguish neither
foot-stepts nor paths. And the woods round about them being
full of briars and brambles, they apprehended too there might be
wild beasts to annoy them, though they saw no marks of any. But
above all, for want of food, they were afraid of being starved to
death : but God had otherwise provided for them.
The wreck of the ship furnished them with many necessaries ;
for, getting together some broken pieces of boards and planks,
sails and rigging, with the help of poles they made themselves
tents; and having gotten wood for firing, and three or four sea*
gowns to cover them, making the negro their centry, they slept
soundly all night, having been without sleep for several nights
before
The next dayj after being well refreshed with sleep, the wind
ceasing, and the weather being warm, they went down from the
rocks on the sands at low water, where they found a great part of
the ship’s lading, either on shore, or floating near it. Mr. Pine,
with the help of his companions, dragged most of it on shore;
and what was too heavy for them they broke ; and, unbinding the
casks and chests, and taking out the goods, they secured all; so
that they wanted neither clothes, nor other necessaries for house-
keeping: but the salt water had spoiled all the victuals except
one cask of biscuit, which, being lighter, and perhaps better se-
cured than the rest, was «ndaraaged; this served them for bread
a while, and a fowl of about the bigness of a swan, very heavv
and fat, which by reason of its weight could not fly, served them
for present subsistence. The poultry of the ship, by some means
getting on shore, bred exceedingly, and were a great help to
them. They found also in the flags, by a little river, plenty of
tggs of fowl much like our ducks, which were very nourishing
food, so that they wanted for nothing to keep them alive.
Mr. Pine, being now less apprehensive of any thing to dis-
turb him, looked out for a .Convenient place to build a hut to
shelter him and his family from the weather; and, in about a
- ' C


■week’s time, made a room large enough to hold them and all their
goods; and put up hammocks lor his family to sleep in.
Having lived in this manner full four mouths, without seeing
or hearing any thing to disturb them, they found the land they
were in possession of to be an island, disjoined, and out of sight
of any other land, uninhabited by any but themselves, and that
there was no hurtful beast to annoy them. ’ But, on the contrary,
the country was very pleasant, being always clothed in green,
and full of agreeable fruits, and variety of birds, ever warm, and
never colder than in England in September: so that this place
{had it the culture that skilful people might bestow on it) would
prove a paradise.
The woods afforded them a sort of nuts as big as large ap-
ples; whose kernel being pleasant and dry, they made use of in-
stead of bread, together with the fowl before-mentioned, and a
*ort of water-fowl like ducks, and their eggs ; and a beast about
the size of a goat, and almost such a like creature, which brought
forth two young ones at a time, and that twice a-year, of which the
lowlands and woods were very full; and being harmless and tame,
they Could easily take and kill them : fish also, especially shell-
fish, were in great plenty : so that, in effect, they* wanted no-
thing of food for subsistence.
After being in possession of this country full six months, nature
put them in mind of the great command of the Almighty to our
first parents, as if they had been conducted thither by the band
of Providence to people a new world ; and in this respect they
proved not unfruitful, for, in less than a twelve-month, from their
first arrivaFon thisislajid, the females proved all to be with child,
and coming at different seasons they were a great help to one
another. The women all had their teemings annually, and the
children proved strong and healthy. Their family increasing,
they were now well satisfied with their condition ? for there was
nothing to hurt them. The warmth of the climate made it agree-
able for them to go abroad sometimes, and they reposed them-
selves, on mossy banks, shaded by trees. Mr. Pine made several
pleasant arbours for him and his women to sleep in during the
beat of the day; and in these they passed their time together,
the females not liking to be out of his company.
Mr. Pine’s family was increased, after he had lived in this
island 16 years, to 47 children : for his first wife brought him
thirteen ; his second, seven ; his master’* daughter, who seemed


to be his greatest favourite, fifteen; and the negro, twelve ; which
was all the produce of the first race of mortals in this island.
Thinking it expedient to provide for another generation, he
gave his eldest sou a mate ; and took care to match the rest as
fast as they grew up and were capable. And, lest they should
incumber one another, he appointed his sous habitations at some
distance from him ; for, growing in years, he did not like the
wanton annoyance of young company.
After having lived to the sixtieth year of his age, and the for-
tieth of his being in possession of this island, he summoned his
whole people together, children, grand-children, and great grand-
children, amounting to 565, of all sorts. He took the males of
one family, and married them to the females of another; not
permitting any to marry their sisters, as they did at first, out of
a necessity.
Having taught some of his children to read, he laid them un-
der an injunction to read the bible once a month at their general
meetings.
Three of his wives being dead, viz. the negro-woman, and the
other two, who had been servant-maids to his master, she who
was his master’s daughter survived them twelve years. They were
buried in a place he had set apart for that purpose, fixing for his
/>wn interment the middle part, so that two of his wives might lie
on one side of him, and two on the other; with his chief favou-
rites, one on each side, next to him.
Arriving to the eightieth year of his age, and sixtieth of com-
ing to this island, he called his people together a second time ;
the number of which amounted to one thousand, seven hundred
and eighty nine ; and having informed them of the manners of
Europe, and charged them to remember the Christian religion,after >
the manner of tlaose who spake the same language, and to admit
of no other, if any should come and find them out; and praying
to Ood to continue the multiplication of them, and send them
the true light of his gospel, he dismissed them.
He called this island the isle of Pines, and gave the people,
descended from him, the name of the English Pines, distinguish-
ing the tribes of the particular descendants by hi§ wives names,
viz. the Englishes, the Sparks’s, the Trevors, and the Phills;
Philippa being the name of the negro.
Being now very old, and his sight decaying, he gave his habi-
tation and furniture that was left, to his eldest son after his de-
cease ; made him king and governor of the rest; and delivered


to him the history of these transactions, written with bis own hand,
commanding him to keep it; and if any strangers should come
hither by any accident, to let them see it, and take a copy of it
also if they pleased, that the name of this people might not be
lost from off the earth.
It happened that, in the year 166?, Cornelius Van Sloetten,
captain of a Dutch ship, called the Amsterdam, was driven by
foul weather to this island ; where he found the posterity of Mr.
Pine, speaking good English, and amounting, as it was supposed,
to ten or twelve thousand persons.
The narrative, from which this account is taken, was given
by Pine’s grand-son to the Dutch captain. Printed in London,
being licensed June 27, 1668.
MAURICE GRIFFITH’s ACCOUNT
Of the Discovery of a Nation of Welshmen, in the Western interior
of America.
Various writers have asserted the existence on the American
Continent of a race of Indians, descended from the ancient Bri-
tons. There are traditions of a number of people ffom Wales
landing on the Continent of America, as far back as the year 1170 J
whose descendants are said still to form a distinct tribe, and to
speak the Welsh language.
Many attempts have been made to ascertain the truth or false-
hood of these assertions. The extent of territory, impenetrable
forests, obstructions of rivers, and the worse opposition trom un-
friendly natives, have hitherto rendered them abortive.*
• In the year 1795, Mr. Evans, a Welshman, went «p Hie nver Missouri,.,
search of this settlement. The Spanish Commandant at ht. Emus arrested him,
and confined him in prison ; where he might still have lingered, had notJo ge
Turner interested himself in his behalf. By his influence, Mr. E v ans obtained
his liberty; he also obtained him a passport to go up the nver, and promised
kirn a reward of 2000 dollars on his return, provided he discovered the 1 acrfic
Ocean.—About the same time, a merchant ot the name of Mackte, went up th
Missouri to trade with the Indians. He was met at a place called Cincinnati,
by a gentleman who furnished him with a Vocabulary in Welsh and Eng .s
The Merchant promised, if possible, to see Evans, and grfe him the book,, w'th
every assistance in his power; but nothing hath been since heard of either of
them


The following account, published by Mr. H. Toulmin, a gen-
tleman of respectability at Frankfort, in Kentucky, is worthy of
consideration in the investigation of this subject. He observes,
that he had it from Mr. John Childs, of Jessamine county.
“ Maurice Griffith, a native of Wales, which country he left
when about sixteen years of age, was taken prisoner by a party of
Shawnese Indians, about forty years ago, near Vosses’ fort, on the
head of Roanoke river, in Virginia county, and carried into the
Shawnese nation. Having staid there about two years and a half,
be found that five young men of the tribe bad a desire of attempt-
ing to discover the sources of the Missouri. He prevailed upon
them to admit him one of the party. They set out with six good
rifles, and six pounds of powder each, of which they were of course
very careful. On reaching the month of the Missouri, they were
struck with the extraordinary appearance ot the muddy waters of
the Mississippi. They staid two or three days amusing themselves
with this novel sight, and then determined on the course which
they should pursue, which happened to be so nearly in that of the
river, that they frequently came within sight of it, as they pro-
ceeded on their journey. After travelling about thirty days
through good farming woodland, they came into the open prairies,
on which nothing grew but long luxuriant grass. T here was a suc-
cession of these, varying in size, some being eight or ten miles
across, but one of them so long that it occupied three days to
travel through it. In passing through the large prairies, they were
much distressed for water and provisions, for they saw neither
beast nor bird ; and though there was an abundance of old springs,
fresh water was very scarce. In one of these prairies, the salt
springs ran into small ponds in which, as the weather was hot,
the water had sunk, and left the edges of the ponds so covered
with salt, that they fully supplied themselves with that article,
and they might easily have collected bushels of it. As they were
travelling through the prairies, they had likewise the good fortune
to kill an animal which was nine or ten feet high, and ot a hulk
proportioned to its height. They had seen two of the same spe-
cies before, and they observed four ot them afterwards. 'I hey
were swift {‘noted, and had neither tusks nor horns. After they
had passed through this prairie, they made it a rule never to enter
on one which they could not see across, till they had supplied
themselves with a sufficiency of venison to last several days.
After having travelled a considerable time through the prairies,
they came to \ery extensive lead mines, where they melted the


ore, and furnished themselves with what lead they wanted. They
afterwards came to two copper mines, one of which was three
miles through, and in several places they met rocks of copper, as
large as houses.
“ When about fifteen days journey from the second copper
mine, they came in sight of white mountains, which, though in
the heat of summer, appeared to them to be covered with snow.
The sight naturally excited considerable astonishment, hut on
their approaching the mountains, they discovered, that instead
of snow they were covered with immense bodies of white sand.
They had, in the mean time, passed through about ten nations
©f Indians, from whom they received very friendly treatment. It
was the practice of the party to exercise the office of spokesman
in rotation ; and when the language of any nation through which
they passed was unknown to them, it was their duty, in which the
others never interfered, to convey their meaning by appropriate
signs.
“ The labour of travelling through the deep sands of the
mountains was excessive, but at length they relieved themselves
of this difficulty by following the course of a shallow river, the
bottom of which being level, they made their way to the top of
the mountains with tolerable convenience.
“ After the mountains, they entered a fine tract of land,
which having travelled through for several days, they accidentally
met with three white men in the Indian dress. Griffith imme-
diately understood their language, as it was pure Welsh, though
they occasionally made use of a few words with which he was
unacquainted; however, as it happened to be the turn of one of
his comrades to act as spokesman, or interpreter, he preserved a
profound silence, and never gave them any intimation that he
understood the language of their new companions.
“ After proceeding with them four or five days journey, they
came to the village of these white men, where they found that
the whole nation were of the same colour, having all the Euro-
pean complexion. The three men took them through the village
for about the space of fifteen miles, when they came to the
council-house, at which an assembly of the king and chief men
of the nation was held. The council lasted three days ; and as the
strangers were not supposed to be acquainted with their language,
they were suffered to be present at their deliberations.* The
' Many Indian rliiofs have displayed talents in oratory, and are men of
eonsiderable natural abilities. Among those examples that might be adduced
to corroborate thi* assertion, vye shall content ourselves with mentioning


great question before the council was, what conduct should be ob-
served towards the strangers. From their fire-arms, their knives.
the Mohawk chief called Teyoninllokerawen, or as he is likewise denominated.
John Norton, fins interesting Indian some years ago visited England,
where numerous traits of an amiable disposition and a vigorous intellect
produced the most pleasing impressions on all who were introduced to him. A
proof of his possessing, in a high degree, the qualities of a good temper and
great mental quickness, occurred at the Upper Rooms, at Bath, where he ap-
peared in the dress of his country. A young Englishman, who had been iu
Amenca, accosted the chief w ith several abrupt questions respecting his place
of abode, situation and tbe like. To these Norton returned answers at once
pertinent and modest. The inquirer, however, expressed himself dissatisfied
with them; and hinted, in almost plain terms, that he believed him to be an
impostor. Still the American preserved bis temper, and endeavoured to con-
.h ® Gentleman that Ins account of himself might be depended upon.
' Well but ’ returned “»e o'«*er. “ * you really are what yon pretend to be •
how will you relish returning to the savages of your own country “ Sir ” re’
plied Norton, with a glance of intelligence, “ I shall not experience so m eat
a change in my society as yon imagine, for I find there are savages in this connfrv
also." Animated with the spirit of genuine patriotism, this generous chieftain
was unweanedly occupied, during the intervals of bis public business, in acm.i
ring every species of useful knowledge, for tbe purpose of transporting it to
his own country, for the benefit of his people; and, what the friends to the
happiness of men will hear with still greater admiration and pleasure he was
also engaged, under the auspices of Mr. Wilberforce and Mr. Thornton in
the laborious employment of translating the gospel of St. John into his native
tongue,
Teyoninllokerawen appeared to be about forty-five years of age; his person
is tall, muscular, and well-proportioned; his countenance fine and intelligent
illuminated with “ an eye like Mars to threaten and command.” His mother
being a Scotch woman, and he himself having spent two years of his life, (front
thirteen to fifteen) in Edinburgh ; he has acquired sufficient knowledge of the
English to read it with ease, and speak it with fluency ; the French language
also is equally familiar to him. Assisted by great natural sagacity, and habits
of deep reflection, he appears to have generalised more than could have been
expected fiom the circumstances of his place of birth, and the state of society
in which be has spent his life, and has not enly worked out, by tbe energies
of his own mind, many schemes for the improvement of his country, and tbe
benefit of ours, but also acquired a very considerable share of moral, political,
and philosophical information. His wife is a female of his own tribe, by whom
he has two children,
A s another proof that the Indians are not deficient in mental ability, we annex
the following instance of genuine witr—Governor Dudley, who was well acquaint-
ed with the disposition and character of the Indians, would often tell this
story, as a mark of their sagacity. He was building a house at his planta-
tion; and while superintending Iris workmen, he took notice of a lusty Indian,
who, though the weather was severely cold, was a naked, as well as an idle


and their tomahawks, it was concluded they were a warlike peo-
ple; it was conceived they were sent to look out a country for
their nation; that if they were suffered to return, they might ex-
pect a body of powerful invaders, but that, if these six men wer£
put to death, nUthing would be known of their country, and they
should still enjoy their possessions in security. It was finally de-
termined that they should be put to death. Griffith then thought
that it was.time for him to speak. He addressed the councilja_
the Welsh language. He informed them that they had not been
sent by any nation—they had no hostile intentions that it was
their wish to trace the Missouri to its source, and that they
should return to their country satisfied with the discoveries they
had made, without any wish to disturb the rhpose of their new
acquaintances,
spectator, i ‘ Hark you, Indian (says the Governor), why don’t you work ai
these men do, and get deaths to cover you ?’ ‘ And why you not work, Gover-
nor?’ replied the Indian. ‘ I work (returned the Governor, clapping his fore-
finger upon his forehead) witinny head, and therefore need not work with my
hands ’ ‘ Well (replied the Indian) and if I would work, what have you for me
to do"? ‘ Go kill me a calf (said the Governor), and I will give you a shilling.’
’Hie fellow did so, and the Governor asked him why be did not skin and dresl
it.’ Calf dead, Governor (said the Indian), give me my shilling, give me another
, and I will skin and dress him.’ This, was complied with, and avi/ay went the
Indian to a public house with his two shillings. He soon drank one shilling’s
ivorth of rum, and then returned to the Governor. ‘ Your shilling bad, tire
mariiio take it.’ > The Governor believed, and gave him another; but retiirn-
the same manner with the second, the Governor discerned that he was a
rogne • but however, lie exchanged that too, reserving his resentment tor anothet
opportunity, which lie thought lie should find , 119 difficulty in procuring.
To accomplish this, the Governor wrote a letter to the keeper of Bridewell at
' Boston, to take the hearer, and give him a sound whipping'. This letter he kept
tri his pocket, and, in a Tew days, the Indian came again to stare at the Workman.
The Governor took no notice of him for some time, but at last pulling the letter
out bf his pocket, ‘ if yon will carry tins, said he, to Boston, I will give you
half a crown ’ The Indian closed with the proposal, and set out npon his journey.
He had not gone tar, before he met another Indian, belonging to the Governor,
10 whom he gave the letter, and told him his master had sent him to meet with
him; and to bid him return with that letter tp Boston, as soon as he could. The.
; poor Indian carried it wltfi great diligence, and received a sound whipping for
his pains, at the news of which’ the Governor was not a little astonished on hi»
return. The oilier Indian came no more ; but at the distance of some months,
at a meeting with spins of bis nation, dhe Governor saw this fellow there amongst
the rest, and asked him how he durst servg him such a trick? The Indian
looking him foil in the face, and clapping his fore,fi n gcr upon Ids own forehead,
• Head-work, Governor, (stud he) head work, head-viork.


When Maurice Griffith had concluded his speech, an instant
astonishment glowed in the countenances not only of the council
but likewise of his Shawnese companions, who then clearly
perceived that he was understood by the people of the country.
Full confidence was at once given to his declaration; the king
advanced and gave him his blind. They abandoned the design
of putting him and his companions to death, and from that mo*
ment treated them with the utmost friendship. Griffith and the
Shawnese continued eight months in the nation, but were deter-
red from prosecuting their researches tip the Missouri, by the
advice of the people of the country, who informed them they
had gone twelvemonth’s journey up the river, but found it
was as large there as it was in their own country. As to the history
of the people, he could learn nothing satisfactory. The only-
account they could give was, that their forefathers had come up
the river from a vety distant country. They had no books, no
records, no writings.
They intermixed with no other people by marriage ; there was
not a dark-skinned tiian in the nation. Their numbers were very
considerable. There was a range of settlements on the river for
fifty miles, and there were, within this space, three large water
courses, which fell into the Missouri, on the banks of each of
which they were likewise settled. He supposed there must be
fifty thousand irien in the nation capable of bearing arms. Their
clothing was skins well dressed. Their houses were made of
upright posts, and the bark of trees; The only implements they
had to cut them with were stone tomahawks. They had some
silver, which had been hammered with stones into coarse orna-
ments, but it did not appear to be pure. They had neither
horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, nor any domestic or tame animals.
They lived by hunting. He said nothing about their religion.
Griffith and his companions had some large tomahawks
with them. With these they cut down trees, and prepared a
Canoe to return home in ; but their tomahawks were so great a
curiosity, and the people of the country were so eager to handle
them, that their canoe was completed with little labour. When this
work was accomplished, they proposed to leave their new friends,
Griffith, however, having promised to visit them again. They
descended the river with considerable speed, but amidst frequent
dangers from the rapidity of the current, particularly when pas-
sing through the WhiV Mountains. When they reached th#
D


Shawnese nation, they had been absent two years and a half.
Griffith supposed that when they travelled, they went at the rate
of about fifteen miles a day. He staid but a few months with
the Indians, before he found an opportunity of escaping, and pro-
ceeding to the head waters of Coal river, which rnns into the New
river, not far above the Falls, he left the Shawnese country,
and easily reached 1 the settlement on the Roanoke. Mr. Childes
knew him before he was taken prisoner, and saw him a few day*
after his return, when be narrated to him the preceding circum-
stances. Griffith was universally regarded as a steady, honest
man, and a man of veracity. Mr. Childes has placed the utmost
confidence in his account of himself and his fellow travellers,
and has no more doubt of the truth of his relation, than if he
had seen the whole himself. Whether Griffith be still alive or
not, he does not know.”
Mr. Tool min investigates this subject with great assiduity.
He says, “ that by recurring-to a passage in history, it appear*
that several years before the discovery of America by Christopher
Columbus, a certain Welsh prince embarked from his native
country, with a large party of emigrants; that after some time
a vessel or two came back, with the account that they had dis-
covered a country far to the westward, and that they set sail again
with a fresh reinforcement, and never returned any more. The
country which these adventurers discovered, it has been supposed,
was the continent of North America, and k has been conjectured,
that they had lauded on this continent somewhere in the Gulph
of Mexico, and from thence proceeded northward, till they got
out of the reach of the hostile natives, and seated themselves in
the upper country of Missouri. Many accounts accordingly have
been published within the last thirty years, of persons, who, in
consequence, either by accident or the ardour of curiosity, have
made themselves acquainted with a nation of men on the Missouri,
possessing the complexion of Europeans, and the language of
Welshmen. Could the fact be well established, it would afford,
perhaps, the most satisfactory solution of the difficulty occasioned
by a view of the various fortifications with which the Ohio country
abounds, of any that has been hitherto offered. These fortifica-
tions were evidently never made by the Indians. The Indian art
of war presents nothing of the kind. The probability too is, that
the persons who constructed them were at that time acquainted
with the use of iron : the situation of those fortifications, which
are tmifonaly in the most fertile land o[ the country, indicate*


that those who made them were an agricultural people, and the
remarkable care and skill with which they were executed, affords
traits of genius of a people, who rehed more on their military skill
than on their numbers. The growth of the trees upon them is
very compatible with the idea, that it is no more than three
hundred years since they were abandoned,”
We ace equally ignorant of many other nations of Indians in
this unexplored part of America. The nation of the Snake, the
Guacsitaries, the Padoucas, the Kaiisez, the Macoutens, and
numerous other tribes, are known only by name.
Ik order to render this article as complete and interesting as
possible, we shall present our readers with a brief account of the
LOSS OF THE GROSVENOR INDIAMAN,
AS ALSO OF THE
Discovery of Two Ladies who survived the Wreck.
In the melancholy catalogue of human woes, few things appear
more eminently disastrous than the general fate of the Grosvenor’s
erew. Shipwreck is always, even in the mildest form, a calamity
which fills the mind with horror ; but what is instant death com-
pared to the situation of those who had hunger, thirst, and naked-
ness to contend with, who only escaped the fury of the waves to
enter into conflicts with the savages of the forest,, or the greater
savages of the human race; who were cut oif from all civilized
society, and felt the prolongation of life to be only the lengthened
pains of death?
The Grosvenor sailed from Trincomale June the 13th, 1782,
on her homeward bound voyage, and met with ho memorable oc-
currence till the fourth of August, the fatal day on which she
went on shore.
Captain Coxson, after the fatal wrpek, called together the
survivors, and having divided the provisions among them, asked
if they consented to his continuing in the command, to which
they unanimously agreed. He then informed them, that from
the best calculations he could make, he was in hopes of being
able to reach some of the Dutch settlements in fifteen or sixteen


days. In this calculation the Captain was probably not much
mistaken. Subsequent observations prove, that the Grosvenor
must have been wrecked between the 2?th and 28th degrees of
South latitude; and as the Dutch Colonies extend beyond the
31 si degree, they might have accomplished the journey within
the time specified, had not fivers intervened and retarded their
progress.
Every thing being arranged, they set out on their journey on
the 7th, leaving behind only an old East India soldier, who being
lame, preferred trusting himself to the natives, till some more
favourable opportunity of getting away should present itself;
adding, that he might as well die with them, as end his life on
the way of pain and danger.
As they moved forward, they were followed by some of the
natives, while others remained at the wreck. The natives plun-
dered them from time to time, and sometimes threw stones at
them.' t
The following day they crossed the river. Here their provi-
sions being nearly expended, and the delay and fatigue occasioned
by travelling with the women and children b&ing very great, Jhe
sailors began to murmur, and each seemed resolved to shift for
himself. Accprdingly the Captain, with Mr. Logie, the first
Mate, and his wife ; the third Mate, Colonel James and his lady,
Mr. and Mrs. Hosea, M r * Newman, a passenger, the Purser, the
Surgeon, and five of the children, agreed to keep together, and
travel as before; many of the sailors were also prevailed upon ta
attend them, by the liberal promises of the passengers.
On the other hand, Mr. Shaw, the second Mate, Mr. Trotter,
the fourth, Mr. Harris, the fifth, Captain Talbot, Messrs. Wil-
liams and Taylor, M. t>’Espinette, several other Gentlemen and
their servants, together with a number of the seamen, jn all forty-
three persons, among whom was Hynes, from whom much infor-
mation was afterwards obtained, resolved to hasten forward..—
A young gentleman of the name of Law, seven or eight years of
age, crying after one of the passengers, they agreed to take him
with them, and to carry him by turns, when tired.—This separa-
tion was equally fatal, cruel, and impolitic; they parted to meet
po more. In adopting this resolution, they appear to have been
influenced by motives which hud, at least, the specious appear-
ance of reason. They conceived, that by pursuing different
routes, and travelling in small parties, they should be less the


object of jealousy to the natives, and could the more easily pro-
cure subsistence.
From this period, the fate of the Captain apd his associates is
almost wholly unknown. But imagination cannot fonp a scene pf
deeper distress than what the delicate and tender sex, and the in-
nocent children, must haye experienced. From the accounts pf
some of the party who survived their distresses, and subsequent
inquiries, it is probable that the hand of death soon released them
from their accumulated ills; though the public mind was long
harassed with the belief that a few had been doomed to worse that*
death aipoqgst the natives—and so it proved.
After many .disputes, another division of the party tpok place.
Mr. Shaw, the fourth Mate, Mr. Harris, the fifth, Messrs. Wil-
liam* and Taylor, Captain Talbot, and seamen, to the number of
twenty-two persons, among whom was Hynes, the reporter, re-
solved to proceed inland. The Carpenter, the ship’s Steward,
M. D’Espinette, and Mr. Olivier, with about twenty-fpur seamen,
continued to follow the shore. , • ' '
During their march through this territory, our travellers were
absolutely starving in the midst pf plenty. They saw abundance
of cattle, but so tenacious were the natives of their property, that
they would not part with any thing gratuitously, and our people
had nothing to give in barter So apprehensive were the Caffres,
lest these poor vagrants might comm|t depredations, that: they
constantly secured their cattle as they approached, and even used
violence to keep them at a distance. So true it is, that in ajl
countries poverty is considered rather as a crime than a misfor-
tune, and that fie ,who has nothing to bestow, is immediately sus-
pected of an intention to take away.
The Caffre# have been characterised as a humane and inoffen-
sive people; but how are we to reconcile this description with the
conduct they displayed to pur countrymen ? May not the idea,
that they were Dutchmen, solve the difficulty £ Between the
Caffres and the Dutch Colonists, an inveterate enmity subsisted
at that period. The Caffres hud been treated with unparalleled
cruelty and ppprpssion by the white people with Whom they were
conversant, and all white people were, therefore,.probably re-
garded as enemies. Among all uncivilized nations, wherever any
intercourse has been established with Europeans, the character of
t.he latter, in general, has been determined from the; conduct of


a worthless few. Thus, as on other important occasions, many
suffer for the vices of individuals.
Owr travellers, every where repelled, or regarded with appre-
hension, at length entered a sandy desert, where it was with the
utmost ftofficnlty they could procure any sustenance.—Having
passed the desert, they arrived at a large river, which, as they
afterwards learned from the Dutch, is called the Bosjeman’#
river. Here they found Thomas Lewis, one of the party who had
gone before them, and who having been taken ill, was abandoned
to his fate.—He informed them that he had travelled inland, and
seen many huts, at one of which he obtained a little milk, and at
another was beaten away.—He added, that having reached the
place where he now was, he found himself too weak to cross the
stream, and was therefore determined to return to the nearest
kraal, indifferent as to his reception or his life. In vain his com-
panions strove to overcome this determination : they flattered him
with the hope of being yet able to reach the Cape, but their en-
couragement was ineffectual. Both his body and mind were
broken down ; he had drained the cup of affliction to the dregs;
despair had laid her iron hand upon him, and sealed him for her
own. In spite of all their intreaties, he went back to the natives,
and once more had the good fortune to receive assistance, when
be could least of all expect it, and in such a shape as proved ef-
fectual to his preservation.
They had not proceeded far, before one of the party asked for
a shell of water, which being given him, he solicited a second, and
as soon as he had drunk it, laydown and instantly expired.—To
such a state t»f wretchedness were they now reduced, that death
was stripped of all its terrors.
Next morning two more of the party were reduced to a very
languid state ; one of them, unable to proceed a step farther, lay
down ; and his companions, incapable of affording him any assist-
ance. took an-affectionate farewell, and left him to expire.
Towards evening they reached a deep gulley, which they en-
tered, in the hope of meeting with fresh water. —Here they found
another of the Grosvenor’s crew lying dead, with his right hand
cutoff at the wrht. A circamstance so singular could not fail t«
attract the notice of his companions, especially as they recollected
that it had been the comrpon asseveration of the deceased :— May
the cut my right arm off if it be rvi true /It had a aeiv


»ible effect upon his,comrades for a time, believing that Provi-
dence h id interfered, by a miracle, to shew its indignation against
feis profanehess.
Their misery, from thirst, now became so intolerable, that
Wormington earnestly importuned his companions to determine,
by lot, which of them should die, in order that the others might
be preserved by drinking his blood. Hynes, though almost
childish, was shocked at the proposal; his tears flowed abundantly,
and be declared, that as long as he was able to walk, he could
■ot think of casting lots; but that, if he should be obliged to
drop, they might then use him as they pleased. Upon this, Wor-
Hlington, shaking hands with Hynes and Evans, goffered them to
proceed without him,—This day they fell in with four of the
Steward’s party, from which they had been separated. From
these they obtained a supply of water, and two of them went back
in search of Wormington, who was recovered by their humanity.
The united party, consisting of six persons,, pursued their
route over a desert country, where neither hut nor native was to
be seen ; and in six days reached the Schwartz river, on the banks
•f which they took up their abode for the night.
The country at length began to assume a fertile and cultivated
appearance, and some huts appeared at a distance from the shore.
While contemplating with pleasure this change of prospect, the
grass rear them took fire, and spread with great rapidity ; they
all used every effort to extinguish it, for fear this involuntary mis-
chief should provoke the resentment of the natives, or the blaze
oall them to the spot.
Next morning they swam over the river in safety, and dis-
covered another dead whale lying on the sea shore. Here, as
Price was collecting fuel, he perceived, at a little distance, two
men with guns; and being intimidated at the sight, he returned
hastily to the fire, whither the welcome intruders pursued him.—
These men belonged to a Dutch settlement in the neighbourhood,
and were in search of some strayed cattle. One of them, named
John Battores, supposed to be a Portuguese, was able to converse
with De Lasso, so as to be understood—a circumstance as fortu-
nate as it was little to he expected. Battores having learned the
outline of their melancholy story, accompanied them to the whale,
where their companions were employed in cutting away the flesh.
Affected at the sight of these miserable objects, he desired them
to throw away what they had been collecting, promising them
better fare when they reached the habitation to which he belonged.


In vain shall we attempt to describe the sensations of the ship-
wrecked wanderers, on receiving this intelligence, and that they
were within four hundred miles of the Cape. The joy that in-
stantly filled every bosom produced effects as various as extraordi-
nary ; one man laughed, another wept, and a third danced with
transport.—One hundred and seventeen days had revolved their
melancholy hours since they were shipwrecked a period of suffer-
ing almost unparalleled, and during which they had often been
miraculously preserved.
Battores conducted them to the house of his master, by whom
they were kindly entertained for several days* and aftei wards for-
warded in carts to the Cape.
Though the flames of war were raging between the fwo nations,
the Dutch Government at the Cape being informed of the parti-
culars of the loss of the Grosvenor, with a humanity that dues them
infinite honour, dispatched a large party in quest of the unhappy
Wanderers. This detachment consisted of one hundred Europeans
and two hundred Hottentots, attended by a great number of
waggons, each drawn by eight bullocks. The command was given
to Captain Muller,- with orders to proceed, if possible, to the
wreck, and load with such articles as might be saved, and to en-
deavour to discover such of the sufferers as were still wandering
about the country, or in the hands of the natives.—ln their pro-
gress they found Thomas Lewis, who had been abandoned by his
companions, Wm. Hatterley, and another. Hatterley was ser-
vant to the second Mate, and had continued with that party till
he alone survived. Thus the fate of one division was ascertained;
On the road they likewise met with seven lascars and two black
women, #ne of whom was servant to ]\lrs. Logie, and the other ti
Mrs. Hosea. From these women they learned, that soon after
Hynes” party had left the Captain and the ladies, they also took
separate routes; the latter intended to join the lascars, but what
became of them after this separation was unknown. They, indeed,
saw the Captain’s coat on one of the natives, but whether he died
or was killed, could never be ascertained.
The interest which all nations took rn the fate of the unhappy
persons, particularly the women, some of whom it was reported
had been seen, induced a second party of Dutch Colonists, with
the sanction of Government, to make another effort to explore the
roautrv, and to reach the wreck.


After proceeding an immense way, on the 3d of November
they arrived among the Hambonaas, a nation quite different from
the Caffres, They have a yellow complexion, and their Jong
coarse hair is frizzled up in the form of a turban. Some of these
people informed our adventurers, that, subject to them, there
was a village of bastard Christians, descended from people ship-
wrecked on the coast, of whom three old women were still alive
and married to a Hambonaa Chief, This intelligence roused their
curiosity, and they were fortunate enough to obtain an interview
with the old women in question, who said they were sisters; but
having been shipwrecked when children, they could not say to
what nation they originally belonged. The Dutch adventurers
offered to take them and their children back, on their return, at
• which they seemed much pleased.
It appears probable, that the reports which had been spread,
in regard to some European women being among the natives, ori-
ginated from this circumstance, and as the existence of any other
white people in this quarter was neither known nor suspected, it
was naturally concluded that they must have belonged to the
Grosvenor.
Several of the party proceeded on horseback to the wreck, but
found nothing.worth notice remaining. It was plainly perceived
that (fires had beep made in the vicinity ; and on a rising ground,
between two woods, was a pit, where things had been buried and
dug out again. -
These intrepid adventurers, who were now 447 leagues distant
from the Cape, and 2-26 bfeybiid any Christian habitation, finding
that nothing farther was to'be discovered relative to the wreck, or
the fate of the persons who had reached the shore, determined to
return—On their way back they called at the bastard Christian
village, and would have taken under their protection the three
old women, who seemed desirous of living among Christians ; but
they wished first to gather in their crops; adding, when that
business was accomplished, their whole race, to the number of
four hundred, would be happy to depart from their present set-
tlement. Every indulgence was promised them, in case they
should be disposed to emigrate to the Cape. On seeing people of
the same complexion as themselves, they appeared to be exceed-
ingly agitated.
E


We cannot conclude this mournful narrative better, than with
the sensible reflections of Capt. Hiou,
.. Had the party (.ays he) that set out in search of these ship-
vrrecked people, in 1783, prosecuted their journey with the same
loree of teal and resolution that Van Reenen s party manifested.
it Ts possible they might have discovered and relieved some wio
have since perished. Yet, as they could not have arrived at the
place of the ivreek in less than six months after the disaster hap-
pened, .here is no great probability for supposing hat, after
fuch a length of time had elapsed, any great number of the unfor-
tunate sufferers could be remaining alive."
/„ the Appendix to the Rev. John Campbell's Travels in South
1 Africa, ice hare an account of two Ladies who survived the
Wreck of the Grosvenor, being notv living in CaJ/raua.
u may be recollected (says Mr. CO that, about 30 years ago, the
Grosvenor Indiam.n .as. recked off the coast of Caffraria (ads.
5L dlvlde d from the country of the Holtentots by the Great Fish
ttl.erl and that nearly the .hole of the passengers and crew
\'a It was however, discovered that two young Ladies
perished. ’ j f this dreadful event, and were resident
- ,ad ,r r r„uri r o a Tomi.ry uninhabited by Europeans. Mr.
10 ,U A nut relate this occurrence from personal ev.dence,
br.he flmis* not at all doubted. The Landrost of Grant Hegel
c , 1 n denoted by the British Government to pay a v.s.t to
Jht Kin" of Caffraria, for the purpose of ascertaining .he,her
, Ire anv survivors from the wreck of the Grosvenor. Find,
"’ there were two females, he succeeded in procuring an in.ro-
ing the. .ere I (h(m habi ,ed like Caftre .omen ; their
duction to th . of the native inhabitants,
anl tear ance .ere altogether oppose to
atl d their roan The Lan drost, however, sought to ob-
that of lhe,r J' b a libera i offer of his best services to re-
tain their con J and frien ds. But they were unmoved
store them to th Y that they had fallen into the
by his «d.c.tatmn. 1 hoy ■*. )iaJ been „ sho(e ftom the
1,3 k that'.heir companions had been murdered, and that they
ha'dUn compelled to ,3
tr:"dedby .heir actual enjoyments. Open being


repeatedly urged to depart, they replied, that probably on their
return to England they might find themselves without connec-
tions or relatives, and that their acquired habits ill fitted them to
mingle with polished society. In short, they would not quit
Caffraria !*'
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.
From a review of the preceding narratives, the opinion we at
first supported—that the world was originally peopled from one
pair only, and that the Ark of Noah would give to his descendants
the general idea of a ship; that in the early ages of the world, its
hardy and adventurous inhabitants, ignorant of the use of the
compass, and without skill in navigation, would necessarily be-
come the sport of waves and storms, and consequently be often
shipwrecked, &c. appears to receive not only considerable
Strength, but, as far as the nature of the argument will admit,
po>itive confirmation. Yet other ideas and reflections crowd upon
ns. The manner in which the venerable John Adams superintends
and governs his growing family, reminds us of the good old Patri-
archal days, and we feel anxious to have them incorporated into the
family of George the Third ; but at the same time we have a fear,
that an acquaintance even with any civilized nation, would rob
them of their innocency and happiness.—The little colony on
Pitcairn’s Island may be as happy as any other people on
the face of the globe ; a very few additions to their present com-
forts would, in all probability, render them the most happy—
such as various implements of husbandry and kitchen utensils;
an active Carpenter, a Smith, and a Missionary (with a store of
Bibles and useful books), to instruct them more particularly in
the grand truths of the Christiaq religion, and to establish a
School for the education of their children. With these additions,
the whole of human blessings would be placed within llieir reach :
“ Man wants but little here below,
‘f Nor wants that little long.”
No situation in the world can be more happy' than that of the
individual, whose wants being those of nature only, lias at the
same time all the lawful means of their gratification. The more
men possess, the greater will ever be their cares; the greater
their abundance, the more complicated and the more certain be-


comes their anxiety. The riches of the universe, when put in
competition with the enjoyment of pure innocence and true con-
tentment, must ever sink in the comparison, and appear too in*
significant to engross the attention of a rational creature.—ln Eng-
land, alas! the exertions which are necessary to enable the
great mass of the population, to obtain even food to support
their existence, renders life rather an evil than a blessing : the
burden of taxation under which the nation groans, must, while
that evil continues, be more than a counterbalance to all the other
blessings enjoyed by the poor inhabitants of one of the finest coun-
tries in the world. In the British Colonies, under the same Sove-
reign, and under the direction of the same enlightened Govern-
ment, where taxes are low, a man may live by honest industry.—ln
Canada, for instance, a numerous family is the greatest source of
wealth, and the consummation of blessing; there is to be found
A TOTAL ABSENCE OF THE FEAR OF WANT, AND ALL THOSE
ANXIOUS CARES RESPECTING THE FUTURE WELFARE OF A FA-
MILY.
Mr. Lambert author of Travels in Canada, who is far from
being a partial writer, speaking of the Canadians of f rench ex-
traction, says, “ The manners of the Habitans are easy and
polite. Their behaviour to strangers is never influenced by the
cut of a coat, or a fine periwig; it is civil and respectful to all,
without distinction of persons. They treat their superiors with
that polite deference which neither debases the one nor exalts the
other. They are never rude to their inferiors because they are
poor, for if they do not relieve poverty they will not insult it.*
• Ono would naturally suppose, that all these good qualities would render
these honest people objects of the greatest respect: so they are amongst the
prudent and judicious, and we lament that so mueh good nature is too often the
sport of designing knavery. Amongst the various impositions which Mr. Lam-
bert states to be practised upon the unsuspecting Habifans, we select the fol-
lowing, as having something of wit in it as well as roguery:—
A soldier who had dressed himself as an officer’s footman, went to a coun-
tryman, and asked what he had got in his bag? The man answered, “A pig;’*
upon which the soldier said he could not tell whether it would suit his master,
hut would take the pig for him to look at, and leave a dollar till he came back.
He accordingly took the pig into the barracks, and returned to the man about
five minutes after, saying that he was sorry the pig did not suit his master, ami
received his dollar back again. The unsuspecting countryman placed his bag
again in the cart amongst his other articles: presently an old gentleman, a mem-
ber of the house of assembly, came up, and began to overhaul the provisions in
the rart. “ What have you in the hag there?” said the old gentleman. “A pig,
c; - mu i Mine look at it.” The Habitant laid hold of the bag, and


Tney live on good term, with each other; parents and children
to the third generation frequently residing in the same bouse—
Tne farm is divided ns long a, there is an acre to divide; and
their desire ot living together is a proof that they live happy,
otherwise they would be anxious to part.
They are universally modest in their behaviour; the women
rom natural causes, the men from custom. The latter never
bathe in the river without their trowsers, or a handkerchief tied
round their middle*
They marry young, and are seldom without a numerous family.
Hence their passions are kept within proper bounds, and seldom
become liable to those excesses which 100 often stigmatize and
degrade the human character.
Few peasantry in the world are blest with such a happy me-
locnty of property, and such-a mild form of government as they
universally enjoy. They possess every necessary of life in abun-
uice. and, when inclined, may enjoy many of its luxuries. They
h ive no taxes to pay, but such as their religion demands. The
revenues of the province are raised, in an indirect manner, upon
ai tlcles which are rather pernicious than beneficial to them ;
an(i therefore it is their own fault if they feel the weight of the
impost. Ihey are content and happy among themselves, and
protected by a well regulated government. The laws are severe,
out tempered in their administration with so much lenity and
I,K u g em -e *or human failings, that it has occasioned a singular
proverbial saying among the people, that “ it requires great
interest Jar a man to be hung in Canada;" so few in that country
ever meet with such au ignominious fate.
They have now enjoyed an almost uninterrupted peace for half
a century, for they were so little disturbed in the American war,
tuat that event can hardly be considered as au interruption.—
1 Ins has increased the population, agriculture, commerce, and
prosperity ofthe country ; and while it has raised the people to all
the.corn forts of moderate possessions, of freedom and iudepeh-
‘ enc.e, it has strengthened their attachment to the Government
and Constitution under which they have thus prospered.
•he old gentleman opened tjie month'of it to.examine, the pig, when a large t;nn
cut instantly <pru»£ up in his face and made off with aii speed tor ilto barracks,
leaving the member of lie* bon-re of assembly and die Habitant in the utmost
consternation. The soldier had no doubt been t ivillztil and educated in
Europe,


“ The Canadian Habitans (continues Mr. Lambert), have
almost every resource within their own families. 1 hey cul-
tivate tlax, which they manufacture into linen; and their sheep
supply them with the wool of which their garments are formed.
They likewise tan and dress the hides of their cattle, and make
them into moccasins and boots. From woollen yarn they knit
their own stockings and bonnets rouges; and from straw they make
their summer hats and bonnets. Besides articles of wearing ap-
parel, they make their own bread, butter, and cheese; their soap,
candles, and sugar ; all which are supplied from the productions
of their farm. They build their own houses, barns, stables, and
ovens ; make their own carts, wheels, ploughs, harrows, and
canoes.”
Blest with so much real independency, the Habitan may say,—
“ Oh poorly rich, and meanly great,
Who crowd preferment’s slippery gate ;
To honour lost, with low-bom soul,
Who beg the virtue barter’d doll;
I envy not your splendid lot,
But smile content within my Cot.”
In Canada, all religions have equal privileges : there is no
party rancour ; none of those jealousies which disturb and harass
the *polished nations of Europe, exist m that settlement.-
Teachers of all denominations are found in abundance ; schools
ere encouraged and promoted ; and Sunday Schools have very
recently been established. The writer of these remarks has the
honour to correspond with one of the most enlightened merchants
in those provinces, and who is a member of the senate; from him
he has received the communication of many important particu-
lars w ith the promise of farther information : consequently he
will’he enabled to lay before the public, on some future occassion
«u accurate account of the Canadas, which, from their increasing
importance and value to Great Britain, must be peculiarly inter-
esting to every class of our readers.
dfs
C. Hulbert, Fruiter, Shrewsbury.




