

DR. C. S. MEAD, B.A
ADELAIDE:
A. Hyde, Bible Hall and Tract Depot, Flinders Street.
MELBOURNE:
Religious Tract Society, 272, Little Collins Street.
PRICE—ONE PENNY, or 8/- per 100, net.




INTEREST IN MISSIONS
For the last two months I have been visiting our Northern
churches seeking to deepen their interest in missions, and when one
goes to a church bent on such a mission one naturally asks oneself,
“ What is this interest in missions ? ” “ What am I aiming at ? ”
“ How shall I try to deepen it ? ” “ How gauge it ? ” Such questions
as these constantly occupy one’s mind; and, since it is a question that
lies at the very foundation of our work, it may not be out of place
to think over this matter of “ Interest in Missions.”
A VAGUE WORD.
“Interest” is a vague word, and “interest in missions,” with
a sadly large number of professing Christians, is a sadly vague thing.
Interest, as we know it in every day life , varies from the languid
turning of the eyes to look at a passing stranger, to the intense
absorption and self-sacrificing energy of a great general in a stern
campaign, and, as we know it in relation to missions, it varies from
an occasional indifferent glancing at a missionary periodicial, to the
intense absorption and self-sacrificing energy which led a Zenana
missionary, after summing up all the difficulties and disappointments
of a missionary’s life, to say, “ There is not money enough in all this
world to hire me to do house to house visiting in the villages of
India. And yet the love of God constraineth me, and makes
fascinating what would otherwise be utterly repellant, and intolerably
disagreeable.”
I don’t much like that word “ Interest.” It has a sort of outside
flavour about it, and people speak of an “ interest” in missions, moi’e
in the way they speak of patronising an exhibition, than of bestowing
care and loving gifts on a beloved mother. Is not the latter the truer
conception ? Affection, because of close indissoluble ties, rather than
interest catered for by something seeking our patronage.
Interest in missions is a holy essence distilled out of the very
heart of Christ. It is the overflowing of His heart into ourg. Hence
it is that no man in living, close, sympathetic union with his Lord can
be devoid of interest in mission work any more than the carbons in
an arc light can fail to glow as the electric current pours into them
from the dynamo.
PAUL, OR A PITILESS PRIEST.
Let every member of our churches know that in this matter he
must be either a Paul or a pitiless priest. Paul stood in the streets
of Athens with heathenism in all its folly and its futility, its fine
philosophy and its filth facing him, and “ when he saw,” his spirit
was “ stirred,” or, as the Greek has it, was paroxysmed, a very frenzy
of holy indignation seized upon him.


Paul stands there the type of a man ivith an interest in missions ,
his eye filled with a new light, his lips trembling with emotion, and
his heart surging in its vehemence with indignation and with love.
“ And by chance there came down a certain priest that way, and
when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a
Levite when he was at the place, came and looked at him, and passed
by on the other side." — (Luke 10, 31)
Here is the type of a man with no interest in missions. And let
that man know assuredly that
God saw him pass by.
One’s heart rises up in pity and shame that there should be a single
man in the hosts of Israel who never contributes a penny or a prayer
or an interested thought to the world’s evangelization, and yet “ the
evangelization of the world is the ruling passion of
the heart of Christ.” Thank God the time has come when the
state of the whole church before Carey’s time has come to be the state
of the few exceptions. That state was, for the church, wrong, alien to
the love of God, and subversive of His purposes. The church was
torpid, asleep and self-centred, and it ought to be so recognised in the
individual to-day.
A member of the church openly professing to have “ no interest”
is surely one of the sick ones, and he ° gb* t ’ 1 ' 1 that he is not
sound in the faith. I doubt if it is not more important for that man’s
soul health that he be sound in the faith in the direction of missionary
zeal, than in the direction of a sound theory of the atonement, or of
the inspiration of the Bible.
[ J9UB ; CONVERSION’ TO MISSIONS.
! These defective, crippled and crippling men are known to each
pastor. They are sometimes left alone in their wayward and uncon-
verted state. Should not earnest efforts be made to lead them out
into a larger life? They are men with a thin enfeebled faith
which never saio the vision of the world; they are often men who grasp
the world idea in almost every aspect of it but the religious; commerce,
empire, thought, all are looked on in universal relations, yet, curiously
enough, when they come to the world of religion, a sudden paralysis
of vision seizes them. Their conversion to a true relation to this work
should be deliberately set about, and, if there be only some faint desire
after Christ likeness, that is sufficient to warrant the expectancy of
success; and success achieved, and their hearts kindled to an enthu-
siasm for the expansion of the empire of the King, will mean for
them a veritable “ second blessing,” a “ higher life ” of broader outlook,
of greater spiritual vigour, and of a new and heavenly freshness.
I have seen books and heard addresses telling “ How to deal with
the unconverted,” but I have never seen a book dealing with the
conversion of the unregenerate missionwards. Is the reason this, that
the need has not been felt, and that no demand has meant no supply ?
(ECUMENICAL CONFERENCE.
The interest of London has been recently awakened in the great
Endeavour Convention recently held there, a great gathering full of
meaning, and fraught with great issues. Similarly, the interest of New


York has been recently awakened in a unique and impressive (Ecu-
menical Missionary Conference, a great gathering full of still greater
meaning, and fraught with still greater issues.
At this great conference no less than a hundred and fifteen
Missionary Societies were represented by two thousand delegates,
and vast multitudes for ten days thronged the places of assembly.
The audiences are estimated to have reached a grand aggregate of
170,000. “ Could William Carey have sat on that platform,” says Dr.
Pierson, “ and glanced over those enthusiastic and intelligent crowds,
he would have seen the strange folly of the conservatism -that a
century ago bade the young man “sit down” and leave God to convert
the heathen.” And could Sydney Smith have been there, he would
have seen how vain it was to attempt to “ rout out a nest of
■consecrated cobblers ” when God’s Spirit brooded over the nest.
The President of the United States attended in person
to give a brave warm-hearted address of Christian welcome, and Mr.
Harrison, the ex-President, declared that “ the great commercial
metropolis of New York had halted in its march of greed to consider
the meaning of this convention, so universal in scope, so oecumenical in
interest.”
“ Hard headed New Yorkers,” we are told, “ were forced to recognize
that there are hard heads as well as soft hearts engaged in the cause of
missions; and, before the programme was through, the Nac York
Journal and its kind began to acknowledge that changing the world's
religion seemed a practicable thing, and that the missionaries were
going the right way to do it.”
“ The Conference was convened to review the inspiring history of
this missionary century, to demonstrate before the world the range
and vigour of the missionary enterprise, and to draw the detached
agencies into closer harmony for an enthusiastic and well planned
advance to final triumph. While the outside public undoubtedly
gained from it a deep impression of the extent, sobriety, and force of the
missionary enterprise, the churches may well have realised as never
before their solemn obligation and priceless privilege, the amazing
work done, the appalling work still to be done.”
What a glorious contrast such a spectacle presents “with that
feeble few, who, a century ago, began to kindle the fires of missionary
zeal on the altars of an apathetic and even antagonistic church.”
Where it is needed, and in some places it does seem to be needed,
one of the most striking deductions from this great conference must
be driven home to the understanding of laggard Christians who occupy
as individuals to day the place that the whole Church occupied
in Carey’s days, the lesson that
the era for apologising for foreign missions is over,
The cause needs no longer any justification for the rank it
■claims as a leading department in the organization of the Kingdom
of God on earth. Instead of our making apologies for missions..,
it is those hanging back in cold apathy who must justify their
apathy, for the work of missions has won the unhesitating con-
fidence and co-operation of the intelligent and genuine disciple.
The heart of the Church now answers and leaps back in recip-


rocal desire to the heart of Christ in His pity for the heathen world
and his desire to save it. And the grand motive of missions to-day
is loyalty and devotion to Christ, zeal to make Him known, and a
consuming desire to accomplish His desires, and establish Hi&
kingdom.
The comments of the secular press about the meetings are deeply
significant. Thus the intensely secular journal, the New York
Tribune says :—“ Statesmen were there who have gained eminence in
politics ; thinkers who have written books that are widely read;
theologians who differ radically amongst themselves in matters of
creed ; missionaries who have carried the Bible in one hand and their
lives in the other into unexplored lands. That these widely divergent
types should rally from all over the world to the support of such a cause
shows that missionary work is supported by brains as well as fervour.”
Further, it adds: —“ This conference will engage the attention of the
entire Christian world. It must refute and
put to silence for ever
the habitual scoffers at mission work. They must admit, if they are
honest, that the great ethical impulse now discernible in races that
were once sunk in contented degradation, is largely due to the labors
and teachings of devoted missionaries for the last hundred years.”
An American article in the last Southern fiaptist referring to the
(Ecumenical conference very truly says “ There has never been a
time of deeper conviction in the church of the needs of the heathen
world, and that the gospel of redemption is the only t:uth to meet
that need. There has never been a time of profounder enthusiasm
in missions, than in these recent years. There has never been a
more resolute purpose on the part of the more thoughtful and devout
(mark the words), men and women of the church, to carry the gospel
into all the world.
“ Enthusiasm for missions is not as effervescent, nor as romantic,
nor as ignorant as in the olden days. Now, missionary enthusiasm
is deep, practical, sagacious, and determined.”
The Church of to-day is saying, with a new enthusiasm, and a new
accent of conviction (and we praise God that it is so). —
Thou, oh Christ, art all WE want-And we have GOT Thee.
Thou, oh Christ, art all THEY want—And we will GIVE Thee.
Now how is interest in this sublime work to be created ? I answer
in a word: —Face the people with the facte of the field, then face them
with Christ, and there, in His presence, demand their enthusiastic
sympathy and support.
The demand often made by cold hearted Christians, that we
interest them is to be resisted. No man has a right to justify him-
self in lying fallow until someone comes along and sows him with a
crop of missionary interest. Yet that is a very common thing. The
onus must be thrown upon him. He has no right to demand that
you interest him. The demand must come from your side, the
demand to
“Fall in, and follow the King.”


Christians must be faced with the fact that missions means must,
not may. The cause of missions has been lifted from the optional to a
place among the compulsory subjects in the curriculum of Christian
service.
THE FACTS.
What then are the facts with which the priest and the Levite
are to be faced in order to call out an interest in this work ?
1. The Facts of the Field.
2. The Fact of their own spiritual relationship to Jesus Christ,
and all that that involves.
Missionary facts well known, and praying and giving well used, will
assuredly create a glow, if there is any lire there at all, as the Holy
Spirit breathes upon it, in answer to prayer, and pains.
Turn we then to the Field.
What do we see ?
We see the field occupied by the hosts of hoary Hinduism and
militant Mahommedanism.
To take first
THE GREAT STAGGERING FACT of HINDUIS/tf.
What have we here with which to face the Christian Church as
it looks upon the field ?
(1.) We do not find, alas, India so ashamed of her Hinduism and
ready to part with it as some imagine. Listen to these proud words
from Hindu lips recently sent forth to the world.—“ India is a noble
country. Its philosophy is most transcendental, and its religion is of a
highly spiritual nature. The many sided devotion and deep spiritual
life of her people are simply wonderful. The more one studies them,
the more he is struck with their loftiness and grandeur.”
“ English education,” says another writer, “ has opened the
eyes of our educated countrymen, and, with the diffusion of Western
education, there has sprung up a visible reaction in favour of Hindu-
ism, which has almost annihilated the chances of the evangelization of
India. Hindu philosophy still retains its position of unapproached
superiority, and is being more and more appreciated by the master
minds of the West.”
And yet one more : —“ The people of India,” says this writer,
“ possess a religious system of their own which satisfies their spiritual
cravings, and commands their spontaneous allegiance. While the
educated natives of India yield to none in their admiration for the
character, and reverence for-the teachings of the Nazarene, they fail
to see,
{Brethren, it is ours to make them see, for “ the god of this
world hath blinded the eyes of them that believe no!.”]
they fail to see why they should abandon the faith in which
they were born.”
“ The precepts and moral principles which are inculcated by
Christianity are certainly not its exclusive property. Why then
should the educated Hindu discard what he has for something which
he can only regard as, at best, a bad substitute ?! ”


There speaks the pride of that part of educated India, which,
blindly proud in its intellectualism, with starved soul, esteems the
preaching of the Cross “ foolishness.” “ Their eyes have they closed.''
(2.) But, kept out of sight, is a very different aspect to all this
proud boasting.
If the shastras contain “discourses which may challenge
comparison with the Sermon on the Mount,” they contain also plenty
of tests like the^following
“ A low caste man the Brahmin may compel to practise servitude,
for he was created by the Self-Existent merely for the service of the
Brahmin.”
“ If a low caste man endeavours to sit down by the side of a high-
born man, he should be banished after being branded. One may not
teach him the law or enjoin upon him religious observances. He
who does, shall, together with him be teaches, sink into the darkness
of hell.”
An English Law.
Listen to an extract from the Indian Statute book, as enacted by
the Queen Empress : —•
“ Section 292—Whosoever sells or distributes, imports, or prints
for sale or hire, or wilfully exhibits to public view any obscene book,
pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation or figure, or
attempts or offers so to do, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three months.”
“ NOTE (and let heaven and hell note this lurid ‘ note ’). This section
docs not extend to any representation , sculptured , engraved, painted ,
or otherwise represented on or in any temple, or on any car used far
the conveyance of idols, or hept or used for any religious purpose."
As a missionary speaking at the last May meetings of the
English Baptist Union put it, this would mean, if applied to England,
“ No indecent sculpture or painting shall be exhibited in any public
building in England except in St. Paul’s Cathedral, the Metropolitan
Tabernacle, and the City Temple, and no lewd song shall be sung
except at the May meetings of the Missionary Societies, and when
Christian people gather round the table of the Lord.”
Is that blasphemy?
Be it so. But it is the boasted Hindu religion.
Need I say more ? or shall I dare to tell you what happened to
a young man named Krishna, who was baptised at Pubna a few years
back, and who is now training for the ministry in Serampore College ?
He found Christ, was baptised, and then fell into the hands of
his friends ; and the youth’s own father dragged him round to places
of infamy in the hope that, thus defiled, the Christians would not
receive him back, with moral health shattered, and character blasted,
into their hated community. Such is the religion that some tell us is
“ good enough ” for these millions. This vile, degrading, popular
Hinduism is the religion of the great bulk of the people; sad,
disadvantaged millions ; a distressful community naturalised through
countless centuries to hopeless servitude, contempt, and degradation.
And yet,
“They polish at the touch of Jesus.’’


And what shall we say of the priests ? As it was when Chris-
ianity faced heathenism in the Roman Empire, so is it as Christianity
faces heathenism in India. In Rome “ the priests had become lewd
and false, and had converted its religion into a huge imposture.
Thoughtful men had flung it off, while the crowd retained it, but
emptied it of all morality.” When Dr. Fairbain was recently visiting
India, an educated Hindu said of some temple priests, “I would not
touch them with the tiptvof my fingers.”
(3.) Then face the church with the wonderful spectacle of this
great country’s thoughtful men beginning to think Christian thoughts,
even while calling them, often, by Hindu names. Tell them how that
the contact of the East and West has produced mental activity,
stimulated thought, and set before the East a new set of problems to
be considered. How that the powers of the Hindu mind are being
exercised upon new and strange material, and that in spite of much
vague, crude, ill digested, erratic thought and speech, the general
trend is in the right direction.
Is there a single member of our churches whose spiritual
imagination will not kindle when faced with the wonderful sight
of a thoughtful nation commencing to think ChriStwards ?
Keep before the people this great and important section, a rapidly
growing body of bright thoughtful men for whose conversion to the
faith of Jesus Christ, most systematic, persistent, and enthusiastic
effort is demanded.
We are wont to speak of these as in a state of transitioUj hut
transition to what ?
Shall we not strain every nerve that it may be a transition to
Christ ?
I read recently in a non-Christian Indian paper a paragraph
dealing with the onward march of events in India which was deeply
pathetic, with its recognition of both need and remedy, and yet in its
ignorance and misguidedness as to where the remedy is to be found.
The article says“ There is no gainsaying the fact that the evil
effects of social disintegration are already visible. New vices,
unknown in old Hindu society, have made their appearance, and,
alas, there is no social agency to put them under restraint. There
is every likelihood of these evils spreading day by day, till the body of
old Hinduism becomes a seething mass of corruption. But what
can save us,” the writer goes on to ask, “from this impending
calamity?” He answers in the words; “ The passion for a new
ideal of life."
Having given his answer, and emphasized the word passion—
(“ for,” says he, “ we firmly believe that nothing short of a passion
for a new ideal of life can give a new turn to the national energies
and a new impetus to the spent and effete social forces”) —he asks
again :—“ But what can create this passion ?” “ That," he says, “is
the question.” “Mere holding up of high ideals before man,” he
continues, “ is not enough.”


“ Roman society had sunk into corruption in spite of the noble
precepts of Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius.” “India” (he
laments), “has fallen into degeneracy in spite of the lofty teachings
of the Rhagabat Gita.” And then he concludes with these words:
“ Something more than mere high precepts is necessary for the
purpose of kindling a passion and creating an enthusiasm. Enthus-
iasm is born of personal contact .”
He comes up to the very threshold of the truth, and then stumbles
into darkness, and sets before his readers the emptiness of a reformed
Hindu sect, closing with these words : “ May God help us in accom-
plishing this mission! ”
No, no, Qod wont help them
so long as they deliberately set aside the Person. True it is that
enthusiasm and moral passion are born of personal contact, and we
must take hold with both bands earnestly, and make heaven fill with
joy and India fill with light, as the passion for holiness, based on the
pardon of sin, is inbreathed into India’s heart as we bring her people
to the feet of the Person of the Ages, India’s King, “their Lord
and ours.”
(t ) Remind them of the glad fact that the
race of Cornelius
still survives ; that, scattered throughout the darkness of heathenism,
are some sincere souls, who truly follow the little gleam of light they
have, who look for the Desired of all Nations, yearned and hoped for
by every pure and tender spirit amongst men, even though they
could not articulate the longing; that, as the Church sends out
its outposts, these souls, ( few certainly, but precious), are met with
as we search and feel about in the darkness.
There is no missionary who will not tell you of thrillings of soul
which he has known as he has seen that light kindle in the eye of
one in a crowd of hearers, and a true instinct has told him that
there before him stands a Cornelius, a man who fears God, and
whose alms and prayers come up acceptably before God. And let
the knowledge that these souls are there, though they be rare as the
scattered diamond, kindle a burning desire to bring such gems to
the surface, that, rescued, they may adorn the diadem of the King.
(5.) Face them with this great fact, that in India to-day we have
a thousand Jeremiahs, prophets of God, whom He has put in commis-
sion with the words, “ See, I have set thee this day over the nations to
pluck up and to break down, and to destroy and to ocerthroic."
The Westminster Abbey,
the Forbidden City, of India is being assaulted and attacked,
undermined and cast down. What a consternation there would be in
London if men set to work to overthrow the hoary and reverend
glory of Westminster Abbey ! Men would ask in awestruck wonder-
ment, “ What does this mean ? What are they going to build
here? Something surely wonderful!” And well may India ask, as
the very, shrines of her hoary religion are being plucked up


and broken down, “ What are they goiny to build here/” And
you shall answer them, dear friends,
“ We build the Temple of our God.”
And though, as ex-President Harrison recently said: “God will
not answer the demand to show a fresh course of stone in His
great cathedral for every thousand dollars given,' 1 yet we know
that the temple is rising in its silent beauty, and we are with the King
for His work, purposed to be among those who through the ages have
“ Wrought with greatest care
Both the unseen and the seen.”
But for us, in our own field, there is
THE STILL GREATER FACT OF MAHOM
MEDANISM.
For you must remember that we practically work a Mohammedan
field, over seventy per cent, of the two millions of Furreedpore and
Pubna being Moslems.
Here is Islam the religion which of all others is the Goliath
that defies the armies of the living God.
Early in this year the Students’ Volunteer Movement held
a conference in London, and from the heart of the Mahommedan
world in Cairo, by cablegram, there came flashing to the Conference
this message:—
“Islam defies your King!”
Is Christian chivalry dead ? Where is our loyalty to our King ? His
place is occupied by a usurper. His glory given to another. Jesus,
our Jesus, hath God anointed Prophet and King, yet this very day,
away yonder in our field, Mahommed is being hailed as the “ Light
of God,” “ Peace of the World,” “ Glory of Ages,” “ First of all
■creatures,” “Paraclete” and “Intercessor.” In short, Christ’s name
and place and office have been usurped by another.
Oh Lord God, to whom the sceptre of right belongeth, because
of the anointing of Thy Son, Jesus Christ, as the true Prophet, Priest,
and King, destroy the curse of Islam, and break the yoke of the
False Prophet from the neck of India, that so the veil upon so many
hearts may be removed.
Father, the hour is come 1 Glorify Thy Sen !
RESULTS.
(7), And the splendid results of missions is another fact they
must be faced with.
Christianity has introduced a thin wedge into Hinduism which
every year’s progress is driving further and further into the heart of
the vast, corrupting, cracking mass, and which will one day, (no doubt
far distant, but still clearly realisable by faith and common sense)
bring all India to the feet of Christ.


At the last Baptist Missionary May Meeting in England, the
chairman asked—“ How could you judge of the spring during the
past few weeks by the amount of leaf that you have seen ? Yet the
sap was rising all the time, and you will have now, in the course of a
few days, the pageant of spring, the bursting of the buds, and the
flowers that are following,
for the sap is rising.
A sure conviction lies deep hidden in the hearts of millions in
India that the Christ who is in the land will one day annex it. To
many a man I have said, after hearing his refusal to give in his
allegiance, “ Well, you may know this, your children after you will
know the Christ, whom you refuse to know.” “ That may be,”
he answers, shrugging his shoulders. “ May be?”—Nay, brethren,
it shall be, for our Leader never falls back, or fails from His
purpose.
Of all the speakers during the great (Ecumenical Conference to
which I have referred, none drew more appreciative applause from the
audience than a native Indian Christian woman, Miss Lilabati
Singh, M.A., whose grace of manner and intellectual accomplishments
have won for her a lasting and affectionate interest in the hearts of
thousands of Americans.
Ex-President Harrison said that, “ had he been rich enough to
give a millions dollars to missions, and get no return beyond that one
educated native Christian woman, he would have reckoned it a good
investment.”
That is a trophy from Hinduism. But what of stubborn defiant
Mahommedanism ? Will that, too, bend to the touch of the Cross,
and melt away before the persevering patient push of Christian love?
Listen to a little incident culled from a Missionary report just to
hand from a Methodist field in South India. It is called
The Three Petitions of syed the Blessed, high
Priest of Medak.
The first under date 1888. To H.H. the Nizam’s Government:—
“ Syed the Blessed, and the Chiefs of Medak petition that the request
of the infidel dogs for a foothold among the company of the faithful
in Medak be refused.”
1898. Petition to H.H. tne Nizam’s Government: —“ Syed the
Blessed, and the Chiefs of Medak earnestly request that land be freely
given, without tax, to the Christian missionary and his sisters, the
pious and the well born.”
1899. Syed the Blessed to the Christian missionary at Medak:—
“ Greetings. May it please the Christian missionary and his sisters
to come with all his people, men, women, and children, and dine in
Syed the Blessed’s new palace banqueting hall.”
“ We must remember,” says the report, “ that no Hindu, and
scarcely a Mahommedan in Medak, would allow these outcast native
Christians to pass his threshold ; but this man, who hitherto had
always opposed us, himself invited the outcast Christians, and welcomed


us to a splendid feast, laid out on the beautiful carpet of his new banquet-
ing hall. Syed the Blessed himself saw to our needs, and, ere we 'rent
away, for the first time, Christians prayed aloud to Christ in the High
Priest of Islam’s palace, and at his request we sang as we marched out:
“ Onward, Christian soldiers, marching as to war;
With the cross of Jesus going on before.”
Brethren, I had rathqy have seen that humble feast than be invited
to sit at Her Majesty’s table when Queen Victoria commands Lord
Roberts, returned from his victories, to dine with her in Windsor Castle.
Listen again. About three years ago the Baptists of Western
Australia sent me money to visit the neglected district of Bogra with
its 800,000 people and not a single Christian preacher among them.
For six weeks my wife and 1 journeyed up and down the district,
preaching and teaching; we scattered thousands of tracts, and sold
no less than 0,000 portions of the Bible. But at last, our money all
gone, our strength exhausted, and our native preachers prostrated
with fever, we turned southwards towards Pubna again. And we
passed out of the district with heavy hearts, for there was none left
to cry aloud the name of Jesus in that dark place. A few days ago
an English missionary paper reached me, and I read of a visit
paid to that same place by an English Baptist missionary. I here
he found a little native house and a sign-board hanging outside
with “ The Mission House ” painted on it. He found that a young man
named Alla Uddin was living there. Years before this missionary in his
itineration had landed from his boat near a village school and sold
Gospels to the boys. Alla Uddin bought one, and ultimately found Cluist,
after having attended a Bible class in Mymensingh (the station of the
Victorian Baptists). I was present a couple of years ago at a native
Baptist Union Meeting, and I sat and marvelled as I looked at Alla
Uddin Bible in hand expounding the truth, and thought of the won-
drous change that in four short years had lifted that young man from
a dark Mahommedan lad to be the editor of a Christian newspaper.
Picture to yourselves the marvellous change, and praise the Conqueror
of the False Prophet of Islam. Now Alla Uddin is living alone doing
pioneer missionary work up in dark Bogra.
And now, having faced the laggard Christian with the facts
of the field,
FACE HIM WITH CHRIST,
and all these things will assume a right proportion, and big
things will bulk big, and small things will shrink and shrivel.
As he looks into the face of his Master, these facts of the
field, urgent facts, clamant facts, facts forced against his very
eyeballs, will become, must become, motive facts; and, motived by
the constraining love which will flow into his heart from his Master s,
these urgent, clamant facts will become urgent and clamant calls,
and his heart will re-echo to his Master’s deep longing, *• Them, also
I must bring.” And while he stands thus facing his Master, his heart
laid open to receive the inflow of his Lord’s love, and the impress of
His will, face him with this deep fact, that Christ suffers in the alien-
ation and in the sinful wandering of these dark millions, and tell him


how that the call to a fellowship with Christ’s sufferings is the deepest
of all calls, and they who, facing the the darkness of heathenism and
facing the Master, can say:
“our fellowship is with the Father and with His
son Jesus Christ,’’
have reached the very heart and the ultimate secret and source of all
that is holiest in this grand commanded enterprise.
There we touch bedrock.
For it is an interest in Christ we want, not merely an interest in mis-
sions. The two are inseparable, and the latter is an integral part of the
former, Moveover, it seems to me that the non-interested among our
Christians must be faced with the plain reason why they are not
interested. They themselves have often not enough interest even to
notice the fact that they are uninterested, leave alone to question
themselves as to the reason. Then do you tell them, lell them that
it is because their interest in Christ is poor and weak. If that sounds
harsh, let them know that, even so, it is true ; and if it startle them,
well. Let them know that interest in missions means interest in Christ,
and that men are permanently and intelligently interested- in the
world’s evangelization only as they catch the spirit of Christ, and are
tilled with the Holy Ghost. Tell them what Henry Martyn said
44 Live more with Christ. Catch more of His spirit, for the spirit of
Christ is the spirit of missions, and the nearer w r e get to Him,
the more intensely missionary we become.”
And thus the whole matter of missions must be kept on the very
highest levels of spiritual life and experience; for a great enterprise
like this must be pulled up from above, it cannot be pushed up fiom
below.
The link is love.
If we get into the way of thinking that our only real link with
missions is that of money (more or less generously given), the whole
business of foreign missions must shrivel up into a sordid and umn-
spiring affair. Ah, no ! The link is love, love linked to Love’s Lord.
And it is He, the Crucified, who says to us, “ Because 1 live, you
shall live also, and because I love, you shall love also, and you must
love in My way." And as we listen to His words we learn that our
“love has got a broken wing,”
if it cannot fly across the ocean.
Every man must look at the question of interest in missions,
keepin" in view the relation between Christ the Head, and the Body
the church. The Head has conceived a great redemptive purpose;
He wills and desires that the hand shall be stretched out to save.
Yet it fails to answer to His call, and does not move. And the
church or the individual finding himself in this position must be
compelled to face the fact that it does not move at the impulse ot
His will, and is, in that direction, deficient and diseased.


Missions come from the heart of Christ. And interest in
missions, in re, is of a piece with Christ’s interest in mankind. It is
a reservoir in each man’s heart fed by the one great stream. As the
River Ganges rises, the water in the tank in our mission compound
rises, and then they overflow and meet above, as, unseen, they meet
below. They are one, though one is a poor little tank fifty feet
square, the other a mighty rush of majestic waters. When water
appears in our dried up tank we say: “ The river is rising,”
and when in a Christian’s heart there forms itself an interest in
missions, we say : “In that heart the Christ is being formed.”
And a man's interest varies accurately with his devotion, and
measures it.
We have seen the glass indicator set in the front of the steam
boiler. It told us exactly what force of steam was working in that
boiler, and we knew exactly what power of work was hidden there.
So can we gauge the intensity and the reality of any Christian’s
devotion to the King, by marking his interest in the King’s interests in
the dark lands of heathendom.
HOW IS THIS INTEREST
TO BE MAINTAINED AND DEVELOPED?
(I) By deepening devotion
(2) By nurturing sympathy.
(3) By calling out prayer.
(4) By summoning to the altar of offering.
And so the whole matter is essentially
a pastor’s question.
And when 1 say that, I am sure no pastor will think I have any idea of
telling pastors their duties. But it is increasingly impressed upon me
that it is not the work of a visiting missionary to create or develop,
though he may spur on, an interest in missions. It is the pastor's
work. For the whole question is a question of likeness to
Christ, of a desire to be like Christ, of being changed into the
likeness of the compassionate Saviour. I say this is a pastor’s
question. That must be so if such an interest is an essential com-
ponent of a healthy Christian character.
It must be so, for a permanent sober interest can never be created
by popular meetings, even though full of eclat and enthusiasm,. Pop-
ular meetings have their place, but the patient development of the
character is the work of the pastor. And it is a truism to say that
the, church will take its lead and colour from its pastor. Unless he
lifts up his eyes and looks on the field, they will not do so.
Speaking recently at Regents Park College, the Rev. Samuel
Vincent said that the truth that God revealed Himself to man lay at
the foundation of Christianity, and ministers, of all men, confessed it,
for they declared by their profession that they had heard God twice,
at least; once calling them out of darkness into His marvellous light,
and again calling them into the ministry,”


“ Twice called ? ” Nay, brethren, that falls short.
Not “ twice called,” but THRICE called.
Called first to the Vision of the Christ.
Called next to the Vision of the Lord of the Vineyard calling for
laborers.
Called lastly, to the Vision of the World.
The Vision of the World as seen from the view point of the
Throne of God, the world, poor, and blind, and naked. “ the whole
dreadful mass,” sinful and sick. The Vision of AJrica, dark and
dreadful, yet destined to reach out her hands to God; of China,
not as the “ Yellow Peril, but as the Golden opportunity; ” of India,
“ smitten by plague and famine, India, India, India, heathen
and Moslem still. Native states and princes, warlike clans and
haughty castes, simple peasant myriads, stalwart aborigines, proud
raiahs, gentle women, (gentlest and meekest upon earth), hardy
mountain races, enervated plain dwellers, subtle, clever, diligent,
penurious, philosophic peoples, India, a host of nations,”
India, a little child.
u I saw ” says Miss Guinness, *‘that it was gi\en us by the gieat
unseen Father. Wandering in darkness it had sought him long and
vainly. The hand of this child, this lost child, has been put by Him
in ours. India is given us of God, that we may bring it home.”
Shall we not add another to those wonderful declarations of Mat. xxv.
‘'l was lost, and ye brought me home."
And when a pastor has been thus thrice called, has thus seen
his Vision of the World, has perhaps (would God it were so) gone
away “ into Arabia,” into solitude, to meditate on it, his heart will thrill
to be out there at the front. “ in the thin red line where it runs up
against the great black broad line.” And if he may not be there in
body, his heart will always be there, (Thank God for so many of our
pastors’ hearts which are there), and he will seek to make the world s
need blaze before His people’s eyes, and to awaken in them such a
heart of love that, as he shows it the need, it will leap, leap into eager
effort and fervent love.
PRAY FOR US.
It is said that Dr. Dale chose for one of his hymns every Sunday
an Ascension hymn, so earnestly desirous was he of keeping before
his people the all important conception of the Bisen Reigning Christ.
Now it might, or it might not be, well every Sunday to sing together
of that Christian Imperialism, which, regarding all mankind as
potentially redeemed in the sacrifice of Calvary, aspires to do its best
to turn the potentiality into an actuality. But, if the burden of the
darkness lies heavy, and presses on the heart of the church, the chmc
will wish every Lord’s day, perhaps at every service, to bring the
burden to the throne in intercession and pleading supplication.
And at every prayer meeting might there not be someone always
called on to pray the “ missionary prayer,” commending to God the
seed sown that very day, praying for blessing on the preachers and


enquirers, and our little Christian communities, and asking that in
the churches’ heart the flame may burn with ever growing intensity ?
We missionaries covet more than anything else the prayers of
God’s people. We feel like the missionary Gilmour who said:
“ Unprayed for I feel like a fireman sent on to a burning building
with an empty hose.” We missionaries are the steel lance head, but
the driving force is the praying power of the church at home. Pray
for us. And again I say, fray.
And in conclusion, ponder this, that
THE INTEREST SHOULD BE A BURDEN.
The work of missions sits all too lightly on the hearts of God’s
people; so lightly that all too often it cannot truly be called a burden
at all. Yet is it not His will that the great woe and desolation
of these “out of the way,” should lie as a felt burden upon the
churches’ heart.
Does the burden press upon YOTJ ?
Is it not rather the case that more often (so often as to be the
rule rather than the exception) the work of missions is regarded
as having to the real work of the church (the work that must be
done), somewhat of the relation of a conservatory to a dwelling
house, an incidental, an unessential luxury ? Whereas the church,
each church, needs to learn that its missionary work is as necessary
a department as its Sunday School; that it is a limb of the body,
nay, rather an organ of the body, ministering nourishment, strength,
and a healthful vigour; that it is not something outside and
voluntary, but that it is the inherently vital work and obligation of
every church and every Christian.
When I was a student I remember carrying out an experiment
in physiology as follows : —A single muscle with its motor nerve is
rapidly detached from the limb of a frog before the electric excite-
ability of the nerve is lost, and, being placed in a moist warm chamber,
is connected with an electric apparatus which records the strength of
the contraction of the muscle when the motor nerve is stimulated.
The muscle’s contractile strength having been recorded, a load is
now suspended from the end of the muscle, and the motor nerve
again stimulated. The muscle in contracting has now in addition to
draw up this load. Strange to say, (if the load is not excessive), the
recording apparatus will show that the contractile power of the
loaded muscle is actually greater than that of the muscle without a
load.
Which things are a parable. The church which consciously and
gladly bears the burden, has a greater spiritual muscular power than
the church which is content to ignore the wandering of the “other
sheep.”
Some of our churches have the load and burden of debt, but this
burden, laid upon us all by Him, who is both Burden Bearer and
Burden Giver, is the greatest of church debts, and “ I am debtor to
both Greeks and to Barbarians,” should form part of the creed of
every church.


because we loved him we did it.
did it faithfully and fully.
“ The restless millions wait
That light whose dawning makes all things new;
Christ also waits, but men are slow and late,
Have we done what we could ? Have I ? Have you ?”
J
meuo
M. 573
Hostav |
May I not therefore plead with you, fathers and brethren, to seek
yet more and more to lay this burden upon your people. Laid upon
your own heart, lay it upon theirs, that they may be followers of you
as you are of the Lord. And you, fellow Christian, will you not seek
to enter more fully into sympathy with the King ? Will you not seek
that the interest of His heart may be the interest of yours ? If it is
your pastor's work to seek to create and deepen in you an interest in
missions, it is ten times more your work, for he can but seek to
persuade, whereas your heart is your own to yield it unto the King.
Will you not bring it to Christ that He “may fill it with His own
yearning compassion over a world lying “in the Evil One”? Will
you not bring Him your will that He may write His will upon it ?
It is He who has laid this burden of Furreedpore and Pubna upon
us. And when we see Him He will ask us of it. Oh that in that day
we may be able to assure our heart before Him, giving a glad account
of our stewardship, not being ashamed, but telling Him that
(To Mr. Price.) Mr. Price, you are old; in all human
probability you will soon pass in to stand before the King. When
you enter the glory, and behold our Master face to will you tell
Him from us that we love Him : and, because we love Him
we will do this thing, THAT WE ARE PURPOSED TO
FAITHFULLY FULFIL THIS COVENANTED SERVICE IN
FURREEDPORE AND PUBNA?
(f - NOV 1992
\7/


THE SCORN OF JOB.
(Job. 31, 17.)
* If I have eaten my morsel alone ! ”
The patriarch spoke in scorn ;
What would he think of the church, were he shown
Heathendom, huge, forlorn,
Godless, Christless, with soul unfed,
While the church’s ailment is full of bread,
Eating her morsel alone ?
I am debtor alike to the Jew and the Greek,
The mighty apostle cried ;
Traversing continents, souls to seek,
For the love of the Crucified.
Centuries, centuries since have sped ;
Millions are famishing ; we have bread
But we eat our morsel alone.
Ever of them who have largest dower
Shall heaven require the more.”
Ours is affluence, knowledge, power,
Ocean from shore to shore ;
And East and West in ours ears have said :
“ Give us, give us, your living bread.”
Yet we eat our morsel alone.
Freely ye have received, freely give.
He bade, who hath given us all,
How shall the soul in us longer live,
Deaf to their starving call.
For whom the blood of the Lord was shed,
And his body broken to give them bread,
If we eat our morsel alone ?
—The Bishop of Derby


MISSIONARY BOOKS.
“RESULTS OF MISSIONS.”
By the same. Author as “Interest in Missions.” id.
[All interested in Missions should read this Powerful Address.]
“ACROSS INDIA AT THE DAWN OF THE
20TH CENTURY.”
By Lucy Guinness. 3/6 and 5/.
“STORY OF CHINA INLAND MISSION.”
By M. Geraldine Guinness. 2 vols. 3/6 each.
“SOUTH AMERICA, THE NEGLECTED
CONTINENT.”
By E. C. Millard and Lucy Guinness, i/- and 2/6.
“TO HELP TO HEAL” (Africa).
By Lucy Guinness. 4c!.
“WORKING AND WAITING FOR TIBET.”
“PARTRIDGE’S SERIES OF MISSIONARY
BIOGRAPHIES.”
and other Missionary Books on Sale at
HYDE’S BIBLE HALL, FLINDERS STREET,
ADELAIDE.
W. Page, Printer, Adelaide.
