

Interim Report
Commonwealth
New Guinea Expedition
Dec. 9th, 1920, to Nov. 14th, 1921
Reporting on the Natural Resources
of the Mandated Territory
26th May, 1922
Sydney
Bloxham J§t Chambers Limited
Printers
1922


c ,„.
<%. sz. y;xrs.
/////<///t'C/r ///?
//tf' /
££</,,ej,,
26 '//. /222


Interim Report
Commonwealth
New Guinea Expedition
Dec. 9th, 1920, to Nov. 14th, 1921
Reporting on the Natural Resources
of the Mandated Territory
26th May, 1922
Sydney
Bloxhani & Chambers Limited
Printers
19 22


PREFACE.
GERMANY has always taken the closest interest and pride in her
colonial possessions, and one of her favourites was the New Guinea
Territory. The collections at her museums, the transacta of her
learned societies, the records of her universities, the work of her dis-
tinguished men and an extensive bibliography all go to show that she
had an intimate knowledge of the country. Before the landing of the
Australian troops she had held it for thirty years. During this period
she had risen into a position of amazing industrial and commercial pros-
perity, and had an endless resource in man-power and finance. Yet,
in spite of it all, the remarkable fact stands out that she did strikingly
little in the way of development of the New Guinea Territory. She
turned it into a copra country and nothing else. Three cogent reasons
seem to account for the fact. Firstly, she failed to induce any considerable
white population to emigrate there ; secondly, the expense of opening
up and developing the country was so fabulous that nothing could justify
it without an adequate white population ; thirdly, such developments
would be paralysed at birth for the want of adequate, efficient native
labour, and would entail the importation, on an extensive scale, of out-
side help.
Australia, as far as actual and potential natural resources are con-
cerned, is one of the very richest countries in the world. She is crying
out for immigrants, and hungry for capital to develop the potential wealth
within her own gates. On her has fallen the task—under Mandate —to
do what Germany shrunk from for a period of thirty years. If the Ter-
ritory has to remain a copra country, it will have but a waning interest
to the people of Australia, except to the handful of men interested in
growing, buying, selling, shipping and using that commodity.
The present Report does not pretend to be anything else than a
summation of a few facts relative to the Expedition, which was sent to
New Guinea to '* take stock of what the country possesses," to quote
the words used by the Prime Minister in introducing the New Guinea
Bill, second reading, 14th September, 1920. During the military occu-
pation I received, at Rabaul, a certain amount of official assistance to-
wards that end, but when civil administration was about to be established
and afterwards I and my staff received none at all. On the contrary
the Administration was openly unfriendly, and made every effort to
harass and interfere with the progress of the Expedition, prompted, doubt-
less, by the Expropriation Board, whose work we were, unfortunately,
compelled to review.
CAMPBELL BROWN,
DIRECTOR,
Sydney, 26 th May, 1922. Commonwealth New Guinea Expedition.


List of Illustrations.
PAGE
Frontispiece. Map of German New Guinea, showing Route taken by
Wattle
Expedition Staff taking part in the Voyage .. .. .. .. .. 3
The Wattle, the Ship used by Expedition .. .. .. .. .. 4
Bush Kanaka Widow Woman from Hinterland, Alido, New Britain .. 8
The Director of the Commonwealth Expedition .. .. .. .. 11
A Woman of Wariai Tribe, New Britain, making Mats .. . . 14
Human Skulls from Ramu-Sepik Area, belonging to Headhunters .. 15
Upper Ramu Native making Arm-band .. .. .. .. 30
A Kanaka of Upper Ramu, with Head-dress of Job's Tears .. .. 32
Head of a Manam Islander with Hair released from Tube .. .. 34
Two Women of the Upper Ramu River .. .. .. .. 36
Sing-sing dress of Atemble Natives, Upper Ramu .. .. .. 38
Felling a Tree with a Stone Adze, Upper Ramu .. .. .. 33
Kanaka of Upper Ramu making " Cloth " out of Underbark of Tree 36
Canoe-builders of Kalinge, New Britain .. .. .. .. 40
Bilibili Women making Cooking Pots out of Clay .. . . .. 44
A Native Man belonging to Mouth of Ramu .. .. .. 46


CONTENTS.
PAGE
CHAP. I. —Origin of Expedition—Scope of Work —The Wattle —
Equipment—Staff—Advance Party—Delays in Starting—
Financial Control of Expedition—Photographic Record of
Expedition—Route and General Plan of Expedition—
Expedition Depots—Questions in the House and Press
Comments . . .. .. .. .. .. .. i
CHAP. II. —Itinerary, Part I—ltinerary, Part II —Ramu Upward
Voyage—Ramu Return Voyage—Health Report of Staff
During Voyage . . .. . . . . . . . . 9
CHAP. lll.—Pre-War Research and Exploration of New Guinea
Territory—The Missions—Official Expeditions—Unofficial
Expeditions—Trading Companies .. .. .. .. 19
CHAP. IV. —Natural Resources of the New Guinea Territory—ln-
troductory—The Bird of Paradise —Mineral Resources :
Petroleum, Gold, Platinum, Iridiosmine Osmium, Iron Ore,
Coal, Manganese, Opal, Chalcedony, Jasper, Iceland Spar,
Rock Crystal, Red Ochre, Rock Salt, Lead Ochre, Sulphur,
Asbestos, Mica, Copper Pyrites, Iron Pyrites, Pottery
Clays, Lithographic Slate, Black Marble, Rock Phosphate—
Summing Up of Mineral Resources .. .. .. .. 23
CHAP. V.—Salient Geological Features of the New Guinea Territory 35
CHAP. VI. — Plantations and Native Labour Prevalent Native
Diseases Impairing Efficiency of Labour —Marine Products
—Timber Resources —Map of Ramu River —Native Races 43


NINIGO 1= (J
HERMIT 15 ADMIRALTY ISLANDS
' hanovsr
? \ _flL riKARKARIs WITU VL J \ ( ®
3 !> rrr— « J* J V „
; \TV 4?- \]bukai5
I J„ » „ " v L MAP OF V/^J
S\ / PAPUA \T7Sp LATE GERMAN NEW GUINEA o s
§ Nx -^b^ robe rotafLand Area 7Z.300sq y miles
The heavy line indicates the area of investigation of Expedition, and route taken by the Wattle■


CHAPTER I.
ORIGIN OF EXPEDITION.
DURING the military occupation of the Territory no organized
effort was made to ascertain its actual and potential resources.
Casual reports occasionally came through from the Administrator
to the Minister of Defence, and were based, for the most part, on ob-
servations made by Police Masters, Deputy District Officers, District
Officers, etc., or sometimes through the Rabaul Lands Department.
Just before the introduction of the New Guinea Bill the Prime Minister
decided that an Expedition, suitably equipped for the purpose, should
be sent to New Guinea, and the writer had a conference with him, along
with the Minister of Defence, and the Expedition was outlined in several
official memoranda submitted to and approved of by Mr. Hughes. There
never was any secrecy or mystery attending the work of organizing the
Expedition, though there was a degree of urgency in getting together
a staff, suitably equipping it, and making a start before the finish of the
north-west season. General instructions were issued that the Expedition
should not cost more than £lO,OOO, and should not be absent for more
than a year ; should be under the sole control of the Prime Minister's
Department; should have a roving commission in the Territory, with
liberty to determine its own movements.
SCOPE OF WORK.
The main purpose of the Expedition was to conduct investigations
regarding Natural Resources along every possible avenue which would
yield reliable information helpful to the Federal Government. The
Territory has a land area of 72,000 square miles, and it was no part of the
objects of the Expedition to attempt to explore such an area. The main
object in making a voyage was to gain information at first hand relating to
general questions, such as land, man power, trading, recruiting, waterways
and power, anchorages, etc., and also to visit the more remote and little
known parts away from the shipping routes and in uncharted waters.
During its currency provision was made for conducting the customary
observations of a scientific expedition, such as meteorological work, mapping
reefs, rivers, mountains, measuring potential power of waterfalls, deter-
mining latitudes and longitudes, measuring altitudes, taking soundings,
recording natural phenomena, such as earthquakes, geysers, etc.
THE " WATTLE."
At the t'me the Expedition was organized the Administration at
Rabaul had no boat available for the use of the Expedition. One had
to be built which could work safely among coral reefs, cross over river


tf^\
* r4
JH|H|
lift
w
CAPT. J AS. DUNCAN (Sydney), Marine
Products.
N. L. CALLAGHAN (Sydney), Wireless
Operator and Electrical Engineer.
NORMAN MURPHIE (Sydney),
Engineer.
j J ACKSON (Melbourne), Cinema
Photographer.
EVAN R. STANLEY, F.G.S. (Adelaide),
Geologist.
LIEUT. J. H. THOMPSON (Melbourne),
Hydrographer.
The Staff of the Commonwealth New Guinea Expedition,


bars, negotiate submerged timber on river beds, as well as other "snags,"
and yet have a useful speed in times of danger, and comfortable sleeping
accommodation, besides mosquito-proof protection for seven observers.
The Wattle was built in Sydney, but fitted out in Rabaul, and proved
a magnificent success. She is 40 feet long, with 12 feet beam, ketch
rigged, with a2O h.p. " Amis" Engine. She carried a searchlight,
and was electrically fitted throughout otherwise. Her cockpit had deep
weather boards, and could be converted in a moment into a spacious
dark room for cinema photography. She is a type of boat not uncom-
monly used in tropical waters for administration patrol work along coasts
and rivers, and her wireless installation was comfortably carried and
of great use, especially the listening set.
EQUIPMENT.
One of the features of the Expedition was the perfect equipment
on board the Wattle. Some of the instruments were loaned by the
Navy, others purchased, and others privately owned by members of
staff. She carried 150 maps and charts, and a small reference library
of 100 volumes. Among other things on board were a complete field
equipment for chemical analysis and determination of mineral substances
of commercial importance, as well as a hand dredge for taking river-
bottom samples. The cinema operator was equipped with a whole battery
of moving picture, press, standard and panorama cameras, to ensure
as complete and perfect a photographic record of the voyage as possible.
Ample provision was made for the Red Cross, and for camping on shore
as occasions arose, and a small armoury was on board, both for procuring
fresh food and defensive purposes.
STAFF*.
Evan R. Stanley, F.G.S. (Adelaide), geologist (services lent by
Papuan Government). Captain James Duncan (Sydney), pearling and
marine products. Lieut. J. H. Thompson, R.A.N.R. (Melbourne),
hydrographer. W. J. Jackson (Melbourne), cinema photographer. N.
L. Callaghan (Sydney), wireless operator and electrical engineer. Norman
Murphie (Sydney), engineer. The Director, precious metal. With one
exception each member of the staff was familiar with work in the tropics,
and had lived in countries of the same or similar latitudes, or had already
taken part in expedition work before. Mr. W. Lucas, Director of the
Expropriation Board, was appointed as Plantation and Native Labour
Expert prior to the departure of the Expedition, the intention being
that he should not accompany the staff, but merely write a report, in
virtue of his unique experience in dealing with such matters. Mr. E.
R. Stanley succeeded Lieut. Commander Rolleston as Secretary to the
Expedition on the latter being invalided home.
'Two members of the staff, viz., Lieut. Commander Rolleston (Hydrographer) and F. Haynes
(Timber Expert, Queensland), were invalided home suffering from malaria prior to the com-
mencement of the voyage of the Wattle. The services of Lieut. Crookshank were replaced bv
those of Lieut. Thompson, who holds a Master Mariner's Certificate.


f
1 ■ I'
II
,
The Wattle, the ship used by the Expedition, was built specially
for the work.
The cruise of the Wattle was confined, for the most part, to unchar-
ted waters, amid coral reefs, little-known rivers, swamps and unex-
plored coasts, etc. The Expedition party came within an ace of total
destruction on the dangerous reef at Owen's Spit, at midnight, 26th
April, 1921. On nth May the Wattle got on the reef at Cape Stephens
while engaged in close examination of geological outcrops exposed on
a precipitous rock face. On 14th May, on the return from Lokustie
Falls, six miles south of Kurindal, the Wattle again got on the reef in
waters practically impossible to navigate. On 19th May, while emerging
from the Toriu River at low tide, the Wattle got aground on the bar
at mouth, and great difficulty was experienced in getting her off. On
21 st May she struck a reef at Lolobau Island during landing operations,
to enable the party to cut their way through the bush from Labau to
the great crater lake in the interior. On the Ist June the Wattle was
hurled, before daybreak, during a violent gale, on to the reef at Iboki,
and remained in a perilous position for eighteen hours, but no lives were
lost and little damage done. During the 200 mile voyage up the Ramu
River the Wattle was held up twenty-eight times by submerged snags
of fallen timber or rocks invisible in the muddy waters, and the return
down stream was characterised by even greater difficulties. On 16th
September, at Potsdam Hafen, a violent squall arose before daybreak
and drove the Wattle on to a dangerous reef, forcing her to drag her
anchors.


ADVANCE PARTY.
Lieut. Commander Rolleston, Lieut. Crookshank, N. L. Callaghan,
Norman Murphie, proceeded to Rabaul, picking up Mr. Stanley at Port
Moresby on the voyage, and taking with them the hull, etc., of the Wattle,
which, by the extreme courtesy of Messrs. Burns, Philp & Co., was
carried, with difficulty, on the 5.5. Marsina. The advance party were
assigned at Rabaul the Lloyd Bungalow, which became the headquarters
and offices of the Expedition until the voyage commenced.
Several weeks later I proceeded to Rabaul myself, accompanied by
Capt. J. Duncan and W. J. Jackson, picking up Mr. F. Haynes at Cairns
on the voyage. On arrival I found that a considerable amount of work
had to be done to fit out the Wattle properly, and that suitable local
labour and material were not available.
DELAYS IN STARTING.
Although the complete party started operations on gth December,
3920, it was not till April 15th, 1921, that the voyage of the Wattle com-
menced. Little material assistance was officially given the party in
fitting out the Wattle ; the Port of Rabaul was under quarantine ; es-
sential requisites had to be procured from Sydney, where there was a
shipping strike ; and, above all, one member after another fell sick with
a virulent form of intermittent malaria. One after another was removed
to Namanula Hospital, and most of the staff were patients there on several
occasions. The Lloyd Bungalow, in which we were located, was in a
notorious state of neglect. I invalided the Timber Expert and the
Hydrographer home, suffering from malaria, and could not proceed with a
staff further depleted. I was well aware that we were about to proceed to a
fever-laden country of swamps, rivers and coasts, and was unwilling to
take a fever-stricken staff into it. During the period in question we
had cruised 500 miles in different directions, using Rabaul as a base
and conducting investigations and testing gear, instruments and outfit.
FINANCIAL CONTROL OF EXPEDITION.
To begin with, the Treasury, in Melbourne, handled the financial
side of the Expedition, but just before the voyage of the Wattle commenced
transferred it to the Treasurer at Rabaul. At the expiry of the Expedi-
tion I was officially informed that the Administration of the Territory
was endeavouring to transfer back to the Treasury at Melbourne the costs
of the Expedition. The latter were kept well within prescribed limits,


and compare more than favourably with the Australian 1885 Expedition
from Sydney, and (considering the present purchasing power of money)
were remarkably low for any Government enterprise. The actual com-
pletion and consummation of the financial arrangements did not take place
till 16th April, 1921, the day the Wattle left on her voyage.
PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD OF EXPEDITION.
Arrangements were made with the Australasian Pictures Limited
to have an operator accompany the Expedition. The primary object
was to secure photographs and films of an instructive and educative
nature, for exhibition before the people of Australia. This would enable,
by publicity in the illustrated press, lectures and cinema theatres, everyone
to get familiarized with the country, its resources, its problems and potential
value. This work was satisfactorily carried out, and there is now available
for the purpose as fascinating and varied material as ever any tropical
expedition brought home.
ROUTE AND GENERAL PLAN OF EXPEDITION.
At the time of departure of the Wattle a change over from military
to civil administration at Rabaul was taking place. The new officials
appointed had no knowledge whatever of the country, and could afford
no assistance. The Lands Department there failed to carry out the
Prime Minister's instructions to submit all documents and render all
help to the officers of the Expedition. I was handicapped thereby, and
decided to make as close an investigation of the Island of New Britain
as time would permit; then proceed to the Mainland of New Guinea.
As far as is known conditions do not vary throughout the Bismark Archi-
pelago very much in respect to natural resources, and I selected the
largest and most important member of the Group. The thorough ex-
ploration of this Island will take very many years of patient research,
and the same applies to Bougainville and other islands, and also applies,
with double force, to the Mainland of New Guinea. We had only a
few brief months at our disposal to do everything, and I was unable to
devote any prolonged period prospectively to any definite object.
EXPEDITION DEPOTS.
Before civil administration had been established, and before the
commencement of the voyage of the Wattle, ship's stores, fuel, etc.,
had been sent in advance to Morube, Madang and Eitape. Madang,
being the central point on the New Guinea coast and the first port of
call after leaving New Britain, was the most important depot on the
Mainland. When we arrived there, on account of official confusion,
the discovery was made that these supplies were not properly available
for the purposes of the Expedition. The depot at Eitape was intended
to cover the needs of investigation work in the Weewak area, where
petroleum was known to occur. Six officers of the Anglo-Persian Oil
Company had turned up in the meantime, however, and had taken over
this branch of the Expedition work. The Morube depot was intended


to take care of the Expedition requirements -for the investigation of the
Waria and Markham Rivers, on both of which gold was known to occur.
On account of the unjustifiable action of the Administration I had neither
food nor fuel to prolong the voyage, and was confronted with a very
delicate situation, the only solution to which seemed to me to take no
further notice of them, but carry on, and I acted accordingly. Subse-
quently my action was upheld by the Government.
QUESTIONS IN THE HOUSE AND PRESS COMMENTS.
From time to time it transpired that some form of anxiety was being
felt as to the welfare of the Expedition, and what it was doing. The
Wattle was equipped with a wireless installation, the main feature of
which was its listening set, the transmission of messages being hampered
partly by its restricted radial action, and partly by the indifferent con-
dition of the apparatus and service of some of the shore stations. Re-
peated wireless messages were being received from the Administration,
the whereabouts of the Expedition being well known all the time. The
Acting Prime Minister, Sir Joseph Cook, and the press of Australia were,
for some mysterious reason, misled into the belief that we were " lost,"
by a new Administration that did not know, from practical experience,
the first outlines of the geography of the Possession. Among my radios
not one asks if we are in distress or needing help.


I
f .. . ,
■ ■■■■"" ■ ;■■ ■■■■■■.■;■■ ■ K .' :; ". : "v.s.
a* 4d&&
:;Sl|h,
.
■r
BRHH m MPS ♦ •
flflUH '*'' - «' :i
4NMI ' \JBK
HHf ■§' - ■ >|f
Bush Kanaka Widow Woman belonging to Hinterland behind Alido, New-
Britain.


CHAPTER 11.
ITINERARY.
PART I.
On the afternoon of April 15th, 1921, I ordered the Wattle to proceed
to Kokopo, and await my arrival there next day. She was fully equipped
with stores and ready for a long voyage. Stayed two days, then, com-
pleting film of Copra Industry and visiting several localities reputed to
yield oil and coal in small quantities, left for Put-Put on the 18th,
in a rough sea. Passed close into shore along the prosperous, well culti-
vated neighbourhood, and arrived at anchorage at Put-Put in afternoon,
leaving again early next morning in a rough sea. For the first time
we had decisive evidence that the South-Easterly season had started, and
the North-Westerly had finished. We made Sum Sum Bay before noon,
and arrived at Henry Reid Bay, anchoring before sunset in behind Tongue
Point. Along this coast most of the land is precipitous, with many caves
in a persistent elevated coral bed, and without any anchorages and few
traces of natives, and is not suitable for development.
The whole neighbourhood of Henry Reid Bay, on the other hand,
is fertile and particularly suitable for cultivation and saw-milling, with
generous anchorage space. This region will one day attract attention
for its timber, water-ways, fertile soil and favourable situation for road
or railway building across the Island of New Britain.
After examining Powell and Henry Reid Rivers, our next objective
was Brown Island, in the vicinity of which were located two officers
taking the native census, a procedure I was greatly interested in. Around
Brown Island were strewn on the shore a vast number of drifted giant
tree trunks, apparently derived from the flooding of the Powell and Henry
Reid Rivers. Leaving here, we made for Kiep, where there is a splendid
anchorage and young plantations, and we put on shore the Census party,
who were without food or means of transport, and were our guests.
On the 23rd April we made an unsuccessful attempt to round Crater
Point in a heavy sea, and had the same result next morning in a second
attempt. Disappointed, but not discouraged, we left next morning at
3.30 a.m., and were buffeted for the third time by the enormous seas
running. On the 26th success crowned our efforts, and we were able
to anchor behind reef near Owen's Spit just before sunset. We found
the charts too inaccurate to be of any use to us after leaving Henry Reid
Bay, and discovered one or two Bays suitable for plantations with tolerable
anchorages.
While at this anchorage the Wattle broke her chain during the night,
and drifted unobserved on to the reef, and the total destruction of the
boat and party was only averted by the skill and promptness of Capt. J.
Duncan, who brought her back to safety in the nick of time. Our only


remaining anchor was lost next morning while being hauled up, having
been insecurely fastened by an officer who ought to have known better.
As the South-Easterly season had well set in, and not having any
anchors, I decided to go back and made Put-Put before dark on the 27th
April, remaining there next day to give the staff a much-needed rest
and food. Thereupon, we made for Kokopo, where I landed Duncan
and Stanley, both of whom were ill. The former was immediately re-
moved to Namanula Hospital, with a severe attack of malaria, and Stanley
soon recovered.
On the sth May, Wattle proceeded to Rabaul, where I removed a
heavy oil tank to make her more buoyant, and fitted her with deep weather
boards, and replenished her stores. On the 10th May, Capt. Duncan
was released from Hospital, and I resumed the voyage, anchoring for
the night in Matupi Bay, and starting at 4 a.m. next morning. While
on the way to Wotom Island, and engaged in examining some outcrops,
the Wattle got on the reef at Cape Stephens, but received no damage.
From Wotom Island, where we landed, we proceeded to Kambeira
Bay, and thence we made for Massawa, where the Engineer was placed on
sick list with malaria fever. We visited St. Paul, and the wonderfully
fertile valley leading up to it, where many tropical products are grown
successfully. We found no trace of gold in the rivers here, nor of the mica
reputed to occur in this neighbourhood. Pearl shell is found on the reefs
here, but the natives do not collect it.
I left Massawa, keeping well inside the reef and made for Korindal,
passing the timber country and plantations close to, and anchored at the
Mission, beside the saw-mill. Here may be found cocoanut palms
bearing at three and a-half years, and there is much fertile land not yet
taken up. Two immense waterfalls occur a few miles from Korindal,
around which place the ground is level enough for factory building, and
where cables could be led without difficulty. Native labour is locally
unobtainable; and wild pig, wallaby and cassowary abundant. The
Eucalyptus forest is not extensive and is being quickly used up.
On the 14th May visited the Lokustie Falls and made observations
on another giant waterfall inland a few miles, then proceeded to Toriu
River, and anchored for the night outside the bar. In the early morning
I proceeded up the Toriu as far as confluence with Ludwig River. I sent
a party to proceed up both rivers, and I was taken ashore sick with fever.
The dinghy was able to get a long way up the Toriu, before stopped by
excess of fallen timber. I sent a party of two on foot up the river banks
next day, to report on the well-known occurrence of coal in the river bed,
but floods set in and they were forced to return after being absent one
night. On the 19th resumed voyage, but had misfortune to get on bar
at river mouth. Although the waters here are infested with sharks and
crocodiles, the staff very pluckily leapt into the water and finally got the
Wattle off by united efforts.
I left the Toriu next morning and made for the Pani, where a
small party proceeded up the river. The natives grow excellent tobacco


r ~
; ' ' '-'MV.- ■
' .-'I- '■ . '•• --
JJ
CAMPBELL BROWN, M.A., B.Sc., PH.D., Director of the Expedition.
in the vicinity. Extensive plains occur behind the volcanoes known
as the Father and two Sons ; the soil is fertile, but no land development has
ever taken place. Lolobau Island was our next objective, and we anchored
in Expectation Strait, opposite Close Island. We landed at three points,
and visited the Crater Lake. Five volcanoes exist on the Island, one of
which is active and scares the natives with its paroxysms. The soil is
rich and reddish brown in colour, and as the Island is 27 sq. miles in extent,
much valuable land should be available. In practically all the native
villages the disease called " Elephantiasis " is very prevalent.
I next proceeded to the Kapiriru River, in Commodore Bay, but
found the bar at mouth a hopeless obstacle to getting the Wattle inside.
Many giant trees are strewn all along shore around the mouth, indicating
valuable timber country in interior ; they lie loosely in the pumicious
sand forming the banks at mouth, and some measure 150-180 feet in
length. A thermal district of some extent occurs on Mount Tango in
this vicinity, a number of geysers being constantly active and plainly
visible from the sea. The Kapiriru is the longest river on this coast
of New Britain, and could form a most important waterway by dredging
mouth, but the access to it will always be difficult on account of network
of reefs in Commodore Bay.
On the 22nd we proceeded to Garua, threading our way through the
reefs. Garua is of intense interest for two reasons. It is a most wonder-
ful thermal region ; and it is also a unique illustration of intensive culti-
vation. The Resident District Officer has cultivated native foods with
11


striking skill, method and system, and the first impression of the visitor
is that of a gigantic nursery, capable of growing any tropical product."
The soil is rich, and the region capable of great development, with a
good harbour in all weathers. Bulu was our next place of call, and we
found it without any proper anchorage. The natives grow and trade
their own tobacco. Ascended to top of mountain to view the great
Crater Lake, and see the native plantations. The whole area is extra-
ordinary fertile, but the lack of proper anchorage in North-West season
makes it not so attractive. Two of the party fell ill with fever here, and
we left on the 29th May, for Talisea, which we overhauled after a 50 mile
run. The harbour is perfect, and much valuable land exists in the vicinity,
ready for development. There is some good timber in neighbourhood,
but occurring scattered and not in forests. This is a pearling area, and the
natives take an interest in pearl shell, pearls and turtle shell.
Early on morning of 31st May we proceeded to Iboki, a flourishing,
isolated plantation with three anchorages, none of which are satisfactory.
Here the Wattle came to grief in a North-Easterly squall which arose
suddenly before daybreak, on the Ist June. In all my experience I have
never known a squall to arise with such terrific violence and unexpected-
ness, accompanied by such blinding rain and incessant lightning. The
Wattle was hurled bodily on to the reef, and smothered in surf for 18 hours.
By fastening shear legs on to her masts and the free use of oil bags she was
saved, thanks again to the skill of Capt. Duncan and Lieut. Thompson.
We camped on shore and removed everything out of her and, by the aid
of all the plantation boys at Iboki, were able at high tide to push her off
again. I took her thereupon to the South anchorage and beached her
for repairs, which were remarkably slight. We explored the Aria, Banu,
and Borkia Rivers, and found few natives in the region and only swamp
timber. Many concentrates made yielded no trace of gold or any other
mineral, except magnetite.
We left Iboki on Bth June, and were able to get through extensive
reefs, anchoring favourably off Crow Island, in which vicinity marine
products on the reefs attract one's attention in numbers. Next morning,
progress was made as far as El Bay, where the Tamu River was explored.
The rivers in this locality are very short, and are merely run-aways car-
rying the overflow from extensive swamps lying inland. Cruising
along the coast from here, and having an anxious time, we arrived finally
at Alido, where we remained for two days, after which Atamo, in Borgen
Bay, claimed our attention, and later Tulubu and Silimata, in the Sahre
division of the Wariai district. After leaving this interesting region we
rounded Cape Gloucester and finally anchored at Kalinge, the native-
canoe building centre. The Chinese and Japanese do considerable
trade here with natives, procuring marine products, which are found in
abundance on the reefs.
Early on the 13th June we made our first effort to cross the dreaded
Dampier and Vitiaz Straits, a run of 180 miles in rough weather. After
proceeding some distance I decided to return and wait for the weather
to moderate.. The Engineer again had fever badly and we awaited his
recovery. Tried to cross on the 17th June, but was again baffled, and


next day had the same result. I proceeded thereupon along West Coast,
finding a good anchorage at Kutarveli Point, and exploring the Wolomolo,
Gimo and Sak-Sak Rivers. On the 19th was fortunate in making a
fresh start and passed Ritter Island and Sakar, and soon rounded Cape
King and got abreast of Loloqua Island, and overhauled Long Island
before dark. We were making excellent progress, and I decided to sail
all night and make Madang at daybreak. The Engineer was very sick
with fever, but would not abandon his engine till we were safe in port.
Our stores and fuel were depleted, and I was relieved to arrive safely in
Madang Harbour, on 20th June, to replenish them.
ITINERARY.
PART 11.
The Engineer was in a serious condition with malaria, and I removed
him to Madang Hospital, where he remained for some time. The Wire-
less Operator also reported sick with fever. I had the Wattle put up
on the Mission slip at Nagada, to examine her and restore her damaged
copper plates, and was able to put to sea again on July 2nd. On that
date I visited Jabob Island, to see the native pottery village there, and
cruised along Astrolabe Bay, finally anchoring in Konstantine Harbour.
Next day, I crossed over to the Kabenau River, a locality reputed (without
authority) to yield gold and platinum, and many concentrates were made.
We then returned to Jabob Island to get a film record, and later anchored
in Madang Harbour. I waited in Madang till the 6th July, then put to
sea, making for the Ramu River.
I was unnecessarily detained at Madang, on account of official mis-
understanding relative to the Wattle's stores. I replenished them at my
own personal expense, sailed out of Madang Harbour in broad daylight,
dipping my flag to the Union Jack, and got on with my job. The Acting
Prime Minister was well aware of the circumstances, and the Federal
Government endorsed my action.
We called first at Lydup, and later at Sarang, where we anchored
in its excellent Harbour. I was anxious to push on to get up the Ramu
at low water, and left next morning for Potsdam Hafen. On the nth
July, left here for Manam Island to make the acquaintance of the most
wonderful volcano in the Possession and the most picturesque people.
Having secured some excellent film material here, I gave orders to proceed
to the mouth of the Sepik River, which I wished to examine at this juncture.
RAMU.—UPWARD VOYAGE.
In the evening of the 12th I anchored inside the mouth of the Ramu.
Here we picked up two extra native boys and started voyage up the river
on the morning of the 13th July. We anchored in early evening 32 miles
from the mouth, and had struck a submerged ridge of rock rather vio-
lently. The water of the Ramu is always so muddy that nothing below
the surface is ever visible. On the 14th made only 12 miles progress,


A Woman of the Wariai Tribe, New Britain, making sleeping mats at Alido.


Human skulls from the Ramu-Sepik area, inhabited by the head-hunters.
The features have been restored in clay, forming a striking example of primitive
native art.
having struck snags twice and had to lighten Wattle to get her off. On
the 15th July we did over 21 k miles, but struck snags five times in the
day's run. We made better progress next day, having got up another
26 miles and striking snags three times only. We were not so fortunate
on the 17th, and advanced only 5J miles, having got on to a sand bank
and being compelled to unload Wattle, and striking submerged timber
twice. We anchored just above One Hundred Mile Island, where we
cut an inscription on a " Wattle Commemoration " Tree on left bank.
On 18th saw natives 106 miles from mouth, and huts and canoes. We
landed and found natives very distrustul and shy, but willing to trade
birds of paradise, ospreys and goura crests, which I strictly forbade any
of the staff to touch or barter for. The Wattle anchored at 108 mile
point, and left next morning, but were only able to proceed four miles,
the water ahead being too shallow and having struck bottom four times
on the day's run. We stuck at this point waiting for rain, and on the 22nd
were able to reach the Ramuta tributary, about half a mile from Duck
Island, and approximately 114 miles from mouth. The natives were not
so shy here and appeared in considerable numbers, offering feathers
for barter. We were held up here till the 25th, and made several excur-
sions up the Ramuta, but could not get the Wattle up it. The Ramu at
this point is completely blocked right across by fallen timber, and we had
to wait till sufficient rain fell to make the small channel on other side
of Duck Island navigable. Our progress on the 25th was only 14 miles,
and we got into difficulties with snags three times, anchoring in the evening
opposite a large village in a populous district of rather friendly natives.
Next day three members of staff reported sick and we were able to proceed
a little over 16 miles, anchoring early in afternoon, and getting into diffi-
culties badly only once. Five and a-quarter miles was all the distance
we got on the 27th, and stuck fast on various sandbanks and snags of
submerged timber, until the staff was completely exhausted. The out-


look at this juncture was anything but promising, but I determined to
push on, and next day added another n miles of progress, bringing up
approximately 160 miles from mouth. We found the current very troub-
lesome during the day, but struck no bottom or timber. On the 29th
July the last advance by the Wattle was made, when she reached the
165 \ mile Islands and was confronted by an impassable barrier of shallow
water. She came to grief badly here, but was undamaged thereby.
A dry spell took place and substantial rain did not fall for 27 days,
during which period we were marooned, being able neither to advance
nor retreat on account of shallowness of water. During this trying
period our food and stores ran done, but the staff behaved splendidly.
Native food was abundant, and Lieut Thompson with commendable
ardour provided a generous supply each day of wild duck, pigeon, etc.,
with his gun.
In spite of suspense, anxiety and uncertainty as to when we would
get our release each Officer set about his routine duties, and the period
was most profitably spent in making excursions in every direction ; up
tributaries, and the river itself—the highest point reached of latter was
173J nautical miles from mouth, or 200 land miles.
RAMU.—RETURN VOYAGE.
On the morning of 25th August we had sufficient water to make a
start down stream. Going astern cautiously we were able to retreat
4i miles, when we struck a shallow and were held up once more. How-
ever, it rained heavily overnight, and we got nearer the mouth by another
13 miles, after getting aground once or twice. On the 27th we made
another three miles only, having struck submerged snags repeatedly,
and finding water too shallow for substantial progress. We were held up
for three days in consequence, and made a fresh start on the 31st August,
reaching a point 128 miles from mouth, after getting held up on several
sandbanks. Next day our-experiences were even worse, and at night-fall
we had to abandon any further attempts to get the Wattle off a sandbank,
as everyone was exhausted. Six miles progress was all we made. Next
morning we unloaded Wattle and finally got her off the sandbank and
started again in afternoon, doing another 2J miles after a very anxious
time in a dangerous part of the river. On the morning of the 3rd Sep-
tember we were still 120 miles from mouth, and after six miles run reached
Duck Island, where we were compelled to anchor. During the last
ten days we made 40 miles of progress only, the voyage being full of
mishaps, adventure and desperately hard work. On the 4th September
we did two miles only, the day being devoted to getting off snags, one after
another. This is the portion of the river I had grave doubts about being
able to get through and dreaded it. Next day we reached a point within
sight of 100 Mile Island, and were held up-for want of sufficient depth
once again. Rain had been scanty for some time and the river had fallen
considerably, but conditions improved overnight and we resumed next
morning, putting another ten miles to our credit, after a terrible trying
time with submerged timber. On the 7th September we did 31J miles,
having struck only twice, and with plenty depth of water. We had now


reached a point 59 miles from mouth and had very little anxiety about
the remainder of the return journey. We did 41 miles next day, leaving
18 miles to go only, and struck somewhat violently a submerged
ridge, but were able to proceed without damage. Borai village and
lagoon claimed our attention during the short run to mouth, where
we anchored in evening on the 9th September. I returned the two
native boys to Kadjuban, their village, and discovered that their chief
had sent runners to report that the Expedition had vanished, that
the Cannibal tribes on the higher reaches must have eaten us, and that
none would return. This extraordinary rumour ultimately filtered
through to the press in Australia. I will deal with the Ramu River
later, but at the present juncture would record my opinion that its navi-
gation, in the dry season, is a feat beset with intense difficulty and danger,
barring it effectively from ever becoming a satisfactory waterway. The
Germans spent fabulous sums of money on exploring and development,
built a shallow-draft stern wheeler arid opened up five stations on the
Ramu, but ultimately discovered the futility of it all.
On the nth September we left at daybreak for Potsdam Hafen,
where I was anxious to beach the Wattle and examine her propeller blades,
and adjust them, as well as get food and stores, of which we were so sorely
in need. We arrived at 10.30 and received some mail, the first for a long
time.
We remained at Potsdam Hafen till the 16th September, by which
time I had recovered from a severe attack of malaria, contracted at the
mouth of the Ramu. In the meantime the Wattle had had her propeller
blades adjusted and generally overhauled, with fresh stores on board
and was in perfect sea-going condition. Our next objective was Dugu-
mur, where we anchored in the evening of the 16th. Starting before
dawn next morning we reached Sarang in the afternoon, after a severe
battle with head winds and rough sea. We remained here till the 19th,
the weather being unfavourable for progress and arrived in Alexis Hafen
just after mid-day. Next day we put in at Nagada to arrange for over-
hauling of the Wattle on the slip and repairing her copper plates damaged
in Ramu River and arrived in Madang same day.
HEALTH REPORT OF STAFF DURING VOYAGE.
We have seen above that from December 9th, 1920, till April 15th,
1921, the staff located in the Lloyd Bungalow, at Rabaul, had contracted
a virulent type of malaria fever, which recurred in spite of all precautionary
measures. The great majority of the staff had lived before in malaria
countries, and understood well the nature of the fever and its treatment.
Besides, the Wattle was equipped with a perfect medical outfit, including
the latest works on Tropical Medicine.
Taking the situation all round, the general health of the staff on the
date the Voyage started, was a long way below par. Along with Callaghan,
I had just emerged from Namanula Hospital, and most of the staff were
convalescent. On the 17th and 18th April, 1921, at Kokopo, I was unable
to proceed with any safety, and on the 22nd of same month, I had a fresh


attack at Kiep. On the 27th Jackson reported ill and Stanley followed
suit. On the 29th I landed Stanley and Duncan at Kokopo, and had
the latter removed later to Namanula Hospital, suffering from a severe
attack of intermittent malaria, which lasted some time. On the 7th May
Callaghan fell ill with fever ; on the nth May Murphie, the Engineer,
reported sick. Two days later Callaghan again went down with fever.
My turn came again on 15th May, at Toriu River, where I had a severe
attack lasting several days and was put on shore for treatment. On 24th
May, 1921, Jackson reported sick at Garua, and on 28th at Bulu was
not well enough to film the most impressive sight in the Possession, viz.:
the great crater lake of Bulu. On the latter date Murphie, the Engineer,
had to be carried down the mountain side, having collapsed with fever,
and I erected an Hospital tent on shore. On the 7th of June Murphie had
a fresh attack, which recurred again on the nth, and lasted several days.
On the 14th Callaghan was laid up, as well as Murphie, who had a prolonged
attack, lasting till we arrived in Madang, on 20th June. I had him removed
then to Madang Hospital for seven days, and Callaghan had another
attack, but would not go into Hospital. I had another attack on 3rd
July, while at Madang, which lasted several days. On Bth July Duncan
and Stanley both reported sores which would not heal up, and on same
date Jackson and Callaghan were laid up with fever. Six days later,
on the Ramu, Callaghan was again ill, followed by Jackson ten days
later. On the 26th July I had three on the sick list, Murphie, Callaghan
and Jackson, the two former having a severe attack. On the 2nd August
Callaghan had another attack, and next day Murphie fell ill while out in
bush. The same happened to Callaghan on the sth, and both were
seriously ill at same time on the Ramu upper reaches. One week later,
on the 13th, Callaghan had a fresh attack ; six days later Jackson reported
sick and was laid up. On the 23rd August Murphie had a fresh attack
of malaria, and was joined next day with Callaghan; on this occasion
Murphie's condition caused me some anxiety. On the 27th August
Thompson reported sick with malaria for the first time in his life, his
temperature rising to' 104°, and the illness lasting nearly a week. On
6th September Callaghan again ill, and three days later at mouth of
Ramu I fell ill, the attack being a prolonged one. It lasted all the way
to Madang, and finally compelled me to go into Madang Hospital for
one month. On the 18th and 19th September Callaghan and Murphie
both had fever, and I had the latter removed to Madang Hospital on the
next day, on account of his serious condition. Stanley underwent a
slight operation at Madang on our arrival, and Duncan was laid up with
influenza, which was locally very prevalent at the time we got there.


CHAPTER 111.
PRE-WAR RESEARCH AND EXPLORATION OF NEW GUINEA
TERRITORY.
1. THE MISSIONS.— The history of the' Possession is wrapped up
in the history of the Missions, which always have been a dominant force.
Attraction to the potential wealth and commercial possibilities of the
territory was first drawn to it by the Missionaries. They settled early,
had steamers built in Hong-Kong and elsewhere, and to their credit
lies the great bulk of the pioneer exploration work. They found the
development of the country in a commercial way exceedingly profitable
to their own interests, and soon attracted to New Guinea, Brothers who
were experts in the lumber trade, ship-wrights and ship-builders, etc.
Gradually they obtained timber concessions, erected saw-mills, built
ships and started joinery works. In the prosecution of their labours
they were in a particularly favourable position to do exploration work.
They were searching for suitable land and labour, and districts adapted
for Missionary effort, and gradually obtained the most intimate knowledge
of the districts where they were operating.
Among the Fathers engaged in Missionary work were men of out-
standing ability and scholarship in Natural Science. Some were botanists,
others were geologists, etc., and all of them put their training to good
account in their travels. The present Venerable Bishop at Kokopo,
who has done a vast amount of pioneer work, can even yet, along with
others, use a blow-pipe and do chemical analysis in the field for mineral
determination. Practically all the Fathers have taken their share in
compiling, among other things, a dictionary consisting of 20,000 native,
words belonging to the coastal tribes, and they have left nothing undone
to help on the general scheme of getting a more intimate knowledge of
the Territory. Some of the Maps of certain districts were published'
by the Mission, and to-day arrest one's attention as fine examples of the
cartographer's art. In the extensive bibliography of the Territory the
Missionaries have contributed much of outstanding merit, and some,
indeed, are classics in tropical anthropologic research.
2. OFFICIAL EXPEDITIONS. — From a purely scientific standpoint
the New Guinea Territory affords a fascinating, and in some ways unique,
field for research. One expedition after another under official auspices
was sent out from Germany staffed by some of their ablest men, and
their work will stand for all time. As far back as 1908 we find their ex-
peditions equipped with phonograph negatives recording native speech
and music, in addition to cinema records. In another case the explora-
tion of a single river (the Sepik) lasted one year, and was carried out
by an exceedingly well-equipped expedition. Five survey ships were
available during the German occupation, and much of the work was done
under the supervision of the German Imperial Navy or Colonial Office.


Native of Upper Ramu River making an arm-band, using the hollow wing-
bone of a flying fox to pull the strands through.


For the exploration of the Ramu River, which lasted several years, a
special shallow-draft stern-wheel steamer was constructed and sent out
in sections and assembled in New Guinea at great expense, and was
finally wrecked in that river. Many of their expeditions were daringly
carried out, and some of their explorers lost their lives. Expense was
never spared, efficiency was never impaired, and every expedition had
the whole-hearted support and fullest co-operation not only of the local
administration at Rabaul but also of the authority responsible for its
existence.
3. UNOFFICIAL EXPEDITIONS. — Private enterprise gave rise to several
expeditions interested in natural resources, most of which were of little
consequence. Two instances might be cited : one in Bougainville Island
and the other in the Toriu River, in New Britain. Both were characterised
by the extraordinary number of native carriers, and the preponderance
of cases of beer in the equipment. In each case the expedition lasted
as long as the beverage did.
4. TRADING COMPANIES.— For some time the Possession was held
under charter by the leading trading company, around which gradually
sprang up others. All of them contributed largely to the exploration
and development of the Territory. Closely identified with them were
many recruiters of native labour, bird-shooters, coastal and other traders,
etc. In the development of the pearling and allied industries the Japanese
came forward and obtained the mastery of the situation. To-day, their
knowledge of the sea in these parts stands alone, both as regards navi-
gation, ship-building and salvage work.


A Bushman of the Ramu River, 165 J nautical miles from mouth. The head-
band is made of " Job's Tears," the ear ornament of bamboo and the nose
ornament of the broken handle of a tea cup.


CHAPTER IV.
NATURAL RESOURCES OF THE NEW GUINEA TERRITORY-
Introductory. —Two salient facts stand out- in considering the in-
dustrial development of the Possession prior to the outbreak of war.
Firstly, we note that even after thirty years of colonisation the total white
population did not exceed 900 souls on the date of the landing of the
Australian troops, and these were scattered over 72,000 square miles.
Small though the population was, its prosperity was equally striking.
Every man was more or less successful, and had accumulated wealth.
Secondly, in spite of all the research a"nd exploration, industrial develop-
ment had taken place along one single groove, viz., plantations. The
country was practically exclusively devoted to the cultivation of the coco-
nut palm for the production of copra. Other products were grown in
a small way, of course, but were of no consequence whatever compared
with copra.
Reviewing the first point, it is perfectly clear that the main deterrent
was the pernicious climate of the Possession. The opening up of a
virgin country is a task beset with great difficulties, dangers and risks.
Few are willing to take on the latter, but many are willing later to benefit
by the experience of others once the country is opened up. The second
point, viz., the singleness of development of industrial activity, arose
out of several causes. One —the main one —is due to the geological
condition of the coast lines. There has been a great deal of earth move-
ment within the area under review, which lies in the general trend of
one of the most pronounced lines of weakness on the earth's crust. Raised
coral reefs, yielding a suitable calcareous soil, occur almost everywhere,
but, unfortunately, not always with an anchorage. Another contributory
fact was the influx of influential Samoan planters, who recognised the
value of the country for copra cultivation. It would appear that official
discouragement was steadfastly given to any attempt to develop other
natural resources, but heavy official inducements were given, on the
other hand, to clear the land for plantations.
The evolution of a primitive country has a strong affinity to its
administration. Of the three last German Governors, the first was a
professional soldier, and was succeeded in a long reign of office by a
Judge, who gave place, a few months before war broke out, to a mining
expert, who was a practical business man. All of them were surrounded
by a staff of highly trained technical men, who had ready access to Java
and its wonderful research laboratories. Care of the white man was
adequately provided for by the exclusive employment of practitioners
who were graduates in tropical medicine, and attended the medical con-
gresses in Java, and had their own research laboratory and were conversant
with the last word in tropical research. Care of the native was carried
out on a similar scale, and with the same efficiency. Both are absolutely


Jj| *-
'• ■iPy!'' 1 'It ; ' : ■ '
-
Head of Manam Islander. His long hair has just been released from a tube in which it is habitually worn.


essential in the early stages of development of a new country, and the
Germans simply followed the successful lead of the Dutch in these
matters.
The Bird of Paradise, etc. —The emblem used on the former coinage
of the Possession was a bird of paradise, symbolic, no doubt, of the most
important part this bird played in its early history. The Island of New
Guinea has been famous for generations for the variety and quality of
its bird skins. Many of the wealthy Germans recently expropriated
built up their immense fortunes by starting off life as bird shooters.
Many were penniless when they arrived in New Guinea Territory, and
took to the bush with a license to shoot with so many guns, provided
they cleared and planted so many acres of land for plantation purposes.
The work was dangerous ; the work was difficult; but the work was
exceedingly lucrative. They invariably made sufficient money to carry
them over the waiting period, when their plantations were yielding no
revenue, and prosperity was assured.
The trade in bird of paradise skins, ospreys, goura crests, etc., has
always been regarded, all over the world, as a recognised business. Leaving
Papua out of account, in the rest of the Island of New Guinea it has
always been considered of paramount importance. When the military
occupation took place in the late German portion of New Guinea, the
traffic was suppressed, and is to-day. The bird occurs on a belt reaching
all the way from Morobe to Humboldt's Bay, and is particularly numerous
and, on account of its habitat, well protected.
The native, in his association with the white man, has always looked
on the bird of paradise as a ready means of barter. For over thirty years
he has been accustomed to look on it as his unfailing and legitimate source
of what he regards as wealth. In proceeding up the Ramu River, I was
greatly impressed by the dismay and disappointment among the natives
when we refused to accept as barter their bird skins, ospreys, etc. The
native reasons things out for himself. His former white master traded
these things with him, shot them for himself, bought and sold them,
and handled them fearlessly. His new white master can do none of
these. He must not; he dare not. In the native mind his new master
is " long-long," or, failing that, not nearly so good to him as his former
white master. But he comes along all the same to collect his taxes 1
The native himself can do what he likes as far as birds of paradise are
concerned —a situation involving a serious loss of prestige to the white
man, who gets fined or imprisoned for attempting it. The natives of
New Guinea are not, and cannot be, subjects of Australia under the
Mandate, and I question the advisability of the suppression of a lucrative
trade, which these people relied on for paying their taxes and procuring
knives and other barter from the white man.
I would like to approach this question from another standpoint.
The returned soldier sent up from Australia to New Guinea has more
than a transient interest in the matter, and I have been repeatedly re-
quested to state a case for him. I was present in New Guinea when
a number of prosecutions took place for illicit traffic in bird skins. These


Two Women of Upper Ramu River. The morality of the Tribes they belong to has been the despair of the
Missions, who have never made an effort to establish a station there-


returned soldiers are, in many cases, identified with plantation work,
and know their records and history from the plantation books. Many of
these brave fellows are attempting to live on a mere pittance, sustaining a
wife and family on it in Australia, and keeping the strenuous life of a planter
going at the same time in New Guinea. They very properly argue that
an Australian returned soldier is as good as a German planter, and deserves
all the latter's rights and privileges as far as making money is concerned. He
wants to engage in the bird of paradise trade, and wants the restrictions
removed. He wants to be humiliated no longer in front of the native
by getting punished for what his predecessor did openly.
The whole question is one which, when it comes up for considera-
tion, is dominated by sentiment. The bird is exquisitely beautiful. Many
things occurring in nature equally wonderful are destroyed every day
for the sake of commerce. There is no fear of its extinction. It belongs
to a prolific family, and its natural habitat will always prevent its total
extinction. As soon as birds get scarce in any locality, it does not pay
the expense of trying to shoot them, and they soon replenish themselves.
There is no sign or trace of any extinction in the Dutch East Indies,
where immense fortunes have been made for generations out of the birds.
Stocks to the extent of 200,000 skins were held in Makassar when I
visited that centre recently.
It is a traffic which requires the closest official control. I would
submit to the Federal Government that the whole question should come
up for consideration for the sake of the native, for the sake of the returned
soldier, and for the sake of the revenue that could be derived from it. To
cut out an important natural resource of this country which needs every-
thing it can possibly get, is, in my opinion, neither common fairness
nor good business. Sentiment has no place.
MINERAL RESOURCES.
Petroleum. —To the native belongs the credit of discovering petroleum
in New Guinea. Bird shooters, operating along its coasts, first found
him using it about 83 miles from Eitape, towards the Sepik River, and
discovered that he obfained it from two localities adjacent to each other.
Attention was quickly drawn to the discovery; geologists and petroleum
technologists visited the region ; but, up to the time of the military
occupation nothing substantial was ever done with it. Part of the plan
of the Expedition was to report on the occurrence, but the work was at
the last moment taken over by six members of the staff of the Anglo-
Persian Oil Co. Four members made an exhaustive survey of the region
in question. One member (a geologist) made a running survey of the
coast up to the Dutch Territory and, later, was joined by a surveyor
who assisted him in his observations of the region of Astrolabe Bay,
between the Valley of the Kabenau and Gogal Rivers. This took place
almost a year ago, and I have not had access to their report. I can
only record the result of our own investigations.
Germany has always known very well the value of petroleum. Had
it been a sound commercial proposition it would have been developed


1/77 ; •
Sing-Sing or ceremonial dress of Atemble Natives, Upper Ramu River. The man in the centre is the Chief,
wearing head-dress of Cockatoo feathers. Dog's teeth, boar's tusks and " Job's Tears " are ornaments worn.


long before war broke out. The region lies in the general trend of the
line of weakness and volcanic activity traversing the Possession. The
geological formation in the region is confused and jumbled, and quite
unfavourable to the occurrence of any large body of petroleum retained
below. Two local distillations have, apparently, taken place, and the
country is heavily masked by vegetation, and difficult to survey with
precision. Pending the report of the Anglo-Persian Oil Co., I can only
submit that all the evidence available otherwise goes to show that pet-
roleum does not occur in commercial quantities, and does not afford
a business proposition in any way comparable even to Papua.
Petroleum has been alleged to occur in other parts of the Possession.
On the Sepik and Ramu Rivers a scum of vegetable origin, derived from
the swamps, gave rise to statements that petroleum occurred there. Apart
from the Weewak and Matapau areas, above cited, I have never been
able to get any substantiation for any other reliable occurrence, and do
not believe it exists.
Gold. —As far back as 1528 the island of New Guinea was named,
by Saaverdra the Spaniard, " The Island of Gold," and this precious metal
occurs in the Dutch, Papuan and late German New Guinea sections
of it. In the latter, the Germans were well aware of it, and at the actual
outbreak of war Haber, the Governor, was returning from the Waria
River after examining the possibility of dredging the latter.
Ramu and Huon Gulf Gold Konzessionsgebiet. —The main localities
where gold was known to occur was along a line extending from 5 degrees
south to 8 degrees south, from the Herbert River (a tributary of the
Ramu) right up to the sources of latter, and across the watershed and down
the valley of the Markham River, and along the coast of the Huon Gulf
to the mouth of the Waria —a strip of country approximately 310 miles
long.
Ramu River. —The Herbert River joins the Ramu at a spot 212
nautical miles from its mouth. It is a hook-shaped tributary, taking
its source in Mount Herbert, on the left bank. Proceeding up the Herbert
River a distance of 8f nautical miles, an alluvial deposit occurs con-
taining gold, position Lat. 5 0 30' south, Long. 145 0 o' 30* east. Any-
one desiring to get there should not proceed up the Ramu, but go overland
from Stephansort to the head-waters of the Ramu, and proceed down
the River. Before he gets there he will have traversed the main gold
alluvial deposits on the Ramu, viz.: the Yagei River, one of its head-
waters (Lat. 5 0 42' south, Long. 145 0 15' east). He will pass through
the former gold station of the New Guinea Company at 258 nautical
miles from mouth, and proceed down the River to a point 234J nautical
miles from mouth, where gold disappears until the Herbert River is
reached, a little over 22 miles further downstream.
These facts are taken from official German records. In proceeding
up the Ramu River on the " Wattle," we made concentrates all the time,
and never once found any trace of gold. Nor have I ever been able to
get access to authentic records of any gold ever having been found there.
I certainly know of no returns or statistics showing any output of the


precious metal. At one time a considerable quantity of corrugated iron
was taken up the Ramu, but fell into the hands of the natives, who used
it for building huts. Machinery was also supposed to have been taken
up, but I could discover no trace of it. In making exhaustive enquiries
into the whole circumstances, I came to the conclusion that the New
Guinea Company had either been misled by inexpert advisers or wil-
fully deceived by a band of unscrupulous men, whose main object was
the much more lucrative business of bird shooting. This Company
had five stations in all on the Ramu, one on the left bank at the mouth,
the second 100 miles up, the third 155 miles up, the fourth 166 miles
up, and the gold station 258 miles up. A fabulous fortune was spent by
them in its exploration and development, but they could not possibly
have got any return out of it, except in bird skins and a little sago.
Markham River. —Leaving the Ramu Gold Konzessionsgebiet and
passing over the water-shed into the Markham River Valley, forming
part of the Huon Golf Konzessionsgebiet, we find traces of gold in small
quantities occurring till a point 63 miles from the mouth is reached,
and where the confluence of a tributary flowing in from the right bank
takes place. This tributary was the main objective of pre-war prospectors.
A gold reef was supposed to occur at the source of this tributary, but no
one ever found it. They certainly found some gold, but, partly on account
of the irksome conditions under which they held their prospector's license,
and partly because the bird of paradise had a stronger attraction for them,
no development ever took place. Anyone desiring to get there should
proceed to Morobe and take the coast line along the Huon Gulf till the
mouth of the Markham is reached ; then proceed up the River for 63 miles.
The missions are fairly well represented in the vicinity, and could be
very helpful.
The Waria River. —This River flows through a region adjacent to
the richest mineral belt in Papua, namely, the Mambare District. It
has always been known that the River contains a certain amount of gold.
Long before the war licenses to prospect it for dredging purposes were
granted by the Germans, even to Australian syndicates. Australian
gold alluvial miners have worked the River for many years past. The
Waria flows rapidly, through a very precipitous course, and dredging,
in many cases, would be beset by difficulty. The country is mountainous,
and the feasability of getting machinery up has always been a doubtful
point. No great quantity of gold has every been recorded except in
one locality, a concession for which was given to an Alsacian subject named
Kempf by the German Governor before the war, and who, on account
of being born in Alsace, of French parents, has his title supported by
the French Government. I have seen a number of parcels from the
Waria River, including from the concession in question, and they have
always been clean, the alluvial gold assuming the habit of flakes and
scales rather than granular. Apart from the bed of the River itself, the
main locality for alluvial gold occurs on the plateau three and a-half to
four days inland by direct route behind Morobe, or six days inland fol-
lowing the River bed, situated about 3,500 feet above sea level. Anyone
desiring to proceed there should take the steamer to Morobe, and either
take the direct bush track or follow the river bed. Kempf never worked


his concession, and no figures are available to me of any output of gold
from the River. The only trace I can find of such a thing was a parcel
of 50 ozs. gold sent by an Australian miner to Rabaul, covering an advance
made by the Local District Officer.
The Kabenau River. —Gold is reputed to occur on this River, and
to be found near the mouth of it. The New Guinea Company owned
a plantation skirting the side of the reputed locality, and found none.
A good deal of iron pyrites occurs in some of the rocks, particularly a
hornblende porphyry, and concentrates made of the gravels show the
same feature. lam of the opinion that the identification was incorrect.
I cannot imagine the New Guinea Company spending a fortune up the
Ramu River in quest of gold, when it could be found readily on the River
alongside their own plantation.
Other Localities. —Expeditions up the Sepik recorded gold on the
higher reaches, but not in commercial quantities. Malay bird shooters
from the Rawlinson Range brought back alluvial gold with them from
a locality unknown. The Baining District has always been reputed to
yield gold. The missions state they know of none there. I have seen
a great deal of iron pyrites come from that locality, and some of it, ap-
parently, deceived some of the missionaries themselves. Natives in
some of the outlying islands have been known to have gold derived from
some undiscovered locality. It may be mentioned that the average native
does not use gold for ornamental or any other purpose, and would not
recognise it until trained, and has no interest in it.
Platinum. —(See above, Gold, on Kabenaie River.) —This precious
metal has been recorded at the mouth of the foregoing River, one alleged
specimen having been found in an erratic yielding a fabulous
percentage. The authority who identified it is unnamed. No rocks of
an ultra-basic type occur at all among the erratics, which are mainly
acidic and intermediate in character, and the occurrence, I can only
conclude, is mythical—same as the gold.
Iridosmine. —This rare metal has been recorded from the upper
reaches of the Waria River. Its characteristics are very similar to those
of the metal found in the Mambari district in Papua. It is found in
small quantities in alluvial deposits, associated with gold, the association
being mechanical and accidental probably. It has never been mined
in a methodic way, and the extent and value of the deposit is yet un-
determined.
Osmium was identified by one of the previous Bergraths resident
at Morobe as occurring in association with gold, same as iridosmine.
I am of the opinion that his identification was incorrect.
Iron Ore is found in various localities in the Territory. The main
occurrence is in an outcrop of magnetite on the North Coast at no remote
distance from Rabaul. During the military occupation the Chief Sur-
veyor was sent to report on it, and his specimens were analysed in Mel-
bourne under official auspices. It was surveyed many years ago by
the Germans, who marked it on some of their maps as a danger to naviga-


shhSBSE*. ■ ■ i*iL m •"*'
|sf Eg
H- — -■ jp^*£^'iipWI^BH^^ - »
IHHjgBr 6* J||- 4t^
jMfe :.; < # * JMM^TV.
A Ramu River Native using a stone adze for cutting timber. As far as implements are concerned these
natives belong to the stone age.


tion on account of' compass deflection. It was never mined by them
on account of the impossibility of procuring suitable labour, and the
difficulty in finding a profitable market.
At Iboki very extensive deposits of black sand occur along the sea-
shore, composed almost exclusively of pure magnetite, and also form a
danger to navigation. I went up all the rivers in the neighbourhood
to locate the origin of the magnetite, but found no rocks with any excess,
its derivation arising probably from the conglomerates, grits, etc., which
are well represented in the vicinity.
A similar occurrence of black sand takes place at Alido, and also
at the mouth of the Ramu River. Iron ore, in the form of haematite,
is reputed to occur in the valley of the Markham River, but I could find
no records of its survey or any reports.
Coal. —Very extensive outcrops of lignite take place in the south
end of New Ireland. They formed the objective of an expedition in
1908. Many specimens were collected and analysed. On account of
the dip, and a bed of clay underlying, it was deemed unsafe to attempt
any mining operations, and nothing was ever done with it.
The same substance also presents itself on an extensive scale at
the base of the Rawlinson Range on the Huon Gulf. Analyses were
also made in this instance, and one of the trading companies held a con-
cession for mining it. On account of lack of suitable anchorage and
general inaccessibility, nothing was done with it either.
From time immemorial the natives of the Toriu River in New
Britain have been burning coal, which they find on the river bed, and
the exact outcrop of which has never been determined. One unofficial
German expedition went up the Toriu to locate it, but failed. While
the " Wattle " was anchored there, I sent a party up to investigate, but
they also found no trace, not having penetrated far enough probably.
At the termination of the Expedition one of the Mission Fathers assured
me that they had located beds of coal in the interior of the Baining dis-
trict, but it was too late for us to proceed there to conduct investigations.
Manganese. —The natives of the Siassi Islands procure this ore in
a crumbling condition, and grind it down to smear themselves with it,
by using oil in combination. They trade it extensively with the natives
of Sahre and Kalinge, as well as with the natives of the Mainland of New
Guinea. It is much sought after for this purpose.
Opal. —Common and wood varieties are found in the Toriu River
basin. No precious variety has been recorded.
Chalcedony, Jasper, Iceland Spar and Rock Crystal were found by
us in examining the gravels of the Toriu. Some of these gravels resemble
strongly gem-gravels occurring in various parts of the world.
Red Ochre is found in quantities at Garua, and widely used by the
natives for trading purposes as a pigment. The natives of the Ramu


River have also several localities where they find it. It is apparently
fairly widely distributed throughout the Territory.
Rock Salt crops out in Stettin Bay, on the coast line, and the natives
use and trade with it.
Lead Ochre. —A bright red oxide of lead, occurring massive and
in considerable quantities, is found in the Baining district, not far from
the north coast, and in the area where the magnetic iron above referred
to crops out, and was located by the Roman Catholic Mission.
Sulphur is relatively scarce in the Territory in spite of the extra-
ordinary volcanic development. In one or two cases emanations have
taken place, but the substance does not occur in paying commercial
quantities.
Asbestos, Mica, Copper Pyrites, Iron Pyrites all occur as in Australia,
but not in such a way as to call for special comment.
Pottery Clays. —ln many parts native tribes make cooking vessels
out of clay. The art is best developed, perhaps, at Bili-bili, in New
Guinea, and also in the Ramu area. The Roman Catholic Mission at
Alexis Hafen use clay for the manufacture of tiles, bricks, etc. The
Buka natives procure a fine grained clay, which they manufacture into
tobacco pipes. Samples of all these have been sent to Australia repeatedly,
but created little interest.
Lithographic Slate. —A fine grained, compact, homogeneous lime-
stone, somewhat resembling the Solenhofen slate, is found in the Baining
district. It has never been tried so far for the purpose. It is probably
an indurated product of a contact zone, and whether it occurs in suitable
slabs or not is unknown.
Black Marble. —Another interesting limestone occurs in the same
region as above, and in hand specimens looks a very handsome ornament
stone.
Rock Phosphate of a low grade was worked prior to the war on one
of the outlying islands of the Bismark Archipelago, and a certain amount
of plant installed.
Summing Up Mineral Resources. —It must be admitted that even
after 30 years of German rule and 7 J years' Australian occupation there
has been little indication of the mineral resources of the New Guinea
Territory being of any considerable value or outstanding importance
as a source of wealth or revenue. When placed alongside those of Papua
they are, as far as is known, of little significance, and until some solution
to the native labour situation is forthcoming, are destined to remain so.
34


• - j M-ipt • - — e ft.e -*
'^AW
CHAPTER V.
SALIENT GEOLOGICAL FEATURES OF THE
NEW GUINEA TERRITORY
BY
EVAN R. STANLEY, F.G.S.
YOUNGER TERTIARY LIMESTONES. —In this series are included the
raised coral limestones from the pliocene to present, together with the
tuffs and marls so common in these parts. On the South coast of New
Britain and on New Ireland there is a large development of limestone
forming bold headlands interrupted only by bays into which many mountain
streams flow. Many of these headlands exhibit the typical terraced
structure common to the Solomon Archipelago and the Louisiade chain.
Fig. i. —IDEAL SECTION FROM KIEP PLANTATION THROUGH PORTION OF
COASTAL RANGE, WIDE BAY, NEW BRITAIN,
i. Coarse river alluvium in part cemented with travertine. 2. Vesicular
basalts and Tuff (late Tertiary). 3. Limestone (pliocene). 4. Volcanic
Agglomerate (pre-pliocene). 5. Gabbroid dyke containing splashes of pyrites.
6. Altered banded slates and quartzites, etc.
At Cape Orford three distinct terraces are seen, proving that in late
Tertiary times at least three distinct elevations occurred. A positive
eustatic movement is now in progress along the coastline of New Britain.
On the Mainland and a portion of the New Britain coast there are small
veneers of recently raised coralline limestone, wjtiich are partly interbedded
with volcanic tuffs and pyroclastics of coarser grain. This is to be ex-
pected, as at present time rifting and volcanic action are still in progress.
OLDER TERTIARY LIMESTONES. —The oldest known beds of these rocks
are seen in New Ireland. They range from oligocene to miocene in age,
are folded and faulted, and are, in part, glauconitic in character, being
interbedded with sandstones and grits. There appears to be a development


•jgwf-jfc. ' 3y K 'si; rM .j*taB$X&'
Ramu natives making " cloth " by beating the under-bark from a tree, and pulling it off like a sleeve. It
is used mainly by men for loin cloths.


*+~ w 7 Mites — £ t - >
umudu Punam Pudukudu
\ /H7o' • »
( after BehrencT/. )
.. w - 10 Mile* - - '£
/H/SS'Cn Ttmr-
Tono Ft*sn 7dnuRt*tr lliL^*"
of these rocks on the Gazelle Peninsula and the Mainland. There is
undoubted evidence of the existence of miocene limestones in the higher
elevations of the Southern strands of New Britain, New Ireland and the
New Guinea coast from Madang to the Dutch Border.
Fig. a. —GENERAL SECTION ACROSS MIDDLE NEW IRELAND —FROM UMUDU
TO KUDUKUDU DISTRICT.
1. Alluvium. 2. Volcanic Ash Cinder and Tuff. 3. Raised pleistocene
coral limestone. 4. Pliocene or Plio-miocene foraminiferal sandstones, mud-
stones, limestones and tuffs. 5. Basalts, andesites, etc. 6. Gneisses with
quartz diorites, syenites, gabbros and granites.
OTHER TERTIARY DEPOSITS. — The large development of fossiliferous
and unfossiliferous rocks in the Tertiary series is well in evidence in many
places examined during the expedition. They appear to occur practi-
cally all over the Territory. They are, for the most part, sandstones of
varying fabric, grits, conglomerites, psammtatic fossiliferous mudstones
containing semi-carbonised vegetable remains. They sometimes exhibit
a pliocene habit, and sometimes miocene fauna are to be seen. These
Fig. 3. —IDEAL SECTION FROM MOUTH OF TORIU (HOLMES) RIVER, SHOWING
SEDIMENTARY SERIES, GAZELLE PENINSULA, NEW BRITAIN.
i. Alluvium. 2. Raised coral limestone probably Pleistocene. 3. Fora-
miniferal limestones, mudstones, sandstones and Tuffs, together with thick
deposits of calcareous sandstones and psammitic mudstones (plio-miocene).
4. False-bedded, jointed, fossiliferous sandstone, probably Miocene.
plio-miocene series are seen to advantage at the Toriu River, Iboki and
Putput in New Britain, at the Kabenau River, Nagada, Potsdamhafen on
•the New Guinea coast, and at Angaua on the East side of the Ramu, 190
miles by river inland.


£ „ - 2 M,les - -* J *
»- Vt . — A Af./es 1 • • £ - *
M&3
%
Fig. 4. —GENERALISED SECTION FROM MALANGEN ISLAND ACROSS COASTAL
RANGE NEAR POTSDAMHAFEN, NORTH COAST, NEW GUINEA.
1. Raised Coral Reef. 3. Semi-indurated limestones, sandstones and
grits dipping generally North-north-east at 25°-35°. 3. Weathered Amy-
gdolcidal basalt flow. 4. Faulted and contorted sediments (highly indurated)
with fine-grained volcanic rocks and quartzites. 5. Intrusive dyke (Post
Tertiary). 6. Veneer of Volcanic dust and boulders of Augite Andesite.
7. Serpentinised peridotite, highly decomposed.
Fig. 5. —GENERALISED SECTION FROM TAB ISLAND THROUGH NOBONOB,
NEAR MADANG, NORTH COAST, NEW GUINEA.
i. Alluvium. 2. Coralline limestone. 3. Post Tertiary Andesite. 4. Ap-
proximate position of late Tertiary .Sediments. 5. Older Volcanic capping,
probably early Tertiary. 6. Contorted Metamorphic zone penetrated by
fine-grained dykes.
Near the coast these series have become folded and faulted to a
great extent, the faulting taking place, in most instances, parallel to the
coastline, following the line of volcanic activity. In part, the coastal
series have been intruded by saussuritised gabbros and grano-diorites
which have caused considerable local metamorphism. The general
strike of the series is West-north-west, and East-south-east dipping
variably from 5 0 to 50°, with a throw Northerly on the Mainland, and in
New Britain, striking nearly East and West and dipping a few degrees
Northerly.
The hinterland portions of the series are less disturbed, being away
from coastal movements, and it appears as though there is a considerable
development in the Ramu and Sepik Valleys.


The plio-miocene series are important in that they represent the typical
oil series common all over the littoral of New Guinea. Oil seepages occur
near the sea shore between Karawop and Eitape, in the Matapau district.
The occurrences have been described by Captain Macintosh in 1917,
and later by the Anglo-Persian Geologists in 1921, but the existence of
petroleum was known to the Germans in 1910, when 120,000 marks were
voted for scientific investigation, which was later increased to 500,000
marks. A systematic geological survey is necessary in those portions where
plio-miocene deposits occur, in order to prove the existence or otherwise
of commercial deposits of petroleum.
Associated with these deposits are seams of lignitic coal, which have
been reported from the low undulating country South-east of Madang.
Its composition compares very favourably with the Purari occurrences in
Papua. Again, coal of superior quality was reported on by German Ex-
perts, and occurs in the Tamul formation in South New Ireland. Although
there appears to be a fairly large deposit here, the steeply dipping strata,
in a slippery formation, renders it almost impossible of development.
Deposits of brown coal may be of value in these parts providing they
compare favourably in composition and accessibility with Australian
occurrences. The cheap water power in New Guinea may be utilised in
conjunction with its development.
MESOZOIC ROCKS.— These rocks, as far as is known, only occupy a
very limited area in New Guinea. They occur on the Torricelli Moun-
tains as fossiliferous limestones, dipping North-north-west at 85°. In
Dutch New Guinea, on the Wilhelmina Peak, 15,000 feet above sea level,
aveolina (cretaceous) limestone occurs in large masses. These limestone
masses also occur in the mountainous regions of Papua and the New
Guinea Territory, and are probably the same age.
METAMORPHIC ROCKS.— In New Guinea, three zones of rocks are
recognised in the complex metamorphic series. They are:—
1. Phyllytes, slates, quartzites and crystalline limestones ;
2. Gneisses and schists, both of igneous and aqueous origin, and
3. Serpentine series.
Gneisses and schists have been recognised in the Schleinitz and Rossel
Mountains, in New Ireland, and in Bougainville. There is also a con-
siderable development of gneissic gabbroid and granitoid rocks in the
Baining Mountains—penetrating a highly contorted and indurated series,
the components of which have not been determined. They are probably
palaeozoic or precambrian in age, and similar to some of the recognised
series in Papua.
It is quite probable that the highlands of the Eastern half of New
Britain are made up of these rocks. In New Guinea, on the other hand,
there is undoubted evidence of all three series existing. The metamorphic
zones of Papua are more or less restricted to the main and subordinate
ranges, and extend over the border into the Mandated Territory.
Semi-waterworn boulders of sericite, mica and hornblende schists,
gneisses, quartzites and quartz, and schistose fine-grained eruptive rocks,


jJP mL MUX *I
.;BE! _.&jagX PE4i
>. JvV*' =f *""- "*-j^R^.. < . -i*ii^® v ' ■■ ■ '_
._' * '" *'*•* ■ '~TT.' *~ •*■.**; -jW ~ A, ," v -'J:
_d>'w • " iv ■*■ — - " **• %
V K - - ' - „ • 1 " - _ , **>
" ~ "****•• w ..i3* ■■«#:..■ ' , "~«*
-'" . ' ■•" . t ' . . " -«* *•»,
Canoe Builders at KaltSge, New Britain. Their canoes are famous all over New Britain for fine workmanship,
and jhey trade them to other tribes for commodities they are in lack of,


have been picked up on the Western tributaries of the Ramu very near the
foot of the Aiome Mountains, pointing to the possible large development
of these rocks in this range.
The Metamorphic zones in New Guinea are important in that they
carry the rocks responsible for the occurrence of gold, osmiridium, copper,
iron and other minerals of commercial importance. Magnetic iron occurs
in the Baining district, and gold and osmiridium on the Mainland. Osmi-
ridium is usually associated with ultrabasic intrusions and serpentines,
both of which occur about the watersheds of the main range.
IGNEOUS ROCKS. YOUNGER ERUPTIVE ROCKS.— The New Guinea
Territory is certainly one of the finest places in the World for the research
student in Petrology, Volcanology and Seismology.
The huge development of late Tertiary eruptive rocks on New
Britain, New Ireland, Buka and Bougainville, and a large percentage of
the coastline of the Mainland, points to the fact that there must have been
some stupendous earth movements, culminating in suites of volcanoes
which have built up new land surfaces along the old oceanic strands and
archipelagoes. In recent times a portion of the Gazelle Peninsula, and
the whole of the Northern coastline of New Britain, the Islands of the
Dampier Strait, and a portion of the Solomon Archipelago, were sites of
volcanic activity of the most destructive type. Outpourings of lava,
followed by terrific explosions, built up numerous cones of tuff and scoria,
the remnants of which can be seen throughout the island portions of the
Territory. Volcanic action is now in the dying stages, and a few active
volcanoes are still spasmodically erupting along different portions of the
faulted coastline. The Volcano of Ghaie, on Tavurvur, West of the
South Daughter, is in the sofataric stage, but showed signs of activity in
December, 1916, during a severe earthquake shock. It was violently
active in January, 1878, when the Island of Vulcan, in Blanche Bay rose
out of the sea. The craters on the West side of the Mother and North
Daughter, together with a number of smaller craters, have been respon-
sible for the veneer of pyroclastic material over a large area of the Gazelle
Peninsula. The Father and South Son, Lolobau Island, Sulu, Banga,
Bulu, Benda and the parasitic cone of Nangila—all on the Northern coast-
line, show signs of activity. Off the North-east coast of New Guinea
the volcanoes of Manam and Bern are the only active members of the chain
of Islands making up the Schouten and Dampier Groups. They are
coterminous with a line of weakness passing through the Straits, con-
tinuous with that of the Philippines and Japan on the one hand, and the
Solomons—New Zealand and Antarctica on the other.
The late Tertiary volcanic rocks met with in the New Guinea Terri-
tory are augite andesites, basalts, dacites, rhyolites, obsidian and tachylytic
basalts, together with tuffs and pumice. The later flows of lava are, for
the most part, olivine basalts and tachylytic basalts followed by explosive
types of eruption which spread a veneer of ejectamenta over the whole
countryside for many miles in radius.
Fumaroles, solfataroes, geysers and hot springs are not uncommon
in the volcanic regions. Sulphur is being sublimed from steam vents at
Ghaie and Tavurvur, and hot springs are seen on the shores of Matupi


Bay and the Matanatara (Sulphur) Creek, near Rabaul. A line of geysers
and sulphur deposits associated with hot springs are seen at Pangalu,
in Garua Harbour, a very picturesque area, suitable for a health resort.
Hot springs are also reported as occurring at the base of Kairiru, an
extinct volcano on the North coast of New Guinea, near Karawop.
OLDER IGNEOUS ROCKS. —There appears to be a fairly large develop-
ment of these rocks in the metamorphic zones of the Mandated Territory.
On the Gazelle Peninsula diorites, grano-diorites, granites, syenites,
diabases and gabbros, exist in association with a complex series of meta-
morphic rocks. These rocks are all found in the Baining Mountains,
whilst West of Wide Bay, porphyrites, gabbros and volcanic agglomerates
are not uncommon.
On New Ireland and New Hanover quartz diorites and hornblende
syenites have been reported to occur on the Schleinitz and Rossel Moun-
tains.
On the Mainland of New Guinea there is a large development of
these rocks judging by the quantity of boulders brought down by the
rivers.
The Finisterre Mountains carry basic plutonic rocks, and hornblende
porphyrites have been noted carrying a high percentage of pyrites.
Grano-diorites penetrate the coastal series near Nagada, Potsdam-
hafen and the North Coast.
The Main Range is similar in many respects to the Papuan areas,
examined by myself and others, and prove the presence of granites,
gabbros, diorites and peridotites. Quartz porphyries and porphyrites
containing a high percentage of epidote are fairly common, and in some
cases veins of quartz and epidote were noted.
The intrusive varieties of these rocks have been responsible for the
•deposition of metals of commercial importance.
Tectonically, New Guinea is a representative of the Indo-Malay
■chain, forming a portion of the great arc which passes from Java to the
New Hebrides and New Zealand. There is an oriental commingling
with Australian features, as is shown from geological, biological and
palaeontalogical comparisons. The main New Guinea Arc virgates
somewhere on the Main Range in the New Guinea Territory. The
virgation extends through the Finisterre Mountains to New Britain,
uniting with the outer Australian Arch passing through New Ireland
and the Solomons.
Apart from the Oceanic tectonic faulting, New Britain has been
subjected to a series of North and South late Tertiary rifts, which have
been responsible for the formation of volcanoes, and accounts for the
large development of eruptive rocks of this period. Associated with the
rifting, acute earth folding has occurred in the late Tertiary sediments,
along the major portion of the coastline of the Mainland, which feature
has probably been more or less responsible in creating difficulties in
isolating commercial supplies of petroleum.


CHAPTER VI.
PLANTATIONS AND NATIVE LABOUR.
At the time of going to press the text for this portion of the report
is not available. In November, 1920, Mr. Walter Lucas was nominated
by the Prime Minister's Department to undertake this section of the
work, when the services of an Australian Expert, in Java, were procurable.
In view of the fact that the Possession is mainly devoted to the planta-
tion industry, it is to be regretted that this most important detail in
the Report must be deferred. The fact that expropriation is not yet
altogether completed within the Territory justifies some of the informa-
tion being withheld in the meantime.
The New Guinea Territory is potentially one of the richest Posses-
sions in the Pacific. As far as plantations are concerned, its possibilities
are limitless, and fertile land is available almost everywhere. It must
be noted, however, that most of the best positions, with good anchorages
near the main sea routes, and where labour is abundant, have been taken
up long ago. By linking these up by light railways to the less favoured
locations, expansion of the cultivated areas could be made to an enormous
extent.
The physical and climatic conditions are so varied, and so favourable,
that any of the usual tropical products can be grown successfully. It
is a coming country for kapok. Cotton, hemp, sugar cane, rice, and many
other things have been grown—experimentally—perfectly. The country
has everything in its favour to ultimately become one of the foremost
in the world for tropical vegetable products. It has one drawback only,
which we will consider later, and which is very serious.
In connection with Mr. Lucas's Report, arrangements were made
by the Prime Minister's Department to have the Principal Medical Officer
at Rabaul write a sub-joined Report on " Prevalent Native Diseases
Impairing Efficiency of Labour." At the time of going to press this is
not available, although instructions were issued to the Administration
in November, 1920. Several serious epidemics of measles, influenza
and smallpox have recently broken out in the territory, and such a Report
would be of greatest value to policemasters, patrol officers, district officers,
etc. The extraordinary series of incidents which took place near the
Dutch border last year, in connection with an alleged outbreak of small-
pox, could never have taken place had such a Report been available to
the officers involved.
MARINE PRODUCTS.
In a similar manner to the above, this portion of the Report is, mean-
time, deferred. A good number of leases were held, and came under
the attention of the Expropriation Board. Generally speaking, the country
is very favourable for trochas shell, which is very abundant. Golden


|t£' K ~ » iP *
' " jSmj^KKb**
'" * sH •~<II8 " 'J^LJJ^FLS^^^
Women of Bili-bili Island making cooking pots out of clay. Note the extraordinary amount of neck ornaments,
indicative of trade prosperity.


lip and black lip pearl shell occur commonly in certain localities. Green
snail is very plentiful on many of the reefs. Of the actual pearl output I
could get no information. Turtle occurs almost everywhere, but not in
great numbers, and tortise shell is relatively scarce, compared with other
countries. The trade in beche de mer has never been seriously developed
in the Possession, although everything is most favourable to it. Pearl
fishing is carried on mostly by Japanese from Dobo, Broome and Torres
Straits.
TIMBER RESOURCES.
Instructions were issued to the Lands Department, Rabaul, in Oc-
tober, 1920, per the Administration, to afford the officers of this Expedition
all assistance and information relative to the natural resources of the
Territory. The Department had conducted a number of important
surveys relative to timber, among other things. Up to the time of going
to press the instructions of the Prime Minister have been openly dis-
regarded—not through the fault of the Lands Department so much as
the inefficiency of the Administration.
What timber there is occurs in a sporadic way, and much of it is
very valuable and rare. The Missions have been using it at their mills
and joinery works for various purposes for many years. There is nothing
comparable to the vast forests lands of Tasmania or Queensland in the
New Guinea Territory, and native labour is hard to get for the lumber
business, Chinese and Malays making the best workmen. As far as
timber is concerned the Territory is not nearly so well stocked as Papua is.
MAP OF RAMU RIVER.
In connection with this Expedition, a very accurate map of the
Ramu River has been issued, showing the traverse made by the Wattle
up to the 200 mile limit, and prepared by Mr.. E. R. Stanley, F.G.S.,
assisted by Captains Duncan and Thompson.
NATIVE RACES OF NEW GUINEA TERRITORY.
How far can the country itself provide the labour necessary for its
industrial evolution is the only question we are concerned with here.
The Germans took census by sending out patrols in a similar manner
to that adopted during the military occupation and subsequently. So
much of the country is still inaccessible that any statement about its
population is the merest guesswork. The Missions are in the position
to know best, but cannot tell. Leaving out of consideration the vast
inaccessible areas, we come to the coastal, island, and river populations.
These have been carefully worked over for many years by recruiters for
labour, yet the supply of the latter is always well under the demand.
The population is distributed in a peculiar way, the determinant being
the supply of the staple native food. In many cases where the labour is
most wanted the population does not exist, and recruiting troubles arise,
bringing the Missions into conflict with the recruiter. The Germans
found they could not run the Territory without outside aid, and one


j _
IV
V jflBra
A native man belonging to mouth of Ramu River. Note the shaved forehead,
neck-rings of Chinese origin, and cane corset.


of the Governors favoured the introduction of the yellow races to such
an extent as to lead to his ultimate recall.
The native population is so small, and the number of efficients
willing to work so limited, and the present methods of recruiting them
so inefficient, that the country is altogether impoverished. Herein lies
the weakness of the whole situation. Available native labour, adequate
and suitable for the ordinary legitimate industrial expansion of the country
does not exist.
