

INTO
A LAND
UNKNOWN
and Out






Copyright 1923
Dort Motor Car Company


INTO A LAND UNKNOWN
and OUT
BEING the adventures of a few
stout-hearted men who set
out to establish a short route for a
transcontinental railroad through
a wild, unknown land and how
three stock Dort cars made the
trip of 5,546 miles in 67 days —the
first time on record that any cars
were able to make such a trip
entirely under their own power.


Route taken by the expedition.


AUSTRALIA
“The Lonely Continent”
A USTRALIA, the land of the kangaroo, the emu,
the goanna and the strange platypus; Australia,
where flora and fauna can be seen as in the years
before the age of coal; Australia, home of the aborigi-
nes —this is the country with which our story has to do.
Western United States in the days of ’49 was not as
undeveloped, as wild, as little known as the interior of
the “Lonely Continent” is today. True, there are great
cities in Australia. Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and
Brisbane are as modern as any American cities but they
are all on the fringe of the continent. There are only
5,000,000 white people on the whole continent and 60
per cent of these live in the cities.
Australia, historians claim, was officially discovered
by Willem Jansz in his ship, the Duyfken, in 1606.
However, maps made by French and Portuguese ex-
plorers as early as the 16th century show a rough


sketch of its coast line, indicating that other white men
had visited the place before the Dutchman. In 1770
Janies Cook, an Englishman, explored Australia and
his reports led to settling the continent and claiming
it for England. Great Britain, through her loss of the
American colonies, turned to colonizing the new land.
Before the practice was discontinued over 83,000 con-
victs were transported. Few of these, however, were
hardened criminals, they being for the most part
political prisoners and men whose only crime was debt.
Today Australia is developing at a rapid rate and
the government, particularly since the war, is seeking
to bring civilization into the interior, much of which
still remains unknown.
THE PLAN FOR A TRANSCONTINENTAL
RAILWAY
One of those most interested in a transcontinental
railway that would unite the north and south of
Australia and develop the wild country of the interior
was the Honorable T. McCallum, a member of the
Legislative Council of South Australia.
In order to see for himself just what the possibilities
were for such an undertaking he organized and financed
an expedition that would go over foot by foot the
territory the proposed railway would cover.
The idea to cross the continent by automobile was
not new. Several attempts had been made previously
by both American and European cars. But no car
ever had been able to complete the trip under its own
power. Wrecks of cars that attempted to make the


Johnny and Billy
Aborigine, their father
and two uncles posing in
front of one of the cars.
One of the towering
ant hills to be found
in the interior.


trip still lie on the desolate sand hills and in the treacher-
ous swamps, like the whitened carcasses of animals
found on our western plains.
Consequently Mr, McCallum took extreme care in
selecting the make of car he would use for the journey.
Finally he chose the Dort because of the remarkable
records which it had established on the continent for
endurance and trustworthiness, and persuaded Murray
Aunger, a famous Australian driver, to engineer the
exploration party.
START OF THE EXPEDITION
In three Dort four cylinder stock cars the expedition
left Adelaide, at the extreme south of the continent,
in the early summer of 1922. Driving in a drizzling
rain, the start was made under the most adverse
conditions, but the weather in no way chilled
the enthusiasm of the party. A camel train with
supplies had gone forward three months ahead and
a schedule had been made out for picking up pro-
visions at various points. Good headway was made
until the trio of cars reached Oonadatta, the end of
the railroad. From then on all sorts of adventures
and hardships were encountered.
ANT HILLS HIGHER THAN A
MAN’S HEAD
Mountains, rocky ridges, flood-saturated country,
sand dunes, plains where grass grew six feet high, and
spots studded with towering ant hills, were traversed.
Rivers as wide as the Missouri had to be crossed. This
was accomplished in a novel manner. Natives swam


Crossing a river in
the flood season.
Crossing a river
in the dry season.


Photograph of three Dort cars taken
in Adelaide just as they had completed
their journey of 5,5 46 miles through
the heart of Australia in 67 days.


across and attached a block and tackle to a tree on
the opposite shore. One car fitted with a power drum
was used to pull the first two cars, which in turn
pulled the third across; thus the three Dorts furnished
the power for transportation. Many times the cars
were entirely lost from view and the pilot was forced
to stand up in the seat in order to keep his head above
water.
EXTRACT FROM OFFICIAL REPORT
The official report of the expedition in describing
this experience says: “Before leaving Adelaide No. 1
car had been fitted with a small winding gear which
was driven by gears from the engine. The rope was
passed round the drum and the other end attached to
No. 2 car. As soon as the engine was started, No. 2
started off and immediately began sliding through
several feet of mud and slush, left by the receding
floods. It then entered the water, piloted by Mr.
Murray Aunger sitting in the front seat and steering
just as calmly as if he were driving down a boulevard.
Gradually the car sunk lower and lower until at last
he was obliged to raise himself to the top portion of
the seat panel and in the center of the stream very
little more than his head was visible, but we watched
with extreme interest and delight the slow but steady
progress that he was making towards the other side of
the river. The natives were filled with astonishment
at this unique sight and their excitement was intense.
Gradually he began to arise from the water as he
approached the opposite bank, first of all shoulders,
then steering wheel and finally the car emerged like a


How rivers were crossed.
Going down.
Down.
Coming up.


great amphibious animal and gradually out on to the
bank with water flowing from either side like a sub-
marine coming to the surface.
“The performance was repeated with No. 3 car. The
magnetos, which were the only parts removed, were
then replaced and within half an hour of their total
immersion both No. 2 and No. 3 cars had their engines
running in perfect order.
“Having accomplished this remarkable performance,
we decided to camp for the night, which we did on a
cold and bleak muddy bank where we waited very
patiently for the dawn so that we might make an early
start. As soon as day broke, No. 1 car was dug out of
the mud into which she had sunk deep during the night.
The rope was then passed through the pulley block
and attached to No. 2 and 3 cars and in this manner
No. 1 car was towed through the river to the north
bank. After straightening up our equipment and get-
ting as much mud from the cars as we were able, we
proceeded on our way. We discovered that by deviat-
ing to the west, we could circumvent considerable
flooded areas. All afternoon we were crossing boggy
and slippery creeks and rough Bay of Biscay country.
Darkness found us on a high plain, rolling and rocking
through indescribable country, with a feeling to the
occupants of the cars more akin to being on a ship in
a heavy sea than in an automobile.”
CANNIBALS
Unusual birds such as huge black storks and queer
animals were encountered and many unfamiliar trees,
shrubs and flowers were seen. Strange to relate, how-


Mud and sand in a
country without roads.


ever, the party was never seriously menaced by the
tribes of aborigines —nomad savages —that were to be
found in great numbers. Groups of savages often
gathered on hillsides and watched the cars with great
interest, believing them to be some super-animals of
wonderful strength and speed.
The aborigines are known as “blackfellows” or “bush-
men” and are the most primitive kind of people. They
are not really black but dark brown, and many writers
claim them to be of mixed Papual and Malay blood.
Some of these tribes prefer the taste of human flesh
to that of animals. Captives of war are generally eaten
after the victory. It is not uncommon to see a warrior
of the tribe decorated with the skull or hand of a victim
dangling from a cord about his neck. Nearly all of the
natives lacerate their bodies as proof of their great
courage and endurance. In some tribes the custom of
knocking out the front tooth of a wife-to-be is prac-
ticed.
THE RETURN
Despite rains and storms, the party of persistent
travelers and the three Dorts landed in Darwin, the
northern objective, without a mishap. After a short
stay they set out for the return journey over a different
route. Coming back the same rough country had to
be travelled, but the party became used to conditions
and better time was made. In fact, the cars made
such good time that the last of the camel train, which
had started three months before, was overtaken
150 miles from its destination. In just 67 days from
the start the party reached Adelaide, with all three


An ant hill, one of
thousands that are
higher than a man.
A guide. Note how
his chest is lacerated.


Dort cars performing wonderfully, having covered
5,546 miles through the wildest country in the world.
It was the first time that human beings had, in one
journey, seen the Southern Ocean and the Timor Sea.
To demonstrate the efficiency of the cars after the
trip, a test run was made over a particularly steep
grade in Adelaide, in high gear. A stop was then made
on the ascent and the car restarted in high. A speed
of thirty miles an hour was quickly attained and the
top was negotiated at a speed of forty miles an hour.
On a level stretch the cars again demonstrated their
fine condition by traveling fifty-five miles an hour.
ONE OF THE GREATEST ACHIEVEMENTS
IN MOTOR CAR HISTORY
All newspapers and motor magazines in Australia
have given considerable space to the details of the trip
and even American and European papers have printed
long stories about it. Everywhere it is recognized as
one of the greatest records ever established by motor
cars, and the explorers have been given much praise
for their brilliant accomplishment.
Meanwhile, the Transcontinental Railway, which
will join the north and south of Australia, seems to be
a certainty and —
The Three Dorts continue to give the same good
service that owners always expect from these high
quality cars.


A native burial
place in a tree.
Wife and child of
camel team driver.
Meeting the camel team


IT has always been the policy
of the Dort Motor Car Com-
pany to build well, to represent
fairly, to deliver full value and to
preserve good will. Now, with
sixes and fours in beautiful open
cars, smart sport models and lux-
urious closed cars, Dort presents
the greatest array of quality auto-
mobiles that have ever borne this
famous name.




