

I '
ov jBs (N S
INTRODUCTORY LECTURE
r
GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE
DELIVERED AT THE
P
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
MARCH 6, 1800.
BY
JOHN F. HARGRAVE, M.A.,
READER IN GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE FOR THE YEARS 1859-1860.
f/o z v- 0.
“There have been Lawyers that were Orators, Philosophers, Historians, —there have been
Uaeons and Clarendons. There will be none such any more, till, in some better age, true
ambition and love of fame prevail over avarice; and till men find leisure and encourage-
ment to prepare themselves for the exercise of this profession, by climbing up to the “ Vantage
Grounds,” (so my Lord Bacon calls it,) of Science, instead of grovelling all their lives below
in a mean, but gainful, application to all the little arts of chicane. Till this happen, the
Profession of the Law will scarce deserve to be ranked among the learned professions ; ’ and
whenever it happens, one of the Vantage Grounds to which men must climb is Me toft hq s/ cat,
and the other, Historical, Knowledge; they must pry into the secret recesses of theUiunan
heart, and become well acquainted with the whole moral world, that they may discoyo* the
abstract reason of all Laws, —and they must trace the Laws of particular states, especially of
their own, from the first rough sketches to the more perfect drafts ; from the first causes or
iccasions that produced them, through all the effects, good and bad, that they have produced.’"
—BoUNODROKE ON UISIOEY.
SYDNEY;
if
PUBLISHED BY J. W. WAUGH, 286, GEORGE STREET.
1860.
. ♦ '
-J*—


In correcting the following pages for the Press, the Lecturer became
more conscious than ever, not only of the vast importance of the
subject he has undertaken to Lecture upon; but of his own great
deficiences for the task.
Nevertheless, the more he reflected on the various topics of Juris-
prudence, selected for the Lectures, the more he became convinced
that the publication of this Introductory Lecture was the only
appropriate and effectual foundation for his future labours.
He has, therefore, no wish to deprecate, but rather every desire to
encourage the most rigid criticism ; and he feels that he should be
utterly unworthy of the confidence which he has already received,
if he further hesitated to submit to an Australian public this earnest,
but imperfect attempt to advance the cause of Colonial Education.
University, Sydney, May, Ist. 1860.


u 6 rr
SYLLABUS
READINGS ON GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE,
TO BE DELIVERED AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
DURING LENT AND TRINITY TERMS, 1860.
The Reader will Lecture during the year 1860, to his junior class who
have not attended the Lectures of 1859, on the most important of the
topics of Law comprised in the First and Second Volumes of Mr.
Justice Blackstone’s Commentaries as particularly mentioned on the
other side
To those pupils who attend the Lectures of 1859, and who may
wish to form a Senior class, the Reader will deliver a course of
Lectures during Michaelmas term ; the topics of which Lectures will be
hereafter published on the formation of the Senior class.
In all these Lectures the Reader will endeavour: —
Ist. —To convey to his audience a clear and popular exposition of
the present state of the Law on each of the topics selected, pointing
out the most important alterations and modifications of our several
Zegal rights, duties and liabilities, since the time of Blackstone, in the
various political, social, and domestic relations Lectured upon; with
an especial reference to ou.x own Colonial community.
2nd.—To point out to his audience certain land marks, to guide the
future progress of the student through the Imperial and Colonial
Statutes, and other legal authorities, on the several topics of Lecture ;
whereby the various fundamental principles and philosophical maxims
of General Jurisprudence, on which our English and Colonial Laws are
based, may be made manifest in all their true harmony and just
proportions.
These Readings will be delivered at the Sydney University, and
pupils desirous of attending can communicate with the Registrar at the
University.
A? /0240


FIRST COURSE
READINGS ON
GENERAL
TO BE
DELIVERED
AT THE
UNIVERSITY
DURING LENT
TERM, 1860.
Date and Hour.
f Monday,/
/ Mar. 12./
f Monday,/
\ Mar. 19./ ”
f Monday,/
\ Mar. <6./
f Monday,/
/ April 16./
j Monday,/
/ April 23./ ”
J Monday,/
X April 30./
f Monday, /
\ May 7. /
/ Monday,/
/May 14./
•f Monday,/
X May 21./
Subject.
Introductory Lecture.
JURISPRUDENCE,
OF SYDNEY,
“ Thre is not, in my opinion, in the whole compass of human affairs so nobJe
a spectacle as that which is displayed in the progress of Jurisprudence, where
we may contemplate the cautious and unwearied exertions of wise men through
a long course o ages, withdrawing every case as it arises from the dangerous
power of discretion, and subjecting it to inflexible Rules, extending the
dominion of Justice and Reason, and gradually contracting within the narrowest
possible limits the Domain of Brutal Force and Arbitary Will.”
M‘lntoshs Discourse on the Laws of Nature Arc of Nations.
On our Constitutional Law.
On our Legislative System.
On our Judicial System.
On the office of Justice of the Peace.
On the Common Law of England.
On the Law of Real and Personal
Property.
On Commercial Jurisprudence and
Mercantile Law.
On the Civil Law and Equity Juris-
prudence.
On Modern Conveyances and Testa-
mentary Dispositions.


SECOND COURSE
READINGS ON GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE,
TO BE DELIVERED AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
DURING TRINITY TERM, 1860.
“ The Science of Jurisprudence is the pride of the human intellect, a Science
which, with all its defects, redundances, and errors, is the collected reason of
ages, combining the principles of original Justice with the infinite variety of
human concerns; it is one of the first and noblest human sciences, and does
more to quicken and invigorate the human understanding than all other kinds
of human learning put together.”— Bukke’s Speech on American Taxation.
“ The application of the general principles of Justice to the infinitely various
circumstances, which may arise in the disputes of men with each other, is in
itself an admirable discipline of the moral and intellectual faculties.”
Haixam on the
Literature of Europe, Vol. 1.
I ECTURE
Date and Hour.
Subject.
j At 7 p.m.
On Municipal Corporations.
{ } -
{ } -
{ } ■■
{ } -
{ } -
{ } -
{ }
{ } -
{ } -
On Joint Stock Companies.
On Commercial Partnerships.
On Principal and Agent.
On Trustees and Executors.
On Mortgagors and Mortgagees.
On Landlord and Tenant.
On Husband and Wife.
On Parent and Child.
On Master and Servant.
* The dates for delivery of the Lectures of this Course will be fixed before Trinity Term.




SUMMARY OF CONTENTS.
Introductory Observations ; Opinions of Bentham, Lord Avonmore, 1
Fox, Mr. Justice Coleridge and Sir W. Jones on the value of Black-
stone’s Commentaries; their importance to English and American
liberties; necessity of publication of Colonial Statutes and reserved
Judgments of Supreme Court. 4
Scope and Object of Proposed Lectures ; “Jurisprudence” as defined
and noticed by Dr. Johnson, Sir J. Mclntosh, Cicero, Hooker, Burke,
Blackstone, Hallam, Lord Bacon. 5
The Study of Jurisprudence best commenced with the original text of
Blackstone’s Commentaries ; summary of the topics of these volumes. 10
On the Study of Jurisprudence, with a view to Professional Prac-
tice ; English Law Lectures ; Bolinghroke’s observations on Me-
taphysics and History as connected with Legal Studies ; Cicero de
Oratore; Coleridge on the mental dangers of advocacy, and on the
Metaphysics of Theology; Hooker on the Union of Religion with
Justice. 14
All sound Jurispeudence founded on “Conscience”; Cicero de
Legihus ; Digby’s “ Broadstone of Honour ” ; Prof. Smyth, of Cam-
bridge ; Comparison of Legal Study with other branches of University
Course; Cicero, Seneca, Hallam; O’Brien’s “Lawyer: his Character
and Rule of Holy Life.”
SUMMARY OF PROPOSED LECTURES.
First Course 2. Constitutional Law ;3. Legislative System ; 4. J u .
dicial System ; 5. Justice of the Peace; 6. Common Law of England;
7. Law of Property; 8. Commercial Jurisprudence and Mercantile
Law; 9. Civil Law and Equity Jurisprudence; 10. Modern Con-
veyancing and Testamentary Dispositions.
Second Course 1. Municipal Corporations; 2. Joint Stock Companies;
3. Commercial Partnerships; 4. Principal and Agent; 5. Trustees
and Executors; 6. Mortgagors and Mortgagees; 7. Landlord and
Tenant; 8. Husband and Wife; 9. Parent and Child; 10. Master
and Servant.
Concluding Remarks Recent death of Macaulay; Eulogium by present
Lord Chancellor of Ireland upon Lord Brougham and Modern Law
Reformers.




INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.
u It is an undeniable position, that a competent knowledge of the Laws of the
Society in which we live is the proper accomplishment of every Gentleman and
Scholar; a highly useful, I had almost said essential, part of liberal and polite
education.”
The passage which I have just read to you is from the first
Introductory chapter of Mr. Justice Blackstone’s celebrated Lectures
on the Laws of England, addressed exactly a century ago to the
“ Vice-Chancellor and Gentlemen of the University of Oxford,” and
which, published afterwards in their present form, have become
familiar to us all wherever the English tongue is spoken.
I have commenced these Lectures before the University of Sydney
with the above extract from Blackstone, stating before an University
audience that Law must be considered and treated as a branch
of “ liberal and polite education ” and as the “ accomplishment of
Gentlemen and Scholars ;” not merely in order to impress these leading
truths on our minds at the very outset of these Lectures, but also because
the Law Lecturer, from whom I have quoted the passage, supplied by
his own Lectures the most perfect model of “ Law” Lectures which were
ever addressed to any assemblage of Gentlemen or Scholars, or
delivered at any establishment of English Education.
As Blackstone’s most unrelenting critic, Bentham, was forced to
admit—“ Blackstone, first of all institutional writers, taught Jurispru-
dence to speak the Language of the Scholar and Gentleman, put a
polish on that rugged science, cleansed her from the dust and cobwebs
of the * office,’ decked her out to advantage from the toilette of classic
erudition, enlivened her with metaphors and allusions, and sent her
abroad in some measure to instruct, and in a still greater measure to
entertain, the most miscellaneous and even the most fastidious
audiences.”


So also, Lord Avonmore, one of the most brilliant of Ireland's
brilliant Lawyers, said —“ Blackstoneit was who first gave to * Law’ the
air of a science ; he found it a skeleton and clothed it with life, color,
and complexion; he embraced the cold statue, and by his touch it
grew into youth, health and beauty.”
“ Blackstone’s style of English,” wrote Fox in a private letter, “ is
the very best among our modern writers —always easy and intelligible,
far more exact than Hume, and less studied and made up than
Robertson.”
The same opinion Fox thus publicly expressed in Parliament: —
“ Blackstone’s purity of style I particularly admire; he is distinguished
as much for simplicity and strength as any writer in the English
Language. He is perfectly free from all gallicisms and ridiculous
affectations, for which so many of our modem authors and writers are
so remarkable.”
Mr. Justice Coleridge notices “ the lucid order of the Commentaries,
their sound and clear exposition of the Law, their style—almost
faultless in its kind ; and the learning, judgment, and taste of Black-
stone, and, above all, his total want of self-display.”
So Sir W. Jones speaks of the Commentaries iC As the most correct
and beautiful outline that ever was exhibited of any human science.”
But in these days, audiences such as I now address, or rather all
audiences addressed in the English Language, have still larger and
most solid reasons for reverential attachment to Blackstone’s Com-
mentaries ; and the chief of those reasons is—that by their publication
the middle classes of Englishmen were awakened to a first sense of
their own importance in the community, and acquired a familiar
knowledge of all their political as well as their social rights.
Further than this, in England,—and in America also, —from the date
of these Commentaries, not the middle classes alone, but as the 18th
century advanced the large masses of Society, “ the millions”—as
thoughtful men now style those who used to be called the lower
classes of Society,—became familiarized and practically acquainted with
all the great and ancient land marks of English liberty, whereby our
properties, franchises, reputations and even lives were placed above all


peril; and learned from their pages to understand, and therefore to
appreciate, all our social and political liberties.
In Burke’s speech on American Taxation you will find the most
distinct and important testimony given to the value of the Com-
mentaries, in connection with the first establishment of the American
liberties.
Lastly, to refer to the recent edition of “ Blackstone’s Commentaries
abridged and adapted to the existing Law and intended for use in our
public Schools and Universities,” Mr. Warren well remarks :—“ It was
Blackstone’s Commentaries, which about the middle of the last century
introduced large classes of English society to a knowledge of the Laws
of their country, of which it gave them so attractive an account and so
full and accurate a chart as to render ignorance and indifference any
longer inexcusable.”
With such unanimous and high testimony to the value of Blackstone’s
Commentaries as a Text Book for all Students of English Law or
Jurisprudence, it must be obvious to every one, that the task of a
Lecturer or Leader on these subjects must be very simple. His task
must be, to accompany the Student in following the steps of Blackstone;
and while so doing, he must endeavour : —lst. To point out the most
important alterations and modifications of the English Law since the
time of Blackstone in the various political, social and domestic
relations lectured upon, with especial reference to our own community;—
2nd. To direct the Student’s attention to the various fundamental
principles and philosophical maxims of General Jurusprudence on which
our English and Colonial Laws are based; and which are in fact the
great land-marks to guide the future progress of the Student into every
branch of Jurisprudence.
To fill up the “ Chart” laid down by Blackstone so far as it affects
our own Australian Laws, was the first object I had in view in
accepting the appointment I have the honor to hold in this University;
and indeed, to correct the outlines of that Chart so far as
to present to every “ Australian’’ a guide to the study of the English
Laws as modified and adapted to our Colonial requirements, would be
an undertaking worthy of the most erudite and ambitious of onr


Australian Lawyers; but when we contemplate and examine our
Colonial Statute Book, and observe and consider the confusion and
entanglement in which our Colonial Statute Law seems to be huddled
together, and the extreme difficulty of tracing legislation, and
collating these Statutes with each other, on any particular topic or
sections; —When we consider all these impediments in the way of
practical use of and reference to our Colonial Statute Book, I confess
I cannot hold out much hope to an University Audience, that their
Lecturer on General Jurisprudence will be able to accomplish much
towards the elucidation of our Colonial Laws, or be able to fill up much
of the outline of our Colonial Jurisprudence.
It seems to me that the first step to be taken towards the improve-
ment of our Colonial Laws, must be a correct reprint of all the Colonial
Ordinances and Acts of the Legislature, or other proper authorities,
in their mere chronological order from the commencement of the Colonial
Statute Law, at least to the close of the year 1859—and without any
annotations, remarks or other commentary; but simply with a view to
the amplest and most accurate investigation of the present state of our
Law, before any measures are taken for its amendment or consolidation.
In like manner I regret that I cannot even refer you to any
authorized collection or reports of reserved judgments of our Supreme
Court, in all its several Jurisdictions of Common Law, Equity, Insol-
vency, Vice-Admiralty, and Ecclesiastical matters. Even in the area
comprised in the Equitable Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, I have
myself collected more than 120 reserved Judgments upon points in
Equity Jurisprudence of great importance, and if other Members of the
Legal profession would collect and arrange the reserved Judgments on
the other branches of the Jurisdiction of that Court, I am satisfied that
a most valuable, or rather an invaluable collection of Colonial Law
■would result from a very moderate expenditure of Labour.
But, Gentlemen, until all the Colonial Statute Law, and the reserved
Judgments of the Supreme Court are thus collected and arranged first
in chronological order as I have suggested, and afterwards classed
under the several topics of Law or Jurisprudence, I cannot hope
to bring from these Colonial sources of information much light
upon our Colonial Jurisprudence.


Nevertheless in the course of these Lectures, I shall endeavour to
elucidate the various topics by references to as many of the Colonial
Statutes and Reserved Judgments as are applicable and within my
knowledge ; and must trust to future labours to bring Colonial
Jurisprudence more usefully under our consideration.
Let us now consider more closely the precise scope and object of these
proposed Lectures on Jurisprudence.
“ Law,” says Dr. Johnson, “ is the science in which the greatest
powers of the understanding are applied to the greatest number of
facts.” And Sir James Mclntosh (when commenting on this dictum
of Dr. Johnson) says,—“ No one who is acquainted with the variety and
multiplicity of the subjects of Jurisprudence and the prodigious powers
of discrimination employed upon them, can doubt the truth of this
observation.”
The Law that I would hope to explain will be that Abstract Law of
which Cicero speaks in his Treatise de Republica:—Est quidem vera
lex, recta ratio, naturae congruous, diffusa in omnes, constans,
sempiterna, quae vocet ad officium jubendo, vetando a fraude deterreat;
quae tamen neque probos frustra jubet aut vetat, nec improbos jubendo
aut vetando movet. Huic legi, neque abrogari fas est, neque derogari
ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari potest. Nec vero per
senatum aut per populum solvi hac lege possumus, neque est quaerendus
explanator aut interpres ejus alius. Neque erit alia lex Romae, alia
Athenis—alia nunc, alia posthac ; sed et omnes gentes et omni
tempore una lex et sempiterna et immutabilis continebit ; unusque
erit communis quasi magister et imperator omnium Deus. Hie
legis hujus inventor, disceptator, lator: —cui qui non parebit ipse se
fugiet, ac naturam hominis aspernatur; atque hoc ipso luet maximas
paenas, etiam si caetera, supplicia quae putantur, effugerit.”
It is of this Abstract Law or General Jurisprudence that Hoker
speaks, in the noble peroration of his First Book, when he says :—“ Of
Law there can be no less acknowledged than that her seat is the
Bosom of God, her voice the Harmony of the World, all things in
Heaven and Earth do her homage, the very least as feeling her care,
the greatest as not exempted from her power both angels and men.


and creatures of what condition soever, though each in different sort
and manner, yet all with uniform consent, admire her as the mother of
their peace and joy.”
Again, in another passage set forth in the motto to the first course of
these Lectures, the same enlightened Philosopher from whom I have
already quoted, Sir James Mclntosh, observes, “ There is not, in my
opinion, in the whole compass of human affairs so noble a spectacle as
that which is displayed in the progress of Jurisprudence ; —where we
may contemplate the cautious and unwearied exertions of wise men,
through a long course of ages, withdrawing every case as it arises from
the dangerous power of discretion, and subjecting it to inflexible rules ;
extending the dominion of Justice and Reason, and gradually contracting
within the narrowest possible limits the domain of Brutal Force and
Arbitrary will.”
So again Burke, in his celebrated speech on American taxation, says ;
“ the science of Jurisprudence is the pride of the hnman intellect; a
science which with all its defects, redundances and errors, is the
collected reason of ages, combining the principles of original justice with
the infinite variety of human concerns.” “It is,” he continues, “ one
of the first and noblest of human sciences ; and does more to quicken
and invigorate the human understanding, than all other kinds of human
learning put together; but it is not apt, except in persons very happily
born, to open and liberalize the mind exactly in the same proportion.”
I need not remind you that Sir James Mclntosh and Burke were, in
early political life, antagonists to each other, and always of very
different opinions on political topics, particularly as to the French
Revolution ; but in these passages as to the moral and mental effect of
the study of the Law, you observe there is the most exact coincidence
of opinion between these master minds in Philosophy and True
Learning.
You will see, if you refer to Burke’s speech from which I have read
this extract, that Burke was replying to his then political antagonist
Charles Greville ; and that the latter part of the passage quoted by me
as to the mental effect of the study of the law, as not “ opening and
liberalizing the mind” in the same proportion that it became quickened
and invigorated,—was an oratorical introduction to an attack upon the


policy of a political opponent; and must, therefore, not be considered as
entitled to so much weight, as if written by Burke in the calm reflec-
tion of his closet. I have quoted, however, the whole of these sentences
exactly as they stand, in order that you may have the full weight of
Burke’s authority, in estimating the scope and object of the studies
we are now about to enter upon.
To me it seems that, however much there may have been, in the
study or practice of the English Law in the days of Burke, which might
not tend to open and liberalize the mind, subsequent alterations in that
Law (from Burke’s age to the present) have manifested and developed,
at least among Lawyers themselves, a tendency to open and liberalize
the mind rather too widely ; and that at all events the tendency of the
present generation of Lawyers is much more to experimentalize in
Legislation, than to build on the old foundations of our ancestors. I
would also suggest that Burke’s concluding sentence' would find few
dissentients, if we understand the warning as rather referring to “ the
practice of the Law, as a Profession” than “ its study as a science.”
I think I may also add another observation on this oft quoted passage
from Burke. Burke was a statesman, not a lawyer—a political philo-
sopher rather than a metaphysician or psychologist, and therefore not so
well able as we could wish to appreciate the peculiar excellencies of
a Jurisprudence which had not then assumed any of the forms of a
science; but had only then cast off its cumbrous feudal armour, and
was just beginning to reveal all its harmonious and noble proportions,
and present itself to Englishmen in the light in which we are now
enabled to view it.
Let us next refer to Blackstone, our favourite’ Author and Com-
mentator, In the introduction Jo his Commentaries Blackstone speaks
of the Theory and Practice of the Law : —“ The Law is a Science which
distinguishes the criterions of right and wrong, which teaches to
establish the one, and to restrain to punish and to redress the other;
which employs in its theory the noblest faculties of the mind, and exerts
in its practice the cardinal virtues of the heart; a science which is
universal in its use and extent; accommodated to each individual, yet
comprehending the whole community.”


These quotations from Dr. Johnson, Sir James Mclntosh, Edmund
Burke, Cicero, Hooker and Blackstone, as to the general nature of
Abstract Law or Jurisprudence, are thus echoed by that great Consti-
tutional Philosopher of our own age, Henry Hallam ; —whose star has
just melted away into the Heavens; but who, while among us, seemed
in his own mental character to have combined the religious respect for
antiquity, so characteristic of Dr. Johnson, without’his bigotry or morbid
superstition,—the wide'philosophic powers of Macintosh’s mental vision,
without his speculative rovings,—and the sound constitutional erudition
and political sagacity of Burke, without his enthusiastic and irritable
temperament.
In the last of Hallam’s invaluable compositions, “ The Literature of
Europe during the Middle Ages,” he expressly excepts “ Law” from
his consideration. Never, I believe, having practised at the Bar, he
seems to have left the Legal Literature of Europe and of our own
England in particular, without attempting to throw any light upon its
treasures, or applying thereto his wonderful powers of industrious
research and discrimination. He did not claim Law or Jurisprudence
among “ the sheaves,” which, as he mournfully writes in the Preface
to the last edition of the Literature of Europe, “ his own advancing
years, and the gathering in of the heavens, warned him to bind up.”
The passage I refer to in this most interesting of all his works
was written only a short time before his death last year, and that
passage so well expresses the modest but earnest tone of Hallam’s
mind, and seems so prophetic of his own recent death, that I cannot
help reading it to you; more especially as Hallam’s apologies may
well furnish me with excuses for my own shortcomings and deficiencies
in these lectures: —
“ The Press is so active that no year passes without accessions to
our knowledge, even historically considered, upon some of the multi-
farious subjects which the present volumes embrace. An author, who
waits till all requisite materials are accumulated to his hands, is but
watching the stream that will run on for ever; and, though lam fully
sensible that I could have much improved what is now offered to the
Public by keeping it back for a longer time, I should but then have
had to lament the impossibility of exhausting my subject.”


“ EIIOIEIjthe modest phrase of the Grecian sculptors, well expresses
the imperfection that attaches to every work of literary industry or of
plilosophical investigation. But I have other warnings to bind up my
sheaves while I may—my own advancing years and the gathering in
of the heavens.”
Nevertheless, in looking through Hallam’s works for some traces
of his opinions as to the study of Jurisprudence, I find that in
the last edition of his History of Europe, he thus touches with
a master’s hand the subject before us. Writing of the History
of Jurisprudence, when its study became revived in Europe
about the 12th century, Mr. Hallam thus shows the advantages
of Jurisprudential studies as a mental discipline, and the revival
of legal studies as accompanying the progress of enlightened civili-
zation, His words are—“ The application of general principles
of Justice to the infinitely various which may
arise in the disputes of men with each other, is in itself an
admirable discipline of the moral and intellectual faculties. Even
where the primary rules of right and policy have been obscured
in some measure by a technical and arbitrary system, which is apt
to grow up perhaps inevitably in the course of civilization, the
mind gains in precision and acuteness, though at the expense of
some important qualities; and a people wherein an artificial Juris-
prudence is cultivated, requiring both a regard to written authority,
and the constant exercise of a discriminating judgment upon words,
must he deemed to be emerging from ignorance.”
He then proceeds to comment on the condition of Europe in the
12th century, and the importance to all Law Students of studying the
Feudal Law in connection with the Civil Law ; and I hope you will
all consult Hallam’s own pages for this slight but invaluable notice
of the subject before us in these Lectures.
But there is another philosopher, Bacon, foremost in the scroll of
fame, whose mighty intellectual powers we have to lament were never
applied to the study of Jurisprudence. As Hallam well remarks —Bacon
was compelled, for a reason sufficiently obvious and almost avowed,
to be cautiously silent upon the Art of Government, the craft of his
King. The motives for silence were so powerful that, even in his


“ Advancement of Learning,” the proper place for the science of Law, he
treats only of two heads in political science—the methods of enlarging
the boundaries of a State, which King James could hardly resent as an
interference with his own monopoly ; —and one of far more importance
to the well being of mankind, the principles of universal Jurisprudence,
or rather of universal Legislation, in which he investigates the standard
on which all laws ought to be framed.
These principles of Legislation Bacon has condensed, or rather
sketched, in ninety-seven aphorisms or short rules which, from his
great experience as a professional lawyer, as well as his peculiar
vocation for that part of philosophy, deserve to be well studied at
this day.
“ Upon such topics,” as Hallam continues, “ the progressive and
innovating spirit of Bacon’s genius was less likely to be perceived
by his Royal Master” ; and these ninety-seven aphorisms certainly
will well repay the attentive perusal of the student of modern
Jurisprudence.
Well indeed would it be, both for the Legal Profession and
the Public, if these high and philosophical views of the nature of the
duties of the Legal Profession as thus depicted by such eminent men
as Dr. Johnson, Sir James Macintosh, Burke, Blackstone, and Hallam
were always present to our minds; but at least it is gratifying
to know, that such have been the views of these sound and enlightened
philosophers ; and believing that they are still the views entertained
by all the leading members of the Legal Profession in England and
America, I doubt not they will be found equally acceptable to all
Colonial members of “ the great brotherhood of the law.”
But I must now leave these preliminary topics relating to ** Abstract
Law” and to “ Lawyers” as the “ Jurisconsulti” of a civilized community;
and proceed to more precise advice to you as pupils. You must have
already noticed that the authors from whom I have quoted use the
terms “Law” and “Jurisprudence” as synonimous with each other;
and throughout all these Readings, I would wish you to understand
these words as of the same meaning. Unless actual laws exist


and can be cited to you as founded on those great principles of
Justice and Reason with which I would seek to imbue your minds,
and which lie at the root of all sound Law, our Readings
on General Jurisprudence will be without practical illustration
of the great truths I am appointed to teach ; and, on the other hand,
unless our Readings be conducted so as to exemplify and explain the
practical duties of our daily life, I shall despair of leaving any useful
or beneficial trace of our progress on your minds or memories.
I ought also here to state that, although it w r as the wish of the
University authorities that the Title of the office in virtue of which I
have the honour to deliver these Lectures, should be “ The Readership
in General Jurisprudence,” yet I must thank them for the indulgence
which was kindly extended to me of perfect freedom as to the
topics of my Lectures ; and I have selected all those topics out
of Blackstone’s Commentaries, chiefly in order that throughout the
Lectures, I may fix your attention on “ General Jurisprudence” only
so far as its operation is observed in the practical business of our daily
life ; and I shall endeavour to keep our minds altogether free from those
theoretical, and in a great measure speculative inquiries, which might
perhaps appear to be popularly included under the term “ General
Jurisprudence,” but which I believe to be of little practical benefit
to any student, certainly to any youthful student of this University.
With this view also I have commenced this Introductory Lecture
with the preceding remarks upon Backstone’s Commentaries; and
have sought to impress upon your minds the inestimable value of that
work, which I now recommend to you, as the foundation of all our
future readings on Jurisprudence.
It is the original text of Blackstone which you must peruse, not the
interpolated editions recently published, incorporating only portions
selected from Blackstone’s text; —which editions I only notice now as
bearing unanimous testimony to the value of the original text.
By only once perusing the original text of Blackstone you will obtain a
general outline or plan of what English Jurisprudence was a hundred
years ago; and, having once secured this basis for future operations,
you will find all your future studies agreeable and advantageous.
If, on the one hand, you would extend your studies further back into


the authorities cited by Blackstone, you will find all your antiquarian
investigations producing increased clearness and accuracy of knowledge
as to principles. If, again, you extend your studies into the
century subsequent to Blackstone, you will find all our statutes
and amendments of the law, all our political and social
changes since 1760, easily arranging themselves under Blackstone’s
text ; and gradually storing your minds with legal knowledge
applicable, and safely applicable, to almost every question that may
arise in the present day, as to your own rights and duties. I
do not recommend you at this stage of your studies under my
guidance even to consult these incorporated editions of Blackstone;
not even the best, if not the only good one, by Mr. Serjeant Stephen.
This may, hereafter, be useful to you, but as students in Jurisprudence,
you would find its perusal of no present advantage. For myself, I
know no style of composition so unpleasant and painful as these
incorporated editions; I cannot read a single chapter even of Mr,
Serjeant Stephen’s without a restless dissatisfaction. The intermittent
change, from Blackstone’s style to Mr. Stephen’s interpolated sentences,
is so irritating, that I feel that neither author has fair play. Black-
stone’s elegant and continuous essay is all shattered into fragmentary
sentences; which, like the ruins of some ancient building, though
incorporated into the walls of a modem edifice, only make us
lament the Vandalism of the present age, and regret more deeply the
absence of the original fabric. So, on the other hand, Mr. Serjeant
Stephen’s profoundly learned and accurate statements of the Law in its
present state are, by the constant necessity of using the text of Black-
stone, prevented from arranging themselves so as to produce their own
natural effect; but are cramped and distorted, so as to fit the spaces
which the old materials leave vacant.
Let us just glance over the first two Volumes.
In Blackstone’s first volume you will find in the original text a lucid
and correct statement of those branches of our English Jurisprudence
which relate—first, to our rights and duties as members of the same
political community ; and, secondly, to the limits of our social and
domestic relations towards each other.


The four introductory chapters should be attentively perused by you
all. They explain the nature of laws in general, the grounds and
foundation of English law ; and define the countries subject to those
laws, distinguishing between Imperial and Colonial Law.
The body of the Commentaries is then commeuced by a firm and
clear assertion of the three absolute rights of individuals, viz:—
The enjoyment of personal security and personal liberty, and of
private property, rights which must be primarily secured by every
code of Jurisprudence.
The remainder of the first volume to the 13th chapter inclusive
is then devoted to our social or relative duties, public and private:
our public duties in relation to Magistrates ,whether supreme, as the
Legislative and Executive authorities ; or subordinate, as Justices of
the Peace, &c. The 14th to 17th chapters relate to the four
private or domestic relations of life—viz., Master and Servant,
Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, and Guardian and
Ward, and the last chapter will bring under your notice
the relations of the Corporations of the Mother Country, and
the various incidents of these bodies in their social and political
capacity. The varied subjects of this first volume of the Com-
mentaries, and the admirable spirit and tone of Blackstone’s Commen-
taries on these most interesting topics, must render this portion of his
work very attractive to all students of Jurisprudence, whether of
General Jurisprudence or of the Jurisprudence of our own Colony.
In Blackstone’s second volume you will find an able and lucid
outline of the English Law of real and personal Property ; which
almost all our subsequent legal writers have adopted as the basis of
their own treatises.
I need scarcely tell you that the Property laws of any nation form
perhaps the most important branch of its Civil Jurisprudence ; and in the
English Laws of Property, as explained by Blackstone, we see the most
striking developments of our own peculiarly compounded nationality
all more or less illustrating the great principles, of General Jurispru-
dence, which I shall bring under your observation.
This second volume of Blackstone’s Commentaries has always seemed
to my mind more elaborated and highly finished than the other volumes;


although I believe that is owing rather to the circumstance that the English
Law of Property is in itself more completely elaborated, and has under-
gone more cautious and less organic changes than other branches of
English Jurisprudence; and the Commentator, therefore, found this
branch of his labours more complete and ready for his masterly
powers of elucidation.
With regard to the Third and Fourth volumes of the Commentaries, I
do not wish you, during this year of your studies, to do more than peruse
the titles of the several Chapters. These Volumes related respectively,
as you will observe, to our Civil and our Criminal remedies for wrongs
against our public or personal rights, as enunciated in the two preceding
Volumes. In themselves, therefore, the topics of these last two
Volumes of the Commentaries supply little to elucidate the principles
of General Jurisprudence, while as illustrations of our past English
Jurisprudence so little remains Law at the present day, that the
perusal of these Volumes would be of little use except to the antiquary
or Law Student.
This leads me to another remark. In recommending the first two
Volumes of Blackstone’s Commentaries as your first Text Book, and
as the basis of these lectures, none of you must imagine that your
attending these Lectures will supply you with your professional educa-
tion as Law Students, or that these Lectures will in the least assist you
in passing your Examinations at the Supreme Court, either as an Attorney
or Barrister. University Lectures on Jurisprudence are, as Blackstone
said, addressed to you as “part of a liberal and polite education,and as an
essential part of the education of Scholars and Gentlemen and will have
no more of a professional character than is necessary to elucidate each
subject. Law, as a Profession, must be studied very differently from
particular Law, as a branch of University Study. In England from the
first establishment of the Lawyers as a distinct class in the community in
the 12th and 13th centuries, when the four Inns of Court —Lincoln’s
Inn, the Inner Temple, the Middle Temple and Grays Inn,—forming one
Metropolitan Legal University for the study and practice of the Law, —
became fixed, with the settlement of the Aula Regis by Magna Charta,
from that date you will find until the age of Blackstone, the study of


the Law, as a Profession, was promoted, so far as the Inns of Court
could promote it, through the Readings of the several Inns, where
every Barrister and Serjeant, before admission to his Legal degrees,
was required to go through a long and severe course of elaborate mootes,
readings, exercises and orations on various legal topics, embracing
the whole compass of Jurisprudence,
These readings, mootes, and exercises fell into disuse about a
century and a half ago, but their good uses have been recently revived
by the establishment of Law Lectures under the direction of a Council
of Legal Education, consisting of the Attorney-General of England,
and a permanent Board of the leading Queen’s Counsel of all the four
Inns of Court.
I would fain hope that this short course of Lectures on Jurisprudence
may suggest some additional advantages to be provided for Australian
Law Students ; but at least I will use my best efforts to render these
Readings useful to the Law Students who listen to me, though only
as introductory to their professional studies hereafter; and after each
Lecture I shall be most happy, following the example of the Cambridge
Professors, to converse with any one, who may think I can assist
him by any advice or information in my power ; and you may peruse
any of the books which I may from time to time lay on the table.
The subjects of the English Law Lectures embracing, as I have said,
every topic of English Law and Practice, will henceforth undoubtedly,
form a most important and valuable portion of the education of the
Law Students of England; the Lecturers or Readers being selected
from Barristers of great eminence in their respective branches of the
Profession; and most, if not all of them, having given public and ample
evidences of their ability by their several philosophical and scientific
treatises on various abstruse branches of the Law.
These English Lectures are, however, far more elaborated than I
could hope to address to you; and are replete with Professional learning
to a degree which I could not think adapted to this Colony ; —where we
are compelled to adopt a less ambitious and more practical course of
study. Nevertheless, I would not advise those of my audiance, who may
hereafter be, or now are, of the Profession of the Law, or perhaps just
crossing its threshold, to place before themselves any less lofty standard


of excellence than have always been before English Law Students.
And to enforce this advice let us for a few minutes pause and consider
the nature of the Legal Profession, and its peculiar duties. This
topic of practical jurisprudence will be best introduced to you by
reading a passage from Bolingbroke’s Letters on History, respecting the
state of the Legal Profession in his day, at the beginning of last century.
“ I might instance in other professions the obligations men lie under
of applying to certain parts of history, and I can hardly forbear doing
so in the noble profession of the Law, in its nature the most noble and
beneficial to mankind, but in its abuse and debasement the most
sordid and most pernicious. A Lawyer is now” I speak, says
Bolingbroke, of ninty-nine in a hundred, to use Tully’s words “ nisi
leguleim quidem cawtus et a cuius, —prceco actionum, —cantor
formularum, —auceps syllaharum,”
How admirably do these few words, which Bolingbroke thus
adopts from Cicero’s Treatise de Oratore, combine together into one
view all the mental and moral dangers which beset the Lawyer’s
career, whether Roman or English;—and in pursuing your classical
readings, in the University course, you will find in the younger Pliny’s
Letters many Commentaries on these words of Cicero ; and the most
interesting picture of the whole system of the Roman Advocacy and
clientage. I will at least attempt to impress Cicero’s words upon
your memories by a few remarks.
By leguleim cautus I understand Cicero to warn his readers against
gathering scraps and fragments of jurisprudence, rather than
fundamental principles and essential rules of Right:—
By prceco actionum, I understand Cicero to designate that class of
Lawyers who foment discord in Society for the sake of actions to arise ;
ferretting out litigation among individuals who, but for their inter-
ference, might have lived in harmony with each other: —
By “ cantor formularum ” Cicero warns the young Lawyer against
learning jurisprudence by rote, against the thoughtless use of precedents
without considering the legal principles involved therein, —against
becoming “ a mere singer of the forms of positive law” rather than
having his whole being attuned to those Harmonious Rules, which
form the Universal Laws of our one Common Nature of Humanity:—


Lastly, Cicero by the words f{ auceps syllabarum,” means to
warn the Lawyer against becoming a mere “ splitter of hairs
as is often said of the mere technical Lawyer:—who, by the
acute and practised subdivision and dissection of legal verbiage, by a
ready application of all the quirks and quibbles of litigation,
“ Can make the worse appear the better reason.”
These are the Lawyers, to whom I have often listened before the
recent Reform of English Chancery Pleadings, who seemed at length
to have brought their minds to delight in wrangling over the
thens and theres of a demurrer, —to take pleasure in mental conflicts
irrespective of the discovery of truth. Like gladiators, this class of
advocates sacrifice their own minds in the “ keen encounters of
forensic wits and, after long habitual surrender of their moral nature,
seem to lose all sense of moral right or wrong, and at length rest their
client’s defence and even his just rights on any technical arguments
or forensic reasoning,—rather than on the real and substantial merits
of his case and upon arguments drawn from the Eternal principles of
the Laws of Conscience and Honour and on the familiar truths of
Common Honesty; which bind together all ranks, orders and interests
of human beings, in all the varied transactions of Social Life, by that
one harmonious and never failing principle, which is so well expressed
and condensed in the phrase —“fair dealing between Man and
Man”
But to return to the extract from Bolingbroke, —after having thus
expressed his opinion of the Lawyers of England, according to his ex-
perience of ninety-nine in a hundred of the Legal Profession, in the
reigns of Queen Anne and King George the First, Bolingbroke thus
continues, in words which I would strongly recommend to the con-
sideration of every student of Jurisprudence or Law :
“But there have been Lawyers that were Orators, Philosophers,
Historians,-— there have been Bacons and Clarendons. There tv illbe none
such any more, till in some better age, true ambition and love of fame
prevail over avarice ; and till men find leisure and encouragement to
prepare themselves for the exercise of this profession, by climbing up
to the “ vantage ground ,” (so my Lord Bacon calls it) of science, instead
of grovelling all their lives below in a mean, but gainful, application to


all the little arts of chicane. Till this happen, the profession of the
Law will scarce deserve to be ranked among the learned professions;
and, whenever it happens, one of the vantage grounds to which men
must climb is metaphysical, and the other historical, knowledge. They
must pry into the secret recesses of the human heart, and become well
acquainted with the whole moral world, that they may discover the
abstract reason of all Laws, —and they must trace the Laws of particular
states, especially of their own, from the first rough sketches to the more
perfect drafts ; from the first causes or occasions that produced them,
through all the effects good and bad that they have produced.”
As to the hard truths contained in this denunciation of the Lawyers
of Bolingbroke’s age, that they had debased the Profession “in its
nature the noblest and most beneficial to mankind, so as to become the
most sordid and the most pernicious,”—that Lawyers had allowed
“ avarice to prevail over true ambition and love of fame,” and that Law-
yers had “grovelled all their lives in a mean, but gainful, application to all
the little arts of chicane” ; —I will merely reply by saying, that such
results are the faults or errors of the individual, not of the Profession.
There have been Bacons and Clarendons, as the scoffing Bolingbroke
admits ; —and well for us, the countrymen of Bacon and Clarendon; —well
for us, and for all who dwell in peace and safety, and in the secure
enjoyment of all that makes life happy and honorable, under the care
of British Law ; —well for us, I say, that there have never been
wanting, in every peril of our Liberties, learned and patriotic Lawyers
and wise and enlightened Statesmen, who had carefully studied the
great principles of British Law, and who have preserved the Land-
marks of British Liberty, —KTrjua es aei, —an inheritance to us and our
children for ever.
But, I would not dismiss this extract from Bolingbroke, without
impressing upon every one the truth of its concluding remarks, on the
revival of the law as a Professsion ; and as one of the noblest and most
beneficial to mankind.
It has revived during the present century, and must revive, chiefly
by strict adherence to the rules here laid down by Bolingbroke.
Young Men must find leisure and encouragement to prepare them-
selves for the exercise of this Profession, by climbing up to the “ vantage


grounds” of Science; and especially must they climb to the “ vantage
grounds” of metaphysical and historical knowledge.
Here again you observe how Law and Jurisprudence cooperate.
The Students of both must pry into the secret recesses of the
human heart, by the study of every branch of metaphysical, or rather
psychological, science, as it is more properly calledthey must
become acquainted with the whole moral world, that they may
discover the abstract reason of all Law; —and they must labour until
they at length acquire that magic insight into first principles which
renders Lawyers so influential, not merely for the protection of the
interests of their individual clients, but for the advancement or
retrocession of a State.
Again, as Bolingbroke well remarks, to become sound Lawyers, you
must also become careful and attentive Students of history. You
must, as Bolingbroke says, “trace the Laws of particular States,
especially of your own, from the first rough sketches to the more
perfect drafts; —from the first cause or reason that produced them,
through all the effects good and bad that they have produced.”
To you, or any of you, who may thus be called upon to adopt any
branch of the Law as a Profession, I would ask —what nobler work
can be placed before any Student; and what mental toil can be too
great, or what industry too laborious, to prepare yourselves for the
responsibility of such duties ?
Nevertheless, I would in this introductory Lecture, warn any of my
hearers who may already be Law Students, or who may hereafter
enter on the Study of the Law as a Profession, that unless they are
watchful they will suffer both mentally and morally from too exclusive
attention to the Law and especially to its Practice. I have aheady
quoted to you Edmund Burke’s opinion on this point; and Coleridge in
his Table Talk has a striking passage to the like effect, but recommending
the study of the Metaphysics of Theology as a cure for the mental perils
of Advocacy. Coleridge’s words are “ I think that upon the whole
the Advocate is placed in a position unfavourable to his moral
being, and indeed to his intellect also in its higher powers. Therefore,
I would recommend an Advocate to devote a part of his leisure time to
some study of the metaphysics or metaphysics of theology. Something


I mean which shall call forth all his powers, and centre his wishes in
the investigation of TRUTH alone, without reference to a side to be
supported. No studies give such a power of distinguishing as
metaphysical, and in their natural and unperverted tendency they are
ennobling and exalting. Some such studies are wanted to counteract
the operation of legal studies and practice; which sharpen indeed, but
like a grinding stone, narrow whilst they sharpen
That Metaphysical Studies are not without great use as accompanying
Legal Studies, Bentham’s celebrated Treatise on Judicial Evidence well
shews; but lam disposed to think that you will find a more effectual
and simple corrective to the dangerous tendency of legal studies, by
adopting those high views of the Legal Profession, which I have already
suggested to you from the quotations previously made; and which I
know is the view taken of the Profession by many of its brightest
ornaments.
Hooker, in the First Chapter of his fifth Book, thus speaks
of the inseparable union of Religion with Justice. “So natural
is the union of religion with justice, that we may boldly
deem there is neither, where both are not. For how should
they be unfeignedly just, whom Religion doth not cause to be such;
or they religious, which are not found such by the proof of their just
actions ? If they which employ their labour and travail about the
public administration of justice, follow it only as a trade with unquench-
able and unconscionable thirst for gain; being not in heart persuaded
that Justice is God's own work, and themselves His agents in this business ;
—the sentence of right, God's own verdict; —and themselves his Priests to
deliver it; —formalities of Justice do but serve to smother right, and
that which was necessarily ordained for the common good, is, through
shameful abuse, made the cause of common misery .”
You must read the whole passage, to appreciate the admirable
manner in which the “ judicious Hooker” treats the vast subject of
Public Equity, concluding with these words : —“ all good laws are the
voices of right reason, which .is the instrument wherewith God will have
the world guided —a sentence which I would have always before our
minds while studying Jurisprudence.


There is another remark which, if you adopt the high view I would
wish you to take of the study and practice of Jurisprudence, must find
its place in this Lecture, as introductory to the course ; and that is—
you must never ignore the existence of conscience,—nor admit for an
instant any philosophy which is based on a denial of conscience, as an
inherent part of man’s mental and moral nature.
There is an excellent note in Mr. Justice Coleridge’s edition of
Blackstone discussing to some extent the difference in foro conscientim
between offences mala in se, and those only mala prohibita ; and there
is no possibility of your avoiding this metaphysical difficulty which lies
at the threshold of every code of Jurisprudence.
Let me, therefore, most earnestly warn you against that class
of false philosophers, who, like Hobbs, Mandeville, Hume, Paley, and
Bentham, denying the existence of conscience, as the faculty by which
we judge of right and wrong ; —and so denying the permanent and
immutable character of the laws which to us ; —substitute in
its place, as the guide of human conduct, several varying and uncertain
standards, called the Supreme Power of a State, Self interest, Utility,
General Good of Mankind and other external and experimental
standards. These Philosophers wholly ignore the moral nature of man ;
and, forbidding him to look within for a guide and rule to judge of human
conduct, send him necessarily to the cumbrous and variable accumula-
tions of a painful experience, to determine, not what is right, but what
is useful ; not what is honest, but what is profitable.
Even the pagan orator, unenlightened by the sun of Christianity,
could discern the fallacious character of speculations such as these.
Speaking of those who made power and utility the measure of right and
wrong, Cicero indignantly exclaims : —“ Quod si paena, si metus
supplied non ipsa turpitude, deterret ab facinorosaque vita,
nemo est injustus, et incauti potius habendi sunt improbi. Turn
autem qui non ipso honesto movemur ut viri boni simus, sed utilitate
aliqua atque fructu, callidi sumus non boni.”
I would still further enforce this topic of my Lecture by a short
extract from a modern work, Bigby’s “ Broad Stone of Honoura copy of
which is in your own University Library, and which I trust you will
all peruse during your leisure. It is an attempt,—and a very ingenious


and successful attempt,—to apply the chivalric honour of the middle
ages to the facts and circumstances of the nineteenth century.
The author, in his review of the callings which present themselves
to the notice of young men on entering upon life, thus speaks concerning
the Legal Profession: —“The Profession of the Law will, of course,
present itself, and the question will arise whether it be consistent with
your Order. Now this appears to me to be altogether a question of
individual character, and not one that will admit of any general conclusion.
If you are of studious habits ; —of a decided disposition of mind, not to
be influenced by the subject of your study, and of a devotedness to
truth, not to be perverted or overcome by sophistry,—if you are
firmly established in the principles of religion, —and if you are one of
those elevated spirits that are raised above the world, above temptations
and opinions : in that case you may embrace this Profession;
and look up to a Cicero, a Sulpicius, a Daguesseau, a More, a Bacon,
a Clarendon, a Hale, a Mansfield, and an Eldon, as your dignified
Masters.” “ But,” continues the author, “ if this be not your character ;
if nature has not so fashioned you, and practice confirmed these habits ;
if a higher power has not so refined and elevated your mind, I exhort you
not to undertake the Profession of the Law.”
The author then confirms his advice by quotations from Clarendon*
Bacon, Cicero, and other writers ; and concludes with an entreaty to
this youthful aspirant for the honours of the Legal Profession—“ after
an honest examination of his own powers, habits and disposition, to
make that decision which will disown every base and unworthy
motive ; —the decision of conscience and honour: —which will assure to
you your own respect, whatever may be the subsequent opinion which
experience shall induce you to adopt.”
In this moral sensitiveness, and assertion of your own honour and
conscientiousness I wish you to lay a broad and firm foundation for all
your Legal Studies. You will find it the more important, because, as
I have already shown you by several quotations, the study of
Jurisprudence being the “ Collected Reason of Ages,” will
necessarily withdraw us, often altogether, from present i houghts, and the
passing events of our own passing age ; and compel us, perhaps more
than any other study, to live with antiquity as with our own living


selves and contemporaries. In guiding you through these studies, it
will be my object to show you that it is in these fixed rules of Truth,
Justice and Honour that we trace those silver cords, which have
hound together, ail the “ Just Men” of every Age, and of every Nation;
—and have linked the public history of each Nation, with the history
of Humanity, both past and future, in one Universal Brotherhood.
And think not that it is immaterial to your studies what school of
Moral Philosophy you adopt.
The general effect and result of these studies upon your own
mental and moral natures will be, I trust, beneficial; but it can only
be so by the efforts of your own minds, and according to your own
mental and moral idiosyncrasies; and recollecting my own difficulties
and doubts as a Law Student, and tracing these doubts and difficulties,
as I now can, to my having no fixed and unvarying basis for my
studies, I should be jmjust to you not to warn you against this chief
danger that besets the threshold of our studies. For myself I can
truly promise you, that in this varied course of Lectures on so many
branches of our Jurisprudence, public and private,—political, social and
domestic, —I have set before my mind only your improvement;—and that
in these Lectures on Jurisprudence my great object will be to illustrate
these great truths, which Professor Smyth of Cambridge thus laid down
to his pupils :—“ that the magnanimity of uprightness, all the elevating ,
all the attractive qualities of the human mind are the best protection of
Nations , as well as of individuals; —That the path of Honour is the
Path of True Policy;—And that the Great Governor of the World,
in public as well as in private life, has indissolubly connected, even on
this side the grave, the happiness of his creatures with the exercise of
their virtues and the fulfilment of their duties
It is now twenty-five years since these sentences were addressed to
me when a youthful student at Cambridge ; and I assure you that I have
found no thought so useful to me during ray own studies of Jurispru-
dence, as the thought that I was studying the human developments of
the great principles of Justice as laid down by the Eternal and Almighty
Governor of the World for the happiness of his creatures ; and proud
indeed ought any Nation to be that she possesses in her own Juris-
prudence so many illustrations, of the truth of those philosophical prin-


ciples, which insist upon placing the foundations of Positive Law on the
highest and noblest views both of our mental and moral natures.
This leads me to another remark. These Lectures on Jurisprudence
being part of an University System of Education, and the studies in
Jurisprudence leading us back into all ages of the world, and into
the greatest depths of philosophy, ancient and modern, will necessarily
compel us to take enlarged views of every topic before us ; and after a
time will create an instinctive habit of examining and testing every
topic of Jurisprudence with reference to its widest possible relations to
the progressive development of Society.
I will illustrate my meaning by reference to your other studies in
this University ; —for example, your mathematical studies.
You all know that as you advance in the stfldy of mathematics,
especially when you reach Newton’s Principia, and when for the first
time your minds grasp the laws of gravitation, and your thoughts are
compelled to rise above this earth of ours as the scene of the action
merely of the mechanical powers, you all remember how from
that date in your mathematical education you felt that you had
achieved a great mental advancement. Your Mathematical Lectures
and Readings, both synthetical and analytical, the whole area of your
mathematical studies from that date assumed a vastness and grandeur
to your own minds, infinitely above their proportions while you were
studying the Lever, the Inclined Plane or the Screw, or working out
the most difficult problems in the Differential or Integral Calculus,
So, Gentlemen, I would have you to pursue your studies in Juris-
prudence while under my guidance; —but with this difference, —that
from the very commencement of your studies with me, you will
at once adopt the enlarged and truly catholic views I now seek
to impress upon you, as to the relations of the several systems
of Jurisprudence, of the different ages and the several nations
of the earth, and that you will look upon these Systems only as
the varied, because always the free, developments of an Eternal
and Unchangeable Jurisprudence, which the Almighty Governor of the
Universe has laid down as inherently right;—which has existed for


ever, independently of this earth and all its inhabitants ; —and which
will hereafter be revealed to us in all its infinite perfections and in all
its harmonious proportions.
It is with reference to this view of our subject that I have quoted to
you already, in the early part of this Lecture, the two noble passages
from Cicero and Hooker, —passages every word of which should be
engraven on your memories, should be meditated upon in your hours of
reflection, and will then be the source of constantly-recurring and
always increasing mental delight to you.
It is in the perfect coincidence of thought that exists in the “ Just
Men” of different ages of the world, that we feel the grandeur of our
subject; and appreciate the bonds which unite all nations in one
universal and eternal union and long for the opening of that Day
when, as Cicero says ; —“ Omnes gentes, et omni tempore, una lex et
sempitema et immortalis continebit”; —and what is still-more important
to remember —“ unusque erit communis quasi magister et imperator
omnium—Deus.”
You will also recollect Seneca’s condensed expressions to the same
effect as Cicero’s :—“ Hie enim ipse omnium Conditor et Rector ;
Scripsit quidem fata, sed sequitur;—semper paret, semel jussit.”
But in this Introductory Lecture the present topic may well carry us
a little farther. The Providence of God and the Immortality of the Soul
being the foundations of Natural Theology, and being the foundations also
of my conceptions of General Jurisprudence, I do not see why the
future reassembling together of all these master spirits of each age
should not give additional interest to our present studies.
Hallam, in discussing the character of Shakspeare, and the effect
of his drama on the literature of his age and on posterity, laments the
insufficiency of past criticisms to realise the religious depths of Shak-
speare’s character.
In Hallam’s note you will read his regret that none of the critics
upon Shakspeare seem to have described or understood
« The Shakspeare we shall meet in heaven.”
What an enlarged view of Shakspeare’s dramas and of Shakspeare
himself does this short remark bring before our minds ! And from the
time that I read this note of Hallam’s I confess that Shakspeare’s


dramas and Shakspeare himself have occupied a very different place in
my estimation, —and have been the source of far deeper pleasures
to me, as the composition of a great mind whom “ we shall meet in
heaven.”
Why should we not extend these thoughts into the subject before
us ?
I have already quoted to you from the writings of many illustrious
men; and, having no ambition to he “an original thinker,” I shall
throughout these Lectures cite to you the opinions of many illustrious
thinkers and reasoners who have gone from among us.
Why should we not look upon all these “ illustrious dead” in the
light that Hallam has placed himself before us, —as “ having bound
up their sheaves ” —and been gathered into the heavens, —where the
“ spirits of all just men” will be “ made perfect.”
As an illustration of the practical application of the principles I am
seeking to impress upon your minds, I gladly lay upon the table a little
book which was published at London in the year 1842, and which will
well repay an attentive and frequent perusal. It is entitled “The
Lawyer, his Character and Rule of Holy Life : after the manner of
George Herbert’s Country Parson; by Edward O’Brien, Barrister-at-
law.” The author was the third son of Sir Edward O’Brien, of
Dromoland, born in 1808, and, after taking his degree at Trinity
College, Cambridge, became a member of the Irish Bar. He was one
of those enthusiastic, even glorious, characters whose memory sheds
such imperishable lustre on the name of “ Irishmanand whose ideas
of a perfect Lawyer, as expressed in his little work, seem almost too
high for human nature to attain to, Mr. O’Brien himself died of a
fever, caught in consequence of his exertions on behalf of some religious
and charitable societies established in Dublin; and after his death this
little book was found among his manuscripts and published by a legal
friend.
The pages of this little book show how thoroughly Mr, O’Brien had
reflected on the nature and duties of the Legal Profession; and as there
is not a single word which can possibly offend or grate on the pre-
judices of the sincere believer in any religious creed, I feel no hesitation,
but rather the greater pleasure, in leaving the book on the table for your


perusal. You will find in its pages several of the passages I have cited
to you in this Lecture, with many others from classic and other writers
of authority. And by now reading to you the titles of the chapters of
the book, you will gain a clear conception of the scope and object of
the author. The titles of the chapters are as follows: —1. The Lawyer;
2. Their Diversities ; 3. The Lawyer’s Choice of a Calling ; 4. The
Lawyer’s Life ; 5. The Lawyer’s Knowledge; 6, The Lawyer’s
Accessory Knowledge; 7. The Lawyer’s Duties ; 8. The Lawyer
Advising; 9. The Lawyer Drawing Pleadings ; 10. The Lawyer
Advising on Evidence; 11. The Lawyer in Consultation; 12. The
Lawyer Pleading in Civil Cases ; 13. The Lawyer of Counsel for the
Crown ; 14. The Lawyer of Counsel for Prisoners; 15. The Lawyer
Examining Witnesses ; 16. The Lawyer Drawing Deeds; 17. The
Lawyer Drawing Wills ; 18. The Lawyer a Peace-maker ; 19. The
Lawyer an Arbitrator; 20. The Lawyer on Circuit; 21. The
Lawyer at Elections ; 22. The Lawyer’s Secresy; 23. The Lawyer
Discomfited; 24. The Lawyer in the Matter of Fees; 25. The
Lawyer’s Regard for Professional Rules; 26. The Lawyer’s Regard
for Professional Confidence; 27. The Lawyer in Vacation; 28. The
Lawyer’s Humanity ; 29. The Lawyer’s Charity ; 30. The Lawyer’s
Courtesy ; 31. The Lawyer’s Hospitality; 32. The Lawyer a Citizen ;
33, The Lawyer a Legislator ; 34. The Lawyer’s Consideration con-
cerning Ecclesiastical Affairs ; 35. The Lawyer upon Sundays ;
36. The Lawyer become Judge ; 37. The Lawyer’s Death ;
38. The Lawyer’s Prayer.
The mere enumeration of these chapters shows how thoroughly
Mr. O’Brien had reflected on the various duties of the Lawyer; but
1 wish you to read these pages to obtain an idea of what a Lawyer
may be “ whose sole impulse is the love of Justice.”
In these 144 duodecimo pages you have, as Mr. O’Brien’s biographer
writes, “ The portraiture of the very soul of a man conversing with his
fellow-men: recording for their benefit the best thoughts of his best
hours : presenting them, in a brief space, with principles the sifted and
select result of all his studies, meditations and experience : counselling
them, exhorting them : witnessing for what he has known of Truth,
and putting it forth, with his prayers, that it may serve to the need


of his brethren.” * * * * “ The grave which has closed on its
author does not more securely shield him from the arrows of fortune,
and the sharp or flattering speeches of men, than did his own manly and
modest nature ; and those of Mr. O’Brien’s friends who remain will
possess, in this book, a memorial more consoling than public applause
could be. In it his portraiture remains; stamped upon it they will
find not his love of Justice alone, but that kindness which made him
seem, if injured, to remember Justice only against himself: they will
observe his fearless reverence for Truth, and, at the same time, his
respect for opinions long established ; his slowness to oppose them ;
his charitable desire to exculpate those who hold them, and that higher
charity which stimulated him to combat their error: they will be re.
minded of his reluctance to give pain, and his greater fear of doing
wrong ; his distrust of his own judgment and his invariable faith in
the moral sense and the divine commands; his indifference to promiscu-
ous applause, and his solicitude for the esteem of those he esteemed,
the love of those he loved. They will find many light traces to fill up
of his single-heartedness, his humility, his earnestness and his courtesy.”
Gentlemen, I ask you all to peruse these pages at your leisure ; and
to such of you as may have tha candour and patience to reflect and
form your own opinions on the important social topics of Mr. O’Brien’s
chapters, I will only add, I hope you will have also Mr. O’Brien’s
manly courage, and be enabled as fearlessly to maintain your con-
scientious convictions as he did his.
But I was in error when I said just now that Mr. O’Brien’s ideas of
a perfect Lawyer were “ too high for human nature to attain to.” I
forgot Sir Thomas More ; —I forgot Sir Matthew Hale. Bead and
reflect upon the lives of these Lawyers; and then you will understand
how True Religion and Sound Philosophy may be combined with the
deepest Legal Learning, and how Purity of Life will give additional
glory to the strictest performance of the Lawyer’s professional duties.
In conclusion, I will now proceed to lay before you a short sketch or
outline of the Lectures or Readings I propose to deliver at this
University during the ensuing terms of 1860.


The appointment to the office of Reader in “ General Jurisprudence”
to the University, under which I now address you, requires me to
deliver at the University of Sydney a series of at least twenty Lectures
or Readings on General Jurisprudence ; and, as I have already stated
to you, I shall endeavour to bring before you the vast subject of General
Jurisprudence, not as a theory, but as most conveniently arranged with
reference to the most important of the topics of Law, which have been
commented upon by Mr. Justice Blackstone in the first and second
Volumes of his Commentaries.
In preparing and delivering these Lectures it will be my earnest
endeavour, in accordance with the “ Report of the Professorial Board”
to whom this subject was referred, to convey to my audience a clear
and philosophical exposition of “ the principles involved in Jurispru-
dence ; pointing out their most important applications in our code, and
the various modifications of the Law since the time of Blackstone —
with especial reference to our own community.”
Although indeed I cannot expect to effect much in these first rough
drafts of my Lectures, yet I would fain hope that, by keeping before our
minds the passage from Mr. Justice Blackstone, with which I com-
menced this evening, I shall be able at least to place the various
important topics of our Lectures before you as the “ liberal and polite
education” of an University system, and as parts of the education of
“ Gentlemen and Scholars.”
My previous observations this evening have been intended to introduce
the subject of Jurisprudence as agreeably to you as I can—first, by
showing you the class of authors whose writings you should first peruse;—
secondly, by pointing out to you how noble and ennobling is our subject
in itself; —and, thirdly, by warning you against the various narrow
views of that subject, which would impede your future progress in
studying Jurisprudence. By these preliminary observations made with
these views, I thought I might secure, if not increase, your veneration
for the extensive and almost exhaustless stores of philosophy which lie
open to your enquiries under the name of General Jurisprudence.
I thought further that by these extracts and this mode of treating our
subject, I might excite your curiosity most effectually on these intro-
ductory topics; communicate some general knowledge on some of the points


I have touched upon, give some hints that may be useful to you in your
future studies, —and, at the very outset of your studies, call into activity
all the nobler qualities of your hearts ; —encourage a love of constitu-
tional freedom and of mild government, —a love of peaceful industry
and of lawful authority, which, to be patiently submitted to, must be
founded upon Reason and Justice ; —inculcating and impressing upon
you a sense of duty and responsibility as the basis, and only firm and
lasting basis, of every sound system of Jurisprudence.
As I have already said, Gentlemen, I purpose during this year’s
Lectures to limit my Readings to the various topics of Law selected
from the First and Second Volumes of Blackstone’s Commentaries and
specified in the syllabus before you. These topics you will observe
are distributed over twenty Lectures during 1860, ten being delivered
during Lent, and ten during Trinity, Term.
The topics comprised in the first course of Lectures during Lent
Term will be :
Ist. Introductory Lecture.
2nd. On our Constitutional Law.
3rd. On our Legislative System.
4th. On our Judicial System.
sth. On the Office of the Justice of the Peace.
6th. On the Common Law of England.
7th. On the Law of Real and Personal Property,
Bth. On Commercial Jurisprudence and Mercantile Law,
9th. On the Civil Law and Equity Jurisprudence.
10th, On Modem Conveyances and Testamentary Dispositions.
The second course of these Lectures will be delivered during
Trinity Term, and will comprise the following topics, viz.:—
Ist. On Municipal Corporations.
2nd. On Joint Stock Companies.
3rd. On Commercial Partnerships,
4th. On Principal and Agent.
sth. On Trustees and Executors.
6th. On Mortgagors and Mortgagees.
7th. On Landlord and Tenant.
Bth. On Husband and Wife.


9th. On Parent and Child.
10th. On Master and Servant.
You will observe, even from the mere list of these twenty topics, how
wide an area is before us, during the twenty hours, the total period for
which I shall be favored with your attention during the ensuing
months.
You cannot help observing that the subjects which I have undertaken to
elucidate are of the utmost importance to us all; that they relate to
our dearest interests, whether we consider ourselves as members of the
same political community, boasting, and rightfully boasting, that the
bonds which unite us in one political community are not the bonds of
despotic authority, are not the bonds of the strong imposed on the weak,
but are the bonds of mutual duties towards each other, the bonds of
reciprocal responsibility to each other, —bonds which I think I
shall succeed in shewing you have created, among all who have adopted
our English Jurisprudence, a far more firm and lasting union than any
other union by which any political communities ever have been, or can
ever be bound together.
As a Political and Social community, in the first place, I shall
endeavour to give you a clear and distinct statement of our present
condition in the next three Lectures of this first course, which you
observe relate to the following subjects, viz.: —
The Constitutional Law of our Colony.
Our Legislative System, and
Our Judicial System.
Under one or other of these heads, it has appeared to me that I
might classify and arrange most of the great principles of Jurisprudence
which relate to our political relations, either towards Her Most
Gracious Majesty or His Excellency the Governor General as repre-
senting Her Majesty, or towards each other as fellow citizens under
fixed Constitutional Laws and boasting an elaborate system of Legis-
lative and Judicial Self-Government; and I hope to treat these
delicate subjects in a manner which will enable every pupil to pursue
the subject safely and advantageously to any further extent to which
he may choose or be obliged to carry them.


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW.
In my next Lecture on Constitutional Law, I shall especially
rely on the Constitutional writings of De Lolme, Hallam, and
Macaulay. I shall endeavour to introduce you to those grand Consti-
tutional Statutes of the Mother Country,—which, commencing from
Magna Charta, have at every epoch in our Constitutional History
secured and fixed every advance of English liberty by appropriate
legislation ; dividing our constitutional history into three epochs—lst,
from Magna Charta to Queen Elizabeth; 2nd, from Queen Elizabeth
to Queen Anne ; 3rd, from Queen Anne to Queen Victoria.
I shall also endeavour to put’you on a right course of reading through
the English Constitutional Law as contained in the various Constitu-
tional Statutes I shall cite to you; also noticing the most important
Judicial decisions on Constitutional Law, and conclude with a short
account of our own Colonial Constitution Acts.
LEGISLATIVE SYSTEM.
In my third Lecture, on Our Legislative System, I shall, in the
first place, explain the elaborate fabric of the English Legislative System,
and the position of the Crown in the Mother Country, with reference to
Imperial Legislation ; and the admirable manner in which the Koyal
Prerogative is made subservient to the real interest of the people. I
shall then point out the limits of our Colonial Legislative authority, and
notice the various topics reserved for Imperial Legislation by the terms
of His Excellency’s Commission. I shall also endeavour to explain
the position of the Executive authority as part of our Legislative
system, and specify as many of the leading decisions in our Constitu-
tional law on these most important topics, as the limits of one Lecture
will enable me ; especially such decisions as Ashby v. White, Stockdale
v. Hansard, Fraser v. Hampdon.
JUDICIAL SYSTEM.
In the fourth Lecture of this course, viz.On Our Judicial System,
I shall endeavour to bring into one view the History of the English
Judicial System since Magna Charta. I shall also enumerate to you
the most valuable features of our Judicial System, such as its
separation from the Legislative and Executive authority, the limita-


tions of “ judicial discretion,” the judicial independence of the Crown, the
further limitations on judicial power by juries, and the other important
principles which render this branch of our English Jurisprudence so
entirely satisfactory to the best interests of society, I shall also hope to
bring under your notice the chief provisions of our own Charter of
Justice, and the various Colonial Statutes on the subject of our
Judicature.
These three Lectures, next after the present Lecture, relate, as you
observe, to the largest possible view of our Jurisprudence; and I would
consider my duties in treating these most important topics as defined
by the concluding sentence of Blackstone’s Commentaries. Adopting
Blackstone’s words, my endeavour will be “to examine the solid
foundations of our Constitution —to mark out its extensive plan ; —to
explain the use and distribution of its parts; —and from the harmonious
concurrence of those several parts, to demonstrate the elegant propor-
tions of the whole.”
I would also hope that we shall all keep before our minds, especially
during these three Constitutional Lectures, the final words of the Com-
mentaries :—“ that the preservation of our Constitutional Liberty is a
duty which we owe to ourselves who enjoy it; —to our ancestors, who
transmitted it down; —and to our posterity, who will claim at our
hands this, the best birthright and noblest inheritance of mankind.”
The points of English Jurisprudence which will thus be introduced into
these first three Lectures, I need scarcely promise you, will be altogether
beyond all controversy or question; and will be discussed by us rather
with a view to guiding your future Jurisprudential studies and
researches, than in the hope of giving you any complete outline of the
most important topics of these first three Lectures. Nevertheless, con-
sidering our Constitutional Law, and the proper adaptation of our
Legislative and Judicial systems to each other as the foundations of our
English Jurisprudence, I think I shall, in the three hours I have set apart
to these topics, satisfy you that our most ancient and firmly established
statutes of the Mother Country, and the principles of our own Colonial
Jurisprudence on these topics, are based on the soundest principles of
General Jurisprudence, and on the catholic and eternal maxims of


Reason and Justice; —while, on the other hand, by thus practically
treating these branches of General Jurisprudence, I thinkyou will accustom
yourselves to consider our present Imperial and Colonial Constitutions,
though now known to us as the result of the labours of along succession of
patriot statesmen; as also being secured to us by the most anxiously con-
sidered and patiently elaborated statutes, and by a long and unbroken
series of wise and enlightened Judicial decisions ; —and although Reform,
Amendment, even Revolution, be engraven on so many portions of our
Constitutional Law, and written on so many pages of our Statute Book,
I think you will become convinced that we now enjoy, under this old
English Jurisprudence, in every position of life, all the practical
advantages of a more than Republican liberty.
These first four Readings, which will occupy us for the present Term,
may be considered as introductory to the course ; —not only as laying a
broad and firm foundation for all our future Readings, but as necessarily
most general in their character, and as referring to those larger topics
of General Jurisprudence, upon which clear opinions must precede all
our investigations into the topics selected for our subsequent Readings*
And I am sure that by thus giving you, or, rather, attempting to give
you a clear practical outline of the present state of our Jurisprudence
firstly, as to our Constitutional Law, or those invaluable, long-established
primary Rules, and fundamental Principles of Political Truth and Jus-
tice, which are interwoven into every branch of our Jurisprudence;
secondly, as to our complicated Legislative system, or the machinery
whereby our Jurisprudence may be cautiously, but effectually, amended,
and from time to time adapted to the ever-varying and advancing re-
quirements of a highly civilized and liberty-loving community ; and,
thirdly, as to our present Judicial System, or the machinery whereby
our General Jurisprudence is applied with perfect impartiality, and with
strong and just efficiency, to every particular case of rights invaded, or
wrongs attempted among us ; and if you will yourselves further pursue
these introductory topics by j our own reflections, you will find that
during the four hours, which is the utmost I could allot to these por-
tions of our subject, you will have acquired correct and definite percep-
tions of these important branches of our English Jurisprudence, as illus-
trating the more abstract principles of General Jurisprudence.


JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.
After the short vacation we will commence with my Fifth Lecture, in
which I shall attempt to give you a practical and untechnical exposition,
as far as I can in a single lecture, of the office of “ Justice of the Peace;”
that ancient judicial magistrate whose office is of so much practical im-
portance to us, as “ bringing home” the initiatives of English Law and
and Justice to every, even the most remote, district of our Colony.
and an office whose dignity and duties I am sure it is desirable, on every
ground, should be fully appreciated throughout the Colony, and by
every rank in life. In this Lecture I shall be able to bring before
your minds the colonial aspect of the office of “ Justice of the Peace,”
because, by the recent adoption in this colony of three admirable
English Statutes, the Colonial Law upon this topic has been consolidated
into a very distinct outline, the leading features of which I shall have
no difficulty in placing before you and fixing in your memories.
THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND,
In my sixth Lecture I shall introduce you to that vast storehouse of
the Maxims and Principles of English Jurisprudence, “ The Common
Law of England ,” and I shall endeavor to place before you the chief
points in its history,—explain some of its leading maxims,—and
direct your future readings into the sources of its most useful and ad-
vantageous learning. By thus only looking into the treasuries of the
Common Law you will learn how utterly beyond all estimation is this
ancient and peculiarly English branch of our Jurisprudence, how full of
instruction, and how illustrative of every topic of General Jurisprudence.
I shall also hope, in this Lecture, to give you a clear historical summary
of the Pise and Progress of the Common Law, the chief points of its
connexion with the Feudal System, and the influence which the
“ Common Law maxims ” exercise on every branch of our English
Jurisprudence,
In the four remaining Lectures of the First Course, I shall endeavour
to give you an insight into four different views of our Law of Property,
and its most conspicuous rights and incidents, dividing my subject into
the four following divisions, contained in my seventh, eighth, ninth and
tenth lectures.


THE LAW OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY.
In my seventh Lecture I shall endeavour to explain The Law of
Beal and Personal Property, showing you the origin of the abstract
Right of Property, and distinguishing between the various kinds or
classes of Property as recognized by the English Law, and as forming
a distinct branch of General Jurisprudence. I need scarcely remind
you that the Laws of Property form the most essential feature of
every code of Jurisprudence, and in our code the rules and maxims of
our Property and Tenure Laws form a peculiarly characteristic and
highly National branch of enquiry.
COMMERCIAL JURISPRUDENCE AND MERCANTILE LAW.
In my eighth Lecture we will consider our Commercial Jurisprudence
and Mercantile Law, and the rules and maxims which fall most naturally
under these two heads, as regulating our mutual duties, liabilities, and
responsibilities as to our Commercial and Mercantile property; and I
shall hope to point out to you at least the ground plan and chief out-
lines of that edifice which the merchant has erected for himself, with
little aid from our Judges and still less from our Legislature, I shall
also hope to explain the principles of international codes and naviga-
tion law. This lecture will consider our Commercial and Mercantile
Jurisprudence only so far as such Jurisprudence extends over Mercantile
Property, as shipping, negotiable instruments, charter-parties, &c,, re-
serving to the Second Course our duties as persons or individuals, con-
nected in our Commercial relations as partners, principal and agent or
other personal relations or duties.
THE CIVIL LAW AND EQUITY JURISPRUDENCE.
The ninth of these Lectures will relate to the Old Civil Law of Rome,
and its Modern Offspring, our English Equity Jurisprudence ; —and
here I greatly hope to be able to give you a succinct and intelligible
survey of one of the most wonderful systems of Human Ingenuity and
Intellectual Labor that will come under our notice during these read-
ings—a system to which although I only ask your patience and atten-
tion for a single hour, your enquiries will often be attracted in your
future life, as you will see how deeply all its principles and maxims


enter into every relation in which we stand towards each other as
members of the same social community.
In this Lecture, also, I shall merely consider those branches of the
Civil Law and of our Equity Jurisprudence which relate to Property
and its incidents ; leaving those most important parts of the Civil Law
which relate to Communities, Obligations, and their incidents, and other
special matters, to the Lectures in the second course on those specific
topics. Of course it will be impossible, in a single lecture, to give you
any more detailed information, either as to the Civil Law of Rome or
as to our Equity Jurisprudence, than is necessary as an explanation to
those subjects as two particular phases of General Jurisprudence.
MODERN CONVEYANCING AND TESTAMENTARY DISPOSITIONS.
Lastly f in the tenth Lecture of the first Course, and the last of these
four Lectures on Property, I shall endeavour to bring before you a sim-
ple and practical survey of the principles of Modern Conveyancing and
Testamentary Dispositions —that is to say, of the instruments whereby
we transfer to each other property from one man to another inter vivos ,
or by Testators in their Wills or Testamentary Dispositions;—a branch
of our Jurisprudence which I trust to make perfectly intelligible
to you, though burdened with an undue amount of technicalities.
Here, also I trust to show you how much w r e have to admire
in our English system of Jurisprudence, how wisely the English
Laws, by a mixture of the Civil Law of Rome with the
Tenure of the Feudal Law, have regulated the transfer of property from
one owner to an other; and, adopting the words of Lurke, I think
you will find that even in our modern systems of Conveyancing and
Testamentary Dispositions, with all their defects, redundances and
errors, the great “principles of original Justice” have been successfully
applied to all the “ infinite variety of human concerns.”
In this Lecture I hope to be able also to give you a short sketch of
the history of English Conveyancing, as an Art, and the various stages
it has gone through until it reached its present highly elaborated con-
dition ; concluding my lecture wfith a practical analysis of most of our
usual Conveyances and forms of Wills, so as to supply you with a key


to the ready interpretation of the most usual legal instruments which
may come before you.
That Lecture will conclude the first course, and I hope these
ten Lectures will leave a clear and definite impression on all your
minds, upon each topic which shall have been thus discussed by us,
during this term of your University course.
I think in the present Introductory Lecture I ought also to give you a
short epitome of the second Course of Readings to be delivered here
during Trinity Term.
The Lectures or Readings for this second course will have for their
object, rather to explain our personal relations, and the more practical,
principles on which our social intercourse is founded, than to expound our
political constitution, or to explain the larger and more expansive views
of General Jurisprudence.
The ten lectures of this second course may be divided into three
divisions, viz.:—lst, Corporations, Joint Stock Companies, Partnerships
and Principal and Agent; 2nd, Trustees and Executors, Mortgagors
and Mortgagees, and Landlord and Tenant; and 3rd, Husband and
Wife, Parent and Child, and Master and Servant.
CORPORATIONS, JOINT STOCK COMPANIES, PARTNERSHIPS,
AND PRINCIPAL AND AGENT.
The first four lectures relating to Corporations, Joint Stock Com-
panies, Partnerships and Principal and Agent will bring before your
minds the whole varied system of the social combinations into which
the Law allows us to incorporate or unite ourselves for a common object.
By these four lectures you will learn how large are the powers which men
possess for good or evil by combining and concentrating their individual
separate powers into one common focus. I shall also seek to instruct
you how to distinguish and appreciate the sound and fixed principles
which should regulate these various social combinations ; and, as far as
the time permits, I shall endeavour to show you how our English Laws
have applied the great principles of General Jurisprudence, and in many
respects restrained the Natural Rights to combine for a common object
within defined limits, so as to become not only more powerful for the
common object, but less likely to produce peril to the common peace or


our separa e liberties. In these four lectures I shall also endeavour to
give you a modern view of Municipal Corporations, as presented to us
in the mother country, in America, and in the British colonies;
that you may comprehend the principles which ought to regulate their
establishment and encouragement among ourselves.
The legal incidents and relations of the several members of Joint
Stock Companies, and of Commercial Partnerships, and Principal and
Agent will also require special notice, as most important branches of
every code of Modern Jurisprudence.
These four lectures on Corporations, Joint Stock Companies, Partner-
ships, and Principal and Agent whether considered in this combined
view or separately from each other will, I trust, leave a clear, definite
and lasting impression on your minds of the extreme necessity of main-
taining the great principles of Justice and Honesty as our only guide in
the infinitely various rules which men must lay down for their conduct,
when combining their united forces, whether of capital, talent or labour
for any one common object of social advantage or individual benefit.
TRUSTEES AND EXECUTORS.—
MORTGAGORS AND MORTGAGEES.-LANDLORD AND TENANT*
The fifth sixth, and seventh Lectures of the second course will
relate to General Jurisprudence as developed and applied in the three
relations of— Trustees and Executors, Mortgagors and Mortgagees, and
Landlord and Tenant.
These three relations seemed to me to be the most common and
generally known relations, in which the English Law of Property has
been allowed to develope itself and become incorporated with our social
interests, duties and responsibilities, and supplying these Eeadings with
practical illustrations of General Jurisprudence.
These relations would seem at first sight to be somewhat technical
in their character; but I think I shall be able to show you that the
great principles of the Civil Law are in these three topics combined
with the Feudal Law of Real Property in a degree which has been
very favourable to the development of our own English Juris-
prudence ; and that the principles of General Jurisprudence laid down
and inculcated in the previous Lectures of these courses will be found
again developed and illustrated.


In determining the relative duties, rights and liabilities of Trustees
and Executors we shall incidentally ascertain and fix the duties, rights
and liabilities of all persons in a fiduciary position towards others and
as to every species of property.
In investigating the relative rights, duties and liabilities of Mortgagors
and Mortgagees , we shall incidentally ascertain and fix the rights, duties
and liabilities of borrower and lender, debtor and creditor, and all per-
sons in similar relation to each other, I have selected this relation of
Mortgagors and Mortgagees as a topic of Lecture because I found this
topic an admirable illustration of the mode in which Natural Justice and
the Jurisprudence of the Civil Law, as to obligations, have been practi-
cally applied among us, and have resulted in the formation of a very
distinct branch of English Jurisprudence on these topics.
The last of these relations, viz., that of Landlord and Tenant >
is a relation of such daily and general occurrence, and of so much im-
portance to our social and domestic peace and comfort, that I thought
an evening hour might be advantageously spent in investigating the
principles which should guide you whether as Landlord or Tenant in
entering upon and in performing the duties which will arise
from such relation. This Lecture will also enable me to give you a
farther insight into the English Law of Landed Property, and will
familiarize you with some important Imperial and Colonial Statutes
which ought to be brought under your observation.
HUSBAND AND WIFE,— PARENT AND CHILD.—MASTER AND
SERVANT.
The three concluding lectures of the second course will explain the
relations of Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, and Master and
Servant ; —three relations which it is of the utmost importance should
be founded on sound and definite principles of General Jurisprudence.
HUSBAND AND WIFE.
The first of these Lectures, viz., on Husband and Wife will, of course
require our investigation of the Law of Marriage ; a branch of General
Jurisprudence upon which, with the Law of Property, as Sir James Mc-
Intosh observes in his Introductory Lecture, the whole frame of every
social fabric must rest. “ Around these institutions all our social duties
will be found, at various distances, to range themselves : some more


near, obviously essential to the good order of human life, —others more
remote, and of which the necessity is not, at first sight, so apparent, —
and some so distant that their importance has been sometimes doubted,
though, upon more mature consideration, they will be found to be out-
posts and advanced guards of these two fundamental principles—that
man should securely enjoy the fruits of his labour, and that the society
of the sexes should be so wisely ordered as to make it a school of the
kind affections and a fit nursery for the Commonwealth.”
The Civil Law of Rome, the English Common Law, and the
English Statute Law will each supply us with much useful learning, and
many general principles on the subject of marriage; and the recent
alteration of the English Divorce Law will also compel us to investigate
the exact nature of the Marriage Tie more accurately, and perhaps
more anxiously, inasmuch as these English alterations of the Law may
Shortly come before our Australian Parliament. You will find also
that the largest jurisprudential view of the Marriage Contract has been
elaborated with consummate skill and forensic eloquence in the speeches
of that accomplished orator of the British Bar, Erskine ; who, dur-
ing the whole period of his forensic career, was invariably retained in
every important cause on this topic; and who seems to have understood
the Jurisprudence of Matrimony in all its intrinsic and beautiful ramifi-
cations.
PARENT AND CHILD.
The nurture, education and protection, which we receive from our
parents on the one hand, and the duty and obedience which children
owe to them on the other hand, form the foundations of this earliest re-
lation of human life, of Parent and Child. I trust, on the one hand, to
be able to show you both from the Civil Law and our own Modern
Jurisprudence that the due performance of the duties of parents in this
nurture, education and protection, and obeying the fixed law of our
nature implanted in man under every form of social life, is generally
enforced among us as essential to the prosperity of every social and
political community ; and, on the other hand, that the implicit and
dutiful obedience which we ought to render to our parents, while under
their control, is the best preparation for the larger duties of citizenship,
and for that patient submission to authority which binds us together in


performing all the varied duties and responsibilities, arising from the
various relations discussed and examined in detail during our
previous Lectures.
I think, too, we shall be able to admit these principles of patient
submission to authority as a part of our General Jurisprudence, without
falling into the Filmer theory of Paternal Government, or endangering
in any degree the Political Liberty on which our social Government
rests.
MASTER AND SERVANT.
In our final lecture, viz., On Master and Servant, we shall have be-
fore us a branch of General Jurisprudence of the utmost practical im-
portance to us, under the present circumstances of our public Jurispru-
dence ; because the relation of Employer and Labourer gives rise to
contracts of the most extensive character, and of the utmost importance
to the progress of our Social Improvement. Unless this relation of
Employer and Labourer be founded on sound principles, admitted and
recognised by the individual parties to the contract, and unless this
relation be cleared from oppression on the one hand and extortion on
the other, that most important instrument of modern civilization.
Money Capital, will be unable to exert its proper power in our social
and national progress. Unless we clearly understand how Labour as
the great Creator of Property, and how the hiring of a man’s services,
as the agent whereby a very large amount of Property is first created,
then preserved and improved, unless we clearly understand how the
great principles of Eeason and Justice (upon which the relation of
Master and Servant must be founded to be mutually serviceable and
advantageous to both parties) have been cleared from all the slavish
Jurisprudence of antiquity, and expanded by our modem Jurisprudence
into a system which has now become as perfect as any other branch of
General Jurisprudence-, —unless we clearly understand this, we shall
take a very narrow view of a relation which occupies a most important
position in our English and Colonial Jurisprudence.
Besides these twenty Lectures, I shall also hope to be able to deliver
few special Lectures to any Gentlemen who may wish to form


“ a senior class of Jurisprudence.” Among the topics of these
Lectures I thought 1 might advantageously explain the principles of
Forensic Rhetoric, —the Chief Rules of Evidence, —and perhaps give a
few additional Lectures on Equity Jurisprudence and Equity Practice.
But the delivery of these additional Lectures will depend on the
formation of a senior class, as I must not lecture except to an University
Audience nor attempt any professional style of readings.
Such, Gentlemen, is a short sketch of my proposed readings at this
University on General Jurisprudence during the present year, 1860.
The topics of Jurisprudence to be considered by us, the mere titles of
subjects set forth on the prospectus, and thus rapidly glanced over in
this Lecture, will show you at once how “ the whole compass of human
affairs ” lies here displayed before us ; how “ the principles of original
Justice ” have been adapted by the “ collected Reason of Ages ’’ to
“ the infinite variety of human concerns and how “ the cautious and
unwearied exertions of wise men ” have, through a long course of time,
formed a science which, I trust, will be found, in your experience also,
“to quicken and invigorate all your understandings ,” and to “discipline
all your mental faculties.” It is in this light, Gentlemen, as a discipline
of the mental faculties, that I would especially wish you to enter upon
these Lectures, and would urge you to bring all your moral and
intellectual powers to bear upon the science now placed before you ; so
that hereafter in all the difficulties of social life, in all your intercourse
with men of every possible opinion, and under every varied phase of
personal and political character, and in every relation of social life you
may possess an unerring Catholic Jurisprudence, safely guiding all your
opinions and conduct.
Before I conclude, I have two additional observations to make.
The first observation is that when I first sketched out this Lecture
we all looked forward in our constitutional studies to Macaulay as our
guide ; from the high position which he had just attained as the future
Nestor of the British House of Lords. As I said, while lecturing at another
place, “ Macaulay’s banner now ranks with the time-honoured banners
of the Howards, the Percies, the Bussells, the Stanleys, the Nevilles,
the Wentworths, and the Cavendishes, in the most ancient Senate


acknowledged by or known to the civilized world.” But scarcely had
his sagacious wisdom, from that high position, begun to assist the de-
liberations of the British Parliament, than, alas! he is summoned from
this earth. The volumes of that History of England which so many
thousands, I might say hundreds of thousands, of Englishmen watched
and waited and longed for; and which were welcomed at the remotest
bounds of the British Dominions, to flush the proud cheeks and brows of
us all, while we read his Baphael paintings of “ our ancestors;” those
volumes are concluded. Macaulay, like Hallam, has “ now bound up
his sheaves,” —and been “gathered into the Heavens” to the “ spirits
of just men made perfect .”
The other concluding observation I would make, is that my previous
references to Hooker, Burke, Coleridge, and others, as to the lofty views
I would wish you to adopt in our Jurisprudential studies, I find thus
confirmed by the address on Jurisprudence, recently delivered by the
Bight Honorable Joseph Napier, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, before the
National Association for the promotion of Social Science.
Speaking of Henry Lord Brougham, and other master spirits of this
age, who have helped forward the great work of Law Amendment,
the Lord Chancellor of Ireland continues thus : —“ Much of this
Law Beform has been brought about by the energy of those master
spirits (I speak both of the living and the dead), not Ministers, but
High Priests of Justice men, who in the good providence of God,
have been raised up from time to time and have imparted living
powers, and loftier views, and clear intelligence to public opinion ; —to
that which, in the end, must test, and discriminate, and separate, the
true from the false; reject what is unsuited for immediate use, but
absorb what is in keeping with the “sensus communis,” —which
nourishes the real life and accords with the inherent laws which govern
the “ Progressive Development of Society.”
Gentlemen, no one can be more sensible than myself of the
deficiencies and short-comings of this Lecture, and I might find many
and sufficient excuses in the circumstances under which I accepted my
appointment ; though I would rather seek my excuses in the vast and
immeasurable subjects of these Lectures.
But I will not detain you by any thoughts relating to myself.


Enough for me that I have done my best to fulfil my duty towards
you, and towards the University; and it will be hereafter the highest
reward and gratification to me, if any of you should hereafter look back
upon these Lectures, as having in any degree given new vigour to your
intellectual progress; —in any degree opened new stores of learning to
your enquiries;—in any degree introduced you to authors, whose guiding
stars may henceforth shine on any portion of your mental existence,
and assist you to steer your course, manfully and honourably, through
the troubled seas of this Life.






