

INTRODUCTION
TO THE
LAW REFORM COMMISSIONERS’ REPORT
AND
CRIMINAL LAW CONSOLIDATION
AND AMENDMENT BILL.
CRIMINAL LAW CONSOLIDATION.
BY
SIR ALFRED STEPHEN, K.C.M.G.,
PRESIDENT OF THE COMMISSION.
SYDNEY: THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1876.




INTRODUCTION, ETC.
In the year 1861, six statutes were passed by the Imperial
Parliament, being chapters 91 to 100 of the 25th year of Her
Majesty’s reign, for consolidating and amending the Statute Law
of England and Ireland, respecting Offences against the Person,
Larceny and similar Offences, Malicious Injuries to Property,
Forgery, Offences relating to the Coin, and the Statute Law
respecting Accessories. These six statutes repealed, while to a
large extent re-enacting, the Consolidation and Amendment Acts
of the 7th and Bth, and of the 9th George the Fourth, commonly
known as Sir Robert Peel’s Acts and Lord Lansdowne’s Act,
respecting Larceny, Malicious Injuries to Property, and Offences
against the Person; together with the Acts passed in the first
and second years of William the Fourth, for consolidating and
amending the laws relating to Forgery and the Coinage. They
repealed also, but as to some of the more modern Acts consoli-
dating and amending tbeir provisions, above ninety other statutes
or parts of statutes on the subject of Offences and their
prosecution.
These six statutes of 1861, therefore, although perhaps—it
may be thought — not in the most desirable form, nor altogether
unexceptionable in some portions, are in effect unitedly a Code
embracing every statutory provision affecting the crimes to which
they relate. And these, it will be observed, comprise all the
ordinary indictable offences prosecuted in the Courts. Whatever
its shortcomings, the body of law thus presented is beyond
question a great improvement on the code or series of enact-
ments, themselves the first attempt at a system, passed in the


reigns of the fourth George and William. But, in this Colony, we
have hitherto been content with those older statutes, and the
fragmentary ameliorations or alterations of them which succeeded ;
adopting the Imperial Acts from time to time, with no other
change than such as local circumstances rendered necessary. In
Tasmania, however, the new code was introduced without delay,
and in the same shape ; that is to say, by separate laws, each
limited to one class of offences only. It will be found embodied
in the Acts 27th Victoria, Nos. 5 to 11, passed in 1863.
Queensland adopted the same course in 1865. In Victoria, the
more desirable and simple course was pursued of including all
the six statutes in one ; —and at the same time introducing,
but with scarcely an attempt at amendment, the Colonial
enactments respecting Procedure and some other matters.
The Act is the 27th Victoria No. 233, passed in June, 1864. In
this Colony, up to the present year of grace 1876, notwith-
standing the labours of a Commission specially reporting on the
subject, and the efforts of successive Attorney Generals in the
Legislature, nothing in this direction has been done, and in truth
little in any department of Law Beform been attempted.
That Commission was appointed in the month of June, 1870;
the members being Sir Alfred Stephen, then Chief Justice, Sir
William Manning and Mr. Salamons, the then Attorney and
Solicitor Generals, Sir James Martin, Q.C., Mr. Butler, Q.C., the
late Mr. Iceton, and Mr. Barker —the first object mentioned in
the Letters Patent being “ to inquire into the state of the Statute
Law of the Colony, and submit proposals for its revision, con-
solidation, and amendment.” In pursuance of the instructions
thus conveyed, the Commissioners during the ensuing eight
months repeatedly (in the whole above fifty times) met, and
considered the subject of the suggested statute law reform ; and,
in the result, they submitted the three undermentioned compre-
hensive measures, of which the last was drafted by the Commis-
sioners themselves, with—if the writer may pardonably say so —
an amount of pains-taking care and study which could not be
surpassed. The first, a Bill for the consolidation and amendment


of the laws relating to the Insane; the second, for the consolida-
tion and amendment of the laws affecting Equity Procedure ; the
third, a Bill for the consolidation and amendment in various
respects of the Criminal Law. The last combined all the pro-
visions of the Acts of 1861, so far as they are applicable to this
Colony, together with in substance the enactments, or most of
them, which had in the interim been passed in England, sixteen
in number; it repealed, but to a large extent re-enacted, in effect,
above fifty Colonial statutes ; it contained provisions on the sub-
ject of Blasphemy and Perjui’y; and it introduced clauses —
suggested by difficulties occurring within the experience of the
Commissioners, —for the improvement in many particulars of the
Criminal Law, in respect of Pleading, Procedure, Punishments,
Evidence, and other matters. It is to the Criminal Law Bill
alone, but more especially the provisions in it respecting Homi-
cide, that the observations in this paper are directed.
In December, 1870, there was a change of Ministry, and Mr.
Windeyer, the new Solicitor General, was substituted for Mr.
Salamons. The Commissioners’ Report, therefore, dated in
March, 1871, was not signed by the latter; nor had it the advan-
tage of Sir James Martin’s signature—but this not because of
any dissent, for Sir James had taken no part in any discussion on
the Bill. In September, 1872, it was read a first and second time
in the Legislative Assembly, on the motion of Mr. Butler, then
Attorney General. In September, 1873, a Session intervening,
the Bill got into Committee ; but, on Mr. Butler’s resignation in
November, it dropped. In November 1874, it was brought into
the Legislative Council by his successor, Sir George Innes; and,
on the change of Ministry in the following year, the Bill was a
third time abandoned. Such is its history.
Similar abortive efforts to improve the Statutory Criminal Law,
it may be confessed, have occurred in England; although the
failures have not altogether been from the like causes. In 1833,
Sir Robert Peel’s Acts having been passed in 1827, a Royal Com-
mission was issued to five eminent lawyers, instructing them to


“ digest into one Statute all the enactments touching Crimes, and
the trial and punishment thereof,” and to report their opinion, as
to consolidating other branches of the law.* In 1836 and again
in 1845 other similar Commissions were issued, and several (in
all thirteen) Reports were made. In pursuance of these, or
shortly following them, several Acts —more or less amending pre-
vious enactments, were drawn and passed. In 1850, a Bill pre-
pared by Lord Campbell’s direction, (ultimately the 15th Victoria
c. 100,) passed the House of Lords ; but, says the learned framer,
“in the House of Commons in Committee it was so completely
spoilt,” that it became necessary to withdraw it for that Session.
In 1852 and 1853 further efforts were made, under the successive
Chancellorships of Lord St. Leonards and Lord Cranworth, in
the direction of codification of the Criminal Law. Bills were
framed, referred to the Judges, discussed, and abandoned. Mr.
Greaves expresses his opinion that no Code, none embodying the
entire law, ever will be passed through Parliament. “ Although
possibly ” (he says) “ the House of Lords might pass such a Bill
uninjured, it is perfectly hopeless to suppose that the House of
Commons would do the same.” Introd., p. 12.
The next attempt made was, it seems, to prepare Bills for con-
solidating simply, without materially amending, the several
existing enactments. But, in 1857, after conference with the
then Statute Law Commissioners, Lord Cranworth decided that
“ it would be an unsatisfactory course to introduce those Bills with-
out taking the opportunity of correcting and supplying the
admitted imperfections and omissions in the law ” —and the Bills
were re-drawn accordingly. Finally, after many amendments in
these by successive hands, the Acts of 1861 became law. Their
draftsman and annotator comments unreservedly on them; on what
he considers to be mistakes or imperfections in certain clauses, and
on ill-judged omissions or alterations by the Commons in portions
of the Bills ; which, in their original state, or as approved of by a
Select Committee, passed the House of Lords the previous year.
# This short account , with that which follows, is taken from Mr. Greaves’s
Introduction to the Acts of 1861 ; 2nd Edition.


He attributes the adoption of the Bills, as they stood, to the state
of affairs at the time in the House; the recent death of Lord
Campbell, then Chancellor, the accession of another to that office,
and the consequent delay —involving, as it would seem, the
alternatives of accepting the Bills at once, or postponing them to
the Grecian Kalends.
All these matters being considered by the New South Wales
Law Commissioners, they determined on adopting that which
appeared to them all to be the best course ; the amalgamation of
the six Statutes in one Bill, with all the Imperial Acts subse-
quently passed —not deviating from their language needlessly in
any instance, but simplifying and shortening the phraseology
where clearly required, —and at the same time introducing such
improvements in the Criminal Law, generally, not limited to the
specific classes of crime comprised in the Acts of 1861, as the
great experience of the framers, and their practical acquaintance
with the entire subject, enabled them to suggest. The result was
the Bill, of which mention has already been made. To par-
ticularise all its details, or all the points which it embraces, would
be to do more than copy the elaborate Report of the Com-
missioners, laid before Parliament in 1871: —it would be necessary
to consult the Bill itself. Some of the matters included, however,
may here be mentioned. Discretionary punishments to a con-
siderable extent limited ; Distinction between Felony and
Misdemeanor clearly marked; Forfeiture for Felony abolished,
and other provisions substituted ; Tickets of Leave regulated;
Enactments respecting Habitual Criminals, Cumulative Sen-
tences, Whipping for certain offences, Reformatory Schools,
Investigations after Yerdict, Challenges of Jurors, and Refresh-
ments to Jurors after retiring; Allowing expenses to Witnesses
for Prisoners; Taking depositions of Witnesses dangerously ill,
though not expecting death; Facilitating prosecutions for Perjury
and Bigamy ; Extending the Evidence Amendment Acts ; Assimi-
lating the law of False Pretences to that of Embezzlement;
Amending the Quarter Sessions Acts ; Simplifying Proceedings
in Summary Cases under the Bill, &c., &c.


One portion of this extensive measure, that which proposes to
take certain cases of killing out of • the category of Murder,
classifying them either as Manslaughter, or as crimes still
technically Murder but of a less degree,—and the clauses which
deal with the crime of Infanticide, itself unquestionably Murder,
yet as to which the mother is in fact never found guilty, —demand
in this place further examination than there has hitherto been
extended to them. The writer entertains what he trusts is a well-
founded belief, that the extracts appended to this paper will pre-
sent a most complete, as they are a very striking vindication, in
substance, of the changes submitted on these points by the Law
Reform Commissioners. Some gentlemen were pleased to con-
sider it great presumption, and an uncalled for interference with
time-honored technicalities, that we should have ventured any
recommendation on the subject of Murder. Our justification
will be found in the Report of the Royal Commission on Death
Punishment, in 1866, and the Report of the Select Committee of
the House of Commons on the Law of Homicide, in 1874.
Annexed to the former is a letter to His Excellency Sir John
Young, (Extracts post, p. 14,) dated in 1864, from the writer of
these remarks, in which the suggestion of a change in the law is
conveyed —so as to discriminate between the cases in which
“malice aforethought ” can be truly averred, and those in which the
phrase is used technically, and applied by a forced construction
only. It is no small honor, that this suggestion should have been
so remarkably consentaneous, if not identical, with the recom-
mendations subsequently of such high authorities, supported by
so many other eminent persons, on exactly the same grounds.
(Extracts, p. 3 and 10.) "With regard to the law affecting
Infanticide, the New South Wales Commissioners have introduced
clauses into their Bill, to meet the defects in evidence which at
present so often secure impunity to the crime. But it had not
occurred to them to do more. The recommendations however on
this subject, of the Royal Commissioners, (Extracts, p. 11 and
12), and of Mr. Justice Blackburn, in his evidence before the
Select Committee, (Extracts, p. 7,) tend almost conclusively to
show that something in addition is required.


The Criminal Law Consolidation and Amendment Bill, then, is
respectfully, but with pardonable confidence, submitted to the
Legislature for adoption; in substance at least, if not in its
entirety. And if, in some clauses, the phraseology should be
found to differ somewhat from its original, the objector may be
assured that the framers have introduced no variation without
careful thought, and reasons which they would be prepared to
explain. In absolute appropriateness and precision of language
few compositions are faultless ; and perfection or even propriety
must not hastily be attributed to English Statutes, merely because
they are English. Enough has appeared in the criticisms here
cited, independently of frequent complaints of errors and
ambiguities from the Judges, to justify our occasional departure
from the easy task of mere transcription ; and we need no higher
authority for the fault, if it be one, than the language which the
writer has quoted (Extracts p. 9) from the written memorandum
of the Lord Chief Justice of England, transmitted by him to a
Select Committee of the British House of Commons.
20i th June, 1876.
The following is the paragraph in the New South Wales Com-
missioners' Report, on the subject of the clause respecting non-
premeditated or technical Murder, to which reference is above made.
“ The act of shooting at a tame fowl with intent to steal it,
whereby a man is killed whom the malefactor never saw or heard
of, is Murder ; and punishable by death. Two or more men
engage in a design to commit some felony, perhaps equally trivial;
and in the prosecution of it, • one of them in a scuffle kills his
assailant. All the party are equally guilty of Murder. A mis-
chievous beast, known by the owner to be so, is turned loose by
him among a crowd with intent merely to frighten people ; and
the death of one among them is the result. Or a labourer throws
stones from a height into a frequented street, without giving any


warning ; and a passer-by is accidentally killed. In each instance
the act is Murder. On the other hand, the most atrocious con-
spiracy to commit that crime, under circumstances combining
every aggravation, is in the English Acts lightly dealt with. And
any crime whatever, or any series of crimes in succession, against
either person or property, or both, if death though intended do
not supervene —a Burglary at midnight, for instance, stripping
the dwelling of its contents, and violating or stabbing the inmates,
or a planned Eobbery with arms, accompanied by the most
brutal ill-usage, and wounds that shall cripple the victim for life,
—may be committed without a greater punishment than penal
servitude ; which the Judge may mitigate to imprisonment for a
single day. We have endeavoured to avoid both extremes.
Eetaining the death penalty for certain more flagitious acts, the
Bill proposes to take it away from cases of Murder not actually
malicious, in the ordinary sense of the word, or (in their nature,
or in respect of the probable consequences of the act,) not wicked
in a high degree. The mode adopted, it will be perceived,
although creating a distinction so great, infringes no established
rule or maxim, and removes no known land-mark of the Criminal
Law. The definitions of Murder and of Manslaughter, as of
Homicide Justifiable or Excusable, will remain; but, supposing
the legal requisites to be established, the punishment of Murder
will be made to depend, in the cases provided for, on specific
established facts —and not on the Executive alone.”


LAW OF HOMICIDE.
THE following are extracts from the Special Deport
of a Select Committee of the House of Commons
on this branch of the law, consisting of
Eighteen Members, dated the Ist July, 1874,
and from the Evidence of the Judges and
others examined before them.
From the Committee's Report.
The existing definition of murder, which may be roughly stated
as killing with malice aforethought, is far too narrow, and the
defect has been supplied, not by re-defining the crime, but by
subtle intendments of law, by which malice is presumed to exist in
some cases where the action is unpremeditated, and even in some
cases where death is caused by accident. It is most desirable
that a state of the law under which people are condemned and
executed by means of a legal fiction should cease. But sucb a
change, however urgently required, is, in the opinion of your
Committee, not a matter for them, but rather for the Law
Officers of the Crown, assisted by the advice and fortified by the
sanction of the highest legal authorities, after mature and careful
deliberation.
Your Committee earnestly recommend, that the attention of
the Government and of Parliament should be directed to the
present imperfect state of the definition of the Law of Murder.
They believe that they have collected materials from which a
re-definition of murder can be produced; and they are convinced
that such a definition is urgently needed, not only to rescue the
law from its present discreditable state, but to give clear notions
to the public at large of the real nature and extent of this crime,
and to prevent the confusion often created in the minds of jurors
by an appeal to the doctrine that murder cannot be without
malice aforethought, which it is not always easy for the Judge to
remove. If there is any case in which the law should speak
plainly, without sophism or evasion, it is where life is at stake ;
and it is on this very occasion that the law is most evasive and
most sophistical.
B


Evidence of Mr. J. Eitzjames Stephen, Q.C.
11. Would you just give us the history of the law of murder,
with the twisting of the “ malice aforethought” ?—I will do so
in a moment; but there is one remark which appears to me
pertinent to this point. The point which I wished to refer to
was what I may call the notorious case about the fowl; it is a
thing that everybody knows who has paid any attention to the
subject.
12. Will you state the case for the information of some of us P
I will read the case, and then there can be no mistake about it.
There is a long discussion about the whole of this matter, which
you will find in “ Eussell on Crimes,” page 741. The Editor of
Russell quotes Lord Coke’s 3rd institute, 56. “If the act be
unlawful it is murder; as if A. meaning to steal a deer in the
park of B. shoots at the deer, and by the glance of the arrow
kills a boy that is hidden in a bush, this is murder.” Then he
quotes various authorities to show that if shooting at a tame
fowl you accidentally kill the owner it is murder. Then he goes
on: “In ‘ Bex. v. Plummer,’ Kel. 117, the question is discussed
in the judgment of the Chief Justice, and Lord Coke’s dictum is
explained to mean” (this is the more lenient form of the doctrine)
“ that if two men have a design to steal a hen, and one shoots at
the hen for that purpose, and a man be killed, it is murder in
both, because the design is felonious; and it is said, that with
that explanation the books cited do warrant that opinion,” i.e.
Coke’s opinion, “ that if you shoot at a fowl with intent to steal
it, and a man is killed, it is murder by reason of the felonious
intent.”
13. And that ruling to which you have referred would apply to a
vast variety of cases ? —I could give you cases which have actually
occurred; I did not hear them, because they were somewhat
before my time, but they were subjects of common conversation
on the Midland Circuit. There was a case at Warwick which I
have heard quoted by those who did hear it. Three boys were
walking through the streets of Birmingham to pick pockets; an
old gentleman, who was fat and weak, comes walking along with
a gold watch in his pocket; one of the boys gives him a slap to
make him bend forward, and the poor old man did bend forward,
and died by reason of that slap; I suppose some vessel was frac-
tured. As he bent forward the boy pulls out the watch from his
pocket and hands it to the second, and the second to the third.
Tb ey were all tried and condemned to be hanged. There is another
case, which arose at Lincoln, which I have heard of. A man has
committed a burglary; an old woman, very much frightened, is in
bed. The burglar, hearing her screaming, tells her to be quiet,
and by way of frightening her, but not with any intention of
hurting her, throws a pillow towards her, and in some way or


other the shock kills her; and for that he was hanged. There is
another case of the same kind that I might mention; it is a case
of resistance to lawful apprehension at the time of the commission
of a felony. A thief is running away, a policeman running after
him; the thief puts out his foot and trips up the policeman just
as he is catching him; the man falls on his head and fractures
his skull and is killed. That is murder ; and yet I cannot believe
that that sentence in the present day would be suffered to be
carried out in ordinary cases. And I say that it seems to me
that the dignity of justice is compromised, and that a great
scandal takes place, whenever so solemn a thing as the condem-
nation of a man to death occurs without a serious intention that
it should be executed.
Evidence of Hon. Baron Bramwell.
133. The present law is that if a man who is committing a felony
happens in the course of it to take a life, he is guilty of murder ;
that is to say, if a man shooting at a tame fowl, in order to steal
it, by some misfortune kills a man that he had no reason to
suppose was in reach of the shot, he is guilty of murder. That
state of the law, in the extreme case which I put, is preposterous,
and ought to be set right.
138. If you had to look for a definition of murder, you would not
find it anywhere precisely laid down ; you would have to search
through Coke’s Institutes, Hale’s Pleas of the Crown, Hawkins’
Pleas of the Crown, Leach’s Crown Law, and Russell on Crimes,
and a score of other books. You would not find it intelligibly
or authoritatively stated anywhere, to comprehend all cases; and
in addition to that, when you did find it, you would find it encum-
bered with what I cannot help calling a number of unfortunate
expressions about malice, and malice aforethought, and other
things, which are attended with several mischiefs.
200. A man is indicted for murder; he has not used a necessarily
deadly weapon, neither shot or stabbed the man ; he has struck
him with a stick. Or a man has kicked his wife. You say to the
jury, “ A blow with a small stick, or one trifling kick, savage as
it may be, does not usually take life, and if life has been taken
owing to slight violence which no man would expect would kill, it
is a misfortune, perhaps attributable to the state of health of the
victim, or the want of skill of his doctor,” and therefore you say
to the'jury, “If you think that the violence used was not of a
character likely to kill, you will find him guilty of manslaughter
only ; but if you think, from the size of the weapon, the number
of blows, or the number of kicks, the place where they were
inflicted, and so on, that they were likely to kill, or that the
prisoner intended by them to kill, (which indeed men may with


the most trifling wounds), then you ought to find him guilty of
murder, because he was doing that which he might have known
would bring about death.”
214. I think a Judge who knows his business never troubles the
jury with needless definitions, but he deals with the particular case
before him ; and says, for instance, in the case which I have put:
“ The first question that you have to consider is” (forgive a sort
of model summing up) “ did the man die of the injuries which he
received ? The doctors prove he did. The next question is, did
the prisoner commit them P as to which the evidence is so-and-so.
Now, you have to consider, if you are of opinion that he is at
least guilty of having killed him, whether it is murder; and that
depends upon the extent of the blows, and the place they were
directed to. If you think he intended to kill him, and did, it
matters not what means he used ; but suppose he did not intend
it, you must consider whether the means used were likely to do
it.”
231. I am sorry to say, that the words “ malice aforethought”
really have no definite meaning. They are unfortunate words,
which I think the Bill would do a good thing if it got rid of.
They are made use of by counsel for mischievous purposes ; who
attempt to get a man off on the ground that premeditation is
necessary to constitute murder —which it is not.
Evidence of Hon . Mr. Justice JBlacJclurn.
236. I would make it a substantive felony for the parent of a
child, either before, or at, or during, or immediately after the
birth, to cause the child to be prevented from being born alive,
or to die. When that was done intentionally I would make it a
substantive felony, to be punished severely. Practically, the
child is born when no one is present but the mother; and the
medical evidence cannot determine whether it had been wholly
separated from the mother, and was wholly delivered before it
died. The consequence is, that —except for concealment of the
birth —the mother does very often escape, when she really has
been guilty of murder, or of culpable negligence, causing the
child to die.
240. I think that the common cases of murder are really very
much what Mr. Stephen defines them to be; where the person
has been killed generally without any deliberately prepared
thought beforehand, but has been killed in such a manner as to
show that there was an intention to kill, or at least an intention
to inflict dangerous bodily harm from which death ensues; and
practically there is no difficulty about those. The real difficulty
is, on the question whether there is a sufficient mitigation or
excuse to reduce the crime to manslaughter.


248. Would not this, which I will venture to suggest, he in fact
a definition of murder—the killing another person by a voluntary
act, without legal justification or excuse, or without such circum-
stances as are held by the law to reduce it to manslaughter ? It
would: —but then, if you were to enact that, you would need a
very great commentary of cases, and decisions of points, to make
it intelligible how the definition was to be applied and qualified.
295. You would make it a substantive felony to injure a child
before, or during, or immediately after its birth, and thereby
cause its death; and also, where there was no actual violence,
you would make culpable negligence on the part of the mother,
when with child, in making no provision for her child, and
thereby causing its death, a crime ? The last part of that state-
ment is not quite what I meant to express. I meant, where the
mother has been guilty of culpable negligence in not having the
child properly looked after in the birth —and where, in conse-
quence of that, the child dies.
304. You would make the law more comprehensive, and in con-
sideration less severe? —It would come to be that. I would, in
truth, make it in form and appearance less severe, for the very
object of making it more severe.
305. So as to make it more sure?—More sure. There are
scores of cases which occur every year, where one has no moral
doubt whatever that the woman intentionally killed her child, yet
she is convicted only of concealment ol birth, and the punish-
ment then is limited to imprisonment.
310. The Infanticide Bill referred to this Committee says, iu
the third clause, “ If the mother of any child shall unlawfully and
maliciously wound, or inflict any grievous bodily harm upon such
child, during or immediately after its birth, and shall thereby
cause its death, she shall be guilty of felony ; and on conviction
thereof shall be liable to be kept in penal servitude tor any
term not exceeding ten years, or to be imprisoned for any term
not exceeding two years with or without hard labour. ."Would
that meet your views ? —I would rather, if I were framing the
Act, than using the words “wound,” and so on, use the words
“intentionally in any way cause the death.” I wOuld make the
two distinctions. Intentionally causing the death would be a
felony, which I would say should be punished by such and such a
punishment; culpable negligence causing death would be an
offence punished with a less, punishment.
Mr. J. Fitzjames Stephen recalled.
330. You constantly have difficulties with juries which make it
necessary to tell them that a man is always presumed to intend
the natural consequences of his acts, and that he is presumed to


know ordinary things. Now, if you had that solemnly inserted
in an Act of Parliament, it would be found very convenient indeed,
on many occasions, to the Judge who had to sum up.
331. “ Criminal homicide is murder, if the act by which death is
caused is done, firstly, with the intention of causing the death of,
or grievous bodily harm to, the person killed, or any other person
ascertained or unascertained.” There are a great number of
cases in which the proof of an actual positive intention is a most
essential part of the evidence. Though there is difference between
motive and intention, though motive is one thing and intention
another, yet the existence of motive is strong evidence of inten-
tion. Take such a case as the great case of Palmer; half the
evidence given in that case was to prove his motive for murdering
Cook. There you have a case which falls under the first branch
of the definition. Then take the second part. If the law were
administered by Judges only, or by highly trained persons, you
might dispense with it; because you may depend upon them to
infer intention from knowledge—but you cannot depend upon a
jury to do so. You would continually have people saying, “ The
intention with which this act was done was not to kill anybody ;
it was to save a man from custody ; or to effect this or that
collateral purpose.” Then you would have the Judge obliged to
say, “ You have nothing to do with what the ultimate purpose of
the person might be. You must look at his intention ; and you
must collect his intention from his conduct.” It is much simpler
to say at once, as is said in the second head of the section,
“ Never mind what the man’s intention may have been; that is
provided for elsewhere. Apart altogether from the question of
intention, if a man does a thing which he knows will cause death,
or grievous bodily harm, either to the person killed or any other
person, and it does so, and the accused has no excuse for that
act, it is murder.” It seems to me, that that prevents a great
many common-places which people would be apt to use in
defending prisoners.
348. Barrett exploded a barrel of gunpowder at the foot of the
wall of the prison, for the purpose (and with the intention, in the
ordinary sense of the word,) of knocking a hole in the wall, and
rescuing a prisoner. In so doing, he blew up several houses in
the neighbourhood, and killed the people who were in them.
Suppose that he comes to be tried for this. I should sum up
somewhat in this way“ Gentlemen, the question for you will
be, whether that act was murder or not. It was murder, if it
was done with the knowledge that it would probably cause the
death of, or grievous bodily harm to, the person killed, or any
other person, ascertained or unascertained. Then the law does
not stop there; but goes on to give you a rule, to show what you
are to suppose that a man knows. It says, that he is presumed


to know the natural and ordinary consequences of his acts.
Now, what is the natural and ordinary consequence of exploding
a barrel of gunpowder in a street ? It is to blow up the neigh-
bouring houses, and kill the people in them.”
363. It is said, that there is great difficulty in proving that
a child is born alive; and that you are always able to defend a
woman, on the ground that it does not appear that the child was
completelv so born. That is true ; but it is a difficulty inherent
in the facts of the case. The only way in which you can get rid
of it, if you determine to get rid of it, is this : If you choose to
say, that every child which has breathed shall be presumed to
have been born alive unless the contrary appears, you get rid of
the difficulty.
Note.—The examination of this witness, and the 11 memorandum"
of Sir Alexander Cockburn which follows, relate exclusively to the
frame, and to particular clauses, of the Bill then before Parliament
for codifying the entire Law of Homicide.
Memorandum of the Lord Chief Justice, sent to the Committee.
Though a strong supporter of codification, and deeply regretting
that the law of England should be suffered to remain in its
present state of confusion, —arising from its being partly un-
written, and partly written in statutes so imperfectly drawn as to
be almost worse than unwritten law, —I think that any attempt at
codification which is either partial or incomplete can only be pro-
ductive of confusion and mischief. It is impossible, that a
subject so extensive as the law of homicide can be stated, and
disposed of, in so short a compass as is here proposed.


Extracts from Report of the Royal Commissioners
on Death Punishment (Duke of Richmond,
Lord Stanley, Mr. Bright, Mr. Ewart, Dr.
Lushington, Sir John Coleridge, Lord O’Hagan,
and others), dated 8th January, 1866; and
from the Evidence before the Commission.
Extract from the Report.
6. By the law, murder is the unlawfully killing another with
malice aforethought, and this definition appears to us to be correct
in principle.
Unfortunately these words have not been confined to express
malice aforethought, or, as it is sometimes called, malice in fact,
but have received a less natural construction, which has long been
adopted as the settled law of the land. It has been held that
malice, in its legal sense, imports nothing more than a wicked
intention to do injury to the person of another, without any just
cause or excuse; and that where a man is killed in consequence
of any such wicked intention, the law will infer malice afore-
thought, though no express enmity or preconceived design can be
shown ; not indeed a particular, but a general malice aforethought,
arising from the extreme depravity of disposition shown by the
act. This doctrine of implied malice aforethought goes even
beyond this, and is carried to such an extent, that the law always
infers it when a person, in the act of commiting a felony, even of
a trifling nature, kills another, though there may be in fact no
premeditation, and no intention to kill or do serious injury.
7. The extreme severity of this construction has been somewhat
mitigated by the law of manslaughter, which is defined to be the
unlawful killing of another without malice express or implied. In
order to reduce the crime from murder to manslaughter, the law
allows evidence of provocation to be given, to rebut the inference
of malice, which would otherwise be drawn from the act of killing.
Here, however, again, certain arbitrary rules have been introduced
into the law, which most materially restrict its beneficial opera-
tion. It has been established by the decisions of our Courts,


that no provocation by words, looks, or gestures, however con-
temptuous or insulting, nor by any trespass merely against lands
or goods, is sufficient to free the party killing from the guilt
of murder, if he kills with a deadly weapon, or in any
manner showing an intention to kill or do grievous bodily
harm. In these cases, though the suddenness of the provo-
cation may rebut in point of fact the express malice afore-
thought, it is not allowed, on account of its supposed insig-
nificance, to overcome the general malice aforethought, which
is implied by the law, from the wickedness and cruelty of the
deed. Without entering into the many nice and subtle distinc-
tions which prevail upon this subject, it is enough to say that the
practical result of this state of things is most unsatisfactory. A
man who, in a sudden fit of passion, aroused by insult to himself
or his wife, kills the person who offers the insult, is, bylaw, guilty
of the same crime, and liable to the same punishment as the
assassin, who has long meditated and brooded over his crime. A
great majority of the witnesses whom we have examined have
expressed a strong opinion that this branch of our criminal law
requires revision and amendment, as least so far as the punish-
ment is concerned, and we have unanimously arrived at the same
conclusion.
8. We proceed, therefore, to offer such recommendations as we
think expedient for altering the present law of murder. It
appears to us that there are two modes in which the change may
be effected.
9. The first plan is, to abrogate altogether the existing law of
murder, and to substitute a new definition of that crime ; con-
fining it to felonious homicides of great enormity, and leaving all
those which are of a less heinous description in the category of
manslaughter.
10. The other plan is one which has been extensively acted upon
in the United States of America, where the common law of
England is in force. This leaves the definition of murder, and
the distinction between that crime and manslaughter, untouched,
but divides the crime of murder into two classes or degrees, solely
with the view of confining the punishment of death to the first
or higher degree.
13. Our attention has been called to the frequent failures of
justice in cases of infanticide.
The crime of infanticide, as distinguished from murder in
general, is not known to the English law. The moment a child
is born alive, it is as much under the protection of the law as an
adult.


14. We have considered whether the failure of justice, which
undoubtedly often occurs in such cases, may not be obviated by
some change in the law which shall add to the protection of new-
born children. The principal obstacle w r hich now prevents the
due enforcement of the law is, the extreme difficulty of giving
positive proof that the child alleged to have been murdered was
completely born alive.
15. We have given this important and difficult subject our
serious attention, and we have arrived at the opinion that an Act
should be passed making it an offence, punishable with penal
servitude or imprisonment at the discretion of the Court, unlaw-
fully and maliciously to inflict grievous bodily harm or serious
injury upon a child during its birth, or within seven days after-
wards, in case such child has subsequently died. No proof that
the child was completely born alive should be required. With
respect to the offence of concealment of birth, we think that no
person should be liable to be convicted of such offence upon an
indictment for murder, but should be tried upon a separate indict-
ment. The accused should not be entitled to be acquitted in
either of the above cases, if it should be proved on the trial that
the offence amounted to murder or manslaughter.
16. There is one point upon which the witnesses whom we have
examined are almost unanimous, viz., that the power of directing
sentence of death to be recorded should be restored to the Judges.
We think this change desirable.
From Evidence of the Eight Honorable Sir George Grey.
1494. There is no case which I remember in which there has
been premeditation proved, where there has been a deliberate
case of wilful murder, (putting aside the case of women destroying
children,) in which the law has not taken effect, unless some
extraordinary circumstances have intervened to take it out of the
general rule ; but there are numbers of cases in which, the
verdict being a right verdict in the opinion of the Judge, and
nobody doubting that it is justified by the state of the law,
the circumstances have been such as to induce the Minister
charged with that duty, and I think very properly, to advise the
Crown to interpose and to prevent the law being carried into
effect. Many of those cases would be disposed of in another
way, and I think more satisfactorily, by the classification of
murder, and the Judge passing a sentence which really would be
carried into effect.
1495. Mr. Hardy.'] I should like to know your opinion upon
the question whether or not you would give to k the jury the power
of altering the nature of the punishment by any finding of theirs ?


I have thought a good deal upon that subject, and I am clearly of
opinion, with all deference to others who may difler from me,
that it would be undesirable to do that. I understand the ques-
tion to mean, whether it would be desirable to adopt the law
which exists in France, which allows a jury to find extenuating
circumstances, and thus to take the case out of the category of
cases to which Capital Punishment attaches, and to reduce the
punishment by that means.
1496. Mr. Bright .] Practically, would not the jury have the
determination of the punishment, if they were at liberty to bring
in a verdict of murder in the first degree, or in the second degree,
inasmuch as in the one case the punishment would be capital,
and in the other it would be a secondary punishment? Not to
any greater degree than they now have with regard to a verdict
of murder or of manslaughter. I think that, generally speaking,
they take the law from the Judge. There have been cases, no
doubt, in which a verdict of manslaughter has been given where
a verdict of murder would have been more satisfactory to the
Judge. But where the Judge expresses his own strong opinion
that the law does not justify a verdict of manslaughter, I think
that juries are generally disposed to yield to it.
1497. Mr. Neate. ] Is there not now somewhat of the same
conflict between Judges and juries as there was with respect to
libel, Avhen the Judge used to tell the jury that they were bound
to take the law entirely from him ? It would be a question ot
fact, if there was a classification. If you put murder in the first
degree upon premeditation, evidence of premeditation must be
given, and the jury would be the proper judges whether the pre-
meditation was proved. What the Judge would have to tell them
would be, “ If you are satisfied that there has been premeditation
in this case, if a week before the act the prisoner was plotting
this murder, and if he bought the poison and administered it to
the deceased, then I must tell you distinctly that the law puts
that into the first class of murder, and if you find anything you
must find that.” But the jury must be the proper persons to
find whether the premeditation was proved; and only to that
extent would they have the power of finding a verdict of murder
in the first or second degree.
From Evidence of the Bight Mon. Sir Lawrence Peel.
2760. Supposing that it was possible to divide murder into two
classes, one of which was capital, and the rest only punishable by
penal servitude for life, would you object to there being two
classes of murder, or would you rather leave that which was made


capital under the name of murder, and class the other under the
head of manslaughter ? I should class all that was not of the
gravest kind under the head of manslaughter.
2761. You would have one class of murder, leaving it to he
capital, and would range all the rest under the head of man-
slaughter ? Yes. I think that it would be very easy to say
“ After the passing of this Act no offence which has hitherto been
murder shall be deemed to be murder unless it falls under the
following heads,” and then shortly to state them.
From a letter of Sir Alfred Stephen, C.J., to His Excellency Sir
John Young, dated 19 July, 1864, pages 562 and 563.
7. There is in England a growing impression, it seems, that
cases of murder only should be capital, if any. I submit that
very many cases of intended and attempted murder, but in which
the injured person lives, are worse in atrocity than the ordinary
instances of actual murder. Murder varies in degrees of guilt,
of wickedness, treachery, and cruelty, down to merely culpable
carelessness, as much as manslaughter does ; yet, for all alike,
the one penalty of death is provided. Surely this is to confound
all the essential distinctions of crime. A man who rides into a
crowd with no homicidal design whatever, but with a horse which
he knows to be given to kicking, and which kicks and kills the
rider’s own child, is guilty of murder. So is a workman who
throws a brickbat into a street, which, had he reflected at all,
he would have remembered was usually a thronged thoroughfare,
if he thereby accidentally kills a passer by. Murder simply, or
technically so only, should not be punished capitally even in form ;
and there would be no insuperable difficulty in distinguishing
such instances, by enactment, from a murder by lying in wait, or
murder accompanied by cruelty, or in the prosecution of some
other serious crime, as robbery or rape, or with intent actually to
kill or violently injure the person killed, or to prevent the slayer’s
lawful apprehension, or that of some other party, or afterwards
to commit robbery or the like, though not actually in the course
of prosecuting such crime. In some of the recent American
codes, I believe that murder has been in its degrees thus or
similarly discriminated, and that punishments are assigned
accordingly.
8. It is true that Judges may, by merely “ recording ” the sen-
tence of death, immediately after the verdict, mark the wide dis-
tinction between a gross case of murder, and one calling only for
a comparatively mild punishment. But the only legal sentence
after all is to death, and I hold this system to be every way
objectionable.


9. I go further, and say that, in my humble judgment, this
sentence of death, remembering how solemn a thing it is, should
never he pronounced, even though the evidence has been such as
to justify'the verdict, and however gross the circumstances of the
murder, if the Judge himself entertains a scintilla of a doubt as
to the prisoner’s guilt. The public should be aware, that there is
a responsibility in sentencing beyond that merely of carrying out
in due form the legal result of the verdict. And I conceive that,
after sentence is pronounced, the pardoning power should very
rarely indeed be exercised, except on evidence of some new fact,
the bad character, not known to the jury, of a material witness,
or the like. A power should exist in the Judge, or some appellate
body (to which he should report fully) of examining witnesses on
oath in aid of any such suggestion. But no new trial should be
tolerated; and the grounds of interference should be ascertained,
stated, and promulgated.
10. It will not be supposed that I contemplate any such alter-
ation in our Criminal Code as that which would leave the power
to any jury of finding “ extenuating circumstances.” Nothing
should be left to the jury but the duty of finding (in alleviation
or aggravation) specific facts. And in this view the legal crime
of murder might remain as it is defined now ; but the punishment
of death should not be entailed, if facts appear in evidence, and
are found by the jury, reducing the offence to the second or third
class or degree by law in that behalf specified.
11. The mere fact, however, of the victim of great cruelty or
violence escaping with life, where that life has manifestly been
intended to be taken, or has been wilfully put in danger, appears
to me to present no reason whatever for the vast difference which
the law of England now makes between cases of wounding with
intent to kill, or with intent to prevent arrest, or violently injuring
in any manner a person robbed or attempted to be robbed, and
cases of murder. The accident of the wound being half an inch
higher or lower, or of the patient’s being of a strong or a weak con-
stitution, or of his surgical treatment being more or less skilful,
or the weather favourable or unfavourable, will determine the
result. But surely there is no difference in the guilt of the felon;
and to make the act capital if the man dies, but punishable only
by hard labour if he recovers, seems clearly to be a confounding of
all real differences in crime. The test should be the degree of
actual wickedness, such as reflecting men would at once recog-
nize and comprehend, and not the result of the act, which is a
matter beyond the perpetrator’s control. Instances may easily
be imagined, and your Excellency may remember three, recently
tried before myself: the shooting of the two constables, Hosie
and Middleton, the lying in wait for and wounding of the gold
escort, and the treacherous shooting of the Bennera traveller on
the Liverpool Eoad.


12. In the first and last of these eases, clearer proofs of
murderous design on the part of the prisoner could hardly he
imagined. In each instance the attempt had been renewed more
than once, and very serious wounds been inflicted, and in the first
mentioned the men were shot while endeavouring to arrest a
notorious armed robber. Yet that case by the present law of
England would be punishable by penal servitude only. In a case
tried before me the same week a labourer stabbed his comrade in
a quarrel, in sudden revenge for insulting words. The wound
was not dangerous, but the patient went to his work too soon,
and the injury became mortal. This, an act infinitely less
atrocious than any of those first mentioned, was therefore murder
and punishable by death. But everybody knows beforehand that
in such cases the punishment is not enforced, and thus its enunci-
ation becomes practically a farce. The public see that in many
cases the holding out of Capital Punishment as a threat is a threat
merely, and the law, to that extent at all events, is despised
accordingly.
From Letters of Mr. Justice Mellor, and Mr. Justice Keating , to
the Commissioners, dated respectively the Ist and 30 th Novem-
ber, 1864, pages 580 and 581.
I certainly think that a new classification of the offences
included in the crime of murder is desirable. The legal definition
of murder includes many cases in which the Judge invariably
recommends a commutation of the sentence, and I think that the
sentence of death should not be passed in such cases.
I may say that, having considered the suggestion contained in
the paper circulated by Mr. Waddington, as to the propriety of
dividing the offences at present included in the legal definition
of murder into two classes, I agree in such suggestion.
In a considerable proportion of cases in which convictions for
murder take place, it is perfectly well known to the Judge, jury,
and oftentimes to the convict himself, that the awful sentence,
which, in obedience to the law, the Judge is bound to pronounce,
is a solemn mockery, and never intended to be carried into
execution. The effect is, I believe, most pernicious, though, in
the present state of the law, unavoidable. The case in which the
sentence passed by a Court is not carried out ought to be rare
and exceptional; and I feel sure that a system which compels a
Judge to pass a sentence of death not intended to be carried out,
even though the facts remain unaltered, contributes to defeat the
only legitimate object of all punishment—the prevention of crime.


The existing state of things results from the fact, that the same
compulsory sentence is attached to all cases of conviction for
murder; whereas, although their legal incidents may be the same,
they vary much in real criminality, whilst the law satisfies the
averment “ of his malice aforethought ” by proof of constructive,
as well as of actual malice. The difference in the real character
of the offence, in the one case and in the other, is in most instances
obvious to everyone. The man who in shooting at his neighbour’s
fowl with intent to steal it accidentally kills a man, commits an
offence very different in character from that which is perpetrated
by one who, from motives of revenge or self-interest, assassinates
another; yet they both commit murder, and the sentence on con-
viction must be the same.
From a letter of Mr. Justice Shee to the Commissioners, dated
22nd March, 1865 ; Report, page 584.
I think it most desirable, that an effort should be made to dis-
tinguish between premeditated murder, the perpetrator of which
is never an object of pity, and unpremeditated, and also construc-
tive murder, or homicide; of which the guilt is greater than that
of manslaughter, but in the commission of which the “ malice
aforethought” has only a momentary existence, or is rather a
fiction of law than an operating motive of action.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB76.


