

# |
inug-^


r , _ Introducinq —,
When the air raids first started over London, Pepita, a
frisky little town mouse, had just finished growing up. Her
coat was shining and sleek, and a most delicate shade of silvery
fawn. With her large beady black eyes, long silken whiskers
and tiny pink hands and feet, she was much admired by all
the young mice she chanced to meet, especially for her long
finely pointed tail.
A large black mouse with golden rings in his ears, and
whose name is Jonathan, had recently come to live in the
basement of the Theatre Royal next door.
As a special favour Pepita had promised to share a nibble
of cheese with him m the Refreshment Bar on Sunday night.
Pepita’s home was in a smart Hat Shop, her bed was beautiful
and very comfortable, being made inside a hat box of red satin
roses and purple silk violets, carefully nibbled into small pieces.
Then fell the bomb which changed the whole of Pepita’s
life. It was a very large bomb, it wiped out the Theatre Royal
next door, and poor Jonathan too!
Pepita was fast asleep amongst her flower petals when it
fell, and was rolled dizzily over and over inside the hat box out
into the street, thereby escaping injury from the falling bricks
and plaster of the Hat Shop.


' 4s?v:,% I
»i 1 >
r\rT 1944
Soon they were chatting like old friends and Pip took her to see his
large Store—of Hazel Nuts —in an ivy-covered bank close by.


Bruised and shaken, she crept out of the hat box when
the raid was over, and, looking around, found hei home ruined.
All the beautiful hats were a tangled dusty heap upon the floor.
Sadly she climbed amongst the rubble, collecting what clothes
she could carry, pieces of silk satin, ribbon, and delicate lace,
also two beautiful purple pansies off the bonnet only finished
that morning for a lady. After carefully packing everything
into a tight little bundle, she bade good-bye to her old home.
Wearing her pale blue hat, sadly Pepita opened her pink
parasol and bravely went forth in search of a new place in
which to live. At that moment a large army lorry stopped
nearby, and unloaded a lot of soldiers carrying spades with
which to clear away the wreckage. Seeing the timid little
mouse one of them made a playful jab at her with his spade; like
a flash Pepita hurried to safety inside the lorry, still grasping
her bundle and parasol. With fnghtened eyes and beating
heart she hid out of sight.
Later the lorry moved on its way, carrying its tiny
passenger from all the dear familiar places, and mice that she
knew. On and on went the lorry, past burning buildings and
smoking streets. Jolted about for mile after mile, tired and
hungry, little Pepita hid under the seat, occasionally peeping
out the tip of her whiskered little nose and tearful beady
black eyes.
Slowly the town was left behind, houses gave way to trees
and streets to hedgerows. Strange animals howled in the
darkness, and lamplights flickered from cottage windows. Soon
the driver switched on the lights in front of the lorry, which
lit up hedgerows and trees and starry flowers growing along
the countryside.
After a while the lorry stopped at a farmhouse. Seeing
her chance to escape Pepita gathered her bundle and parasol
together, scampered out of the lorry, and scurried into the long


5M lb
-KV/>
*
. f/ia*
> yv
V 3**l"t
I I
Pedro, the Trapeze Artist, and no end of a Smart Boy.


grass growing on the roadside. Finding an empty burrow at
the foot of a large oak tree, she hid inside, there to wait in fear
and trembling for the morning. After weary hours spent in
fretting over the loss of her home and black Jonathan, Pepita
saw the day at last appear.
A lark burst into song overhead, and sunlight glinted on
lovely ferns, and wildflowers, starring the hedgerow around her
burrow. Among the long grasses could be seen clusters of
cowslips and primroses, and here and there were roots of her
favourite flower, the scented purple violets.
Feeling much happier, Pepita thought she would walk
outside and look around. Opening her little pink parasol as
she went, she walked straight into the arms of a fieldmouse.
With a startled Pepita scampered back into the
burrow, but on hearing the jolly laughter of the fieldmouse
she stuck her head out, and seeing how handsome and
friendly he was, smiled shyly at him. Being well brought up
and anxious to see more of the little town mouse, the
stranger introduced himself as “Pip,” the Hazel Nut Merchant.
In no time Pepita was telling this charming young field'
mouse that she was a refugee from London, and of her dreadful
adventure.
Soon they were talking like old friends, and Pip took her
to see his large store of hazel nuts in an ivy covered bank close
by. Watching her daintily step through the wildflowers, Pip
knew she was the little mouse he had been waiting for all his
life, and resolved to make her his bride.
At that moment a travelling circus passed by. Five large
elephants pulling heavy trucks laden with goods, followed by
gaily painted horse drawn caravans, driven by gypsy folk. On
the roof of the highest caravan gaily playing a mouth organ,
sat a large white mouse with pink eyes. On seeing the dainty


-
t** 9 * —^li/w
wjnr * - ~* i »
y-|Ji/A fcJ^Ip BW|fc_^^ A |
-f k ,| t ;~ j#%, _ *
*%SP ■ .
*
I v
With bright, twinkling eyes she read the name Pip had chosen and
proudly hung above the door—"The Whiff of Cheese."


town mouse he raised his large black hat and winked cheekily
as he was driven by.
Pip was not at all pleased when he saw the circus stop
and start to make camp at the end of the road. After seeing
Pepita back to her burrow, he hurried to his nut store and
carefully locked the door, then he set off to the farm house to
collect pieces of cheese and other nice little tit'bits for his new
friend, Pepita.
Pepita spent the rest of the day in cleaning out the burrow,
sweeping away dead leaves, fixing a curtain of leaves over the
entrance, and washing the top of a toadstool to use as a table.
Then after cleaning every hair on her satiny coat and washing
her whiskers and face with her tiny hands, she sat down and
ate some of the tit'bits kindly provided by Pip.
Feeling very tired and sleepy she curled up into a round
ball, twisted her tail right round and went soundly to sleep.
She was awakened by a loud knocking at the door; trembling
at the knees she tiptoed to the curtains and peeped out.
“Flutter my whiskers,” muttered Pepita, “if it isn't that cheeky
circus mouse,” and hid herself under the toadstool at the back
of the burrow. The circus mouse had heard her scampering
inside, and banged louder than ever, and called out to tell her
in a very lordly way, that he was Pedro, the trapeze artist, and
no end of a smart boy. Once more peeping through the
curtains Pepita saw that he carried a box of chocolates under
one arm, and a large bunch of flowers, whilst with his other
hand he slowly stroked his long white whiskers, and lazily
leant against a tree trunk.
“The conceited wretch,” thought Pepita, “I don’t want
him, or his old chocolates, anyway,” so flinging back the
curtains she called, “Not at home to you tO'day, or any other
day,” and walked back inside.


t ’ v I y'^k
f fr ■ »k\ ' TKrf 1 "'' O
\\^ oMrVK^ji^ . j /
1
Mrs. Ticlclewhiskers had her table nicely set, and she wore a big
starched white bonnet and a cherry coloured red shawl.


Pedro just smiled and waited, crossing one leg over the
other, and winking wickedly at Pepita every time she marched
to the doorway to see if he was still there.
Meanwhile, Pip went down the road to visit a very old
widow mouse, who was a great friend of his, and whose name
was Mrs. Tickle whiskers. On hearing of Pepita’s horrible
adventure, she was most anxious to help the little refugee, and
sent an invitation to her to come and have tea with her the
next day.
Joining Mrs. Ticklewhiskers in a glass of cowslip wine Pip
felt in love with the whole world and especially with Pepita
Thinking he had been away long enough he hurried along to
Pepita’s burrow, taking with him a newly baked loaf and a
pot of home made strawberry jam, a gift from kind Mrs
Ticklewhiskers for Pepita.
When Pip had almost arrived at the burrow, he heard
Pepita give a smothered scream. Brushing aside the curtain
he found Pedro, the circus mouse, inside trying his hardest to
steal a kiss from Pepita. Flowers were trampled underfoot and
chocolates rolling from their box on the toadstool table. Pip
took one flying leap at Pedro and Pepita ran screaming for
help through the doorway. Hearing the noise, a fat white
mouse at the circus camp called her thirteen children around
her. Grasping a large rolling pm she stood ready for action.
Seeing Pepita running towards her she asked if Pedro was
causing the trouble. When Pepita said “Yes,” she said he had
always caused trouble by running around with the ladies, and
that she was Mrs. Pedro and out to give him a few taps with
her rolling pin. Pushing her way through all her children
that were crowding round, Mrs. Pedro stepped inside the
burrow, taking one angry look at the pink eyed villain who was
getting the worst of the fight with Pip, she joined in the fray.
Bang! bang! went the rolling pin, and down went Pedro with
two large lumps quickly growing on the side of his head.


SShv
J*— -*111
m
*w m
bill
*• rr^it 1 ] !£/
Each one of them agreed that Pepita was the cutest little Mouse Bride
they had ever seen.


Throwing her rolling pin to the children, Mrs. Pedro
stooped down and grasped Pedro’s tail, and helped by her
thirteen children, dragged him along the bumpy road back to
camp. With a cry of joy Pepita threw herself into Pip’s arms
telling him that she was more frightened than hurt.
The next day was bright with sunshine; happily, Pepita
untied her bundle and chose a dainty blue and white striped
dress with a gay sash to wear on her visit to old Mrs.
Tickle whiskers.
When Pip called round he found her looking sleek and
sweet and neat as a new pin. Smiling happily they rubbed
whiskers and set off on their way.
Pepita thought Mrs. Tickle whiskers the kindest old mouse
she had ever met. She had a long wobbly nose and long
whiskers that would fall into her tea cup when she was
drinking, and wore a large white starched bonnet and a bright
red shawl. Her table was set and many special dainties had
been cooked for Pepita.
A large bottle of red wine was placed handy to Mrs.
Tickle whiskers who drank so much of it that she got a fit of
the giggles, and caused Pepita to rock with laughter at the
funny stories she had to tell.
A small lonely mouse waited on them at the table and
when Mrs. Tickle whiskers was not looking, he handed plates
of lovely things to one of his pals who was watching through
the window. Pepita pretended not to see, and looked the
other way.
The next day was a red letter day for Pepita, as Pip asked
her to be his bride. With her little heart wildly beating with
happiness, Pepita answered “Yes.”
In the evening Pip took her to see the little house where
they would live. It was cunningly built into a mossy bank
and had a clump of Pepita’s much loved violets growing close


\
f f ~-'Xjp l£
«*\
/*^ < ~ W y f^"" 3
L^— .„ " r "T| Aj
, ••^i' , " . >yV
I 1 \ \
7l Hk # I A I I \JMK ; l3iS''K 'Jr
I i |ViA- I |Tvl jfr jfT
V I % —*, a™ 1
%
Pepifa makes delicious cakes and pies while Pip teases her
about the roiling pin.


to the door. With bright, twinkling eyes she read the name
Pip had chosen and proudly hung above the door, “The
Whiff of Cheese.”
Pepita went to live with kind Mrs. Tickle whiskers until
her Wedding Day. From the lace and silken pieces brought
from the Hat Shop, a beautiful wedding gown was made.
Hundreds of field mice were invited to the wedding, and
each one of them agreed that Pepita was the sweetest, cutest
little mouse bride they had ever seen. Waving good'bye, they
watched Pip carry his little wife over the threshold of their
new home.
Nowadays, Pepita finds her time fully taken up in
keeping every thing spic and span, making curtains of silk, and
bedspreads of delicate lace with a velvet pansy from the lady’s
bonnet to place on each pillow.
Pip works hard in his store, and keeps their pantry well
stocked with fruit and nuts and juicy slices of carrot.
Mrs. Tickle whiskers has shown Pepita how to make
lovely cakes and pies. Pip is reminded of Pedro every time
he sees Pepita using the rolling pin, and being a bom tease, has
only to whisper “How’s Pedro,” to get chased around the house
by the angry little cook waving the rolling pin. Then, of
course, he has to kiss and make friends again.
Lately, there has been less time for teasing and fun making,
for they are the proud parents of four baby field mice named
Violet, Emily, Agnes and Jonathan.
Every night after putting them to bed cosily covered in
a large patchwork quilt, Pepita sings a lullaby as she mends
each tiny garment. Pip always pops in to kiss his babies
good'night, and never forgets to tell his friends that he would
not exchange his little town mouse for any field mouse in
the world.


-
wi
r -#■ ■
Y - ■
> m
- .4*
•' *
r a
Pi
K- *
o e i
Pepita puts her babies to bed cosily covered in a large patchwork
quilt. She sings them to sleep with a sweet lullaby.


Wholly Set Up and Printed
in Australia.
