





COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
BULLETIN No. 30
Investigation
ON THE
BUNCHY TOP DISEASE
OF THE
BANANA
By
C. J. P. MAGEE. B.Sc.Agr.
MELBOURNE. 1927
By Authority:
H. J GREEN. GOVERNMENT PRINTER. MELBOURNE
C.13263.




FOREWORD.
This Bulletin deals with the scientific aspect of the Bunchy Top
Disease in bananas, and is the result of an investigation instituted
by the Governments of the Commonwealth, New South Wales, and
Queensland. I have considered it fitting and proper that this Bulletin
should be issued as the work of the Assistant Plant Pathologist, Mr.
C. J. P. Magee, B.Sc. Agr., since the knowledge of the nature and
mode of transmission of the disease is mainly the result of investiga-
tions carried out by that officer. A general report dealing with the
problem has already boon issued. Further investigations regarding
certain aspects of the problem arc still in progress.
E. J. GODDARD,
Supervisor.
Dejmrtment of Biology,
University of Queensland,
Brisbane.




CONTENTS.
Page
1. Introduction .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
2. History of the Disease in Australia .. .. .. ..10
Economic Effects of the Disease .. .. .. .. ..14
(1) Destruction of Plantations .. .. .. .. .. 15
(2) Financial Loss to Individuals, Districts and States .. .. .. 10
(3) Utilization of Land for other Purposes .. .. .. .. 18
4. Geograimiical Distribution .. .. .. .. .. ..1!)
5. Previous Literature and Investigations .. .. .. .. 19
0. Host Plants ; Varietal Susceptibility .. .. .. 22
7. Common Names of the Disease .. .. .. .. 23
S. Symptoms :
(1) General Habit and Behaviour •• .. .. .. -.24
(2) Leaf Symptoms .. .. .. .. .. 27
(3) Below-ground Symptoms .. .. .. .. 29
(4) Internal Signs of the Disease .. .. .. .. ..31
9. C\use and Transmission of the Disease;—.
(1) Parasitic Soil Factors .. .. .. .. .. ..35
(2) Soil Sterilisation .. .. .. .. .. 37
(3) Ultra-microscopic Organism or Virus .. .. .. 38
(4) Juice Transfer Inoculations .. .. .. .. 39
(5) Preliminary Experiments on the Transmission of Bunchy Top by the
Banana Aphis .. . . .. .. .. 40
(li) Final Transmission Experiment by the Banana Aphis .. .. 41
(7) Systemic Nature of the Disease —Sucker Transmission .. .. 45
(8) Root Contact of Healthy and Diseased Individuals .. .. .. 4(1
(9) Transmission by Grafting .. .. .. .. ..40
(10) Transmission of Bunchy Top to Abaca or Manila Hemp .. .. 48
10. Observations on the Banana Aphis
(1) Specificity of the Banana Aphis .. .. .. .. ..50
(2) Dissemination of Aphides .. .. .. ~ ..51
(3) Role of Aphides in Transmission of Bunchy Top .. .. .. 51
11. Ecology of the Disease .. .. .. .. .. ..52
12. Control Measures —
(1) Exclusion .. .. .. .. .. .. ..54
(2) Protection .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
(3) Eradication .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57
(4) Immunization .. .. .. .. .. .. 00
(5) Remedial Measures .. .. .. .. .. 01
13. .Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..01
14. Literature Cited .. .. .. .. .. ..02
15. List of Illustrations .. .. .. .. .. ..03




Investigations on the Bunchy Top
Disease of the Banana.
1. INTRODUCTION.
It is the purpose of this paper to record the results obtained during
the -past eighteen months in the investigation of the Bunchy Top
disease in the banana. This disease was first reported in Australia
about 1913, and has since practically wiped out the banana industry in
many centres in north-eastern Hew South Wales and south-eastern
Queensland. It is doubtful if there are many other diseases on record
which have wrought such devastation on a flourishing industry as that
produced by the ravages of Bunchy Top. The disease has been easily
the most serious banana malady in Australia, and has also occasioned
serious losses in Fiji, Ceylon, and Egypt.
Up till the time of the present investigation, nothing definite was
known regarding the nature of the cause of this disease or of its means
of natural transmission. The absence of this knowledge has been the
indirect cause of the rapid extension of the disease and its calamitous
effects over such a wide area. Also, until the present time, it has not
been possible to elaborate any reliable scheme of control measures to
check the ravages of the disease. Evidence is contained in this paper
which definitely proves that Bunchy Top is an insect-transmitted disease
belonging to the class of virus diseases.
The Bunchy Top Investigation, consisting of Professor E. J.
Goddard, 8.A., D.Sc. (Supervisor), the writer (Assistant Plant Patho-
logist), and Mr. 11. Collard (Horticulturist), undertook the responsi-
bility of researches on Bunchy Top in May, 1924, on the recom-
mendation of a Board which represented the Commonwealth Institute
of Science and Industry, the Hew South Wales Department of Agri-
culture, and the Queensland Department of Agriculture and Stock.
The funds required for the iiivestigations were contributed by these three
bodies, and the expenditure of the money was controlled by the Board.
A considerable amount of work had previously been devoted to the
problem by scientific workers in Australia, as well as in Fiji (where the
disease has been present for at least 40 years), Ceylon, Egypt, and the
The Supervisor of the Bunchy Top Investigation, Professor K. J. Goddard, has graciously
suggested that I should accept the responsibility of preparing this paper. In doing so J feel that lam
under a great obligation to him and to the Horticulturist, Mr. 11. Collard. To Professor Goddard lam
indebted for help in every direction during the course of the Investigation and for criticism, suggestions
and assistance in the preparation of the manuscript. To Mr. Collard I owe a great deal for bis care
and thoroughness in field work, for observations and practical suggestions, and constant co-operation
during the work. I desire to make acknowledgment of the kind assistance received from Mr. W. L,
Waterhouse, University of Sydney, bv the loan of literature and for helpful suggestions throughout
the Investigation. ■ Thanks are also due to Mr. A. E. Mee for assistance in photography.
—C. J. P. Magee.


Philippines, but no definite cause could be proved. It had been sug-
gested by some that the disease was caused by nematodes (in Fiji,
Fgypt, and the Philippines), while various others had suggested that
the causal agent was a fungus, chemical deficiency of the soil, deteriora-
tion of the banana stock, climatic factors, aphides, &c. There was no
substantive evidence to strengthen the claims of these opinions, and as
the ravages of the disease along the northern rivers of New South
Wales, and in south-eastern Queensland, became so intense, it was clear
that any attempt to solve the problem would have to bo made by scien-
tific investigators working on the spot.
A laboratory was founded at Tweed Heads, and experimental plots
were leased at Cobaki from Messrs. T. Pilgrim and McAlister. The
investigation work at the laboratory was attended to by the writer, and
the horticultural work at the plots was under the care of Mr. 11.
Collard. In the interval, awaiting the planting season, Mr. Collard
was sent to Fiji to gather first-hand information as to the history of
the disease in those islands, its present status, and the possibility of
securing resistant or immune stock.
Attempts to isolate any constant fungal or bacterial agent from the
variotis parts of affected plants were unsuccessful, and after a period
of six months, during which visits were constantly made to various
parts of the affected area, noting the behaviour of plants in deserted
plantations as well as the initial and early stages of infection in other
plantations, it seemed highly probable, in view of discoveries mentioned
later, that the trouble would not be attributed to any such agent.
Meanwhile the Investigation was also devoting attention to the
matter of nematodes or eel worms, since these were found to be
abundant in all plantations, and their presence readily indicated by the
almost constant presence of galls on the roots of affected and apparently
non-affeeted plants. Plants from northern Queensland were planted
in tanks filled with steam-sterilized soil, and others in tanks of soil
from an infected plantation, with a view to settling the possible effect of
soil factors, c.g., nematodes, parasitic fungi, and bacteria, in a purely
preliminary manner. It soon became apparent that such experiments,
if they were to be of any scientific value, would have to be carried out
under such conditions of control as obtain in a properly equipped glass-
house. This development and the necessity for a glasshouse for the
purposes of other experiments, which were to be tried out, compelled
the Supervisor to request the erection of sueli a glasshouse. The cost
of the erection of this building was considered to be insignificant for
scientific purposes whore the national loss due to the disease was so
great.
Keeping in view the possibility that the disease might bo of the
mosaic type of virus disease, attempts were made to produce the disease
in healthy plants from northern Queensland, grown in sterilized soil,
8


and inoculated with the sap of affected plants. There was no evidence
manifested for the transmission of the disease in the material used in
these preliminary experiments, hut it was recognized that further
work along these lines should bo carried out when the glasshouse was
available. Similarly, no results were obtained by inoculating sterilized
soil with three species of fungi, which were isolated from the roots of
some specimens of plants affected with Bunchy Top. "Further, the
association, over a long period, of diseased and healthy plants in
sterilized soil, and in the same pot, out-of-doors, so that the roots were
in intimate association, failed to produce the disease in the healthy
plants (an experiment which was later repeated with several plants
under glasshouse conditions with the same results). Meanwhile, con-
siderable work was accomplished on the experimental plots.
One of these with excellent soil had previously been affected with
Bunchy Top, and, after being leased, had been thoroughly ploughed
(part of it had rested for a period of several months) prior to the
planting of the same by the Investigation in October, 1921. The plants
wete selected from various areas —some were plants which appeared to
have stood out against the disease in affected plantations; some which
appeared to have shown some signs of healthy constitution, taken from
a deserted plantation; healthy plants from Brihic Island and Bracalba,
Queensland; and three species of wild bananas from the neighbourhood
of Cairns. The objects in this experiment were to determine the possi-
bilities of resistance in local stocks, the possibilities of recovery from
the disease, to make an intensive study of the incidence of the disease
in originally undoubtedly healthy plants, and to determine the possible
effects of cultural treatment in upholding resistance in healthy plants,
and the possible resistance of wild stock to tiro disease.
Another plot of virgin land which had grown lantana for eight years
was cleared, and planted with healthy stock from Bracalba. It rvas
considered that, if soil factors such as physical and chemical constitu-
tion, bacteria, fungi, or nematodes played the major role in the direct
production of the disease, it was possible that the plants on the plot of
virgin land would stand out in contrast to those on the other plot which
had carried Bunchy Top plants.
The early outbreak of disease in the plot of virgin land in January,
.1925, and its rapid development throughout that plot within a few
weeks, contrasted with the very slight development of the disease on
the other plot, and led to an intensive study of the conditions prevail-
ing in this plot. It w r as noticed that aphides were particularly
abundant on this plot, an abundance possibly to bo attributed to the
topography of this lower plot being responsible for the bringing about
of conditions more favorable for the aphides.
C. 13263—2
9


At once aphides were transferred from affected plants to healthy
plants growing in sterilized soil, under insect cages, in the grounds of
the laboratory, and the disease made its appearance in these experi-
mental plants in about three weeks. The experiments were repeated
by transferring aphides from affected to healthy Bracalha plants, grown
under insect cages, in the University grounds, at Brisbane, where the
disease appeared in two plants within a fortnight. Tls,us a definite
lead was established to the investigation, and at once preparations
made for following up these results in the glasshouse, arrangements for
the construction of which had then been completed.
2. HISTORY OF THE DISEASE IN AUSTRALIA.
The earliest definite record from Australia of a disease in bananas,
which can be regarded without doubt as that now known as Bunchy
Top. is from a centre in tbe Tweed Hirer area about thirteen years ago.
There are growers who are of the opinion that the disease occurred
much earlier in Australia, basing their opinion on statements about a
banana trouble ” in the Clarence River area, or, as more often appears
to be tbe case, on some malady affecting sugar cane in that region.
There are no reliable data to support such opinions, and, in fact, the
knowledge we now possess of the rate and mode of distribution of tbe
disease detracts from the reliability of such statements. At all events,
it can be definitely stated that the disease had been detected in the
Tweed River area in 1913, although its status as a plant malady was
not then recognized, the first interpretation being that we were concerned
with a malformation due to non-parasitic agencies such as seasonal or
climatic factors. It is of interest to note that the disease first made
its appearance in a certain plantation from which stock was supplied
to neighbouring jdanters, and tins practice was continued until the
extension of the disease within the original plantation indicated to
the owner that he was viewing something more serious than a mere
malformation of plants.
When the Advisory Committee, appointed in 1924 to inquire into
the position in respect of Bunchy Top, visited the affected area in
February of that year, it was learned from numerous growers who
gave evidence before the Committee that “it was generally believed
that the disease had emanated from the neighbourhood of this particular
plantation.” The reliability of tbis evidence is enhanced when an
endeavour is made to discover the source of supply for the stocking
of plantations—quite a large proportion can be traced to tbe neighbour-
hood of the plantation mentioned above. The fact that the trouble
was brought under the notice of the Department of Agriculture, Hew
South Wales, when the disease first appeared, enables the date of the
earliest occurrence to bo definitely stated. The fact that the history
10


of tlie disease lias a very direct bearing on the results obtained by tbe
present Investigation and on the recommendations made, renders such
statements of some importance. The origin of the disease in the
plantation referred to was, in all probability, Fiji, where the disease
has been present since about 1885. This statement is based on the
fact that banana stock was imported from Fiji and planted in the
neighbourhood of the spot where the disease was first recorded in 1913.
The identity of the Fijian disease is beyond dispute, since the visit
of the Horticulturist connected with the present Investigation to Fiji
in 1924.
There was a marked extension of banana-planting from 1913 on-
wards, and in Hew South Wales production reached its maximum in
1922. As planting progressed over the Tweed area, the disease
gradually spread, this being facilitated by the distribution of affected
suckers which, as wo know, would serve to disseminate the virus in
each locality. During the early years after the first appearance of the
disease, Cabbage Top or Curly Top, as it was then known, was not
considered such a dire malady as at present, but it gradually secured
a thorough grip of the banana area which was still attracting a large
number to the industry. The distribution of the disease by planters
eventually led to the acknowledged dominance of the disease, particularly
in certain spots within the Tweed area. During the past three years
banana growing within the Tweed area has become a risky proposition,
and since 1922 the industry has gradually declined. The disease
became very well established at Terranora, and eventually wiped out
the industry in that locality. There are to-day very few plantations
around the Tweed where banana growing is maintained on a profitable
basis. In a few places attempts have been made during the past three
years to wrest some profit from banana land by planting on a sufficiently
extensive basis to ensure some return, but such plantations have during
the past two years become more and more intensely affected.
The position in the Tweed area at the present time is such that
banana growing should bo discouraged. Where the land was of a
nature that it could be utilized for other purposes, the growers have
gone over to some other means of livelihood, but in very many cases
the plantations have been deserted, or are allowed to hold on, yielding
a slight return, which, however, is becoming smaller each half-year.
In the Mullumbimby area the disease has become well entrenched,
and. there is an abundance of deserted plantations. In certain parts
sj)ecial efforts are made by removing all affected plants to fight the
disease, with some measure of success. The proximity of deserted
plantations renders such a task very difficult, but in some cases isolation
renders considerable assistance. The origin of the disease in this zone
can be traced to stock from the Tweed area.
11


The disease readied Bangalow' in 1922, despite the institution of a
regulation forbidding the passage of suckers from the north across a
natural buffer zone in the neighbourhood of Byron Bay. The disease
has been known along the Richmond River since 1923. There are
many plantations along the Richmond where the disease has never
appeared, others in which only a few plants have shown the disease
during the past two years. This condition can he seen in such localities
as Wardell. In the neighbourhood of Alstonville we have seen
plantations in which comparatively few Bunchy Toji plants have made
their appearance, and by careful removal of these diseased plants the
disease has not affected the industry in any way; in other cases there
is a slight occurrence of Bunchy Top, hut the owners, obsessed with
the idea that the disease cannot he fought, have allowed the diseased
plants to remain, thus eventually sealing the fate of the plantation.
While wo are not in possession of the details, which can he made
available only as the result of a serious and thorough effort to obtain
a census which will reflect the state of affairs in all the banana planta-
tions, it is quite time to state that the area in the Richmond basin, which
would embrace Wardell, Rousmill, and Alstonville, can be regarded as
a lightly affected area, and one -which, by the discharge of the recom-
mendations made later in this report, could be conserved.
In proceeding from Alstonville to Tintinbar, via Teven, we saw
plantations which have “gone out” with the disease. It is interesting
to note that from Teven quite a number of plantations along the
Richmond River received their stock, hut rve could not succeed in
obtaining reliable evidence bearing on the ultimate source of affected
stock at Teven. Occurrences of the disease in varied stages of intensity
are to he noted between Tintinbar and Bangalow'. Here and there on
that stretch, as -well as between Byron Bay and Mullumbimby, are to
be met heavily affected and lightly affected plantations. A r o doubt
good luck in respect of the original selection of suckers and isolation
have together played a part, but in no plantation in this tract is the
disease completely absent.
There can be little doubt that, wore the details of the history of
the plants available in the various plantations, the distribution of the
disease could in every case be readily explained in terms of diseased
suckers and the migration of aphides. Wo have on record the
occurrence of the disease in Chatsworth Island, in the Clarence River.
Reference has been made to the occurrence of the disease in the
■Mullumbimby region, where it is -widespread. Yet a syndicate is there
cultivating about 100 acres of bananas, immediately above the deserted
Soldiers’ Settlements plantations. At Terragon, about 12 miles from
Murwillumbah, and on the slopes of Mount Warning, the disease w T as
bait sparsely represented when visited during 1924. Isolation is,
apparently, responsible for this condition.
12


At Upjier Burringbar plantations are to bo seen in various condi-
tions. Some are in a hopeless state, some deserted; others are still
producing. In the latter case attempts are made to cope with the
disease by spraying with nicotine sulphate, or by digging out affected
atools. On the whole, it may be stated that the disease is gradually
increasing, which, under any circumstances, could be expected owing
to the proximity of deserted plantations, and the fact that early detection
of the disease and immediate digging out of the plants are not regarded
as matters of extreme urgency by the growers.
The Soldier Settlement at Bilainbil has been deserted. It will thus
be seen that a very large part of the banana-producing area in north-
eastern New South Wales has passed out of the industry, and that
practically no portion of the area is free from the disease. Unless
something is done to arrest the spread of the disease in the more lightly
affected areas, the industry in those parts must, within a few years,
suffer the same fate as the Tweed area.
In Queensland the first record of the disease was made at Currumbin
in 1916 in several plantations which were stocked with suckers from
the Tweed area. Bunchy Top was there recognized as a disease
identical with that responsible for the epidemic which devastated Fijian
plantations from 1885 onwards. The growers concerned recognized
that replanting was necessary, and for this purpose obtained suckers
from Samsonvale, Queensland. It is of interest and significance that
no sign of Bunchy Top was observed in these plants for three years.
In the intervening years, however, suckers from the affected areas
made their way into new jffantations along the Cnrrumbin-Tallebndgera
.zone, and the disease became firmly established. Towards the end of
1922 it was recorded that at Currumbin and Tallebudgera 112 jffanta-
tions, representing 1,250 acres, were affected in varying degree.
The Queensland Government, towards the end of 1921, attempted
to stem the advance of the disease by jirohibiting the removal of any
vegetative jmrts of the banana jffant from the affected South Coast
fruit district to any other jnart of Queensland. Consideration was
given to the creation of a buffer area between the affected districts in
Queensland and the plantations to the north of the Brisbane River,
but Ibis idea was considered impracticable in view of the heavy com-
pensation involved and the fact that a natural buffer area had not
succeeded in checking the spread of the disease in ISTew South Wales.
(In the present state of our knowledge we are justified in stating that,
provided no diseased suckers had already jmssed across such a buffer
area, further spread of the disease northwards would have been pre-
vented by this procedure.)
Despite the widening of the area over which the restrictions on
removal were exercised, the disease was recorded from Brookfield, north
•of the Brisbane River, in December, 1923. The nearest area of
13


infection previously known was about 40 miles distant. There are now
but few localities south of the Brisbane River, such as Beeuleigb and
the neighbourhood of Coomera, from which the disease is absent.
On 30th December, 1925, the disease was discovered at Rush Creek
in a plantation at Moorina, just south of the Cabooltnre River, 25 acres
revealed the presence of the disease in quite a large number of planta-
tions, the maximum infection in any plantation being about 20 per cent.
In January, 192 G, it was discovered that the disease was rampant
in a plantation at Moorinn, just south of the Cabooltnre River, 25 acres
showing 100 per cent, infection. Immediately a proclamation was
issued by the Queensland Government prohibiting the shifting of suckers
from any plantation south of the Cabooltnre River. The state of
infection of the plantation at Moorina suggested that the disease had
been present in that locality for several years. As large consignments
of suckers had been sent northwards from the Dayboro district and
from Moorina as recently as December, 1925, every effort was made
to trace the consignments during the period 1923-1925. It was found
that such suckers had been sent to various centres as far north as
Innisfail, and the outbreak of Bunchy Top in such centres was
anticipated.
It has been found that all plantations so far examined, which
received suckers from Moorina since October, 1923, are affected, and
that the presence of the disease at one plantation in the neighbourhood
of Kilcoy (since completely eradicated), at Beerwah (one plantation),
Yandina (one plantation), and Innisfail (two plantations), can be
traced to suckers from the Moorina or Dayboro areas. The consign-
ments from Moorina have been traced in completeness, and all receiving
plantations inspected, but the very heavy consignments forwarded by
agents from tbe Dayboro area necessitate much heavier inspection work.
Undoubtedly many of these consignments may have consisted of healthy
suckers, but, nevertheless, it is to be anticipated that further records
of the disease in previously unaffected areas wil be made in the near
future. In the meantime, the Queensland Government is prohibiting
the shifting of suckers in any part of that State, and this will continue
until a thorough examination enables the Queensland Department of
Agriculture and Stock to determine areas which can be regarded as
definitely free from the disease.
3. ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF THE DISEASE.
The economic effects of Bunchy Top may be considered from three
aspects, namely, (1) the actual destruction of banana plantations and
the loss of a most lucrative primary industry in heavily affected areas;
(2) direct financial loss to individuals, districts, and States; (3) utiliza-
tion of heavily capitalized land for the purposes of other primary
industries.
14


1. Destruction of Plantations. —ln Hew South Wales practically
the whole of the banana-producing country is comprised within the
Tweed, Brunswick, and Eichmond Eiver districts. Banana cultivation
is attenqfied in a small way only in the Clarence Eiver district, namely,
at Chatsworth and Palmer Islands. In the Tweed and Brunswick
districts banana growing as a profitable industry has practically dis-
appeared. There is probably no plantation in any part of these
districts which is free from Bunchy Top. There are a few profitable
plantations, but these arc mostly situated in outlying parts of the
districts, and are more or less isolated.
A recent survey of the Tweed and Brunswick districts by Mr. 11.
W. Eastwood, of the Department of Agriculture, Hew South Wales,
substantiates the general conclusions at which the Investigators had
arrived as the result of frequent traversing of the affected areas. The
following figures arc taken from a report furnished by Mr. Eastwood
to the Department of Agriculture, Hew South Wales: —
(1) There are about ninety (90) plantations still profitable,
with an approximate area of five hundred and fifty (550)
acres, including the Maroomba plantation (100 acres).
(2) There arc, in addition, about fifty (50) growers who are still
marketing fruit in varied quantities from the remnants
of plantations.
(3) There are at least eight hundred (800) deserted planta-
tions, with an approximate area of five thousand (5,000)
acres.
(4) Fully 90 per cent, of the area producing bananas in 1922
has gone out of production.
(5) Every plantation in the Tweed and Brunswick districts is
infected with Bunchy Top, the percentage in the indivi-
dual plantation varying from 5 to 90 per cent.
This represented the condition at the end of December, 1925, since
which time there has probably been further development of the disease,
as it becomes more prevalent during January and February.
The Eichmond Eiver district is generally infected, but, with the
exception of such places as Tevcn, Tintenbar, and Tuckombil, only
to a slight extent. The industry is increasing in importance. There
are a few deserted plantations, but most of those have been deserted
on account of age. There are many plantations quite free from Bunchy
Top, and many again that are kept free by the digging out of affected
stools as soon as the disease appears. In the Warded area many
plantations have never been affected.
It is not possible to produce detailed figures for Queensland, but
the following facts will serve to indicate the losses duo to Bunchy
Top. In south-eastern Queensland Bunchy Top has produced damage
15


comparable to that in the Tweed and Brunswick districts. In 1922
there were over 100 growers at Currumbin occupying over 1,000 acres
of banana land; at the end of 1925 only four (4) plantations were left
in cultivation, and they are practically done.
In Tallebudgcra, once a great producing area, the position is much
the same as at Currumbin, and production has practically ceased.
Production has fallen by about 50 per cent, at Brookfield; every one
of the 40 plantations producing bananas is affected with the disease.
There are a few young plantations recently planted which, when last
examined, were free from the disease.
In the Xerang district the disease has not yet brought about the
same damage, but it is present. The Logan district now produces the
bulk of the bananas in the area south of the Brisbane Biver.
2. Financial Loss to Individuals, Districts, and States.—The value
of the banana industry to Australia is, perhaps, too little known to
the people of the Commonwealth, and, consequently, the actual financial
loss occasioned by Bunchy Top to the banana producer, to certain
districts in Xew South AVfiles and Queensland, as well as to these
States and the Commonwealth, is hardly appreciated by those who
have no direct concern in the banana-producing areas. It is necessary
that the loss so far occasioned should be realized in order that a serious
effort be made to provide every practical means of conserving this
important national industry and ensuring the utmost endeavour to save
unaffected areas.
The following statement of losses in individual districts will serve
<o illustrate the extent and nature of the losses. In 1922 there were
over 1,000 acres under banana cultivation in the Currumbin (Queens-
land) area, finding employment for approximately 200 men and a good
living for several carriers; at the present time only five men are
making a living from this industry in this area.
The following table* will serve to indicate the losses to the individual
growers, to the Currumbin district, and to Queensland during the period
1922-1920:
1022 1(12,000 cases 4,400 tons Railway freishtf £20,000
1923 50,000 „ 2,4! 0 „ „ 11,000
1024 17,700 „ 770 „ ~ „ 3,500
1925 2 500 „ 110 „ „ „ 500
t From Currumbin to Melbourne.
When the Advisory Committee visited this area in February, 1924,
the examination of the books of one grower showed that ho had pro-
duced, on a 14-acre plantation, 3,725 cases of bananas in 1921, 3,500
cases in 1922, and 1,070 cases in 1923. The plantation is now deserted.
It would be difficult for any one who has not visited those devastated
areas to visualize the completeness of the destruction ■wrought in such
• Supplied by Mr. D. McLaurin, late secretary of the Currumbin Fruitgrowers’ Association.
16


short time by a plant disease. The happenings at Tallehudgera are
comparable to those at Currumhin, and the same results will he attained
in the Brookfield area within a very short time, since production has
already been reduced by 50 per cent, during the past two years, and
the disease is now rampant. There is every danger that a simitar
fate awaits areas further to the north, such as Dayboro, Moorina, &c.,
unless there is determined action on the part of growers and the Govern-
ment.
The following figures, made available by Mr. E. M. Smith, of the
Tweed Fruit-growers’ Association, show the estimated increased pro-
duction during the period 1919-1922 (due to further planting-up), and
the effects of Bunchy Top during the period 1923-1925, in the banana-
producing areas of northern New South Wales: —
1919 . . . . 180,000 cases.
1920 . . . . 200,000 „
1921 . . .. 350,000 „
1922 . . .. 460,000 „
1923 . . . . 250,000
1924 .. .. 200,000 „
1925 . . . . 140,000 „
Fully 90 per cent, of the area in northern New South Wales which
was producing bananas in 1922 has gone out of production, hut new
areas have come into hearing. The effects of Bunchy Top are there-
fore greater than the figures show.
The above will serve to indicate the losses in New South Wales
to the growers and to the Government in respect of railway revenue,
income tax, &c.
The jnfice paid for good banana land in the Tweed district during
the peak years of banana production was exceedingly high. Although
the lucrative position of the industry may offer some justification, these
prices would appear to have been excessive. At all events, the original
cost of land adds further difficulties to the position now created by the
Bunchy Top epidemic, since much of the land is unsuitable for purjmses
other than banana growing. The figures obtained by the Advisory
Committee in 1924 have been substantiated by frequent inquiries when
visiting various parts of the Tweed area —hearing plantations having
realized £3OO per acre, and virgin land covered with lantana having
changed hands at £l5O per acre.
Bunchy Top has thus been responsible for the ruination of many
who entered the industry before the disease had gained control of the
banana plantations in the Tweed and Brunswick districts in New South
Wales and the Currumhin and Tallehudgera areas in Queensland. A
case is on record where one man is now maintaining a dairy farm on
200 acres of land which at one time was divided into banana farms,
furnishing a very good livelihood for fifteen men. The loss of the
C. 13263. —3
17


industry lias affected not only those who are actively interested in
banana growing, but also a large number of labourers and those con-
cerned in haulage, the production of case timber, &c. The cumulative
effect of these losses as reflected in the various town centres in the
affected areas is a subject of common comment by the townsmen.
3. Utilization of Land for other Purposes.— The losses which accrue
as the result of the inability to replace banana growing in the devastated
areas by an equally lucrative industry are exceptionally great. The
greater portion of the land growing bananas in the Currumbin, Tweed,
and Brunswick areas in 1922 has gone out of cultivation, and, in many
cases, has been deserted. There is no alternative industry which, on
this heavily capitalized land, would give a return equal to that obtained
from bananas. Owing to the steepness and stony nature of the greater
part of the land, attempts to wrest some profit from holdings which
have not been deserted have necessarily been confined to minor crops
on small areas. Unless measures are taken which will again permit
of banana growing in the affected areas, these losses will be of a
permanent nature.
Some few plantations have been replanted with sugar cane, but
the area where this has taken place has been limited to those planta-
tions with frontages to rivers or creeks to enable haulage of the cane
to the mill by water. Many growers have engaged in bean cultivation,
in some cases with good success, but the seasonable occurrence of
Black Spot or Anthracnoso {Collet of rich um Ihidimuthianium ) render's
bean growing an undertaking which is subject to considerable risk.
Such cultivation is also limited to land which can be ploughed or
chipped; quite a large proportion of the banana plantations are on
boulder-strewn slopes and offer insuperable difficulties in respect of
cultivation.
In very many instances abandoned plantations are now covered with
lantana or grass. The usual practice, when plantations become un-
profitable, has been to desert them or to turn in stock to cat down the
stools. Eventually such land reverts to lantana or grass, and in the
latter case the land is in some parts used for dairying or grazing
purposes. As the average area of deserted plantations varies from
10 to 15 acres, it is necessary for several plantations to be grouped
together to obtain sufficient land for a profitable dairy farm. The
number of areas in which this can be done is naturally limited, and
such a dairy farm starts off with an excessive capital outlay.
Some growers have attempted the cultivation of passion-fruit, pea-
nuts, pineapples, tomatoes, &c., but for various reasons, except in
isolated cases, these crops have not proved successful, and could not
come into cultivation on a district scale.
The position is, therefore, that unless banana growing can again
be safely undertaken in the devastated areas, this large tract of country
will never return to its once flourishing condition.
18


4. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.
Bunchy Top has a comparatively wide distribution among banana-
growing countries. In Australia the disease is well developed in north-
eastern New South Wales and south-eastern Queensland, and is present
also in isolated centres of the banana areas of North Queensland. As
infected suckers were sent from Queensland during 1925 to the North
Gascoyne district of Western Australia, there is little doubt that the
disease is also present in that State.
In Fiji about 40 years ago, Bunchy Top threatened the banana
industry with extinction. The disease is still present there, but is not
regarded as a serious menace.
Bunchy Top has probably been present in Egypt since about 1900.
Fahmy(fi) reports that tho disease is found in every province, but is
most ju'evalent in Lower Egypt.
In Ceylon Bunchy Top made its appearance in 1913, and has since
spread over a considerable area of the island. Dr. Bryce, who investi-
gated the outbreak in Ceylon, reports that the disease is also present
in tho Bonin Islands.
During 1924 reports were received of a disease which was causing
damage in abaca or manila hemp in the Philippines. The symptoms
of this disease closely resemble those of Bunchy Top, and since Bunchy
Top has been transmitted to manila hemp, it is probable that the two
diseases are identical iu nature.
Mr. J. Csimpbell, Mycologist, Department of Agriculture, Fiji, has
recently reported the occurrence of Bunchy Top in the Ellice Islands,
where it was introduced some years ago in infected suckers imported
from Fiji.
5. PREVIOUS LITERATURE AND INVESTIGATIONS.
Tho available literature dealing with the Bunchy Top disease is not
extensive. This disease, although comparatively widespread in its
distribution among banana countries, has apparently assumed greatest
potentiality in Australia. In all countries in which it has occurred,
efforts have been made on tho part of workers to determine the nature
of its cause and means of transmission, and to devise methods of com-
bating it. In spite of considerable endeavour, nothing definite regard-
ing these aspects of the disease had been proved up till the time of tho
present investigation.
As far as can be ascertained, Bunchy Top first made its appearance
and attracted notice in Fiji. Writing in 1912, Knowles and Jepson (1)
state “ that the earliest record of tho presence of this disease in Fiji
was in 1891, although, according to certain old residents in the colony,
it was known ten years prior to this date. About 1894 the banana
industry was severely threatened, and many planters were compelled
to abandon their plantations.”
19


Knowles and Jepson considered the disease to be caused by a fungus
“ the exact systematic position of which has not yet been ascertained.”'
This fungus was never found except in conjunction with nematodes.
The disease was most prevalent in low-lying and poorly drained land,
although it also made its appearance on the higher slopes. The local
name of “ strangles ” was given to the disease in Fiji. The symptoms
of the disease are briefly described, a special mention being given to
the decomposed condition of the roots and conn. It is suggested that
the disease is possibly identical with the banana disease described by
Massee (1903) under the title of Banana Disease (Jfarasmius
snniv.shts. Berk. Curt.)/’ occurring in Trinidad and other West Indian
islands. Reference is made to the resemblance of the abnormal condi-
tion of the roots of plants affected with “ strangles ” to the root
symptoms of a banana disease prevalent in Alexandria, attributed by
Looss and Foaden (1902) to the agency of nematodes. An indirect
reference is made to the occurrence of aphides on bananas during the
1891 outbreak of “ strangles ” in Fiji. Regarding the identity of this
disease with Bunchy Top, it may bo stated that photographs of the
condition, received at Kew over 40 years ago from the Governor of
Fiji, show exact symptoms of Bunchy Top.* This is also proof of
the fact that Bunchy Top occurred in Fiji prior to 1891.
Kowell(5) reports that an eelworm (Tylenchus similis), was
described by IST. A. Cobb as the cause of a serious outbreak of a disease
of bananas in Fiji in 1890-91. There is little doubt that Bunchy Top
is the disease referred to.
In 1921 Bryco(S) in a paper on “ The Bunchy Top Plantain
Disease,” states that Bunchy Top first appeared in Ceylon in 1913, and
has since spread over a considerable area of Ceylon. Fiji, Australia,
Egypt, and the Bonin Islands are listed as countries in which Bunchy
Top occurs. The cause of the disease was undetermined. Bryce con-
sidered it improbable that nematodes caused the disease. A species of
Rhizoclonia was found to be prevalent on both the finer and larger
roots, and it w r as thought that this was a possible cause of the disease.
A preliminary experiment to determine whether the disease was caused
by a filterable virus gave negative results. Bryce attributed the spread
of the disease to the dissemination of diseased suckers for planting-up
purposes. He states that it is not known whether any of the Ceylon
plantains are immune to Bunchy Top, but that in Fiji the Gros Michel
or Jamaica banana is immune. Observations made by the horticul-
turist of this Investigation during a visit to Fiji do not bear out this
statement. Manila hemp (2litsa textilis ) is reported as being
susceptible to Bunchy Top. Ko mention is made of the occurrence
of the banana aphis (Pentalonia nigronervosa ) in association with
Bunchy Top plants.
• We are, indebted to Dr, E. J Butler, Director of the Imperial Bureau of Mycology, for
this information. During 1923 Dr. Butler visited the Bunchy Top-infected area of New South
Wales.
20


Darnell-Smith and Tryon(d), reporting in 1923 on their conjoint
investigation of the banana Bunchy Top disease, state that their experi-
ments and observations indicate that theories attributing the cause of
the disease to soil depletion, loss of vigour in the banana stock, soil
acidity or climatic factors, cannot receive any measure of support. The
investigation, so far as it had gone, had failed to reveal the presence
of a fungus organism capable of causing Bunchy Top. This work
was still in progress; nematodes, in that they were not invariably found
to occur in association with the disease, were not considered the ex-
clusive cause of the malady. The banana aphis (Pentalonia nigro-
nervosa) is reported as having received notoriety as the communicator,
or even the prime cause, of the disease. It is stated that “ although
general observations do not favour this explanation, a remedy involving
this insect theory is being tested in the Hew South Wales portion of
the infected area.”
In a report issued in 1924 on the “Bunchy Top Disease of
Bananas,” in Australia, Darnell-Smith (I) gives a description of its
symptoms and occurrence, and the results of his work on the disease.
He states that his observations suggest that Bunchy Top is the result
of a fungus or bacterial infection of the roots or corm. He accounts
for the sporadic occurrence of the disease by the fact that “the infect-
ing organism may act as a saprophyte or a parasite.” Ho particu-
larly suspected Fusaria and bacteria attacking the roots as the cause of
the disease, and reports that several organisms had been isolated. The
possibility of insects transmitting or causing the disease was considered
by him. A preliminary experiment to determine whether the banana
aphis (Pentalonia nigronervosa ) was a vector of the disease is reported
as having given negative results.
In view of the fact that the investigation of the Bunchy Top disease
was undertaken in 1924 by the present workers, Dr. Darnell-Smith’s
work in connexion with the disease was discontinued.
A special Advisory Committee, appointed in 1924 to inquire into the
position in respect of Bunchy Top in Australia, in its report (5) gives
a description of the disease and its complexities, its history in Australia,
its economic effects, and recommendations for the future investigation
of the problem.
I’ahmy(C), in 1924, in a bulletin on “A Banana Disease caused by
a species of Heterodera,” described a condition in the banana which we
consider, from the nature of the symptoms and photographic evidence,
as identical with Bunchy Top. Communications with the author have
confirmed this belief. The most reliable symptoms of Bunchy Top, i. 0.,
dark, broken, green streaks along the midrib and secondary veins of the
lamina, are present in the diseased plants in Egypt. Eahmy attributed
the condition to the agency of nematodes (Heterodera radicicola), stat-
ing that “ when over 30 per cent, of the roots were attacked, the disease
21


was externally apparent, the plant being dwarfed, and growth sluggish.”
The disease is present in every province of Egypt, but is most prevalent
in Lower Egypt. It is stated that the disease has probably spread from
one locality to another through the sale of infected suckers. All varie-
ties of the banana grown in Egypt are susceptible to the disease, but
symptoms are most noticeable in the Hindi variety {Musa r.avendishii).
Fahmy (1921), states the disease was first observed at Alexandria
over twenty years ago. It had its origin in a few plantations, but soon
spread, causing considerable damage. According to Fahmy, Dr. Alex.
Preyor, in 1901, in a contribution to the Khedival Agricultural Society,
attributed the disease to a parasitic nematode or eelworm.
6. HOST PLANTS: VARIETAL SUSCEPTIBILITY.
Investigations carried on thus far have not shown any plant, ether
than a member of the genus Musa, as a positive host of the Bunchy Top
disease.
All varieties of the banana grown in Australia are susceptible to
Bunchy Top. The chief and only commercial variety of banana grown
in north-eastern (New South Wales and southern Queensland is the
Cavendish ( Musa cacendishii). This dwarf variety is very susceptible
to Bunchy Top, but appears to be the only variety which can be grown
profitably in these districts on account of climate and windy situations
of plantations. Other varieties, grown in these areas to a minor extent,
which succumb to Bunchy Top, are the Gros Michel {Musa sapienlum),
the Lady’s Linger, and the Sugar variety. Two local varieties —the
llansonian (?) and the Vernon —also take the disease. In Fiji, the
Cavendish, Gros Michel, Vi-ma-ma, and the Sawaqa (Musa fehi) are
reported as Susceptible to Bunchy Top. Three indigenous species of
banana occur in the dense scrubs of north Queensland. These produce
an inedible seed-bearing fruit. One of these species {Musa Banhsii )
has been successfully grown at Tweed Heads, and has been infected with
Bunchy Top; the other two did not survive transplanting. Bryce (2)
reports that, in 1918, in Ceylon, a plot of manila hemp {Musa tc.rlilis)
was attacked by Bunchy Top. Bunchy Top has been transmitted to
healthy manila hemp plants under glasshouse conditions at Tweed
Heads.
A seed-bearing variety of banana from the Philippines (the FI of a
cross between Musa sp. var. alinsanag and an unknown male parent)
has also been infected with the disease.
There is a marked difference in the susceptibility of the Cavendish
dwarf variety as compared with the tall growing varieties such as tint
Gros Michel and Lady Finger—the Cavendish being by far the most
susceptible variety. Owing to its dwarf habit, the abnormal changes
induced by the disease are more striking in this than in the taller varie-
ties. Unless otherwise stated, the studies and experiments recorded
below have been made with the Cavendish variety.
22


Observations do not suggest that Bunchy Top will attack any plant
outside the genus Musa. Attempts to transmit the disease to the closely
related genera Strelitzia and Bavenala, and to Canna sp., including the
arrowroot ( Canna eduhs), the potato ( Solatium luherosum), and
maize {Zea maps) have failed to give results. Should another sjieeies
of aphis, less specific in its host relationships than the banana aphis,
be found capable of acting as a vector of Bunchy Top, an extension of
the host range of the disease may be made possible.
On two or three occasions the attention of the Investigation has
been drawn to a pathological condition shown by maize growing in
Bunchy Top infected plantations. The maize plants were stunted, and
their leaves were somewhat upright and contorted. Although a cause
could not be definitely assigned to this condition in maize, wo do not
consider, from a study of its symptomatology, that it has any connexion
with Bunchy Tojt. However, further inquiry into this matter is
desirable.
Our attention was drawn during Sejttember, 1924, to the condition
of a number of individuals of Canna sp. in a pilot of these plants in a
garden in Hurwillumbah. Quite a percentage of the plants appeared
to differ in their habit from the other members in the plot, and appeared
to show symptoms very suggestive of Bunchy Top.
This impression was kept in mind, and, as stated above, was tested
out in an attempt to transmit the disease to Canna sp., with unsuccessful
results.
Careful study of the occurrence of the disease in various parts of the
world has not demonstrated that any species or variety of banana is
immune or highly resistant to Bunchy Top. Reference is made later
in this paper to the position of the disease, as it now obtains in Fiji,
with respect to the various varieties of bananas grown in those islands.
7. COMMON NAMES OF THE DISEASE.
The name “Strangles” was originally given to this disease of
bananas in Fiji. Later, it became generally known in that colony as
“ the banana disease.” In more recent years the names “ Cabbage
Top,” “ Curly Top,” and “Bunchy Top,” which were originally applied
to the disease at various times during its progress in Australia, have
also come into general usage in Fiji. In Ceylon, the disease has
evidently always been referred to as the “Bunchy Top” plaintain
disease, while in Egypt no special common name has been given to the
trouble. Of the various names which have been applied to this malady,
the name “Bunchy Top,” for the reason of its more general application
and its descriptive nature, seems to bo the most desirable.
23


8. SYMPTOMS OF THE DISEASE.
Tlio external symptoms of Bunchy Top have already been described
in some detail by Darnell-Smith (3), and Bryce (3). A study of the
symptomatology of the disease has been made during the present investi-
gation, under varied field conditions, and in the glasshouse. This has
revealed some points not noted by previous workers. A preliminary
study has also been made of the internal symptoms of the disease.
1. General Habit and Behaviour. —The symptoms of Bunchy Top are
very characteristic, and the condition is easily identified. There is little
possibility of confusing its symptoms with those of any other banana
disease.
A plant may show symptoms of Bunchy Top at any stage of growth,
from its first emergence from the ground, or as a plant fully grown and
throwing a bunch. The name aptly describes the disease; the leaves of
a badly infected plant are bunched together at the apex of the plant to
form a rosette (Plate 8, Pig. 2). Owing to the failure of the leaf
stalks to elongate, the leaves stand more erect than normal. Infected
plants are markedly stunted, there being little growth in height once
the plant has taken the disease.
The disease is systematic in nature. Suckers obtained from infected
stools and replanted are almost invariably diseased. Suckers which
have received infection from the mother plant, before being removed
from the parent stool, show symptoms somewhat different from those
obtaining in plants which have received the inoculum from an external
sojurco.
We propose using the terms primary and secondary respectively to
distinguish these types of infection.
The difference in symptoms between the primary and secondary con-
dition is really one of intensity. A plant receiving secondary infection
in its earliest stages of growth may later exhibit symptoms just as
marked as those of a primary-infected plant, while a sucker which has
received infection from the parent plant, and shown the disease while
growing in situ, rarely differs very much from the secondary-infected
typo. Plate 9, Fig. 3, depicts the habit of a primary-infected indivi-
dual. Where primary infection has been acute plants may not grow
more than 0 inches to 2 feet in height. Growth is very slow, and plants
never mature or produce fruit. The plants do not die, at least within
one or two years.
The habit of a secondary-infected plant will depend on the amount
of normal growth which has been made before the plant shows symptoms
of Bunchy Top. An early infected plant will later show symptoms
indistinguishable from those of a primary-infected individual, due to
the withering of the older healthy leaves. A plant may exhibit normal
growth up till the last leaf before bunching, and then in the last leaf
24


show the first symptoms of the disease. Such a plant would mature a
bunch of fruit —often of marketable quality. All intermediate stages
are found between these extremes. Plates (J, 7, 8 show stages of the
development of the disease in a secondary-infected plant.
When symptoms of the disease are exhibited after the bunch has been
formed in the interior of the base of the pseudostem, there is evident
an effort on the part of the plant to throw the bunch. Owing to the
leaf congestion and constriction at the apex of the pseudostem, the
bunch may with difficulty get ont, only partly do so, or may fail alto-
gether to emerge. Plants are thus often seen with partly-emerged
bunches of small stunted fruit at their apices, standing erect, or jutting
out at right angles. Where the constriction has prevented the bunch
from emerging, on splitting open the pseudostem, the true stem support-
ing the bunch is seen to he contorted, or oven bent hack on itself, duo to
growth pressure.
Inspections of plantations in the infected areas of north-eastern Wow
South Wales and south-eastern Queensland show the disease to be present
to varying extent. A few plantations arc perfectly free, while many
others have 9-5 to 100 per cent, of the stools showing infection. At the
present lime the greater number of the heavily infected plantations are
abandoned.
In affected plantations, healthy and diseased stools are often seen
separated from one another by only a few feet. In other plantations
every stool may bear one or several Bunchy Top suckers. In its early
incidence in a plantation, which has made healthy growth for some
time, the disease occurs sporadically. As a rule, definite centres of
infection arc not evident at first, but the later spread of the disease can
often bo accounted for by the proximity of diseased stools. Where
planting has taken place in a badly infected area, or where infected
suckers have been used in planting, every plant may exhibit symptoms
of Bunchy Top within six months of planting. Bunchy Top plants do
not wilt or die; a well-grown plantation which has become badly
infected, when viewed from a distance, may look remarkably vigorous.
It is observed that, even in a stool which can be considered badly
infected, suckers grow up which, for several months, may appear per-
fectly normal. Such suckers, however, usually take the disease beforo
reaching maturity. In isolated cases, such suckers have been observed
to grow to maturity, remaining healthy, and producing a good bunch.
A stool of any age, or a sucker at any stage of growth, may become
infected with the disease. Thus, in any infected plantation, the disease
is seen in plants of all sizes. Suckers which have been replanted from
a badly infected stool almost invariably become Bunchy Top, even if they
are not showing symptoms of the disease at the time of removal from
the parent.
C. 13263.—4.—4
25


Tlic set-back received by a sucker in the separation of it from its
parent, and the replanting of it as a separate individual, appears to
hasten the manifestation of symptoms of Bunchy Top in that sucker.
In this connexion it has frequently been claimed by growers that injury
to healthy stools by runaway boulders has “ caused ” the injured stools
to throw up diseased suckers. The same has been said of injury induced
by desuckcring in a Bunchy Top plantation.
In the case of a comparatively lightly infected plantation which was
damaged by a severe wind-storm in 1924, it was claimed that the
uprooting of large plants by the storm was the indirect cause of the
later appearance of a largo number of suckers showing infection.
Exactly what factors are concerned here we are not certain. It seems
possible that, in Bunchy Top, the infective agent in its relationship
with the host may, in certain cases, arrive at a point of equilibrium
where other factors are necessary to upset the balance, and cause the
appearance of symptoms.
In a large stool which has shown the disease for the first time in only
one or two suckers, it is often possible to select a sucker from the oppo-
site side of the stool which, on planting out, will remain healthy. This
is possibly due to such suckers at the time of removal being outside the
diffusion range of the virus (and having escaped secondary infection
from other members of the stool).
In the normal banana stool the individual plants are in organic
connexion with one another. Young suckers are, for some time at
least, physiologically dependent on the parent plants, but it seems
doubtful, from observations on the spread of the disease in a stool, if
this relation is maintained altogether among older plants in the stool.
Also the removal of plants, which have fruited, from a stool may sepa-
rate it into two or more organic units. This would account for cases
of the apparent failure of the disease to spread as a primary infection
to the whole of the stool. However, the practice of the selection of
suckers for propagating from any part of a stool which has shown
even minor infection is strongly condemned.
The period immediately prior to the throwing of the bunch is very
frequently the time at which the first symptoms of disease become
evident. This period cannot be correlated with the prevalence of
aphides. Wo are led to believe that a plant may carry infection for
some time before showing external symptoms —the physiological activi-
ties associated with the production and throwing of the bunch
apparently' causing the plant to react to the infection.
A Bunchy Top plant does not recover, hut slowly goes on producing
abnormal leaves over a long period. A few cases have been observed
where infected suckers arising from a stool, after throwing two or three
abnormal loaves, again produced a few loaves which were practically
26


normal in character, with almost total absence of green streaks
(described below as the most reliable symptoms of the disease). Such
plants, however, always reverted to the Bunchy Top habit. This con-
dition was observed in the early summer when growth was most rapid.
(Such behaviour has frequently been construed by growers as evidence
of the “recovery” of infected plants).
2. leaf Symptoms. —The first external symptoms of Bunchy Top
appear in the leaves of the plant. The normal leaf emerges from the
centre of the pseudostom with the leaf-blade wrapped tightly around
the midrib in the form of a rod or “ pipe.” The leaf remains tightly
rolled until it has almost fully emerged, and then commences to unfurl
more or less evenly along its whole length. While unfurling the leaf
stands erect, and when fully unrolled the elongation of the leaf stalk
carries the blade clear of the pseudostem, and the leaf gradually assumes
a position approaching the horizontal, making room for the next leaf
which is pushing up through the pseudostem.
In the case of secondary infection, it is in a leaf which has unfurled
in this manner that the first symptom of Bunchy Top is usually
observed. The first definite symptom of the disease is the appearance
of irregular, nodular, dark green streaks about .75 mm. wide along the
secondary veins on the underside of the lower portion of the leaf-blade,
along the leaf-stalk, or along the lower portion of the midrib.
In the first instance one, two, or several of these streaks may be
present. Usually others appear later in the same region. In character
they may vary from a series of small dark green dots to a continuous
dark green line with a ragged edge, an inch or more in length. (Plate
3, Fig. 1.)
The lamina of the normal leaf is of an even rich green colour.
From the midrib prominent vascular strands run out more or less per-
pendicularly at intervals as main veins. The area between the main
veins is lined by secondary veins which are even in colour throughout
the leaf. The normal midrib and leaf-stalk are of an even pale green
colour, and arc covered with a whitish waxy bloom.
Usually the dark-green streaks are first seen in the leaf-blade, but may
later appear in the midrib and leaf-stalk of the same leaf. In some
cases of secondary infection, an earlier indication of the later appear-
ance of green streaks in the lamina is seen. This occurs in the “ pipe ”
or tightly rolled heart leaf. It takes the form of the appearance of a
number of irregular pale whitish streaks (Plato 5, Fig. 1) along the
secondary veins of the tightly rolled lamina when the “pipe” is about
one-half emerged from the pseudostem. When these pale whitish
streaks appear as the first symptom, the “ pij)o ” shows a slight trans-
verse wrinkling along its length. On unfurling, a leaf which has
shown these early streaks, bears numerous dark-green streaks along
the secondary veins of the lamina. In other respects this leaf may
not differ from the normal preceding leaves.
27


When, as usually is the case, the first symptoms take the form of a
few characteristic green streaks in the lamina, midrib, or petiole, the
“ first-symptom ” leaf, except for these streaks, appears normal in size,
shape, and behaviour (Plate 7, Fig. 1). In the following loaf, however,
while the “ pipe ” is still unfurled, pale whitish streaks are seen along
the secondary veins of the leaf blade, These vary a groat deal in
number, depending on the degree of infection. The “pipe” or heart
leaf now unfurls slightly abnormally, beginning to unroll from the top
region, giving the partly unfurled leaf a funnel-liko appearance. In
this leaf, when unfurled, dark green streaks will be found to bo present
along many of the secondary veins of the lamina, and several dark green
dots or lines are seen along the midrib and petiole. This loaf will be
smaller than normal, slightly chlorotic, and the marginal portion of
the lamina will bo wavy and slightly rolled upwards.
The presence of the characteristic broken dark-green streaks (Plate
4, Fig. 1) along the secondary veins of the lamina, or along the midrib
or petiole, is the most definite and reliable symptom of Bunchy Top.
These streaks appear as the earliest external indication of the disease,
and together with all other symptoms are not later retrospective in
leaves which have been thrown earlier than the “ first-symptom ” leaf.
The dark green streaks are not apparent when viewing the dorsal sur-
face of the leaf in reflected light. The leaf should bo inspected from
the under-side so as to allow light to pass through it.
Successive loaves as they are thrown become more abnormal. There
is a slight retardation in the rate of growth. The heart-leaf unfurls
prematurely, and is slow in completing the process; often another leaf
has begun to unfurl before the preceding one is fully unrolled. The
leaves may become progressively smaller in size or successive leaves
may bo of similar dimensions. (In normal growth each leaf is larger
than the preceding one.) There is a reduction both in width and
length of the leaves, this being more noticeable in the case of the
lamina than in the midrib. The petiole does not elongate normally,
thus the leaves stand more erect than in the healthy plant. Leaves
thrown soon after infection are distinctly chlorotic in appearance, but
this character does not persist except on the margins of the laminae.
After several abnormal leaves have appeared, extreme congestion is
apparent at the apex of the psoudostem. The leaves are seen to have
lost their normal symmetrical arrangement around the psoudostem, and
to have assumed the “ rosetted ” condition. This characteristic arrange-
ment of the leaves of a Bunchy Top plant does not result until several
weeks after infection, and is thus not an early diagnostic symptom.
In colour the mature leaf of a secondary Bunchy Top plant is of a
slightly more yellowish hue than that of a healthy plant. In the
primary Bunchy Top plant the position is often reversed. Owing to
the dark green streaking being present along the greater number of
28


the secondary veins, the general colour of the leaf is sometimes darker
than normal. The lamina of such a leaf usually has a light yellowish
green margin (Plato 9, Figs. 1,2).
In texture there is a difference between the Bunchy Top and healthy
leaf. Whereas the latter is elastic and pliable, the petiole, midrib, and
lamina of the Bunchy Top leaf are harsh and brittle, and snap readily
when bent or crushed in the hand. There is a distinct rigidity and
apparent resistance to wilting shown by Bunchy Top leaves. They
are not nearly so readily shaken by winds as healthy leaves.
The surface of the lamina of a Bunchy Top leaf becomes markedly
corrugated as it matures, due to the growth of tissue in the region of the
main veins producing ridging on the dorsal surface, and troughing on
the ventral surface. This prominence of the main veins is not a diag-
nostic symptom of the disease. It is often seen in the leaves of healthy
plants growing under adverse, or even rank, conditions.
The margin of the lamina of the young Bunchy Top leaf is wavy
and slightly upward-rolled at intervals along its length. In the older
Bunchy Top leaf the lamina is not supported normally by the midrib;
both sides tend to hang down so as to be nearly parallel with each other,
the margin, however, remaining up-turned or rolled.
In primary-infected plants, symptoms of the disease are apparent
as soon as the first leaf appears above ground. The leaves are small,
rosetted (Plates 9, Figs. 1,2), and numerous broken dark green streaks
are seen in the petioles, midribs, and laminae. The margins of the
leaves are usually highly chlorotic, and arc slightly rolled upwards.
3. Below-ground Symptoms.—Abnormal changes are seen in the root
system of a Bunchy Top plant in an advanced stage of the disease.
These symptoms wo consider to bo of a secondary nature; they are
apparently due to the loss of immunity on the part of the roots of an
affected plant, to the attacks of otherwise harmless soil organisms. This
conclusion has been arrived at after considerable study of the root
system of Bunchy Top and healthy plants. A good deal of attention
has been given by previous workers to the presence of decaying roots
associated with the Bunchy Top condition. The impression has been
held that the disorganization of the root system by such agents as fungi,
bacteria, or nematodes, was primarily connected with the causation of
the disease.
The root system of the healthy banana consists of wdiite, fleshy
roots, cord-like in appearance, which spread through the soil in all
directions. They are often of great length. From those cord roots
arise large numbers of fine lateral roots which branch profusely. The
lateral roots function only for a comparatively short time; new laterals
are continually being produced as the cord roots spread through the soil.
29


In .Bunchy Top plants some time after infection, many of the large
fleshy roots are decayed and dead, while many others show purple
patches upon their surface. In an advanced stage of the disease many
of the roots have rotted back to within a few inches of the corm. All
the lateral roots are either dead or purple in colour. On apparently
healthy plants in the Tweed Hirer district, many roots are found that
are dead and decayed, and the laterals of many roots arc purplish in
colour. The purpling of the roots in the case of the banana appears
to be a natural reaction to injury of any type, and to normally precede
natural decay of laterals which have ceased to function.
The root system of a Bunchy Top plant, examined soon after the
appearance of first symptoms of the disease, shows little difference in
the number of decayed roots present, as compared with a healthy
plant of the same age. As the disease progresses more and more, decay
becomes apparent in the root system. However, Bunchy Top plants are
sometimes seen with comparatively good root systems. Plants growing
under glasshouse conditions in soil which has boon sterilized, examined
four months after the development of Bunchy Top, showed a relatively
small difference in the number of decayed roots present when compared
with healthy plants of the same age growing under similar conditions.
(Plate 10 shows the root system of one of these plants.)
As the roots of a Bunchy Top plant rot back towards the corm,
now roots, at first healthy in appearance, arise from the corm. On
these an abnormal number of laterals is borne. After a time these
laterals become purple in colour, and decay may be set up in these new
roots. The Bunchy Top plant appeal's to be always endeavouring to
maintain a scanty root system, but difficulty seems to be experienced
on account of the attacks of decay-producing organisms in the soil.
The disorganization of the phloem region of the vascular system, de-
scribed later, may account for this loss of immunity on the part of
the roots of Bunchy Top plants.
Galls caused by nematodes are seen on both the cord roots and
lateral roots of Bunchy Top plants. The root system of practically
every plant examined in the field has shown these galls to some extent.
They may be numerous or only few in number. The surface roots are
more often attacked than the deeper ones. [Nematode galls appear to
be just as plentiful in the field on the roots of healthy plants as on
the roots of diseased individuals. Plate 10 shows a Bunchy Top plant
grown in sterilized soil under glasshouse conditions, the roots of which
are entirely free from nematode galls.
The surface of the cortex of a corm of a Bunchy Top plant in an
advanced stage of the disease is often decayed. The conns of both
healthy and Bunchy Top plants are in many plantations tunnelled by
the beetle borer (Cosmopolites sordidns, Chcv.). Where corms have
been badly riddled by the beetle borer, decay in the region of the beetle
30


tunnels is common. The nematode-galling of the roots and beetle
injury to the corm cannot he considered as contributing factors in the
causation of Bunchy Top, and appear to be in no way connected with
the disease.
4. Internal Signs of the Disease. —An internal macroscopic examina-
tion of lire pseudostem and corm of a Bunchy Top plant reveals no
pathological changes which, in our opinion, are of diagnostic value. In
an advanced stage of the disease, extreme congestion of the leaf tissue
is observed at the distal end of the pseudostem when split open. In
suckers which have been topped for planting, it is not practicable, by
inspection, to distinguish diseased from healthy individuals.
Both Darnell-Smith(3) and Bryce(3), in their descriptions of the
symptoms of Bunchy Top, make mention of the yellowish or brown
flecks or lines which run in all directions following the course of the
vascular bundles in the corm and pseudostem, as symptoms of Bunchy
Top. Observations made at Landshorough (Queensland), an area free
from Bunchy Top, and on suckers from Bracalba (Queensland), from
whence there has been no record of the disease, make it evident that
the brown ducts cannot be considered as symptoms of Bunchy Top.
Young healthy suckers arc usually free from them. All healthy plants
in a fairly advanced stage of growth, which have been examined, have
shown these coloured ducts. Each vascular strand is accompanied on
either side, for at least part of its length, by one of these canals, which
vary in colour with the age of the sucker. They may he of the nature
of continuous or broken lines, or have a mouil form structure. They
accompany the vascular bundles from the corm through the pseudostem
into the midribs of the leaves. The coloured contents of these canals
give a positive test for tannin with the Ferric chloride method, and
are apparently solidified. The coloured ducts are particularly prevalent
in a healthy corm where root decay or rotting of the corm surface has
taken place. In a Bunchy Top conn which has been infected for any
length of rime, these coloured ducts are very noticeable, hut young
plants examined soon after infection may show few or none at all. The
presence of coloured duets associated with the vascular bundles cannot
he considered as a symptom of Bunchy Top.
A microscopic examination of sections of tissue of the leaf system
of an infected plant reveals a unique pathological condition of extreme
interest. The following description is of a preliminary nature. It has
not been possible to make a detailed study of the development of the
condition, and future work is projected.
In the Bunchy Top plant disorganization has taken place in the
phloem regions of the vascular system. Such alterations as are present
are quite distinct in nature from the necrosis and lignification of
phloem groups associated with the condition of leafroll of the potato
(Solatium tuberosum), and are of value as a diagnostic internal
31


symptom of Bunchy Top. Studies made up to the present on this
condition have been carried out on material fixed in Fleming’s weaker
solution and stained either in haematoxylin and erythrosin, safranin
and light green, or in gentian violet and orange G. .Healthy control
material was obtained from a Bunchy Top-free area in Queensland
and grown in the glasshouse at Tweed Heads. Comparative studies
wore made in hand sections and in mierotomed paraffin sections
12 jx thick, of Bunchy Top and healthy material.
The external appearance of the broken dark green streaks in the
lamina, midrib, and petiole of the Bunchy Top plant can be accounted
for by the internal alteration in the region of the vascular bundles.
The reliability of the appearance of dark green streaks as first symptoms
of the disease is therefore evident.
In the secondary Bunchy Top plant Internal alterations in the
lamina, midrib, and petiole are only seen in the vascular bundles in
the region of the dark green streaks, so that, sections through these
plant parts in the early stages of the disease show relatively few
altered bundles. As the disease progresses, more and more vascular
bundles show abnormal changes. In the primary Bunchy Top plant
where infection is intense, every vascular bundle in the leaf is seen to
have undergone alteration.
The vascular tissue of the banana consists of closed collateral
bundles. From the corm, individual vascular strands run through the
pseudostem into the midribs, where they branch profusely to form the
parallel venation of the laminae; by branching and anastomoses the
individual bundles communicate with one another. In transverse
section, the normal vascular bundle is seen to be bordered on both phloem
and xylem ends by a distinct sheath of fibrous elements. The xylem
region is made up of spiral tracheidcs and xylem parenchyma. The
phloem consists only of sieve tubes and companion cells.
A study of the internal pathological condition of the vascular
system of a Bunchy Top plant is best made by cutting transverse and
longitudinal sections of the midrib and leaf stalk of the primary
diseased plant. Iveforence to Plate 19, Figure 2, will demonstrate how
marked these alterations are. Plates 17-18 show individual healthy
and Bunchy Top vascular bundles in transverse and longitudinal
section.
A comparison of healthy and Bunchy Top bundles reveals the
following alterations: —
(1) In the phloem region there is a suppression of development
of the fibrous sheath. The region in which fibres are
normally present is occupied by cells which are heavily
laden with chromatophores.
32


(2) The fundamental tissue in the neighbourhood of the phloem
has become gorged with chromatophores. In the normal
plant this region is almost entirely devoid of chlorophyll.
(3) “ Appositional ” growth has taken place in the fundamental
cells in contact with the phloem. The original cells have
been divided up into angular cells by the growth of thin
cellulose walls. Growth of these cell walls has apparently
taken place in all planes. The newly formed cells contain
numerous chromatophores and distinct nuclei.
(4) “Appositional” growth of cell walls along all planes has
taken place in the “ sieve lubes ” and companion colls
of the phloem, giving rise to numerous angular cells
along their length. These cells are uninucleate and their
.nuclei are of an abnormal type. The abundance of these
nuclei in the phloem of a primary affected plant is a
most noticeable feature in any transverse section and
longitudinal section.
There is wide variation in the size and shape of these nuclei.
Observations suggest that they arc derived from normal nuclei by
amitotic or direct division rather than by true mitosis. Although a
binucleate condition of colls has not been definitely seen, numerous
nuclei which appear to he undergoing division by constriction are
observed. We recognize the necessity for further investigation of these
remarkable changes in the phloem region of the vascular bundles of
plants affected with this particular type of virus disease.
In general, the above description describes the alterations in the
phloem region of the vascular bundle of a primary Bunchy Top plant
as seen in the midrib. Wo alteration has taken place in the xylem
region. The abnormal development of chlorophyll in the fundamental
tissue is greatest in the region of the peripheral bundles of the ventral
surface of the midrib, but is also present in association with the more
internal bundles.
In the lamina of the primary Bunchy Top leaf, alterations similar
to the above have taken place in both the main and secondary vascular
strands. In some cases a reduction in the amount of sclercnchymatous
tissue is also seen at the xylem end as well as the phloem end of the
secondary vascular bundles. In the secondary Bunchy Top plant in
the early stages of the disease, alterations of the vascular bundles are
seen only in the region of the green streaks. Abnormal changes arc
not observed along the whole length of such bundles. This corresponds
to the external appearance presented by an altered vascular bundle,
i.c., as a broken dark green streak.
If a transverse section is made of a midrib which has shown dark
green streaks as first symptoms of the disease, in the position of the
streaks one or more vascular bundles in the ventral periphery of the
C. 13263. —5
33


midrib exhibit abnormal changes. “ Appositional ” growth lias taken
place in the fundamental tissue in the region of the phloem and for
some distance! from it. The newly formed cells are gorged with
chromatophores. At this stage there' is usually little alteration in the
sclerenchyniatons sheath, but the abnormal cldorophyllor.s tissue' may
extend as a hand arounel the phloem end of the bundle. At this stage
little cr no alteration is apparent in the phloem itself, fn a transverse
section of the veins of the lamina of a leaf which is showing first
symptoms of the disease, a similar condition is scon in (he region of
the green streaks. There is a proliferation of the mesophyll cells
adjoining the phloem, with excessive development of chlorophyll. A.
strand of fibrous cells usually persists on the outer margin of the phloem
end, so that a baud of chlorophyll-bearing cells may extend on the
inside of this fibrous strand, through the bundle from one side of the
phloem to the oilier.
The brittleness of the leaf tissue of a Bunchy Tojj plant may. to
some extent, he due to the suppression of development of fibrous tissue.
Other factors, however, ju'obably also contribute towards this charac-
teristic.
The distribution in the plant of phloem alterations is subject to
a good deal of variation. This is dependent on the stage of develop-
ment of the disease. In the early stages of the disease l a cross section
of the midrib may show only a single altered vascular bundle. At a
more advanced stage the greater number of the vascular strands are
abnormal, while in the primary Bunchy Top plant every bundle has
undergone change. In the primary Bunchy Top plant typical altera-
tions arc observed in the lamina, midrib, and petiole. In the pseudostem
proliferation of the phloem and surrounding fundamental tissue, with-
out the production of chloropyhll, has been observed as far down as the
base of the pseudostem. The condition has not been observed in the
conn or roots. "Where a Bunchy Top plant has thrown a bunch, the
true stem subtending the hunch, on examination exhibits typical altera-
tions at the distal end. Around the fibres of the phloem region of
many of the more peripheral vascular bundles, some of the cortical
cells have undergone “ appositional ” growth to produce angular
chlorophyll-bearing cells. Often a bundle is seen almost entirely sur-
rounded by chlorophyll-tissue. Typical alterations are also seen in
many vascular bundles in the rind of the fruit thrown by a Bunchy
Top plant. These alterations do not produce an external appearance
of green streaking in the fruit.
9. CAUSE AND TRANSMISSION OF THE DISEASE.
"When the present Investigation commenced operations in May, 1924,
one of the main problems before it was to determine the cause and
moans of transmission of Bunchy Top. Regarding this phase of the
34


disease, nothing definite had been proved by previous workers, either
in Australia or other parts of the world where Bunchy Top occurs.
Sufficient evidence was available from the work of Darnell-Smith and
Tryou, as well as from the history of the disease iu Fiji, to provisionally
negative the suggestions which had been put forward that Bunchy
Top was due to — (a) climatic factors; (b) “running out” of stock;
or (c) chemical deficiency of the soil. Other theories relating to the
cause of the disease which, in our opinion, had to be proved or dis-
proved, were —•
(i) That Bunchy Top was due to parasitic bacteria or fungi
iu the soil.
(ii) That nematodes were the causal agent of the disease.
(iii) That Bunchy Top was a virus disease.
1. Parasitic Soil Factors (Bacteria, Fungi, Nematodes). —This factor
was given first consideration for the reason that previous workers
were inclined to give some credence to the idea that a soil parasite
was the cause of the disease, and because the evidence of root decay
associated with the Bunchy Top condition seemed to indicate the
possible association of parasitic fungi and bacteria. Extensive observa-
tions were made on the root system of diseased and healthy plants in
the Tweed Diver district of New South Wales, and on healthy plants
in an area free from Bunchy Top at Landsborougb (Queensland).
Plantations in every stage of infection were examined, and evidence
was collected with regard to the incidence of the disease. The early
observations wore made during the dormant period of growth, but from
December, 1924, it was possible to study the first incidence of the
disease in plants which had been brought to the Tweed Diver district
from a disease-free area in Queensland.
In every plantation one was struck by the almost universal associa-
tion of root decay with both healthy and Bunchy Top plants. This
root decay was most marked iu Bunchy Top plants in an advanced
stage of the disease. The intense purpling of the surface of young
roots of both healthy and recently diseased plants was suggestive of
parasitic action, and received considerable attention.
Close observations were made of Bunchy Top jdanfs for evidences
of bacteria or fungi. As soon as facilities permitted, cultural work
was commenced at the field laboratory at Tweed Heads with a view to
isolating an organism as a casual agent of the disease. Extensive
tissue platings were made of leaf, pseudostem, conn, and root tissue
of diseased plants in every stage of disease on nutrient beef agar, potato
dextrose agar, malt extract agar, prune juice agar, banana corrn agar,
banana leaf extract agar, gelatine and potato slopes. Studies were
also made on inoculation of bouillon with infected tissue. It was
possible to work on material within one or two hours after removal of
35


the plants under examination from the soil. Internal leaf and
pseudostern tissues of diseased plants were invariably found to he
sterile. ]\lieroseopical examination of diseased leaf tissue revealed a
distinctly abnormal condition of the phloem region of the vascular
bundles. There was, however, no evidence of the association of fungi
or bacteria with this condition of the phloem, cither under the micro-
scope or when material was submitted to a fair range of isolation tests.
Later, attention was focussed on the decay of the root system and
the surface of conns of Bunchy Top plants. Large numbers of platings
on various media were made of decayed roots and conn tissue of plants
in every stage of the disease, and also of healthy plant parts as controls.
Isolation work extended over a period of six months, and, in spite of
every endeavour, no positive results were secured. Two species of
Fnsarimn were quite commonly isolated from decaying roofs and the
decaying areas of the cortex of conns of Bunchy 'lop plants. Platings
of decaying roofs from apparently normal plants also yielded both these
species of Fnsarimn. Humorous species of bacteria were isolated from
the decaying margin of conns tend from decaying roots of Bunchy Top
plants. Ho particular species of bacterium was associate! with any
degree' of constancy. Their role seems to he that of secondary
organisms. From the purple lateral roots of.both healthy and recently
diseased plants, both species of Fnsarimn were frequently isolated.
When grown on potato dextrose agar, pure cultures of single spore
strains of one of these species of Fnsarimn produced an intense blue
colouration of the medium after about ten days’ growth. The relation,
if any, between this pigment production and the purpling of young roots
was not determined. In older stools which had taken the disease, a
species of Rhizoclonia was often found in association with decaying
roots, both independently or in conjunction with Fnsarimn. In no ca«e
was the constancy of isolation sufficient to justify a suspicion of any of
these types as a causal agent. At this stage, in view of results obtained
from preliminary insect-transmission experiments, isolation work was
discontinued.
However, for observational purposes, soil infection experiments with
two species of Fnsarimn and Rhizoclonia sp. were carried out. A pure
culture of Rhizoclonia and pure cultures of single-spore strains of both
species of Fnsarimn, were prepared as soon as possible after isolation
from decaying roots. Prolific growth of each species of fungus was
obtained on sterile puffed wheat, and heavy inoculations of each species
wore made in duplicate into autoclaved soil contained in fourteen-inch
earthenware pots. Six days after inooulation, on the 12th February,
1925, young healthy suckers from a disease-free area in Queensland
were planted in these pots, one to each pot. Before planting, each
sucker was surface-sterilized in l-in-1200 corrosive sublimate. Two
pots of autoclaved soil wore planted with similar suckers as controls.
36


All plants in the experiment, as well as the control plants, made only
poor growth owing to cold weather. When this experiment was termi-
nated, in October, 1925, both inoculated and control plants were free
from Bunchy Top. An examination of the root system of all the plants
was made, but this did not indicate that any of the fungi worked with
were parasitic towards healthy plants.
2. Soil Sterilization.—Concurrently with isolation work, and as early
as the growing season would permit, a pot experiment along the lines
of soil sterilization was set up during 1924 in the open, at the laboratory
at Tweed Heads, with a view to throwing some light on the possible
association of parasitic soil factors with the disease. It was reasonable
to believe that if the disease was caused by certain typos of parasites,
soil sterilization should control the trouble. The "rounds of the labora-
tory at Tweed Heads are situated about 4 miles from the nearest banana
plantation.
This experiment was conducted in eight Wo. 24-gauge corrugated
galvanized iron tanks, 3 feet in diameter and 2 feet deep. These tanks
were filled with soil from a badly infected plantation, the soil having
been dug from the neighbourhood of rank Bunchy Top stools. The
soil in four tanks was sterilized by moans of steam. For this purpose
use was made of the apjjaratus shown in Plate 11, Fig. 2. Steam at
a pressure of 30 lb. per square inch was applied through the four-
pronged pipe attachment, which was inserted in each jmt of soil. The
lower 10 inches of each prong of this attachment consisted of fine brass
gauze tubing. "With the apparatus in position, the soil in each pot was
covered with sterilized corn sacks, and each pot was steamed for two and
a half to tlin e hours. After steaming for about one and a quarter
hours a temperature of 100° C. was registered at all points on the sur-
face of the soil, the lower portion of the soil being first raised to high
temperature, the rising steam then heating the soil above. At least
a temperature of 100° C. was maintained throughout the soil for one
and a quarter hours.
On the 4th Xovember, 1924, one week after sterilization, healthy
suckers from a disease-free area in Queensland were planted in both
sterilized and unsterilized soil —one sucker to each pot. Before plant-
ing, each sucker was surface sterilized by dipping completely in 1 in
1200 corrosive sublimate for two hours. The four pots of unsterilized
soil were arranged as far away from the pots of sterilized soil as the
grounds of the laboratory would permit, and each pot in each group was
separated by a distance of G feet. This experiment was conducted in
the open without insect-cages. It was thought that the isolation of the
laboratory grounds would, to some extent, control the factor of insect
transmission. All plants in both sterilized and unsterilized soil made
vigorous growth from the commencement. From the 14th February,
1925, till September, 1925, at weekly intervals each plant received a
thorough spraying with a 1 in 800 solution of Black Leaf 40.
37


In August, 1925, nine months after planting, all plants in both
sterilized and nnsterilizod soil wore healthy, and had made equal growth.
On the 26th August, 1925, one of the suckers from a plant growing in
a pot of sterilized soil showed first symptoms of Bunchy Top. On this
date, all the remaining plants in the experiment, including those grow-
ing in the pots of unstorilized soil, were still healthy. This position
was maintained when this experiment was terminated in October, 1925.
The behaviour of the plant growing in sterilized soil is intelligible in
the light of the results of other experiments recorded below. On
several occasions during spraying operations, banana aphides (Po.nla-
lonia nigronervosa ) were noticed in this, and later (in September,
1925) on two of the other plants growing in sterilized soil. These plants
were in close proximity to caged aphis-infested plants belonging to
another experiment.
In view of the fact that healthy plants, growing for eleven months
in soil obtained from the proximity of Bunchy Top stools, remained free
from the disease, wo are able to conclude that the soil does not carry
infection. (The soil used was probably free from, aphides, as there
was a lapse of ten days from the time of its removal from the plantation
till suckers were planted in it.) An experiment described later, show-
ing that the association of Bunchy Top and healthy roots in sterilized
soil, in the absence of aphides, does not cause transfer of the disease,
further emphasizes the fact that the soil in which Bunchy Top plants
are grown docs not serve as a medium for infection. An examination
of the root system of the four plants growing in unstorilized plantation
soil showed the presence of large numbers of nematode galls on the cord
roots and laterals of all plants. Several roots on each plant were also
showing decay. On the roots of the plant which developed Bunchy Top
while growing in sterilized soil, no nematode galls were found, although
several roots were showing decay similar to that of the plants growing
in unsterilizcd soil.
This experiment helps to eliminate the possibility of nematodes or
parasitic fungi or bacteria being concerned in the causation of Bunchy
Top.
3. Ultra-microscopic Organism or Virus. —The possibility that
Bunchy Top is caused by the association with the plant of an ultra-
microscopic organism or virus received early consideration. The
general nature of the leaf symptoms was suggestive of such a cause for
the disease. Both Professor Stakman (Minnesota, United States of
America), and Dr. E. J. Butler (England), who visited the infected
area after the Pan-Pacific Congress in 1923, were agreed that Bunchy
Top had many of the characters of a virus disease. Previous workers
on the disease in Australia had, for the greater part, confined their
attention to parasitic soil factors as the probable cause of the trouble.
The possible virus-nature of the disease therefore called for further
inquiry.
38


Dr. Bryce (2) records having coiulnetcd an experiment in Ceylon to
determine if the disease was caused by a filterable virus, but reports
having secured negative results.
During 1922, Mr. "W. J. Marks, a banana-grower of Terranora, Xow
South ales, announced that he had discovered the cause and cure of
Bunchy Top. He stated that Bunchy Top was duo to aphides, which
attacked the plants, and that aphides could be kept in check sufficiently
to prevent Bunchy Top by spraying the plants at intervals with kerosene
emulsion. Mr. Marks conducted an experiment to demonstrate the
effectiveness of his treatment. Ho failed to prove that spraying would
prevent Bunchy Top altogether, hut it is now evident from the results
after thirteen months’ operation of the experiment, that he was securing
partial control of the disease.
In 1923, Dr. Darnell-Smith (J) in a preliminary experiment con-
ducted in Sydney, attempted to secure transmission of the disease by
transferring banana aphides from Bunchy Top to healthy plants. This
experiment gave negative results.
Evidence is presented below which serves to place Bunchy Top in the
category of the virus diseases.
4. Juice Transfer Inoculations. —Two attempts have been made to
transmit Bunchy Top from diseased to healthy plants by artificial
inoculation. Juice was expressed from shavings of Bunchy Top conn,
pscudostem and midrib tissue, and was separated from the pulp by
straining through muslin. The undiluted juice was applied to healthy
plants by hypodermic syringe injection, needle pricks, and mutilation
of leaves along the veins. Endeavours made thus far to transmit the
disease in this manner have failed to give; positive results.
Experiment 2\ r o. 1. —On the 4th Xovember, 1921, eight banana
suckers from a Bunchy Top-free area in Queensland were planted in
sterilized soil in 3 feet x 2 feet corrugated iron pots —one sucker to each
pot. On the 9th December, 1924, and again on the 12th January and
the 24th February, 1925, each of four plants received inoculation of
juice expressed from the leaves and conns of Bunchy Top plants in
both early and advanced stages of the disease. Inoculations were made
by hypodermic syringe injection, needle-pricks, and loaf mutilation into
the younger leaf tissue and into the pseudostem and conn of each plant.
The inoculations apparently induced no disturbance in the plants other
than local necrosis of injured tissue. The growth of inoculated plants
was equal at all stages to that of the control plants. From the 14th
February, at weekly intervals, all plants in this experiment were
thoroughly sprayed with Black Leaf 40 (1 in 800).
On the 4th June, 1925, one of the inoculated plants in this experi-
ment showed first symptoms of Bunchy Top. Several individuals of
Penialonia nigronervosa had been observed on this plant during Feb-
ruary, 1925, but were at once removed by spraying. During March,
39


aphides were again observed on this plant, and were removed. In
August, ouo of the control plants showed symptoms of the disease.
Aphides had been observed on this plant on three occasions. When this
experiment was terminated in October, 1925, all the remaining plants
were still healthy. This experiment was repeated later under insect-
proof glasshouse conditions.
During April, 1925, an insect-proof glasshouse became available at
the laboratory at Tweed Heads. The dimensions of this glasshouse
(Plato 11, Pig. 1) were 42 feet x 22 feet. It was divided by an insect-
proof glass partition into two sections —one 24 feet x 22 feet, and the
other 18 feet x 22 feet. These sections are hereafter referred to as
section A and section B respectively. All ventilators of the glasshouse
were covered by fine brass gauze (50 meshes to the linear inch). All
soil used in experiments in the glasshouse was sterilized by steaming.
Before being used, both sections of the glasshouse were thoroughly fumi-
gated to remove insects.
Experiment Xo. 2. —On the 27fli August,- 1925, four healthy Caven-
dish banana plants, which had been planted on the IGth April, 1925,
in sterilized soil, in four large corrugated iron pots in section A of the
glasshouse, each received inoculation of unfiltercd expressed juice of a
Bunchy Top plant in an advanced stage of the disease. The juice was
obtained by pressure from shavings of conn, pscudostem, and midrib
tissue. Juice-transfers were made to each plant by hypodermic syringe
injection into the midrib and petiole, and by needle-pricks into and
leaf mutilation of the younger leaves and the unfurled heart leaf.
Hypodermic injections were also made into the pseudostem of each
plant. Prom the conn of each, plant a plug of tissue was removed with
a flamed cork borer and about 2 c.cs. of infected juice were run in, the
hole then being plugged with sterile cotton wool. Each plant again
received similar inoculations on the 9th September, 23rd September,
and the Bth October, 1925. At the time of the first application the
plants wore about 2 feet high, and had thrown either their tenth or
eleventh leaf.
At the termination of this experiment on the 30th January, 1920,
all inoculated plants and their controls were healthy and rigorous.
Each plant had produced one or more suckers, which were also healthy.
Ajiparently no effect on growth was produced by the inoculation. The
average maximum temperature during the period following inoculation
was 88° F. We do not consider that the phenomenon of masking would
account for the absence of symptoms in the inoculated plants; it is
during the warmer months of the year —December to Warch —that the
appearance of the disease is most marked in infected plantations.
5. Preliminary Experiments on the Transmission of Bunchy Top by
the Banana Aphis (Eenfalonia nigronervosa). —Following on observa-
tions made early in January, 1925, on the incidence of Bunchy Top in
40


plants obtained from a disease-free area in Queensland, and planted at
tbo experimental plots at Cobaki, New South Wales, a preliminary
experiment was conducted to determine whether the dark banana aphis
(Pentalonia nigronervom) was capable of acting as a vector of Bunchy
Top.
A healthy plant from Queensland, which had been growing for two
months in a tank of sterilized soil in the open at the laboratory, Tweed
Heads, was netted in with cheese-cloth. A large batch of banana
aphides from a Bunchy Top plant in the early stages of the disease was
transferred to this plant. The purpose of the cheese-cloth cage was
to prevent aphides spreading on to neighbouring plants belonging to
other experiments. The aphides multiplied rapidly. The date of
transfer of the aphides to the healthy plant was the 17th January, 1925.
On the 10th February, 1925, 24 days later, this plant was showing
definite first symptoms of Bunchy Top. The control plant remained
healthy till removed in October, 1925. Again, on tbo 15th February,
1925, aphides obtained from a Bunchy Top plant were transferred to
another caged healthy Queensland plant, which had been growing in
sterilized soil for three months. (More plants were not then available.)
On the 13th March, 1925, 26 days later, this plant also showed symp-
toms of the disease, while the control plant remained healthy.
Two experiments conducted by Professor Goddard, Supervisor of
tins Investigation, furnish further evidence of the ability of the banana
aphis to transmit Bunchy Top.
On the 15th February, 1925, aphides from Bunchy Top plants were
placed on six young healthy plants from Bracalba, Queensland (a
Bunchy Top-free area), growing in tanks of Tweed and Brisbane soil,
two plants to each tank, under insect cages, in the grounds of the
Queensland University. In one tank (Tweed soil) both plants showed
first symptoms of Bunchy Top on the 28th February; in another tank
(Brisbane soil), one plant showed symptoms on tbe 4th March, and the
other on the sth March, while in the remaining tank (Tweed soil), both
plants wore showing symptoms of the disease on the 16th March, 1925.
Again, on the 16th March, 1925, aphides from Bunchy Top plants
were transferred to six young healthy north Queensland plants growing
under similar conditions to those in the last experiment. All plants in
this experiment were showing disease symptoms on the 12th April, 1925.
The control plants to these experiments, including two growing in
Tweed soil, all remained healthy till removed in November, 1925. The
caged tanks in which these experiments were conducted were indis-
criminately arranged, being separated only by 2 feet.
6. Final Transmission Experiment with the Banana Aphis (Pentalonia
uiyroncrvosa). —Healthy Cavendish banana suckers obtained from tbo
0.13203.—S
41


Queensland Government Nursery, Bribie Island—an area where
Bunchy Top has never occurred, were used in the final transmission
experiment with aphides in the insect-proof glasshouse at Tweed Heads.
On the IGth April, 1025, 40 healthy suckers were planted in steam-
sterilized soil in twenty 3 feet x 2 feet galvanized iron tanks in the glass-
house. Twenty suckers were planted in ten tanks—two suckers to each
plant—in section A of the glasshouse. The other twenty suckers were
planted similarly in section B. On the same date, six healthy suckers
were planted under muslin cages in two large tanks of sterilized soil —•
three suckers to each tank —in section B of the glasshouse. All suckers
were of even size, and were free from the beetle borer (Cosmopolites
sordidus). Each sucker, before planting, was dipped for one hour in
l-in-1,200 corrosive sublimate.
The soil used was a red volcanic loam, and although not of even
quality in all the pots, was so arranged as to give adequate control of
this factor. Each pot of soil was sterilized in situ in the glasshouse
by steam, as described previously.
Owing to cool weather during the winter, the early growth of all
plants was slow. On account of aspect the plants in section Aof the
glasshouse made more rapid growth than those in section B. By
August, 1925, all plants were making healthy growth. The twenty
plants in section A were slightly more forward than those in section B.
On the 29th August, 1925, approximately 150-200 individuals of
Penlalonia nigvonervosa obtained from two Bunchy Top plants, were
transferred to each of the twenty plants growing in section B of the
glasshouse. The method of transfer of the aphides is depicted in Plate
6, Fig. 1. A portion of leaf tissue of a Bunchy Top plant with a colony
of aphides attached was placed on a piece of thick blotting-paper, resting
on one of the leaves of each plant. Actual contact between Bunchy
Top and healthy tissue was thus prevented. Each portion of tissue was
carefully examined before transfer to the healthy plants, to make cer-
tain that no aphides other than Pcnf.alonia nigvonervosa, or any other
insects, were being transferred. After the lapse of three days, the
Bunchy Top tissue and blotting-paper were removed from each plant.
By this time practically all the aphides had migrated to the healthy
plants, and taken up a position on the sheathing bases of the leaves, or
on the base of the pseudostem. The aphides multiplied rapidly. After
a fortnight each plant was carrying a large colony of aphides, as shown
in Plate 14, Fig. 1. These were clustered around the unfurled heart-
leaf, the sheathing bases of the leaves, and the base of the pseudosteni.
Very few aphides were seen on the surface of the leaf-blades.
42


The twenty control plants in section A remained free from aphides
throughout the experiment.
An examination of the twenty aphis-infested plants on the 23rd
September, 1925, revealed three plants showing definite first symptoms
of Bunchy Top. On the 25th September, eighteen plants were showing
symptoms of Bunchy Top. By the 29th September, 1925, all the
infested plants were exhibiting definite symptoms of the disease. An
examination on the same date of the twenty control plants in section
A showed every plant to be healthy, and free from aphides. (After the
appearance of symptoms of Bunchy Top, aphides were removed, or kept
in check, by spraying the infected plants at intervals with Black Leaf
40.)
At the termination of the experiment on the 30th January, 1920, all
the control plants were still healthy, while the infected plants were in
a fairly advanced stage of Bunchy Top (Plates 12 and 13). Plates
0,7, and 8 depict one of the infected plants at different stages in the
development of the disease. Beferencc to the accompanying table will
show details of the incidence of first symptoms in the aphis-infested
plants.
The period from the time of placing aphides on the plants to the
appearance of first symptoms varied from 23 to 29 days, with an
average period of nearly 25 days. There was thus a fairly definite
incubation period in the development of Bunchy Top in the plants in
this experiment. Field observations, however, suggest that the incuba-
tion period may be influenced by a number of factors at present
unknown. The age of the plant seems to exert some influence—younger
plants apparently reacting to the disease more quickly than older
individuals. We are therefore not inclined to believe that the incuba-
tion period of Bunchy Top, developing in plants of different ages and
under varying conditions, is at all constant. Low temperature masking
may have some effect in lengthening the incubation period during cool
weather.
On 9th September, 1925, a large number of individuals of Ponta-
lonia nigronervosa obtained from healthy plants growing at Lands-
borough, Queensland (a Bunchy Top-free area), was transferred to the
six healthy plants (mentioned above), growing under insect-cages in
section Bof the glasshouse. The banana aphis is widespread through
parts of North Queensland from which there has been no record of
the disease. The object of this portion of the experiment was to
demonstrate that non-virulcnt aphides, i.e., aphides which had not fed
On Bunchy Top plants, were incapable of inducing the disease under
similar conditions where positive results were secured with the uso of
local aphides fed on Bunchy Top plants,
43


Xo.
of
Plant.
Xo. of Loaves
thrown at
time of
Infestation.
Date of
'Infestation
Date of
appearance
1 of first
Symptoms
Incu-
bation
Period.
Xo. of Leaves
thrown at
time of
appearance
1 of first
j Symptoms.
1
1 Nature and Position of
, first Symptom*.
I,
Five, sixth
emerging
20.8.25
24.0.25
24 days
Eighth ..
Several broken green streaks
on right and left side ot
lower portion of lamina of
eighth leaf
i s
Five, sixth
emerging
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Eighth ..
Pale whitish streaks apparent
in unfurled “ pipe of
eighth leaf
I,
Six, seventh
just shoeing
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Eighth ..
Droken green streaks in petiole
and on both sides of lower
portion of lamina of eighth
leaf
I 4
Six, seventh
emerging
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Eighth ..
Eighth leaf unfurling showing
several green streaks in
lamina and one green streak
in midrib
i s
Seven, eighth
emerging
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 clays
Xinth
Xinth leaf unfurling showing
green streaks in midrib and
several in sides of lajmna
t b
Seven, eighth
showing
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Ninth
Faint-green streak in petiole,
several faint-green streaks
on left side of lamina of
ninth leaf
I-
Six, seventh
emerging
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 (lays
Xinth
Two faint broken green
streaks on right side of
lower portion of lamina of
ninth leaf
Lighth. ninth
emerging
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Eleventh..
Long broken green streaks in
midrib of eleventh leaf, none
in lamina
T»
live, sixth
emerging
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Eighth ..
Eighth leaf unfurling showing
two green streaks in midrib
and several on both sides of
lamina
ii.
Six, seventh
showing
29.8.25
2:1.0.25
23 days
Eighth ..
Several broken green streaks
on right and left side of
lamina, none in midrib
l n
Six, seventh
emerging
29.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Eighth ..
Three faint-green streaks at
base of left side of lamina,
none in midrib or petiole
I 2 o
T«
Seven, eighth
emerging
29.8.25
28.0.25
28 days
Tenth . .
Pale-whitish streaks in un-
furled “ pipe ” of tenth leaf
Seven, eighth
emerging
29.8.25
24.0.25
24 days
Tenth
Several green streaks in left
and right side of lamina of
tenth leaf, none in midrib or
petiole
i»
Seven, eighth
emerging
20.8.25
25.0.25
25 days
Xinth
Xinth leaf unfurling showing
pale-geen streaks on both
sides of lamina, none in
midrib or petiole
I I5
Fight, ninth
almost un-
filled
29.8.25
24.0.25
24 days
Tenth
.Several broken green streak* in
petiole, none in lamina or
midrib
Light, ninth
emerging
29.8.25
23.0.25
23 days
Twelfth ..
Pale-whitish streaks in un-
furled “ pipe ” of twelfth
leaf
L-
Light ninth,
emerging
29.8.25
29.9.25
20 days
Twelfth ..
Several pale-whitDh streaks in
unfurled “ pipe ” of twelfth
leaf
La
Xine, tenth
emerging
20.8.25
24.0.25
24 days
Twelfth ..
Several pale-whitish streaks in
unfurled “ pipe ” of twelfth
leaf
Several broken green streaks in
both side of lamina, no
streaks in midrib or petiole
Tib
Six, seventh
emerging
20.8.25
24.0.25
24 days
Tenth
I, 0
Seven, eighth
showing
20.8.25
23.0.25
23 (lays
Xinth
Six broken green streaks in
lower portion of right side
of lamina of ninth leaf no
streaks in midrib or petiole
Table showing detads of incidence of first symptoms of Bunchy Top
in plants infested with Pentalonia mtjromrvosa from Bunchy Top plants;—
Largo colonics of aphides developed on the six plants on 'which
aphides from healthy plants had been placed. At the end of two
months all the plants were still free from 'Bunchy Top, but the
44


heavy infestation of aphides was beginning to cause injury to the
plants. Largo quantities of “ honey-dew ’’ had collected around the
sheathing bases of the leaves and had fermented, causing a decay of
the petioles. Three of the plants were therefore lightly sprayed with
Black Leaf 40 to decrease the number of aphides. During December,
1925, the three unsprayed plants withered and died as the result of
the attacks of the aphides. Up till the time of their death no indica-
tion of Bunchy Top was seen in these plants. Smaller colonics of
aphides were maintained in the remaining three plants, and up till
30th January, 1926 —that is. after four and a half months’ infestation —
they had not developed Bunchy Top.
This experiment definitely proves that banana aphides which have
fed on Bunchy Top plants are capable of transmitting the disease to
healthy plants. During the course of the experiment, no other species
of aphis, and, with the exception of a few metallic green flies (Psitop'n. <
pachigyna Macq.), no other insect was found to be present in the glass-
house. Acarids (Tetranychus sp .) were noticed on the foliage of both
infected and control plants during the latter part of the experiment.
7. Systemic Nature of the Disease —Sucker Transmission. —Field
evidence collected during 1924 seemed to indicate that the incidence
of the 'disease in many plantations had been due to the introduction
of suckers from the areas infected with Bunchy Top. During 1924 and
1925 experiments were conducted to determine whether the disease was
of a systemic nature.
Experiment A T o. 1. —On 7th November, 1924, ten small eyes were
selected from a Bunchy Top stool in an advanced stage of the disease.
Each eye was cleaned free from soil by scrubbing, and was submerged
in l-in-1,200 solution of corrosive sublimate for two hours. A plug
of tissue was removed from each eye by means of a sterile cork borer
and platings were made on potato dextrose agar and nutrient beef
agar. The selected eyes were then planted in pots of autoclaved soil—
one eye to each pot. In every case symptoms of the disease were
evident as soon as the first leaf had spread out. After three months’
growth each plant was showing the typical primary-infection symptoms.
All plants during growth remained free from aphides. The tissue
platings revealed no organism of interest.
Experiment No. 2.—On 20th April, 1925, twelve unemerged eyes
were selected from plants in the field which had exhibited symptoms
of Bunchy Top for only two to three weeks. It was considered that
eyes which had not yet broken through would have escaped inoculation
by aphides. The twelve eyes were surface-sterilized in l-in-1,200
corrosive sublimate, and were planted in a 3 feet x 2 feet tank of
sterilized soil in the glasshouse under insect-proof conditions. Eleven
of the twelve selected eyes made growth. Each plant showed primary-
infection symptoms from the time of its appearance above ground,
45


It is dear from those experiments that the disease can he spread hy
the propagation of suckers from infected stools.
8. Eoot Contact of Diseased and Healthy Individuals.—Pot experi-
ments conducted to determine whether the contact of roots of healthy
and Bunchy Top plants would cause transfer of the disease have
indicated that in itself root contact is not a factor in the natural
transmission of Bunchy Top.
On 6th Xovomhcr, 1924, one healthy sucker froiu a disease-free
area in Queensland was planted in the same large pot of sterilized soil
with three suckers from an advanced Bunchy Top stool. The experi-
ment was conducted in the open at the field laboratory at Tweed
Heads. The diseased suckers gave rise to primary-infected plants.
Both diseased and healthy suckers were sprayed weekly with 1-in-SOO
Black Leaf 40. After eight months’ growth under these conditions the
healthy plant was still normal.
On 16th April, 1925, one healthy and three primary-infected suckers
wore planted in each of two largo pots of sterilized soil under insect-proof
glasshouse conditions. Each healthy sucker was thus surrounded hy
three infected ones. In January, 1925, the healthy suckers were still
normal. One of the pots of this experiment is depicted in Plato 15,
Fig. 1.
On the same date six healthy and six primary-infected suckers were
planted in six 14-in. earthenware pots of sterilized soil under insect-
proof glasshouse conditions. In each pot one diseased and one healthy
sucker were pressed in actual contact under the soil. In January,
1926, all the healthy plants were normal. All suckers in these experi-
ments were surface-sterilized in l-in-1,200 corrosive sublimate previous
to planting.
9. Transmission by Grafting.—An attempt to graft eyes from healthy
plants on to diseased conns was made on 15th October, 1925. Six
young eyes were removed from healthy plants and were each inserted
on a diseased sucker in the position from which a similar sized eye
had just been removed. Contact between the stock and scion was
established with the aid of cord and adhesive tape. All other eyes
were removed from the diseased suckers. The grafts were planted
in a tank of sterilized soil under insect-proof glasshouse conditions.
All the diseased stocks grew, but none of the inserted eyes appeared
above ground. A later examination showed that they had rotted with-
out making any growth.
The results of the above experiments definitely prove that Bunchy
Top can be transmitted hy the banana aphis (Pmtalonia nigronervosa).
There is definite evidence that the disease is systemic in nature. Micro-
scopic examination and cultural tests have failed to indicate a bacterial.
46


protozoan, or fungal organism as a causal agent. As Pentalonia nigro-
nervosa is widespread in banana plantations of North Queensland,
where as yet no Bunchy Top has been reported, there is reason to
believe that in north-eastern New South Wales and south-eastern
Queensland this insect is carrying some factor which induces the
disease. By analogy with other aphis-transmitted diseases, such as
potato and tobacco mosaic, sugar cane mosaic, &c., it would seen that
Bunchy Top comes in the category of the virus diseases.
This class we here consider to be constituted by those transmissible
or infectious diseases, caused by an ultra-microscopic agent, which arc-
perpetuated indefinitely by vegetative growth and propagation. Such
diseases are in general characterized by chlorosis and may manifest
other symptoms such as foliage distortion, excessive chlorophyll pro-
duction, blight, stunting, proliferation, and internal lesions. ' Diseases
caused by infective viruses fall into two divisions —one capable of
being produced in healthy plants by artificial juice-transfer inoculation,
as in the typical mosaic diseases, and the other in which juice inocula-
tion is ineffective in producing the disease, as in the case of Leaf roll
of the potato. It is in this latter group of virus diseases that Bunchy
Top should find a place.
There arc many features of resemblance between Leafroll of the
potato and Bunchy Top of the banana. Dwarfing, chlorosis, rolling,
rigidity, and uprightness, the symptoms of Leafroll, are seen also in
Bunchy Top. The phloem necrosis of Leafroll has a parallel in the
phloem disorganization associated with the condition of Bunchy Top.
Leafroll also resembles Bunchy Top in its inability to be transmitted
from diseased to healthy individuals by artificial juice-transfer inocula-
tion. This comparison is drawn only to further the evidence obtained
as to the nature of the cause of Bunchy Top, and not as an inference
that Leafroll and Bunchy Top are cognate diseases.
In view of the above, we feel justified in concluding that Bunchy
Top is a transmissible disease caused by an ultra-microscopic agent.
Wo are of the opinion that its chief vector is the banana aphis
{Pentalonia nigronervosa), and that the spread of the disease in north-
eastern New South Wales and south-eastern Queensland over wide
areas, has been due first to the propagation of infected suckers, and
then to natural transmission by aphides. There is evidence available
that the soil, apart from its harbouring of aphides for a limited period,
does not become infected. As attempts to transmit the disease by direct
sap-inoculation have so far met with failure, it would appear that the
disease cannot be spread by infected tools during cultural and harvest-
ing operations, such as the pruning of suckers and the cutting of
bunches.
It is possible that another species of aphis may be concerned in the
natural transmission of Bunchy Top. On the lower leaves of young
47


banana plants a green species of aphis (probably Mavrosiphvm solani-
folii) is sometimes found during the early summer These aphides do
not remain on plants for any prolonged period. Two unsuccessful
attempts have been made to arrange an experiment to test out the trans-
mission capabilities of this species of aphis. These efforts have failed
because the green aphides were unavailable when required. It is
desirable that this species of aphis should be experimented with further.
10. Transmission of Bunchy Top to Abaca or Manila Hemp (Musa
text His). —Dr. Bryce (3) observed the occurrence of Bunchy Top in a
plot of manila hemp in Ceylon in 1918. The exact identity of this
disease with Bunchy Top in the banana was not established.
During 1924 reports were received from the Philippine Islands
concerning a disease in abaca, the symptoms of which corresponded
well with those of Bunchy Top in the banana. In October, 1925,
definite evidence was secured by this Investigation of the transtnission
of banana Bunchy Top to manila hemp.
Through the courtesy of Dr. Darnell-Smith, six healthy manila
hemp suckers were obtained from the Botanic Gardens, Sydney. Three
suckers were planted in separate pots of sterilized soil in section A and
in section Bof the glasshouse. On 29th August, 1925, the three suckers
in section B were infested with a large number of individuals of Penia-
lonia nigronervosa obtained from a Bunchy Top banana plant. The
suckers had then thrown either their fourth or fifth leaf. On fith
October, 1925, all three suckers were showing definite symptoms of
Bunchy Top. The incubation periods wore 33, 34, and 38 days. The
three control plants in section A remained free from aphides, and were
still healthy at the termination of the experiment in January, 1920.
Plate 14, Pig. 2, depicts one of the infected and one of the control
plants.
The first symptoms appeared in the eighth or ninth leaf as broken
dark green streaks along the midrib. The “ first-symptom ” leaf was
otherwise normal in appearance and behaviour. The following leaf
was slightly reduced in size and showed a distinct diffuse chlorosis;
dark green streaks were present in the petiole and midrib but not in the
lamina. All succeeding leaves were much reduced in size, and showed
uprightness, rigidity, and slight chlorosis. The margins of their
laminae were crinkled and upward-rolled; dark green streaks were
present in the midribs and petioles, and faint green streaking was
apparent along some of the secondary veins of the laminae.
As growth continued, the leaves assumed the rosetted. condition,
resembling more that developed by the tall-growing varieties such as
the Sugar banana, than the dwarf Cavendish variety. The internal
alterations in the region of the vascular bundles in the positions of
the green streaks were apparently similar (in hand-sections) to those
seen in the banana.
48


10. OBSERVATIONS ON THE BANANA APHIS (Pentaloina
nigronerrosa Coquerel).
The banana aphis (Pentalonia nigronervosa Coquerel) was first
described by Coquerel in .1859, and later by Wilson in 1909.
Froggatt(,9), in 1920, contributed a paper to the Agricultural Gazette
of Xew South ll T a/c,s giving a description of the banana aphis, and
mentioning that certain growers in the Tweed Hirer district of Xew
South Wales claimed that the presence of this insect indicated that the
infested banana plants would later on be attacked by Bunchy Top.
Coquerel describes (in translation) the banana aphis as follows: —‘‘ Of
reddish brown colour, clearer on the head. Antennae, norvures, and
cornicles blackish; legs yellow, with the base of the femora, tibia, and
tarsi black.” (After Froggatt.)
Bakcr(fO), in 1920, gave the following description of the characters
of the genus Pentalonia: —“Head with prominent antennal tubercles,
which are, more especially in the apterous form, projected inward,
gibbous and somewhat Wyzus-like in appearance. Antennae of six
segments, armed with sub-circular sonsoria, the first segment gibbous
like the antennal tubercles. Cornicles somewhat constricted near their
middle, then again somewhat swollen near their distal extremity.
Cauda rather small but elongate, subconical, slightly constricted about
the middle. Fore wings with the radial sector extending abruptly
downward and meeting the upper branch of the media with which it
fuses but is diverted again towards its natural course near the tip of
the wing. A closed cell is thus formed by the radial sector and the
media, but at the margin of the wing there are the same veins as in
the Aphidini. Hind wings very much reduced, cubitus absent.”
(Plate 21, Fig. 2.)
In plantations in north-eastern Xew South Wales the banana aphis
is found widely distributed on both healthy and diseased plants. They
are seen around the base of the pseudostem at soil level, and for several
inches below the soil surface; between the sheath of the outer leaf and
the pseudostem, and on young suckers just emerging from the ground.
Often close examination is necessary to demonstrate their presence.
Where plentiful they are also seen on the apex of the pseudostom,
clustered in colonics around the heart-leaf and the bases of the petioles
of the leaves. They may vary in number from a few individuals to
large colonics. They usually take up a position on the most sheltered
and inaccessible parts of the plant. Xumcrous examinations both
during the winter and summer have failed to demonstrate their presence
on the roots of the banana. When aphides arc transferred to healthy
plants, the greater number migrates to the basal region of the pseu-
dostem. As they multiply they spread upwards towards the heart-
leaf. Aphides are most numerous during wet seasons; their numbers
decrease rapidly during periods of drought. They flourish throughout
49


tho whole year, but the summer mouths are most favorable to their
development. A few individuals under optimum conditions for
development soon produce a dense black colony. When viewed with
tho unaided eye the banana aphis apipears dark brown or brownish-
black in colour. Both winged and wingless individuals occur in the
normal colony, the wingless aphides being by far the most plentiful.
The adult winged forms have the nervures delicately lined with black,
which gives them a characteristic appearance.
Large quantities of “ honey-deware produced by a colony of
banana aphides. This is often seen on the leaves as fine droplets, and
accumulates around the pseudostem between tho sheathing bases of the
leaves. In the sugary solution thus formed, yeasts develop to produce
a thick slimy white paste. The large quantities of “ honey dew ”
attract ants, which swarm over the aphid colonics. The presence of
ants on a banana plant is a good indication of the association of
aphides.
1. Specificity of the Eatiana Aphis.—Observations suggest that the
banana aphis is specific in its host relationships. It is very doubtful
if Penlalouia nigronervosa will live and flourish on any host other than
a member of the natural order Musaceae. In heavily infested planta-
tions the banana aphis has nor been observed on any plant other than
the banana. Banana aphides have never been seen on weeds or grasses
growing in close proximity to stools heavily infested with aphides.
Banana aphides have been transferred to the potato ( SoJunnm
iuherosnm), maize (Zea mays), arrowroot (Canna ediilis), canna
(Canna sp.), Slrelilzia sp., manila hemp ( Musa lextilis), and a seed-
hearing variety of banana (J him banksU) indigenous to the scrubs
of Worth Queensland, all growing under glasshouse conditions. On
Musa {cxiilis and M-usa Jxnilsii the aphides flourished well. "When
transferred to tho potato and maize they remained for only a few
hours; on the arrowroot and canna the aphides lived for a week to a
fortnight, but eventually either perished or deserted the plants. On
Strelitzia the aphides remained for a slightly longer period, but finally
disappeared. Subsequent attempts to establish colonies of Pcnlalonia
nigronervosa on these species growing under glasshouse conditions also
failed.
During Warch, 1926, Hr. 0. 11. Hardy, Walter and Eliza Hall
Fellow of the Queensland University, reported having observed colonics
of Pcnfalonia nigronervosa on StrelUzia sp. and llavenala so. growing
in the Botanic Gardens, Brisbane, in the neighbourhood of banana
stools. An aphis closely resembling Pcnlalonia nigronervosa was also
observed on plants of Calodium sp. growing in a greenhouse in the
same gardens. It is understood that such plants harbour aphides in
abundance at least during certain times of the year, and tho gardeners
intimate that the aphides are of the typo now recorded. It cannot yet
50


bo definitely stated whether these aphides are to he regarded as Penfa-
lonia nigronerrosa or P. caladii Y. d. Goot., the latter being charac-
terized by having “ veins not heavily bordered.”
2. Dissemination of Aphides.— There are a number of ways by which
aphides may spread through a plantation or a banana district—
(l) Transfer from plant to plant in the same row or adjacent
rows by the contact of foliage or the movement of aphides
over the soil.
(2) Plight of winged individuals.
(3) Carriage of aphides, winged and wingless, by strong winds.
(4) By the transportation of aphis-infested suckers from planta-
tion to plantation.
(5) By translocation of aphis-infested soil on tools and the
hoots of workers.
(G) On the clothes of workers during cultural and harvesting
operations.
3. Role of Aphides in Transmission of Bunchy Top.—The actual
part played by the banana aphis in the transmission of Bunehv Top
is not definitely known. By virtue of the possession of certain charac-
teristics or functions, it is able, after feeding on affected plants, to
cause transmission of the disease, while artificial juice-transfer inocula-
tions are unsuccessful. The relationship) between the causal agent of
the disease or virus, and the vector or carrier, may he purely mechanical
and incidental, or the virus may pass through a definite stage of its
life history within the bodies of the aphides. Two preliminary experi-
ments have been conducted in an endeavour to learn something about
this relationship.
Experiment A T o. I.—A largo number of banana aphides wore
removed with a camel-hair brush from a Bunchy Top banana plant
and were transferred on to a layer of moist cotton wool in a small
insect cage. After holding the aphides in this manner for S t hours,
twenty individuals were, on sth October, 1925, transferred to each of
two young healthy banana plants (free from aphides) growing in
separate pots of soil under an insect cage in section B of the glass-
house. On 2Gth October, twenty days later, both plants were showing
definite first symptoms of Bunchy Top.
It is clear from this that aphides can retain their infective capacity
for some time after removal from the source of inoculum. It was
not possible to keep aphides alive for a longer period under these
conditions. An attempt to cultivate infective aphides on young maize
plants in order to determine if the feeding on a new host would cause
the aphides to become non-virulent failed on account of their inability
to adapt themselves to the new host.
51


Experiment So. 2. —On 21st October, 1925, several thousand in-
fective aphides were crushed up and thoroughly mixed with 00 c.cs
of sterile water. The mixture was strained through muslin; the fluid
was then inoculated by fine needle pricks and hypodermic syringe
injections into the two youngest leaves of four young healthy banana
plants growing under insect-proof glasshouse conditions. Four control
plants received similar injuries, but without inoculation.
The inoculated plants were apparently unaffected by the intro-
duction of the body juices of infective aphides. On dOtli January,
1920, all the plants in the experiment were still healthy and vigorous.
The negative result of this experiment docs not prove anything;
but at the same time it does not strengthen the possibility of the
existence of a highly infectious stage of the virus within the bodies of
the aphides. The failure to secure transmission of the disease in this
experiment, and also earlier by juice-transfer inoculations, is possibly
due to the special requirements necessary to jjroduee inoculation not
being satisfied. The phloem region of the vascular system is probably
the only region which is susceptible to infection. Erandes(7) has
shown that Aphis maydis, the vector of sugar cane mosaic, in bringing
abo'ut inoculation, inserts its setae into the phloem of the vascular
bundles. The penetration of the tissues by the very fine setae is
aided by a copious secretion from the salivary glands, and practically
no structural injury results. The entry of tissues with a minimum
of injury contrasts with the feeding phenomena of other insects, with
coarser mouth parts, which have failed in repeated experiments to
transmit the disease.
It seems reasonable that an analogous position may exist in the
ease of the successful inoculation of Bunchy Top by Penialonia ni/jro-
nerrosa, in contrast to the failure to produce the disease by artificial
inoculation with needle jmints, which, compared with aphid setae, are
enormously large.
11. ECOLOGY OF THE DISEASE.
Any consideration of tlio influence of environmental factors on tlic
incidence of Bunchy Top should be made with three aspects in view—
(a) influence of the various factors on the vector —Penialonia nigro-
nervosa, (b ) influence on the causative agent or virus, (c) effect on
the plant in its relation to the virus.
What is known concerning the climatic range of the disease docs
not suggest that this factor would exert any effect on its incidence or
development. In Australia it has been observed under both temperate
and sub-tropical conditions, while under more tropical conditions in
Ceylon and Fiji it has done extensive damage. Wo consider that the
disease would develop under all climatic conditions which will foster
the growth of bananas.
52


Seasonal variations Lave a marked effect on the amount of develop-
ment of Bunchy Top in a plantation in Australia. Although the
disease does make its appearance during the winter months, it is during
the summer months, January to March, that the incidence of the,
disease is most manifest. This may he due to three factors—the more
rapid development of aphides, an increase in the rate of diffusion of
the virus from infected to healthy suckers in the same stool, or possibly
to the warmer temperatures favouring the development of symptoms
in plants which have carried infection for some time without showing
signs of the disease. At any rate, it is certain that aphides are most
plentiful during the wanner months of the year. The time of the year
at which planting takes place in an infected area seems to have a
hearing on the amount of disease which will show up during the first
year. There is an earlier and more rapid development of Bunchy Top
in a young plantation, when planting-up takes place in or
December, than when it is delayed till the autumn. The prevalence
of aphides during the summer months is very probably the factor
concerned in bringing this about.
Evidence of growers points to the fact that the rapid development
of the disease is influenced by periods of rain following on a dry
spell during the sum;mer. Many growers whose plantations had been
destroyed by the disease have stated that although Bunchy Top was
present in their plantations, it was only under such weather conditions
that the disease made rapid headway and rendered their plantations
unprofitable.
Topography seems to exert an influence on the prevalence of the
disease. In north-eastern Xew South Wales and south-eastern Queens-
land, bananas arc grown almost exclusively on steep hillsides, on
account of the occurrence of frost on the lowlands during the winter,
and for the reason that it is in these regions that rich basaltic soil is
available. In a plantation on a steep hillside in the early stages of
the development of the disease, it is noticed that Bunchy Top is
usually most plentiful in the lower, more sheltered portions of the
plantation than on the exposed brow of the hill. The soil in the
lower portion is usually of higher moisture content than the higher
ground, the temperature is usually greater, and the growth of plants
more vigorous. Aphides are usually most plentiful in such regions,
the conditions being more favorable to their development than in
higher exposed situations. The influence of topography on the
incidence of the disease was well shown in the development of the
disease in the two experimental plots at Cohaki, an account of which
is given in the early part of this paper.
The fertility of the soil, in that it influences the vigour of the plant,
appears to be a factor in the development of the disease. .field
observations suggest that the more vigorous a plant is and the more
53


rapid its growth, the more susceptible it is to Bunchy Top. The
disease seems to spread more rapidly through young vigorous planta-
tions than in old worn-out plantations where growth is slow. Planta-
tions on poorer soil do not appear to bo wiped out so quickly as those
on richer soil. In its earliest incidence in a large plantation where
there is variation in the vigour of the different sections, Bunchy Top
is usually seen to make most headway in the best part of the plantation.
The most favorable conditions for the development of Bunchy Top,
therefore, appear to be during periods of rain in the summer months,
on rich soil in a warm well sheltered position.
12. MEASURES RECOMMENDED FOR THE CONTROL OF BUNCHY
TOP.
The present Investigation, in considering the matter of control,
has kept in view two distinct aspects of the Bunchy- Top problem,
namely:—•
(a) That concerned with the conservation, as far as practicable,
of the industry in the affected areas, and the problem
of bringing the industry in the same areas hack to its
original status, as well as the resuscitation of the industry
in those portions of the area whore it has become
moribund.
(b) The protection of the largo area in Queensland which is
in no way affected with the disease.
In considering the methods of control, it is proposed to discuss
them under the headings of—(1) Exclusion, (2) Protection, (3) Eradi-
cation, (4) Immunization, (5) Remedial Measures.
1. Exclusion.— The exclusion of the disease from any area can be
effected, provided that none but healthy suckers are imported into
that area, and that the area is sufficiently remote from any affected
plantation to remove the possibility of migration or transportation
of infective aphides.
The principle of exclusion should apply primarily to the unaffected
areas in Queensland north of the affected zone, but should have
application also to certain districts in the affected areas which occupy
isolated positions and contain only a few plantations infected to a
greater or less extent.
The exclusion of the disease demands, in our opinion, the efficient
discharge of the following recommendations: —
(i) Prohibition of the transportation of any vegetative parts
of any banana plant or of any member of the genus
Musa from any part of the areas affected with Bunchy
Top to the north, or to any unaffected or lightly affected
area.
54


(ii) Prohibition of the shifting of the vegetative parts of any
species of the genus 21usa from any place within a
newly affected area to any other place within that area,
or, otherwise prohibition of any further planting-up
within the area unless with suckers obtained from a
certified disease-free area.
(iii) That no person shall be allowed to trade in suckers or
to transport suckers from one area in Queensland or
Xew South Wales to another, unless a special permit
be granted by a competent Government officer, or by
such persons as may be responsible for the control of
Punchy Top.
(iv) The registration of all plantations in which any species
of the genus 2lusa is cultivated throughout Queensland
and Xcw South Wales.
(v) The destruction immediately of all banana plants or any
member of the genus Musa in backyard or similar
gardens, that is, in other than registered banana planta-
tions, and the growing of such prohibited.
(vi) Immediate eradication and destruction in lightly affected
areas of every infected stool in which any portion or
plant has shown the symptoms of the disease.
(vii) The systematic examination by growers of all stools in
plantations within a newly affected area, lightly
affected area, or unaffected area.
(viii) Prohibition of the transportation of banana fruit from
any affected area to the zone north of the affected
area, or out of any affected zone in which the disease
may, at any time, appear, to any unaffected banana
area.
(ix) Bunchy Top to be made a notifiable disease in all areas
not so far known to be affected with the disease,
(x) A complete survey of the banana plantations throughout
Queensland by competent inspectors; immediate atten-
tion to be given to that portion of the unaffected area
which adjoins the limits of the recently discovered
affected areas.
(xi) Illustrated lectures and practical demonstrations of an
educational nature with a view to enabling banana
growers to identify the disease at its earliest stages;
also distribution of a clear, concise, and well illustrated
pamphlet indicating the symptoms of the disease and
the manner in which it can be disseminated.
55


Wo have every reason for believing, from the study of the history
of the disease in Australia and the most recent spread of the disease,
that the extension of Bunchy Top to new areas has been effected
primarily by the imjiortation of affected suckers, and that the part
played by aphides in the transmission of the disease concerned is of
importance rather in spreading the disease throughout an affected
plantation, or from an affected limitation to a healthy plantation in
the neighbourhood.
Efforts have been made over several years, both in Queensland and
Wow South Wales, to check the spread of Bunchy Top by the estab-
lishment of buffer areas and the issue of regulations prohibiting the
transportation of vegetative parts of the banana plant or of any
species of the genus from the affected zone to unaffected areas.
These endeavours have so far failed to stem the spread of the disease.
A study of the recent outbreak in the areas north of the Brisbane River
suggests the possibility that owing to incomplete data the buffer areas
and boundaries, when established, did not take in the full extent of the
infected zone. The failure of the earliest attempts to confine the
disease to narrow boundaries can probably be explained similarly. The
need for a complete survey of plantations is thus evident. For this
purpose and for other reasons, the registration of all banana planta-
tions is essential to furnish information as to positions of plantations,
many of which are isolated and inaccessible.
The presence of Bunchy Top in many backyard and similar gardens
suggests that definite method of procedure is imperative in dealing
with the casual cultivator of banana plants. The individual growing
a few banana plants in his garden will not, generally speaking, exorcise
that amount of care which, on personal grounds, is necessary in the
case of the individual attempting to grow bananas on a commercial
basis. Also, owing to the size of the inspectorate, it would be imprac-
ticable to carry out inspections of backyard gardens in city and town
areas.
The educational aspect should not be lost sight of, when it is
considered that the greater proportion of growers in the unaffected
areas arc ignorant of or only slightly acquainted with the charac-
teristics and early symptoms of the disease. The gazetting of the
disease as notifiable in areas at present unaffected would materially
assist in the ultimate control of the disease.
2. Protection.—Protection against the disease would be effective if
there were available some means of keeping the plants free from
aphides. Under such conditions it would bo possible to preserve intact
a plantation containing healthy plants, despite the proximity of plants
affected with the disease.
This Investigation has given special attention to the possibilities
of protection offered by the use of sprays, dusts, and various specifics.
56


On the experimental plots nicotine sulphate, pyrethrum powder,
calcium cyanide, and chlorocide have been employed in an endeavour
to protect plants against the disease. This work has been conducted
in a very methodical fashion by the Horticulturist, and it may he said
that the work has been done more efficiently than would bo the case
in any commercial undertaking, yet the results do not indicate that
either spraying or dusting are efficient methods of control of the
aphides. Neither do these operations produce more than partial control
of the disease. Further, the cost of labour has proved prohibitive—
about £34 per acre.
In view of the nature of the disease and the manner in which it
is conveyed by aphides, it is clear that for any substance to he of
value in the protection of plants against Bunchy Top it would be
necessary for that substance to bring about a very high degree of
control of the aphides, since it is their biological and not their
mechanical effects that are disastrous. There are serious practical
difficulties which militate against the effectiveness of spraying in com-
bating the disease. Owing to the fact that the aphides feed on the
base of the pseudostem and on young “ peepers ” down to several inches
beneath the soil surface, and occupy most inaccessible positions between
the closely adherent old leaf-sheaths of the pseudostem, it is a difficult
matter to bring the spraying fluids in contact with them. Again,
spraying fluids have no lasting effect, as has been demonstrated con-
clusively at the experimental plots. More important still is the fact
that spraying becomes a really impracticable proposition in banana
plantations where the rugged nature of the ground and the difficulties
in the transport of water appear to be insurmountable.
Wo do not consider that any protective means are of any consider-
able importance in a serious attempt to control the spread of Bunchy
Top. Such sprays as Black Leaf 40 and Derrisol may be utilized in
a minor way, in supporting the scheme of eradication by killing the
aphides on a diseased stool and thereby preventing their migration
prior to the digging out and destruction of the stool.
3. Eradication.—Eradication of all stools affected with Bunchy
Top, on a most thorough basis, appears to us to bo the real solution
of the problem, keeping in view the exclusion of the disease from
unaffected areas, the control of the disease in lightly affected areas,
and the rehabilitation of the heavily affected areas where banana grow-
ing has become perilous or moribund.
It is patent, from the mode of transmission of the disease, that
eradication of all stools showing any symptoms of Bunchy Top should
be an ideal towards the attainment of which every possible effort
should be made if the affected areas are to again offer facilities for
banana growing, and if the northern areas now free from Bunchy Top
are to be conserved. The eradication of all diseased plants, in that
57


it removes the source of inoculum, seems to offer greater possibilities
of success than any scheme which could be elaborated for the control
of aphides—the carriers of the inoculum.
The disease is distinctly systemic, and we cannot ovor-emphasize
this fact when recommending that eradication should be interpreted
as meaning the removal and destruction of all parts of any stool which
have developed symptoms of Bunchy Top in any of its parts. We
mention this fact, since attempts are made by some growers to conserve
apparently healthy plants in an affected stool by killing out only the
affected parts. Wo are well aware that in a certain minor percentage
of cases in which the killing out has happened to be done early enough,
certain parts of the stool have stood up and remained healthy for a
long period; that is to say, they have missed the infection from which
the killed portions of the stool have suffered. The chances of success
along these lines arc very small, since there is ample opportunity for
the spreading of the disease by aphides from the portion of the stool
which first contracted the disease, independent of the possible diffusion
of the virus from one member of the stool to another member of the
same stool. Also from the practical standpoint it is not economical
with respect to time on the part of the grower to reckon on the physio-
logical independence of certain parts of the stool, which sometimes
does obtain, and hence the impossibility of diffusion of the virus.
Further, the adoption of any such procedure would so seriously damage
the projected plan of eradication on a universal basis as to remove all
hope of controlling the disease.
The eradication of Bunchy Tojd in the affected areas demands, in
qur opinion—
(i) The cleaning up of all deserted jdantations.
(ii) The cleaning up of affected plantations still under
cultivation or not deserted. (This includes heavily
infected plantations, “ still payable ” plantations, and
lightly infected plantations.)
(iii) The destruction of all banana plants growing in backyard
and similar gardens.
(iv) Rigid enforcement of regulations rendering the owner of
any area liable for harbouring affected stools after the
lapse of a stated period from the adoption of eradi-
cation measures.
(v) The discouragement of further planting up within the
heavily affected areas for an indefinite period, that is,
until such time as a clean certificate can bo given for
the whole of the affected area.
58


(vi) That after a period of twelve months from the date of
the adoption of the eradication measures, the matter
of the complete destruction of all banana plants
throughout the affected areas in Now South Wales and
Queensland, or in certain plantations hearing unfavor-
able reports, ho considered by the body responsible for
the control of Bunchy Top,
(vii) The future replanting in the infected areas to he done
only with suckers from a certified Bunchy Top-free
area.
The basis on which these recommendations are made is the belief,
held in the present state of our knowledge, that Bunchy Top is a
spiecific disease confined to species of the genus Mvsa, that the banana
aphis is the main transmitting agent, and that this aphis is confined
to members of the natural order Musaccae, which, apart from the
banana, is not represented in plantations in the affected area. We
recognize that there are great difficulties in the way of a consummation
of the scheme of eradication, chief among which is the large labour
cost of removal of Bunchy Top plants over extensive areas, especially
where the land is very stony and precipitous or is overgrown with
weeds and lantana. The complete removal of affected stools growing
on excessively stony land will demand that subsequent inspections of
the land must he made, some time after the first digging out, to destroy
those plants which have grown from the unremoved portion of the
original stools.
In the badly infected areas of north-eastern New South Wales and
south-eastern Queensland the presence of large acreages of abandoned
plantations, much of which are owned by men who have no further
interest in the banana industry, will call for special consideration and
appropriations. Unless the administration and the work of eradication
are undertaken most seriously, both by the Governments concerned
and the growers, the period which must elapse before replanting can
safely take place in the affected areas will ho unduly prolonged, and
the chances of further spread of the disease increased. For some time
following the initial attempts to eradicate Bunchy Top from a district,
the disease will recur, duo to the overhang of infective aphides which
have migrated from dug-out stools, or to the later development of the
disease in stools receiving infection some time previous to the com-
mencement of eradication. Observations suggest that in certain
instances a period of dormancy may elapse before symptoms of Bunchy
Top become manifest in infected stools, which would occasion for some
time a persistence of the disease in a plantation which was being
cleaned up. Nevertheless, we feel certain that if the scheme of
eradication, outlined above, can he carried out as a district-measure
over a period of time, the disease will gradually disappear from the
area.
59


Attention lias been given to the possibility of providing some means,
other than the laborious method of digging-out, for the destruction of
infected banana stools. A series of experiments, with arsenical and
other poisons, has boon conducted by Mr. IT. Collat'd, Horticulturist
to this Investigation, to determine whether stools could bo completely
killed out by this method. These experiments have demonstrated that,
although poisoning is effective in destroying the above-ground parts of
stools, the conns are not injured sufficiently to prevent them throwing
up fresh suckers. Where individual plants in the stool are poisoned
out, no effect is produced on adjoining or neighbouring suckers. The
physiological indejiendenco of the various members of a stool, at least
as far as the effects of poisoning are concerned, therefore defeats this
method. There seems to he no other way of efficiently eradicating
diseased stools than by the costly method of uprooting.
4. Immunization.—There appears to be little hope of obtaining stock
satisfactorily resistant or immune to Bunchy Top.
Observations and experiments conducted thus far would indicate
that all species of the genus ,1/j/sn which could bo grown commercially
under sub-tropical conditions, including cultivated and wild species of
the banana and Manilla hemp, contract the disease. Although the.
various species may differ slightly in respect of their susceptibility to
Bunchy Top, yet this difference docs not open up the possibility of
being able to repdace the standard Cavendish variety. The particular
climatic and topographical conditions obtaining in the affected banana
areas seems to militate against the successful commercial establishment
of any variety other than the least tropical of all varieties—the
Cavendish.
Bunchy Top, in 1891-95, devastated the plantations in Fiji, and
mined the industry. The disease still occurs there, but is by no
means the serious menace that it was. At times it docs happen that
complete replanting becomes necessary in some plantations, owing
to all the plants developing Bunchy Top. It would appear from
observations made by the Horticulturist, on his visit to Fiji, that
while the disease is prevalent, it affects a comparatively small per-
centage of plants in most plantations, although it is rampant in
native gardens. It is hard to discover the cause of this, and it would
be unscientific to attribute the same to actual immunity or resis-
tance on the part of the plant. Unfortunately, the carefully selected
plants which were sent from Fiji for experimental purposes were so
badly affected with Beetle Borer that very little use could be made
of them. The result is that the reputed resistant stock present in
Fiji cannot be definitely reported on.
It is to bo recognized that, despite the agnostic attitude with
respect to Fijian plants, such problems as immunity and resistance
60


to Bunchy Top, variations with respect to the virulence of the virus,
prevalence of the vector, &c., merit further consideration. Never-
theless the propagation of possibly resistant stock would require so
long a period for purposes of restocking the large acreage of planta-
tions that more immediate attention has been necessarily devoted to
other methods of combating the disease.
5. Remedial Measures. —At times reports are made by growers and
enterprising sellers of specifics—fortunately not so frequently now as
in past years, that they have knowledge of remedies. It may bo defi-
nitely stated, in the case of Bunchy Top, as in the case of other virus
diseases of plants, that all reputed remedies are valueless. Once
Bunchy Top has made its appearance in a plant, nothing will restore
that plant to health,, and immediate destruction is the only means
of effecting any good as far as banana-growing is concerned.
13. SUMMARY.
1. The Biincliv Top disease in bananas made its appearance in
Australia in 1913, being introduced very probably in infected banana
suckers from Fiji. It lias since spread through the banana areas of
north-eastern New South Wales and south-eastern Queensland, ruin-
ing the industry in many centres. All attempts made in the past to
stem the march of the disease have failed. Decently Bunchy Top
has appeared in isolated areas on the north coast of Queensland. The
disease has also occasioned extensive damage in Fiji, Ceylon, and
Egypt.
2. Thus far, no plant other than a member of the genus Musa has
been found to bo susceptible to Bunchy Top. No variety of banana
is known to ho highly resistant or immune to the disease. The
Cavendish, the standard commercial variety in Australia, is very
susceptible.
3. The symptoms of the disease are very characteristic; the leaves
become shortened, narrow, brittle, upright, wavy, and slightly rolled
and later take on a typical rosetted habit. The earliest and most
definite symptom of the disease is the presence of characteristic, broken
dark green streaks along the secondary veins of the laminae, the mid-
ribs, and petioles. This streaking is correlated with an interesting
pathological condition of the phloem region of the vascular bundles.
The disease induces a disorganization of the root system of infected
plants.
4. Microscopic examinations and isolation tests have failed to
indicate the association of either bacteria, fungi, or protozoa as a causal
agent. Definite evidence has been secured that Bunchy Top can
be transmitted from diseased to healthy individuals by the banana
61


aphis Pentalonia nigronervosa Cql. Artificial juice-transfer inocula-
tions and the contiguity of the roots and conns of diseased and healthy
plants have not caused transfer of the disease. Bunchy Top is dis-
tinctly systemic in nature, and has been classified amongst the virus
diseases of the “ potato-lcafroll ” type.
5. The spread of the disease in north-eastern Xew South Males
and south-eastern Queensland has, in our opinion, been due, first to
the distribution of infected suckers by planters over wide areas, and
then to the dissemination of the disease to neighbouring plantations
by the banana aphis.
6. A consideration of the possibility of controlling the disease
shows that measures serving for the exclusion of the disease in
unaffected areas, and from plantations in lightly affected areas, and
measures for eradication of the disease from heavily and lightly
affected areas, represent the only' means available for controlling
Bunchy Top. Xo protectionary measures are of value, and no
immune or resistant stock is available.
14. LITERATURE CITED.
(1) Knowles, C. 11., and Jepson, F. P., 1912. —“ The Banana in Fiji.”
Fiji Expt. Sta., Bulletin Xo. 4.
(2) Bryce, G., 1921. —‘‘ The 'Bunchy Top’ Plantain Disease.” Leaflet
Xo. 18, Dept, of Agrie., Ceylon.
(3) Darnell-Sjutk, G. P., and Tryon, 11., 1923. —“Banana 'Bunchy
Top’ Disease.’’ In Queensland Agric. Journal, Yol. XIX., pt. 1.
(4) Darnell-Sjiitii, G. P., 1924. —-'"Bunchy Top’ Disease in
Bananas.” In Queensland Agric. Journal, Yol, XXI., pt. 3.
(5) 1924. —'' Investigation of ‘ Bunchy Top ’ Disease in Bananas.” In
Queensland Agric. Journal, Yol. XXI., pt. 1.
(6) Fatijiy, T., 1924. —‘'A Banana Disease Caused by a Species of
Ileterodera.” Bulletin Xo. 30 (Bot. Section). Ministry of
Agric., Egypt.
(7) Brandes, E. M., 1923. —“ Mechanics of Inoculation with Sugar
Cane Mosaic by Insect Yectors.” In Jour. Agric., lies., Yol.
XXIII., pt. 3.
(8) Xowell, M., 1925. —“Diseases of Crop-Plants in the Lesser
Antilles,” p. 249.
(9) Froggatt, M. M., 1923. —“ The Banana Aphis.” In Agric. Gazette
of Xew South Males, Yol. XXXIY., 4, p. 296.
(10) Baker, A. C., 1920. —“Generic Classification of the Hemipterous
Family Aphididae” LLS. Dept, of Agric., Bulletin Xo. 826.
62


15. LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Plate
1 Two secondary-infected plants.
2 Two lioaltliy plants, same age under similar conditions.
3 Pig. 1. Lamina of young leaf showing along secondary veins dark
green streaks.
Pig. 2. Lamina of similar young healthy leaf.
4 Fig. 1. Lamina of older Bunchy Top leaf showing advanced
stages of streak.
Pig. 2. Lamina of similar older healthy leaf.
5 Pig. 1. Unfurling heart loaf of young plant showing broken
whitish streaks.
Fig. 2. Portions of healthy and Bunchy Top leaf midribs.
G Pig. 1. Young healthy plant, stage at which infective aphides
transferred.
Pig. 2. Same plant one month later; showing first symptoms of
Bunchy Top.
7 Pig. 1. Same plant as T’late G, Pig. 1, about seven weeks after
transfer of aphides, showing symptoms of a Bunchy
Top leaf.
Fig. 2. Same plant two and a half months after transfer, showing
several abnormal leaves.
3 Pig. 1. Same plant as Plate 6, Pig. 1, five months after transfer
of aphides, showing resetting of leaves.
Fig. 2. Stool eighteen months old, showing stunted habit and
resetting.
0 Fig. 1. Young primary-infected plant about four (4) months old.
Fig. 2. Leaf of young primary-infected plant.
10 A secondary-infected plant, grown in sterilized soil under
glasshouse conditions.
11 Fig. 1. Insect-proof glasshouse.
Pig. 2. Apparatus used in sterilizing soil by steam.
12 Some of the plants which were infected by the aphides
transferred to them five months previously.
13 Control plants which remained healthy.
14 Pig. 1. Young plant infested with aphides in colony formation.
Pig. 2. Young manila hemp plants, one on left showing Bunchy
Top condition; control on right, healthy.
63


l.'> Fig. 1. Healthy (1) and Bunchy Top (3) plants which grew
together without transmission of disease, owing to
absence of aphides.
Fig. 2. .Bunchy Top stool, infected at late stage, showing effect
on bunch.
IG View in plantation in which every stool is affected with
Bunchy Top.
IT Fig. 1. Transverse section of vascular bundle of midrib of young
healthy plant. X2OG.
Fig. 2. Similar section of Bunchy Top plant.
IS Fig. 1. Longitudinal section of phloem region of vascular bundle
of midrib of young healthy plant. X2OG.
Fig. 2. Similar section of Bunchy Top plant.
It) Fig. 1. Transverse section of midrib of young healthy plant,
showing arrangement of vascular bundles.
Fig. 2. Similar section of Bunchy Top plant.
20 Fig. 1. Transverse section of vascular bundle of ventral periphery
of midrib of leaf of young healthy banana plant.
Fig. 2. Similar section of Bunchy Top plant.
21 Fig. 1. Transverse section of phloem region of vascular bundle of
interior of midrib of young Bunchy Top plant.
Fig. 2. Wing of banana aphis (Penialonia n'ujrnnrrvosa).
22 Wap of Queensland and Xew South Wales, showing in-
fected areas.
64


Two secondary-infected Bunchy Top plants, nine months old, which have shown the disease for four months.
Plate 1.


Two healthy plants of the same age, grown under similar conditions.
Plate 2;


FIG. 1. Portion of the lamina of a young leaf, photographed from the under-. s ide in transmitted light, showing nature of the
broken dark green strcks along the secondary veins, which appear as the usual first symptoms of the discase. The leaf in which
these streaks first appear is otherwise normal in size, shape and behaviour. The next leaf thrown by the plant however, shows
marked alterations.
FIG. 2. — Portion of the lamina of young healthy leaf photographed from the under-side in transmitted light.


Piste 4.
FIG. 1.—Portion of the lamina of an older Bunchy Top leaf, photographed from the
under-side in transmitted light, showingadvanced stage of the characteristic dark green
streaking.
FIG. 2. —Portion of the lamina of an older healthy leaf photographed from the
under-side in transmitted light.


FIG. 2.
FIG. 1.
FIG. 1.—Unfurling heart-leaf of young plant which is showing first symptoms of the disease as broken whitish streaks along the
secondary veins of the lamina. When such a leaf has unfurled, and is viewed from the under-side with light passing through the leaf,
it is observed that what were originally whitish streaks are dark green in colour.
FIG. 2.—Portions of healthy and Bunchy Top leaf midribs. The healthy midrib is of an even pale green colour, while dark green
streaking and mottling are seen in the Bunchy Top midrib in an advanced stage of the disease.
Plate 5.


Plate 6<
FIG. 1. —Young healthy plant, 117 of the final transmission experiment by means
of aphides, showing stage of growth at which infective aphides were transferred to the
plants and also method of transfer of aphides. 29th August, 1925.
FIG. 2.— Same plant one month later. First symptoms of Bunchy Top have
appeared in this plant as whitish streaks along the veins of the tightly rolled lamina
of the heart-leaf. Note that the heart-leaf is about to unfurl quite normally.


Plate 7.
FIG. 1. —Same plant on 17th October, 1925, eighteen days after the appear-
ance of first symptoms. The leaf marked with the arrow is the “first-symptom”
leaf which is seen in the preceding figure as the heart leaf. Apart from the
occurrence of broken dark green streaks along the secondary veins of the lamina,
this leaf does not differ markedly from the normal preceding leaves. The
following leaf, however, is showing all the symptoms of a Bunchy Top leaf. It
is more narrow and upright than normal; the lamina is ridged along the main
veins, is wavy and slightly rolled upwards, and showing chlorosis around the
margin. Note the funnel-shaped heart leaf due to premature unfurling.
FIG. 2—The same plant on 11th November, 1925, now showing several more
abnormal leaves.


Plate 8.
FIG. 1. —Same plant on 30th January, 1926, four months after the appearance
of first symptoms, showing intensive rosetting of the leaves.
FIG. 2.—Stool eighteen months old, derived from the planting of an
infected butt, showing the stunted habit and rosetting of the leaves of primary
infected plants. Plants of this type never produce a bunch.


FIG. 2.
FIG. 1.
FIG. 1. —Young primary-infected Bunchy Top plant, about four months old. Note rosetting of the leaves, waviness and upward-
rolling of the laminae, the ridging along the main veins and the chlorosis at the margins of the laminae.
FIG. 2. — Leaf of young primary Bunchy Top plant. Note the dark green streaking along the midrib and along the secondary veins
of the lamina, the upward rolling and chlorosis of the margin of the lamina. (Photographed in transmitted and reflected light.)


Plate 10.
PLATE 10. —A secondary-infected Bunchy Top plant, grown in sterilized soil under
glasshouse conditions. This plant has shown symptoms of the disease for four months
The amount of decay present in the root system is not greater than that seen in healthy
plants of the same age grown under similar conditions. The roots of this plant are entirely
free from nematode galls.


Plate 11.
FIG. 1.—Inseet-proof glasshouse, in which the final transmission experiment
with Pentalonia nigornervosa, juice-transfer inoculations, and other experiments
were conuueted
FIG 2.—Apparatus employed in the sterilization of soil by means of steam.


PLATE 12. —Showing some of the twenty piants which were infected with Bunchy Top by the transfer of the
infective aphides, five months previously.
Plate 12.




Plate 14.
FIG 1. —Young banana plants infested with aphides (Penlalonia nigronervosa)
showing colony formation. Aphides congregate on the pseudostem between
the sheathing bases of the leaves and may extend on the pseudostem and young
suckers into the soil for several inches.
FIG. 2. — L ett. —Young Manilla hemp plant (Musa textilis ), showing
symptoms of Bunchy Top. Right. —Healthy control plant.


FIG 2.
FIG. 1.
FIG. 1. Showing one healthy and throe Bunchy Ton plants which have grown together in the same pot, in the absence of
aphides and other insects, for over nine months without transfer of the disease.
FIG. 2.— A Bunchy Top stool showing type of hunch thrown by a plant which becomes infected at a late stage of growth. To
the right of the picture is seen a bunch which is borne normally.


PLATE 16. —View in a plantation in which every stool has become affected with Bunchy Top.
Plate 16.


FIG. 1.—Transverse section of a vascular bundle of the midrib
of a young healthy banana plant. (Drawn with the aid of the
camera lucida. X206.)
FIG. 2.—Transverse section of a vascular bundle of the [midrib of a
young primary Bunchy Top plant. (Drawn with the aid of the camera
lucida. X206.)
NOTE.
(1) The lack of development of fibrous tissue in the phloem region.
(2) The presence of chlorophyll bearing cells, replacing the fibrous sheath and the
abnormal development of chromatophores in the fundamental tissue at the phloem end of
the vascular bundle.
(3) The abnormally large number of nuclei present in the sieve tubes and companion
cells.
(4) Appositional growth in cells of the fundamental tissue adjacent to the phloem and
the presence of chromatophores and prominent nuclei in these newly formed cells
(Stained in Gentian Violet and Orange, G.)


Plate 18.
FIG. 1.—Longitudinal section of the phloem region of a vascular bundle
of the midrib of a young healthy banana plant. (Drawn with the aid of
the camera lucida. X 206)
FIG. 2.—Longitudinal section of the phloem region of a vascular bundle
of the midrib of a young primary Bunchy Top plant showing typical
alterations induced by the disease. (Drawn with the aid of the camera
lucida. X206.)


Plate 19.
FIG. 1 —Photomicograph of transverse section of midrib of leaf of
young healthy banana plant, shoving arrangement of vascular bundles.
(Hand-section, stained in dilute Gentian Violet.)
FIG. 2.—Photomicrograph of transverse section of midrib of leaf of
young primary Bunchy Top plant. Note excessive development of
chlorophyll tissue and alterations in region of vascular bundles. (Hand-
section, stained in dilute Gentian Violet.)


Plate 20.
FIG. 1.—Photomicrograph of a vascular bundle of the ventral periphery
of the midrib of a leaf of a young healthy banana plant.
FIG. 2.—Photomicrograph of transverse section of a vascular bundle of
the ventral periphery of the midrib of a leaf of a young primary Bunchy
Top plant showing nature of alterations induced by the disease.


Plate 21.
FIG. 1. —Photomicrograph of transverse section of the phloem region
of a vascular bundle of the interior of the midrib of a young primary
Bunchy Top plant showing appositional growth, the large number of nuclei
and the absence of fibrous tissue. (Section stained in Gentian Violet and
Orange G.)
FIG. 2. Showing wing venation of the banana aphis (Penlalonia nigronervosa).
(Drawn by I. W. Helmsing.)


Plate 22.
PLATE 22.— Map of Queensland and New South Wales showing infected areas.
By Authority : H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.


