

INVITATION TO PRAYER
FOR THE
SYNODS OE AUSTRALIA AND EASTERN AUSTRALIA,
WITH REFERENCE TO UNION OF THE CHURCHES.
Z 74-33?
The Synods of the two Churches and the Conference on Union, have declared very
plainly, first, their heartfelt desire of Union, and, second, their earnest hope that the
difficulties which stand in the way of it, when fairly met, may not be found insuper-
able. The Committees of the two Churches have held their conferences on the
whole subject, and the Synods must soon he anxiously and prayerfully engaged in it,
if the Lord will. What issues of untold importance will hang on those conferences !
What joy would the failure of them give to the men of this world! \Vhat thankful
gladness in other quarters would arise from their success, together with glory to the
Lord, and good to men !
This blessed result, however, can come only from above, —from the God of Zion,
the Father of lights, the God of all peace and truth and concord, the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. “ Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them ” —“ If two of you shall agree on earth as touching
anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which in
heaven”—“ This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask anything
according to his will, he heareth us.” _ . , .
Therefore do we venture earnestly and affectionately to invite, in behalf of the
Synods, and their whole conferences, the prayers of all ministers, elders, and
devout members of both Churches, throughout the colony and elsewhere. When
Peter was kept in prison, ready to be brought forth a violent death, “ prayer was
made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him.’’ These prayers unlocked
Herod’s prison, and brought forth Peter, not to death, but to his whole after work
and labour for the Church, and her glorious Lord. No less mighty, resistless, is
prayer still. It is not only social and public prayer we invite in behalf of the
two Synods, but still more earnestly, if possible, prayers in secret also, from day to
day, assured that these last will not fail to carry the other along with them.
Let us agree together as touching the following specific matters of request: •
1. That in all the meetings of the Synods and of Committees on Union, there may
reign a spirit of fervent love—unbroken courtesy, mutual and regard,
brotherly affection and confidence, see Ps. cxxxiii.; 1 Cor. xiii, 4-7; Phil. ii. 1-5 ;
Prov. xvi. 24.
2. That, with all earnest desire for the Union, there may be combined a most
frank interchange of thoughts respecting difficulties and obstacles, and a supreme
regard for the honour of Christ, and the claims of truth and righteousness. See Gal.
ii. 5, 11; Rev. ii. 10; Rev. iii. 8, . . ,
3. That there may be largely given to the Synods and Committees “ the spirit of
power and of love, and of a sound mind ; ’’ —“the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord,” to devise the best and fittest means towards the accomplishing of the great
object in view. See Ps. xxxii. 8 ; Is. ix. 6; xlii, 16 ; 2 Tim. i. 7.
4. That the entire deliberations may be carried on in a deeply solemnized and
prayerful spirit; and that, in answer to many prayers, it may please the Lord so to
direct and guide them even to the close, that they shall issue in deliverances so
harmonious and wise, as may approve themselves to the respective Churches, and
become the ultimate basis of their happy union in the one glorious Lord and Head.
See Isa. xxii. 22-24 ; Ps. xxxvii. 5 ; Ps. xc. 17 ; Gen. xxii. 14 ; xxiv. 27.
“ Unto thee lift lup mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens. Behold, as
the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden
unto the hand of her mistress ; so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God”—“Who art
thou, O great mountain ? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain ” —“ Unto us
a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his
shoulder : and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The Mighty God”—
“ Ye that are the Lord’s remembrancers, keep not silence, and give him no rest ”
“Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee.”
Extracted from the Presbyterian Magazine for October, published by Sheeeiff
& Downing, 256, George Street, Sydney.


T/4F^>»
E mEuo
pi 4333
M Ec2?<{
