





• IRELAND’S CASE STATED.
• THREE LECTURES,
MR. J.E.REDMOND, M.P.
The Aims and Objects of the Irish
National League.
Home Rule: Its Real Meaning.
Was the late Land League Responsible
for the Outrages?
MELBOURNE:
J. WI N.T ER AND CO., “ ADVOCATE ” OFFICE,
25 Lonsdale Street East.
1883.




lU-U T 1
MR. REDMOND, M.P., in South Australia.
LECTURE ON THE AIMS AND OBJECTS OF THE
IRISH NATIONAL LEAGUE.
A laege and enthusiastic audience as-
sembled at the Town Hall on Friday evening,
9th February, to listen to a lecture delivered
by Mr. J. E. Redmond, M.P. for New Ross,
Ireland, who recently arrived in Adelaide as
the representative of the league, on the
“Aims and Objects of the Irish National
League.” Mr. C. C. Kingston, M.P., pre-
sided, and the following gentlemen occupied
seats on the platform:—The Right Rev.
Dr. Reynolds, Mr. W. H r K. Redmond,
Yen. Archdeacon Russell, Dean Ryan, Rev.
Mr. Ley bourne, Hon. G. W. Cotton, M.L.C.,
Mr. Henning, M.P., Mr. E. Ward, M.P.,
Dr. Gunsou, Mr. W. K. Simms, Messrs. H.
Taylor, H. M'Oonville, E. W. O’Halloran,
J. W. Walshe, W. Dixon, F. F. Wholohan,
and others.
There was a large number of Catholic
priests, and a fair sprinkling of ladies,
amongst the audience,
Mr. C. C. Kingston, M.P., who was re-
ceived with loud cheers, said he was sure
they would all accord a courteous reception to
Mr. Redmond, who had come thousands of
miles across the sea for the purpose of plac-
ing before them the real facts respecting the
cause. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Redmond, who met with a tremendous
reception, the whole of the audience rising
and cheering lustily, said—The cordiality
with which you have received me this evening
will considerably diminish the difficulty
which I must experience in the performance
of the important duty which I have under-
taken. The true significance of that cor-
diality I fully appreciate. It is not so much
a compliment to myself as an expression of
your confidence in the leaders of the national
movement in Ireland, in whose name I speak
(cheers) —and an emphatic expression of
your loyalty to that cause which we trust
we are destined in our day to see triumphant.
(Cheers.) Of the fortunes of that cause lam
here to-night to speak. lam here, as one
who has shared in the struggle, to tell you
how the fortunes of the day are going, to
recount to you what the land movement has
accomplished in Ireland, and what it has yet
to do, and then to ask you to send across the
world assistance in their dire distress to those
who are waiting for the result of this
movement for permission to live on the land
which the Almighty gave to Irishmen to be
their homes—(loud cheers) —and strength and
support to the men who are waging a holy
but unequal contest. (Cheers.) When I
left Ireland she was in a sad condition. The
shadow of a coming famine had once again
fallen in the far west and the far north, and
we felt our hearts almost stand still with fear
as we thought what might perhaps be before
our country in the near future. What pre-
parations, you will ask, had the Government
made to meet the coming disaster. Sir—
Absolutely none. The warning cry of famine
has been met, as it has always been met by
the English Parliament —(hear, hear) —first
with incredulity, and then with the heart-
less recommendation of emigration. What
have the leaders of the national movement
doneP I will tell you. They have taught
the lesson that the scenes of 1847 shall
never again be enacted upon Irish soil—
(loud and continuous cheering)—and that
come what may the people shall have food.
(Cheers.) This brings me to the commence-
ment of my story, a story of what the land
movement has done, what it is now doing,
and what we believe it is destined to do in
the future. A few words first of retro-
spection. The land question in Ireland
may be said really to date from the first
incursion of the English. Since then
the land of Ireland has been confiscated
many times over. The last confiscation was
that carried out by Cromwell. The land of
the country was then parcelled out amongst


his successful followers, and it is an absolute
fact that two-thirds at least of the present
owners of land in Ireland owe their titles to
their estates to ancestors who earned them
as military marauders. (Cheers.) By
this means a land system was created in
Ireland so vicious in principle and so brutal
in practice that we look in vain for its
parallel in the history of the civilised world.
The native Irish had at one blow been struck
down from a position which was practically
that of proprietor to the position of serfs.
Their new lords, who for the most part had
gained their estates by rapine and murder,
were alien in race and bitterly hostile in
religion. They sought to retain all political
and social influence in their hands, and they
possessed absolute power over the lives
and properties of their unfortunate tenants.
(“Shame.”) As time went on things did
not improve. If tenants were rash enough
to reclaim or improve their land they were
forthwith obliged to pay over the full value
of these improvements in the shape of rack
rent to their landlords. The latter, hating
and hated by the people, began to live in large
numbers abroad, merely sending to Ireland
to collect to the last farthing their exorbi-
tant rents. (Hear, hear.) A natural result
followed. Poverty, misery, famine, discon-
tent, and unsuccessful rebellion followed
each other in dismal sequence generation
after generation. Then the process of
consolidation of estates began to creep in,
and it has gone on so steadily ever since that
to-day we have the astounding fact that 740
men own one half of Ireland, and a little
over 10,000 men own the whole of it.
(“ Shame.”) Every act of the British Par-
liament was conceived in the interests of the
landlords and against the tenants, until in
1870, startled into a momentary conscious-
ness of the enormity of the system which
they were supporting by their blood and
their treasure, the English Parliament passed
a Land Act which professed to protect the
improvements of the tenants, but it left the
old power of raising rents and of eviction in the
hands of the landlords, and proved a useless
and hollow mockery. Erom that date down
to the establishment of the Land League, a
period of less than ten years, no less than
thirty-one bills were introduced into the
House of Commons to amend the land system,
and, although all of them were supported by an
overwhelming majority of the Irish members
they were all defeated by majorities composed
of Englishmen and Scotchmen. The most
extreme of these measures was less revolu-
tionary than the Land Act which in 1881 the
League forced the Government to pass—
(cheers) —and they were all conceived in a
spirit of conciliation towards landlordism.
The fact is that at any time for fifty years
before the establishment of the Land League
the people would have been willing to have
made terms with the landlords. All they
wanted was permission to live, permission to
remain so long as they paid a fair rent in
undisputed possession of their poor homes,
dearer to them than their palaces to the rich.
Their summum bonum was fixity of tenure and
sufficient food, and they were for ever begging
for justice, and holding out the hand of con-
ciliation. All they wanted was bread for
their children, and permission to go on en-
riching the soil with their labour for the
benefit of the landlords. But, no! the absolute
power of landlordism would not be yielded,
and generation after generation the landlords
of Ireland rudely repulsed the hand of
friendship held out to them by the people.
But they did it once too often. Weary of
begging and petitioning, with their intelli-
gence awakening to the power which after all
rested with themselves, a new spirit sprang
to life amongst the people. They had begged
for compromise, and compromise had been
refused. They had held out the hand of
friendship, and that hand had been repulsed
time after time. So be it. They could be
uncompromising as well as the landlords,
and not one moment too soon they adopted
from the standards of their enemies the
watchword of “No surrender.” (Loud
cheers.) Henceforth they said their demands
should be for their right, and their right was
the land. (Cheers.) Fixity of tenure
meant fixity of landlordism, and they would
have none of it. The day of patience was
passed, and with one voice the cry went up
to heaven that landlordism should go —“ The
land for the people.” (Cheers.) The men
who first raised that cry were few in number.
At their head were Charles Stewart Parnell
and Michael Davitt. (Loud and continued
cheers.) Before many weeks had passed
they found that their words had sunk deep
into the hearts of the people, and that they
had the manhood of Ireland at their backs.
They speedily assembled the leading men
together, and the Land League was formed.
From the very commencement the principles
of the Land League were plain and unmis-
takable ; the people—the tillers of the soil—
should become the owners of it. (Cheers.)
But it was not proposed to enquire into the
titles of the estates of any landlord ; and with
a sense of justice—nay, even, I believe,
of generosity—which the impartial his-
torian of the future will record with
wonder and admiration, the representa-
tives of this people, plundered and op-
pressed and degraded and done to death
by landlordism, proposed that they should
only resume possession of the land upon


payment of ite full honest value to the land-
lords. (Cheers) They called upon the
State to advance the money necessary for
this transaction, as had been done in Prussia
and other European countries, but mean-
time they called upon the people to combine,
to organise, and refuse to submit any longer
to the imposition of rack rents. You know
what followed. The scheme was denounced
as revolutionary and communistic ; we have
lived to see it adopted and recommended
by a committee of the House of Lords.
(Cheers.) The Government refused to move
in the matter, the landlords refused reduc-
tions, and the struggle commenced. One of
the regularly recurrent famines fell upon
the land in 1879, and Mr. Parnell sped
across the Atlantic to beg bread for the
people. But before he went he gave the
people certain words of advice. He told
them to keep a firm grip of their holdings.
(Cheers.) He told them to feed themselves
and their children before paying their rent.
(Cheers.) He told them where their rent
was excessive to demand reductions from the
landlords, and he assured them that all the
power of England was not sufficient to carry
out a policy of universal eviction —(cheers)
—and that all that was necessary to ensure
success was union. His words rang through
the country. It was the preaching of a
new gospel—a gospel of life and hope—and
the people hearkened to it, and combined as
never in their long and chequered history
had they combined before. (Hear, hear.)
The result soon became apparent. The
famine was averted. Before the winter was
over the landlords had yielded, and sub-
stantial reductions of rent were everywhere
the order of the day. (Cheers.) But the
Government, between two fires, hesitated,
and the Government that hesitates is lost.
It yielded to the landlords on the one side,
and it introduced a degrading, a galling, but
a useless Coercion Act. It yielded to the
Land League on the other side, and it in-
troduced a weak, a halting, and an impotent
Land Act. In both of these policies it was
half-hearted, and in both of these polices it
failed as it deserved to fail. There is no
sane politician now who does not condemn
the failure of Forster’s Coercion Act.
—(cheers and groans)—and I think before I
sit down I will be able to prove to you the
failure of Gladstone’s Land Act. (Hear,
hear.) That Land Act was regarded by the
Land League as a stage of the road upon
which they were travelling. It contained
the recognitions of great principles for which
generations of Irishmen had contended in
vain, but it was based upon wrong lines, and
it was unmistakably introduced with a view
to bolster up a rotten system. But the Land
League recognised that it affordei protection
to some, at any rate, of the tenants, and that
it contained germs which might be developed
into useful and even valuable enactments.
Hence the league did not reject it. Oa the
other hand, the league would have been false
to its principles if it had accepted the Land
Act as a settlement of the land question.
What attitude then did it adopt ? An attitude
of reasonable and statesmanlike character,
an attitude legal and constitutional, and
now proved to have been most wise. It
determined to test the Act. No one knew
how the newly-constituted law courts would
construe its provisions, but everybody knew
that if four or five hundred thousand tenant
farmers applied to these courts all at once a
hopeless block would be the result. If the
Act proved a valuable one its only hope was
that, when a few cases in a district had been
decided, the other landlords would consent
to make agreements out of court on the
same basis in the remaining cases, and thus
save time and endless legal expenses. This was
the meaning of testing the Land Act. Now
mark—how did the Government meet this
action of the Land League ? In a moment
of blind folly the members of the Govern-
ment listened to the counsels of Mr. Forster,
and under the outraged name of the ‘ ‘ resources
of civilisation” they invoked all the worst re-
sources of oppression and of brute force. In
that moment the Government tore the mask
of constitutionalism from its face, and an
absolute reign of terror commenced. The
pitch cap and the triangle of a bygone day
were not more horrible in their exquisite
cruelty and their cold barbarity than were
the devices resorted to by Mr. Forster to
crush the spirit of the people. (Cheers.)
The Land League was suppressed first by
the arrest of all the leaders, then by a pro-
clamation of the Lord Lieutenant, A
thousand men, most of them men of moderate
political views, of good social standing, and
of stainless character, were seized upon and
thrown on suspicion, untried and unaccused,
into the prisons of the country. (Cries of
“Shame.”) Martial law in all its horror,
though not in its name, was proclaimed
throughout the land, and absolute power
over the lives and properties of the people
was vested in the hands of six military magis-
trates, all of them men like Mr. Clifford
Lloyd—(hisses)—who had gained their ex-
perience by riding roughshod over the coolies
of British India. Public meetings through-
out the country were suppressed, the national
press of the country was muzzled, the land
was flooded with spies and informers, and day
after day the people were shocked and mad-
dened by the accounts of the brutalities of the
agents of the Government in molesting and


beating, ay, and, as I will’show you, some-
times in murdering the defenceless people.
(Hear, hear.) Then, and not till then, the
leaders of the people had recourse to the last
weapon in their armoury—a weapon against
which they knew all the power of the Govern-
ment was useless, but a weapon which, in
spite of temptation, they had up to that
moment refrained from using, because they
knew that its use must entail unmerited suf-
fering upon individuals. Ladies and gentle-
men, a name conceived in malice has before
now ruined a movement. The “no-rent
manifesto” was so named by the enemies of
Ireland. No rent was never and is not to-
day the policy of the Land League. (Loud
cheers.) The document in question was •not
in its true sense a no-rent manifesto. It was
simply this—a call upon the people to sus-
pend the payment of what they acknowledged
as a debt for a certain definite time, and,
although that call was only partially re-
sponded to, it achieved its object, and be-
fore six months were over the Government
had to acknowledge itself defeated, Mr.
Forster was dismissed from office, and the
leaders of the people were released. (Loud
cheers.} But meantime a winter of unutter-
able horror had passed over Ireland; innocent
blood had been shed, and the friends and
enemies of Ireland alike stood aghast at the
daily record of outrage and of crime. This
is a difficult and painful subject, as you will
understand, for me to speak upon, hut it is
my duty to vindicate my country from the
responsibility of what occurred. From its
commencement the Land League set its
face against violence and crime of every
kind, and if there be a man present who
hears me, or if there be a man outside of the
hall who may read a report of my words who
says otherwise, I defy him to contradict my
statement when I say, as I do say con-
scientiously and solemnly, that up to the
moment of the suppression of the Land
League in October, 1881, there never was so
large a movement which had accomplished so
great a work in any nation with less cost
to human blood and to human suffer-
ing. When the Land League was sup-
pressed, and its leaders imprisoned, our
responsibility for the peace of Ireland
ceased, because our restraining influence
was destroyed. We had warned the Govern-
ment what would happen. We pointed out
to the Government that when open
agitation is suppressed the history, not only
of Ireland but of every nation, goes to prove
that the passions of the people will find vent
in secret organisation and in crime. We
pointed out to the Government that the Land
League was an organisation which had a
branch in almost every parish of Ireland, and
that every branch was presided over by the
local clergy, and had the names of most of the
richest farmers placed on its roll of members ;
and we contended with irresistible force that
such an organisation meeting in the open
light of day must of necessity possess a re-
straining influence on the side of peace ; and
we pointed out that the central executive of
the Land League had issued a circular di afted
by the hand of Michael Davitt—(cheers) —
calling upon the people to put down violence
and outrage of every kind ; and we warned
the Government what would happen if that
restraining influenced were destroyed. Alas !
that our words fell on heedless ears. Michael
Davitt was sent back to herd with English
criminals in Portland prison. The Land
League was suppressed, its leaders im-
prisoned, and every man of influence and
popularity with the people throughout the
length and breadth of the land was seized
on suspicion and cast into prison. Then the
Government found themselves face to face
with a maddened and despairing people. We
all know how near akin desperation is to
crime ; how misery and sin go hand in hand.
The immortal words in which Shakespeare
makes Romeo tempt the poverty and the
misery of the apothecary contain the burden
of the temptation which was for ever ringing
in the ears of the Irish people during that
terrible winter: —
Famine is in tiiy cheeks.
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes.
Upon thy back hangs ragged misery,
The world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich ;
Then be not poor, but break it.
Fellow-countrymen, the Irish people found
themselves stripped of all. The evictions
which, during the progress of the Land
League movement, had been checked,
now again began to be carried but
ruthlessly all over the land. They were
carried out with armed force, with all the
pomp and circumstance of war. And the
very ladies who, like angels of mercy, came
to the side of the evicted families, and pro-
vided homes for the homeless and bread for
the hungry, were seized as malefactors and
flung into prison. Do we always realise
what these wholesale evictions mean ? Some
know what they mean by a bitter experience.
But does the outside public realise the mean-
ing of the scene of a wholesale eviction in a
country like Ireland? Will you allow me
to read to you a few words written on this
subject—written by a man whose statements
will be received here as in Ireland and
England with unqualified confidence, I mean
Dr. Nulty, Bishop of Meath. The bishop in a
pastoral, dated 20th February, 1871, con-
cerning evictions in previous years in the
county of Westmeath, writes :


“ In the very first year of our ministry as
a missionary priest in this diocese we were
an eye witness of a cruel and inhuman evic-
tion, which even still makes our heart bleed
as often as we allow ourselves to think of it.
Seven hundred human beings were driven
from their homes in one day, and sent adrift
on the world to gratify the caprice of one
who, before God and man, probably deserved
less consideration than the last and least of
them. And we remember well that there
was not a single shilling of rent due on the
estate at the time, except by one man, and the
character and acts of that man made it per-
fectly clear that the agent and himself quite
understood each other. Tbe crowbar brigade,
employed on the occasion to extinguish the
hearths and demolish the homes of honest,
industrious men, worked away with a will at
their awful calling until evening. At length
an incident occurred that varied the monotony
of the grim, ghastly ruin which they were
spreading all around. They stopped sud-
denly, and recoiled panic-stricken with terror
from two dwellings which they were directed
to destroy with the rest. They had just
learned that a frightful typhus fever had
those houses in its grasp, and had already
brought pestilence and death to their inmates.
They therefore supplicated the agent to spare
these houses a little longer; but the agent
was inexorable, and insisted that the houses
should come down. The ingenuity with
which he extricated himself from the diffi-
culties of the situation was characteristic alike
of the heartlessness of the man and of
the cruel necessities of the work in which he
was engaged. He ordered a large winnow-
ing-sheet to be secured over the beds in which
the fever-victims lay—fortunately they hap-
pened to bo perfectly delirious at the time—
and then directed the houses to bo unroofed
cautiously and slowly, 1 because,’ he said,
* he very much disliked the bother and dis-
comfort of a coroner’s inquest.’ I adminis-
tered the last sacrament of the Church to
four of these fever-victims next day; and,
save the above mentioned winnowing-sheets,
there was not then a roof nearer to me than
the canopy of heaven. The horrid scenes I
then witnessed I must remember all my life
long. The wailing of women—the screams,
the terror, the consternation of children —the
speechless agony of honest, industrious men—
wrung tears of grief from all who saw them.
I saw the officers and men of a large police
force, who were obliged to attend on the
occasion, cry like children at beholding the
cruel sufferings of the very people whom they
would be obliged to butcher had they offered
the least resistance. The heavy rains that
usually attend the autumnal equinoxes de-
cended in cold, copious torrents throughout
the night, and at once revealed to those
houseless sufferers the awful realities of their
condition. I visited them next morning, and
rode from place to place, administering to
them all the comfort and consolation I could.
The appearance of men, women, and chil-
dren as they emerged from the ruins of their
former homes -saturated with rain, blackened
and besmeared with soot, shivering in every
member from cold and misery—presented
positively the most appalling spectacle I
ever looked at. The landed proprietors in a
circle all round —and for many miles in every
direction—warned their tenantry, with
threats of their direst vengeance, against the
humanity of extending to any of them the
hospitality of a single night’s shelter. Many
of these poor people were unable to emigrate
with their families ; while at home the hand
of every man was thus raised against them*
They were driven from the land on which
Providence had placed them, and in the state
of society surrounding them every other walk
of life was rigidly closed against them.
What was the result ? After battling in vain
with privation and pestilence, they at last
graduated from the worhhouse to the tomb ;
and in little more than three years nearly a
fourth of them lay quietly in their graves.
The eviction which I have thus described,
and of which I was an eye-witness, must not
be considered an isolated exceptional event
which could occur only in a remote locality,
whore public opinion could not reach and
expose it. The fact is quite the reverse.
Every county, barony, poor-law union, and
indeed every parish in the diocese, is perfectly
familiar with evictions that are oftentimes
surrounded by circumstances and distin-
guished by traits of darker and more disgust-
ing atrocity.”
God knows I have no desire to palliate crime,
but I say here, with a full sense of my re-
sponsibility, that I believe in my heart and
conscience that the outrages committed by
the people during that terrible winter were
not greater in their enormity in the sight of
a just God than the outrages committed
during that winter in the desecrated names
of law, order, and justice by the agents
of the Government. (Cheers.) Such out-
rages were of constant occurrence. I will give
you, if you will bear with me, one example.
Do you remember the story of Ellen
M'Donagh? I will tell it. Away in the
far west of Ireland an army had assembled
to carry out some evictions among a number
of poor people who were absolutely unable to
pay the accumulation of arrears of rack rent
which had been the result of a succession of
bad harvests. The people were thoroughly
hopeless and helpless ; they could not, even
if they would, resist. But a crowd, com-


posed principally of women and children, col-
lected near the home of one of the tenants, and
began to groan the police and the soldiers.
This, of course, was an outrage against law
and order, and the officer of the police ordered
his men to fix bayonets. This not overawing
the crowd, a further order was given to
charge. Well, at the first sight of that
phalanx of steel advancing against them,
the crowd broke and ran ; but the faster
they ran the more fiercely charged
the policemen. In the confusion which
ensued, a young girl stumbled and fell. She
was about 18 or 19 years old. She was the
daughter of one of the tenants about to be
evicted, and her name was Ellen M‘Donagh.
The police came up to her as she
lay face downwards on the ground. A cry of
madness broke from the people as they saw
these ruffians lift their weapons and stab her
fiercely and madly until life was extinct.
Then they carried her back to her poor home,
where her widowed mother was waiting for
the decree which was to make her and her
children outcasts upon the world. As they
crossed the threshold a young man, with the
fury of a demon in his eye, sprang across it
and attacked the police. He was quickly
knocked down. He was only the brother of
the murdered girl, and he soon had the
gyves upon his wrists. Picture that scene
to yourselves. The poor cabin half
filled with policemen and soldiers. On one
side the widowed mother, wailing over
the corpse of her murdered darling ; on the
other her only son about to be led away as a
criminal because he had proved that he had
the heart of a man in his breast. Picture
that scene to yourselves, Irish men and
women, and tell me can you wonder if that
aged mother lifted her hands to Heaven and
cursed the Government which permitted
Such enormities. Picture that scene to your-
self, you stern moralists, who rail against
Irish crime, but know nothing of Eng-
lish provocation. Picture that scene, you
fireside philosophers, who would reform
humanity on a theory, but make no allow-
ance for human nature and human passion,
and tell me can you wonder if the people of
that whole countryside, their blood turned to
flame by the sights they had witnessed, de-
prived of the advice of their leaders, and stript
of every hope, were driven to desperation, to
madness, to outrage, and to crime. Let no
man misunderstand me. I deplore Irish crime.
I detest it. I denounce it! (Cheers.) But I
say that Irish crime is due to English
misgovernment ; that England has sown
the wind and is reaping the whirlwind;
and that upon her head rests the primary
responsibility of much of the innocent
blood which has been spilt in Ireland.
(Cheers.) But I have paused too long upon
a painful subject. Let me get on. Let
me come to the present. You all know
how the policy of imprisonment by suspicion
broke down; and how Mr. Forster was
dismissed from office a discredited politician
in England, and a man whose very name is
execrated in Ireland. Mr. Parnell and Mr.
Davitt and the suspects were released, and at
once their influence on the side of law and
order became apparent, and agrarian out-
rages diminished. It is true that since then
some instances of crime of a horrible charac-
ter, which have shocked the whole com-
munity, have occurred. It was not to be
supposed that the evil passions aroused by
the action of the Government could be sup-
pressed in a day. But it is a solemn fact,
from the moment of the release of the sus-
pects and the dismissal of Mr. Forster down
to the present moment agrarian crimes in
Ireland have steadily and rapidly diminished.
When the leaders were released they at once
faced the situation. They saw that the great
work which the Land League had undertaken
to accomplish was but half achieved, and
they determined to at once take up that work
exactly where it was left when they were
arrested. They faced the difficulties of the
situation. They found themselves face to
face with a new Coercion Act—an Act under
which they knew that the Government had
the power in their hands to suppress any
movement which they disliked, no matter
how constitutional or legal. But they knew
also that they had a cause which was founded
upon justice. They knew that their objects
were legal and constitutional, and they deter-
mined, at whatever risk to themselves, that
they would pursue their course fearlessly
and resolutely. The Land League was sup-
pressed. On its ruins they speedily created
a new organisation upon the same principles,
having the same objects; and to-day the
National League is a power throughout the
land. The settlement of the land question
which it advocates is the same as that
advocated by the Land League. Its leaders
are the same; but its platform has been
widened so as to include not only the emanci-
pation of the tenant farmers of Ireland, but
of the nation generally, and the restoration
of national self-government. (Cheers.) I
said at the commencement that the Land Act
had been a failure. Let me shortly prove
that statement. The Land Act had two
main objects. The first was to bring redress
within easy reach of every tenant in Ireland
who could prove that he was suffering from
injustice; and the second —which depended
upon the success of the first—was to con-
ciliate the goodwill of the Irish people, and
to spread peace and prosperity throughout


the land. In neither of these objects has it
been successful. The Land Act has been in
operation for a year and a half. Of the
600.000 tenant farmers in Ireland only
80.000 have applied to its courts, and of
that 80,000 only 37,000 have as yet had their
cases decided ; and of these decisions 60 per
cent, have been appealed against. The total
amounts of reduction of rent have only been
£70,000 ; and to achieve that miserable
result the tenant farmers have paid £IOO,OOO
in costs, the landlords have paid another
£IOO,OOO in costs, and it has cost the State
£150,000 for the working of the land com-
mission ; whereas the Laud League, with
rough-and-ready measures, had obtained a
reduction for the people of considerably over
a million. The rents fixed by the land courts
lasted for fifteen years, but at the present
rate of progress it will take twenty years
to decide all the oases of disputed land
in Ireland. Meantime what are the tenant
farmers to do ? The new rents date, not
from the time of application to the court,
but from the time of the decision of the
question of the rent by the final court.
So that the most rack-rented tenant
may find on applying to the court that he
has years to wait, and that meantime he is
liable to eviction for non-payment of the old
rent. This is a direct inducement for the
landlords to appeal from one tribunal to
another, and of itself will be sufficient to
clog the entire machinery of the Act. But
it is a small defect compared with some of
the others. The entire class of leaseholders
—130,000 of the most rack-rented tenants in
Ireland—are entirely excluded from all the
benefits under the Act. It is difficult to
imagine on what principle of justice or logic
this has been done. I will give you a single
instance how it works. I know a tenant in
Ireland who holds a farm under a lease. Some
time ago upon that farm he erected a sub-
stantial house,and there opened thebusiness of
a general country store. His business became
prosperous and valuable, and when his lease
fell in his landlord knew he could not afford
to lose the farm, and for the privilege of re-
newing the lease he made the man pay £SOO
for the very house he had built himself.
(Laughter.) If that man held his farm under
under the ordinary terms from year to year he
would be able to bring his landlord into court,
and have an allowance made for that £SOO
which was robbed from him. But under the
new Act, because he holds under a lease, the
redress is denied him. The one real blot upon
upon the rent fixing clauses of the Land Act is
the manner in which the improvements of the
tenant are confiscated. As the Land Act
left the House of Commons its one valuable
clause was the Healy clause, whereby it
was enacted that no rent should be charged
in respect to any improvements made by the
tenant or bis predecessor in title. Now the
House of Lords, which, as you know, has
a knack of interfering with Irish matters,
amended this clause by adding the words,
“ Unless the tenant shall have been paid or
otherwise compensated for these improve-
ments by the landlord.” A perfectly fair and
reasonable amendment no doubt you would
think, but the chief land commission in
Dublin, composed, I may add, entirely of
landlords, has construed that provision or
amendment to mean that compensation for
improvements is the same as the enjoyment
of improvements by the tenant. It has held
that enjoyment or use of his own improve-
ments by the tenant for twenty years is to be
taken as compensation for them, and that
at the end of that time they become the
property of the landlord. So that if a man
twenty years ago built a house on his farm
and lived in it, at the end of twenty years
it ceases to be his and becomes the property
of the landlord, upon which increased rent
may be charged. Now, I appeal to every
fair-minded man in this assemblage whether
it is necessary for me to say a single
word more to prove to you that a Land
Act under which the property of the tenant
can thus be shamelessly confiscated is not
little better than a mockery, and must of
necessity be a failure. Last year, when Mr.
Parnell was lying in Kilmainham Gaol, I
introduced into the House of Commons a
bill to amend the Land Act of 1881. One
portion of my bill was accepted by the
Government, and the Arrears Act of Mr. Glad-
stone, which I am happy to say when I left
Ireland was working very fairly, was copied
word for word from my bill. (Cheers.)
The proposals which I then made in the
name of the Irish members in the House of
Commons contain to-day the full demands of
the Irish National League and of the Irish
people for the settlement of the land ques-
tion. My bill first dealt with the rent-fixing
clauses of the Act of 1881, and it remedied
the defects which I have already pointed
out, but it did not stop there. We
recognised that no regulation of the relations
between landlord and tenant could settle the
Irish question. The rent-fixing clauses we
sought to amend and make workable, but the
most that we expected from them is that they
will act as a stop-gap, and afford protection
to the tenants while we are working out upon
different lines the ultimate solution of the
problem. (Hear, hear.) In a word, we pro-
pose to do for Ireland what has been done for
Prussia, and for other countries in Europe,
with the happiest results. (Cheers.) That is,
we propose to transfer by State aid the


ownership of the soil from the privileged few
to the people. (Cheers.) Our scheme I will
explain in a very few words. We propose to
call upon the State to advance the whole of
the money necessary to enable the tenants to
purchase his holding, and we call upon the
tenant to repay that sum to the Government
by means of yearly instalments at the rate of
3i per cent, for a period of 63 years. Now,
allow me at once to dispose of the idea that
we are asking English taxpayers to permit
this money to be advanced out of the general
revenue. Nothing of the kind. We only ask
for Ireland the benefit of the Imperial credit
on which Government can borrow at 3 percent.
(Loud cheers.) For a scheme of this kind to be
successful, it must not only be honest in itself
but it must hold out inducements to the
landlords to sell and to the tenants to buy,
for we do not propose to make the scheme
compulsory upon anybody. (Hear, hear.)
Let us see how our plan would work. Let
me take, as an example, the case of a tenant
whose fair rent is £75. Taking then
twenty years’ purchase as a fair value for the
land, the State would be called upon to
advance to that tenant £ISOO to enable him
to purchase his holding, and he would be
called upon to pay to the State 3| per cent,
upon that —£s2 10s. a year—for a period of
sixty-three years, at the end of which time
the land would be his or his children’s after
him. (Cheers.) So that, from the tenant’s
point of view, he would have achieved this :
Instead of paying £75 a year rent for ever,
he would be only called upon to pay £52 10s.
a year for a term of 63 years, after which
the land would be his. From the landlord’s
point of view this scheme is equally attrac-
tive. It may safely be said, and those who
know anything of the condition of Ireland
will bear me out when I state it, that landed
property in Ireland is mortgaged to at least
two-thirds of its value at this moment. It
has been proved that the rent-fixing clauses
of the Act will reduce the rentals paid in
Ireland at least 25 per cent, all round, and
will thereby ruin the majority of the present
landholders. Their only hope is in the
scheme of purchase such as we propose,
whereby they would obtain a fair value for
their land in cash down, and then be able to
pay off their liabilities and have something
to live upon. Hence it is that the very men
who, when we started our scheme three
years ago, denounced it as revolutionary and
communistic, are now to be found in favour
of it; and a committee of the House of
Lords, composed entirely of landlords, and
presided over by that arch Tory Lord Cairns
—(laughter) —actually adopted and recom-
mended the scheme which I now propose.
The Marquis of Lansdo wne, and almost all
the prominent Irish landlords, are urging
the Government to adopt our scheme, so that
we have to-day the strange sight of land-
lords and tenants, the two parties in-
terested, both asking the same settlement.
This, and this only, is the demand of the
Irish people for the settlement of the land
question. (Loud cheers.) I appeal to all
impartial men in this land whether that
scheme is not a just one, whether its objects
are not legal and constitutional ones ; and I
appeal to all justice-loving men to aid the
Irish people in obtaining them. Our scheme
affords to the landlords a means of escape
from a certain future of ruin, and to the
people it affords a complete concession of
their demands and an end of a system
which has pauperised and depopulated
Ireland, and which is stained with the
tears and blood of countless thousands of
her children. (Cheers.) Of course objections
to this scheme are urged in England and in
the House of Commons. I always like to
face objections, and, if I can, to overcome
them. There are only two objections to the
scheme of any weight. The first ob-
jection comes from those who say that
that in times of distress it may be difficult to
collect the yearly payments from the people ;
that, in other words, the security of the
Government would not be ample enough.
Now, I might answer that objection by
referring to the experiences of other coun-
tries where a similar scheme has been tried.
I might answer it by pointing out that year
after year the tenant farmers of Ireland
would be acquiring an interest in their
holdings—an interest which they could
mortgage or §ell, and that every earthly
inducement would tend to make them
punctual in the payment of these instal-
ments. But I prefer to answer these objec-
tions by referring to actual experiences in
Ireland itself. As you are, no doubt, well
aware in the Irish Church Disestablishment
Act of 1869 the Irish Church Temporalities
Commission was charged with the duty of
transferring the ownership of the Church
land to the occupiers of it. By that scheme
6000 tenant farmers were changed into
proprietors on the same lines as we propose,
and, although they purchased at what seems
to us now ruinously high rates, down to this
moment, during the land agitation, and
during the period of distress through which
Ireland has passed, they have not been, and
they are not to-day, one sixpence in arrears
with their instalments. That, I con-
tend, is a complete answer to this objection.
The second objection comes from those who
say that there are tenants in the west of
Ireland, and in the north of it, who could not
live upon the land even if they could get it


for nothing, so poor is the soil and so dense
is the population, and they recommend
emigration as the only remedy for them.
Now, the orer-population of certain districts
in Ireland is a fact, but none the less is it a
fact that there is room in Ireland for every
soul within her shores. Tracts of fair and
fertile land can be seen in the centre of
Ireland which have been depopulated by
landlordism, and allows me to remind you
that at this moment there are four millions
and upwards of acre) of land —of reclaimable
waste land—in Ireland. We propose to
employ people from the over populated
districts on works of reclamation upon these
lands, and then we propose to settle
them as owners of the soil which they
have won back from the mountain and
the moor. It seems to me that any man
who recommends emigration as a panacea for
all the ills of Ireland cannot have read aright
the history of Ireland since the great famine.
Three millions of Irish people have left the
shores of Ireland within the last 30 years.
Of these 75 per cent, have been under the age
of 35 years. What does this mean P It means
that the old, the weak, and the decrepit,
those least able to assist the industries or in-
crease the wealth of the country, remain, and
the able, the strong, those who should be the
wealth producers of Ireland, go. As emi-
gration has gone on, so has increased the
general poverty and misery of the country. As
emigration has gone on, so has increased the
amount of acres of land which every year
are going out of cultivation and back to
waste, and we are determined to use what in-
fluence we possess to prevent the young blood
of the nation being drained away any longer
by hundreds of thousands of her people
leaving her shores. In the Ireland of to-day
there is an awakened intelligence, a wider
education, and a sterner spirit than in the
Ireland which many of you left. Conscious
of the justice of their cause, the people are
willing to endure suffering and to with-
stand calumny. They know that time is
working on their side, that day by day the
public opinion of the civilised world is
awakening to the justice of their demands,
and they know, although there may yet be a
weary time before them to wait, that an
inevitable day of triumph and of jus-
tification is at hand. (Cheers.) They
may have to wait, but they only have
to wait because the system of government
under which we live is an anomaly and a
scandal. We are mocked with the empty
form and not the substance of representative
government. Representative government
means government in accordance with
the constitution ally-expressed will of the
majority of the people—(cheers)—govern-
ment carried out by a Ministry constitution-
ally responsible to the people. The govern-
ment of Ireland is based upon diametrically
opposite principles. The government of
Ireland is carried out in direct opp osition to
the constitutionally-expressed will of the
majority of the people, and is carried out by
a Ministry responsible, not to the people
whom they govern, but to the people of
another nation. (Hear, hear.) In England
all that is necessary to ensure the enactment
of reform is that the people of the English
nation shall be in favour of it. In Ireland,
even where the people of the Irish nation are
unanimously in favour of certain reforms,
they could not be carried out without the con-
sent of the people of England, who, to say
nothing harder of them, are for the
most part ignorant of our wants. (Cheers.)
What has been the history of 82
years of the so-called union with
England? A history of ruined prosperity,
of embittered passions, of poverty, misery,
famine, insurrection, bloodshed, and murder
—a history of reforms refused to peaceful
agitation, only to be granted afterwards to
violence ; and, from the days of Catholic
emancipation down, the same lesson taught
to the people, to hope nothing from Eng-
land’s sense of justice, but everything
from her fears. Such a system of govern-
ment stands self-condemned before the world,
and cannot last. (Cheers.) Here, where
the paralysing fingers of centralisation have
not laid their withering grasp, where a free
Parliament legislates for a free colony, it
ought not to be necessary for me to argue in
favour of Irish legislative indepe n dence. By
Irish legislative independence I mean, and
the National League mean, and the Irish
people mean, this and this only—that the
will of the majority of the people of Ireland
should be as powerful iu the government
of purely Irish affairs as the will of the
people of South Australia is powerful in
the government of South Australian affairs.
(Loud and continued cheers.) I know there
are men here as there are in England who
pretend that they think that by Home Rule
we mean a dismemberment of the Empire.
The dismemberment of the Empire is a
fine phrase. I am not quite sure that I
exactly understand what the gentlemen
mean who use it in this connection, but I am
speaking here as the representative of the
National League, of the leaders of the
people, and of the people themselves, and I
think I have a right to claim that my
definition of self-government shall be
accepted. (Cheers.) What we mean is this
—a measure of self-government, similar to
that which you possess here, and the recogni-
tion of our nationality similar to that whioh


Austri i recently made to Hungry. (Hear,
hear.) Were I so disposed, I might
bass Ireland’s claim for self-government
upon England’s failure to govern her,
upon the disastrous effects which the
union has entailed upon every Irish
industry and every Irish interest. In
a word, I might base our claim upon griev-
ances, but, although I know that a claim so
based must be powerful in the minds of all
impartial men, at the same time I will not be
so dishonest as to pretend that either I or
the Irish people base our claims for self-
government upon grievances alone. We
believe that our claim has a firmer basis.
Grievances may pass away, but Ireland’s
nationality will remain. (Cheers.) Grier*
ances may pass away, but Ireland’s divine
right to self-government is imperishable.
Do what England may, she cannot make
Ireland a part of herself. She cannot make
Ireland other than a separate country.
(Cheers.) The Almighty so willed it when
He traced the lines of the universe, and ga,ve
to the Ireland that we love a separate exis-
tence. He so willed it when he gave to Irish
intellects and Irish hearts a distinct and
unmistakable individuality. (Cheers.) He
so willed it when He reserved for the Ireland
of old the glorious mission of being the
educator and evangeliser of the world.
(Cheers.) I know that Englishmen find it
difficult to understand the wild, passionate
love which we Irishmen have for our
nationality. Will they allow me to remind
them that our nationality has come down to
us sanctified by the blood and sufferings of
our forefathers. Seven centuries of undying
struggles, seven centuries of sacrifices, of
Buffering, of defeat, of disaster, of undying
faith, living through it all, look down upon
us this day and make the sentiment of our
nationality the master passion of our lives.
(Loud cheers.) There is no day that the
sun rises which does not bring to us the
memories of the paet, the voices of the dead,
binding our hearts to stronger allegiance to
the nationality for which the bravest and
best of our race have laid down their
lives. (Cheers.) It may be that there is
suffering in store for the present generation
of Irish as there was for their sires and their
grandsires. If so, let suffering come. There
is but one thing impossible for Ireland, and
that is the abandonment of her nationality
so long as their beats under the vault of
Heaven one Irish heart. (Cheers.) I fear
I have wearied you. The mission which I
have brought to the country requires, I
believe, but few words of explanation. I
have come here to appeal for the renewed
sympathy and support of my fellow-country-
men in Australia, but I have not come to
appeal to them alone. I desire to appeal to
the entire people of these colonies; I desire
to be permitted to place before them in their
true colours the real demands of the Irish
people ; I ask their permission to endeavour
to prove to them, as I think I am able to do,
that the cause of Ireland is founded upon
justice; that the objects of the National
League are legal and constitutional and
patriotic, and that they are deserving of the
support of every impartial and justice-loving
man, I care not what his nationality or his
creed may be. (Loud cheers.) No doubt
you will say that is an arduous task to have
been entrusted to so young a politician as
myself. Well, I am very deeply impressed
with the responsibility of my position here.
When I undertook this work I knew that I
was about to appeal to a people who had
proved before the world their sympathy with
the sufferings of Ireland by an unparalleled
and never-to-be-forgotten generosity —
(cheers) —and I said to myself these are a
people who, if once I can convince them that
our cause is founded upon justice, will not
allow prejudice to interfere with their minds,
but will give that cause sympathy and
support. I trust that I am not too
sanguine when I say that I hope the
little I have said to-night will do some-
thing to hurst those clouds of ignorance and
prejudice which unfortunately everywhere I
go I find surrounding the Irish question. To
my fellow-countrymen in Australia I appeal
with unbounded confidence. Ireland’s chief
hope, and her greatest glory, consist«to-day in
her exiled sons throughout the world.
Englishmen often boast that the sun never
sets 3 on the dominions of the Queen. Well,
we have as proud a boast, for, wherever the
rays of that sun fall all round the circle of
the world, there are to be found Irish men
and women faithful to the fortunes of their
country. “ Condemned to death, but fated not
to die,” the grand old Celtic race has to-day
found a home wherever the foot of man has
trod, and at this moment Ireland is receiving
tokens of sympathy and allegiance and
support and of affection from her exiled sons
in every quarter of the globe. Fellow-
countrymen, my last words to you to-night
will be words of encouragament and hope. I
believe in my heart and conscience that
Ireland’s night is well-nigh over. True, her
plains and her valleys still lie shrouded in
darkness, but the watcher on the tower sees
a break in the far east, and a ruddy glow
upon the mountain top, and he knows that
the god of the day has risen, and that anon
he will flood every nook and corner of the
land with his broad, glad light, and that


darkness and the things of darkness shall dis-
appear. When that moment comes —that
moment for which our forefathers so wildly
and so vainly prayed, and wept, and struggled,
there will go up to Heaven a cry that will be
echoed over the ocean and wafted by the
four winds to the corners of the earth, that
will be chorussed in America and re-echoed
here under the Southern Cross, and the sea-
divided Gaels wherever they may be will
hear that cry, and they will rejoice, for they
will know, their glad hearts will tell them,
that the God of justice, who has decreed that
those who sow in tears shall reap in joy,
has at last rewarded the tears and the
sufferings of a faithful people, and that Ire-
land, their Ireland, is free. (Loud and con-
tinued cheering.)
Dr. Gunson, K.G.G., moved the following
resolution ;—“ That having heard the exposi-
tion of the aims and objects of the Irish
National League, as propounded by Mr. J.
E. Redmond, M.P., and heartily supporting
the programme adopted at the recent Con-
ference in Dublin, we now resolve that the
Irish National Land League be dissolved,
and that a branch of the Irish National
League be established in Adelaide.” He felt
sure that the meeting would not hesitate to
accept the programme of the league, headed
as it was by men in whose ability, intelli-
gence, and integrity they had the highest
confidence. He had been highly gratified at
the clear exposition given them by Mr. Red-
mond of the objects of the league, and it
gave him pleasure to propose the resolution.
(Cheers.)
Mr. Henry M'Conville seconded, stating
that after the able address delivered by Mr.
Redmond it was unnecessary for him to make
a speech.
Mr. William Redmond, in supporting the
resolution, said they would agree with him
that after the lengthy address of his brother
there was very little indeed left for him to
say. His brother had referred to those
points in connection with the Irish land
question which it was most necessary for the
fulfilment of their mission to bring under the
notice of the public and the people of this great
and free country. Under any circumstances,
the delicate condition of his health at the present
time would prevent him from speaking at any
length, a condition of health produced first
by a three months’ imprisonment, and three
months’ harsh treatment —(cheers) —and by
the recent tour which he had taken in
America with that parent of patriots and
noblest of men—Michael Davitt. (Cheers.)
It was his intention, and that of the gentle-
men at whose wish he came to this country,
that, if his health permitted it, he”should
visit and address meetings in different parts
of this country, by which means both his
brother and himself might at the same time
in different places be pleading for the cause
they had at heart, and which they were
assembled that night to forward. Weak as
he was, he could not resist the invitation to
say a few words to them; he could not leave
his fellow-countrymen of South Australia
without raising his voice and calling upon
them to continue their loyal allegiance to the
holy, and just, and sanctified cause of their
mother land. (Cheers.) The object of his
brother’s and his visit was not to remind Irish-
men of things long gone by, for he knew
they did not forget the sad but glorious past
of their country, or those men who sealed
their devotion to their native land with their
heart’s best blood. Let them not forget the
past; but the time had come when they must
turn their minds, and hearts, and eyes to
the present, the present which was passing
so swiftly, in which so much might be done,
in which so much might be lost, for their
native land. There was no Ireland to-day.
There was a Coercion Act of the most
drastic description ; prisons were filled ; the
scaffold was doing its hideous, though just,
work ; and there was neither peme nor tran-
quility upon Erin’s shores. His brother and
himself were present to ask them to help
them in the accomplishment of a change in
Irish affairs. There might be some present
—not of his country —prepared to say that
the lack of tranquility in Ireland was due to
agitation. But would a well-governed and
prosperous people sustain or participate in an
agitation like theirs ? No ! Their agitation
was based on the misery and poverty of the
Irish race—a condition which was based, not,
as some averred, on the idleness of the Irish
people, or on over-population, but on bad legis-
lation. As to over-population, Ireland was like
a desert land. One might travel through miles
of the richest country, and discover nothing
more nearly approaching a human habitation
than the ruined walls which marked the spot
where once were happy homes—spots which
were now rendered desolate. The cause of
Ireland’s lack of prosperity was to be found
in the cursed system of landlordism.
(Cheers.) The Irish landlords had neglected
their duty to their tenants in every respect.
They lived at ease in other lands on the
industry of their struggling tenants. Mr.
Redmond then referred to the passing in the
House of Commons of the Compensation for
Disturbance Bill and its rejection by the
House of Lords, whom he characterised as an
assemblage of “ imbecile, aged, old men.”


The lesson which the past taught was that
there was need for continued agitation, for
they must not stop now that they had got
their feet on the rungs of the ladder. He
had told them that he had already been in
prison, and when he went back to Ireland he
would go to prison once more, his offence
having been that he had told men, not on a
public platform, that it was their first duty
to provide for the family which God had
given them before paying one cent, of rent.
If that were a crime, he was proud of it and
glad to go to prison for it. (Loud cheers.)
The motion was carried unanimously.
Mr. H. Taylor moved—" That a subscrip-
tion list be now opened to further the objects
of the Irish National League,” and remarked
that English people would, were they ap-
pealed to in a systematic manner, sympathise
with their fellow-beings in Ireland.
Mr. E. W. O’Halloran seconded the
motion, which was carried unanimously.
The Right Rev. Dr. Reynolds moved a vote
of thanks to Mr. J. E. Redmond. His lord-
ship said, from his own experience, he could
endorse much of what Mr. Redmond had said.
In one diocese, 6£ miles long and 6 miles
wide, that within the previous 15
years had contained 1500 families, the
people were evicted at the bidding of
one man who was spending the
money he drew in harlotry and de-
bauchery. When he (his lordship) had
heard of and witnessed such things during his
late trip to Ireland, he thanked God that his
lot was cast in so pleasant a place as Aus-
tralia, for were he living in Ireland he would
never cease attempting to remedy the evils
under which she laboured, even if his actions
were taken at the cost of his life. (Loud
cheers.) Some English noblemen with whom
he had spoken had no idea of the true state of
affairs in Ireland, and they, having gone to
the country at his request, were greatly
surprised at what they found existing there.
He was almost ashamed to confess it, but
when the Land League was first formed he
had looked upon it with despair, believing it
to have revolutionary and communistic
tendencies. All that the people of Ireland
wanted, however, was that they should re-
ceive similar privileges to those enjoyed by
the people of Australia, Canada, and Hun-
gary, and they wanted to receive Queen
Victoria, not as coming to Ireland as a part
of the English nation, but coming as Queen
of Ireland to open an Irish Parliament.
(Loud cheering.)
Mr. Wholohan seconded the motion, which
was carried unanimously.
Mr. Redmond, in replying, said the true
way to thank him was to render him that
assistance on behalf of the cause he was
espousing which he desired. They wanted to
establish branches of the league all over the
colony, and before he left Australia he would
return to South Australia and visit these
branches, which he trusted he would find in
a flourishing state. He then proposed in
eulogistic terms a vote of thanks to the chair-
man.
Archdeacon Russell seconded the motion,
which having been carried, the chairman
suitably replied, and the meeting was brought
to a close.


MR. REDMOND, M.P., IN VICTORIA.
LECTURE ON HOME RULE.
Me. J. E. Redmond, M.P. for New Roes
in the British House of Commons, delivered
a lecture on Tuesday evening last in St.
Patrick’s Hall, in aid of the funds of the
Irish National League. The subject was
“Home Rule: its Real Meaning.'’ Long
before the hour at which it had been an-
nounced that the lecture would be com-
menced the hall was densely packed, so that
those who were fortunate enough to secure
admission at all were hardly able to move,
and anyone who had managed to get into the
centre of the room would have found it im-
possible to leave the place before the proceed-
ings were at an end. Hundreds of persons
congregated outside the doors to get a
glance at the lecturer. Only a few
seats were provided in the body of the
hall. These were close to the platform, and
were occupied chiefly by ladies. Amongst
the gentlemen on the platform were the
Very Rev. Dean England, Rev. Father
Dunne, Rev. R. J. Carr, Rev. J. H.
O'Connell, Rev. P. Walsh, Rev. J. Heffer-
nan, Rev. D. Quinn, Rev. D. O'Callaghan,
Rev. T. J. Egan, Rev. Dr. Graber, Rev. J.
Grant, Rev. P. Moran, Rev. P. M‘Gee,
Rev. M. Brady, Rev. W. O’Brien, Rev.
Brother Corbett, Brother Nunan, Mr. T.
Fogarty, J.P., Mayor of Hotham; Mr. J.
Curtain, J.P., City Councillor; Mr. W. H.
Gunson, “ Peutetre,” Mr. F. G Duffy,
Barrister-at-law; Mr. Higgins, Barrister-
at-law ; Mr. J. Moloney, Solicitor ;
Mr. Lynch, Solicitor; Mr. H. M‘Donald,
Solicitor; Mr. Nicholson, J.P. ; Councillor
Kavanagh, Councillor Dillon, Councillor
M'Guiness, Councillor Donaghy, Mr. Lyons,
J.P. ; Mr. James Carroll, J.P.; Mr. J. Kelly,
J.P.; Dr. MTnerney, Fitzroy ; Dr. Murphy,
Dr. M‘Kenna, Mr. J. Andrews, ex-M.L.A. ;
Mr. J. M'Grath, Chief President H.A.0.8.
Society; Mr. M. O’Hea, District President
V.C.Y.M. Society; Mr. F. Edwards, Presi-
dent Melbourne O.Y.M. Society ; Mr. J. W.
Rogers, Inspector Catholic Schools, N.S.W.
The Hon. Francis Longmore took the
chair.
Mr. Redmond, on being introduced by the
chairman, was received with loud and long-
continued cheers, accompanied b v waving of
hats and handkerchiefs. When silence Was
resumed, he said ; —Mr. Chairman, ladies and
gentlemen, I feel that I would be wanting
in gratitude if I did not commence my re-
marks by telling you how much I have been
touched by the spontaneous enthusiasm with
which you have received me here to-night.
For that I thank you, and if, to-night, in
handling my subject it becomes necessary
for me to deal with details which may seem
tiresome to very many of you, I have to ask
your patience, because it is of the utmost
importance that the case of Ireland for
Home Rule should bo stated calmly, dispas-
sionately, and logically. You are probably
aware that I purpose delivering three
addresses in this hall, the first two dealing
with an explanation of the aims and
objects of the Irish National League,
and the third devoted to a refutation of the
accusations made against the late Land
League and the present leaders of the Irish
people. There are some of my friends who
think that it would be well if I had opened
my work in Victoria by taking the last sub-
ject first; but, having thought the matter
over, I determined that I would refuse to
allow myself to be driven to enter upon a de-
fence the moment I first spoke in Victoria.
My primary object in coming here has been to
explain the aims and objects of the organisa-
tion by which the Irish people are working
to-day ; having fulfilled that duty I am
ready, as I think I am able, to meet every
accusation against the late Land League,
the present League, or integrity of the
leaders of the people. I have two things
to ask. First, I ask the public to
deal with those matters, which are dis-
tinct matters, upon their merits; to judge
of Home Rule upon its merits; to
deal with the Land Question upon its merits,
and then to consider the responsibility or
otherwise of the late League for the outrages,
also upon its merits, but not before they


have heard the defence of the one man who
professes to speak as the direct mouthpiece
of that organisation. Secondly, I have to
ask the press to report every word I say, or
not to report me at all. Many accusations
have been made against us, but I shall
now only allude to one, and that is of a
personal character. It seems that some enter-
prising gentlemen in this colony have dis-
covered that I have modified my tone. Now
I can quite understand that accusation.
I can quite understand that men who find it
necessary to modify their tone seize the
excuse that I have modified mine. I
challenge any man to quote from any
speech made by me in Australia,
or in the House of Commons, or on the hill-
side in Ireland, and to show where and Mien
and how I have modified either my demands
or my tone. I have been moderate j but I
have been moderate b» c iuse I am a moderate
man, holding moderate principles, and
the representative in this land of a
body of politicians who are moderate
politicians. The subject I have chosen for
consideration to-night is one which ought to
prove of general interest. It has its at-
tractions, not only for those who, like
myself, hope to see Ireland transformed into a
self-governed nation, but also for
those who, without sympathising with
what they understand by Home Rule,
are anxious that the present condition
of poverty and discontent may be
changed, and are willing to consider, in the
calm light of history and philosophy, any
scheme for that end which may be
proposed by responsible politicians. The
question of Irish self-government is the one,
above all others, which offers most temptations
to an Irish speaker to rely upon appeals to
the passion and imagination of an Irish
audience. This evening, however, I promise
to make no such appeals. I will endeavour
to speak dispassionately and impartially, to
look upon this question from every point of
view, and, weighing the arguments for and
against the scheme, to see whether, after all,
our demand has not a solid foundation in
theoretic reasonableness, in practical advan-
tage, as well as in justice. Without
further preface, let me get into my
subject. What do I mean by Horae
Rule? I mean by Home Rule the res-
toration to Ireland of representative govern-
ment, and I define representative go-
vernment to mean government in accord-
ance with the constitutionally expressed
will of a majority of the people, and carried
out by a ministry constitutionally respon-
sible to those whom they govern. In other
words, I mean that the internal affairs of
Ireland shall be regulated by a Parliament
consisting of the Queen, Lords, and Com-
mons of Ireland —that all Imperial affairs,
and all that relates to the colonies, foreign
States, and the common interests of the
Empire, shall continue to be regulated by the
Imperial Parliament as at present con-
stituted. The idea at the bottom of this
proposal is the desirability of finding some
middle course between separation on the one
hand, and over-centralisation of government
on the other. We who propose this scheme
consider that it is undesirable that two
countries so closely connected geogra-
phically and socially, and having so
many commercial and international ties,
should be wholly separated, or that
any dismemberment of the Empire, which
Ireland has had her share in building
up, should take place. But we are just as
strongly of opinion that it is equally un-
desirable that one country should control the
domestic affairs of another whose wants and
aspirations it confessedly does not under-
stand, whose various needs it admittedly has
not time to attend to, and whose national
life such a system of government tends to
destroy. We propose a middle course. We
say to England, “ Retain every guarantee
for the unity and strength of the Empire,
but give up a task which you have proved
yourself incompetent to fulfil satisfactorily.
Subdivide the labours of an over-burdened
Parliament, and relegate to Irishmen the
management of purely Irish affairs, which
they alone can thoroughly understand. Let
us join for every Imperial purpose, and
defend the Empire, which is the heritage
of both of us, against all the world in arms,
if need be, but let each give up, once and
for all, the attempt to rule the domestic
affairs of each other. Let us have national
freedom and Imperial unity and strength.”
This is the meaning of the demand of
the Irish people for self-government.
But, you may say, “ This is but a
very cursory definition of a general
principle ; what of details ?” Well, as soon as
the principle is conceded, the details for carry-
ing that principle into effect may, I think,
safely be left to the collective wisdom
of Englishmen, Irishmen, and Scotchmen
in the Imperial Parliament. It is irre-
gular and confusing to discuss details
until we have decided upon principles.
But it is perhaps not unreasonable to ask
far some suggestions. Mr. Isaac Butt, who
was its first proposer, has left upon record a
sketch of its details. These, of course, are
only put forward as the individual sug-
gestions of that gentleman, and not as
essential portions of the proposal. Mr. Butt
says:—
“As to the Crown, it is not pro]


to affect its prerogatives at all. The
only change would be that, in exclu-
sively Irish matters, it would be guided by
the advice of an Irish Parliament and an
Irish Ministry. In all other affairs it
would continue, as at present, to be
guided by the advice of the Imperial
Legislature. As to the Imperial Parlia-
ment, it would continue to have pre-
cisely the same supreme powers that it now
possesses over all Imperial affairs—just as
completely as if no Irish Parliament existed.
Its jurisdiction would include every inter-
national transaction, all relations with foreign
States, all questions of peace and war, the
government of the colonies, the army, navy,
and all that relates to the defence and
stability of the Empire; control of the Im-
perial Customs and general trade regulations;
control of expenditure and supplies for all
Imperial purposes; power to levy general
taxation for such purposes; charge of the
public debt and the Imperial Civil List; and
sovereign power within the limits of its
attributions over individual citizens of both
countries. But it should be settled before-
hand in what proportion Ireland should con-
tribute to such expenditure—with what share
of the public debt she is fairly chargeable;
what part of the Imperial Civil List she
should pay ; and taxation should be adjusted,
not only as to amount, but as to mode, in
such a manner that its burden would be
equitably distributed throughout every part
of the United Kingdom. Of course Ireland
would continue to be represented in the Im-
perial Parliament on Imperial questions, but
on these only. For all Imperial purposes the
two countries would continue to be a ‘United
Kingdom,’ and to constitute in the face of
other nations one Imperial State. As to the
Irish Parliament, it would have supreme
control over the internal affairs of Ireland,
just as if no Imperial Parliament existed.
Its jurisdiction would include every exclu-
sively Irish interest: education, agriculture,
commerce, manufactures, public works,
courts of justice, magistracy, public railways,
post-office, corporations, grand juries, and
every other detail of Irish business and Irish
National life. ... It would be com-
posed of the Sovereign, Lords and Commons
of Ireland. The sovereignty of both king-
doms would continue and would be declared
to be indissolubly united. ... In respect
of all exclusively Irish interests the Irish
Parliament, so constituted, would rank, act
and rule as the Parliament of an independent
nation.”
But, lest some people might say that I am
quoting Mr. Butt and not the present leaders
of the movement for Home Rule, who are
supposed in this country to be more
advanced than Mr. Butt was, I will read a
conversation which took place at an interview
between a Parisian journalist and Mr.
Parnell:
“M. Comely—So far we have dismissed the
disease. What about the remedy ?
“Mr. Parnell —There is but one—Home
Rule autonomy. We wish to enjoy the
rights belonging to us as other subjects of
the United Kingdom. We are tired of the
position of pariah. In my soul and con-
science I believe we shall win, and within a
reasonable time.
“M. Comely—l wish you may. But what
do you want exactly P
“Mr. Parnell —A Parliament of our own—a
Government of our own, with a natural
result —liberty. You will better understand
me when I say that we should be assimilatad
to a state of things that exists in Canada or
the Isle of Man.
“ M. Comely—And what control would the
English have ?
“ Mr. Parnell—We would not cease to
be subjects of the United Kingdom.
The Queen would be our Queen. She
would be the link that would attach
Ireland to Great Britain. We would con-
sent even to be governed by a Viceroy, pro-
vided there were no exceptional laws, and
that the Viceroy had no more rights, no
arbitrary powers over us, than Queen Victoria
has over her English or Scotch subjects.
Political peace will never he obtained until the
day when we are treated , if not as a nation, at
least as a free colony, and when we shall have
an Irish Parliament. The day when Ireland
shall become like Canada or the Isle of Man, as
I have told you, the day when the Viceroy, if
Viceroy there shall be, shall have over Ireland
no more rights than the Queen, of whom he is
delegate, has over England.''
Now, that is what the Irish people mean by
Home Rule, both in principle and detail.
The first thing I have a right to claim
is that our proposal is not either vague or
unintelligible. It is clear, precise, and
abundant in detail. Secondly, I have a right
to say it is not a proposal for separation.
One of its essential conditions is the preser-
vation of the unity of theEiupire. The scheme
is totally inconsistent with separation. A
federal union and separation are entirely
distinct things, and if I am to argue this
matter reasonably, my opponents must
recognise and acknowledge the distinction.
Thirdly, I have a right to say that it is not
communistic or revolutionary. It aims
simply at a prevention of over-centralisation,
and it violates not one principle of the con-
stitution. I will now proceed to consider
whether I am entitled to say that our
proposal is a reasonable one theoretically.


Let ns seo, first, whether it is a proposal
judged by the test of common sense which
would seem a reasonable one to suggest as
a remedy for the present deplorable con-
dition of things in Ireland. Let us see,
then, whether it bears the recommendation
of political philosophy ; and, lastly, whether
it has the sanction of successful working in
other nations at other periods in the
world’s history, and in the British Em-
pire itself. What are the facts as pre-
sented by the political situation of to-day ?
Here we have two countries closely connected
geographically and socially, but distinct in
historic tradition, in religion, in national
instinct and national natures. Speaking
the one language, belonging to the ..one
Empire, composed to some extent of an ad-
mixture of the same races, yet presenting to
the world national characteristics as es-
sentially distinct as any two nations in the
universe. Historically, Ireland is the elder.
She can boast of having been a civilised and
famous nation when England was a bar-
barous province of the Roman Empire.
Butlongages since England reversed the bal-
ance. She has been rich, prosperous and free,
while Ireland was poor, miserable, and sub-
ject. For seven centuries England has more
or less successfully asserted her sway, but
Ireland, ’mid unparalleled suffering, has
straggled, age after age, for the preservation
of her nationality and her freedom. For-
ever 600 years Ireland had her own Parlia-
ment upon Irish soil, subject, it is true, more
or less at different times to England, but still
all this time a distinct legislature. In 1782
Henry Grattan, backed by the Irish Volun-
teers, declared that no power on earth had
the right to legislate for the Irish people
save the Sovereign, Lords, and Commons of
Ireland, and he enunciated the memorable
doctrine, upon which we take our stand
to-day—“ They knew their duty totheir sove-
reign, andthey were loyal; they knew their duty
to themselves, and were determined to be free.”
(Applause.) In that happy moment England
yielded, and for the short span of 18 glorious
years Ireland, under an absolutely free and
independent Parliament, prospered and ad-
vanced with enormous strides in power and in
prosperity. But, sir, history tells us how a
conspiracy was entered into to rob Ireland of
her rights. The means whereby the Union
was carried have received the scathing de-
nunciations of all historians of all nation-
alities and all shades of religious opinion and
political thought. A great Irishman, one of
the present leaders of the national movement,
has said that what is morally wrong can never
be politically right, and the scheme of
Pitt and Castlereagh, carried as it
was by bribery and corruption, by. violence
and murder, stands to-day upon the
page of history as the hughest politi-
cal crime and blunder of the century.
From that moment down to the present day
Ireland has been ruled by Englishmen and
Scotchmen, and it requires no words of mine
to prove the utter failure of the system—a
system which in 83 years has necessitated
the enactment of no less than 52 Coercion
Acts—a system which in 83 years has been
marked by half-a-dozen famines, by four
unsuccessful rebellions, and which neces-
sitates to-day a standing army in Ireland
absolutely larger than England had in the
Crimea when she was fighting Russia.
(Cheers and applause.) One of the aeutest
political thinkers of the day, Mr. Lecky,
has said that “ Pitt’s scheme centralised
but did not unite, or rather united the
legislatures, but divided the nations.” True,
Ireland sends a certain number of
members to the House of Commons, but
they are invariably defeated on purely Irish
matters by Englishmen and Scotchmen, and
in every detail of her political life Ireland
is ruled by Englishmen and Scotchmen. At
first she was ruled brutally, but I am one of
those who are not only willing but proud
and glad to be able to admit that there is in
England a number, and a rapidly increasing
number, of Englishmen who are willing to
do justice to Ireland. (Loud applause.)
But, sir, they neither have time to attend to
her wants nor knowledge to understand them.
The Imperial Parliament at the present
moment is overburdened with work
of every description. Day by day
the pressure is becoming more extreme,
and all thoughtful men now say that
reform is absolutely necessary. The
effect of all this upon Ireland has been
most disastrous. She has been depopu-
lated and pauperised ; her industries have
perished ; her men of wealth and genius have
left her shores. Her people, deprived of all
sense of responsibility, have too often
been left a prey to men of des- I
perate designs. All, all seems gone, save one
thing, that has Ijved through it all, and that is
Ireland’s undying faith in the ultimate 1
triumph of her nationality/ (Loud and
continued cheering.) This is the state of :
things! These are the facts of the political 1
situation which, for everybody’s sake, we ask '
Englishmen honestly to face to-day. Surely, l
sir, common sense would recommend as a 1
remedy the very scheme which we pro-!
pose. Surely common sense would say, j
“ Lighten the work of the already over- *
burdened Parliament—relieve it of a task J
which it has proved itself incompetent ‘
to fulfil—relegate to Irishmen the manage- !
ment of Irish affairs, which they alone can 1


thoroughly understand.” Common sense, I ancient times the most remarkable instance
know, goes for a great deal in this world, but, of the success of the system was the Achaican
standing alone, it is very often disregarded.
I now ask, Is our proposal reasonable, judged
by the test of political philosophy ? It is not
necessary for me to tell you that the
federal system that we propose is not a
new-fangled plan, invented for the oc-
casion, but one that has existed from
the very earliest times. At all times
in the world’s history there have been
found nations so closely connected by circum-
stances of position or mutual interests
as to make it desirable that they should
be united in one common state, yet so distinct
in national characteristics as to make it not
only undesirable but impossible to weld them
into one homogeneous nation. To suit this
state of thin gs the federal system was invented.
Let the distinguished historian, Mr. Free-
man, explain to what set of circumstances it
applies, and remember he speaks now without
any reference to Ireland. That gentleman,
in his “ History of Federalism,” says :
“ The federal system requires a sufficient
degree of community in origin, or feeling,
or interest, to allow the members to work
together up to a certain point. It requires
that there should not be that perfect degree
of community, or rather identity, which
allows the members to be fused together for
all purposes When there is no community
at all federalism is inappropriate—the cities
or states had better remain wholly indepen-
dent. When community rises into identity
federalism is equally inappropriate the
cities or states had better both sink into the
counties of a kingdom. But in the inter-
mediate set of circumstances ....
federalism is the true solvent. It gives as
much union as the members need, and not
more than they need."
Now, sir, I contend that the intermediate
state of things there described exactly por-
trays the present relations between England
and Ireland, and I consequently contend that
I am justified in saying that my proposition is
not only reasonable when judged by the test
of common sense, but that it is also reasonable
when judged by the test of political philo-
sophy. (Applause.) Now let us see whether
it has the sanction of successful working in
other nations, and at other periods of the
world's history. In truth, the very super-
abundance of evidence in favour of the federal
system constitutes my chief difficulty in
dealing with this part of the sub-
ject. If I dealt with it fully I would
be obliged to relate some of the
most glorious chapters in the world’s
aistory. All time permits me to do is to
five two or three instances from the past
ind the present history of the world. In
League. In the heyday of Grecian power
every city was a state and every state
was independent. But with the fall of
Athens came the necessity for combination
to resist the encroachments of Macedonia.
Each of these states retained home rule and
supreme control over their own affairs, but
they united for the common purpose of de-
fence, and history tells us that the federal-
ism then adopted arrested Hellenic de-
cadence for centuries. The most remark-
able instance in mediaeval times is
furnished by the history of the United
Provinces of the Netherlands. Here again
was an instance of a number of com-
munities so bound together by mutual
interests as to make it essential that they
should be united in a common state, yet so
distinct in their traditions and characteristics
as to make it impossible for them to be welded
into one nation. They united, but each
province retained supreme control of its own
affairs. They united in one state, with one
sovereign and one army, and history tells us
that the federalism they then adopted enabled
them to hold their country against Spain
when Spain was mistress of the world.
Switzerland presents an instance of federalism
commenced long ages ago and lasting down to
the present day. Their position made it
necessary for the cantons of Switzerland to be
united ; but their diversities of custom and re-
ligion, not half so marked as those between
England and Ireland, made it impossible
that they should be welded into one nation.
Each of the cantons to-day possesses
home rule, while the general government
watches over the prosperity and honour of
every one of them. Of course the most
remarkable instance of modern times is
supplied by the history of the great republic
of America. It is not my duty now to
enter into an explanation or defence of the
constitution of America. I may be told that
that constitution has defects. I have
never read of any political constitution
that was perfect, but it is a remarkable thing
that the so-called defects in the American
constitution all seem to flow from divergen-
cies from the pure principle of federalism ;
and, at any rate, the fact remains that in
the very shurt space of a century these
federated S ates have built up a great and
free nation. Every State has its own Parlia-
ment, has supreme control over its own
affairs, whilst Congress, representing all the
States, guards the national honour
and the national prosperity. (Loud
applause.) Monsieur Da Tocqueville
says, “ Every American citizen defends the
Union, because in defending the Union he


knows he is defending the increased pros-
perity and freedom of his own State.” In 1814
Norway and Sweden adopted the federal
system, and later still, and within the recol-
lection of even the youngest of us here,
Austria conceded to the State of Hungary,
after a long, bitter, and useless struggle,
the very same privileges which Ireland now
demands from England. (Applause.) But,
after all, those examples which come home
to our hearts and minds more forcibly than
any are those supplied by the British Empire
to-day. Here, in each one of these Austra-
lian colonies, you possess and you jealously
guard the privileges of home rule. (Ap-
plause.) I have asked repeatedly since I
came to this country, and I now ask again, for
some intelligent reasons why Australians
should refuse to concede to Ireland that
which they themselves acknowledge is the
source and the cause of their own prosperity
and their own loyalty. What England
granted to Australia she granted to
Canada, I hold in my band a
list of places to which England
has already conceded the right of
self-government which Ireland now
demands. The list includes 2o different
dependencies which are now in possession
of home rule. The Bahamas are eighteen
small islands containing a population of less
than 40,000 persons, and of these about an
eighth are white. Home rule exists there.
The domestic legislature is elected by the
people. Barhadoes is an island containing a
population of 171,889. It has home rule.
Its assembly, elected annually, administers
its domestic affairs. The Bermudas, 12,000
inhabitants. They enjoy home rule. The
Cape of Good Hope, with a population one-
fifth that of Ireland, and only one-fourth
European, was granted home rule thirty
years ago. Natal, an integral part of the
Cape settlement, was dissatisfied with Cape
control, and was allowed autonomy in 1856.
Sierra Leone contained ten years ago one
hundred white men and thirty white women,
but it enjoys home rule. British Guiana
enjoyed home rule for nearly a century.
Honduras has home rule. Dominica has
home rule. St. Vincent is a beautiful oval
island, eleven miles wide and eighteen long.
It has home rule. Tobago, in 1834, eman-
cipated its slaves, paying their masters com-
pensation, and blossoms under home rule.
Australia was granted legislative indepen-
dence. Australia West is under home rule.
New South Wales has its own domestic
government. New Zealand has boasted
home rule for more than forty years.
Queensland is governed also by its own
legislature. Tasmania is governed by a
legislature elected by the people. . Victoria
also. Alderney, eight miles in circumference,
is unquestionably possessed of home rule.
Guernsey makes its own laws, imposes its
own taxes. The tiny Isle of Man, seventy-
five miles in circumference, enjoys home rule
in the fullest and most effective form. The
Dominion of Canada is technically included
in colonial dependencies of Great Britain, and
is comparatively the most striking illustra-
tion of the fact of home rule antagonising
the law of disintegration in great empires.
I may be told that in not one of these cases
are the circumstances precisely the same as
in the case of Ireland. I don’t suppose that
any two cases in history are precisely the
same in all their features, but I think
there is sufficient similarity in the cases
I have quoted to warrant my assertion that
my proposition is not only reasonable
theoretically, judged by the test of common
sense and of political philosophy, but also
because it has the sanction of successful
working in other nations, at other times,
and in the British Empire itself. (Loud ap-
plause.) Now, sir, having, I think, estab-
lished my proposition that home rule is
reasonable theoretically, I will proceed to
consider whether it is a proposition that is
likely to prove advantageous in practice. My
first proof of this is supplied by the instances
I have already quoted of its successful work-
ing, in other nations, at other times, and in
the British Empire to-day. It is for my op-
ponents to prove, if they can, that what has
created prosperity and strengthened loyalty
in Australia would have a different effect in
Ireland. As it is with an individual, so it
is with a nation. No one can transact its
business so well as itself. Unless a man or a
community be mad they must understand
their own business better than anyone else.
Deprive a man of the right of governing his
own affairs himself and what happens ?If
he submits, you turn him into a slave. You
kill in him all genius, all talent, all enterprise,
all energy, all interest in life. Treat a nation
in the same way, and with no sense of
responsibility left to them you may make
the people reckless. You ruin self-reliance,
you kill energy, and enterprise, and in-
dustry. No nation so treated has ever
prospered ; yet this is the position in which
they insist upon keeping Ireland to-day.
They can’t say it is because we are unfitted
for self-government, for their own historians
say in every page they have ever written on
the subject that in the 18 years of Irish
rule Ireland advanced in prosperity, the
arts of peace, and good government, and
presented to the gaze of the world
and the admiration of posterity a galaxy
of great men whose names will


live as long as the English tongue. (Loud
applause.) And from that day to this Irish-
men have been going through the world
providing the best governors and the ablest
statesmen to the colonies of England. (Ap-
plause.) There are two things that are
absolutely essential to the successful fulfil-
ment of its duty by Parliament. _ The
first is time to transact its business,
and the second is knowledge to understand
ic. Now, if there is one thing upon
which all men at home are agreed it is this,
that the Imperial Parliament has not at its
disposal one-half the time necessary to
transact all the important business it is sup-
posed to do. Leaving aside all matters of
foreign and colonial moment, there are at
this time sufficient Irish questions waiting for
settlement to occupy the undivided attention
of the Imperial Parliament for several years.
The same remark applies to English and Scotch
affairs. Matters of the most vital conse-
quence to England and Scotland had to be
shelved last session, and now this session, Mr.
Gladstone has announced, is to be a purely
English one, which means that Irish
grievances, which he has acknowledged are
crying for redress, must again be neglected.
The question of the day par excellence is
how to lighten the labour of the Im-
perial Parliament, and Mr. Gladstone has
admitted that this can only be done by de-
centralisation, or, as we call it, home rule.
But, sir, deficient as the Imperial Par-
liament is in the time at its disposal, it is
equally deficient in that intimate knowledge
which is necessary for successful Irish legis-
lation. It is a matter about which there can
be no cavil that the ordinary English and
Scotch member knows little or nothing
about Ireland. He has never been there.
He has never studied any of our great social
or political problems, and is not bound to the
country by any ties either of birth, parentage,
property, or affection. Under these circum-
stances, is it to be wondered if blunders
of the most serious and sometimes most ludi-
crous character creep into the legislation of
the House of Commons ? The Yiceroy is an
Englishman, the Chief Secretary is a
Scotchman, and the Under Secretary is an
Englishman, and through all the Executive
every officer is either a Scotchman or an
Englishman. No doubt many of them are
men of capacity, but they are devoid of that
intimate knowledge which can only be at-
tained by living amongst the people and
knowing them, and which is absolutely essen-
tial to the successful government of the
country. (Loud and prolonged applause.)
It is a very significant thing that in every
constitutionally governed country in the
world there is one essential condition
which must be fulfilled before any
man can become a Minister of the
Crown, and that is that be shall
represent the will of the majority of the
people and have their confidence. In Ireland
ihere is also an essential condition that must
be fulfilled before any man can hold office
under the Crown, and that is, that before
accepting office he must hold opinions
notoriously opposed to those of the people he
is going to govern. (Applause.) Under
these circumstances can there be any wonder
if Irishmen are discontented with the present
system of government ? Can there be any
wonder that Irish wants and aspirations are
misunderstood? Can there be any doubt of
the enormous practical advantage which would
ensue to Ireland from the adoption of the
principle of federalism, whereby Irish mat-
ters would be ruled wholly by Irishmen, who
alone can thoroughly understand them?
Ah ! were I to mention all those Irish
interests and industries which would be
benefited by home rule I should name
every Irish interest and every Irish
industry—the agricultural interest, the
manufacturing interest, the railway interest,
the fisheries, all languishing and neglected ;
the commerce of the country ruined; the
general trade paralysed ; the education of the
country stunted; the national life of the coun-
try suppressed. A man whose words should be
received with weight in this country has
written upon this subject, and I will read a
few sentences from what he says. The man
I refer to is Sir George Grey. He says :
“ Give to Ireland a State Legislature
and a State Executive in Dublin ; secure
thereby the residence of its ablest men
in the country; open a fair field as
Ministers, legislators, orators to its best
and wisest men; afford from the same
source, as would necessarily and certainly be
done, "occupation to Irish architects, sculp-
tors, painters ; and secure a resident
aristocracy of worth, talent and wisdom ;
and you will at the same time restore the
wealth, trade and commerce of Dublin and
Ireland. Dumb Ireland will then speak
again. Half inanimate Ireland will again
awaken to national life and breathe the
breath of hope and freedom. Whilst, by
again accustoming the Irish people to the
management of their own affairs, and to the
administrative duties of the highest order, a
willing people will be educated in that
political knowledge which will enable them
to put an end to the ills which afflict them,
1 the cause and cure of which none can
understand so well as themselves.’ ”
So much then, sir, for the practical advan-
tages that would result from home rule


to Ireland; but 1 may be asked what
practical advantages would ensue to Eng-
land and the Empire. What practical
advantage to England? Will it not
be the means of relieving the over-
burthened Imperial Parliament, and of
converting Ireland from what she un-
doubtedly is to-day, the weak spot in the
armour of the Empire, into a prosperous
and contented portion of it ? (Hear, hear.)
Grattan once warned Pitt that he was pulling
down one of the pillars of the Empire in
passing the Union. I know not if Irish
loyalty may be considered a pillar of the
Empire, but this I do know, if the Union did
not destroy Irish loyalty it tended to
weaken it. Sir, lam very loath indeed to
weary the patience of those who have
listened to me so attentively up to the
present, but I want, if I can, to make my
case complete. I hold here an extract from
Mr. Lecky, whose name requires no intro-
duction to any man of political or historical
thought and research. He says:—
“It appears tome perfectly evident that
no Government will ever command the
real affection and loyalty of the people
which is not in some degree national,
administered in a great measure by Irish-
men and through Irish institutions. If the
present discontent is ever to be checked,
if the ruling power is ever to carry with it
the moral -weight which is essential to its
success, it can only be by calling into being
a strong local political feeling, directed by
men who have the responsibility of property,
who are attached to the Constitution, and
who at the same time possess the confidence
of the Irish people. As in Hungary, as
in Poland, as in Belgium, national institu-
tions will alone obtain the confidence of the
nation, and any system of policy which fails
to recognise this craving of the national
sentiment will fail also to strike a chord of true
gratitude. It may palliate, but it cannot
cure. It may deal with local symptoms, but
it cannot remove the chronic disease. To call
into active political life the upper class of
Irishmen, and to enlarge the sphere of their
political work —to give, in a word, to Ire-
land the greatest amount of self-government
that is compatible with the unity and in-
tegrity of the Empire—should be the aim of
every statesman.”
(Loud applause.) Now, sir, I have two
or three more quotations. I have quoted
from eminent jurists, political philosophers
and historians, and I now purpose to
make two short quotations from states-
men of the present English Government.
The first is a speech delivered recently by
Mr. Herbert Gladstone, the son of the Prime
Minister, and also a member of the present
Government. It is as follows :
“The form of government in Ireland was as
bad as it could be. In his opinion it was one
of the worst forms of government to be
found in Europe. Centralisation was the
curse of the country. The form of govern-
ment should before long be radically changed,
and the people allowed to manage their own
affairs. No Government could claim to exist
on Constitutional principles which did not
rest on the will and support of the people.
(Applause.) The Irish Government rested
on the Scotch and English majority in the
British Parliament. How far ought we to
go in the way of concession to Irish demands
for political freedom ? Every man could see
that in certain cases the granting of full
political freedom would lead to risks and
dangers which no Government could rightly
make. The converse of this was equally
true. Equal laws every Liberal at once con-
ceded to them. The mere mention, however,
of an Irish Parliament, of home rule,
aroused wild cries of “ Disintegration of the
Empire.” Yet, as we had given a Parlia-
ment to all our great colonies with the most
beneficial results, and as we lost America
through withholding elementary political in-
stitutions, in the abstract there were strong
reasons for its adoption. But it was said
that by granting home rule they would
play into the hands of the Separationists, and
that the Irish were hopelessly disloyal. He
did not grant the latter; but assuming it to
be so, he did not think a Parliament in Dub-
lin would endanger the Queen’s authority in
Ireland.”
(Hear, hear, and loud applause.) My
next quotation is from a speech recently
delivered at Ashton by Mr. Chamberlain,
also a member of the British Government and
the Cabinet :
“Do not let us deceive ourselves. Do
not let us suppose that our work is yet
complete. As long as Ireland is without any
institutions of local government worthy of
the name—as long as nothing is done to
cultivate the sense of responsibility among
the people—as long as the large proportion
of the population are shut out from any
part in the management of their own affairs,
while the education of the people is stunted,
their prejudices ignored—so long the seeds
of discontent and disloyalty will remain,
only to burst forth into luxuriant growth at
the first favourable season.”
(Loud applause.) And now, sir, everybody
will be glad to hear that I have reached my
last quotation. (Voice No, no.”) I have
quoted from eminent jurists, from politi-
cal philosophers, from historians, and from
statesmen, members of the present English
Government. I quite understand, however,
there may be a class of the community with
whom such men have little weight, and con-


sequently I have reserved for my last quo-
tation an authority which should be
final. This is from an article in
a newspaper—probably you know the
name—the Age. (800-hoos, groans, and
cries of “ Ananias.”) For the benefit of the
other section of the community to which I
referred I will read this extract, although
I am afraid that many of you will think it
much too extreme to proceed from my lips.
It is an answer to what appears to have been
an article in the Times of London attacking
home rule :
Thk “ Age,” 16th October, 1882.
“ Briefly stated, the Times argument amounts
to this, that an injustice is not to be redressed
because some of the people who suffer under
it are using violent means to obtain redress.
No one denies that the union of Ireland with
England was obtained by foul means—by
governmental pressure and bribery—from a
Parliament that did not thoroughly repre-
sent the people of Ireland. No one doubts
that for fifty years past—that is, after fair
time had been allowed for the experiment of
union to be tried —the majority of the people
of Ireland have earnestly desired repeal, and
wish to be allowed to govern themselves.
No reasonable man can doubt that if Ireland
had enjoyed self-government as in Victoria
for the last eighty-two years, that is, if its
Parliament had received new powers at the
time of the Union, instead of being absorbed
into the British, the numerous intricacies of
‘ the Irish question ’ would have been
solved years ago in a more satisfactory
manner than is the case. An Irish Parlia-
ment would not have waited till 1828 to
emancipate the Catholics or to remove the
burden of thp Irish Church ; would not have
left Trinity College so long sectarian, or
have grudged the pitiful dole to Maynooth ;
above all, would have settled the land ques-
tion without the revolutionary violence of
the Encumbered Estates Act, or the tortuous
legislation of 1870 and 1881, which seems to
offer law suits in the place of law. Even if
the Irish Parliament had failed as the British
Parliament has failed—and it could not have
blundered more heavily—it would have been
supported by the loyal sympathy of the
electors, and the people would have known
that England was not in fault.
‘‘We do not extenuate the late outrages in
Ireland. From the shooting of landlords to
the maiming of cattle they are a disgrace to
any people ; and it is part of the penalty of
crimes like these that the innocent part of the
population is exposed among unreflective
people to lose the sympathy it deserves.
Still it is ridiculous to say that the crimes of
a few hundred or a few thousand people are
to be an excuse for depriving the whole com-
mnnity of its rights. The Americans began
the War of Independence by tarring and
feathering their opponents, by throwing
private property into the sea, and by firing
upon the King’s troops; but the wisest states-
men at present hold that the best answer to
all this would have been to redress American
grievances even before the authority of the
law was enforced. Perhaps, however, we
ought to apologise for daring to argue the
question. Mr. Gladstone’s Government has
replied to the Parliament of Canada in
language which, says the Times, approaches
very closely to * the incisive directness of the
domestic snub, Mind your own business.’
Without pausing to inquire how a snub can
be incisive, we may observe that the well-
being of Ireland is almost as much
our own business as it is that of the
English Government.
“ Lastly, what is England doing at this very
moment but trying to stave off home rule by
assisting part of the Irish population to emi-
grate to the colonies ? We are to get either
the cripples ivho cannot support themselves or
the dangerous men, whom England hopes to
bribe away from their homes. We have a
right to protest against this. Give Ireland
self-government for a generation, let her
people become as peaceful and law-abiding as
they are industrious, and we shall tvelcome
them to our shores. Eut we do not want to
take the bad bargains of the mother country
off her hands, and we do not wish to assist
England in keeping the sister island deprived
of constitutional rights.
“We wish her the free institutions of a
colony, because we know from experience
that freedom only rivets the links which
attach an English dependency to the father-
land and the throne.”
I confess that, having reached the climax
of authority—(laughter)—in the shape of an
article from this journal which I believe is
published in this colony, and is called the Age,
I would be detracting from the force of my
arguments if I added anything further from
the utterances of statesmen or political
philosophers. I have finished my quotations,
and I have only a few words more to say.
There are two objections to home rule which
I would wish to deal with, because they confront
us on every hand. The first is that, if home
rule just in itself were granted, we would then
demand total separation the day after. Now,
granting home rule itself to be just, is that
a valid argument ? There are many people
who believe that to-day the Irish people
would separate from England entirely if they
could. What prevents them ? No doubt
those objectors would reply, “ England’s
power, her army and navy.” Well, but


England’s power —her army and navy—
would remain after home rule just as before,
and the Imperial Government, with which we
do not wish to interfere, would remain just as
potent after home rule as it is to-day to pre-
vent separation. The truth is, the great bulk
of the Irish people have no desire for separa-
tion, and I believe in my heart of hearts that
if home rule were granted, before five years
every man—even those who hold extreme
views—would be contented and loyal,' and
willing to live under a free constitution as
citizens of the British Empire. The second
familiar objection may be summed up in the
word “ Scotland.” Scotland is contented with
the Union, say the objectors, and Scotland is
prosperous. True, but what then ? Does
that prove that self-government is wrong ?
I believe, in principle, Scotland is entitled to
home rule; and I am very sure that if the
majority of the Scotch people demanded it as
we do, it would be granted. They do not
demand it; but does that prove it is
wrong ? If in the history of the world
you find one country which has pros-
pered under the rule of another,
and one only, does that prove self-govern-
ment is wrong, or rather does it not become
the exception which proves the rule that no
country can be prosperous and contented un-
less she is mistress of her own destinies.
Scotland has prospered not because of, but
in spite of, the Union. She has had many
advantages denied to Ireland. Virtually,
she has been ruled by Scotchmen. I have
never seen a Scotch bill, receiving the sup-
port of the majority of the Scotch members,
that was not willingly passed into law
by the Imperial Parliament with as little
hesitation as Irish bills, supported
by a majority of the Irish members,
were invariably rejected. The Government
officials in Scotland are Scotchmen, while
those in Ireland are not Irishmen; and in
addition to all this, I am perfectly convinced
that the day is not far distant when Scotch-
men will demand and get the privileges
and rights which we are demanding for
Ireland. I have now finished. I think
I have explained what we want under
the name of home rule. I have en-
deavoured to prove that home rule
is reasonable theoretically, judged by the test
of common sense, political philosophy, and
history, and that it is likely to prove advan-
tageous in practice to Ireland, England, and
the Empire ; I have quoted my authorities,
and have combated some of the most popular
objections to the scheme. I trust I have
fulfilled my word not to make any appeal
either to the passions or the imagination of
my audience, and I hope I have not done bo
at the cost of being dull or uninteresting.
I have discussed matters calmly and
dispassionately, with a due sense of the
responsibilities of my position as the repre-
sentative of a nation, and remembering that
I am surrounded by men who are only too
anxious to seize upon my words and twist
them so as to render them injurious to me
and to my cause. I have dealt with my sub -
ject impartially and fairly. All that I can
say in conclusion is this: I shall be amply
repaid if the few words which I have said
on this question to-night should prove the
means of malting intelligent men in this land
calmly consider the question. It is a ques-
tion which must come up for settlement
sooner or later. Upon its speedy and peace-
ful settlement between the two countries, I
believe in my heart and conscience, depends
the future welfare not only of Ireland but
of the Empire. Without some such settle-
ment I see no hope for the permanent pros-
perity and pacification of my country. Ire-
land’s malady is one which must be cured by
Ireland herself. The great interpreter of
human nature and human passions makes
Macbeth ask the physician :
“ Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased;
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow ;
Eaze out the written troubles of the brain.
And with some sweet, oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stuffed bosom of the perilous grief
That weighs upon the heart P ”
And the physician makes answer, and says —
“ Therein the patient
Must minister to herself! ”
So we say to-day of Ireland. Ireland’s
malady has baffled all the most skilful poli-
tical physicians of England. Ireland’s hope
is in herself. She herself must “ minister to
herself.” She must bind up her own wounds
and cure her own diseases. The vital force
which has lived through seven centuries of op-
pression still animates our race. The simple
faith, the kindly nature, the indomitable
courage which made Ireland the centre of civi-
lisation in the far-off ages of the past are not
yet extinct. Give them free scope. Give them
the bracing influence of a free constitution,
and before a generation has passed away
the long and dreary ages of bitterness, and
strife, and hatred will be forgotten, and
Ireland, the Ireland of our hopes and tears
and prayers, will have entered upon a new
era of liberty, prosperity, and peace.
Mr. Redmond then sat down amidst a wild
outburst of cheers and waving of hats, which
lasted for several minutes.
Councillor Fogarty (Hotham) proposed
the following resolution : “ That this
meeting approves of the principle of home
rule as expounded by Mr. Redmond,
and pledges itself to give the movement with


which he is identified all the assistance
it has in its power, and that a sub-
scription list be now opened to assist in
carrying on the agitation until such time as
the necessary reforms are secured for the
people of Ireland.”
Councillor John Curtain seconded the pro-
position, which was carried unanimously.
The Rev. Father O’Connell proposed a vote
of thanks to Mr. Redmond.
The Rev. Father Walsh seconded the
vote with a few appropriate remarks.
The vote of thanks was carried with accla-
mation.
Mr. Redmond, in returning thanks, said he
would not be so ungrateful as to bore them
with another speech, but he thought it his
duty to return thanks to St. Patrick’s Society
for the use of the hall.
Mr. J. W. Walshethen introduced Mr. W.
Redmond to the meeting.
Mr. Redmond said he had almost
come to the conclusion not to attend
a meeting with his brother again because
he had been so often “ boycotted.” On the
present occasion, however, he did not intend
to occupy much of their time in moving a
vote of thanks to their worthy chairman, Mr.
Longmore. Long before his brother and he
came to this colony they had heard of the true
patriotism of the Hon. F. Longmore, and ap-
preciated it all the more because of the number
of cowardly Irishmen —(groans and hisses) —
who had not the common manliness to stand
by their sides, and adhere to the prin-
ciples in public which in secret they pro-
fessed to hold. (Cheers.) Mr. Longmore’s
name had long been identified with every-
thing relating to the welfare of Irish affairs.
The Irish National League, which they repre-
sented there that evening—which his brother
and Mr. Walshe and himself represented —did
not solicit or require the patronage of any set
of men. The League was an organisation of
the people, to whom the representatives of
the League appealed; but when gentlemen
of Mr. Longmore’s ability and standing
oame forward to aid a cause in which
they knew they were working for Ireland,
they deserved all the honour, respect, and es-
teem which they bestowed on them. He (Mr.
Redmond) would devote two minutes to a
reference to the work which brought his
brother, Mr. Walshe, and himself to this
country. They came to Victoria to appeal
to all classes and conditions of the people to
bring about for Ireland national self-
government and better land laws. There
was in Ireland to-day discontent and starva-
tion : discontent because the Irish people
were not allowed to govern themselves;
starvation because of the existence of an
atrocious and abominable system of land
monopoly. They sought to bring about a
change in the state of affairs by the estab-
lishment of a native Parliament in Dublin,
and the substitution in Ireland for the pre-
sent iniquitous system of land laws a
peasant proprietary, by which the land-
lords would obtain the full market value
for the land which they called their
own, and the tillers of the soil would become
the owners of the land for which their fore-
fathers bled and laid down their lives. It
was in furtherance of that cause that they
had come to Australia; and in England,
Scotland, and America they were accorded the
right of free speech, which w r as denied to
them here. The doors of places of public
meeting were opened to men who preached
blasphemous and atheistical doctrines, while
they (the Messrs. Redmond), who came
here to discuss constitutional questions of
great importance, were hounded down. If
in any town which they visited they could
not get a hall, they would speak in the open
air, although he believed their enemies would
deny them participation in the air of Heaven
if they could. Five years ago home rule
would not be thought of in England ; to-day
the question formed a subject upon which
men spoke rationally in England. Five
years ago the landlord in Ireland would
charge any rent that he chose, and
evict a tenant as the whim or fancy
prompted him. Now all that was changed.
Practically, the landlord to-day had no more
to do with the fixing of rents than any one
in that hall. Capricious evictions were an
impossibility, and Irish farmers were placed
in the position of having as much right to
the soil, under certain circumstances, as the
proudest landlord ever born. A revolution
had been effected which had brought about
changes which were more important to the
people than those effected by the French
Revolution, when the streets of Paris ran
blood. The contest in Ireland had been a
bloodless one—they had used no weapons more
keen than the voice and the pen. He had heard
that one of the newspapers that morning had
taunted the Irish people on the many
futile struggles which had taken place in
Ireland in the national cause. It was pointed
out that Emmet, Tone, and O’Connell had
worked in vain for Ireland, and it was asked,
how could the National League hope for suc-
cess? Those who asked the question knew
little of the Irish people. It was the very
memory of those men and their struggles—
men who had worked and bled for
Ireland—which inspired the men of the
present day to carry on the battle
with firmness and determination, and to be-


queath the warfare to posterity. They would Cheers were then given for the chairman
boldly face opposition, slander, and prejudice, and Mr. Parnell.
never despair and never relax their confidence The chairman’briefly returned thanks, and
in thfl rniflftO’O’lnO' tfllf n At tho TmaK nnnnin j • _?' 1 it ' . ’
in the unflagging faith of the Irish people.
They believed, with Byron, that
Freedom’s battle, once begun,
Bequeathed from bleeding sire to son,
Tho’ baffled oft, is ever won.
Mr. J. W. Walshe seconded the motion in
a few words of warm eulogy of Mr. Long-
more.
The motion was carried.
in doing so said there was a great upheaval
upon the land question in the United King-
dom, and Ireland would undoubtedly be one
of the countries most benefited by it in the
long run, although now she was getting the
hardest knocks.
A subscription list was then opened in aid
of the Irish National League; numerous
subscriptions were handed in, and the pro-
ceedings terminated.


WAS THE LATE LAND LEAGUE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE OUTRAGES?
Me. J. E. Redmond, M.P. for New Ross,
delivered his third lecture in. St. Patrick’s
Hall on the eveningof Wednesday, 13th June.
The audience packed the hall to its full
capacity, about 1000 laiiea and gentlemen
being preaent. The ladiea were accommo-
dated with aeata on the platform, or immedi-
ately in front of it, but the greater portion of
the male part of the audience were obliged to
stand during the proceedings, aa the apace
available had to be economised as much aa
possible.
Mr. Thomas Fogarty, J.P., Mayor of
Hotham, and president of the Victorian
Branch of the Irish National League, occu-
pied the chair. Amongst those present were :
—Mr. Wm. Redmond, the Rev. P. O’Flinn,
S.J. ; the Rev. Hubert Daly, S.J.; the Rev.
Mr. O’Connor, the Rev. Mr. Magee, the Rev.
J. H. O Connell, the Rev. P. B. Walsh, the
Rev. Mr. Brady, Mr. J. W. Walshe, Or. Cur-
tain, J.P. ; Mr, P. Mornane, Mr. H B,
Hiyrgins, barrister-at-law; Mr. F, G. Duffy,
barrister-at-law ; Mr. J. Moloney, solicitor ;
Mr. Andrew, ex-M.L.A.; Mr. M. Mornane,
solicitor; Mr. Lynch, solicitor; Mr. M.
O’Connell, J.P.
The Chairman said ho had very great
pleasure in introducing to them Mr. Red-
mond. (Cheers.) The subject that that
gentleman was about to speak upon was one
of great importance, not only to himself and
his colleagues in the old country, but to Vic-
torians.
Mr. Redmond, on coming forward, was re-
ceived with enthusiastic cheers. He said: —
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, —You
will, I am sure, pardon me if I commence
my remarks to-night by repeating a state-
ment which I made a few days ago.
I wish to repeat the statement that
neither now, nor at .any future time,
will I enter upon any vindication of myself.
Accusations have been made against me per-
sonally in this city—accusations of a gross
and libellous character, but I refuse to
notice them. (Cheers, and “ Quite right.”)
H ippily for me, I have a character which is
out of the reach of such accusations, and I
have inherited a name which defies calumny,
not only in my own land, but in England,
and in the House of Commons, where past
generations of my family have been known
and respected. (Cheers.) To those accusa-
tions which impute to me dishonorable
motives and sympathy with crime, I have
only one answer, and that is, my contempt.
(Loud cheers). But the duty which I am
called upon to fulfil to-night is far different.
Like many another public duty, it is an
intensely unpleasant one ; but I feel it in-
cumbent upon me not to shrink from the
performance of what appears to me a mani-
fest duty, not only to my absent colleagues
and the cause which I advocate, but to
the Irish people of these colonies, every
one of whom is included in the accusation
of those who say that money is being
subscribed in this land for criminal
objects. I ask this audience to bear
with me, while I deal as calmly as I
can with the accusations against the late
Land League, and the present leaders of the
National movement. Let me try if I can
fairly state what they are. As I take it, the
first is that the late Land League was
responsible for outrage generally from its
very inception. The second is, that
what is called in journalistic parlance the
“terrible indictment” of Mr. Parnell by
Mr. Forster remains unanswered. The
third seems to be that the Land
League and the present 1 aders of
the people were responsible, by sym-
pathy, and even by connection, for the
deplorable assassinations in the Phoenix
Park. Fourth, that the money sub-
scribed to the Land League has never
been accounted for, and may have
been used for illegal and criminal purposes.
And the last and most absurd of them
all is that the leaders of the present move-
ment are responsible for what I might call
the “ dynamite policy.” (Laughter.) N>w
I think any fair man will acknowledge,
that I have impartially stated the main ac-
cusations against the cause of Ireland and the
Irish leaders. Let me deal with them
separately. Let me take the first—that the
Land League was the source and cause of
outrage generally from its very inception.
We have an answer to that accusation, and
it will divide itself into four points: First,
if the accusation is true, the Land League
created agrarian outrage. But where is the
child, who has read Irish history, who does
not know that it is as old as the hills, or,
to speak more accurately, as the land


system, which is its parent and source ?
Show me, if you can, the period of Irish his-
tory in the past, since the present land system
came into use, when agrarian crime in Ire-
land was not known ? At every period of
distress in the history of the land war
there has been agrarian crime in Ireland,
and the first point I make in answer is, that
agrarian crime existed in Ireland long before
the Land League or its leaders were heard or
dreamt of. Now for my second point. Turn
to the past history of Ireland, and what do
you find in reference to agrarian outrage F
Wherever you find famines—and they are
plentiful in the pages of our history—
there you will find an enormous increase
of agrarian outrage and agrarian disturb-
ance. It is but natural. When famine,
comes, the opportunity arrives to enforce the
monstrous and unjust power of eviction which
the landlords possessed—eviction for no other
fault on the part of the tenants than that
they were unable to pay exorbitant rent,
not through any fault of their own, but
owing to “the act of God” in the shape
of bad seasons. Turn to the years 1833 and
1848, and you will find famine and its in-
evitable result—an enormous increase of
agrarian outrage and crime. In the winter
of 1879, you are aware, a famine fell upon
Ireland, one whose severity was recognised
in Australia by all creeds and classes, who
contributed generously to alleviate the suffer-
ings of the people. But turn to the records
of crime in that famine, and what do you
find P What never occurred before in the
whole history of the nation ; a famine of
terrible severity visiting three-fourths of
the land, and unaccompanied by any
increase of outrage and crime. Every
other famine resulted in an enormous
increase of agrarian outrage and agrarian
crime; for the first time in the history of
Ireland, the winter of 1879 and the com-
mencement of 1880 witnessed a famine
which was absolutely shorn of its usual
increase of crime and outrage. Surely,
this is a remarkable fact. Why did not
the famine of 1879 produce the same
effect as the famines of previous years ?
I challenge those men who accuse the Land
League of having been from its inception
the parent of agrarian outrage and crime,
to answer this question. Let me see what the
answer is. Was it that the Government took
immediate steps to mitigate the famine, and
thus destroy the provocation to lawless-
ness P We have it on record that the
Chief Secretary, the Hon. James Lowther,
stated in the House of Commons
that all the talk about famine in Ireland
was absurd; that in point of fact
there was greater destitution in Eng-
land than in Ireland; and we have the
further fact that not one step was taken in
Parliament, or by the generosity of English
individuals, till the leaders of the Irish people
declared that there was a veritable famine
there—till they had appealed to the world,
and Mr. Parnell had sped across the Atlantic
to beg bread for his famishing country.
It was, then, no action of the Government
in providing relief that deprived the famine
of 1879 of the usual increase of crime.
What was it, then ? Was it that the
Government took any steps to prevent evic-
tions. (A voice, “ No.”) Here also we have
the records, and pray mark that during the
remainder of my speech I say nothing on
my own authority ; for every statement that
I make I quote my authority, chapter and
verse. In the beginning of 1880, when
the famine was raging in Ireland, the
Government introduced a bill called the
Compensation for Disturbance Bill. The
effect of that bill, roughly speaking, would
have been this, that in any part of the
country which was scheduled as a distressed
part, landlords, for a limited time, should not
be allowed, without payment of a fine, to
evict any tenant from his home if he could
prove to a court of law that the reason he
was unable to pay his rent was the famine.
That bill passed the House of Commons, and
it went up to the House of Lords, where it
was defeated, and the Government never
stirred hand or foot, never uttered one word
of protest, but let the bill go by the board,
and let the people meet the future as best
they could. Consequently, it was not legis-
lation on the part of Government that pre-
vented the famine of 1879 from being marked
with crime as other famines—as every other
famine had been in the past. Was it the
benevolence of the landlords ? (Laughter.)
We happen to know a good deal of landlord
benevolence in Ireland in times of famine.
We happen to know that in the year 1848,
when the people were dying on the roadsides
in Ireland of famine, the Imperial Parliament
was actually obliged to pass into law a bill—
what for P To make it illegal for landlords
to evict tenants on Christmas Day and
Good Friday. (Laughter.) And in the
winter of 1879 and the commencement
of 1880, the landlords of Ireland utilised the
famine as they had utilised past famines, as
a means to enable them to clear their
estates of obnoxious tenants. Then, it
was not the benevolence of the landlords any
more than it was the action of the Govern-
ment, in starting relief funds, or passing
acts of Parliament, that prevented the famine
of 1879 from resulting the same as every
other famine that had preceded it in
the history of Ireland in the increase of


outrage. What was it, then ? Well, I
will tell you. In 1879 the Land League
sprang into existence. (Applause.) The
first duty which the Land League had to
perform was the duty of saving the lives of
the people whose lives had been neglected by
the Government when the Disturbance Bill
was rejected. The Land League had to appeal
to the whole world for charity, and I may
say incidentally that I hope in my heart and
soul that the day will never come again
when Ireland will be obliged to appear as
a beggar at the door of every nation in the
world for charity. (Applause.) The leaders
of the Land League set relief funds in
motion all over the world, and they col-
lected a vast sum of money, but they also
did what was very much more important
than that; they undertook the work of
putting a stop to eviction in Ireland.
Evictions in Ireland, sir, have always been
the forerunner of crime. The Land
League undertook to check evictions—that
is, they undertook to do what the Govern-
ment tried to do in the Disturbance Bill,
but which they had failed to do. The
Land League perhaps took rough and ready
methods; but, sir, the lives of the people
were at stake, and it would not
do to wait for another session of Parliament,
and for another bill. They called upon the
people to combine, and they promised them
that if they "did they would put down
eviction. They preached to them the
doctrine that no tenant in Ireland should
be found base enough to take a farm
from which another tenant had been
evicted unjustly. (Applause.) That doc-
trine was carried out by the people, who
then united as they never united in their
previous history. Before two months had
elapsed eviction was checked in Ireland, and
in checking eviction the Land League effec-
tually checked the tide of outrage and crime.
(Applause.) Now, gentlemen, let me not be
misunderstood. Ido not say that during
this famine there were no agrarian outrages.
I do not claim for my colleagues the per-
formance of a miracle, but I claim this—
that the famine which, judged by the past
history of famines in Ireland, ought to have
been marked by an enormous increase of
crime, witnessed a state of the country in
which crime was kept down absolutely lower
than what I might call its normal condition.
Now, let me verify these facts. I find,
from statistics taken from returns presented
to the House of Commons, that there were
In 1837 ... 172 homicides and murders.
1845 ... 137 „ „
1846 ... 176 „ „
1848 ... 171 „ „
1849 ... 203 „ „
In 1850 ... 113 homicides and murders.’
1851 ... 118 „ „ *
m - 5? „
1853 ... 73
1854 ... 63
1855 ... 65
1856 .7. 50 ”
1857 ... 52 „ ”
1858 so ;; ;;
1859 ... 45 „
And in the year 1879-1880, that is,
taking the time covered by the famine,
there were in all Ireland exactly eight
murders of all kinds (applause) and,
sir, five of them only were alleged
to be agrarian. By way of comparison,
and not of invidious comparison neces-
sarily, I may state that in England, in
the same year in which there were in
Ireland eight murders of all kinds, there
were 61 persons tried for murder, 40 for
attempted murder, and 328 for stabbing,
shooting, and manslaughter. (Loud ap-
plause. ) I find, by referring to the records,
that the whole teaching and tendency of the
Land League were in the direction of the
repression of crime. Of course, I might
spend a whole night in quoting from the
speeches delivered by various members of the
Land League, and were I egotistical enough
I might quote speeches of my own, because
it is a fact which can be verified by any
man who takes the trouble to refer to
our speeches reported in Hansard , and to
be found in the libraries of this city, that
all through the Land League agitations
myself and others never spoke from our places
in the House of Commons without addressing
to the Irish people earnest words of warning
—words of entreaty that they would
abstain from ruining their cause and blasting
the reputation of their ancient nation, by
having recourse to violence and crime. The
same thing occurred in Ireland. I suppose I
have spoken on hundreds of Land League
platforms, and on the hillsides in
Ireland, and I never spoke at a meet-
ing in Ireland where I did not
hear the most responsible men present de-
nouncing outrage in the most uncompro-
mising way. But these are only statements of
my own, and, consequently, may have little
weight with outsiders, and I propose to read
two or three quotations from leaders of
the Land League, and I choose these par-
ticular ones because the first is from a speech
made at the very first Land League meeting
after the opening of the campaign in
Ireland; the second is from a speech made
about the middle of the campaign, and the
third contains absolutely the last public
words spoken by any man at the last public
Land League meeting in Ireland before its


suppression. I find that at Balia, in county responsible for crime in Ireland generally
Mayo in December, 1879, Mr. Parnell used
the following words :
I congratulate you upon your attitude to-day
—calm, self-reliant, determined, but within the
law. In this way we shall teach our rulers
that although they may violate the Constitu-
tion, although they may rush into illegal
acts, we are not going to be induced to follow
them. ... I would exhort you with all
the little power or force I possess to maintain
the attitude that you have maintained up to
the present, and not to allow any provocation
to draw you away from your duty. Even if
your leaders are torn from you, let them go ;
others will take their places. Let us remain
within the law*, and within the Constitution, and
let us stand, although we have to stand on the
last plank of the Constitution —let us stand until
that plank is torn from under our feet.
I find that at Kilburn, in the county of
Cork, on 17th January, 1881, Mr. Michael
Davitt said
Despite the efforts that are being made to
drive you from a stern, passive attitude into
loose and violent action, adhere to the pro-
gramme of the League, and repel every in-
centive to outrage and every inducement to
give your enemies an opportunity of wiping
out this movement in the blood of Irishmen.
. . . But glorious indeed will be our
victory, and high in the estimation of man-
kind will our grand old fatherland stand, if
we can so curb our passions and control our
acts in this struggle for free land as to march
to success through provocation and danger
without resorting to the wild justice of re-
venge, or being guilty of anything which could
sully the character of a brave and Christian
people.
At the last Land League meeting held be-
fore the suppression of the Land League,
the chairman, the Rev. James Cantwell,
administrator to the Archbishop of Cashel,
in dissolving the Central League on the 19th
October, 1881, used these words :
I appeal and exhort each one of you, in
conclusion, that you yourselves, and, so far
as your influence goes over others, will abstain
from using violence of any sort in the country.
Our position is passive resistance. We are an
unarmed people, and every man of sense who
loves his country, who wishes to do nothing to
bring disgrace and injury upon it, will do all he
can to prevent violent action.
These are samples of what were the invari-
able teachings of the Land League leaders.
That their object was successful is proved
by the fact that the winter of 1879-
80, though Ireland was suffering terrible
provocation, was stained by less crime than
any winter for fifty years previously. Now
let me keep the thread of my argument.
I am proving that the Land League was not
from its inception; and first I showed you
that agrarian outrage was of much older
origin; secondly, that the winter, which
from the history of past famines ought
to have been marked by crime, was less
marked by it than any for the fifty years
previously, and that that was directly
traceable to the Land League having stopped
evictions, and to the invariable teaching
of its leaders. Let me get on. There came
a time when agrarian outrage and crime in-
creased, although there was less provocation,
because the famine had passed away. What
was that time, and what was the reason of the
increase of crime ? The time when outrages
began to increase was the time when Mr.
Forster’s Coercion Act was carried into law.
The winter of 1879 saw Ireland almost for
the first time for half a century without a
Coercion Act and an Arms Act, and yet this
winter was free from serious crime. To-
wards the beginning of 1881 crimes began to
increase, though the famine had passed away.
Mr. Forster’s ill-fated Coercion Act had been
passed into law. It had been presented to
Parliament by him upon the plea that it was
absolutely necessary to ensure tranquillity to
the country, and he sought to prove that the
country was not tranquil by the production
of a return of outrages which showed a very
large total. He could not increase the num-
ber of murders—five agrarian ones—but he
said there was a large number of minor out-
rages, and we who lived in Ireland were some-
what staggered to find that outrages were com-
mitted all around us without our knowledge.
(Laughter.) In my own peaceful county of
Wexford there had been fifty. Knowing the
people, and having lived all this time amongst
them, I took the trouble to inquire, and
found that out of the fifty “ outrages” forty
were threatening letters. Now, Ido not
want to palliate threatening letters. I have
received some threatening letters myself since
I came to Australia, but if I received a million
I would not think of calling them a million
outrages perpetrated by the people of
Australia. We find that a most ingenious
method of piling up the agony had been
invented. Mr. A. M. Sullivan tells us how a
certain young man had a grudge against
another young man, the son of a widow, and
that he broke into the widow’s house and broke
her son’s head. Breaking into the house was
made one outrage, striking the son was
another, threatening to do it again was a
third, and the upsetting of the widow’s pail
of milk was a fourth. (Laughter.) In this
way the number of outrages was piled up,
but it was useless for us to expose this as we
did. Unfortunately, in a moment of weak-
ness, which no one regrets more to-day than


he, Mr. Gladstone yielded to Mr. Forster, and
passed the Coercion Act. The direct out-
come was real serious crime. Sir John Pope
Hennessey, late Governor of Hong Kong,
and present Governor of Mauritius, said,
speaking before the Social Science Congress
in London, a few months since: —
He could hardly conclude the opening address
of that section without saying a word on that
which had recently occupied so much Parlia-
mentary and public attention —The repression of
crime in Ireland. He had just come from
Ireland, where he had seen the clearest evidence
that, in endeavouring to repress crime, crime had
been increased. Here, again, it was the old
story; the history of penal laws was the history
of centuries of State-created crime. Last year
hundreds of men “ suspected” by the Executive
were arrested; most of them were politicians;
some of them were actually the persons of
greatest influence in certain districts in repres-
sing outrages. As the arrests increased in
numbers , the number of outrages increased
also. Whether it be ten thousand miles away,
or nearer to the heart of the Empire, one general
principle seemed to hold good—that the
machinery for the repression of crime was
cheaper and more effective where prudent,
government had secured, on the side of the law
the sympathy and supportof the people.
Do not let ft be said the Government had
not ample warning of the result of this course
of action. We warned them in the House of
Commons by the past history of coercive legis-
lation in Ireland. We challenged them to show
that any single one of the fifty-one Coercion
Acts passed since the union had been effective
in repressing crime, and we told them that
they ought to have known from the history
of every land in the world, where simi-
lar legislation had been tried, that the
suppression of open agitation would have the
effect of driving the people into secret organi-
sations. Unfortunately, our warning was
neglected. Let me read the warning given
by the Rev. Mortimer O’Connor, P.P. of
Ballybunion, county Kerry, who spoke at a
meeting of the Land League shortly before
its suppression :
I established a branch of the Land League in
my parish and became its president. Every
householder in the parish—farmer, labourer,
and tradesman joined it. with the result
that the most perfect tranquillity prevails and
serious crime is altogether unknown. The
restraining influence of the league is clearly
visible. The same is the tone of the surround-
ing parishes. It also applies in a greater or less
extent to all Munster. Should the Government
suppress this organisation, which walks openly
in the light of day, and hides nothing, the
population will be brought face to facewith
the armed forces of the realm. Without
restraining or controlling influences in their
struggle for existence, our suffering fellow-
countrymen will be driven into a course which
reason and religion alike condemn.
Mr. A. M. SulUvan, whose words, I am glad
to say, are quoted and approved of by the
journals of this land, and who is, notwith-
standing, one of the leaders of the present
movement, has thus summed up the result
of Mr. Forster’s regime in Ireland:
He (Mr. Forster) found Ireland alarmed and
disturbed. He left it a volcano of human
passions on one side, a Bastile of Government
vengeance and caprice on the other. The
11 village ruffians ” and “ midnight marauders ”
went apparently untouched —nay, multiplied in
numbers and increased in insolence of crime;
while mayors, magistrates, members of Parlia-
ment, public representatives of every degree
were seized and flung into gaol on mere sus-
picion, without accusation, evidence, investiga-
tion, or proof The inevitable result
appeared. The secret societies became masters of
the situation. Crime grew rampant.
Unfortunately, it is true that crime did grow
rampant. From the very commencement of
the operation of the Coercion Act crime
began to increase, but the catalogue reached
an alarming and horrible total when the
Coercion Act was vigorously put iu force :
when the leaders were arrested, the Land
League and its branches suppressed, the precs
of the country gagged, and public meetings
declared illegal. Let me read this miserable
record of State-created crime:
la the first quarter of 1881, when the Coercion
Act just came into full operation, there were
in Connaught and Munster 568 outrages of all
kinds ; in the second quarter there were 763 ;
in the third there were 735 ; and in the fourth
quarter, when the League was suppressed and
the leaders imprisoned on suspicion, there was
the enormous total of 1127.
Prom the commencement of the Land League
movement up to the day of its suppression in
October, 1881, there were only 5 agrarian
murders in all Ireland ; within the six months
after the suppression of the League and the
destruction of the influence of its leaders by
arbitrary imprisonment, there were, in the three
counties of Kerry, Limerick, and Clare alone, 8
agrarian murders.
What does this prove ? Any intelligent or
honest man must say it is proved on the face
of these facts that this enormous increase of
crime, when there was less provocation than
in 1879, was directly traceable to the
action of the Government and Mr. Forster.
When the Coercion Act came into force,
the power of the Land League to suppress
eviction was curtailed. When the Coercion
Act was put vigorously in force ; when our
mouths were gagged, and we (were
manacled; when public meetings were de-
clared to be illegal, and the press confiscated,
then our power to check evictions


was gone, and evictions multiplied. They
multiplied with horrible rapidity, and
wherever they appeared, there came in their
train agrarian outrage and agrarian crime.
Picture to yourselves for a moment the posi-
tion of the leaders of the Irish people at that
time some of them manacled in their
prisons, untried and unaccused of any crime;
others of them in exile, their organisations
shattered, their organs of public opinion
silenced, public meetings declared to be
illegal. Picture to yourselves the position of
Mr. Parnell in his prison cell; picture his posi-
tion, looking out, powerless and helpless, as
the increase of crime throughout the land; pic-
ture his feelings when he saw from his prison
cell the passions that he had restrained break-
ing loose; when he saw that by the mad and
guilty action of the people deprived of their
leaders, without hope and without counsel,
they were destroying, bit by bit, the work
which he had built up by three years of
unparalleled labours and sacrifices, and
picture, if you can, his feelings when,
released from prison, he found himself
taunted with being the source and cause of
the crime which occurred when he was
manacled and silenced, and his organisation
shattered. Sir, there came a time when
these crimes began to diminish just as
suddenly, and apparently with as little
reason as they had commenced to increase.
From a certain day and date agrarian
crime in Ireland began to diminish. What
was that day and date ? Every one
knows, sir, that it was the day and date when
Mr. Forster left the Government, a discredited
politician, when his policy was at last dis-
carded by the man whose reputation will
not be the greater because he ever allowed
himself to be duped by his Irish Chief
Secretary—the time when the leaders of the
people were released without a word, when
the public press of the country once again be-
came free, when public meetings ceased to be
illegal, and when we were once again
free to organise an open agitation for our
rights. (“Hear, hear,” and applause.) I
am not stating on my own authority that
agrarian crimes then diminished. We have
it on the very best authority. We have it
on the authority of Lord Spencer, the Vice-
roy of Ireland, and we have it on the
authority of the Judges of Assize in Ireland,
that the falling off in the number of offences
was less than at the corresponding period
during the last three years. At Longford
there was only one indictment. The Leitrim
Assizes were finished in a few hours. At
Clare the cases were neither numerous nor
serious. Lord Justice Fitzgibbon, in his
charge to the grand jury, commented with
much satisfaction “on the diminution of
crime,” and so on from all parts of Ireland.
There seems to be an idea in this country that
Ireland to-day is in a state of disturbance and
lawlessness. I can understand the idea
in the public mind, which is excited by the
discovery of the perpetrators of the horrible
assassination in Phoenix Park more than a
year ago. But, sir, these things did take
place more than a year ago. Ireland to-day,
notwithstanding a new Coercion Act, not-
withstanding a partial famine, is practically
in a state of peace and tranquillity. To sum
up my answer to the first accusation, that the
Land League was the cause and source of
crime generally from its inception, there are
these four points :—Firstly, agrarian crime
existed long before the Land League ;
secondly, the famine of 1879-1880 was saved
from crime by the Land League; thirdly,
crime began to increase as soon as the Co-
ercion Act of Mr. Forster was passed, and it
multiplied into terrible proportions as soon
as the Land League was suppressed ; and,
fourthly, crime diminished as soon as Mr.
Forster’s policy was disregarded, and open
agitation was once more declared to be
legal. Now, sir, I come to the second
accusation, which is that what is called
Mr. Forster’s terrible indictment of Mr.
Parnell remained unanswered. What was
that terrible indictment by Mr. Forster?
I will not weary you by any comments of
my own, but I may be permitted to say that
I have heard every word of that indictment
from Mr. Forster’s lips at least twelve times
in the last three years. There is not one
word new in this indictment, and it has
only caught the public eye and ear now
because the public mind is excited by
recent discoveries in Ireland. To begin
with, Mr. Forster charges Mr. Parnell
with “conniving at murder.” Any schoolboy
knows that to connive at murder is a crime
in the sight of the law. Who is the man that
accuses Mr. Parnell of conniving at murder ?
Does he represent the Government of the
country whose duty it would be to charge
Mr. Parnell with such a crime ? No, sir.
Does he represent the law officers of the
Crown, whose duty it would be to prosecute
Mr. Parnell? No, sir; the Government of
the country have made no such charge, and
Mr. Gladstone, the head of the Government,
has never breathed one syllable in his life to
hint even at a suspicion that Mr. Parnell was
guilty of such a crime. (Applause.) No,
the man who makes this charge is a dis-
credited and disgraced politician. He is
the man who owes his fall from power
directly to the opponent whom he accuses—a
man who never again, were he to live to
the age of 100, can hope or expect to take his
seat as a member of any English Govern*


ment; a man who has been false to
Ireland —which, being unable to govern,
he calumniated —and false to his own
colleagues, whose most intimate secrets
he betrayed as soon as they dis-
carded him. (Applause.) Who is the
man, sir ? Why, he raised his hand
to rebuke Mr. Parnell, and accuse him of
conniving at murder; look upon his
hand, that hand is red with blood. (Loud
applause.) I do not speak these words
lightly. His hand is red with the blood of
Ellen M'Donagh, aged 18 years, stabbed to
death by the bayonets of emissaries. His
hand is red with the blood of the five
children, all of them under the age of 10
years, shot down with buck-shot in the
streets of Ballina. His hand is red with
the blood of the men slaughtered during his
term of office in Ballina and Ballyrag-
get, and other places in Ireland. Allow
me to read a portion of a speech in answer
to this man, delivered by Mr. Justin M'Carthy,
in the House of Commons :
Mr. Justin M'Carthy, M.P., made a striking
point, and showed that in 1864 Mr. Forster had
been accused both in the House and in the news-
papers of conniving at assassination. Mazzini
had written a letter entitled “The Story of the
Dagger,” in which the patriot said, “ Blessed
be the knife, blessed be the dagger and talked
of these instruments as weapons of “ irregular
warfare.” This letter was read in the House,
whereupon the member for Bradford rose and
said, “Mazzini, whatever his faults, is a man of
high character, and I shall not be ashamed of
being his friend.”
So much, sir, with reference to the charge
of conniving at murders, proceeding
from such a man. Mr. Forster, in his
indictment, to use a journalistic phrase,
goes on to accuse Mr. Parnell with reference
to certain passages which appeared in the
Irish World. First of all, at the commence-
ment of the Land League movement the Go-
vernment stopped the entry into Ireland of
that paper. They would not allow it to cir-
culate, they suppressed its copies in the
post-office and destroyed them. But, sir,
Mr. Parnell and myself were supposed, not
only to have the time to read every line, but
to be able to defeat the Government and
to obtain regularly copies of a paper which
was denied circulation in the country hy Mr.
Forster. More than that, at the time some
of these quotations appeared, Mr. Parnell
was in Kilmainham prison ; so that, first of
all, there was this difficulty in his way in
following this paper, that it was not allowed
to enter the shores of Ireland, and even if it
were it would not be allowed to penetrate
Mr. Parnell’s prison cell; but still we are
told we are responsible for every word
that appeared in that paper, because we
accepted money sent to it. I notice that
the Argus has started a fund in aid of a
distressed Irish landlord, and I notice that
in the last ten days the magnificent sum of
£6 has been collected. I wish my words
could reach that distressed landlord ; I would
say to him, beware how you receive
this money. If you are an honest man,
before you receive it you are bound to
come to Melbourne to obtain files of
the Argus and to read these files, for the
last two years, through and through
and if you find any syllable in the Argus
which you disapprove of, you must not accept
the contributions. Otherwise, according to
the logic of our opponents, this distressed
landlord, to whom I wish every bene-
fit, if he accepts this money thereby
makes himself responsible for every sylla-
ble that was ever written in the
Argus for the last two years. (Applause.)
Now, I am afraid I must detain you still
longer. I come to the third accusation,
namely, that the Land League was respon-
sible, by sympathy and by connection with
the Phoenix Park murders. On this mat-
ter it is useless for me to express ray own
opinions. I have spoken mine in many
places in Australia, and at one of the
largest meetings which I have ever addressed,
held in the Freetrade Hall, Manchester, the
next day after the assassination —the Sunday
after the Saturday upon which they were
perpetrated—when a resolution was
passed expressing the national horror and
indignation at the occurrence. But I wish
to answer the charge that the Land League
was responsible for those crimes. (“It was
not.”) First, in sympathy. The day after
the murders this manifesto was issued to
the people of Ireland: —
To the people of Ireland. —On the eve of
what seemed a bright future for our country
that evil destiny which has apparently pursued
us for centuries has struck at our hopes another
blow which cannot be exaggerated in its dis-
astrous consequences. In this hour of sorrow-
ful gloom we venture to give expression to our
profoundest sympathy with the people of
Ireland in the calamity that has befallen our
cause through this horrible deed, and with
those who determined at the last hour that the
policy of conciliation should supplant that of
terrorism and natural distrust. We earnestly
hope that the attitude and action of the Irish
people will show to the world that an assassina-
tion such as has startled us almost to the
abandonment of hope of our country’s future is
deeply and religiously abhorrent to their every
feeling and instinct. We appeal to you to
show by every manner of expression that,
amidst the universal feeling of horror which


the assassination has excited, no people feel so
deep a detestation of its atrocity, or so deep a
sympathy with those whose hearts must be
scared by it, as the nation upon whose pros-
perity and reviving hopes it may entail conse-
quences more ruinous than those that have
fallen to the lot of unhappy Ireland during the
present generation. We feel that no act that
has ever been perpetrated in our country
during the exciting struggles of the past fifty
years has so stained the name of hospitable
Ireland as this cowardly and unprovoked
assassination of a friendly stranger, and that,
until the murderers of Lord Cavendish and Mr.
Burke are brought to justice, that stain will
sully our country’s name.—(Signed) Chas. S.
Paknell, John Dillon, Michael Davitt.
I find that the Land League in America
issued a similar manifesto. It said this :
To the Land League of America.—The exe-
crable and cowardly assassination of Lord
Frederick Cavendish, the newly-appointed
Chief Secretary for Ireland, and Under-
secretary Burke, has horrified the world, and
ii especially painful and abhorrent to every
true friend of Ireland. We denounce the
awful crime, and exhort our brethren in Ireland
to use every effort to bring its perpetrators to
justice, and show their detestation of the
fiendish act, which only an arch enemy of our
race or some irresponsible idiot could have con-
ceived or executed. — James Mooney, President
of the Irish National Land League of America.
On this question of sympathy with the
Phoenix Park murders, surely our most bitter
opponents will acknowledge that Sir William
Harcourt, the Home Secretary, is an im-
partial witness, and yet he used these words
in my own hearing, five days after the
murders, in the House of Commons :
No man is unjust enough to doubt the
sincerity of the indignation which the
Irish people have expressed at the crime
which has sullied their soil. . . . That the
heart of the mass of the Irish people is sound,
the voice that comes to us now from every
province of that land amply testifies. Though
the body of Ireland is sound, there is a fearful
plague spot upon it, and I firmly believe that
the Irish, no less than the English nation,
desire that the plague spot should be removed.
There is a cancerous sore in Ireland. It is a
sore which springs from the baneful existence of
secret societies .”
Sir William Harcourt, it will be observed,
does not say that the cancerous sore in Ire-
land sprang from the baneful existence of
open agitation or the Land League, but of
secret societies. I find that the brother of
one of the murdered gentlemen, Dr. Burke
of Lafayette, America, spoke thus immedi-
ately after the deed :
I know that his death will be speedily
avenged. I know that no Land League in Ire-
land, and no Land League here, had a hand in
this cowardly deed. Ireland and England are
on the verge of a true reconciliation, and no
true patriot, no true Irishman, ever committed
the fearful and dastardly deed.
And Mr. Davitt—(cheers)—who was inter-
viewed in London immediately after the
crime, said: —
Had I been permitted to continue my crusade
against outrage —to have levelled all the influ-
ence of the Land League against the commis-
sion of murder and the mutilation of cattle, I
could have prevented numbers of crimes that
now stain the name of Ireland and have averted
the horrible deed of Saturday last.
And to conclude on this point, I will read
from an interview which recently took place
between Mr. Parnell and an eminent jour-
nalist in Paris. Mr. Parnell speaks thus :
M. Comely—But what about agrarian
crimes ?
Mr. Parnell—We condemn them. The Eng-
lish try to put the responsibility for them on us,
as certain Republicans in France try to make
the Monarchists responsible for the acts of the
revolutionists, and especially for the late mani-
festations. We are opposed to violence. Our
speeches, our writings, are there to prove it.
Violence leads to no good, but rather plays the
game of the landlord party
M. Comely—As in the case of the assassina-
tion of Lord Frederick Cavendish ?
Mr. Parnell—The knife that killed Lord
Frederick Cavendish came near killing with the
same blow the Land League. We were at that
time in a splendid position. My friends and
myself, as you know, had been put in prison.
Then disorders broke out in Ireland. The
Government found itself unable to repress the
outrages, and came to us to ask us to intervene.
We were liberated. We said to the Govern-
ment, “ You must take certain measures. It is
necessary that the Land Act should be honestly
administered, and that the tribunals charged
with applying it should not be permitted to
defeat the intentions of Parliament.” We were
in some sort the arbitrators of the situation
when, four days after our liberation, Lord
Cavendish was assassinated. By that act nearly
all the ground we had gained was lost. The
English Press never ceased its efforts to make
us responsible for that crime. In truth, we
should have been mad to have even thought of
it, because if men had been paid to discredit us
they could not have found a more abominable
or a more effective means to do so.
In the face of these statements, where is the
man who will tell me that the leaders of the
Irish people to-day had any sympathy with
the commission of that horrible deedP The
men who make that accusation, unless they
be political fools, do not believe in it. Shortly
after the commencement of the Land League
movement Mr. Davitt appeared in
Hound Room of the Rotunda, Dublin, to de-


From Commencement of Movement to October, 1832.
Dr.
Belief Fund £59,178 14
3
Land League Fund to 3rd Feb., 1881 30,825
0
7
Defence Fund per Land League ... 6,563
8
5
Do. Freeman’s Journal... 14,514
0
0
Land League Funds from 3rd Feb.,
1881 129,907
-0
0
Amount Coupons on Investments,
65,196 francs at 25.25 ... ... 2,532
0
0
Profits realised on sale of 91,000 dols.
U.S. 4 per cent, bonds ... ... 1,250
0
0
liver a lecture in aid of the Land League, and
the country was horrified by reading the next
day that the meeting was broken into by a
body of men, who extinguished the lights and
dispersed the assemblage, and that these men
called themselves (oh! the shame of it!)
“ Nationalists.” It came out a few days
after that the person who led that mob was
James Carey. (Oh ! and loud groans.) I have
experienced some of the sympathy of Mr.
Carey and his friends. I attended a Land
League meeting at Blackburn, in Lancashire,
and in the middle of the meeting about a
hundred men seized the chairs, manufactured
shillelaghs out of them, drove us off the plat-
form, and broke up the meeting effectually ;
and I found that these were sympathisers
with the Dublin rowdies, and were allied
with a desperate party in America, who
never from the beginning disguised their
open hostility to us and our movement. It
is a fact of which I have personal know-
ledge that within a week after the Land League
manifesto was issued the men who signed it
received private information—they knew not
from what source —that if they did not
withdraw it they would be assassinated;
and I know that many of us, besides
those three men, were obliged to go
about armed, because we knew we had
excited the enmity of men who would
hesitate at no villany. It had been said that
Mr. Davitt was a Fenian. True, when
eighteen years old he was, and you
may be sure as such he was an honourable
man ; but with growing years he learned
wisdom, and, released from his prison, he cast
Fenianism aside, and to-day is as much
opposed by some Fenians as by our friend the
Argus. (Laughter). I have been told there was
a plot to murder him, which, only for the
treachery of one of the conspirators, who
warned him in time, would have been carried
out. If these are friends, they certainly have
a strange way of showing their friendship.
“ It is all very well to dissemble your love;
But why did you kick me downstairs
Now, was there any connection between the
Land League and these assassinations ? It
was stated that James Carey was a Land
Leaguer. I do not know the value of
the oath of such a man, but there
is his evidence, and in it he states he was
never a member of any branch of the Land
League. Not one of the men convicted was
ever a member of the Land League. On
the contrary, we had very good reason
to know they were amongst its most
bitter opponents. They hoped to work by
desperate means; the Land League was a
stumbling block in their way, and they
rejoiced when Mr. Forster suppressed it. It
is said that money was supplied by the Land
League to the Assassination Committee.
Upon what evidence ? The evidence of Carey.
(Groans.) Did he swear it ? Nothing of the
kind. He said he did not know where it
came from , and, being pressed, he said,
“ Some of us thought the money came from
America, some from the Land League.”
This is the evidence upon which the Land
League is to be convicted of supplying
the funds. I am told that a certain
amount subscribed to the Land League
never was accounted for. When the
statement was first made, the sum
unaccounted for was stated to be
£98,000. I notice it has grown to
£155,000 (laughter), and I would like to
draw attention to the fact that this story
originated in the brain of poor Lady
Florence Dixie. (Renewed laughter.) Now,
what is my answer to that ? Here is my
answer, the existence of which was well
known to the press of this colony,
but which was deliberately suppressed.
I ask, are they going to support my answer
to-night. Here is the balance-sheet of the
Land League, dealing with all moneys re-
ceived from the commencement of the move-
ment down to October of last year, that is,
to six months after these murders were com-
mitted. It may take a few minutes, but I
trust to your patience to allow me to read it:
£244,820 3 3
Cr.
Eelief of distress in 1879-80 ... £50,000 0 0
Htate Trials, Dec., ’BO, and Jan., ’Bl 15,000 0 0
Expenses, support of evicted tenants,
providing wooden houses, law costs,
sheriff’s sales, defence against
ejectments, law costs, and general
expenses of organisation... ... 148,000 0 0
Balance invested in names of Justin
McCarthy, M.P., and C. S. Parnell,
M.P 31,820 3 3
£244,820 3 3
Audited and certified as correct. Eev. Eugene
Sheehy, C.C., John Dillon, M.P., Mathew Harris.
Patrick Egan, Treasarer. And Mr. Justin M'Carthy,
M.P., has also certified to the correctness of these
accounts.
That, sir, is my answer to the man who
says that a single farthing of our funds
went towards illegal or criminal pur-
poses. If any of it did so go,
it must have been with the guilty know-


ledge of the auditors who signed the
balance-sheet, and with men who would
make such an assertion I will have no
argument whatever. Such men there are no
means of satisfying, unless—l presume they
would then be satisfied—l went back and got
the book and vouchers of the Land League,
made as auditors, for a new audit, the
editors of the Age and the Argus, (Laughter
and applause.) The men who subscribed to
un<^B ex pr6ss themselves satisfied. To
those who did not subscribe to the funds that
is my answer, and that only. It has been
stated Mr. Egan refused to allow an audit,
and went to America the other day to pre-
vent its possibility. The absurdity of this is
evident. First, as I have shown you, there
has been an audit. Second, Mr. Egan going
to America could not prevent an audit. He
is no longer the treasurer. Last October he
resigned, and handed over the books and
vouchers to his successor, Mr. Alfred Webb,
of Dublin, in whose possession they are to-
day. Now, there was a little piece of
incidental evidence which has been seized
upon in the country in connection with these
trials. Mullet said he had received a cheque
while in prison from the Ladies’ Land
League, and that is held to be a proof that
the Land League supplied money to this man,
but nobody takes the trouble to inquire the
period he was imprisoned, and how he came
to be imprisoned. It is a remarkable fact
that ought to be noted, that both Carey and
Mullet were arrested as suspects by Mr. Forster,
and, strange to say, were unconditionally
released by him two months before they say
the Invincible Society was instituted. The
Freeman's Journal, in Dublin, which is the
leading organ of public opinion, but not the
organ of the Land League, started a fund when
the Coercion Act came into operation, called
the Political Prisoners’ Sustentation Fund,
which was to supply money to all prisoners
arrested on suspicion, to enable them to buy
food to obviate the necessity for their living
on the prison diet, and one of the
conditions made by the Freeman was
that every prisoner should accept the
same amount, or that none would be given;
and so rigorously was this carried out that
Mr, Parnell and other men who were not in
want of money to buy food, actually con-
sented to accept from this fund their £1 per
week. The Freeman’s Journal found that
Mr. Forster arrested a thousand men, and
consequently their fund grew large and
their duty heavy, and they asked the Ladies’
Land League to distribute the money, and
they consented. Their only duty was to
fulfil the conditions of the Freeman , and to
send a cheque for £1 a week to every man,
and amongst others they sent one to Mullet;
but, strange to say—and of course this
fact has been suppressed— Mullet, on receipt
of the first remittance from the Ladies ’
Land League , returned it in a letter full of
insult, saying that he would have nothing to
do with any money that came from any
Land League source, and that he would
sooner starve in prison than accept money
of a Land League while he was a suspect.
Now, sir, I think all ordinary men will feel
that I have sufficiently answered this charge
of sympathy and connection with these
murderers, because no man of ordinary intel-
ligence believes for one instant in the truth
of that charge. Every child knows that if
the infernal powers had been called upon to
suggest the best means for injuring us and
our cause and blackening our reputation, they
could not have hit upon a scheme more
likely to accomplish their purposes than
the perpetration of these murders, and
we would have been madmen or
worse if we had sympathised or had any
connection with a crime which, I care not
what circumstances may surround it, must
remain, as long as Ireland is a nation, a stain
upon her honour. I have now dealt with
the accusations that the Land League
was responsible by sympathy and connec-
tion with the crimes committed, and also
that the money subscribed for the Land
League was never accounted for. I
now come to deal with the last accusation,
namely, that we are responsible for, and
have sympathy with, the policy of dynamite.
I will not enter at length into this matter.
I will not humble myself by being coerced
into expressing disapproval of a policy which
shocks humanity itself, but I call attention
to the fact that two whose voices are listened
to by Irishmen throughout the world have
spoken, and in no uncertain tone on the
matter. I will refrain from quoting Mr.
A. M. Sullivan’s letter to the Irish people
of America, because my friends of the
press have been quoting it as an example
of what Land Leagues ought to be ; but they
made a little mistake in the matter, for the
man they are quoting is actually one of the
leaders of the Land League. He appeals to
the few in America who have adopted these
means to abandon them, and in scathing
words denounced the injustice and the dis-
honour of such a course of action, and I find
that Mr. Michael Davitt, who is supposed to
be more extreme than Mr. A. M. Sullivan,
used these words in a recent letter :
What Irishmen require more than anything
else at present is sound political education,
which will temper patriotic enthusiasm
with patience, and teach that patient,
plodding perseverance, on a slow but winning
line of action, is the only sure road to victory


in a just and moral cause. Impatience of
results, and passion’s mastery over judgment
and discretion, are our weak points politically,
and in the present state of the national move-
ment we are made to see the disastrous results
that follow from a recklessness that is bom of
political ignorance working upon our Celtic
impulse, I prefer, if necessary, twenty years
of slow work, which will tell bit by bit for
Ireland, to the indulgence of that feeling which
is sung about by the poet, when he says,
“ Revenge upon a tyrant is sweetest of all ” —a
feeling like that of most pleasure, which is not
only transitory as they are, but which leaves a
terrible penalty for Ireland to pay a power that
can play at revenge also. All the labours of
the past are in danger of being so much wasted
energy, because a few political idiots have their
ravings about revenge reported in the press of
America and England. Of all the insane pro-
jects ever condemned by common sense as plans
certain to defeat a just and moral cause , the
dynamite policy is the most idiotic and criminal.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I have finished.
I have, I think, dealt fairly and candidly, fully
and honestly with each one of these five accu-
sations. Let me sum up in two or three words.
The first accusation, that the Land League
was the source and cause of outrage generally
from its very inception, I have disproved
by four points. First, that the Land League
did not create agrarian crime, which dates
back to the origin of the land system.
Second, that in the famine of 1879 Ireland
was saved from an increase of crime, which
ought to have resulted, judging by
the history of the past. Third, that
crime increased after the Coercion Act was
passed, and multiplied after the arrest of the
leaders and the suppression of the Land
League ; and fourth, that outrage only dimi-
nished when the leaders were released,
and open agitation once again became
legal. Then, I have answered the
indictment of Mr. Forster, by pointing out its
absurdity, and showing you the character of
the man who made these accusations.
Thirdly, I have shown you that the charge
that the Land League was responsible by
sympathy and connection with the Phoenix
Park murders is a slander that could only be
uttered by men who are ignorant of the cir-
cumstances of the political situation in Ire-
land. Fourthly, I have shown you the
falsity of the accusation, on the testimony of
the balance-sheet duly audited, that a
single farthing of our funds were ever given
to illegal or criminal purposes, or that a
single farthing remains unaccounted for ; and
fifthly, I have shown you, by the statements
of Michael Davitt and A. M. Sullivan, the
way in which we of the present movement in
Ireland regard what Mr. Davitt happily
calls the “ ravings of political idiots ” about
dynamite in America. I believe that the
trials and vicissitudes through which
Ireland has passed during the last
two years will have a beneficial effect upon
her fortunes in the future. I cannot help
believing that the discovery and punishment,
and the circumstances of the discovery and
the punishment, of the perpetrators of the
Phoenix Park assassinations must have a
good effect in the future. I believe that a
serious—l wish I could say that a fatal—
blow had been struck against secret organi-
sations of a criminal character. Surely, for
the present at least, the miserable memory of
these Phoenix Park murders must deter young
men in Ireland from joining these associa-
tions. What do they seep Some of them
may join with the idea that they are going
to serve their country, but they inevitably
find that they become the slaves of other men.
They are pushed forward ; they are driven
into these crimes, and then the very men who
duped them, and led them on, are found
appearing as Crown witnesses. (Applause.)
I believe that this will have a good effect in
Ireland. I believe that the people are
rapidly learning the lessons of political
moderation and self-restraint as well
as of religious toleration, and upon
these three things I base my hope for
a near future of triumph for our cause.
Sir, it would be out of place for me to
allude to the very absurd comments
which have recently been made upon the
action of the Holy See in Irish matters ; but
as his Holiness has, for the first time,
become infallible in Melbourne—not, mark
you, in spiritual, but in temporal matters
—(loud cheers and laughter)—l may be
permitted to read a few words from the last
encyclical letter to the bishops in Ireland
—words of weight, of wisdom, and of
affection for the Irish people :
The faithful people should be firmly per-
suaded, aa we have already reminded them,
that the standard of honesty and utility is one
and the same; that the national cause should
be kept distinct from the aims, purposes, and
deeds of unhallowed associations; that while
it is j ust and lawful for those suffering oppression
to seek their rights by lawful means, it is not
allowable to make use of the protection which
crime affords; and that Divine Providence
allots to the virtuous the enjoyment of the
fruits of patience and well-doing, but subjects
the evil-disposed, after their fruitless labours,
to heavy punishments from God and men.
So long as these rules are observed, it is lawful
for the Irish to seek relief from their misfortunes ;
it is lawful' for them to contend for their rights ,
for it cannot be thought that what is permitted in
every other country is forbidden to Ireland.
His Holiness’ words breathe the spirit which


animates the leaders of the national move-
ment in Ireland. They breathe that spirit
liberally. We say that our cause is
a great and a holy one, “ the holiest cause
that tongue or sword of mortal ever lost or
gained.” We say that that cause cannot be
advanced by means that are inconsistent with
morality or religion. We repudiate the
assistance of men like these miserable assas-
sins, “ non tali auxilio nec defensoribus intis” ;
not by aid like this, not by such defenders
is the cause of an ancient and honorable
nation to be advanced. (Loud cheers
and waving of hats.) No wrongs, however
great, though they excelled in their atrocity
the greatest wrongs ever perpetrated on
humanity, can justify the commission of a
single murder. No end, however great
or honourable, can justify the commission
of a single crime. There is no man, I
believe, in this room who would be more
willing than I am to make any earthly
sacrifice for the liberties of my native land,
but I say deliberately that the liberties of
Ireland would not be worth having, pur-
chased by the perpetration of one single act
of national dishonour, or of national crime.
God of Right, preserve us.
Just as we are strong.
Let no passion swerve us
To one act of wrong.
Let no thought unholy
Come our cause to blight;
Thus we pray thee lowly—
Hear us! God of Right!
Mr. Redmond then sat down amidst a loud
burst of applause and waving of hats.
The Rev. B. O’Flinn, S.J., moved the
following resolution:—‘‘That this meeting
repudiates the calumnies hurled at the
cause of the Irish people, denies that it
has ever been wilfully marked by crime,
and that we tender to Mr. Redmond our
warmest thanks for his splendid lecture.”
The Rev. J. H. 0 Connell seconded the
resolution.
The resolution was put and carried unani-
mously.
Mr. William Redmond, who was received
with cheers, then came forward, and said :
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, —My
brother has asked me to return to you his
thanks for the cordial way in which you have
passed the last vote. I have nothing to
add to what fell from his lips this even-
ing, and I think that any speech from
me or any one else would tend to blemish
the effect which his speech will have. My
brother has just asked me to challenge the
press to fully report the speech which he
has delivered this evening, and he requests
that the report be a full one, or that it be
not reported at all. (Cheers.) As this is
the last meeting which we propose holding
for the present, at least in Melbourne, it
might be interesting to hear how we have,
to use a familiar phrase, got on. Since the
date of our holding our first meeting in this
hall up to yesterday evening, we have
received for the Irish National League a
sum of £looo—(cheers) —and I may supple-
ment the statement by adding that we have
made no very great exertion as yet
to get subscriptions. I may also say,
in connection with our work here, that
that we are in possession of this large sum of
money for two reasons principally. Through
the kindness of the clergy and people, the
Catholic schoolrooms have been placed at our
disposal, and also we have to thank the St.
Patrick’s Society for having given us from
time to time the use of this hall. Thus
we are able to announce the receipt of £lOOO
in one week, in consequence of our being able
to hold our meetings free of expense.
(Applause.) We have hardly spent £5 in
advertising, the leading journals of the city
having most kindly, gratuitously, and effec-
tively advertised our meetings in their
leading columns. (Laughter.) I do not
propose to say much more this even-
ing, but I will add this : We may have
hours and hours of discussion upon the Irish
Land Question, and the difficulty in Ireland.
But the difficulty which exists in Ireland exists
simply because the Irish have paid away the
last farthing, and left themselves to starve.
With regard to the Coercion Act, I had the
honour —(laughter) —to be one of those who
were imprisoned. Ido not say so because I
desire to announce that fact, which is very
widely known, but one of the papers of this
city said with regard to my arrest that I used
seditious language, and was to be arrested
when I returned to Ireland, for a speech
which I made in Cork last November. It is
true I was imprisoned, because I advised the
farmers to feed themselves and their children
before they paid one red cent, of rent. It is
true I am to be imprisoned again, but not
for seditious language, but because I repeated
my appeal that the farmers would feed them-
selves and their families before paying unjust
and exorbitant rent. I can only say for
myself and the men with whom I have been
working, that we are ready to do anything if
you will only support us with firmness and
determination, without fear or favour, with
toleration for individual opinion. Take for
your watchword that prayer so sanctified by
the last pronouncements of countless martyrs
to the cause of liberty, “ God save Ireland.”
(Cheers.)
A vote of thanks was passed to the chair-
man, and the meeting then terminated.
A number of subscriptions were handed in
to the chairman.








