









t( *CSK Jrlt JjSsj)Jy^yj
• r /,i ■ : Qt'cil
* v > 4> •*• 4*^P
<ft» cj» «k oj» cf« cb «j» 4» _JK 4* *J* *t* _
@Yf?)®V ffflh l\ ivVA'?j 9|[®mSD /j(fnjivSW
wlf §lp^ipipp®
% — \
THE FOLLOWING IS
THE LECTURE ON THE ABOVE SUBJECT
GIVEN BY
J, G. O’RYAN, Esq., Barrister-at-Law,
IN THE HALL OF THE SCHOOL OF ARTS, LISMORE.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —
Before dealing with 4 Irish Wit and Humour’
in the manner I intend, that is by illustration,
I may be permitted to define in a general way
what wit and humour are. Wit is defined by
Pope as 4 What oft’ was thought, but ne’er so
well expressed.’ By Locke as 4 The assembling
and putting together, with quickness, ideas in
which can be formed resemblance and congruity,
by which to make up pleasant pictures and
agreeable visions in the fancy.’ Humour is
that quality of the imagination which gives to
ideas a wild or fantastic turn, and tends to
excite laughter or mirth by ludicrous images or
representations. It is less poignant and brilliant
than wit, but, unlike wit, it is always agreeable.
Humor is waggery. We say a 4 humorous
man ’ or a 4 humorous story ’ when laughter or
amusement is caused by either ; but 4 a witty
man,’ 4 * a witty saying,’ may cause neither
laughter nor amusement, but admiration of the
leverness of the author.
Everybody agrees that the Irish are both
witty .and humorous, particularly humorous.
They apparently cannot help it, and oftentimes
the humor is in such a hurry to get out, that
it is tripped up and appears in what is termed
“‘an Irish bull,” which is nothing more nor
lass than 44 Irish wit in too great a hurry to
speak.” It is as difficult to restrain it as it was
for Pat to stop the milk from boiling over; and
who, looking at the empty pat, exclaimed,
44 Bad cess to it, I haven’t a dhrop left, for the
pot was too full.” Only the day before yester-
day 1 saw amongst the telegraphic news that a
certain candidate for Parliamentary honors was
“inundated with telegrams” The source
whence this emanated can be readily guessed.
A good definition of the condition oi the
poverty of the people of Ireland was given by
one of themselves as 44 Irish flinty.” You
may say this is a 44 bull” if you like, but it
is very like genuine wit. It is the truth, and
Irish ‘ 4 bulls ” as a rule give the truth, though
with the wrong end upwards.
An Irish barrister, testing the admissibility of
the oath of a Chinaman who had been sworn on
the Bible, questioned him as to his belief in a
future state. 44 Charley,” said he, 44 when you
die will you live any more 1” The almond-eyed
Celestial looked astonished, and then with a
broad grin, triumphantly answered, 44 Me die,
how could me live ?”
Mr. Daniel O’Connor, the present Postmaster-
General, as everybody knows, is no flatterer
of great people. Flattery is so repugnant
to his genial soul that whenever he tries
it he invariably makes a mess of it. Well,


once he was laying it so thick on the Cardinal went, and by the time half of our party was
that in the last coat he dubbed his Eminence
the “ lineal descendant of St. Patrick.” Rather
rough this on the Saint, as well as the
Cardinal, considering that history is silent as
to the person of a Mrs. St. Patrick.
At the breakup at Riverview College, in De-
cember, 1889, speaking of the willingness of
the boys to assist in the case of the Panthon, a
a Parramatta steamer in danger of foundering,
he declared that “ their praiseworthy conduct
would be handed down to their forefathers.”
This was worthy of the celebrated Boyle Roche.
On another occasion he solemnly declared in
the presence of 3000 people, that his opponent
w 7 as “ a man who wanted an amanuensis behind
his back to tell him what to say.”
Many of my audience will have heard of Sir
Boyle Roche. This Sir H. B. Roche was the
champion “ bull ” maker in Grattan’s Irish
Parliament, and the following letter from Sir
Boyle to a friend in London, during the Irish
rebellion of 1798, is unique :
u My Dear Sir, —Having now a little peace
and quietness. I sit down to inform you of the
dreadful hustle and confusion we are in from
these blood-thirty rebels , most of whom are,
however, thank God, killed and dispersed. We
are in a pretty mess ; can get nothing to eat , nor
any wine to drink, except whiskey , and when we
sit down to dinner , we are obliged to keep both
hands armed ; whilst I write this letter I hold a
sword in one hand, and a pistol in the other. I
concluded from the beginning that this would be
the end of it; and I saw 1 w 7 as right , for it is
not half over yet. At present there are such
goings on that everything is at a stand. I should
have answered your letter a fortnight ago, but I
only received it this morning. Indeed, hardly a
mail arrives safe , without being robbed. No
longer ago than yesterday, the coach with the
mails from Dublin was robbed near the town ;
the bags had been judiciously left behind , for
fear of accidents ; and by good luck there was
nobody in the coach, but two outside , who had
nothing for the thieves to take. Last Thursday
an alarm was given that a gang of rebels were
advancing hither, under the French standard ;
but they had no colours , nor any drums , except
bagpipes. Immediately every man in the place,
including loomen and boys, ran out to meet them.
W e soon found our force much too little, and
they were far too near for us to think of re-
treating ; death was in the face ; but to it we
hilled , we begun to be all alive . Fortunately
the rebels had no guns hut pistols , cutlasses , and
pikes ; and as we had plenty of muskets and
ammunition , we put them all to the sword ; not
a soul of them escaped , except some that were
droivned in an adjoining bog; and, in a very
short time, nothing was to be heard but silence.
Their uniforms were all of different colours , but
mostly green. After the action we went to
rummage their camp : and all we found was
pikes without heads , a parcel of empty bottles
full of water, and a bundle of blank French
commissions filled up with Irishmen’s names.
Troops are now stationed everywhere round the
country, which exactly squares with my ideas.
Nothing, however, can save us but a union with
England, which would turn our barren hills into
fertile valleys. I have only leisure to add, that
I am, in great haste —Yours truly, Boyle
Roche.
P.S. —lf you do not receive this in course, it
must have miscarried ; therefore, I beg you will
immediately write to let me know .”
The allusion to the coach passengers reminded
him of the story of the fat clergyman, who, to
have room in the coach, got a friend to book
two seats, but, when he came to take his seat,
found one was an outside, the other an inside
seat.
Sir Boyle also sent an amusing equivocal in-
vitation to an Irish nobleman of his acquaint-
ance : “I hope, my lord, if ever you come
within a mile of my house, that you’ll stay
there all night”
When he was suffering from an attack of
gout, he thus rebuked his shoemaker: “Oh !
you’re a precious blockhead to do directly the
reverse of what I desired you. I told you to
make one of.the shoes larger than the other,
and instead of that you have made one of them
smaller than the other.”
Fearing the progress of revolutionary opinions,
Sir Boyle once drew a frightful picture of the
future, warning hon. members that the House
of Commons might be invaded by ruffians who
“ would cut us to mince-meat, and throw 7 our
bleeding heads on the table to stare us in the
face.”
Sir Brian O’Loghlen, the well known Victorian
M.P., gravely told the Supreme Court in Mel-
bourne that “ a verbal agreement is not worth
the paper it is written on.”


Did you ever hear the story of—
well Biddy Malone’s certificate. Bridget
lost her certificate of character on
board ship, between Ireland and blew York,
and was terribly upset. A friend of hers came
to the rescue, and wrote for her this recommen-
dation : “This is to certify that Bridget
Malone had a good character before she left the
ould country, but she lost it on board ship
cornin’ over.”
Nobody expects wit or humour from a
coroner. You might as well expect it from a
gravedigger. A coroner being asked to account
for an extraordinary mortality in the County
Limerick, sadly replied: “I don’t know, but
there are people dying this year that never did
before.”
An Irish corporation once resolved : “ That a
new jail be built, that this be done out of the
materials of the old one, and the old jail to be
used till the new one is completed.”
It is said that Louis XIY once asked Count
O’Mahony if he understood Italian. “ Yes,
please your Majesty,” said the Count, “ if it’s
spoken in Irish.”
An Irish editor said that he could see
no earthly reason why women should not be
allowed to become medical men.
This scene occurred recently in the House of
Commons. An Irish member rose to speak.
Cries of “Spoke,” “ Spoke,’’ met him. The
Irish member stood for av/hile, then burst out
in a rich Tipperary brogue: “If hon. gentle-
men suppose that I was going to speak again,
they are quite mistaken. I merely rose for the
purpose of saying that I had nothing more to
say on the subject.” The House was convulsed
at the ready wit of the Irish member.
Colonel Saunderson, M.P. (I think for Bel-
fast), in a vigorous Anti-Home Rule speech in
the House of Commons, on March 6th, 1890,
gave the House the following information : “I
was born Irish, and have been so ever since.”
In the Irish Bank Bill, passed in June, 1808,
there was a clause providing that the profits
should be equally divided, and that the residue
should he given to the Governor.
An Irish gentleman, noted for his fertility in
making bulls, was once walking through a
street, and was recognised by two boys who
were looking out of an upstair window. One of
them ci iod, 6 There goes Mr. , who makes
so many bulls.’ Looking up, the gentleman re-
torted : ‘ You young rascals ! I know you well
enough ; and if I only had you here, I’d kick
you downstairs.’
During a season of great drought, on one oc-
casion, at Gibraltar, an Irish officer said, ‘he
was very easy about the matter, for he had
nothing to do with water ; if he only got his
‘tay’ in the morning, and his punch at night,
it was all he wanted.’
In the course of the evictions on the
Irish Ponsonby estate the other day, some
Nationalists present questioned one of the
evicted tenants, an elderly man named Patrick
Fitzgerald, but the only material fact elicited
from him was that his rent had never been
raised. He made up for his disappointment,
however, by proclaiming loudly that it was a
hard thing to see a man turned out of a house
which ‘ his father had built and his grandfather
was born in.’
The following were latelj 7 supplied to me by a
young friend, a studentat Riverview College :
At Gowran, during the late Kilkenny election,
Mr. O’Kelly made a rattling, fiery, nationalist
speech. It took immensely, and a countryman in
the crowd asked a friend who the orator was.
On being told it was O’Kelly, ‘Sure,’ said he,
‘wasn’t he a soldier?’ ‘Oh yes,’ replied his
interlocutor, ‘a great soldier in many lands.’
‘ Bedad, 1 thought so,’ rejoined Mr. O’Kelly’s
compatriot, * I knew him at oust, for I’ve often
seen his features in the doctor’s house. Ho is
the very man that stands in bronze on the hall
table of the doctor’s. Sure, devil a mistake,
it’s him or his father. They tould me it was
one of the O’Kelly’s.’ The statue in question
was an ‘ Achilles.’ But who knows? May be
that bold Greek was one of the O’Kelly’s, afford-
ing another proof of the antiquity of the Gael.
I got this from a member of Parliament so I
can’t vouch for its accuracy : —A man named
Kelly was fined for biting off the top of
another man’s nose. Brought up a second
time for threatening to do the same, the P.M.


ordered him to find sureties to keep the peace Dear St. Peter, —Please admit the bearer.
for three months, else go to gaol for two
months. 4 You might as well,’ said Kelly, 4 im-
prison me at once, for how the divil could I
find the piece now if I bit it off a week ago.’
Mr. Donald Sullivan introduced to the House
of Commons last session a droll clipping from
an Irish paper —an advertisement : — 4 Wanted a
laborer and a boy with grazing for two goats ;
both Protestants.
An Irishman writing in the London Times on
the late Baron Dowse, concluded his eulogium :
— 44 A great Irishman has passed away. God
grant that many as great, and who shall as
wisely love their country, may follow him I’
A Dublin paper heard that 4 the health of
Mr. Parnell has latterly taken a very serious
turn, and that fears of his recovery are enter-
tained by his friends.’ Several English papers
quoted this without detecting the bull.
A Cork paper in describing an interval of
peace in a stormy public meeting said :— ‘ For
some time a great calm raged.’
IS cadi ness and Spontanicty are Essential
Qualities of Wit.
A quartermaster in a regiment of light horse,
who was six feet high and very corpulent, was
joking with an Irishman concerning the natural
proneness of Jiis countrymen to make bulls in
conversation. 4 By my sowl,’ said the Irishman,
4 Ireland never made such a bull in all its life-
time as England did when she made a light
hoisernan of you.’
Pat accidentally broke a pane of glass in a win-
dow. He made tracks, but the owner saw it
and was quickly after him. * You broke my
window.’ Pat : 4 To be sure I did, and didn’t
you see me running home for money to pay
for it.’
It is related by Father O’Mailley, that on
one occasion he got a distant sick call to attend
a dying man in a wild part of the parish. De-
layed by bad roads and various causes, he did
not arrive till the man was dead, and he was
met by an indignant people ready to do him vio-
lence for his apparent neglect. Taken in to see
the deceased, he called for writing material, hut
could only get a piece of an old bandbox. Cut-
ting a neat square from this, he wrote: 44 My
Yours truly, Ned O’Mailley.” There,” said
he “ tack that on the coffin, it will pass him in
and so be satisfied the 44 bawneen men,”
whose ruffled feelings were at once alloyed
when their deceased was supplied with such a
passport.
An Irish post boy driving a gentleman a long
stage during torrents of rain, the latter said
‘ Paddy, are you not very wet V 4 Arrah, no,
plaseyer honor, but I’m very very dhry.’
The gods in the Theatre Royal, Dublin, are
well-known as a rowdy lot. On one occasion
when the Italian Co. was playing Faust , the
actor who took the part of Mephistophles neg-
lected to try the trap door by which he was sup-
posed to descend to the infernal regions. His
bulk was too large for the opening, and at the
moment for the descent he discovered he could
not get down above the waist. To heighten the
awkwardness of the situation, and to relieve the
strained feelings of the audience, one of the gods
in the gallery, in a rich brogue, exclaimed:
44 Begorra, the place is full.”
An Irish basket woman’s answer to a new
policeman at Convent Garden was rather smart:
1.8.VV. : 44 Poleeceman ! What’s the raisin
of your wearin’ that white thing round one of
your Wrists ?”
N. Policeman : 44 Why, woman, that’s to show
that we’re on duty.”
1.8. W. : 44 Oh, be the powers! I thought it
was because you didn’t know your right hand
from the left.”
Irish wit, my friends, appears to be born with
the child. Sir Peel, known as the in-
troduce! of the constabulary system as
we know it, while Irish Chief-Secre-
tary, inspecting a National school, asked
the boys of a class: 44 Why did Moses leave
Egypt?” No answer. At last a little fellow
from the end of the school-room put up his hand
and said : 44 I know, sir. Plaze, Your Honor,
he shot a peeler.”
Whoever takes Pat for a fool has a good deal
to learn. He’s not at all so simple as he looks,
or appears to be. He is no fool who double-
banks a Yankee, and this Pat is reported to have
done in New York ;


A man was carrying a live turtle along the
street, when by came an Irishman followed by a
large dog. The countryman tried by gentle
words to get the son of the Emerald Isle to put
his finger into the turtle s mouth, but he was too
smart for that. , , ,
‘ But,’ says Pat, ‘ I’ll put my dog s tail in, and
see what the baste will do. .
He immediately called up his dog, took its
tail in his hand, and stuck it in the turtle S
mouth. He had scarcely got it in when Mr.
Turtle shut down on the poor dog’s tail, and off
the latter started at railroad speed, pulling the
turtle after him at a more rapid rate than ever
it had travelled before. The countryman,
thinking that his day’s work would be thrown
away if the animal should run at that rate,
turned a savage look upon the Irishman, and
exclaimed:
4 Call back your dog !’
Paddy put his hands into his pockets, threw
his head to one side, winked, and then
answered, with a provoking sangfroid. Call
back your fish !’
lie, on one occasion, even had a judge. A
certain judge was once obliged to sleep in the
same room with an Irishman in a crowded hotel
in Australia, when the following conversation
took place between them :
4 Pat, you would have remained a long time
in the old country before you could have slept
with a judge, would you not? .
4 Yes, your Honor,’ said Pat j and I think
your Honor would have been a long time in the
ould country before ye’d been a judge, too.
The Irishman is never at a loss for an answer.
Listen to his definition of ‘ Unclean spirit ’ — 4 a
dirty devil. His pnn on Trench, the Kerry
agent of Lord Landsdowne * — 4 One trench is
enough to drain all Ireland. Of matrimony,
4 A place or state of punishment where some
souls suffer for a time before they can go to
heaven.’ The characteristics of the real Irish-
man may be fitly illustrated by the National
plant. For, as the trefoil or shamrock grows
4 in the bog, the brake, and the mireland,’ so
love, valour, and wit grow in the soul of the
Irishman. Moore, in his own inimitable way,
draws the comparison :
44 But wit perceives the triple leaves,
And cries 4 Oh, do not sever
A type that blends three godlike friends—
Love, valour, wit for ever.’ ”
Now, what is the secret of Pat’s wit arid
humour? Is it the climate ? No. For
a man born in a stable is not necessarily a horse.
The secret of Pat’s wit and humour is— 1 Hope-
fulness.’
Philosophy gives him what wealth oft denies
Contentment —a man’s never dead till he dies
And if I’m knocked down, sure may be I’ll rise
Before I get up in the morning.
And should misfortune e’er come to Pat’s lot,
He says, quite contented, 4 1 don’t care a jot:
Things that are bad might be a deal worse ;
May be they’ll change agin morning.’
The hopefulness of the Irish character, which
nothing can kill, is well exemplified in the un-
conscious answer of the London school boy to
the question —“ Write a short account of the
conquest of Ireland.’ Wrote : 4 The conquest
of Ireland was begun in the year 1170, and is
still going on.’ Never conquered. The only
way to conquer them is to kill them right out,
and then I believe some would be found alive
and kicking. To know what Irish wit and
humour really mean, one has to mingle with the
peasantry ; go to their firesides ; listen to them
at fair or market day ; at election times; and in
the witness box on the occasion of a trial in
which their sympathies are involved. Even in
their religion, to which they are so devotedly
attached, we have occasionally the humorous
side. Father Tom Burke, the eloquent Dorai-
nician, tells a very good story of the days of the
Irish famine :—A peasant, poor and hungry,
left his own church for the sake of a meal for
himself and his starving ones. On his way to
the Protestant Church, on a certain Sunday, he
passed by the Catholic Chapel. When became
opposite to the place in which he had been
christened and married, and seeing the knreling
congregation worshipping, as he had often d-me,
according to the rites of his forefathers, he sud-
denly dropped on his knees in the middle of the
road, and with hands and eyes raised to heaven,
exclaimed : 4 Good-bye, God, till the new
praties come in.’ Listen to this poem, in which
harmless wit and religion are charming’y
blended ; a dialogue between a dying old woman
and the priest who is attending her; a poem,
too, which contains a moral well worthy of
attention in these days :


Will My Soul Pass through Ireland.
[The first three stanzas of the poem were
written a number of years ago by Denis O’Sul-
livan, of New York. The other stanzas attached
w r ere afterwards added. ' Soggarth,’ I may add
for the benefit of those who do not know Irish,
signifies a priest, and ‘ aroon ’ means dear.]
Oh soggarth aroon ! sure I know life is fleeting,
Soon soon, in the strange earth my poor
bones will lie ;
I have said my last prayer and received my last
blessing.
And if the Lord’s willing I’m ready to die.
But, soggarth aroon ! I can never again see
The valleys and hills of my dear native land ?
When my soul takes its flight from this dark
world of sorrow
Will it pass through old Ireland to join the
blest band P
Oh, soggarth aroon ? sure I know that in heaven
The loved ones are waiting and watching for
me.
And the Lord knows how anxious I am to be
with them,
In those realms of joy, ’mid souls pure and
free;
Yet. soggarth, I pray, eie you leave me forever,
Believe the last doubt of a poor dying soul,
Whose hope, next to God, is to know that when
leaving,
’Twill pass through old Ireland on the way
to its goal.
O soggarth aroon ! 1 have kept through all
changes
The three-blessed shamrock to lay o’er my
clay;
And, oh, it has ’minded me, often, and often,
Of that bright shining valley, far, far away.
Then tell me, I pray you, will 1 ever again see
The place where it grew on my own native
sod ?
When my body lies cold in the land of the
stranger,
Will my soul pass through Erin on the way
to our God ?
" Arrah ! bless you my child ! sure I thought it
was heaven
You wanted to go to the moment you died ;
And such is the place on the ticket I’m giving,
But a coupon for Ireland I’ll stick to its side.
Your soul shall be free as the wind o’er the
prairies,
And I’ll land you at Cork on the banks of
the Lee,
And two little angels I’ll give you like fairies,
To guide you ail right over mountain and
lea.”
Arrah soggarth aroon can’t you do any better ?
I know that my feelings may peril your
grace;
But, if you allow me a voice in the matter,
I won't make a landing at any such place.
The spot that I long for is sweet County Derry ;
Among its fair people I was born and bred ;
The Gorkies I never much fancied while living,
And I don't want to visit them after Tin
dead.
Let me fly to the hills where my soul can make
merry,
In the north, where the shamrock more
plentiful grows —
In the counties of Cavan, Fermanagh and Derry
I‘ll linger till called to a better repose.
And the angels you give me will find it inviting
To visit the shrines in the Island of Saints ;
If they brinii from St. Patrick a small bit. of
writing
They'll never have reason for any com-
plaints.
"A soul, my dear child, that has pinions upon it
Need not be confined to a province so small;
Through Ulster and Munster and Leinster and
Connaught,
In less than a jiffey you’re over it all.
Then visit sweet Cork, where your soggarth was
born,
No doubt many new things have come into
vogue—
But one thing you'll find that both night, noon
and morn,
As for centuries back, there’s no change in
the brogue.”
Good mother assist me in this my last hour ;
And, soggarth aroon, lay your hand on my
head :
Sure, you're soggarth for all, and for all you
have power.
And 1 take ib for penance for what I have
said.
And now, since you tell me through Ireland
I'm passing,
And finding the place so remarkably small,
I*ll never let on to the angels crossing
That we know a distinction in counties at all.


LeVer, the novelist, has some very amusing
sketches caricaturing the foolish prejudices of
the tourist from the other side of the Channel
In a book written in 1866 by a French
writer during his visit to Ireland: ‘ 4 The
other day an English tourist, a man already
elderly, arrived at Castle Connell. He
intended passing some weeks there, and on
the recommendation of a friend, had
written to secure rooms in the inn. He
wished for one in the front of the house. He
had been promised one, but did not get An
honorable individual, living by his wits, intro-
duced himself as having fishing rights in the
river, and led him, for a consideration, to a
certain spot, where he left him, promising him
wonderful success. In 5 minutes he was ar-
rested by a keeper, who threatened him with
prosecution. After three or four similar ad-
ventures he packed his portmanteau, vowing he
would never visit Ireland again. At the station,
just as he was starting, he was accosted by four
or five beggars. 4 You tell me that you are
dying of hunger. That, too, must be a lie.
Since I have been in this country I hear nothing
but lies. Look, here are three shillings for
whoever tells the biggest lie now.’ 4 Oh,
answered the most ragged of the lot, addressing
his neighbour, 4 here, at least, is a raal gintle-
man !’ and he held out his hand sure of the
three shillings.”
A story is told of an Englishman who landed
in Dublin not long ago filled with apprehension
that life was not worth a farthing there, and
thereabouts. The Land Leaguers, he imagined,
were all blood-thirsty assassins, and all that
kind of thing. But it was his duty to travel in
the land —a duty he approached with fear and
trembling.
Now there happened to be on his route a
number of towns, the names of which began
with the suggestive syllable 44 Kil.” There was
Kilmartin, and so on. In _ his ignorance of
geographical nomenclature, his affrighted senses
were startled anew on hearing a fellow-passenger
in the railway carriage remark to another as
follows: —
4 I’m just afther bein’ over to Kilpatrick .’
4 And I,’ replied the other, 4 afther bein’ over
to Kilmary .’
4 What murderers they are!’ thought the
Englishman, 4 and to think that they talk of
their assassination so publicly !’
But the conversation went on .
‘ And phare are ye goin’ now V a;
,’ now V asked ;
assassin
No. 1.
‘l’m goin’ home, and then to was
No. 2's reply*
The Englishman’s blood curdled.
4 Kilmore, is it ?’ added No. 1.
4 You’d better be cornin’ along wid me to
Kilnmaul !’
It is related that the Englishman left the train
at the next station.
Even bishops don’t cease to be Irishmen
when they put on the mitre, and take in hand
the crozier: A meeting has just been hold in
Philadelphia to found a Catholic Historical
Library. The meeting was addressed by Cardi-
nal Gibbons, who in the course of an interesting
address urged the people to study the history of
the country and the Catholic hierarchy, of those
eminent men who won honour and glory in
battle, as statesmen, on the bench, or in litera-
ture. Let such illustrious names, he said, as
those of Washington, Jefferson, Jackson,
Patrick Henry, Archbishop Carroll, Randolph,
Clay, and Webster be an inspiration to the
young men of the day. He also said that it
was highly important that every historical docu-
ment pertaining to the work of Catholics in
America should be saved. The Cardinal caused
laughter and applause by saying that the
eloquent and beloved Archbishop of Philadel-
phia, when a small, red-haired lad in Ireland,
delighted in repeating the language of Daniel
O’Connell, but now the stream of genuine
eloquence flowed so freely from the Archbishop’s
own breast that nobody would accuse him of
palming off anybody else’s oration as his own.
But the Archbishop was not to be had thus, and
managed to get square with his Eminence. 44 I
forgive the Cardinal for his witticisms,” he
said ; 44 what nature did for me in my early
days the Pope did for his Eminence later on,
by sending him a red cap.”
Some of you know Dr. Lanigan, R.C. Bishop
of Goulburn, and all have heard of the late
illustrious Archbishop Vaughan. On one oc-
casion after a service on St. Patrick’s Day the
Archbishop, who had worn a 44 green cope,” re-
marked to the others, 44 It would seem as if I
am the only Irishman among you.” Dr.
Lanigan replied immediately, 44 Oh, Your
Grace I We don’t require the green on our
backs to tell we are Irish. With you of course
it is different.”


Pat as a Witness.
The shrewdness of the Irish peasant in the
witness box is well-known to all who have had
to deal with him professionally. The Parnell
Times Commission is fresh in the minds of aIL
From the reports I glean the following :—There
were some truly amusing incidents between the
counsel for the prosecution, in the Parnell Com-
mission/and some of the witnesses who had been
summoned to give evidence in support of the
charges. Whether the answers given were
designed to produce the effect which resulted, or
not, it is certain that greater deftness in avoid-
ing giving the answer that was sought, while at
the same time giving an answer that could not
exactly he termed hostile, although looking sus-
piciously like it, could not be imagined. The
following are some samples of Paddy’s fencing
with Sir R. Webster and his colleagues :
‘Do yon know any of the men who wrecked
your house V
‘ Shure an’ I do.’
‘ What are their names V
4 Their names, is it V
‘Yes.’
‘ Shure, all the shorthand writers in the world
could’nt put their names down, there was so
many ov’em. 5
% # *
4 Stand up, sir, said the counsel ;; ‘ are you
tired.’
4 1 am, that—av talkin’ to you.’
* * *
‘ls the farm vacant P’ another witness was
asked.
4 No. It’s stocked with a caretaker and two
policeman,’ was> the reply.’
* * *
‘ Have you been to a house in the Strand V
was asked of a witness who was suspected of hav-
ing been interviewed by the other side, since his
arrival in London.
‘ I saw no house on the strand. There was’nt
one,’ replied the witness.
‘ What ?. no houses in the Strand ? What
Strand are you talking about V
4 One about a mile beyant our house at home.’
Counsel sat down.
* * *
Some of the witnesses fenced almost with
every question, innocent as they looked, but
were hard nuts to crack.
‘ When yon say, I might,’ said Mr. Davitt t<
a witness who did not intend to answer a certain
question it he could avoid it,, ‘ does that mean, T
did r
‘ Shure it might.’
‘ Yes, but does it V
‘ It may.’
‘ Please answer. What does ‘‘l might mean,
‘ Divil a bit do I know.’
* * *
4 Now, sir,’ said counsel to another, 4 you
bought some hay, and a shot was fired into your
house because you would not give it up. Did
yon give it up after the shot was fired V
6 1 did that.’
‘ Did you get your money back V
‘ Sorra a bit.’
4 How was that. ’
‘ I don’t know.’
‘ Do you mean to say you didn’t try !’
‘ Slime and I did nat.’
‘ Why not V
‘ I don’t know.’
‘ What did you pay for the hay V
4 ls it phwat I paid for the hay F Begorra I
with a sly wink r 4 1 paid nothing at all V
* * *
A Kerry witness was asked how many childrei
he had.
‘ Only six,’ he replied.
‘ Is that a long family V
‘ There’s longer..’
‘Any of them earning money ?’
‘ One’s married,’
‘ What does he earn.’
* I’ve tould ye he’s married.’
* *
‘ Now Michael,’ said counsel familiarly, * you
say you heard a gun, one night, and found a hole
in the door that wasn’t there before V
4 1 do so.’
‘ Was it a bullet hole V
‘ To the best of my belafe.’
‘Will you swear it was a bullet-hole.’
4 It might have been a bullet-hole.’
4 Will you swear it was V
4 Arrah, now, be aisy. I did’nt see the bullet*
doin’ it.’
Michael was asked no more questions.
* * *
‘ They took me out into the fired at me.,
and then bate me,’ said Pat Donoghue.
4 What did they beat you with V
4 1 don’t know that same.’


* Did it feel like sticks V
4 Begorra, it did that V
* * *
4 Now, sir,’ said counsel to a witness, who was
trying his level best to convince the court that
he had no intellect whatever, 4 the constable ac-
companied you from Galway ; did he talk to you
about this case V
4 Is it talk ye mane ?’
4 Yes.’
‘ Eh V
4 Did he talk V
c I didn’t hear him.’
4 You know you did.’
Well, if I did, what did he say T
4 That I mean to find out. Will you swear he
did not talk to you V
4 How should I know V
‘ You know he did.’
‘ 1 don’t.’
4 Come, now, answer the question ; you are an
intelligent man.’
4 Begorra 1 that’s just what I’m not.’
Counsel thought it was a convenient oppor-
tunity to sit down..’
* * *
4 You say your husband was shot ; had he
joined the league V counselinquired of a female
witness.
‘ Phwat did ye say V
4 Was your husband a member of the Land
League V
4 He was very fond of whiskey.’
4 Answer the question. Was your husband a
member of the Land League V
‘No ; I towld you he was very fond of
whiskey.’
‘ What has whiskey to do with it.’
4 Shure, that’s fora clever gintleman like you
to find out.’
Counsel did not put any more questions to
witness.
* * *
Apropos of this part of my subject, I must
m»t forget the following, giving Pat’s descrip-
tion of the prisoner :
Magistrate : ‘ Describe the man you saw as-
saulting complainant V
Policeman • 4 He was a little insignificant
cratur, about your size your worship.
An Irisli Election.
'The humours of an Irish election are depicted
by Irish novelists in colours, which to those who
do not understand the Irish character appear
fantastic, but are, nevertheless, substantially
real. Lover gives us a notion of what elections
were in the olden times ; but, to come to our
own day, we find in that charmingly written
novel by William O’Brien “ When We Were
Boys, ’ a true picture of what a Cork election was
like 25 y< a’S ago, at a time of great political ex-
citement. The Fenian excitement was then at
its height, another greater part of the young men
of Ireland had enlisted in the revolutionary
cause, having despaired of redress by constitu-
tional means. Thank God, at present, all that
Ireland wants can be got within the constitution,
and this the present generation well knows.
Mr. O’Ryan here read an extract de-
scribing Nomination Day :
“ Monsignor M'Grudder stood forth in all the
majesty of his thick-rimmed gold spectacles and
purple buttons to second the nomination of
Glasscock in the name of the clergy.
4 I am here to-day as a humble priest of God’s
sanctuary.’ ‘ Why don’t you stay there,’
shouted one pale-faced youth. . . .’ 4 1 am
here to-day,’ repeated the Monsignor, 4 to ex-
press the gratitude of all men who love religion
and value authority to the Government whoso
vigorous measures have delivered this land from
the inost deadly danger that ever threatened
our holy faith in this Island of Saints, and I
regard it as the Attorney-General’s highest
claim upon this Catholic constituency next to
his own well-proved Catholicity ami attachment
to the Holy See, that he has borne an honor-
able and conspicuous part in the warfare against
those accursed secret societies that were eating
into the faitli of our people and recruiting souls
for hell ”
The angry crowd were swarming on to the
witness-table in front of the orator. Some
passionate encounter was imminent, when the
comic element, which is never lacking in a Cork
crowd, came to the rescue. The Cork folk are
the Irish Parisians. They have something of
the wut ami artistic gift of the Boulevardmns,
with the hankering after barricades of a crowd
fr. >m the Buttes Chaumont. The orator at a
Cork meeting is only one in a merry circle wheie
who so has anything to say says it sans gent, and
when ‘ Irish potatoes flavouied with Attic salt ’
(as Father Front, himself a Cork man, puts it)
are always flying about in abundance. A
sweep, in the full sable uniform of his pr ofession,
had planted himself on the witness-taoie in front
of the Monsignor, in a state of diabolically high


spirits. 1 Yerra, listen to dat for language I’
cried the satirist, pointing his black paw at the
Ajax-like figure of the dignitary. ‘ Dere’s ould
Paddy M‘Grudder’s son for you I—ould Bottle-
de-Broth they used to call him, wasn’t it, sir 1 ?’
he innocently inquired of the Monsignor himself.
A dacent ’ittle man he was, if he didn’t
warther the whisky on de people—and he did
dat for de people’s good, to be sure, de same as
de son do be cursin’ us. Oh, boys, look at de
gold specs of him !’ he cried, enjoying intensely
the Mor isignor’s rising colour. ‘ And look at all
de purple and fine linen, for de honour o’ God !
Begor, ould Bottle-de-Broth wouldn’t know his
own son in his fine Italian regimentals, so he
wouldn’t !’ The crowd roared at each of these
rude thrusts, and the Monsignor winced worse
than he would have winced if he had been on a
bed of torture and the sweep practising with the
t hum b-screws.
fr ihis exhibition of scurrilous ribaldry/ he
cried, his white hair tossing majestically, ‘ comes
in appositely to remind us how narrow an
escape we have had in this Catholic land from
the blasphemous teachings of Garibaldi and the
Carbonari.’
‘Who’s dim, your reverence?’ asked the
sweep. ‘Tree cheers for Garrett-de Dandy and
de udder fellow, anyway ! Dey can’t be so far
wrong whin de Monksinger has de bad word for
em.
‘ Oh, oh I’ interposed the scandalised Glasscock
with eyes gently directed to the empyrean.
v I'his is holy Ireland! Yon will have them
cheering for the devil next.’
‘ Ir we did ’iraself, we’re less in de ould boy’s
debt dan you are, Toby, anyhow,’ returned the
undaunted sweep, who had by universal acclaim
assumed the reins of supreme power for the
moment and had a whole court hanging on his
lightest word and roaring at his coarsest jest.
‘ Order, boys, order V exclaimed Mat Murrin,
n-ing to the left of the High Sheriff like an eye-
glassed Neptune to appease the waves. Whether
i was a wink that lurked behind the eye-glass
the public appeared to be in some doubt, but the
rest of his face was as solemn as a bench of
bishops while he said severely: ‘Have some
respect for the clergy.’
4 Holy fly ! and is dat de clergy?’ cried the
sweep pointing the dirty finger of scorn full in
tne Monsignor’s face. ‘ Boys, look at the
dargy | Begor, if dat’s de Church, and if dats
pointing to the Attorney-General l is de
State, ’twas a’most time for de.boys to try what
a tetch ’ (touch) ‘of physical force could do to
improve tings.’
Monsignor M‘Grudder’s patience was utterly
exhausted. He bent his sturdy body over the
bench, and aimed a thundering blow in tne
direction of the sweep’s black mug. ‘ Physical
force !’ he cried, boiling with indignation. ‘ ’Tis
well for yon I’m a priest and that you have the
police to protect you, or I’d give you a polthogue
in the gob that would teach you what physical
force is, you miserable sprissaun !’
This touch of nature, so far from aggravating
the situation, elicited a roar of approving laugh-
ter from the crowd. The Monsignor’s rough-
and-ready prowess threatened to make him
almost popular. Nobody seemed to enjoy it
better than the sweep, who, having by an agile
duck of the head dodged the blow, came up
with his white teeth grinning resplendently in
their sooty frame-work. ‘ Begor, your rever-
ence,’ he remarked in a tone of confidential
good humour, ‘ if you were only as good a poli-
tician as you’re handy wid de knuckles, we’d be
all going to you for pinances for our sins. Come,
Monksinger,’ he said suddenly, ‘ answer me one
question, and I’ll take the pledge agin openin’
my gob for de rest of de surmonies.’
‘ I will !’ said the Monsignor, seeing a prospect
of a respite from his torturer and facing him
boldly.
The diabolical little sweep waited for a
moment of dead silence. ‘ Was it Dublin
Castle or de people ped for de port wine it took
to give your reverence your complexion V he
demanded with a look of triumph, which was
his vengeance for the blow.
‘ Drop that you little devil,’ cried Con
Lehane, springing on the tables and firing the
sweep like a cricket hall into the body of the
Court ; then drawing himself up like a massy
rampart between Monsignor and the audience,
he said, 4 We won’t listen to you, your rever-
ence. That’s an end of it. No priest in
politics !’ And again the young men formed
with that deep ground-swell cry, 4 No priests in
politics. ’
There was something about Con Lehane’s de-
termined reverence which daunted Monsignor
M‘Grndder more than the sweep’s flippant
blasphemies. He did not attempt to utter
another word. With a gesture to the High
Sheriff he retired in silence before the stone-*


mason from the rostrum whence he had so often
thundered as a King. He had the feeling that
he was doing a solemn thing, and so he was—the
Old Order was giving place to the New.
Glasscock’s rising to speak was, of course, the
signal for the breaking up of the fountains of
the great deep. Amidst the yells the carcase of
a dead cat came sailing down close to the At-
torney-General’s head. 4 Dere’s your patriotism,
Toby,’ said a voice. 4 Wouldn’t you know it be
de smell of it.’
‘ No, indeed, my dear friend,’ said Glasscock,
with face of flowing courtesy. 4 I’d have
thought it was one of your own family.’
4 Yerra, Toby, what did you do wid 44 De
Pike,” agra?’ asked voice number two. ‘Eh,
my noble poet V
4 1 did what you ought to do with that
tongue —I turned it to better account,’ was the
smiling response.
4 You turned it to stab your country for the
wages of the Castle !’ cried a white-faced,
student-like young fellow with burning eyes,
and the crowd responded with a roar of
* Renegade !’ under which Glasscock’s affectation
of gaiety miserably blenched.
4 Boys will be boys,’ he said, hoisting signals
of benevolent good humour on his large face.
4 And lawyers will sell and hang them,’ re-
torted he of the eyes of glowing coals.
4 Men who have no respect for the ministers
of our holy religion,' said the Attorney-General,
who was becoming solemn, 4 can scarcely be ex-
pected to do justice to the motives of one who
represents mere earthly authority -’
4 Is dat what dey calls de rope at de Four
Courts V put in one of his tormentors.
4 Ay, ay, Toby de Hangman !’ chorused the
yelling crowd ; and another egg whizzing past
the candidate’s ear, broke in a star of yellow
glory on the High Sheriff’s bald expanse of
forehead.
4 If I were as bad a shot as that I’d never
talk of fighting the British Empire,’ said
Glasscock, rallying amidst the merriment caused
by the Sheriff’s meek agonies ; but it was now
plain the young men’s wrath was growing dan-
gerous. 4 Well, boys,’ he said, with all the
geniality he could command, 4 as ye won’t let
me do anything else to oblige ye, I’ll oblige ye
by sitting down.’ A roar of triumph broke
from tffe crowd.”
Such is a faithful portrayal of a scene of
frequent occurrence 30 to 40 years ago. Mon-
signor M 4 Grudder is a type of whig clerical-
ism as it existed half a century ago in the ranks
of the higher Roman Catholic clergy. He was
a deadly foe to anything that had a tendency to
revolution by force of arms. The sweep is a
type of the Cork gamin ; and Con Lehane, a re-
presentative of the independent manhood of
Ireland. Glascock is a Catholic whig, the man
for the Monsignor, but hated by the “young
men.” He was a renegade 44 rebel,” his 44 Song
of the Pike,” having been written before his eyes
were dazzled by the glitter of office. He was
Attorney-General, therefore judge in prospective,
and wanted to hear no more of the pike.
Charles I. asked Selden, 4 What was the best
way to put down a rebellion V to which Selden
answered, 4 Remove the cause.’ Sheridan
ged the government to apply this answer to Ire-
land and put an end to the disaffection there by
removing the cause.
Mr. Lundy Foot, a celebrated tobacconist, ap-
plied to Curran for a motto when he first estab-
lished his carriage. 4 Give me one, my dear
Curran, said he, 4 of a serious cast, because 1
am afraid the people will laugh at a tabacconist
settingup a carriage ; and for the Scholarship’a
sake , let it be Latiu.’
4 1 have just hit on it,’ said Curran ; 4 its only
two words, and it will at once explain your pro-
fession, your elevation, and your contempt for
their ridicule, and it has the advantage of being
in two languages, Latin or English, just as the
reader chooses. Put up 4 Quid Bides ,’ upon your
carriage.’
Curran once met his match in a pert, jolly,
keen-eyed son of Erin, who was up as a witness
in a case of dispute in the matter of a horse deal.
Curran much desired to break down the credi-
bility of this witness, and thought to do it by
making the mau contradict himself —by tangl-
ing him up in a net w’ork of adroitly-framed
questions—but to no avail.
The ostler was a companion to Sam Weller.
His good common sense, and his equanimity and
good nature, were not to be overturned. By-
and-by Curran, in a towering wrath, belched
forth, as not another counsel would have dared
to do in the presence of the pourt ;


£ Sirrah, you are incorrigible 1 The truth is
not to be got from you. I see the villain in
your face f
‘ Faith, yer honour,’ said the witness, with the
utmost simplicity of truth and honesty, ( my
face must be moity elane and shinin,’ indade, if
it can reflect like that.’
For once in his life the great barrister wa 3
floored by a simple witness. He could not re-
cover from that repartee, and the case went
against him.
A certain chief justice, on hearing an ass
bray, interrupted Curran in his speech to the
jury, by saying: ‘One at a time, Mr. Curran,
if you please.’ The speech being finished, the
judge began his charge, and during its progress
the ass sent forth the full force of its lungs,
whereupon the advocate said : ‘ Does not your
lordship hear a remarkable echo in court V
Lord Norbury, going as a judge on the Mun-
ster Circuit, was, as usual, so strict in the ad-
ministration of criminal justice, that few, of
whose guilt there was any grounds of suspicion,
were suffered to escape merely through any
slovenly flaws in the wording of their indict-
ments, or doubts upon the testimony. Dining,
as usual, with the seniors of the Bar at the next
inn, a gentleman who sat near the judee asked
leave to help His Lordship to a part of a pickled
tongue. Lord Norbury replied that he did not
like pickled tongue, but if it had been hung he
would try it. Curran, who sat on the other side,
said that defect was easily obviated, for if His
Lordship would only try it, it would certainly
be hung.
Curran’s felicity of illustration was shown at
Cork, when, on one occasion in his peroration,
he said, 4 Thus, gentlemen, I trust I have made
the innocence of that persecuted man as clear to
you as ’ at that instant the sun, hitherto
overclouded, shot its rays into the Cmirt-honse
" as clear to you ’ continued he, ‘as yonder
sun-beam which now bursts in upon u% and sup-
plies us with its splendid illustration.’
Lord Plunkett is said to have acutely felt his
forced resignation of the Irish Chancellorship,
and his Supersedeas by Lord Campbell. A
violent tempest arose on the day of the latter’s
expected arrival, and a friend remarking to
Plunkett how sick of his promotion the passage
must have made the new comer. ‘ Yes,” re-
plied the ex-chancellor, ruefully, ‘ but it won’t
make him 4 throw up ’ the seals.’
Upon Swift’s visiting Carlow the rector con-
ducted him over the town and neighbourhood,
showing him all the objects of interest there.
On returning to the glebe. Swift, pointing to
the church, inquired what building it was, and
why he had not been shown it ? 4 Oh,’ said his
conductor, 4 it is only the parish church ; but it
is so dilapidated, and in such bad order, that I
did not think it worth your inspection.” At
this Swift expressed his regret; but said he
knew a cheap way of repairing it. 4 Why
don’t you give it,’ said he, ‘to the Papists P
Yon know they would repair it, and then you
could take it from them afterwards.’ This fine
stroke of satire is related by Mr. Wilde as
hitherto unpablished. Was it on this occasion
(he asks) Swift said :
A high church, and a low steeple,
A poor town and a proud people.
I shall now briefly refer to those whose
names are historic, to whom Ireland is deeply
indebted for having shed on her a glory of un-
fading lustre. Father Tom Burke was once
accosted by one who thought to raise a laugh at
his expense. “Have you heard the dreadful
news, Father Torn I” “No,” replied the in-
terested priest. “The bottom is out of Purgatory,
and all the poor Papists have fallen into hell.”
The laugh was a very short one, Father Torn at
once, and in tones of apparent sympathy, ex-
elaimed 44 Oh 1 what a crashing the poor
Protestants will get,'’ From this short sketch it
will be seen that Ireland is a land with whose
name wit and humour are inseparable. They
are to be found in the cottage of the peasant,
the senators’ hall, in the forum, and on the
bench. Everywhere are manifest the bright
laugh and the ready wit ; and as the blade of
grass trampled under foot merely gives place to
a newer birth, brighter and fresher, so the wit
of Ireland is ever fresh and green, for it is
immortal. The lips may be silenced by harsh
decree, the body may perish through hardship,
want, or it may he cruel death ; hut so long as
there is a solitary Irish peasant like Jemmy
O’Hare, and aw Irish maiden like Molly Mub
doon, Irish wit will flourish.


For than Jemmy O’Hare
Not a finer boy was seen at a fair.
His face was round and his build was square,
And I’d venture to swear
Not a girl in Kildare,
Nor Victoria’s self if she chanced to be there,
Could resist his wild way
Called—Devil may care.
At wake, or at wedding,
At feast, or at fight,
At throwing the sledge with such dext’rous
sleight,
He was the envy of men and the women’s de-
light.
And Molly Muldoom was an Irish girl,
As fine a one
As you’d look upon
In the cot of a peasant, or hall of an earl.
And Molly and Jemmy were counted the two
Thai would keep up the longest, and go the
best through
All the jigs and reels*
That have occupied heels
Since the days of the Murtoughs and Brian
Boru.
So long as Ireland has such boys and girls, so
long can we discourse on Irish wit and humour.
A perennial stream fresh gushing from the heart,,
brightened by intellect, and fashioned by an un-
failing imagination.
‘ STAR ’ PRINT


' ' N
■
♦




