

FBI D A Y- EVE N IN.G r SEPTE M B E R 28th, 18GG.
THK PROCEEDS, AFTER PAYMENT OF EXPENSES, WILL BE DEVOTED llj
TO THE FUNDS OF THE MELBOURNE HOSPITAL.
f
d
Af7
PRINTED AT THE EXPRESS OFFICE, BACCHUS MARSH,
1 8 G G.


f
• )
If


IRRIGATION
A LECTURE
DELIVERED BY
JAMES YOUNG, ESQ., J.P.,
IN THE
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE, BACCHUS MARSH,
FRIDAY EVENING, SEPTEMBER 28 th, 1866.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
THE PROCEEDS, AFTER PAYMENT OF EXPENSES, WILL BE DEVOTED
TO THE FUNDS OF THE MELBOURNE HOSPITAL.
PRINTED AT THE EXPRESS OFFICE, BACCHUS MARSH.
1 8 6 6.




T-i EC O T TJ R B.
INTRODUCTION.
The subject of irrigation is of such vast im-
portance, as connected with the progress and
prosperity of this district, that I am sure you will
require no apology at my hands for inviting you
to come here this evening, that I might submit
for your consideration the few facts which I have
been able to glean from various sources, and from
authors whose professional and practical know-
ledge has enabled them to write and speak with
authority, and to furnish us with such information
as will in some measure be a guide to us in carry-
ing out the proposed irrigation scheme in this
neighbourhood. It will be readily admitted by all
that it is necessary to take some steps to procure
a sufficient supply of water both for domestic and
irrigative purposes, if we wish to secure ourselves
(as far, at least, as human skill and human fore-
sight can) from those fearful visitations of drought
by which we have suffered so much during the last
two years. I think it will also be admitted, that,
even with the most favourable seasons, we have
not anything like sufficient moisture in the land
to bring out the full capabilities of the naturally
rich and fertile soil with which we are favoured.
So far, then, I think we are all agreed. The
next question for consideration is, whether irriga-
tion is likely to benefit us in any very great degree,
and whether it is suited to our soil and climate.
Were we left to more theory on those two import-
ant points, and had we to draw our conclusions
from what have been the effects of irrigation, as
applied in various parts of the world —we might
pause before we gave our sanction to a scheme
which will involve a considerable outlay, and may
possibly affect the public health, and at the same
time be injurious, instead of beneficial, to the
lands in the district. In this respect, however,
we have convincing and unmistakable proofs fur-
nished us, within a few hundred yards of the build-
ing in which we are now assembled, that the
waters running daily past our doors are of a highly
fertilising nature; and so far as wa can judge,
from an experience (upon a small scale) of upwards
of six years, the health in that pa ct o'; the district
where irrigation has been so successfully applied,
has been fully as good, if not better, than on the
more elevated lands in the immediate neighbour-
hood which have not been irrigated.
IRRIGATION IN THE MARSH.
It is hardly necessary for me to bring under
your notice the great benefits derived from irriga-
tion on the lands of the late Mr. James, at the
lower end of the Marsh. You are all aware that a
system of irrigation has been carried out upon
that farm, for several years past, with the most
marked success; and it must be known to many of
you, that, previous to the waters of the Lerderderg
being applied to the land, the crops there were as
uncertain, and the grass as scanty during the
summer months, as in any part of the Marsh.
How different aro things now. When all other
parts of the district are parched or burned up, this
farm presents a scene of rich luxuriance truly re-
freshing to the eye, and very profitable, no doubt,
to the owner. Those beautiful clover fields are
admired by all travellers, who pass this way, as
being among the finest in Victoria. But during
all the time that the water has been used for pur-
poses of irrigation on this farm, there have not
been witnessed such striking proofs of its magical
effects as a fertiliser, as were exhibited this year.
The death of the late Mr. James having taken
place about the period of the year when he was in
the habit of having his fields irrigated, this very
naturally caused some delay in the operation; and
before the water was applied, a field of oats on the
driest part of the farm was very much blighted,
and bore every appearance of vanishing away alto-
gether. In bygone years, I have seen crops do
this on the same land. When the water was ap-
plied, however, the effects were apparent almost
instantaneously. In the case of the oat field just
referred to, the white and blighted look disap-
peared, and the crops of oats, Indian corn, and
potatoes grown in that field were the hast, I be-
lieve, in this district. It is unnecessary for me to
multiply proofs of this nature. You are all as well
aware of them as I am, and I believe we are all
fully satisfied of the immense advantages to be


derived from the adoption of a proper system of
irrigation. The main questions to be decided now
are—the cost, and the effect which irrigation will
be likely to have on the health of the inhabitants
of the district. The small scale on which irriga-
tion has hitherto been carried out here, affords us
no certainty with regard to health in ease of our
having some ten or twelve thousand acres under
water day after day for weeks together. However,
I will first treat of the probable cost of carrying
out the scheme, and of the water rate which it
will be found necessary to charge, in order to pay
six per cent, upon the money advanced by Govern-
ment. In doing this, it is necessary that we
should take into consideration the three proposed
or combined schemes for irrigating the valley of
the Marsh and the adjacent lauds. Most of you
are aware that in 1859 an attempt was made by
the residents in the Marsh to have all the land
then under cultivation, and also the grass lands,
irrigated; but at that time, although a sum of
money had been voted by Parliament for water
supply to the goldfields, no provision was made to
supply the agricultural districts with water, either
for domestic or irrigative purposes. The Govern-
ment of the day, however, were requested to send
a surveyor to examine as to the best site for a
reservoir, with a view to the formation of a public
company to carry out a scheme for irrigating as
much land in the neighbourhood as possible. As
we had been suffering very much from drought
during the two previous years, the Government at
once complied with our request. Mr. Nixon, one
of the best surveyors in the service, was sent up to
the Marsh; and after making a most careful sur-
vey of the Lerderderg and Werrihee Rivers, he
came to the conclusion that it would entail a much
smaller outlay to irrigate the lands from the Ler-
derderg than from the Werrihee. Acting upon
this conviction, Mr. Nixon made a survey of the
lands proposed to be irrigated, and sent in to the
committee, appointed at a public meeting, a report
of the probable cost of the proposed scheme. The
site of the dam was fixed at or near the boundary
of the lands of Messrs. Perry and Hardy. The line
laid down on survey for the main channel passed
through the lands belonging to Messrs. Perry,
Anderson, Craven, myself, and Mr. Grant—about
sixty feet above the site of the Court-house. The
estimated cost of the dam and the main channel.
from the Lerderderg to the Werrihee, by the
line on the upper side of Mr. Grant’s barn, was
£l3OO. The cost of cutting l the main channel
was to be 50s. per chain, or £2OO per mile. The
channel was to be nine feet wide at the top,
three feet at the bottom, and three feet
deep. The land surveyed for irrigation at
that time comprised about 5000 acres; and
the length of the main channel taken round
the whole of it according to the plan, was about
twenty miles; so that the .estimated cost of the
channel was .64000. In this estimate there
was no provision made for pipes or shoots
to convey the water over the gullies, and
across the Eiver Werrihee and the sub-division
of Parwan ; nor was there any provision
made for sluices and other incidental ex-
penses, which I think would not have cost less
than .£1522, or in all .£5660. At that time, too, it
was not contemplated to cut leading drains to taka
the water on to the highest part of each man’s
farm. As these leading drains would have occu-
pied a length of at least another twenty miles, at
.£BO per mile, they would have added .£l6OO to the
cost, or in all .£8422; which, at six per cent., would
require a water rate of two shillings per acre, or in
round numbers £5OO per annum, or £lOO for every
1000 acres. Of course these figures are, or were,
only approximate ideas as to the cost; but it was
the opinion of Mr. Nixon and other practical men
that the works then proposed would not have cost
more than the sum named —indeed not quite so
much. As the Government, however, at that time,
neither provided the money nor guaranteed the
interest, it was not deemed advisable to form a
company to carry out the contemplated works.
Had the undertaking been then carried out, there
can hardly be a doubt that more money would
have been saved than would have paid for the
works twice over.
However, to use a homely saying, “ it’s no use
crying over spilt milk.” What should we now do
to secure what will prove to be such an inestimable
boon to the district ?—this ought to be the only
thought that should animate us; and as the
Government have agreed to advance the necessary
funds, at six per cent, interest, upon condition
that the Road Board, on behalf of the ratepayers,
shall give the necessary guarantee—it appears to
me that we should avail ourselves of the offer
without further delay. In this, however, as in all
business matters where such a large amount of
money is involved, it is necessary that both the
Board and the ratepayers should act with the
greatest caution. I may, I think, be allowed to
say by the way, that no charge of rashness can be
brought against either the one or the other; and
if there be any truth in the old proverb which says
there is “ luck in leisure,” this scheme will cer-
tainly be the most successful of any ever launched
in the colony.
THE THREE PROPOSED SCHEMES.
To come back, however, to the three schemes
proposed by Government to irrigate the lands in
the neighbourhood of the Marsh. I may first be
allowed to state that when the Waterworks Bill
was brought in by the present Government, and
carried successfully through both houses of Par-
liament, thirty-nine different places were scheduled


where Government would be at once prepared
(upon the conditions named in the bill being
complied with), to advance certain sums of money
to provide a water supply for irrigative and
domestic purposes. Bacchus Marsh and Melton
formed two of the thirty-nine places named; and
shortly after the passing of the bill, a staff of
surveyor’s was sent to Melton to select a site for
a reservoir, for the purpose of suppyling the town-
ship of Melton with water for domestic purposes,
of which they then stood in much need. Indeed,
the want of water for that township during the
summer months must be a great drawback to its
prosperity; and if a supply of pure water could
possibly be obtained, at even a cost of ten per
cent, on the outlay, it can hardly be supposed that
a single ratepayer would raise the slightest
objection against a rate imposed for such a pur-
pose. To resume, however. Surveys were also
made with a view of fixing upon a reservoir
where a sufficient quantity of water could be
stored to irrigate the valley of the Marsh and the
lands adjacent. Plans have been prepared, and
preliminary surveys made, showing that, either
from the basin of the Limekilns, or from the
Lerderderg River, a sufficient supply of water
could be obtained to irrigate from fifteen to
twenty thousand acres of land. After a careful
examination of the district, the Government has
at last decided upon the Limekilns scheme as the
best for the supply of the Marsh and Melton
districts.
OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.
Some contend that, if sufficient water could
be stored in the basin of the Limekilns,
the cost of conveying it down the Coimadai
Creek to the point opposite Mr. Leahy’s mills,
and then bringing it back to the level of the
lands opposite Stamford Hill, would cost much
more than making a dam across the Lerderderg
for the supply of water to the Marsh and Parwau
lands. I will deal with the first objection—
namely, the uncertainty of saving or storing a
sufficient quantity of water to supply the districts
named. Those who make this objection only take
into consideration the volume of water running
daily down the Pyreete Creek. They apparently
forget that there is a natural drainage of over
12,000 acres diverging into the Limekilns basin;
and that, if carried out according to the present
survey, a sheet or lake of water would be formed
about a mile long by three-quarters of a mile
broad, and in the centre over fifty feet deep, or a
mean depth of thirty-two feet. That such a body
of water could be saved, the Engineer-in-Chief
has not the slightest doubt; and I presume his
data is taken from the average rainfall during
the year. I must acknowledge that, after giving
the matter my most careful consideration, 1
entirely agree with the Bngineer-in-Chief’s opinion.
I think there would be no danger of an insufficient
supply of water; and as Mr. Sullivan, the late
Minister of Mines, remarked when this matter
was brought under his notice, “ it would be a sin
to neglect taking the necessary steps to secure
such a splendid supply.” But supposing that
such an abundant supply of water could be stored
in the basin of the Limekilns, could the same
quantity of water not be obtaimed from the
Lerderderg River, and applied to the lands on
this side of the Dividing Range at a much less
cost?_ I have no hesitation in answering that
question in the affirmative; for we must take
into consideration the expenditure that would be
incurred in taking the water round the Coimadai
Creek, and then bringing it back to the banks of
the Lerderderg on a sufficiently high level to have
the water conveyed to the top of Stamford Hill.
This would require a much larger outlay than the
sum necessary to make dams across the Lerder-
derg River. Again, there is no doubt about the
supply from the Lerderderg. The present volume
of water discharged] by this river is not less,
upon an average, during from six to eight months
in the year, than 200 cubic feet per minute.
This_ is sufficient to irrigate, according to the
opinions of the engineers in Lombardy and Italy,
from ten to twelve thousand acres. This, there-
fore, would certainly seem to be the plan most
simple and easiest of accomplishment; and as the
irrigation scheme, at least upon such a large
scale, is more or less a matter of speculation, it
would be much better to try the experiment with
the Lerderderg only. The level fixed by Mr.
Robson will take the water twenty-five feet above
the highest point of the lauds lately selected in
the parish of Parwan. The whole district, with
the exception of a few hundred acres, would be
as effectually irrigated as if the water were taken
from both the Lerderderg and Werribee, and at a
much less cost than if dams had to be erected
across both rivers. Moreover, in the event of not
having sufficient water for the land, it could be
irrigated from one of the rivers—if the water
were found to be beneficial to the growth of corn
crops and grass, it would then be an easy matter
to take advantage of both rivers. The same
channels would do for the lands, both in Parwan
smd the valley of the Marsh. Objection, however,
is taken by the Government to the quality of the
Lerderderg water, or rather to the silt or deposit
washed down the river from the Blackwood gold-
fields ; this objection demands our serious con-
sideration. Notwithstanding that the experience
already obtained proves that the deposit is not
only not injurious, but highly beneficial and fertil-
ising, we must remember that it has been tried
only on our richest soils. The question is, if the
same water were used on grass lands of a lighter


description, would not the deposit in time entirely
destroy all vegetation, as it has done on the lands
adjacent to the river Loddon? We must not for-
get that a large proportion of the land we propose
irrigating may not be brought under the plough
for years to come. We should be careful, there-
fore, not to commit ourselves to a plan which wo
might ever afterwards regret. This much may be
said in favour of the Lerderderg scheme—that,
with a proper reservoir, and the sluices properly
secured, much of the deposit now washed over the
land would be lodged in the reservoir. This, of
course, would necessitate a considerable annual
outlay in cleaning out the dam or reservoir, how-
ever much this might he reduced by machinery,
or properly-constructed sluices. Taking all these
things into consideration, I am forced to the con-
clusion (against my former preconceived ideas)
that the Limekilns scheme is, after all, the best
and the safest we can enter into. I make this
admission the more frankly, because I have both
spoken and written against it, in a way that I was
not justified in doing without first having given
the matter much more careful consideration than
I had really done. After this, I trust you will
believe an honest confession. We will now con-
sider the extra cost of cutting the main channel
down the Coimadai Creek, and back to a sufficiently
high level to enable us to convey the water to the
highest part of Stamford-hill, above the property
of Mr. Grant, of Millbank —somewhere about the
same level as his boundary fence. This level
would enable us to convey the water twenty-five
feet above the highest point of the lands lately
selected in the parish of Parwan. The
extra length of cutting is what claims our first
.consideration. This, lam informed, will be about
sixteen miles. Well, really, after all, a company
of diggers, with not half such prospects as we have
before us, would cut the whole length in a few
mouths. This ought not, therefore, to weigh with
us against the scheme for a single moment. With
the certainty of sneh a return as we can count
upon, it would be worse than madness to hesitate
in giving the necessary guarantee. It may be
asked, however, if there is any certainty of pro-
curing a sufficient supply of water from the
sources Indicated; and also if the water so ob-
tained is of good quality ? To the first question,
I may just refer you to the opinion given by the
special reporter of the Age, who was sent up to
examine into the working of the Amending
Land Act, and also the progress that had been
made in carrying out the proposed scheme of
irrigation. He states that a rain-fail of six inches
would be sufficient to fill the reservoir, and to
supply water for both the Bacchus Marsh and
Melton districts ; and moreover that six inches is
only about one-fourth of the actual rain-fall In
ordinary seasons. We may, therefore, rest satis-
fied as to the supply of water. The quality or
kind of water best suited for irrigation next claims
our attention. All writers are agreed that, for
grass lands, the purer the water the better it is;
and also that water running over a limestone
country is highly fertilising. That the waters in
the neighbourhood of the Limekilns possess these
characteristics in a large degree is well known to
all who are acquainted with the locality. A few
remarks about the kind of water for irrigating
will not be out of place. Some kinds of water
are known to be injurious to the growth of plants.
Water which contains a considerable amount of
putrifying vegetable and animal remains, is con-
sidered an excellent fertilizer. There are few
natural waters which do not contain an appreciable
quantity of salts of potash and soda, sulphate of
lime, and soluble silica; .and as all these com-
pounds are calculated to promote the healthy
growth of plants, most natural waters must
exercise a beneficial action in vegetation, partly
on account of their mineral constituents. In
most waters phosphoric acid, or, more correctly
speaking, phosphate of lime, or bone earth, exists,
and though the percentage of phosphoric acid in
water is but trifling, yet, considering the large
quantities which run over irrigated land, an
absolute amount of phosphate of lime is conveyed
to it, which is equivalent to a good dressing of
bones. The streams or springs which flow from
or over limestone districts are particularly charac-
terised by fertilising properties. In the opinion
of many practical men, it is the lime in those
waters which causes the green, fresh, and luxu-
riant appearance of the herbage, and lime con-
sequently is regarded by them as the most
valuable ingredient of the water. So far, there-
fore, as the quality of the water at the Lime-
kilns is concerned, it is all that could be wished.
The quantity is a matter which demands our
serious consideration, and the facts I am now
about to quote on that head are obtained from
what X conceive to be reliable sources.
THE LIMEKILNS KESEKVOIB.
It is proposed to construct a large reservoir
on the site of the locality known under the name
of the Limekilns Basin, situated on the Coimadai
Creek, about five miles north of Bacchus Marsh
township, and seven miles north-west from Melton.
Prom this reservoir an open channel will be cut
to convey the water to Bacchus Marsh and
Melton. The course of the channel will be along
the east bank of the Coimadai Creek for a distance
of about five miles from the reservoir. At that
point it will divide into two separate channels ;
one, crossing the Coimadai Creek, will be used for
the supply of Bacchus Marsh with water, and the
other will take a. south-east, course to Melton for
the supply of that district.


The Limekilns Ebseevoie. The Limekilns
reservoir will form a sheet of water of about two
hundred and seventy (270) acres in extent, con-
taining 2000 millions of gallons. Its average
depth will be about 30 feet. The reservoir is
about 550 feet above the level of the sea, and
more than 200 feet above the highest point of
Bacchus Marsh, and 130 feet above the township
of Melton. The quantity of water proposed to be
diverted daily from the reservoir is ten millions of
gallons.
Abba or Watershed. —The area of the water-
shed is 12,000 acres, and commences in the high
ranges in the vicinity of Bullengarook. This area,
taking the available rainfall at only six inches per
annum, will give a supply sufficient to fill the
reservoir once a year, or 2000 millions of gallons ;
but during any ordinary year the rainfall available
for storage will amount to at least double that
quantity, or a supply of water equal to 4000 mil-
lions of gallons, which would fill the reservoir
twice in the year.
Eainball.— The rainfall in the Bacchus Marsh
district may be taken at 29 inches per annum, dur-
ing average years, and the available quantity
which may be relied upon for storage, at about 12
inches; during very dry seasons, however, this may
possibly be reduced as low as six inches.
Quality of Wateb.— The quality of the water
of the Coimadai Creek is very good, being free from
salt, sludge from the gold workings, or any other
impurities.
Distbieution of the Wateb.— An open chan-
nel, communicating with the main channel, will be
out entirely round the basin of Bacchus Marsh,
whence the water can be let into the valley from
the heights at any point. The scheme will also
be capable of supplying the whole of the country
between Bacchus Marsh, Melton, and Wyndham, at
a very reasonable cost.
Cost oe Wokks. —The estimated cost of the
works is .£20,000.
ABTASTAGES TO BE DERIVED.
Supposing we had an ample supply of water of
the quality described, for irrigating purposes, the
question will very naturally be asked—What will
be the probable advantage derived by the farmer
xn the shape of an increase of grain, beef, and
mutton, and also farm and dairy produce ? Now,
to _ arrive at even an approximate idea on this
point, we must—as nearly a,s possible—take for
our basis of calculation the average crops for, say,
the last ten years in the neighbourhood of Bacchus
Marsh. We will suppose that 6000 acres of land
have been partly cropped and partly under grass
for the time named; say 2000 acres under crop, at
an average of fifteen bushels per acre; and, to
simplify the matter, we will say wheat—that
would be 30,000 bushels; this, at an average of
6s. per bushel, would realise £9OOO. Then, say
2000 acres under grass for dairy purposes, which
would not graze more than 400 cows, one year
with another; and to put down each coxv at 3 lbs.
of butter per week is as much as could be fairly
calculated upon; this would give 62,400 lbs. of
butter in the year. This, at an average of Is. per
lb., would realise .£3,120. Then we will suppose
the remaining 2000 acres under sheep or cattle.
At present the land would not, in average seasons,
carry more than two sheep to the acre. If we
allow the fleece as profit to the farmer, at 3 lbs.
per sheep, this would be 12,000 lbs. of wool; this, if
sold at Is. 6d. per lb., would fetch £9OO. Of
course I do not suppose that the system described
would be carried out, but the returns would be
nearly the same ; for, although different crops
might be grown—according to the soil, and the
inclination of the farmer—yet the profits would
be in about the same proportion. With irrigation,
I don’t think it would be considered a high
average to put down the return of grain per acre
at 30 bushels, which would be just double the
quantity from non-irrigated lands, or 60,000
bushels, at 6s. per bushel, £lB,OOO. For dairy
stock, we might safely allow 800 cows instead of
400; and the increase of butter, at least 2 lbs. per
week from each cow, or a total of 5 lbs. per week,
which wou*d give 208,000 lbs.—at an average of
Is. per lb., £10,400. The 2000 acres devoted to
sheep would carry, say, four sheep to the acre, or
double the number on non-irrigated lands; these
8000 would give 3 lbs. of wool per sheep, which (at
Is. 6d. per lb.) would realise £lBOO. In the last
item I take the mere profit in wool; of course
sheep-farmers know there are a great many more
things to be taken into consideration, such as the
fattening of sheep and lambs for the market,
which they can estimate better than I can.
Abstract of amount realised on 6000 acres of
non-irrigated land;—2ooo acres of grain—30,000
bushels, at 6s. per bushel —£9000; dairy pro-
duce, £3120; wool, £900; total, £13,020.
On irrigated land: —2ooo acres grain—3o bushels
per acre, 60,000 bushels, at 65.—£18,000; dairy
produce—2oB,ooolbs. butter, at Is. —£10,400; 24000
lbs. wool, at Is. 6d. per lb. —£1800; total, £29,000.
Total from non-irrigated land, £13,200; leaving a
balance in favour of irrigation of £15,800, or £2
10s. per acre.
These figures may fee considered fey some to fee
imaginary, and it is not possible for me or any one
else to say that the estimated amounts would be
realised. At the same time, if we draw a compa-
rison between the yield of the irrigated and the
non-irrigated lands in India, I don’t think I have
over-estimated the advantages likely to be derived
from the one system over the other.


THE NECESSARY GUARANTEE.
The question as to the kind of guarantee to be
given to the Government has often been raised;
and the various opinions expressed show a great
want of information on this point, which I do not
pretend to be able fully to supply. Some are of
opinion that the water-rate will be a charge upon
the whole property of the district, whether the
water be used by all or not. This is not the case.
The water-rate will only be imposed upon those
who can avail themselves of the water fox irriga-
tive or domestic purposes, should it be required
for the latter. For the former, the usual plan
adopted in India and on the Continent is to charge
either by the measurement of water from a certain
escape or outlet, at per inch or per foot. In other
places it is so much per acre —generally the latter;
and for grass or grain crops it ranges from Is. fid.
to 2s. per acre. To add to this, there will be the
cost of keeping the drains clear and in repair,
which I find in India has never exceeded 7d. per
acre. But supposing, says another, that we should
give the guarantee and not get the water, will we
still have the water-rate to pay ? This is rather a
serious question, and one which has disturbed the
minds of our farmers and ratepayers considerably.
Sometimes I can hardly believe that they are
serious when they ask the question; I to
look hard at them to see that they are not poking
fun at me. I fancy that, were they > to bargain
with Mr. Saunders for a quantity of tea and sugar,
they might as well ask if they would have to pay
for it whether they received it or not. Such a
mode of dealing might be very pleasant for one
party, but it would certainly be the reverse for
the other. Well, I think we should just look
upon this matter between the _ Government and
the ratepayers as a purely business transaction.
We agree to pay the Government so much per
acre for a certain supply of water to irrigate our
land. If the Government do not supply us with
the water, of course we will not pay the rate. If
the Government should refuse to insert such a
condition in a guarantee given by the Eoad
Board on behalf of the ratepayers, why then the
Board would simply not give the guarantee; but
I am satisfied that no Government would think
for a moment of objecting to such a condition; on
this score, therefore, we may rest perfectly
satisfied. At the same time it is necessary that
we should take every precaution in entering into
an agreement with the Government. Better to
raise all these objections before giving the
guarantee, than to find out afterwards that some
important point had been overlooked. Some
people consider these cautious objecting men a
great bore, and look upon them as the drones of
society. I must say I consider them to be, as it
were, the drag-wheel on public action. They cause
us to sift and examine everything carefully before
entering upon it, and this is certainly of great
consequence in all such undertakings as the one
proposed.
COLONEL BAIRD SMITH.
The lecturer then gave a brief sketch of the life
of Colonel Baird Smith (the great hydraulic en-
gineer who carried out the scheme of irrigation in
Central India), with the view of showing that any
statements given on his authority were worthy of
the highest consideration. Richard Baird Smith,
the son of a highly-esteemed medical practitioner
at Laswade, in the county of Mid Lothian, was
born on the 33 st December, 1818. He prosecuted
his studies at Edinburgh. At the of his
curriculum he held the highest place in his year,
and was appointed to the Madras Engineers. In
1838 he entered on his duties at Madras, and in
the following year was transferred to the Bengal
Presidency. For some time he was engaged in
various engineering works—among others, super-
intending the boring of artesian wells. The keen
interest which he took in his work, and the accurate
manner in which he noted the different strata
passed through, were found to be highly service-
able in a geological point of view, and had the
effect of making him known to many in India who
were interested in scientific matters. In 1841,
Lieutenant Smith was appointed to the Canal De-
partment, in which he remained until near the
close of his career; and in connection with which
we believe he established for himself the reputa-
tion of being the first hydraulic engineer in the
world. He took an important part in the manage-
ment of the most extensive and most difficult
works of the kind which have ever been executed;
and studied with extreme interest the great Indian
problem of developing the resources of the country.
Shortly after the cessation of hostilities in which
he had been engaged. Lieutenant Smith came on
furlough to England, and was sent by the Court
of Directors to study the system of waterworks in
Italy. He was also sent to America, to study the
great canal works there. When he had completed
this work, he was appointed Head Superintendent
of all the canal works in the North Western
Provinces of India. A great part of the Upper
Province of India depends for its very existence,
as a habitable portion of the world, on a supply of
water for irrigative purposes. The old system of
irrigation from wells was found to be uncertain.
The failure of water often produced famine, and
greatly limited the population which the country
could support provided it had a fair water supply.
By Colonel Baird Smith a vast extent of country
was supplied with water from the rivers of India.
In the surveying of the country for canals, and in
the designing and executing of many most diffi-
cult and important works connected with their


construction; Smith had a most important part to
act, and he acted it to perfection. Tens of thou-
sands whose lives were preserved by his instru-
mentality, will bear in grateful remembrance the
almost unparalleled exertions which he made, and
the all-absorbing zeal with which he devised
measures for the relief of suffering and the pre-
servation of human life. His name will be per-
petuated as a household word amongst successive
generations in the North-West Provinces, as the
preserver of life and the heaven-sent messenger of
mercy.
IRRIGATION IN INDIA.
The system of irrigation carried out in India
seems to me best suited to our requirements in
this colony. The climate is something like our
own, and the cost in that part of the world will,
in some measure, enable us to arrive at proper
conclusions about the outlay for our proposed
undertaking; and it is necessary that we should
have some knowledge of the effects of irrigation in
countries where it has been successfully carried
out. Colonel Baird Smith, one of the most dis-
tinguished writers on the subject of irrigation,
and long Superintendent of the canal works of
India, under the British Government, carried out
some most extensive works in connection with a
water supply for India for domestic and irrigation
purposes. He has written a very excellent work
on irrigation, in two volumes; the first volume
principally regarding the system of irrigation
carried out in Lombardy, Piedmont, and various
parts of the continent; the second volume relating
principally to the important works carried out by
him in India. On those works I can only touch
briefly; but I hope the few facts I am able to
submit will convince you that, with a climate and
soil equally favourable as those of India, it will be
our own fault if we do not take advantage of the
bountiful supply of rain with which we are favoured
during the year. In India the main source of
revenue is derived from the different canals con-
structed for the purposes of irrigation. Prom the
canals west of the Jumna the rent is levied in two
ways—on the area of the opening of the irrigating
outlet, at a certain rate (usually 4s. per annum per
square inch), or the area of lands irrigated; the
rates being dsoriminating, both as regards the
nature of the crops grown and the kind of irriga-
tion, whether natural or artificial, employed. On
measured land they are as follows :—Natural irri-
gation, fruit gardens, 10s. per acre; vegetable
gardens, 4s. per acre; indigo, sugar-cane, tobacco,
grasses, cotton, rice, wheat, oats, Indian corn, 2s.
per acre ; barley, oils, seeds, pulse of all kinds,
la. 4d. per acre. The following statement shows
the gradual development of the revenue from
water rent up to the latest period for which I
have been able to obtain returns ;—Statement of
the annual amount of water rent levied on the
canals west of the river Jumna—Previous to 1820
■£B7 125.; in 1833, .£14,878; total, from 1820 to
1833, .£07.039 19s. ; total, from 1833 to 1846,
£351,763,000. In the year 1833-4, £14,878 was
collected for water revenue ; it was a year of
partial rain, and, consequently, of famine in tho
non-irrigated districts. I find, also, that in 1837
(termed the great famine year) the amount col-
lected was £27,237 ; and, although the revenue
had slowly increased from £B7 125., in 1820, to
£351,763, in 1846, the permanent settlement of
the land revenue gave a great impetus to the
extension of canal irrigation; and, as already
mentioned, in 1837—the great famine year—fatal
as it was to districts not protected by canal irri-
gation, in districts where it was in operation there
was a remarkable increase—a fact pregnant with
meaning. To illustrate the benefit of canals to
the community on that sad occasion, I subjoin a
calculation of the gross value of agricultural pro-
duce saved by irrigation in the districts of the
Delhi territory:—
Statement of the gross value of crops on land
irrigated from the western Jumna canal in 1837-
38, the greater part of which would have been
totally unproductive without the use of canal
water:—l2,Bo6 acres of sugar and indigo, at £8 per
acre, £102,450; 47,027 acres of cotton, at £4 16s.
per acre, £225,726; 46,256 acres of rice, at £3 16s.
6d. per acre, £177,624; 199,375 acres of wheat and
barley, at £4 16s. per acre, £957,000; total num-
her of acres, 305,463; total amount of value of crops
saved, £1,462,800. This return is compiled from
the most authentic source, and is founded on actual
measurement. The rates are very moderate, less
indeed than might ha ve been assumed with perfect
impartiality ; and the result shows that nearly
£1,500,000 sterling in agricultural produce was saved
by irrigation, of which about one-lenth, or £150,000,
was paid to Government, as land and water rent,
while the remainder supported in comfort, during
a period of devastating famine, the inhabitants of
nearly five hundred villages. A more striking
illustration of the social and fiscal value of canals
for irrigation could not be given, and its force
is enhanced, so far as the State is concerned, by the
fact that the entire cost of the works (not includ-
ing repair), and establishments on the canals west
of the Jumna, up to the present time, amounts
only to £119,474; so that the returns of the year
1837-38, in land and water rent, have covered the
whole expenditure, leaving a surplus of nearly
£26,800, from this source alone.
The subject of irrigation in Central India next
claims our attention. The materials for the sub-
sequent sketch of irrigation and its results in
Mairwara, one of the wildest districts in Central
India, have been derived from the printed report
of Colonel Dixon, of the Bengal Artillery. To


have restricted the details to the work of irriga-
tion alone, would have been doing scant justice to
the subject; for these are, perhaps, less interesting
in a professional point of view than in their being
the most influential of those material agents to
which the conversion of an entire race from a
state little removed from utter barbai'ism to one
of progressive civilisation, is to be traced. The
contrasts between Mairwara in 1820 and 1850 are
such as are rarely presented to view; and lam
sure the conclusions they warrant will have their
just effect in stimulating the extension to other
localities of the means by which they have been
produced—to localities where nature is equally
bountiful, and man equally necessitous. In the
comparatively settled districts between the Ganges
and the Jumna, there are no such strikingly
marked examples of the regenerating effects of
constant and profitable agricultural employment,
as Mairwara presents. The lawless Coojur—
closely allied in race, and identical in habits, with
the Mair—has been weaned from his wild life,
and bound to the soil, by the new interests which
gather round the proprietors of a soil easy to till
and sure to xeward. The territory of Mairwara
forms a part of the Arabald Hills, which extend
fi'om the frontier of Goojerat in a N.N.E. direction,
through the middle of Raj poo tana, to the neighbour-
hood of Delhi. The Mairs, a people of Mairwara,
call their county “ Mugra,” a word signifying (in
their dialect) “ hills.” They do not appear to be
a native race, but have derived their descent
mainly from fugitives or exiles, who, *in former
times, took refuge in those jungly hills. In June,
1885, Colonel, then Captain Dixon, of the Artillery,
was appointed to succeed Colonel Hall. It soon
became manifest to the new Superintendent that
water was the great desideratum in Mairwara;
and that the first step to the establishment of
permanent prosperity must be the provision of a
constant supply. From the hilly chax-acter of the
country, the rain which falls speedily flows off
(unless means were used for its retention), leaving
the soil only very impei-feetly saturated with
moisture. The rains, too, are extremely pre-
carious ; and bad seasons, in this respect, are the
rule— good ones the exception. The whole amount
of rain-fall in favourable seasons rarely exceeds
twenty-two inches, and it often ranges from eight
to twelve. In 1832 not a single shower fell, and
Mairwara experienced all the miseries of famine.
Grain was to be had in small quantities, but there
was a total absence of forage. The cattle, con-
sequently, perished; and numbers of the people
fled to Malwa. To remedy this state of things,
the objects aimed at were—first, the ensuring a
sufficient supply of water for the permanent culti-
vation of the soil; second—the subjugation to the
plough of tracts then abandoned to jungle ; third—
the conversion of every individual inhabitant into
a cultivator, so that no excuse should remain for
robbery and cattle-lifting. Before accomplishing
these great objects, it was necessary to reclaim
the thousands of acres of waste lands which
existed, and which would afford locations for
numerous new villages and hamlets. Notice of
the intention of bringing these lauds under culti-
vation was made public, and candidates for
occupation pressed forward. The Superintendent
was urgent in his exhortations to the people to
look to the soil as their only source of prosperity
and independence. The solicitude with which
the subject was urged, and the substantial
pecuniary aid with which these solicitations
were backed, satisfied the people that the
advancement of their interest was the honest
object of the Superintendent. In every village
of Mairwara, as in other parts of Central
India, there ax - e certain handicraftsmen and others,
regarded as the hereditary servants of the com-
munity, who do not usually engage in tillage, but
are x-emunerated for their services by annual and
occasional allowances of grain. All these, however,
were induced, by judicious persuasion and aid, to
take their share of agricultural employment; and
even the Minstrel, whose hands had never before
been blistered by a plough-handle or other vulgar
implement of toil, —was at last enrolled as a con-
vert to rural industry. From this conversion of
the village servants into husbandmen, no incon-
venience resulted. Indeed the measure contri-
buted to an increase of hands, for their brethren
and friends in less prosperous circumstances joined
them, from places beyond British rule. By this
wise policy, new settlements sprung up, and the
population received a considerable augmentation.
Tho Government revenue was increased, and the
haunts of wild beasts were swept away. In the
course of twelve years, tho whole of the jnngle
wastes have been converted into beautiful fields,
affording food and employment to the inmates of
106 new hamlets. As the improvements progressed,
the eagerness of the peasantry to partake of these
benefits became so intense, that the authorities
wore unable to keep pace with the demands for
aid. Such villages as had not been taken by the
hand were envious of the good fortune of those
who were having tanks constructed on their lands.
Among others who had not yet shared in the pro-
cess of improvement, was the village of Sooreean.
They had importuned aid in constructing a tank,
but engagements were already so extensive that
their claim was necessarily deferred till next season.
This was unpleasant news for the villagers, but
they had been prepared for the contingency. A
few months afterwards they requested a visit from
tho superintendent, without assigning a reason.
His camp was accordingly pitched at Sooreean,
and to the surprise of all, it proved that the people
had of their own accord, and from their own means.


constructed a serviceable and substantial embank-
ment. Disappointed of Government aid, they had
mustered sufficient funds for the purpose by the
sale of cattle, and by the betrothal of their daugh-
ters. Such devotion at the shrine of improvement
merited a mark of special approbation. They re-
ceived a donation of .£4O, (equal to half the outlay)
and were highly satisfied; whilst their example
was held up to their countrymen as worthy of
imitation.
To provide a supply of water, the embankment
must be thrown across a hollow containing a water
course, which in the rainy season carries off the
drainage of the tract. The extent of surface
drained by this water channel, is a point of the
first consequence, as on this will depend the irri-
gating capability of the work. There are five va-
rieties of tank works in Mairwara and Ajmeer.
The cheapest and most simple is that which consists
solely of an earthen embankment. It can only be
formed where the soil is tenacious and the country
level, affording a wide spread of water not exceed-
ing three or four feet deep. The bank towards the
front should present a long slope, and be planted
with grass or shrubs, to protect it from the action
of the water. The only expense in addition to the
earthwork is a few sluices of mason-work. There
are but few, and those small, of this nature in the
country, for they are not adapted to its general
hilly character. The most important kind of em-
bankment, and that which is employed for the ob-
struction of the larger water courses, consists of a
massive front wall of lime masonry, buttressedat in-
tervals by solid bastions of the same material, which
give strength to the fabric, and break the force of
the current. Behind this wall is a broad earthen
bank, which is secured again in the rear, through
the whole or part of its length, by a retaining wall
of dry stone masonry. Where the height of the em-
bankment is great, a second and sometimes a third
such wall is carried longitudinally through the
earthwork. The work is provided with sluices,
according to the amount of irrigation to be derived
from it. Finally, there must be an escape or out-
fall sufficiently extensive to carry off a body of
surplus water, equal to the maximum discharge of
the stream before its course was obstructed. Some
of the most beautiful mountain lakes of Mairwara
owe their existence to dams constructed after this
fashion. One other kind of reservoir remains to
be noticed. This is formed by a great weir, or
wall of masonry, without earthwork or flood escape.
Such works are extensively used in the more hilly
parts of the district, where the valley to be closed
does not exceed a hundred yards in breath. Any
excess of water runs over the crest of the wall, which
slopes off on the lower side. When the height
is considerable, it is well to raise the work in suc-
cessive portions, year by year, allowing the floods
to pass over it. When the masonry has thus been
allowed to set, no apprehension need afterwards
be entertained. Such works, when of good mate-
rial, rarely require repair. Numerous weirs, similar
in construction but of smaller size, have been car-
ried across the natural water-courses below the
tank embankments, in order to economise the
wastage by filtration. In constructing such works,
care must be taken to continue both ends of the
weir some distance within the banks of the hol-
low, to prevent the flanks being turned by the
stream. By a series of such works a continuous
canal, as it were, is maintained from tank to tank,
along the hollow, serving to supply the numerous
wells beside its banks. In this manner, by means
of a system of tanks connected by successive weirs,
cultivation has been carried, in one instance, for an
unbroken distance of twenty-six miles. A few
years sgo> this was a jungle waste, with the excep-
tion of a few patches of what is termed “well
cultivation.” A similar course is pursued with each
separate valley. A strong weir is constructed at the
head of the valley to maintain a body of water,
and to break the force of the torrent. In its rear,
at convenient intervals, stone dykes are thrown
across the breadth of the hollow, and when any sub-
sidiary water-course joins the valley, its supply is
stopped by a second weir. In this manner, by
means of a few substantial weirs, intermixed with
stone fences built across its breadth, the valley
is converted into a series of terraces of rich culti-
vation, ascending to the summit of the hills.
RESULTS OF INDIAN IRRIGATION.
I will next bring under your notice the results
of some of the works which have been detailed in
official reports, showing the capabilities of those
villages which benefit by irrigation, as exhibited
in the increase of families, ploughs, wells, and
village tanks, and in the amount of revenue paid
to Government during eleven years (from 1836 to
1847). The names of the different villages:—
Kabra—the increase in families, from 38 to 132;
ploughs, from 22 to 100 ; wells, from 3 to 46;
village tanks, from none to 31; increase in re-
venue, from .£47 to <£2o6. Juwaja—families, from
25 to 122; ploughs, 17 to 100; wells, 8 to 28;
village tanks, from none to 15; increase of re-
venue, from £25 to £179. Kurhee Kurkura —fam-
ilies, 0 to 118; ploughs, oto 110; wells, 0 to 25 ;
village tanks, oto 14; increase in revenue, £0 to
£lO9. Barar—families, 70 to 440; ploughs, from
64 to 329; wells, from 131 to 301; increase in
revenue, from £385 to £BB5. Abstract of increase
on the four villages families, from 133 to 813;
ploughs, from 103 to 639; wells, from 142 to 400;
tanks, from none to 60; increase in revenue, from
£457 to £1379.
From year to year these irrigation works were
carried on, as the sanction of Government was
accorded. During twelve years of steady appli-


cation to their development, the extent of tho
work done and the benefit conferred far exceeded the
anticipations of the most sanguine at the time when
general systematic improvement was first contem-
plated. The success of the scheme of irrigation
in Central India was, in a great measure, due to
Colonel Dixon, to whom we have alluded in the
course of the lecture. Though much was done by
his predecessors for the civilisation of the Mairs,
yet, undoubtedly, the results were most uncertain,
whilst their subsistence and employment were
dependent on the changing seasons; and the
development of a great system of irrigation works
has been the means of giving permanence and
advancement to the improvement in the character
and habits of the people. By these works the
country has been fortified against the miseries of
famine; tracts of wild jungle have been converted
into fruitful fields, dotted with villages and alive
with rural industry; population and revenue have
more than doubled ; families which for generations
had abandoned their native hills, have returned to
seek their traditional land marks; the induce-
ment to constant migration and unsettled habits
has been done away, and a taste acquired for the
sweets of profitable toil. The wild, unmastered
Caterans of 1820 have thus become, in 1848, a
thrifty, peaceful, and industrious peasantry—an
example to their neighbours, whose terror they
once were. To the abstract of the results of
irrigation in Central India thus presented, I have,
myself, but a few words to add. From the statis-
tical tables it appears that, in Mairwara alone, the
revenue of the State has advanced from £9680 in
1836, to £21,021 in 1846—0 r upwards of 216 per
cent. Now, the proportion of the gross produce
of the soil which constitutes the land rent may be
approximately assumed at one-third; hence the
agricultural produce of the district has increased
in value from £29,040 in 1836, to £63,063 in 1846;
while the State accordingly has obtained, during
the ten years included between the dates above
noticed, an aggregate increase of revenue of
£64,122. The Mairs themselves have benefited to
the extent of double this sum, or £128,224, being
upwards of £lO,OOO per annum added to the wealth
of the community as the reward of their newly-
acquired habits of industry and enterprise. The
works through which these ends have been attained
have cost in execution a total sum of £24,111, ex-
pended by the Government; on which it has
already received—from the enhanced land rent
alone—the almost incredible return of 265 per
cent. Nor has this result been attained by adding
to tho burdens of the people, for Mairwara in
1847—flourishing and fertile, and endowed with
permanent machinery of irrigation—actually paid
less in proportion to its population than in 1835.
In the latter year the population was estimated_ at
39,648, and the land rent was .£9680, being
4s. 10 id. for each soul. In 1847 the population
had increased to 100,282, and the land rent to
£21,021 per annum, giving a rate of 4s. 2d. over all,
or about one-seventh less than it was before the
irrigation scheme had begun to influence the re-
sources of the district. Viewed simply in a finan-
cial point of view, therefore, the results exceed
even the most sanguine expectations. On the
moral effects, no comment is necessary ; every
right-feeling man will best estimate them for
himself. Regarding the health of the districts
irrigated, a most careful and minute investigation
was made by Doctors Weir and Collyer, the
medical officers respectively in charge of the
districts of Ajmeer and Mairwara. The investiga-
tion was extended to a sufficient number of locali-
ties throughout tho two districts to authorise a fair
inference as to their sanitary state in general,
and (I am happy to be able to add) with the most
satisfactory results. The highly irrigated villages
of Mairwara indicate a sanitary state equal to the
entirely unirrigated districts in Northern India.
Hence the conclusion arrived at by Doctors Weir
and Collyer—that hitherto irrigation has produced
no deleterious effects whatever in the health of
the people—may safely be accepted as correct.
CONCLUSION.
I have to apologise for the length to which these
remarks have extended. I have been carried
away by the interest of the subject; for to me it
has a rare charm, treated as it is in such works as
I have been describing. I admit that lam some-
what prone to become enthusiastic, and to draw,
perhaps, too largely on the sympathies of others
less personally interested than ourselves; but I
still hope that the details given of the machinery,
and the visible results of one of the most import-
ant and most extensively applicable of the agencies
for good to the State and the people which are
possessed in India, may be held to be oi) sufficient
importance to justify the length at which I have
dwelt upon them. And if we only have the
energy and courage to follow their example, we
cannot fail to obtain the same gratifying and
prosperous results.
PRINTED AT THE “ EXPRESS” OPEIOE, BACCHUS MARSH.


