

IRRIGATION
IN ITS RELATION TO THE
PASTORAL INDUSTRY
NEW SOUTH WALES,
fl26bz
H. G. M‘KINNEY, M.E., Roy. TJniv. Irel., M. Inst. C.E.
[With Two Maps.]
[.Read before the Royal Society of N.8.W., September 4, 188.9.']
SYDNEY :
F. W. WHITE, PRINTER, MARKET STREET, WEST.




mj-rv/
11» *t• “7
IRRIGATION IN ITS RELATION TO THE PASTORAL
INDUSTRY OE NEW SOUTH WALES.
By H. G. M‘Kinney, M.E., Roy. Univ. Irel ., M. Inst. C.E.
[With Two Maps.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S.W., September 4, 1889.']
Importance of the Pastoral Industry.
The great benefits which agriculture and horticulture may, under
favourable circumstances, derive from irrigation are now generally
admitted. But while in this colony agriculture and horticulture
are of great and increasing importance, the pastoral industry is
likely to maintain the leading position for many years to come.
The present paramount importance of the pastoral industry is very
clearly indicated by recent statistics. The total area of land in
New South Wales is estimated at 196,000,000 acres, and reference
to the stock returns for last year indicates that of that area
168,000,000 acres is devoted to pastoral purposes, while the extent
under cultivation amounts to only 1,042,000 acres. These figures
show that it is a question of great moment whether irrigation
cannot be made to assist fn the development of the pastoral
resources of the colony.
It may be at once stated that the question has already been
answered by one of the best authorities in Australia, namely, Mr.
J. S. Horsfall, President of the Australian Sheep-breeders’ Associ-
ation and late Chairman of Directors in the great firm of Messrs.
Goldsbrough, Mort, & Co. In his speech at the presentation of
the last annual report of that firm in Melbourne, Mr. Horsfall
stated that irrigation must play an important part in the develop-
ment of the pastoral industry and in giving steadiness to it. It
is the object of this paper to furnish information in support of the
opinion quoted, and to give some idea of the magnitude of the
question and its importance to this colony. In order to place the
subject to be dealt with in a clear light, I deemed it necessary to
obtain from one who had practical experience of station manage-
ment a concise statement of the risks which Western pastoralists
have to encounter under existing circumstances. In response to
my wish in the matter, the following memorandum was very kindly
supplied to me by Mr. J. W. Boultbee, who, besides having valu-
able experience as manager of a pastoral estate, has been gazetted
as a qualified inspector of stock.
Present Risks of Pastoralists.
“In explanation of the necessity for irrigation in the purely
pastoral districts, it may be observed that so far as stock-carrying


capacity is concerned these districts differ very widely, and that
by far the greater area may be classified as poor. As a general
rule this fact is not due to any inferiority of the soil, but to the
uncertainty of the seasons and the scantiness of the rainfall. In
reality, throughout a large proportion of the pastoral lands of low-
carrying capacity, the fertility of the soil is remarkable. As an
instance of this, it was found on the Lower Darling by actual
experiment that land which in its natural state could scarcely
support one sheep to every 10 acres was capable of supporting
more than 20 sheep to one acre when it was laid down in lucerne
and irrigated. In a dry season in such country not a vestige of
grass can be seen and the leaves of the edible scrub within reach
of the sheep gradually disappear. The wanderings of the starving
stock in search of sustenance, and the concentration near permanent
supplies of water, have the effect of pulverising the surface of the
ground until the soil assumes a flour-like consistency. An almost
impalpable dust is raised as the sheep move about, and is often
carried in a cloud so dense and stifling as to render breathing
difficult, and coating the fleeces with a layer which settles among
the wool, tinging its snowy lustre and checking its growth. To
such an extent does this affect the fleece that at shearing time the
dust is sometimes found in a ridge an inch in thickness along the
back, making the wool tender and giving it a reddish tinge which
no scouring can eliminate. It often occurs, too, that in the search
for sustenance in the scrub the necks of the sheep and portions of
the back become covered with minute twigs, these together with
the ridge of sand necessitating the dismemberment of the fleece,
until perhaps the only sound portions are those along the flanks
and coupling. None but those who have experienced droughts in
the Western district can realise the misery they entail. The loss
is enormous, not only in actual numbers of the stock, but in the
failure of increase, and, as already explained, in deterioration in
the quality of the wool. Efforts are frequently made to avoid or
reduce those losses by sending the sheep to the mountains, or to
other localities where pasture is obtainable; but this course always
involves considerable expense and much risk, and frequently results
in the loss of a serious proportion of the sheep. In one instance
40,000 sheep were sent to the mountains, where the pasture just
sufficed to keep them alive, and after spending the summer there
they were started on the return journey. They had over 600
miles to travel, and the travelling stock routes and reserves proved
to be so completely denuded of grass that hay and chaff had to be
purchased at very high rates. The outlay in this way reached
£6OO per week ; and, notwithstanding that every possible effort
was made to save the sheep, they died in thousands, and only a
small fraction reached their destination. Cases of this description


are by no means uncommon, and it may be inferred from them
how bad the state of the Western district must be when the
pastoralists decide on encountering such risks. The sheep which
remain in the West in a bad season depend almost entirely on the
scrub, and in a prolonged drought large numbers of men have to
be employed for the purpose of cutting down the scrub or beating
down the leaves. It is difficult to imagine anything more dis-
heartening to a stockowner than the conditions involved in such
a state of affairs. Sheep are generally in poor condition when
scrub-cutting is resorted to, and it may be assumed that as a rule
they become weaker and less able to walk to and from water as it
continues. Statistics show that in 1877 the actual loss and de-
crease in the number of sheep amounted to about four millions, in
1884 about six millions, and in 1888 450,000. In addition to
this, the loss of increase has to be taken into account. In some
cases where there was 80 per cent, of lambs marked, not 9 per
cent, has been weaned, and there have been cases in which not a
single lamb was saved. From this source alone the loss is enormous.
In 1888 there were about nine millions of lambs, from twenty-two
millions of ewes, and this on a very moderate estimate meant a
loss of two millions ; that is, assuming that in an average season
the return of lambs would be 50 per cent.
“In the country to which I have been referring, the change
from dearth to excess of vegetation is remarkably rapid. If a
good fall of rain occurs at the proper season the whole face of the
country changes within a week. Within a fortnight the grass
and herbage are edible, the bush revives, and the scrub shoots
afresh, and within a month the pasture is luxuriant.
‘‘ It is at once evident that under such varied conditions a
steadiness or uniformity in a clip from year to year is impossible.
In one year the fleece is sound and clean, in another dirty and
tender. Prices must vary largely, and a brand of wool so varying
does not command the attention of buyers equally with a brand
that is not liable to these recurring fluctuations. From these
considerations it is evident that in bad seasons the loss due to
deterioration of the quality of the wool must amount to a very
large sum. The total production of wool in New South Wales in
1888 was 205 millions of pounds ; and if it be assumed that on
an average for the whole quantity the diminution in value, owing
to the nature of the season, amounted to a half-penny per pound,
we find that the loss under this head alone would be over £427,000
sterling. Some of the ways in which the wool is prejudicially
affected in droughts have already been mentioned, but another
serious cause of diminished value is the break in the wool which
is caused by a sudden change in the character of the season. The
alteration in the quality of wool which takes place immediately


after the break-up of a protracted drought is at once apparent even
to the unpractised eye. In regard to the losses in sheep and wool,
the year 1888, though very unfavourable, was less so than many
preceding years. Yet even in this case it will be seen from the
figures already given that on a low estimate the direct loss in
sheep and wool and in natural increase, must have exceeded
£1,150,000.”
In these notes Mr. Boultbee, where referring to the causes of
deterioration in the value of wool and of loss in the number and
natural increase of sheep, writes from personal experience, obtained
when managing a large station in the district west of the Darling.
How Irrigation can Benefit Pastoralists.
From the foregoing statement of risk and losses to which
pastoralists are liable, it is clear that the reduction and minimis-
ing of these risks and losses is a question of great importance. It
is proposed to show that this object can in a large measure be
accomplished by a properly considered system of irrigation, and
not only so, but by this means the productiveness and carrying
capability of an important proportion of the west of the colony
can be materially increased.
At the outset the fact must be recognised that of the land in
this colony suitable for irrigation only a small proportion can be
irrigated, for the simple reason that the available supply of water
is very limited. Our best rivers by far for irrigation purposes are
the Murray and the Murrumbidgee, and the district commanded
by these includes only the plains between them and a moderate
area to the north and west of the Murrumbidgee. The Darling
and all its tributaries, as well as the Lachlan, are so uncertain in
their discharge that even by storing flood-water wherever prac-
ticable the area which can be irrigated by their waters cannot be
more than a minute fraction of the western and north-western
plains. In short the only portion of this colony in which irrigation
can be carried on with regularity and on an extensive scale is in
the part of Southern Riverina which is commanded by the waters
of the Murray and the Murrumbidgee. I propose to show that
not only in this part of the colony, but also throughout the whole
of the country west of the Dividing Range, irrigation, carried out
under favourable circumstances, will not only be remunerative to
those practising it, but will add in an important degree to the
national prosperity ; in short, that irrigation will give steadiness
to the pastoral industry, increase the carrying capability of the
country in a very important degree, and greatly reduce the losses
in unfavourable seasons.
Methods op Irrigation Suitable.
The methods by which the ends described can be accomplished
are : —l. The irrigation of extensive areas of the native grasses.


2. The irrigation of limited areas of lucerne and other crops for
fodder. The former system is in natural operation on a large scale
on the Lower Murrumbidgee, as well as on a moderate scale on
the lower parts of several others of our western rivers. This is
precisely the same process which irrigates and fertilises the Valley
of the Nile by the rising of the flood waters. In some of the cases
in which it is exemplified in New South Wales, the inundations
due to floods in the rivers form the chief security of the pastoralists
whose lands are thus naturally irrigated. Special attention was
called to this subject in my report on “ Irrigation in Riverina,”
which was published with the Final Report of the Royal Com-
mission on the Conservation of Water. (See abridged edition,
page 82.) Nature having thus shown the method, and the results
of irrigating the native grassses, it is not surprising that enter-
prising men were to be found to follow the example. The most
striking and successful experiments of this nature are those which
have been made on the Lower Lachlan and the Lower Murrum-
bidgee, and particularly on the pastoral estates of Mr. James
Tyson. As generally happens in the case of rivers flowing through
alluvial plains, the banks of the lower parts of the rivers mentioned
are higher than the land adjoining. Hence, in order to divert
supplies of flood-water so as to irrigate by gravitation, it is only
necessary to make cuttings from the rivers with a moderate rate
of fall and extend them till they run out at the level of the natural
surface. Several cuttings of this kind were made on the Juanbung
Run by Mr. Tyson, and one of them alone is stated to have cost
£14,000. How profitable irrigation of the native grasses can be
made under such favourable circumstances is very clearly shown
by the figures supplied by Mr. J. L. Gwydir regarding the work
of this description done on the Corrong Run. With an expendi-
ture of very little over £1,200 Mr. Gwydir succeeded in irrigating
over 17,000 acres of grass land during every flood in the Lachlan.
Taking interest and cost of maintenance together at £l5O per
annum, the cost of irrigating an acre amounted to only three-
seventeenths of a shilling or slightly over 2d. Judging from the
figures given by Mr. Gwydir, it is clear that the profits of the first
year’s operation of the works more than covered the entire outlay.
Hence it appears that if in this case the irrigation of an acre had
cost 2s. instead of 2d., there would still have been a fair return on
the amount expended. The remarkable change brought about will
be more fully realised when it is stated that whereas before any
irrigation was done the land referred to barely sufficed for 4,000
sheep, after the system of watering was adopted it supported 12,000
sheep and 200 horses, besides fattening 125 head of cattle.
Irrigation of the native grasses by pumping, at the gross cost of
about 2s. 6d. per acre, has given a very satisfactory return under


favourable circumstances in the northern plains of Victoria. The
pumping plant in such cases was erected primarily for the irriga-
tion of crops, but at such times as water was not required for the
crops the supply was turned on to the grass land. The result of
this practice in one case inquired into was that while without
artificial watering the pasture land carried one sheep to an acre
in a fairly good season, with the watering the same land carried
five sheep to an acre every season.
It is scarcely necessary to state that the circumstances under
which flooding the land is conducted on the Lower Lachlan are ex-
ceptionable favourable, but there are many other similar cases to
be found in which the profit from irrigation, though perhaps, not
so remarkable, would still afford a very satisfactory return on the
outlay. Such cases exist on a large scale on the Murrumbidgee,
the Darling, the Macquarie, and the Gwydir, and to some extent
on nearly all the other western rivers.
From what has already been stated it may be safely concluded
—First, that the benefit arising from flooding the pasture land
has been practically demonstrated by nature; second, that the
lesson taught by nature has been successfully acted on by the
construction of channels through which the land is flooded by
gravitation, and, third, that pumping water for the flooding of
pasture land has been, and can be made a commercial success.
The profitable irrigation of the native grasses is therefore, not a
question for debate, but an important and accomplished fact ; and
the only point for consideration in connection with it is the nature
of the circumstances under which it is practicable.
Remarks on Rates for Water for Irrigation.
It is impossible to lay down a general rule as to the rate at
which water must be supplied in order to make irrigation remuner-
ative. In fact, different crops require different quantities of water,
so that the Indian system of charging according to the nature of
the crops and the acreage has much in its favour. It may be
assumed that in a fairly well-populated country where a demand
for water exists, irrigation will, as a general rule be confined to
agriculture and horticulture. This state of affairs is best illustrated
in Italy, Spain, France, and India. In the last-mentioned country
the crops, for which the highest rates are charged, are sugar-cane,
rice, and indigo, these being the crops which require the largest
and most regular supply of water. The circumstances which
favour the irrigation of grass land are (1) a limited demand for
agricultural products, (2) distance from market, (3) a fertile soil,
(4) small rainfall, (5) fairly uniform slope of ground, and (6) an
abundant supply of water. The first five of these conditions are
common to a great proportion of our Western plains, while, as


already pointed out, the last applies to the district irrigable from
the Murray and the Murrumbidgee, and in a less degree to some
of the other river districts. In such cases, it may be stated
generally that if the land can be flooded at the proper season to a
depth of Sin. at a cost of Is. per acre a very satisfactory return
will be obtained. This is equivalent to stating that the actual
quantity of water distributed over the land will be 10,890 cubic
feet per acre ; but, even with fairly managed works, it may be
reckoned that the loss in distribution will bring the total quantity
up to 12,000 cubic feet per acre. It is well known that with a
good class of pumping machinery, water can be raised to a height
of from 30ft. to 40ft. at a cost under a shilling for every 12,000
cubic feet, and it goes without saying that in a properly designed
system of canals delivering water by gravitation, the cost of water
would be much smaller still. A rate of one shilling per acre is
here assumed as a maximum for the irrigation of pasture land ;
but there are frequently cases in which a much higher rate could
be afforded. For instance, during the spring and early summer
months of last season—that is from August till December of last
year—when the sheep throughout the Western Division and a large
portion of the Central Division of this colony were reduced almost
to the last extremity, after hundreds of thousands of them had
been drafted off to the hills at great loss and expense, the
pastoralists would gladly have paid a much higher rate than that
mentioned for the flooding of parts of their estates.
It is a striking fact that whilst the pastoralists of the south-
western part of Riverina were experiencing a serious drought dur-
ing last spring, an abundant supply of water was flowing past
them to waste. So great was the supply flowing past Hay that
during the whole of September and October, and up to the middle
of November, sufficient water could have been spared to flood
8,000 acres per day to a depth of 3 in. In fact, during the two
former months the available supply was much in excess of that
mentioned, and a considerable quantity was available in December.
It is not too much to say that if the system of weirs proposed
in my Report on Irrigation in Riverina, already referred to, had
been in operation during last year, the area of land flooded by
that means alone would have exceeded half a million acres. It is
to be borne in mind that this could have been done without inter-
fering with the supply proposed to be distributed in the district
between Hay and Wagga. If a line be drawn due south from
Hay to the Billabong Creek, and another north-west from Hay to
the Lachlan River, the district commanded by the weirs referred
to would lie to the west of these lines, and would extend to a con-
siderable distance westward from the Murrumbidgee below its
junction with the Lachlan. The area commanded consists chiefly


of fertile plains, which can easily be flooded in the manner sug-
gested. At a rate of Is. per acre for a 3 in. flooding, the direct
return in such a season as last would be £25,000. The approximate
•estimate of the cost of the weirs was £34,500; but if navigation
as far as Hay were provided for, the cost would probably amount
to £50,000. In other words, the direct return in two such seasons
•as last would be equal to the entire outlay, and in addition there
would be a great benefit to the navigation.
Besides the irrigation which might have been done on the Lower
Murrumbidgee, there was during the same months sufficient water
to have supplied the proposed canals in the districts on both sides
of the river between Wagga and Hay to such extent that 2,000,000
of acres of pasture land could have had a 3 in. flooding after allow-
ing for a depth of 12 in. over 40,000 acres of crops. These are
■doubtless large figures, and the sceptical New South Wales
pastoralist may suggest exage ration, just as an eminent irrigation
•engineer in India was surprised at the audacity of any one who
■expected him to believe that a single pastoral estate in New South
Wales frequently includes over a quarter of a million acres. The
sceptic who is unable to realise what can or will be done in this
■colony in regard to irrigation should visit the canal works on the
Goulburn in Victoria. He will there find under construction an
irrigation canal 110 ft. wide at the bottom, and with slopes of one
and a-half to one. He will also find under construction a weir
which is to cost nearly £IOO,OOO, and he will be able to ascertain
that a second canal is to be made on the opposite side of the
•Goulburn from that under construction. The canal in progress
may, when running full, be reckoned on to flood 12,000 acres per
day to a depth of three inches.
The system of flooding the pasture land which has been referred
to is merely an extension on a large scale of the system carried
out already on the Corrong and Juanbung runs. In addition to
the proposed large irrigation works from the Murrumbidgee and
the Murray, the same system can be followed on a large scale on
the Darling, Macquarie, and Lachlan, and, in fact, on the lower
parts of nearly all of our Western rivers.
Simplicity op Process op Flooding Pasture Land.
An important point in favour of the irrigation of pasture land
is the simplicity of the process. Where crops are to be irrigated
a considerable amount of care and skill is required in the levelling
of the land and in the construction and management of the laterals
or minor distributing channels. In the case of the irrigation of
pasture land, if the main distributaries are aligned in a scientific
manner, no laterals will be required, the flooding being conducted
direct from the distributaries. As irrigation is very imperfectly


understood by the great majority of our landholders, this is a
matter of much importance.
An important point to be aimed at in a general system of irriga-
tion for pastoral purposes is to have the country so dotted over
with what have been termed protected areas that at least all the
more valuable of the stock can be saved in time of drought without
removing them to distant pastures. Throughout the whole of the
plain country between the Murrumbidgee and the Murray, and to
a distance of about 30 miles north and west from the former river,
not only should there be no necessity for moving stock in any
season however dry, but on the contrary that district should have
a surplus of grass and fodder available for stock depastured in
adjacent districts, In the Western Division every bad season
brings famine prices and causes serious losses in stock. There are
places in which losses in stock in dry seasons may always be ex-
pected to some extent, but such losses may be greatly reduced,
while famine prices for hay can be entirely put an end to.
Production of Podder by Irrigation.
In the foregoing, I have shown that under favourable circum-
stances irrigation of pasture land can be carried out with satis-
factory results, not only by gravitation, but also by pumping. One
of the conditions necessary for the profitable irrigation of pasture
land is the presence of an abundant supply of water. This and
other important conditions are frequently wanting, and the result
is that the irrigation of small areas of lucerne or other crop for
fodder will, in many cases, be the best course to adopt towards
providing for bad seasons. This also is a matter which has passed
beyond the experimental stage. As already mentioned, it has
been proved by actual experiment that the produce of one acre of
irrigated lucerne will feed over 20 sheep. In other words, if we
take the case of a Western run carrying one sheep to every five
acres, it has been proved that 5,000 acres of irrigated lucerne would
support the same number of sheep as 500,000 acres of the land in
its natural state. The practical lesson to be drawn from this is
that the irrigation of comparatively small areas in suitable places
will provide the means of saving large numbers of sheep when
grass is scarce and of preventing deterioration in the quality of
the wool.
That the production of hay by irrigation for the use of stock in
dry seasons is as profitable as it is humane is a fact well known
to the more enterprising of our station managers. The quantity
of hay required to keep a sheep in fair condition where water is
abundant is variously estimated by different competent authorities
some placing it as low as 6oz. per day, but the majority fixing it
at from lOoz. to lib per day. On this subject there is probably


no better authority than Mr. George Mair, of Groongal, and that
gentleman in a recent letter to me, stated that during the last
severe drought he fed 40,000 sheep for four months on hay alone,
the quantity used being equal to about one pound per sheep per
day. It is only necessary to add that Mr. Mair was perfectly
satisfied with the course he adopted. Such an experiment suc-
cessfully carried out by one of the best authorities on practical
station management in New Sonth Wales speaks for itself, and
requires no comment. In the case here referred to the hay was
grown on the station, and was produced by irrigating the land
with water pumped from the Murrumbidgee, but Mr. Mair adds
that even if it had been necessary to buy the hay he would have
had no hesitation in doing so. The latter course was, in fact,
adopted on a neighbouring run, where the quantity of hay pro-
duced by irrigation proved insufficient to meet requirements.
There are several other pastoral estates on the Murrumbidgee on
which irrigation is successfully practised, and a similar remark
applies to the Murray, the Lachlan, and the Darling. Irrigation
bas also been tried with satisfactory results on the Namoi and the
Gwydir ; in fact it may be stated generally that irrigation is a
proved success on all our Western rivers of any importance. Bear-
ing this in mind and taking into account the facts already pointed
out as to the small area of cultivated land which will provide for
the sheep which the land in its ordinary state will support, it is
clear that we have at hand a ready means of enormously reducing
the losses in dry seasons.
Utilization of the River Darling.
The driest and most unproductive part of the colony is that
situated west of the Darling, and next to this the district between
that river and the Lachlan. Roughly speaking, it may be stated
that below Walgett the Darling occupies the position of main
artery to a hundred thousand square miles of dry country. It is
sufficiently near the mark for the pi’esent purposes to assume that
the number of sheep which this extent of country supports in an
average year is ten millions. The question of whether all the
more valuable of these sheep could not be drafted to the river
frontage and fed there with hay during a bad season, is a very
interesting and important one. If two millions of sheep, that is
ont-fifth of the whole number, were drafted on to the river fron-
tages, the quantity of hay required to keep them in fair condition
during four months, reckoning 1 cwt. per sheep, would be 100,000
tons. Taking the length of the river in this case at 1,400 miles, this
quantity of hay amounts to only slightly over 71 tons in every
mile. As lucerne would yield at least four crops of a ton each
per acre in a season, the quantity of hay required would involve


the irrigation of only about 18 acres for every mile of river on an
average, Regarding the quantity of water required to produce
the result described, it is safe to assume that for each cutting of
the crop the maximum quantity of water would not exceed 6 in.
in depth—-that is, two floodings of Sin. each. This is equal to
21,780 cubic feet of water for every ton of hay produced, so that
for 71 tons the quantity of water would be 1,546,380 cubic feet.
This is less than is contained in a mile in length of the river where
the width is 100 ft. and the depth 3 ft. The conclusion to be
■derived from this is that, with a system of weirs in the Darling,
the quantity of water stored in the river would be far more than
would be required for the extent of irrigation here described.
Hence, even in a dry season, when the flow of the river had
entirely ceased, a large margin would be left after providing for
the irrigation estimated.
With regard to the cost and results of feeding the sheep on hay
on the river frontages, it may be safely stated that the cost of
producing the hay and feeding the sheep should not exceed 4s.
per sheep for the four months. These sheep would naturally be
the most valuable, and it would probably be a difficult matter to
replace them at the end of the drought at less than 14s. per head.
Hence, the saving of two millions of sheep in this manner in a
severe drought would be equivalent to averting a direct loss of a
million sterling, and would mean a gain of much more than that
■amount to the country at large.
The quantity of hay here referred to is only a fraction of what
the Darling can be made to produce, and represents the result of
■only one of the methods in which that river should be utilised.
The most important functions which the river Darling should be
made to fulfil are—(l) The provision of reserves of fodder for the
Western district, as already described ; (2) the flooding of large
areas of pasture ; and (3) the provision of a permanent highway
for navigation. To effect the last of these objects, a series of
weirs and locks is indispensable, and there is no difficulty in
arranging and designing these works so as to insure the watering
of large areas by gravitation during every rise of the river. The
raising of the water level by means of weirs will also materially
lessen the cost of pumping for the irrigation of crops. Hence, if
the Darling were utilised as it can be and should be, it would
first of all provide the means of tiding over bad seasons; secondly,
it would greatly increase the stock-carrying capabilities of the
country by flooding large areas of grass land ; and thirdly, it
would afford at all times cheap carriage for goods and produce.
The circumstances of the Darling are extremely favourable, in
some important points, to the construction of works for the
purposes referred to. The fall in that river throughout a great


portion of its length is under three inches per mile, so that by
the construction of a weir the water would be held back to tho
extent of more than four miles for every foot in height of the
weir. A low rate of fall means a low velocity—-a condition of
much importance to successful navigation. With a series of weirs
at suitable intervals, the river at ordinary heights would consist
of a succession of reaches of almost still water, so that navigation
would be conducted under highly favourable circumstances. The
same weirs would also hold up the water in the river to such
heights that flooding the land by gravitation could be carried out
in the manner already adopted on the Lower Lachlan.
Conservation of the Waters of the Macquarie.
In the Wimmera district in Victoria, the judicious expenditure-
of £IOO,OOO in the conservation of the waters of the Wimmera
River, raised the value of the land in the neighbourhood of the
works by a million sterling. Comparing the conditions of this
colony with those in the Wimmera district, we have more than
top times the area of country equally favourable to water
conservation, and under as good or better circumstances in regard
to the supply of water available. The Darling has here been
specially referred to, but the Macquarie, the ISTamoi, the Gwydir,
and the Lachlan also present remarkable facilities for water con-
servation and irrigation. As regards the Macquarie, in particular,
I pointed out in a report to the Water Commission in May, 1885,
after making an inspection of that river and the country adjacent
to it, that “the Macquarie affords remarkably favourable conditions
for the diversion and storage of floodwater.” The report added
that “In the district lying between the Macquarie and the Bogan
there is a complete network of creeks, all or nearly all of which
are well suited for the conveyance and storage of flood supplies.”'
The report dealt chiefly with the engineering aspect of the
question, and mentioned some of the places where weirs could be
advantageously constructed in the Macquarie, and referred to one
place where a large quantity of flood water could be stored. It
might have been added that the land, as a rule, is of the highest
quality, and that it is remarkably uniform and in every way
suitable for irrigation. The floods of 1887 illustrated in a striking
manner the comparative ease with which the Macquarie district
can be watered, and the results showed the great benefits arising
from such watering. On the other hand, the drought of 1888
and the losses which it entailed showed the necessity for conserving
and distributing the available supply of water. The Water Com-
mission in its second report, dealt with this comparison between
the cases of the Wimmera and the Macquarie in the following
terms :—“ The two main streams—the eastern and western
branches—which form the river Wimmera above Longerenong*


have catchment areas of 790 and 550 square miles respectively.
Comparing this total catchment with the effective catchments of
the Macquarie and Namoi, we find that it is less than one-seventh
of the former and considerably less than one-third of the latter.
In the hilly portion of the Macquarie the mean rainfall is over
23 in., and in the corresponding portion of the basin of the
Namoi it is nearly 22-£ in. From the available information, it
appears doubtful whether the average rainfall on the upper parts
of the basin of the Wimmera exceeds that on the Macquarie or the
Namoi; and it may therefore be assumed that, roughly speaking,
the discharge of these rivers is in proportion to their effective
catchment areas. The Wimmera scheme, as already mentioned,
was designed to afford a supply to an area of 2750 square miles,
and there is little doubt that expectation on this head will be
realised if not exceeded. The tract of country between the
Macquarie and the Bogan, which is at least as well adapted for
the distribution and storage of water as the Wimmera district, is,
roughly, 180 miles in length by 30 miles in width, or equal to an
area of about 5400 square miles. To supply this area with water,
we have a river possessing a catchment more than seven times as
great as that which can successfully supply an area of 2750 square
miles. In the short period during which the Wimmera works
have been in operation, they have, as we have shown, increased
by £1 per acre the value of the land benefited; and it may
reasonably be asked why equal results should not be obtained in
this colony by similar works on the Macquarie and other rivers.
Supposing that the works in the Wimmera district will cost
altogether £150,000 —and there is no reason to suppose that that
amount will be exceeded—there is every reason to conclude that
works can be constructed in the Macquarie District at double that
amount, which will give double the supply. Judging, then, from
the result achieved in the Wimmera district, it is a fair conclusion
that a judicious expenditure of £300,000 in diverting supplies
from the Macquarie and distributing them through the district
between that river and the Bogan would result in increasing the
value of the land by about 3J millions sterling. The Macquarie
is only one of a large number of rivers of New South Wales which
could be dealt with in the same manner as the Wimmera.”
Progress of Water Conservation Work in Victoria.
Such was the opinion given by the New South Wales Water
Commission in 1886, since which time the development of water
conservation works in Victoria has proceeded at a rapid rate. In
that year a comprehensive Act was brought into force in Victoria
dealing with the whole subject of riparian rights, and admittedly
based on the principles of the draft bill published in the previous


jearinthe First Report ofthe IST ew South Wales W ater Commission.
Up till 30th June of last year ten Trusts had actually been
constituted under this Act, the extent of land under their control
being 848,620 acres. In addition, 19 applications for the formation
of Irrigation Trusts were under consideration at the date mentioned,
the gross area affected by them being 1,401,780 acres, of which it
was estimated that 1,122,849 acres could be irrigated. A number
of these Trusts have since then been authorised.
Principal Irrigable Areas in New South Wales.
In the accompanying map of New South Wales I have marked
the areas in which irrigation can be carried on under advantageous
circumstances. The boundaries of these areas are in most cases
necessarily approximate only ; but they may, on the whole, be
accepted as substantially correct. It is to be understood that
only a small portion of these areas could be irrigated in any one
year; but even with this reservation inspection of them will at
once show how discreditable to local enterprise are the famine
prices frequently paid for hay, and the importation of Victorian
hay and chaff as far as to the Murrumbidgee and occasionally
even to the Lachlan. On this subject I may again quote the
opinion of Mr. Mair, of Groongal, as given by him to the Water
Commission in 1885. Mr. Mair stated that the conclusion he
had arrived at as a result of experiments made in the irrigation
of a number of different crops was “ that irrigation might be
profitably used for producing hay, which is bulky, and consequently
expensive of carriage ; or for raising potatoes or roots which are
perishable, or green stuff to feed valuable stock on in time of
drought.”
In the light of the facts and opinions referred to, it is abun-
dantly evident that by a judicious use of the means at hand we
could, within a few years, enormously increase the productiveness
of the whole of the Western part of the colony. On this subject
the following conclusions were arrived at by the Water Commission
after a very extended inspection of the country and an exhaustive
inquiry into its capabilities : —“ 1. That on water conservation
mainly depend the prosperity and the development of the whole
extent of the Central and Western Divisions of this colony, and
that though less required in the Eastern Division, it will add in
many places there also in an important degree to the productive-
ness, and therefore to the value of the land. 2. That as the
landholders, as a general rule, are quite equal to the task of pro-
viding sufficient water for the stock which the land can carry
under present conditions, Government works for supplying water
to stock are required only on a limited scale, and generally only
on travelling stock routes. 3. That the great object of water


conservation in this colony and particulary in the country west of
Dividing Range, is for irrigation. 4. That the purposes for which
irrigation is chiefly required, are (a) to provide fodder and grain
for horses, cattle, and stud sheep ; { h) to aflbrd surplus supplies
to be kept in reserve for saving stock of all kinds in bad seasons ;
(c) to produce fruit, vegetables, and miscellaneous crops ; and ( d)
to increase generally the productive powers of the land. 5. That
any well-considered and properly executed project for irrigation
in the country west of the Dividing Range would aflbrd a good
direct return on the capital invested, and would be a distinct
benefit to the colony at large. 6. That legislation on the subject
of water rights is a matter of pressing necessity, both to protect
the rights of the State and to foster and encourage local and
private enterprise.”
The correctness of these conclusions is beyond dispute, and is
thoroughly borne out by the experience of Victoria, where the
extension of irrigation is proceeding by rapid strides as already
mentioned. Competent authorities are of opinion that the rapid
development of the country districts in that colony, and the re-
munerative returns of the railways, are due to water conservation
and irrigation in a much greater degree than is generally under-
stood on this side of the Murray.
It must be borne in mind that the indirect benefits arising from
water conservation and irrigation are often far in excess of the
direct benefits. A severe drought not only occasions enormous
loss in stock during the time it lasts, but frequently leads to the
loss of returns for one or even two succeeding years. For instance
on the first occasion when I visited the Macquarie District there
was a severe drought, which had left scarcely a vestige of grass,
with the natural result that the stock had either died or been
removed elsewhere. On my next visit I found the grass from Ift.
to 2ft. in height, but there was no stock to eat it, as store sheep
and cattle were not to be had at remunerative prices. Cases of
this kind are by no means uncommon, and they serve to show the
importance of the indirect losses arising from droughts, and to
illustrate the causes of uncertainty of the pastoral industry under
present conditions.
Want of Legislation.
The greatest obstacle in the way of irrigation is the want of
legislation dealing with water rights. In my report on “ Irriga-
tion in Riverina,” presented to the Water Commission in March,
1887, I referred to this question in the following terms : —“ As a
means of stifling enterprise by preventing the utilisation of the
natural water supply of the country, the British law of riparian
rights could scarcely be excelled. For instances of the operation
of this monstrous law, we have only to look back on the records


of dams which have been constructed and guarded by armed men,
of other dams which, after construction in this way by one armed
mob, have been cut through by another; of many cases where-
dams were needful, but were not built through fear of litigation
and of the purchase of extensive pumping plant which frequently
lies idle for the same reason.” This is still the state of affairs in
New South Wales ; but as the necessity for legislation is now
universally admitted, it is hoped that the question will soon be-
suitably dealt with. As matters at present stand nothing can
legally be done towards utilising the available supply of water for
irrigation. In this matter the people of this colony are placed in
the same position as the Government and people of Victoria are
in regard to the River Murray. The interests and the necessities
of many of our most enterprising western landholders have out-
weighed their respect for the law, and so it has been with the
Government and people of Victoria in the case of the River
Murray. Were it not for this disregard of the law on the part of
a number of our pastoralists in the Central and Western Divisions
of this colony it might be stated with considerable reason that
Australian enterprise in the development of the land is bounded
on the north by the River Murray.
Necessity of an Examining Board for Engineers.
It is very desirable that legislation dealing with riparian rights
and the constitution of water trusts should also provide for the
appointment of an examining board of engineers of recognised
standing, who would decide as to the qualifications necessary for
engineers to water trusts. A board of this description has been
in existence for some years in Victoria, and the names of qualified
engineers are published from time to time in the official reports of
the Water Supply Department. This arrangement is an important
measure of protection both to the public and to qualified hydraulic
engineers. Some time ago we had a Royal Commission to inquire
into abuses in the medical profession. More recently we have
read and heard much about abuses among architects, and the only
reason why we have heard little about abuses among civil engineers
is that, owing to the existing system of centralisation, private and
local enterprises are checked and limited, whilst nearly all the
available employment for civil engineers is monopolised by
Government.
It cannot be too widely known that any person who pleases can
style himself “doctor,” “civil engineer,” “architect,” or “surveyor,”
or he may even adopt all four designations. Doctors’ mistakes do-
not remain in a position to bear damaging testimony, but the
mistakes of civil engineers and architects afford evidence which
cannot be disputed. In the case of civil engineers, such mistakes.


act as a deterrent to private enterprise to an extent which
few can realise. It is therefore, very important that in dealing
comprehensively with water conservation, the Government should
adopt some such safeguard as that in operation in Victoria.
When irrigation began to be extensively practised in that colony
it was soon found that proper surveys and levels were required to-
show the lines which channels should take, and the best methods
of distributing the water. Even the holders of farms of moderate-
extent found it greatly to their interest to obtain this information..
There ai’e in this colony some station managers who are really
good practical engineers, and who are quite capable of managing
irrigation work themselves ; but these are only a small minority.
As a general rule, station owners and station managers know
little or nothing of the process of irrigation, and this is only natural..
The greatest mischief to the cause of irrigation is done by those-
who, without reason, imagine that they understand the subject.
Such persons occasionally launch into a series of luckless and mis-
directed experiments, and after finding such experiments a decided
failure financially, they come to the conclusion that the conditions
of the country are unfavourable to irrigation. It is necessary to*
add that cases of this kind are extremely rare, owing simply to
the fact, that even with indifferent management and appliances,,
irrigation gives good returns.
Causes of Backward State op Water Conservation.
The want of proper legislation has been mentioned as a great
obstacle in the way of anything being done towards water con-
servation on a large scale, but the root of all difficulties in the
matter is the broad and comprehensive ignorance which prevails
on the subject. The people in the western parts of the colony
realise its importance and are practically unanimous regarding it,
but they constitute a small minority of the population. The great
majority of even well-informed persons in Sydney and its suburbs
understand nothing about water conservation in the West, and to
them it is a much less interesting topic than the Town Hall organ,
or the General Post Office clock. Nor are the country towns free
from blame in this matter. The building of a new post-office or a
courthouse frequently attracts more attention in a town than
questions regarding the inerease of the productiveness of the entire
district in which the town is situated.
The Sydney press has made some creditable efforts to enlighten
the public on the value of water coeservation and irrigation, but
with only a very limited degree of success. If a series of articles
were now published decrying irrigation and stating that it cannot
be successfully practised in New South Wales, I believe there
would still be found Sydney readers who would go approvingly


through the series and end off* with the remark, “ I told you so.”
There was, in fact, much point in the question lately put to me
regarding the River Murray by a prominent Victorian, —“ Do
you think we in Victoria are such fools as to postpone our works
for perhaps fifty years till the Sydney people find out the value of
the Murray ? ” There is no vagueness or mincing of matters in
that question, and the accompanying map (republished with this
paper by the kind permission of the Hon. Alfred Deakin, Minister
lor Water Supply, Victoria,) will show that the action taken has
been as decided and energetic as the question would indicate.
The explanation of the backward state of affairs in this colony
regarding water conservation is very simple. While the indirect
results of a national system of water conservation would be enor-
mous, and would add greatly to the wealth and prosperity of the
colony, the number of persons directly affected in the first instance
would be relatively small. Hence we find that the question is
regarded with comparative apathy by the many, and receives the
cordial support of only a few. Besides, the landholders of the
coastal districts, who enjoy an abundant rainfall, have a selfish
interest in opposing water conservation in the interior of the
colony. But the spread of information and the remarkable pro-
gress made in the Northern Districts of Victoria must soon have
their effect. Many in Sydney are beginning to see that a drought
which occasions losses in the interior of the colony to the extent
cf millions sterling, must have some effect on their business, and
the spread of such ideas cannot fail to lead to action.
Statistics relating to Losses.
The following figures, illustrating the importance of the subject
dealt with in this paper, speak for themselves :—Number of sheep
in New South Wales on December 31, 1886, 39,169,000 ; number
of sheep in New South Wales on December 31, 1887, 46,965,152;
number of sheep in New South Wales on December 31, 1888,
46,503,469. The year 1887 was a good one for pastoralists, and
1888 unfavourable. Inspection of the figures shows that the
number of sheep at the end of 1888 was about ten millions less
than if the rate of increase of the previous year had been main-
tained—in fact, instead of an increase of that amount, we find
that there was a decrease of nearly half-a-million. Some idea of
the proportion carried off by starvation and thirst may be con-
veyed by the statement of a writer in one of the Sydney papers,
who declares from personal knowledge that on one station 60,000
sheep were lost in this way last year out of 120,000, and on another
station 80,000 out of 150,000. The same writer estimates that
the number of lambs shorn this year will be 2,000,000 less than
last year, on account of the drought, and that for the same reason
the wool throughout the country north and west of the Lachlan


will be inferior in quality. The practicability of preventing, in
an important degree, the recurrence of such losses is not a matter
of theory or of opinion, but an ascertained fact.
Discussion.
Judge Docker.—l think Mr. M’Kinney is to be congratulated
upon the able paper he has read on this important subject; and
the pastoralists of the colony ought certainly to appreciate the
way in which the subject has been treated, being as it is, one of
such vast importance, not only to them but also to the whole
colony. Any one who is acquainted with the portions of the
colony referred to, must appreciate the exhaustive way in which
Mr. M’Kinney has argued the question out. I am tolerably
acquainted with a portion of the country he has referred to, and
consequently his remarks have been of the greatest interest to me,
and have borne out many ideas which have also occurred to me-
and which I have endeavoured, perhaps imperfectly, to express.
This part of the colony (referring to the Darling on the map) is
one that has always had great interest for me; indeed I regard it
as the Nile of Australia of the future. I believe from the fertility
of the land it will be capable of growing almost any sort of produce.
I am very glad to hear Mr. M’Kinney’s calculations as to the
amount of fodder which that narrow strip would grow for the
purpose of keeping alive the stock over all the vast district adjacent.
In addition to the river itself, there are many lakes running
back from the river which would form reservoirs for flood
waters which could be used when the river falls. The river
itself in its natural state does not contain a very great quantity
of water as a general rule. I remember hearing of a case in which
a gentleman at a station was irrigating some land-—pumping up
water from the river by means of a power pump—and after a few
days’ pumping he found he had lowered the river locally by about
two feet, the country being so level and the flow so low—he had
actually made a hole in the river as it were. With regard to the
portion of the colony between the Macquarie and the Bogan there
can be no doubt, so far as distribution is concerned, this is a most
favourable part of the colony for irrigating the country, as it is so-
level and there are so many creeks. I remember some years ago
travelling up the Duck Creek from Bourke to Dubbo, and being
caught by the flood waters coming down, there not having been a
proper rain for months. When we were a little way beyond Can-
nonbar we met a flood coming down the whole surface of the country,
and after waiting a few days we started and travelled I think about
forty miles up the Macquarie through water three to four inches
deep. The difficulty was to find any portion of the surface at all
above the level of the water. The grass showed just above the-


water, so that we could see where we were going, and as I say we
-travelled almost through a layer of water three to four inches
deep. But what strikes me as a difficulty with regard to this part
of the country is that the water supply would not be continuous.
This vast body of water flows at irregular times, and there would
require to be some storage to apply the water at the time it was
required. Whether there are places which would be capable of
being used as a reservoir in this part of the country lam not
•aware. Probably Mr. M’Kinney knows more about that than I.
Another part of his paper is of great interest to me and I can bear
■out every word of Mr. Boultbee’s description of this country. It
is a most vivid and accurate description of the nature of the
•country, and of what happens in time of drought. But as only a
■comparatively small portion of this vast pastoral country can be
■directly benefitted by irrigation, only a small portion being capable
of being irrigated, various supplementary methods of preserving
the lives of the stock should be adopted. Of course one obvious
method is that mentioned by Mr. M’Kinney, that the more
valuable of the sheep should be brought to the various areas along
the River Darling and other places where a supply of fodder could
be procui’ed. Mr. Boultbee mentioned that in some places the
«heep were taken from the parts suffering from drought to the
mountains. This is very frequently done, but is not carried out
in a systematic way at all. As a general rule the sheep are kept
in the hope that rain is coming and grass will be growing until
they are unfit to travel. They become so weak and the roads
become so utterly bare that there is nothing for them to eat en
route. It has long occurred to me that the system carried out in
the plains of Spain should be adopted here of moving the sheep,
not merely in the time of drought, but annually making it a regular
part of the business to remove them, say, immediately after the
■shearing to the high lands of the colony, where as a rule there is
plenty of grass. In winter time in the New England District the
;sheep suffer from fluke, in some places they cannot remain all the
year round, but during the summer time there is generally an
abundance of grass and water. But then the difficulty arises of
travelling sheep such a vast distance, and here is the idea I have
tried to impress upon many, and had the honour recently to bring
under the notice of the Minister of Works. My idea is that the
railway system of this portion of the colony should be adapted
specially with the view of serving the pastoral industry by afford-
ing facility to carry the stock by train. I tMnk by taking the
railway from Nevertire, crossing the Macquarie at Warren to
Coonamble, from thence to the Namoi and joining at Pilliga an
extension of the North-Western Railway, the Western should be
■connected with the Northern Railway system. The western plains


would then be connected by rail with New England, and from
Nevertire right away to Glen Innes trains could be run in less
than 24 hours to the heart of the mountain country, where there
is abundance of grass during summer, and this would keep many
sheep to the acre for the few months it would be necessary for
them to be taken there. Then they could be taken back again
for the lambing by which time there ought to be a growth of grass,
rain generally being expected about February or March. By this
means pastoral industry would be rendered more of a certainty
and less of a lottery ] and many more sheep to the acre could be
carried all the year round by utilising the plain country and the
mountainous country together—-working the two in conjunction.
Then of course the system of feeding the sheep on artificial fodder
could be most usefully adopted. This has been a most serious
item during the prevalence of droughts in the Darling River. In
one place no less than £1,200 was spent during the year in pro-
viding food for the horses on the station alone—no attempt was
made to feed the sheep. The cost of bringing chaff was simply
enormous. On one occasion I had to pay for a 401 b bag of chaff
to feed my horses 255. At another place lower down the horses
were being kept alive on flour. The river ceased to become
navigable, and though flour was selling at <£6o a ton at Wilcannia
there was a cargo of flour which could not be got there, the river
having failed. No teams could travel that distance and the owner
of the flour sold his whole cargo to the owners of the station at
£2O a ton, and it was mixed with some of the natural fodder. I
make these remarks to call the attention of those interested to the
necessity of having more than one system in working the pastoral
industry. No doubt the irrigation system is the most important,
and if the railway communication of this district were made to fit
in with that particular industry it would be rendered much more
certain and profitable, and especially stock would be kept alive
with a much greater degree of certainty.
Professor E. H. Rennie.- —-I listened with a great amount of
pleasure to the reading of this paper. I would like to refer to
one aspect of the question to which allusion was made, that is to
the possibility of interference with the navigation of the lower
Murray if these enormous irrigation works are carried out.
People in South Australia are I know somewhat agitated upon
this point, and I believe this colony sent a commission into Victoria
some time ago and some figures were published as to the amount
of water that would be carried away by Victoria for irrigation
purposes. I would like to have the opinion of Mr. M’Kinney—
whether he thinks there is any fear of interference with navigation.
Mr. Trevor Jones moved a vote of thanks to Mr. M’Kinney.
He said he hoped the public press would call the attention of the


public to the points raised by Mr. M’Kinney in his paper. We
had a splendid territory, but had allowed it to fall almost into dis-
use and were consequently far behind Victoria in the matter of
irrigation. He did not think the locking of the Darling would
interfere with the navigation of the lower Murray. He took it
that when the river is locked water is kept in it throughout a
greater portion of the year, He thought that the locking of the
Darling would tend to keep the waters in the lower Darling and
the Murray.
Mr. J. T. W ilshire, M.P., in seconding the vote of thanks said he
fully endorsed Mr. M’Kinney’s remarks with regard to the necessity
of legislation in the matter. He sincerely hoped that during the
next session of Parliament a Bill would be introduced by the
Government.
Mr. P. N. Trebeck said the squatters in the Western District
had tried sending their sheep up to the mountains as suggested by
Judge Docker, but they invariably came back infected with fluke.
He therefore preferred Mr. M’Kinney’s scheme of irrigation as a
more practical means of grappling with the difficulty.
Mr. M’Kinney in reply said he was gratified at the corroboration
of his opinions by Judge Docker, whose experience of the western
part of the country probably even exceeded his own. With regard
to the question asked by Professor Rennie, he would not go so far as
to say that he thought that irrigation would put a stop altogether
to navigation, but he thought it would interfere with it to a con-
siderable extent, as the quantity of water to be taken would be so
great. In Victoria, however, people were quite reconciled to the
idea of navigation being seriously interfered with, believing that
much greater good would result from irrigation.
Mr. J. Trevor J ones desired to explain that he meant that if
the Darling and the Macquarie were locked in the manner indicated
in the paper, that though the pumping would diminish the quantity
of water in the rivers, yet that the quantity conserved by the
locking would to a certain extent compensate for that taken away
by the pumping.
The Chairman, Professor Liversidge, in thanking Mr. M’Kinney
on behalf of the meeting for his valuable paper hoped that the
public press would give that prominence to the subject which its
importance warranted.
Mr. M’Kinney briefly acknowledged the vote of thanks.
Judge Docker desired to say a word in explanation. No
doubt, as stated by Mr. Trebeck, there was a danger of the sheep
contracting the fluke ; but if they were taken up to the mountains
during the summer time they were less likely to catch the disease.
He had always understood too, that sheep which were affected
with fluke were cured by being taken to the salt-bush country.


( H° of Lith. D S 3 IS )






&1&LO
fIM&Z
Nco# y




jAff
Bi&uo
f/2062.
f\j aCkl('
