

I L i r" 1f
* r •■ -
S~iTf
f \ I O P- t, i
r" / &14 ‘
IFRIOOSIOR,
(fHE REWOUSTRAEIA.
■ ’
BY
FRANCIS MYERS
> 2 (" (ij)eletnac|?us, of Or(sus
NOVEMBER, 1891'
Melbourne :
SPECTATOR PUBLISHING COMPANY LTD., 270 POST 0/ V ‘> y PLACE.
: • • " :
£ x
«MHj
* *
■ >'






■


RRI005I0R;
R.EWOUSTRALIA.
FRANCIS MYERS
( of rpus \
NOVEMBER, 1891.
Melbourne :
SPECTATOR PUBLISHING COMPANY LTD.. 270 POST OFFICE PLACE.




NTRODUOTIO
As the principal travelling member of the literary staff of the
Argus, it has already fallen to my lot to write much of irrigation,
and of the Irrigation Colonies established by Messrs. Chaffey at
Mildura and Renmark on the River Murray. I thought, indeed,
that I had fairly said my say in the matter, and yet was not
displeased when the proposal came to me to put my ideas into
the more concise form of a pamphlet, and to supplement them
with certain hard facts which should enter into minds, however
thick, sheathed with incredulity, or prone to fence with quips
and quibbles, often more effective for ill than absolute straight-
forward denials.
I believe in practical, scientific irrigation with all my heart
and soul and strength. I know too well what, in its absence,
life in the bush of Australia has become. I know how, under
the familiar, harsh and unlovely conditions, old men have become
debauched and degraded to the state of absolute brutes, how
young men and boys have tied from it to the city as to a haven of
refuge, until at length the two great colonies of Australia have
become not as fair proportioned human beings, but rather as
those uncouth images familiar enough in modern engravings,
where the head shows ample and fair, while all the body is
pinched, warped, attenuated to the last degree. I know also
how in those cities the curse of pauperdom, of vagrancy, of
lowest vices and crime increase terribly.
And we all know, how under such conditions sedition,
anarchy, and all blackest forms of socialism are bred, and
while the rich and beautiful country is untilled and unutilised,
ri3OH-^


could conceive of no more
they have done, and the
most practical, and yet
incredulous public.
Melbourne, May, 1891.
the cities are thronged with wolf-eyed multitudes, eager only
each for the other’s substance.
For the existence of such conditions I blame chiefly, as I have
said, the unnecessary harshness and brutality of our bush life.
For its removal I look chiefly to the gentler order which shall
follow a general introduction of irrigation. As apostles of that
order I have always regarded the pioneers and projectors of these
Mildura and Renmark Colonies, and as their critic and friend I
congenial task than to put the work
chances they offer, in the plainest,
convincing light before a so far
“ Telemachus.”


6HAFFEY BROTHERS.
«|HO are the Chaffey Bros.? was a question which
H people asked with more serious concern five years
H ago than now. Here were two men suddenly
¥ appearing and asking to be allowed to acquire some
quarter of a million of acres of mallee country.
1 What would they do with it? They would dig,
plant, and water it; they would settle on it a population ; they
would transform it from a wilderness to a garden ; they would
found a city, build a college, establish thousands of happy homes,
and trust to their own genius to make for themselves profit, after
paying to the Government more than twice as much as that land
would have brought that year under the auctioneer’s hammer.
Two sets of people were aghast at these proposals. The
one understood, the other did not. The one consisted of the
irreconcileables of Parliament. They saw in it nothing but a
scheme to trick the colony out of its lands, and loud and bitter
and malignant was their outcry. The other, consisting of
squatters, agents, travellers, and folks knowing the Mallee,
shrugged their shoulders, and sa'd a couple of madmen had
come to visit us. They were not indeed less astonished
than was the lord of the earth who, asking the price
of the magnificent turbot, got reply : “ Fifty lashes on my bare
back, good prince.” They deemed that these men were willingly
and wilfully exposing themselves to risks they did not
understand. They prophesied ruin and disaster, swift and sure.
Nevertheless, the two strangers persevered. They had purchased


January
.. 30,000
February
.. 24,000
March
.. 20,000
April ..
.. 24,000
May
.. 80,000
June ..
.. 40,000
July
• • # • •
.. 48,000
August
.. 48,000
September
.. 60,000
October
.. 60,000
November
.. 60,000
December
.. 40,000
wisdom by experience, and had a better knowledge of the proper
use and true value of that mallee land than all the population
of Australia. They saw sterility on either bank, and the river of
life flowing between. They knew that a union there to be
wrought by simple intelligent human effort would result in
marvellous fructification and increase, but it was absolutely
necessary to secure reasonable rights to both land and water
before putting that effort forth.
Negotiations, tardy and difficult, proceeded through many
months, and at length, with consent of Parliament and approval
of the Governor-in-Council, an agreement was arrived at.
The essential terms were that the Messrs. Chaffey should
be permitted to enter on and occupy 250,000 acres of land on
the Murray River in the colony of Victoria, and on the fulfilment
of certain conditions they were to acquire the fee simple of the
whole or any part of that area. The one all-important condition
was that every ten-acre block sold should carry with it a water
right in perpetual easement. And that this might be done they
were authorised to take from the River Murray water as under: —
During the Cubic Feet
Month of— per Minute.
The quantity of water this would afford is as under :
A total per acre of 88,488 cubic feet, equivalent to a rainfall of
24 inches per acre per annum.


Doubts, it may be mentioned here, were raised as to the
capacity of the river flow and the possibility of the quantity
being supplied. These, to intelligent minds, were for ever set at
rest by the report of Mr. Checchi, C.E., who found that in April,
1889, when the river was lower than it had been for many years,
the lowest discharge was 132,000 cubic feet per minute, or eight
times more than the average quantity required for irrigating the
whole 250,000 acres. And, indeed, to those who know the
Murray from its sources to the sea, who have seen the live
torrents tumbling down to Gehi, Kahnkoban, Mitta, and
Goulburn ; who know, how, in addition to the ordinary flow of
the river bed, they spread through beds of subterranean drift,
over thousands of square miles, it is the veriest crown and
height of folly to talk of exhaustion or even of serious depletion.
Twenty Milduras might be fully irrigated and still old Father
Murray would roll down nobly to the sea.
And what of the possible storage of flood waters, what of
the years when even Murray tributaries have flowed thirty miles
broad for months of the year ? It is a marvellous great Aus-
tralian question that of storage, and even at the time of choosing
their estate the Messrs. Chaffey were not unmindful of it.
Running some six miles inland, making a course of about
12 miles, and re-entering the river at a point known as Psyche
Bend, is a magnificent billabong or ana-branch. Its average
width is 150 yards, and depth when full 80ft., and usually its
rise and fall correspond with the river; but immediately the
land was secured that billabong was locked at both ends, and
being always kept full will supply water for a vast area of
country, should once in 50 years perhaps, rains and snows alike
fail, and such a drought as no man living remembers perish the
land.
lam forestalling, however. The Messrs. Chaffey had obtained
the land. People had ceased to ask “Who are the Chaffeys?”forit
had become generally known that they were men of parts and
pluck who had achieved success in this same fashion in California,


who were not likely to be daunted by any obstacles, and who
could command capital sufficient to launch their enterprise in a
reputable style.
They entered then on their estate at the close of the year
1887, not quite three years and a, half ago, all their squatter
neighbours looking curiously on. And here it may be well to
endeavour fo paint a picture of Mildura as it was. You must
imagine, then, a tract of country with a frontage of some 40
miles to the river, and reaching some 20 miles back ; rising
generally from the river bank, save where in places flats subject
to frequent inundations were covered with really splendid forests
of red gum. Some few thousand acres of the frontage were
lightly timbered or covered with the blue bush, but generally
over the whole area the mallee scrub reigned supreme.
It had been a hard time in the mallee country, and the
rabbits had marvellously increased; grass there was none;
miserable sheep were dying all around ; the parched stranger
on the weary horse riding through the country heard nothing
but the dry rustle of the mallee leaves, saw nothing but the dull
glistening foliage, the red sand driving, the starved sheep perishing,
the rabbits skipping about (sustaining life in some incom-
prehensible manner), and the innumerable ants. The dingo
howled by night, the villain crow croaked dismally by day, and
the only tolerable spot in the broad area of hopelessness and
misery, was the little irrigated garden at the homestead on the
river. Lessee after lessee had been ruined in Mildura, and
indeed the great majority of the squatters on the lower Murray
and on the Darling had been reduced to the condition of care-
takers for the banks, or the great financial institutions. It is
probable, indeed certain, that had the whole of Mildura been
submitted to auction in that month of November, 1887, it would
not have found a purchaser at 10s. an acre.
Yet here were men prepared to pay £1 per acre for
200,000 acres, to spend £5 per acre more on the first 50,000
acres taken up, to reserve one-sixteenth of the whole in alternate


blocks as endowment for an agricultural college (to be by them-
selves built), to provide such pumping plant as had not before
been seen in Australia, and to establish indeed a township, a
city, and a colony in the heart of that howling wilderness. Was
it a marvel that a murmur of madness went all through the
mallee country, and that folks who had lived or existed there for
thirty years looked on incredulous or aghast ?
They did not understand that knowledge begotten of
experience was at length come into the land.


Beginning ©p W©rk.
«ORK began in Mildura in 1888. The boat was moored
to the muddy bank, surveyor’s tent and gear were
pitched out, Mr. W. B. Chafi'ey established himself
in the old homestead, which, together with the stock
and plant, had been purchased from the original
/ lessee, and the first work of all new countries was
practically begun. First of all a block of 25,000 acres was
surveyed, and at once enclosed with a rabbit and vermin proof
fence of netting and barbed wire. Then, taking the landing
place as a central point, a township was surveyed, and
“ avenues ” three chains in width ran out full fifteen miles. The
town allotments were each 155 feet by 33 feet. Immediately
beyond them were villa lots 2\ acres each, and beyond them
again were the horticultural lands proper, each in area 10
acres, and each to be commanded by the irrigation channel,
which must touch the highest corner, A great work had also to
be done in the skilful plotting of the channels. Pumping
stations had to be chosen on the river, whence the water could
be lifted to ridges commanding easily all the surrounding
country ; and along these ridges channels were surveyed, main
channels, each one to convey a river of water to be ultimately
distributed into many creeks, brooks, and rivulets; to trickle over
the whole face of these 25,000 acres. Heart, head, and hand
went into this work, and a big show was very quickly made.
Nor were the white tents long pitched, when the curious enter-
prise of Australia began to manifest itself. The storekeeper
came down with his boat-load of goods ; the butcher and the


baker followed. The publican would fain have come also, but in
terms of the agreement with the Government of Victoria, was
warned sternly off. The Messrs. Chaffey have resolved that if
it be in their power to prevent it, there shall be no liquor shop
in Mildura for ever, and dearly as I love liberty in all things and
at all times, I can but think they are right.
And now did settlers begin to arrive. Enquiring men began
to ask the meaning of all this enterprise, and could they not
provide (through it) some endowment for their children ? Lord
Ranfurly and his friend, Mr. Aylmer, a much-travelled English
gentleman, were amongst the first to arrive, and Lord Ranfurly,
though very well posted in all that had been done and that
remained to be done in California, was quick to recognise a
larger opportunity here. He at once made a large investment,
and entered into contracts with the Messrs. Chaffey for tilling
and planting. Nurserymen and practical gardeners came up
also, and of all that came with any serious intent, very few
went away without, to some extent, casting in their lot with the
settlement.
In a year from the time a Chaffey surveyor planted his first
red flag, there were more than five hundred men busily employed,
and more to show in the way of building and actual development
than on all the sheep stations up and down 200 miles of the
river. A newspaper was started, the Cultivator, under the
editorship of Mr. T. B. Mackay. Great engineering shops were
in course of construction, machinery such as Murray settlers
had never heard of was being landed at Adelaide for conveyance
to the river steamers, and hundreds of hired bullock or contractors’
teams were working with plough and scoop in the big channels.
Planting was already begun, and far-seeing nurserymen were
putting in tens of thousands of truncheons of olives and cuttings
of vines. All through the hot summer and the dreary winter
this work went on, and in the spring of the next year, October,
1888, I visited the colonies.
That practically was but the beginning of work, for


Renmark had not then been twelve months on hand, some little
delay on the part of the Adelaide folk retarding occupation.
But I remember well the surprise which awaited me, when on a
sultry spring day I drove into the settlement from Overland
Corner. The Corner is a settlement of the old sort—two or
three houses at the foot of a hot limestone hill, a garden patch
twenty yards square, pigs rooting close to the door, and dogs
snarling around. “ The same yesterday, to-day, and for ever,”
one might say. But when we had traversed some twenty miles of
parched-up country, what a change appeared. Over some
thousand acres of country initiatory effort was apparent. Men
w r ere hewing, grubbing, ploughing, grading, planting on a dry,
parched land, where no water was, nor any sign thereof.
Ploughing, sowing, planting in wonderful faith, one might
well say. But it was not so. There was one field of about
twenty acres, alongside which you might see a new-made
channel, and about which a dozen men were greatly busy with
long-handled shovels. Looking closely you might see twigs
about the size and with apparently as much vitality as short
lead pencils. Those were cuttings of Zante currants, and the
men were opening trenches by which the water pumped into the
channel might trickle past them.
I saw those same twigs on another visit two years later, but
of that anon. We drove away from that currant vineyard and
round about by rough roads and through recent clearings. We
saw a good many settlers at the very beginning of their labours,
but inspired by a reasonable hope and looking forward from a
hard present, to a happy future. Already two engineers’ shops
had been erected, the foundations for offices dug, stores and
boarding houses erected, and generally it may be said the
skeleton plan of settlement clearly traced. There was not much
to please the eye, perhaps ; all was very coarse and crude, and
the only possible way for one unfamiliar with such work to
realise the splendid future was by an inspection of the pictures of
what, under similar conditions, had been achieved in other lands.


Look at the original, horrid, alkaline desert which once lay
around the great Salt Lake. Nothing so repellant, perhaps, in
all Australia, and look at the matchless gardens and orchards,
vineyards and orangeries, which cover its surface now. Look at
the desolation of the Californian country when the rains and
snows which fell on the mountains went unused and unre-
garded down to the sea. And now—but all Australia is by this
time familiar with the verdant glories of the foliage of all
manner of fruit trees in the colonies of Ontario, Riverside,
Fresno, and Los Angelos. So will it be with Remnark, we w'ere
told; and with others I tried to believe, but it was hard, not-
withstanding good heart and intent.
So from Renmark we went away up stream to Mildura,
that hot and droughty spring, and Mildura seemed then but
very little in advance of Renmark, and, indeed, in Mildura that
year I witnessed one of the most remarkable contrasts man ever
saw ’twixt the old and the new. It was a bad year, the second
successive bad year, very little rain had fallen for twenty
months, and over all the land sheep and cattle were dying by
thousands and by millions. The Mildura sheep were dying, and a
miserable bushman was carting in their skins. Along the dusty
track he came, and close beside, the very personification of
power and energy, a great traction engine was busy at a
mighty work of clearing. Fire fed, mocking the drought
utterly, it gave a few short pants and strokes as the noose of the
wire rope was made fast about mallee clump or gum tree, and
away they came.
There also were the steam cultivators driving their tines
through eighteen inches of soil, pulverising it thoroughly, and
making a bed into which the water would sink and the roots
descend, and to whose ultimate cool, moist depths the most
scorching heats of summer would hardly penetrate. There
were a very few houses built, but a good many tents pitched,
and even then, as one might see, a very superior class of work-
men and settlers preparing to cast in their lots with the new
colony. Still, it was a dreary scene, even nature seemed to


resent the intrusion. The hot wind hissed through the Mallee;
the red dust drove as the sand storms on the Sahara. The
only little patch of greenery visible was in the old station
garden, where a liberal supply of water produced foliage and
flowers, and patches of lucerne, rich and prolific as ever were
seen in the valley of the Hunter.
I remember marvelling at that time at the wonderfully
prolific nature of the soil, for we had been accustomed to speak
of the Mallee as a lean and hungry country. We had deemed
that nought else would grow but this stunted eucalypt, that the
strength of the soil, in fact, was in proportion to the product it
bore. It was all a mistake. The Mallee country is probably a
“ gum-sick ” land. It has borne the same product for hundreds
and hundreds of years till at length all the requisites for eucalypt
growth are exhausted. But through all these years the elements
required for other products have been nursed and conserved.
Remove the mallee and anything will grow in its place. And I
remember well on that visit Mr. Chaffey pointing out to me the
peculiar advantages of this soil for fruit growing. We looked
along the sides of the cuttings and saw everywhere free lime
and gypsum lying partly stratified in nodules and flakes. The
very food which the fruit will require was supplied by nature in
the most convenient form. Everything the irrigationist wants
was there—water, soil, brick-clay (a steam brick-making plant
already at work), and a climate, perfect for their business as
intolerable for sheep farming.
It might be so, I thought, and yet it seemed to need a stout
heart and a firm faith. And, as I went away, that bold verse
by Robert Louis Stevenson’s friend “Q ” occurred with force—
Trust first thyself, then spur amain,
So shall Charybdis wear a grace ;
Grim Etna laugh, the Lybian plain
Take roses to her shrivelled face.
Would roses ever grace the face of this worse than Lybian
plain ? I asked ; this howling, carrion polluted wilderness, which
seemed stirred up rather to more misery than productiveness by
the labour which had so far been expended on it.


Sfwe Years Kater.
fWO years of progressive settlement and continuous labour,
during which many rumours of the irrigation colonies
came down to the cities of Australia and went out into
the world. Representatives of all classes and all
f interests visited the colonies, and I do not remember
to have encountered one who did not speak of what he had
seen in terms of astonishment and delight. During those
years the firm of Chaffey Bros, was transformed into
Chaftey Bros. Limited, several of the best known and most
respected men of Australia having expressed a desire to be asso-
ciated with the new enterprise, and the field of operations having
become too vast for any individuals to retain solely in their own
hands. “ The Mildura Irrigation Company ” was also formed,
with 250,000 shares, in which every buyer obtained shares equal
in number to the acres of his purchase, and to which the Com-
pany turned over the whole of the pumping plant erected, and the
distributing channels. These shares must go with the land, how-
ever conveyed, whether by sale, deed of gift, mortgage, assignment,
or execution under process of law. Every precaution that legal
knowledge and ingenuity can devise is taken to incorporate the
water.-right, which is represented by these shares, with the
transfer of the land. Any failure or neglect on the part of the
proprietary firm in this respect would be regarded as a distinct
violation of the agreement with the Government. When all the
land is sold the entire water-right will have been conveyed with
it to the various purchasers. As each system of works is com-


pleted and set in going order, it is handed over by Chaffey
Bros. Limited. And as matters generally progressed, all the
bases of operation were broadened.
It was in November, 1890, that I prepared for a second visit,
and speedily found that means of access had been much simplified.
We could now travel by rail to Swan Hill on the river banks,
and practically step from the carriages to the boats. The boats
also were not of the old type at all. There was capital cookery,
efficient attendance, and the electric light in every cabin. The
river was full —a banker, and we drove along at a rattling pace.
It is unnecessary to describe the scenery, as that is not the
object of this pamphlet. Suffice it that thirty-six hours from
our start, at about six in the evening, we drew up alongside the
banks, for still, strange to say, Mildura has no wharf, and saw—
I will describe it exactly as it appeared to me, as I wrote it down
some two hours later when sitting alone and meditating on the
great and unappreciated changes which were pending, and,
indeed, occurring in this Australian world. You remember the
barrenness, the desert, the desolation, the shrivelled world-face
of the last trip. That had marvellously changed now, and thus
seemed it unto me :
“ It is evening, the hour of mingled lights and strange effects;
the sun has set, but flakes of ruddy colour are still in the cloud
breast that broods above the west, and they are reflected from
the rippling face of the great river. The tree-crowns seem
black above the pale-green trunks, and the shadows beneath
them are very dark. Two high, white boats lie along a treeless
length of shore, and from all their tiers of windows the electric
lights gleam. Over the tree tops, right out of the east, comes
a-riding the great white, brightening moon, making the faintest
silver streaks across the water where the ruddy reflections have
hardly died away. Brighter the moonlight; brighter the electric
fires ; quicker, keener, the innumerable glints on the black
leaves; deeper the mellow indigo above; blacker all the
shadows —till at length the sovereign moonlight possesses all the


sky, and the river, and the forest, and the shore—all, save the
little space about the ships, whose lights might be compared to
the lamps of a fairy court on a moonlit meadow.
And now two voices, strangely mingling voices, are heard.
One is low, deep, full, majestic, as the whispering of a rolling
sphere. It is the voice of the great river, the volume of the
rendered snows of all the mountains, and the floods of all the
plains. The river, the great river of Australia (as it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be) going down to the sea.
The other voice comes from above, from the high land where
the town is ; where two years ago the abomination of desolation
was, and from the low lands close beside, where the great
machinery is almost at rest. A low throb or slow heave from
some great beam or wheel, a dull reveberation from a furnace
dome, beneath which the fire still glows, but no active voice of
labour. From the town above come shouts and laughter, and
tinkle and peal, and blest and best of music—women’s voices
singing, and children’s voices at play, all the voices of the new
Mildura, the new life—as I verily and truly do hope and
believe the new Australia, sounding on and increasing for ever
beside the great old river.
Is it possible that only two years have passed away ? One
asks that question, looking out on the following morning. Only
two years! I stand out on the balcony of the grand new
coffee palace and look around.
At the river first, the mighty, beneficent, long-neglected deity
of all this land; a shining steely blue in the morning ; a
crescent, whose convex is to the colony, seen along four or five
miles, ending apparently then in the gum forest, but only
turning, as we know, to enfold other areas, embracing in turn
the shore of either colony. The box flats are still green, but on
the high banks the native grass is white, and the red sand is
driving. A broad red road runs along the fore foot of the colony
here, all too close to the palace, next to which —a bright and
happy contrast—is seen the garden-enclosed offices of “ the


company.” A flower garden set all about a broad verandahed
cottage, before which, centred in a perfect lawn, a fountain
plashes, musical and cool. A garden of innumerable flowers —
of stock, and phlox, and pink, and pansy, and rose, and lily, and
verbena, and poppy, and oleander, and all varieties of fuchsias
and geraniums, blazing beds of mingled colours beside
the dark-green grass, and within, the forming of cypress walls.
It is the eye of beauty of the settlement, and fashioned so with
wise intent.
About this little office, at nine o’clock in the morning, there
is a peculiar muster. It is like a bush wedding ; it is like a
bush funeral; it is not like either. It is not, indeed, like any-
thing one has ever seen in the bush before—starts for race-
meetings, and hunts, and man-fights, and dog-fights included.
There is a muster of near a dozen traps, four-horse, and three-
horse, and two-horse, providing accommodation enough for all
the passengers by the steamer and the dozen odd folks who have
arrived at the place by other means. And when all are seated
the usual bi-weekly procession begins; for, under escort of a
member or representative of the firm, all these people are driven
out and about over the whole settlement. They are regarded as
possible buyers, and it is not proposed to ask any of them to buy
without full inspection. Up they tumble, therefore, a queer
nondescript party ; mature men of means, and smart youths of
ambition from the city, farmers of the old sort, with the seal of
much hardship set visibly on them. Visitors from the Old
World, young farmers from England, and tea-planters from
Ceylon, with one or two veteran squatters from the other side,
curious to have a look at the new fight with the old wilderness
whose malignant powers drove so many of them back ruined
and despairing.
And what go they out for to see ? Let us face inland; face
Victoria, as it may be said, from the river. First, one is
impressed by a vast space of cleared country, bounded inland by
the mallee fringe, an arc whose chord is about five miles in


length. All within this may be described as the won area. It
has been won from the wilderness. And wherefore ? First, we
may say, for the well-disposed dwellings of men. Permanent
prosperity only comes from the establishment of comfortable
homes, and homes radiate naturally from a centre. Unnatur-
ally and viciously they too often focus on a centre, pouring in,
compressing, polluting, grinding down a fair and good humanity
to veriest devil’s dust and grains and seed of shame. May
it never be so in our Mildura, and, indeed, it never will. It is
otherwise ordered from the beginning. And yet there needs
must be a town here, for here must abide permanently the
administrative offices of the great undertaking ; here must be
factories, and schools, and colleges ; here stores, and banks, and
shops, with all the homes all their managers and attendants will
require. Already, it may be said, such a town is begun,
strongly, vigorously begun.
You see at a glance that the projectors of the colony have
come to stay. Their offices are solid-built, ample, and in every
way adapted to the exigencies of the climate. Moreover, there
is a residence, nearly complete, for Mr. W. B. Chaffey, which
suggests Toorak, and puts everything hitherto raised on back
block buildings, or even Murray or Murrumbidgee free-
holds, utterly in the shade. It is a stately brick mansion, built
so as to make life enjoyable, and surrounded with garden
grounds, which in a year’s time will blaze with flowers. In an
acre of perfect lawn a fountain will plash, and all around will be
miles of orchard and vineyard abloom. Not far away also are
the solid foundations of the Agricultural College, which should
next year be well advanced. The post-office is neat enough
also, and the school is not large enough by half. The
Wesleyans have builded for themselves a very neat church.
Why the elder Churches lag one knows not. They find a
preaching-place in the public hall. They ought to be establish-
ing for themselves permanent homes. One thinks, with regret,
in this connection, of the pleasure our old friend, Bishop Moor-
house, would have had in witnessing this fulfilment of his


prophecy, of how he would have gloried in it, and how his
trumpet tones would have rung through Australia and the world
after a visit in this third year of progress. But Anglicanism has
no church here as yet, though arrangements will be made to
erect a really fine building within the year.
And as to provision for the natural man. First, there is the
coffee palace, a substantial brick building, with accommodation
for forty-five folks, shortly to be doubled; and hither and thither
round about a good many boarding-houses of varying grades.
They are architecturally peculiar, perhaps, but still have more of
the elements of permanency than the old hash-house of the dig-
gings. Stores and shops are also numerous enough, and the
most notable amongst them—that of Messrs. Williams and
Yule —is a fine substantial two-story brick building. When the
settlement was in its earliest infancy, Mr. Williams brought
down his stores and stacked them on the river bank. ’Twas
something like burning the boats ; but he has every reason to be
satisfied with the ship, having in those few brief years grown to
a position of competency. He was alone in the beginning, but
there are many worthy competitors now —a half-dozen well-
stocked general stores, and shops of all sorts, from the barber’s
to the doctor’s. If there is lack of any sort, ’tis of good town
dwellings. “So far,” say the settlers, “we have been too busy to
make any provision of this sort. All our energies and all our
efforts have been expended in other ways.” And yet the one or
two who have built as a speculation wink contentedly when asked
about returns. It will not take them many years to get all their
capital back in rent. It would not take any enterprising builder
with capital long to literally build himself up a competency,
for scores of people want houses. Everything is taken imme-
diately the foundations are in, and matrimonial business
increases at an unprecedented rate. Building must go on, and
those who pioneer in that way will not be amongst the least
fortunate of the Mildura settlers.
Now let us move abroad a little out of the township, away


from the river, and amongst the working pioneers of the colony.
Mr. Mackay, proprietor and editor of the Cultivator newspaper,
and a pioneer irrigationist and fruitgrower in Victoria, volunteers
to be my guide.
We start now from the verandah of our coffee palace, and we
drive away past the new brick custom-house, the clatter and
bang and whirr and roar of the great machinery shops sounding
just below. We pass the villa sites—all sold, though not yet
tilled or occupied—and enter immediately on a series of orchards
and vineyards, and orangeries and gardens. There is the lemon
patch of the Eev. R. Johnson Smith, of Wentworth. Then,
amongst its trees and flowers, Mr. Appelby’s neat adobe house.
Next, well tilled and luxurious, the 25-acre vineyard of the late
Mr. Eric Farquharson. A sad association this. There are some
amongst us who followed that gallant young rider to his grave
not long ago. There are many who knew him as a bright and
genial companion and enterprising colonist, and who hoped to
have him as a neighbour through all the colony’s development.
Further along is Messrs. Irving and Beecher’s plantation of
apricots, oranges, and vines (24 acres in all), and, beyond a neat
gate and fence, the newly-established home of Mr. F. G. Hodges,
whom we needs must visit.
Mr. Hodges has already a home worthy of the name. No
hut or square-built cottage on a half-grubbed ..paddock, but a
dainty little house, built all of the native pine, with verandahs
on three sides, and quaint fantastic gables here and there, with a
tower above the roof, reached by an outside staircase, on the top
of which is a cool, airy smoking-room, from which is a view of
some thousands of acres of fast-forming plantations. Within,
this dainty place is tastefully lined with polished pine, and
furnished and ordered in a fashion that indicates unmistakably
the presence of the wise housewife. It is indeed a comfortable
home, most pleasantly situated and surrounded. And what is
going to support it ? We walk through the grounds with Mr.
Hodges. “And first,” says he, “let me explain to you that


not one tree you see round about here was planted before
October last year. You see here but 14 months’ growth.”
Fourteen months’ growth ! We are amongst the vines
now. Fourteen months’ growth ! Are we dreaming ? Let us
pause for a moment. Let us look carefully at one of these
vines, and we will certainly choose one of the best. It is a good
stout bush, not staked after the fashion of our ordinary Victorian
vineyards, but growing from a stalk cut almost close to the
ground. It has in all nine shoots ; they average 2ft. 6in. in
length, and we count on them 21 bunches of grapes. There is
no mistake whatever about it. We verify the date of the
planting. In mid-October, 1889, that particular vine was
planted. In November, 1890, it gives promise to yield fully
20lbs. of ripe fruit. It is the best of a dozen; others have 7,
10, 18, and 16 bunches ; but the whole area is in bearing, and
will this year yield more profit than will pay for the whole cost
of tilling the soil and harvesting the crop. Beyond the grapes
are apricots and peaches of the same age, and showing the
same phenomenal growth. They will not bear much fruit this
year, indeed, it is not desirable that they should. Let them
make their summer and autumn’s growth of wood, and
next year we may look for a substantial crop. Prunes
and oranges, beyond the peaches, look also well; not quite
so well, perhaps, as grapes and apricots. The prunes are
naturally of a slower growth, and the oranges do not make much
headway till they get a good grip of the soil, and become inured
to the sometimes nipping or scorching winds. Another year,,
however, will bring them into profit also. Immediately about
the house a varied orchard is set, fruit trees of all sorts, with
almonds and olives amongst them, and for beauty’s and shelter’s
sake pine and currajung, and palm and cypress, a buffalo lawn
within, and some chains of marginal flower beds. Outhouses,
stables, elevated water tanks for house supply, are all well
ordered as can be. And all by and by will be covered with many
varieties of creepers.


“ And you intend to live here, Mr. Hodges, and see no
difficulty in the way of living well out of the returns of your
land ?”
“ I do intend to live here, and maybe to die here,” is the
reply, “ I worked long at my business in Melbourne, and found
my health decaying, and fortune increasing at a by no means
fabulous rate. I have made my investment here, and for every
acre I plant properly, and till perfectly, I expect to net at least
£2O per annum. I see nothing to prevent me doing so. I have
proved the soil and the system, I have studied our home markets
and the markets of the world, and I do not believe that our
supply will ever overtake the demand.”
As Mr. Hodges says, so say they all, as we shall see by
and by.
A turn up the road brings us to a broad area of raisin vines
in their first year, and a gentleman walking in a paddock beyond
halloas us back, for we are driving into a cul de sac, and must
needs turn about to the main road again, for we would drive to
the residence of Mr. Alex. Crossthwaite, J.P. (since alas! dead),
who had just pitched his tent when I came here two years ago,
October, 1888, not a mallee root grubbed, not a sod turned
then.
“ And, now this is the place. This is Mr. Crossthwaite’s.”
“ Nonsense ; it must be another Mr. Crossthwaite.’
“ There is but one, I assure you.”
Do you ask why this incredulity ? Then I will briefly
explain. There is clearing and planting far around now on
every side, There is a broad luxuriant orchard and vineyard
close before. There is a neat verandahed cottage, surrounded
with flowers. There is a lucerne paddock, with a rank green
growth full two feet high, and a stack of oaten hay on a patch
of stubble, scarce an acre in extent. There is a rose hedge
about the garden with innumerable blooms. And there is
a gentleman working with a horse-hoe amongst the fruit trees.


We walk down through the trees, and discover Mr.
Crossthwaite sure enough, working away as every other gentle-
man on this settlement works, full of industry and health and
contentment and hope. His grapes are in bearing; he will
make a good return from them. His apricots and peaches will
supply him this year with more fruit than he can use. His
cows and horses are rolling fat, and all fed from the patch of
lucerne, v Lile the haystack will provide all that is necessary for
the winter. Now, surely this is a grand development, magnifi-
cent return, and its comfort and beauty and profit must needs
increase with every year.
Good-bye, Mr. Crossthwaite ; we will leave you at your
healthy labour, and just across the road look in on Messrs. Call
and Sharland, both busy amongst their trees. Mr. Call is a son
of our old Melbourne P.M., who retired so recently after a long
life of laborious service. He came to Mildura here in the early
days, and made the healthy and honourable resolve to turn his
back on the city, and make a place for himself with the labour
of his own hands. He has a mate, Mr. Sharland, architect and
settler, and the two are working hard, lightly enough clad in
flannels, but grimy and hot, as can be imagined. They are
cleaning around the stems of the house orchard trees, and one
must needs look curiously at the light and useful tools they use.
No heavy mattocks or grubbing hoes or cumbersome blacksmith-
made articles, but neat, light, artistic things, keen in the blades
as razors, cutting through everything with the least possible
expenditure of energy, and causing none of that terrible lassi-
tude which stamps the ordinary labourer working with the
ordinary Australian tool after the ordinary Australian day’s
work. Make work easy, agreeable, as well as profitable. That
seems to be one of the salutary mottoes of Mildura, and it
should be adopted throughout the land. For so begins the
golden age whereof the poet speaks—
“ When gold and gems adorn the plough,
To peaceful arts shall envy bow.”


One of the most hopeful signs of the times, indeed,
is the enlistment of some of the best of the young men
in Australia in this new enterprise. Every gate in Melbourne,
we know, is thronged with suitors. Every market of medicine
and law and commerce and civil service absolutely overflows.
Hundreds rush for every city billet, and when it is won it affords
the barest exigencies of genteel life, while here a hundred pounds
for a start, and three or four years of hard, but by no means
killing or heart-breaking labour, will ensure permanent
competency; enough to live, to marry, to settle on, and useful
and pleasant occupation for a good and industrious life. But
let no man imagine that there is any room for idlers or sharks
of any sort. Neither the one nor the other would be tolerated.
The genius of the settlement from the first is towards industry,
but it is admitted that industry from the first should have its
fair complement of enjoyment in life, and ultimately its proper
reward of permanent success.
So move we on once more, and now, without indicating any
particular road or locality, I should like to say that in the drive
we passed two or three places where mistakes had been made —
the allotments of wrong-headed, or unteachable, or fearfully con-
ceited folks, who would carry out their own ideas; who did not
believe in perfect culture ; who would make haste towards great
results ; and who are now left stranded in bogs or deserts of
failure or despair. You may see a 20-acre paddock of wheat all
crab-holes and sand hummocks, on which inches of water have
been poured to waste, and which has not returned half as much
as Mr. Crossthwaite’s perfectly-tilled two acres. You may see
also orchards languishing, sick as the neglected trees about
Brighton, or through some of the sub-divisions of the shire of
Moorabbin—all the results of mismanagement or laziness, or too
much haste. Success here depends solely on constant, per-
sistent, resolute effort following effective teaching. And there
are lots of competent teachers in the settlement. The Cultivator
is always teaching, the Messrs. Chaffey are always willing to give


advice, and, indeed, every patch they till for absentee settlers is
in itself a lesson, and ail so easy to learn.
Mr. Monnington’s plantation is perhaps the best of these
contract-worked blocks. It took the champion prize for the best
irrigated orchard in Victoria last year, though I think it may
have to yield the palm to Mr, Hodges’ in the next competition.
For always on the spot, and always busy, Mr. Hodges puts on
those finishing touches which are lacking even in the most
faithful and efficient contract work.
Mr. Jamieson is the next settler at home. And Mr. Jamieson
is a settler of a first-class sort. Young, strong, athletic, with
means, education, and knowledge of the world, he brings to
Mildura all the elements of success, and, according to good
Scotch instincts, settles down to work steadily towards com-
petency. Forty acres have been secured by Mr. Jamieson, and
on them he is working himself and employing labour, and
fashioning and perfecting a little estate which in a few years’
time will both delight and astonish all visitors. Regarding the
life of his beasts first, Mr. Jamieson has built a thoroughly good
stable. Appreciating the necessity and blessedness of pure
water in such a climate, he has put down a concrete tank, and
connected it by a filter bed with the irrigation channel. It is a
very simple and cheap process, and it secures an abundant
supply of cool and pure water. The water is raised to a couple
of tanks by a pump, and immediately beneath the tanks, form-
ing the stand, in fact, is a capacious bathroom. The dwelling-
houses are small, just lean-to places which will be set up behind
the home of the future. For everything here points to the
establishment of a home. The garden is already planted, the
vines are creeping along the trellises ; another year or two and
here will be as fairly surrounded a house as you shall find in
broad Australia. Ask Mr. Jamieson if he is content with his
prospects here, and the answer is a deep and genial “ Aye,”
which might perhaps in merry moments be supplemented with
“ An’ what for no ! ”


Mr. H. A. Isard’s example is perhaps more instructive than
that of Mr. Jamieson, for Mr. Isard had spent many and many
a year of labour on the bleak Tragowel Plains. He had been
industrious, thrifty, enterprising, but yet the exceeding diffi-
culties of cultivation, and the tardiness with which any system
of irrigation was introduced, marred or stultified his best efforts.
He came to look at Mildura two years ago, and he can almost
sit under the shade of his own fig-tree now. Incredible as it
may seem, there are in Mr. Isard’s garden fig-trees, planted only
18 months, whose crowns of foliage are now full 4ft. broad and
4ft. from the ground. You can see at a glance, moreover, that
Mr. Isard is a good farmer. Fences, gates, roadways, all trim
and well ordered, and every scrap of refuse thrown into a pit,
where, without any offence, it is transferred speedily into valuable
manure.
Following this street by Mr. Jamieson’s we should come on
to a little colony of tea planters, or, rather, perhaps of ex-tea
planters, emigres from Ceylon, who have all taken up considerable
blocks, and are busy with clearing and preparation for planting ;
and four miles farther along lie the broad plantations of Lord
Ranfurly, in fine condition now, all the broad area as finely
tilled as a Portarlington onion-field, and almost without a weed.
Next year it will make a brave show, and may be expected to
yield a very considerable profit.
We drive home by Deakin-avenue, the main channel of the
settlement, and high on the hill we pass the vineyard of Mr.
Murray, a gentleman of fortune, very well known in our Western
district, who is growing the grape with intent to make wine.
“ Wine,” says Mr. Murray, “ must become a main staple of the
land, and 1 will be the pioneer of wine-making here.” A good
many acres of Mr. Murray’s grapes are already in bearing, and
he has built a cellar to deal with the year’s crop. I shall expect
in a very few years to see vineyards about Mr. Murray’s cellars
broad and luxurious, and far more prolific than any in the
famous Rutherglen district, and see no reason whatever why


they should not return as noble revenues. And next there is
the block lately sold by Mr. Gordon to Mr. J. Desailly, one of
that well-known old squatting family whose history is almost
contemporaneous with that of Australian pastoral development.
Mr. Gordon was one of the pioneers of the settlement, and has
already reaped some harvest. He came down with the Messrs.
Chaffey in the earliest days, put his shoulders manfully to the
hardest and roughest work of pioneering, took up a block of
land, cleared and planted it, eventually became an active
superintendent of the work of the settlement, and now has
taken as a wife a daughter of our chief Railway Commissioner,
and returned to Mildura to take up his old work, invest his very
considerable gains in the old way, and, in association with two
or three kinsfolk and acquaintances, to develop a great fruit-
growing estate. He laid the foundation of competency by three
years of work here. He settles down now with an absolute
assurance of adequate income, and an insurance against any
contingencies of life available within three years. It is open to
any other young men of energy and pluck to go out and do like-
wise.
We have arrived here on the outskirt of the town by a quarter
past five, while it is yet mellow afternoon. The day has been
warm, and far away to westward lies a great cloud-bank, which
betokens a storm-burst later on. And near and far now along
all the roads of the settlement from the clearings and the plan-
tations we see men and horses returning from their labour.
Hundreds of them—the company alone employs 300 horses—
all making into the stable, for the day’s work is ended.
Ended! Yes, friend farmer, whose ploughmen will be toiling
and moiling for two hours yet, whose horses will be munching
their provender while the man is eating his supper by the light
of a candle on a summer’s night. It is absolutely true, it is the
way of the settlement. These folks, who certainly cannot be
accused of encouraging laziness, or of being satisfied with any
half-task in any day, consider that ’twixt the hours of seven and
five, man and horse can do their duty. The man has attended


to his beasts, and finished his own supper by six, and has, as is his
right, two hours of good daylight to use as he deems best for his
own profit or pleasure. The ploughman, if he chooses, can dress
himself decently, go down the village into the athletic or concert
room, play his game at billiards or draughts, or take a walk
with the girl of his heart (why not?), and get back to his bed
by ten, feeling better and more manly and hopeful, that his day
has had a pleasant and reasonable ending. Or, if determined to
make his way in life, he can put in two hours’ work on his ten-
acre block, and so prepare for the time, not very remote, when
he can confidently take a wife to himself and quit the service of
any master but himself for ever. The wages paid to these men
is about 7s. per day. They pay their own cook and provide
their own victuals, after the fashion of shearers, and the cost
per week averages about 125., so that at least 30s. a week
remains as wages. Is it a matter for surprise that there are a
fine set of labourers in Mildura, smart, capable, steady, rattling
along with their work through the day as if they had heart in it,
and whistling cheerily as they come in to tea, knowing that
pleasure and opportunity are ahead of them ?
Be it remembered, also, that there is no public-house or
drinking saloon for their impoverishment or demoralisation. The
company is strong on this point. You may argue against it in
the abstract, if you will, as an infringement of natural liberty,
and an attempt at sumptuary legislation, but the fact stands
that many a score of men in Mildura now are well-to-do and
thriving, small capitalists, or actual or prospective landholders,
who, if public-houses had been permitted, would have been down
in the dregs of poverty and misery, or humping their swags back
through the Mallee. Liquor, of course, is obtainable in Mildura.
There is, indeed, a club for those who desire and are qualified
for such accommodation. But no drinking-bars, I thought
maybe the workmen of the settlement would resent this, and be
disposed to ask angrily, “ Why should the 4 swells ’ have their
club while the 4 poor man’ is denied his beer ?” But having


sounded some half-dozen of them, I began to understand that
such notions were altogether wrong. These men, one and all,
said they had no desire to be led into temptation. Remove the
prohibition, and there would be a dozen drinking-bars in
Mildura within a month, and “where would we be then ?”
It is an oldish man that makes me that reply. Many an
old spree has seamed and scarred his face, but his eye is bright
and his hand is steady now. He has an account with the bank
and an interest in the colony. Open a bar, and within three
months all he is possessed of will be signed over to the publican,
and the most of his next week’s screw mortgaged on the slate.
And he is one of a hundred of his class, which is by no means
confined to the men who labour only with their hands.
Evening finds me the guest of my old friend, Mr. M‘Laren,
engineer-in-chief of the colony, settled down here in a good
house, tastefully built of the mallee pine, and surrounded by a
garden in which all manner of trees and flowers flourish after
the fashion of Mildura. The night is sultry, and there is a
hush in the air which forebodes a storm. About nine it comes,
the old familiar dust storm. The black cloud suddenly leaping
half across the sky, the red dust whirling, driving, blinding,
choking, penetrating everywhere, lightning flickering, thunder
growling, and all the trees by the river roaring. It is like a last
desperate onset of the old defeated malignant genius of the land.
A mad, deafening charge. But even as those fierce but silly
and petulant attacks of other sort in other places which are still
occasionally made, it passes over and with very little harm.
Midnight sees the full moon riding calm and clear in mid-
heaven, and the town of enterprise and labour is all asleep.
One asks, of course, what do you think about the locusts in
Mildura ? And the answer is, “ Don’t care to figure on locusts
till they come.” There is another invasion, however, which
already attracts a little attention. It is of “ school inarms,”
“Preserve us ! ” says a douce and thoughtful Scotch settler ;“ no
mortal man can see the end of it.” And indeed that is very


true, and may apply to liis own case as to others. The disguise
of the school inarm may be very safe and convenient for the sort
of army he dreads. “ What business,” say hundreds of eligible
young women, “have hundreds of young men with means and
prospects to be forming for themselves, even temporarily, a
bachelor colony out there ? Up, guards, and at them! and
without delay.”
And so they come on, and there are about as many kinder-
gartens in Mildura now as in Melbourne, and several more
talked about whenever the necessary house accommodation can
be obtained. May the good women reap the fitting reward of
their enterprise. And I must admit that they work well.
Fancy a good lady almost fresh from the city meeting one at
the coffee palace. Her home is not there, she has a tent pitched
two miles away on her own ten-acre block. She may not, per-
haps, go on with the school teaching. Is not her life lonely,
dangerous ? Oh, no, she has good neighbours close by, and
“ Mildura is not like other places, you see; there are no loafers
or drunken men here.”
There is a world of assurance to the feminine mind in that
statement, and encouragement, I suppose, comes from another
otherwise made. It was a substantial, mature housewife who
was speaking. Was she content with all her circumstances ?
“ Indeed, I ought to be. I brought five daughters down two
years ago, and I have married three already, and have not much
doubt about the other two.”
The man who does not loaf, and who does accumulate
substance, thinks naturally of matrimony, but against the loafers
and the wasters they keep watch on Mildura. And, indeed,
they should be fought against, resisted at every point. The
seed-bed of new life is no place for the matured weeds of the
old wilderness, which surely is broad enough, if only slightly
worked, for the purgation and reform of them all. It is really a
mean and dirty business, whether projected on great or on small
lines, the gathering up of your own vermin and refuse, and


casting it deliberately into your neighbour’s garden. Particu-
larly into the garden where it is evident much care has been
taken to prevent any accumulation of any human pests. For
here let me take opportunity to say, this new place has kept
itself very clear of every pest of that sort. Being no public-
houses there are no bar loafers. Everybody knows the accumu-
lations and varieties of that sort which gather like crows to the
carrion wherever the bar and the saloon open, and idling and
spending begin. The bell-bottomed breeches, the heavy jowls,
with a pack of greasy cards always at hand, and as keen an eye
for a subject who is “fit,” as the doctor for some evidently
smitten man in the time of a great epidemic. They are
unknown so far ; they would, indeed, be lost if left without
occupation. Look into billiard-room, boarding-house, coffee-
house, in the day-time—all are empty. If you yourself chance
to have an idle half-day, you may find it drag heavily. You
stroll even into the club, but it is all vacant, the bar closed,
probably, nothing but an orderly vacuity anywhere around.
“ Where are all the merry party of the night before,” you may
ask. Where ? They are working on their selections ; they are
prospecting for new blocks ; they are in the offices, the stores,
the engineering shops. They are out surveying, they are any-
where but in the way of an idle man.
Let us get to the machinery. In the hum of machinery is
the true voice of modern progress, and hope rises rapidly here
when so many tones of that sort meet one along the river’s
bank. The pumps come first, perhaps. Water onMildura has,
for some areas, to be lifted a full 80ft. Eighty feet up to a
channel which embraces 25,000 acres. It is no mean stream
which will suffice there. Calculations, indeed, showed that a
quantity would be required up to 150,000 gallons per minute.
It fell to Mr. George Chaffey to devise machinery for this work.
He was not satisfied with any pumping plant he had seen. He
deemed it possible, indeed, to use the highest class triple-
expansion engines to work his pumps, and thereby secure an


economy and directness of action not hitherto obtained. The
idea was pooh-poohed in certain quarters ; failure was predicted
even by professional crjtics in the old world. But the results
may be seen now in the great engine-house on Psyche Bend.
A brick building, high, roomy, sufficiently ornate in exterior
architecture, the roof within lined and polished in style that
recalls the ceiling of a cathedral aisle, and, set central on solid
concrete foundations, such machinery as one is familiar with in
the hold of an ocean liner. Triple-expansion compound engines
1000-h.p. Bright on all their polished surfaces as the works
of a watch, moving with that rhythmic, pulse-like action
which always suggests stupendous and perfectly regulated power.
Lifting the water from the river well, and sending it thundering
along two gigantic tubes to the valve on the main channel.
And up it then comes, bubbling and foaming and tumbling and
surging and chafing impetuously against the concrete walls, till at
length in steadied volume it rolls away down the channel and
around the land, the actual benediction of nature raised, dis-
tributed, rendered available to all; doing for the first time the
work which, through all ages, has been reserved and dedicated
to the coming Australian men.
It is great work —cheering, heartening, satisfying ; one
desires to have a share in it; to be with it in fact, as in
sympathy. And see now, conveniently situated each on its
garden plot, the new, well-built brick cottages of the engineers.
No huts or tents ; their day is done. Men’s homes are being
fashioned here.
To any man who has seen much of thirsty Australia, there
is strange fascination in this outpouring of waters. It is,
indeed, the big thing of the place. But it is by no means alone.
What work has gone to the making of all these great new rivers,
80 miles already of main channels ? And what to the grubbing,
clearing, cultivating of all the lands ? You may see a few
of the implements without much travel, for they are ranged


now for repairs at the sheds—five of them, and there are nine
in all on the place, of 20-horse power ; traction engines, huge,
somewhat uncouth, but very determined-looking monsters, with
broad barrel wheels and winding drums attached. What will
they do ? Anything that may be required, “ Jump up and have
a ride if you like,” says Mr. M‘Laren, master of all machinery;
and up and away we go. This engine, with chaff-cutters and
waggons attached, is going out to reduce a haystack to chaff.
Turn the crank, and, with puff and snort and roar, up the bank we
go, and along the main avenue. The scared horses of a riding
party snort with terror, and make frantic efforts to bolt. The
horses, like the people, have much to learn as to the really effec-
tive tools for subduing this wilderness. Alongside the haystack
halts this giant, and in half an hour one of the biggest chaff-
cutters in Australia is set, and with the lightest possible head of
steam doing its work with speed and efficiency. A mile further
out another is grubbing, “ yanking ” out box and mallee clumps
in wholesale fashion. On the hill another is attached to a pump,
getting another 25-ft. elevation for the township water supply,
and three pair more will, in a week or two, be working as many
steam ploughs and cultivators.
Yet Mr. Chaffey tells me they must, by and bye, obtain, a
travelling monster greater than any of these. They cannot depend
on bullocks, horses, or manual labour for channel-making, and
already it is deemed that something is on the stocks which will
answer. Not to be explained in detail, of course, but practically
a very powerful traction engine, driving a cutting and excavating
tool ahead —“ a cutting tool that can be driven right in and
then swung from side to side, something in the same way as
the helm of a ship, shifting tons of earth at a stroke.” There is
no making headway without such tools; bullocks, horses, men
are all too tedious, and as we know well it is miserable working
with them in a Mildura summer. Steam-power alone is adequate
and fit to be employed. Night and day, when necessary, the
steam cultivators work with changing shifts of men, never


wearied and never wearying, for the work of attending on them
requires little beyond watchfulness.
Truly it seems a good and useful thing to see them thus
about the land. They are somewhat to the broad wilderness of
Australia as the Queen’s couriers on the ocean—emblems of
power, of might, of dominion, of victories achieved, and of con-
stant effective control.
Nor free of surprise and admiration can the visitor be who
first makes a tour of the workshops. Ranged along by the river
are the engineers’ and blacksmiths’ shops, the foundry, and
machine wood-cutting establishment. A new steel steamer,
built and engined on the place, is just afloat; boilers and pump-
ing machinery are being manufactured within. Coach, carriage,
and dray building are going on, and in the carpenters’ shop
everything required for the building or finishing of a house is
turned out with scarce a direct human effort. Circular and hand
and fret saws whirling, mortising and planing machines bang-
ing and grinding away, mouldings, sashes, doors, window
frames turned out by the score, under the watchful eye of the
superintendent, assisted by a half-dozen apprentices and work-
men. And here, and in the engineering shop below, almost
every workman is a landholder on the estate, while every appren-
tice is the son of a settler. Hence the prospect of any strike in
the future is remote.
The following is a statement of actual working plant and staff
on Mildura: —1 engine, 1000 h.p. actual, to raise 120,000
gallons per minute, 10 feet average ; 1 engine, 1000 h.p. actual,
to raise 40,000 gallons 40 feet high, built by Tangye, Birming-
ham, triple-expansion engine of most modern design ; 1 engine,
500 h.p., to raise 20,000 gallons 40 feet high, built by Allen, of
London ; 1 engine, 200 h.p., to raise 10,000 gallons per minute
30 feet high, by M‘Laren, of Leeds ; 1 engine, 200 h.p., to raise
2000 gallons per minute 100 feet high, for township supply ;
this engine drives the machine shop and wood-working


machinery as well, will also drive electric-light machinery ;
2 engines, 150 h.p. each, to raise 10,000 gallons 20 feet, built
by Tangye; 2 sets ploughing engines, by M'Laren, of Leeds;
1 set do., by Fowler, of Leeds, capable of scarifying 10 acres per
day each set; 4 traction engines, of 12 h.p. each, for clearing
and stumping land; machine shop and foundry and boiler yard,
capable of doing all repairs, employing fifty men ; wood-working
plant, turning out all sorts of joinery and carpentry, employing
thirty men. This machinery is the best known, and built by
Fay & Co., of Cincinatti, Ohio. Total number of men employed,
500 ; number of horses, 800.
Such in brief is the story of the rise and progress of the
Irrigation Colonies of Australia, from the time of their inception
in 1887 until the close of 1890. A three-years’ story, a story of
marvel, of a grappling of the greatest of all Australian problems
in earnest and with success. But now from a hundred quarters
I personally, as an observer and critic of Australia, am met with
a hundred enquiries How can I and I and I become associated
with, or obtain a share in this enterprise and progress ? How
can I acquire land ? How can I get it tilled and planted ?
Where shall I find a market for my produce ? How shall I get
it to market ?
I propose to deal with these questions in a proper sequence,
to take them one by one, and to devote a brief chapter to the
answering of each. First then—


Mew T 0 OBTAIN AN INTEREST IN THE
60L0N1ES.
IT is easy to answer that. Yon must acquire land, and how
land may he acquired is very clearly set forth in a circular
issued by the Company.


Horticultural & Ogricultural
bANDS,
Cash Purchase System.
SHE lands suitable for vineyards and fruit farms are divided
into ten-acre allotments and sold at the cash price of £2l
per acre to the maximum of 80 acres to any single pur-
chaser :—£2 per acre of the purchase-money payable on
application, and the balance at the time of transfer.
If cash be paid in full within one month from the date of appli-
cation a discount of 2£ per cent, is allowed on the full amount.
The above price includes water right and one fully paid-up
share in The Mildura Irrigation Company Limited for each
acre of land purchased, as set forth in paragraphs, 7,8, and 9.
N.B. —All the pumping machinery, irrigation channels,
conduits, and pipes are constructed and provided at the cost of
Chaffey Bros. Limited for the conveyance of water to the highest
corner for distribution in each allotment.
2. The lands appropriated as agricultural or grazing farms
are sold at the price of £l5 per acre, the terms and conditions
being the same as those specified with respect to the fruit culti-
vation lands. Any purchaser buying the maximum area of 80
acres or any lesser area of fruit land, may also be a purchaser
at the same time of 160 acres or less of agricultural land.


Time Payment System.
8. Land for fruit cultivation, as also agricultural, may be
purchased on time payment, subject to the same stipulations and
conditions and including water rights, together with the same
proportionate share in The Milduka Irrigation Company Limited,
as above stated, upon the following conditions ;—A deposit of
£2 per acre is required upon application, and the balance of the
purchase money is paid upon the Building Society principle by
monthly instalments extending over a maximum term of ten
years if desired.
For each 10-acre horticultural allotment the purchaser will
pay £2O deposit. Ten years’ interest at the rate of 5 per cent,
is added to the balance of purchase-money (£190), and the total
is divided into 120 instalments of £2 7s. 6d. per month.
For agricultural land the payments will be £1 per acre deposit
and 3s. 6d. per acre per month. Thus for 100 acres the deposit
would be £lOO, and the instalments £l7 10s. per month for ten
years.


<& Suburban hANDS.
fHE lands subdivided for building sites will be sold at £25
each lot (ordinary size, 33ft. x 155 ft.); £5 deposit,
balance in two years, payable by monthly instalments
of 18s. 4d. each, which includes interest.
Villa lots of the area of 2% acres, £lOO each ; £2O
deposit, balance in 10 years, payable by monthly instalments of
£1 each, which includes interest.
If the whole of the purchase-money be paid in full within
one month from the date of application a discount of 2-J per
cent, on the full amount is allowed.
Leasehold System
5. All Purchasers may rent irrigated lands (the supply of
water being included in such rental) for general agricultural
purposes for a term of years to be agreed upon, at the annual
charge of one quarter of the gross produce, and they may by
special arrangement secure the power of purchasing such land
within a given period.
Title Certificate.
6. Title Certificates will he issued for all lands purchased,
whether upon the cash or time payment systems; and where the latter
is preferred the purchaser will he required to execute the Company's
form of mortgage (Registration Fee, 10s.j, as security for the
unpaid purchase-money . By this method the purchaser will have a


negotiable security, and he placed in a better position to finance for
the improvement of his land or otherwise, should he require it.
By special arrangement the Company is in a position to
obtain for purchasers their Title Certificates at the reduced cost
of £2 2s. for one or more lots not exceeding in aggregate value
£5O, with an additional ss. stamp duty for every additional £5O
value of land to be conveyed.


FRAINTENAN6E, FRANAGEMENT, 4e-
0P THE IRRIGATION WORKS.
fVERY purchaser of land, whether for cash or on time
payment, will have issued to him one fully paid-up share
in The Mildura Irrigation Company Limited for each
acre held by him. Each share will entitle the holder to
one vote in the control of the management of the Irri-
gation Works; and each share will be issued as appurtenant to,
transferred with, and inseparable from each acre of land.
8. The Irrigation Works will be under the control of a
Board of Directors, who will be from time to time elected by the
shareholders.
9. Each landholder will be called upon to sign the Com-
pany’s agreement in respect of the water-rights, and to pay a
yearly charge (to be levied by the authority of The Mildura
Irrigation Company Limited) at an equitable rate per acre
sufficient to defray the working expenses of the irrigation
machinery and works, and maintaining the same in good order
and condition, but there is no charye for interest upon cost of Pump-
ing Machinery and Irrigation Works, which are all provided by
Chafey Bros. Limited.


A printed copy of the Memorandum of the Articles of
Association of The Mildura Irrigation Company Limited can be
obtained on payment of One Shilling.
It will he observed that all classes of lands are dealt with
here, but I do not propose to concern myself with either town-
ship allotments or villa lots. The men who will make Mildura
will be those who bring capital, brains, and industry to the till-
ing and planting of the land, and the gathering of the fruits thereof.
And I should divide these into three classes—First, the steady
working men who, wearied of the drudgery only punctuated by
debauchery of the old agricultural system, come with nothing
but able and willing hands to the colony. It would not be well
for men of that class to rush in, for they would find on
Mildura, as elsewhere, that unless accompanied by or imme-
diately in the wake of capital, they would be helpless. Let men
of this stamp first secure employment in the colony, or other-
wise work steadily and practise self-denial for a year, and then
set out with a fifty-pound credit in the savings’ bank. Out of
this it would be easy enough to pay down the £2O deposit on an
horticultural block, and on the balance to live for some months
clearing and preparing for the plough. And, most assuredly,
during that time a good man’s services would be sought by
outside employers. He will not be able to plant his land the
first year, but he should have it cleared and fenced by his own
labour, audit may be put down in oats or wheat, from which he
might take a hay crop, which would go a long way towards pay-
ing the cost of future planting. It may be as well, however, to
set forth here the actual cost of clearing, cultivating, and
planting, if done by the Company. It is as under :
Estimated expenditure on one 10-acre horticultural allot-
ment at Mildura, purchased on the time-payment system, one
half, i.e., 5 acres, planted with oranges, and the remainder with
raisin vines, at the Company’s current rates for planting,
irrigating, and cultivating holdings for resident or non-resident
owners.


FIRST YEAR — rate. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Deposit on 10 acres .. .. .. 2/-/- 20 0 0
Twelve monthly instalments .. .. 2/7/6 28 10 0
Title charges .. .. .. .. 3 12 0
Clearing 10 acres (open country), say .. 10/- 5 0 0
N.B.—lf timbered land be selected, the
cost of clearing will be from £1
10s. to £4 10s. per acre.
Cultivation.—First year—
Ploughing or scarifying about 18 inches
deep .. .. .. .. .. 1 /5/- 12 10 0
Grading or levelling, cost varies from
10s. to 80s. per acre, according to
the configuration of ground, say .. 1/-/- 10 0 0
Planting, cultivating, and irrigating for
12 months .. .. .. .. 7/-/- 70 0 0
Water Rates.—About 6/- per acre per
annum .. .. .. .. .. 300
Plants.— s acres oranges.. .. .. 9/12/- 48 0 0
~ ~ raisin vine cuttings .. 1/-/- 5 0 0
Fencing. —Cost of 1 end, 7 chains .. .. 15/- 5 0 0
Half cost of division fence, viz., 2 sides
and 1 end, 37 chains .. .. 7/6/- 13 17 6
Gate .. .. .. .. .. 3 5 0
Total Expenditure First Year ~ 227 19 6
SECOND YEAR—
Twelve monthly instalments .. .. 2/7/6 28 10 0
Cultivation. —Cultivating and irrigating 5/-/- 50 0 0
Water Rates.— About 6/- per acre per
annum .. .. .. .. .. 300
Total Expenditure Second Year
81 10 0
Total Expenditure First Two Years
THIRD YEAR
309 9 6
81 10 0
Total
£390 19 6
After which the yield should be ample to cover all expenditure,
including instalments on land.


Now, our working man certainly could not provide the
£227 19s. 6d. for the first year, but how much of it would he
save by his own labour ?
We may deduct the clearing and the planting and the
fencing and the gate ; we may suppose him to be content with
his five acres of raisins for, say five years, and to cultivate toma-
toes or sweet corn, or any other valuable annual product on
the balance. We may say that it will be seven years before he
will be able to sit under the shadow of his vines, his own master
henceforth and for ever. But what sort of a position would he
have been in had he worked seven years at ordinary agriculture ?
Putting his own labour into his ten acres of cleared and planted
land, he will be sure henceforth of an income of at least £2OO a year..
It may be, indeed in every instance yet recorded it has been very
much more. Surely it is worth thinking about by those few thrifty
farming and station hands who have saved a few years’ earnings,,
who are content with the four per cent, of the savings’ banks
just because they cannot see any opening to start for themselves.
The case of the man who has some capital, the younger
son for whom a thousand is raised, the farmer who, weary of the
hard life of the old world, determines to sell out and start in a
brighter sphere, is much easier. Prom the figures quoted it will
be seen that they might safely take up 20 or 25 acres, and work-
ing, not slaving, themselves, and using their own teams, pull
through without any anxiety or trouble ; £250 would build a
very habitable dwelling in Mildura, and, if the family were large,
in such a climate extra accommodation is easily and cheaply
increased by setting up tents. There is actually nothing to
prevent or deter people of this class from founding for them-
selves an independence in the new colonies.
And then there is another and a large and desirable class
to whom these colonies should make an irresistible appeal. It
consists of those good, thrifty, wholesome-minded folk who.


whenever a child is born, look right ahead to its future. All is
well now, all will be well probably for ten, fifteen, twenty years ;
but what then ? We will insure its life, w r e will purchase an en-
dowment. x\nd thus year by year they make investment in a
life insurance society, pay up an endowment policy, which will
mature when the boy or girl is arrived at 19 or 20 or 21.
It is in every way an admirable development of modern
times. But, suppose now, that instead of the life assurance the
irrigation assurance were chosen? That by hook or by crook
the £390 required for the ten acres were paid up not in three,
but in five, or in seven years ! How marvellously different would
the result be! The endowment would be made sure indeed.
Instead of premiums going out, profits would be coming in, and
the ten-acre block purchased for the five-year-old child would yield
enough for his or her thorough education. And when the time
of going out into the world came, did any unmistakable faculty
manifest itself, would the irrigation block be an incumbus ? I
trow not. Sold out, it would certainly bring in a very handsome
capital; worked on terms by neighbours, or under the Com-
pany’s system, it would yield a steady income, and if its owner
or inheritor chose to go out and make it the nucleus of future
operations in the colonies, it would give him a noble start. He
would be better there than in some meagre billet in civil
service, bank, or mercantile office ; healthier, wealthier, and in a
far better way of progress.
But folks, I know, do not believe these things. An almost
universal incredulity hangs like an old man of the sea on the
back of progress in the way of irrigation. The returns of the
next two years will knock that incredulity down to rise no
more ; but is it not possible now at once to do something to
clear the way to convert people from their unreasoning infidelity
in this respect ? Can we do anything to answer the two ques-
tions with which they are forever asking themselves and others ?
The first is :


Where We Find a FRarketv
! how often has this question met me when, according to
nj my custom, I have given expression to my hope and faith
$ in Mildura. Three years ago the question was, “Do you
think anything will ever grow in such a country as that ? ” and,
that settled, they began to reach after the other extreme. Why,
if it is as it is said to be, we shall have the whole country in fruit
bye and bye, and what then shall we do with it ? We will put
the whole country out of the question, and confine ourselves to
Mildura and Renmark. What will be done with their produce ?
Just at present the few raisins and currants they have produced
are selling at a halfpenny a pound more than any imported fruit.
That is evidence of the excellency of the article which can be
produced. But the quantity, of course, is nothing. We have
to look forward to the yield of hundreds of thousands of acres,
and see if Australia or the wide world can find any consumption
for them. To begin with, we might quote the Californian
example when, in 1890, 64,000,0001b5. of dried fruits were
prepared and sold, and 105,000,0001b5. of green fruits shipped
east; while, in 1880, the quantities were Dried fruits 5901b5.,
green fruits 5,180,0001b5. And yet the demand was not satis-
fied, and prices were better in 1890 than in 1880.
The rejoinder to all this is, of course, California is backed
up by the 50,000,000 people of the States; we have only our
poor four millions, and the broad oceans between us and any
great consuming centres.


I will deal with the four millions first, of which we may
say Victoria has slightly more than a fourth. And now
let us see what quantity of Mildura products they will consume.
Latest statistics available show that last year Victoria consumed
of dried fruits £24,987 worth, of raisins £38,400 worth, of
currants, £69,729 worth, of prunes £41,651 worth. These few
amounts make up a total of £174,767. Multiply that by four
and we come to a total of £699,068 as the last year’s con-
sumption by Australia of these four commodities alone. And
they do not represent half of the possible products of the irrigation
colonies. They do not include olives or olive oil, grapes delivered
in Melbourne a month before the ordinary supplies, in the very
height of summer indeed, and oranges worthy of the name,
properly graded and packed, sent, not to the cities of Australia
only, but to all the markets of the world.
It will be noted that in America the sale of green fruits,
which do not include oranges, is about three-fourths greater
than that of the dried. There is every reason to suppose that
it will be the same with us, and if so, to our £699,068 for dried
fruits we must add on the sum of £1,223,369 for green, and
thus arrive at a total of almost £2,000,000 as the value of the
present Australian demands for some of the products of irriga-
tion colonies. We shall not overtake this for a year or two ;in
fact, it is exceedingly probable that the demand will increase at
least as fast as the means of supply. For hitherto Australians
have never been able to obtain good fruit properly packed, and at a
reasonable price. Collins and Swanston Street shops, it may be
admitted, make magnificent displays, but the fruit they show is
not the fruit they sell. And, moreover, if anything is really
choice, the price to people of ordinary means is prohibitory.
Dried fruits have also been regarded by the bulk of the popula-
tion as luxuries. Raisins and currants used not to come within
the ration table of labourers in the bush. Figs, in most families,
are brought out on high holidays ; prunes are mysterious things
in glass-jars, while dried apricots are practically unknown. The


tinned fruits we have obtained from Adelaide and elsewhere
vary much in quality. Often the apricots are evident windfalls,
the peaches tasteless, the pears woody, and the jams we buy
suggest too frequently vegetables, rather than fruit, touched up
and made palatable and presentable by acids and colouring
matters.
Now, in the fulness of time, the founders and managers of
the irrigation colonies propose to change all this. Beginning
with green fruit, it will be packed from the colonies in small
portable parcels, each a small box of card-board, or eighth-
inch wood, branded with the name of the orchard, and
guaranteed equal to sample. And when fruit is available in this
new and portable form, at reasonable rates, how marvellously
will the consumption increase. Secure against all dust and
defilement on the streets, not to be bruised, crushed, or spoiled
in transit. Purchasing fruit will be a different matter altogether
when that order is established, and no doubt whatever, it will
largely increase. Then, as regards the dried fruits, it is quite
safe to say that at present, with the exception of raisins,
currants, and figs, we know nothing whatever about them. I
have seen apricots dried on Mildura (the very sight of which
begat a longing) which, properly prepared, would make a pie
hardly to be told from that made of the freshly gathered fruit.
And, as regards the pears, peaches, &c., to be tinned, it is to be
remembered that no rubbish of any sort is planted in the
“ colonies.” These tins will all be of named fruits, and the
reputation of the vendors will be staked on each and all being
true to name.
With such provision it will surely be reasonable to expect
an increased consumption, and consequently a larger market.
Then again we have to consider that it will be at least ten years
before the bulk of the area of these colonies can be brought into
bearing, and how will the local market stand then ? Judging
by the past, we may count on a 30 per cent, increase of popula-
tion, Reckoning reasonably on the result of increased facilities


for distribution, cheapening of product, and education as to their
proper preparation and use, we might say that on an average 50
per cent, more would be consumed than at present. And what
then would the total be ? Doubters had better sit down quietly
and work out the problem for themselves. The calculation will
be very convincing. And when it is ended, please to remember that
it has just about as much to do with the real question at issue
as has the demand of the woollen mills of Australia with the
market for Australian wool. No single case of good, well-packed
fruit of any kind has ever been shipped home that has not
realised a satisfactory and indeed a handsome price.
Tasmanian apples and Parramatta oranges (when good)
have been quoted higher in London than ever in Sydney or
Melbourne. Our lemons have realised great prices in San
Francisco. Grapes we have not yet succeeded in shipping in
their natural condition, and it is not absolutely sure that we
ever shall succeed. Still, judgment based on fact, and, indeed,
very recent experience, would not be to the effect that the end
has been reached in steam navigation. A single decade has
reduced the passage ’twixt England and Australia by a week.
Ships have run from Plymouth to Albany in 27 days. Is it by
any means certain that ere another decade is passed we shall
not run from Adelaide to Brindisi, say, in at most 20 days, and
send our fresh fruits thence through Italy, Germany, and France
within three weeks from the date of their gathering on the
colonies ? The world is really our market, though it is tolerably
sure that for a good many years to come we shall not require to
go outside Australia to sell all our produce.
Let not your hearts be troubled, is all that need be said
about the market. Where was the market for China tea, for
American cotton, for Australian wool before the days of their
production ? It will be even the same with Australian fruit.
And in this connection let it be remembered that the world over,
choice fruit has hitherto been regarded as in the nature of a
luxury. Working folks saw it rarely, if at all. But just now,


the world over, is not the general tendency of things to distribute
the world’s wealth more and more amongst the world’s multi-
tudes, and thus to give them a
hitherto have not possessed ?
purchasing power which they
Pessimists will tell us that
increased purchasing power to the multitude means chiefly
increased consumption of alcohol. Then let the philanthropists
remember that fruit-eaters are seldom, if ever, great alcohol con-
sumers. The consumption of good fruit creates as well as satisfies
a healthy appetite. The distribution of fruit serves the world in
divers ways. What comparison is there between the two or
three selfish drinks at the hotel bar and the perfect box of fruit
taken home to the family ? Folks will begin to realise these
matters more vividly perhaps when the proper box is always
available, and to make it available is, I take it, a good and a
philanthropic work, a sort of practical laying-up of treasure in
heaven, as well as making profit on earth.


Sj)HE TO FRARK&T.
SHIS question also arises, and very frequently. In the
beginning of things there was trouble about the road to
the colonies. There were, indeed, only two practicable
routes. To Echuca by train, and thence down the river by steamer,
or to Adelaide by train, thence to Morgan by train also, and up the
river by steamer. But often in a dry season the river was not
navigable for months, and then the routes were closed, and the
only way to reach the colonies was by a dreary coach journey
across the hot and parched and barren plains. The steam
service also was irregular, the accommodation scant, the provi-
doring bad, and the general conditions best described as uncom-
fortable. The Messrs. Chatfey set themselves forthwith to
change all that. They secured a controlling interest in the
boats, formed a new directorate consisting of Mr. George
Chaffey, Mr, Charles Chaffey (manager of Eenmark), and Captain
King, the eldest and best known of all the river skippers. And
the boats were straightway re-fitted, and put in trim to carry
passengers with safety, speed, and comfort. The electric light
was installed, and all things put in order for a regular service.
Yet still there were difficulties to be overcome. It was impossible
even to construct boats which would slither over the rapids of
the Murray when at its lowest, and there is still danger that in
any very dry year Mildura may for a month or two be cut off
from water communication. With Eenmark this can never
occur, and herein is one great advantage of this colony. The


river is always navigable from Morgan to the Renmark wharf,
and there can never be any difficulty in getting produce away.
Mildura, however, does not propose to rest content with the
present tedious and roundabout way of approach. There must
and will be a railway to Mildura. Already the Victorian lines
reach out to the inner fringe of the Mallee, touching it at
Warracknabeal, Donald, and Wycheproof, piercing it through
’twixt Kerang and Swan Hill, and already there have been two
routes surveyed, the one from Donald, the other from Warrack-
nabeal. There is very little difference of mileage between them,
and none whatever in the way of difficulty, or rather ease of
construction. The distance is between 102 and 115 miles.
The country is flat, or is so gently undulating as to present
no engineering difficulties. There are no rivers, no bridges, no
flooded areas to necessitate great lengths of pile work or
embankments. The line chosen ought to be put down
with all ease in one year from the time it is started, and at
a cost far below that of the majority of Australian lines.
A railway to the Murray River would traverse the very
heart of the best Mallee country—the country which, it
has to be remembered, has very recently acquired a new
and extraordinary value. Ten years ago, even five years
ago —at any time, indeed, prior to the establishment of the
Irrigation Colonies —the Mallee was regarded as a worthless
country, or valuable only for the meagre pasturage it afforded
to a few miserable sheep. The impetus of the Chaffey enter-
prise radiated throughout the back country. It began to be
understood that Mallee land was not naturally poor or barren.
Then came the invention of the Mallee roller, and the stump-
jumping plough. A paddock or two of wheat were put in, and
the results were so good that a sort of rush set in for Mallee
country.
From a land which yielded the Government £1 per annum
per 1000 acres, perhaps, it has become a country sought after


by all classes of settlers, worth (if sold by auction) not less than
£3 per acre. It is truly spoken of as the future granary of
Australia. It will undoubtedly feed a railway service largely,
both in goods and passengers, and supplementing the ever-
growing trade of Mildura, make from the very outset a paying
line. Every man who knows the country, knows the people,
and understands the style of development which is daily taking
place, believes with his whole heart that such a railway would
pay. But, unfortunately, the most sincere belief, based on the
most accurate information, does not always justify conviction
that the thing which should be will be. To gauge the prospect
of action and achievement, we must look to the notions and
tendencies of those in power. Happily, it may be said, that even
in this direction we do not look in vain.
First, perhaps, we may take the clearly expressed views of
Mr. R. Speight, our Chief Railway Commissioner, who visited
the colony in October last. Speaking to a representative of the
Mildura Cultivator, Mr. Speight said : —“ I think the work done
and the general progress made since I was here in November,
1888, simply wonderful. I have been driving over the settle-
ment for the best part of two days, and have seen something
to astonish me at every turn. Now I have to go back without
having seen half of the place. What pleases me most are the
evidences on all sides of genuine settlement. There has been,
I can see, a good slice of land taken up for speculative purposes,
but the bulk of the area sold seems to be in the hands of men
who are going vigorously to work, spending their money in
making their holdings valuable and reproductive. As for
the works carried out by the Messrs. Chaffey, I cannot speak
too highly of them. When I was here before I saw much to
admire, but I confess I took away a very inadequate idea of the
design and scope of the scheme. Now that I have seen the
results of nearly two years’ additional work, I am able to
appreciate the ability and foresight of the promoters. Everything,
it is evident, has been thought out carefully beforehand, and a


definite plan lias been adhered to from the start. The various
detached works that I witnessed before have fitted in exactly
where they are required, and the completeness of the scheme
which the Chaffey Brothers had in their mind is now apparent
to me.”
“ What do you think of Mildura’s chances of success com-
mercially ?” “ I haven’t the slightest misgiving about it. With
the start it has made, and the enormous advantages offering, I
don’t see any possibility of failure. The best proof of my con-
fidence lies in the fact that I am sending two of my sons here to
go in for fruit-raising. I don’t know of any better field opening,
or I would not take that step. My paramount duty is to
provide for the members of my family, and I take a strictly
business view of Mildura when I invest my money in it for that
purpose. There is no sentiment about that, of course.”
“ About our railway, Mr. Speight. Can you tell us any-
thing ?” “ I may say this. If I were a private speculator I
should be glad to go into a company for the purpose of making
the line by private enterprise. The Mildura colony is growing
every day, and in two or three years there will be an immense
trade.”
Next to the Chief Commissioner of Railways we may quote
the words of Mr. A. M‘Lean, Minister for Lands, and one of the
most influential members of the present Cabinet. On the
occasion of the Governor’s recent visit to Mildura, Mr. M‘Lean
was pleased to say, “ He was astonished at the progress made,
which was little less than marvellous. It was all due to its
promoters, and, without a doubt, this successful result would
add very greatly to the prosperity of the colony. And not only
was Victoria indebted to them, but all Australia, and he hoped
the managers who had shown such rare skill and energy would
further exercise sufficient care in the curing and handling of
the produce as to establish a high reputation for Australian
fruits and wines. He teas favourable to extending railway


facilities to the district, not necessarily by constructing a costly high-
speed railway, hut one that could he strengthened as the traffic
warranted .”
This, it might be urged, perhaps, was under the in-
fluence or stimulus of champagne ; but lest there might be any
doubt in the matter, Mr. M‘Lean chose subsequently, in a quiet
moment, to give the following information to an Argus reporter,
and the paragraph appeared in the Argus on the 13th of April,
1891 :
“ The Minister of Lands is in favour of the construction of
a railway from Warracknabeal to Mildura. Returning from his
visit to the irrigation colony last week he passed through the
Mallee country lying between the two places, and observed that
there was a large area that was suitable for settlement. With
the exception of 20 miles the country might be put to profitable
use. The line would not only open up good agricultural land, but
provide ready means of communication with Mildura, and tap
the Darling River trade, which at present goes to Adelaide by
way of Morgan.”
Mr. G. Graham, Minister for Water Supply, spoke also on
the same occasion. Referring to the irrigation trusts, he con-
fessed his disappointment at their present condition, and
remarked that if the money had been expended half as well as
that in Mildura had been, it would have been much better for the
country. With regard to the Mallee country, he believed that
the whole of it would ultimately be taken up by the settlers and
become thickly populated, and that some provision would have
to be made to carry the water on to what are now called the
“ back blocks.” He had instructed the engineers of the depart-
ment to furnish information for the purpose of bringing this
matter before Parliament. With regard to railway communication,
he said that from what he had seen of the character of the country
and its capability of supporting a large population, he must admit
that Mr. Taverner had not exaggerated the claims of the district ,


and he thought the country would he justified in extending the rail-
way to Mildura,
Mr. Taverner, member forthe district, speaking with a very
full knowledge, expressed his belief that the railway should be
made, and might be made at a cost of £2500 a mile.
Other testimonies by the score might be added on to these,
but they could hardly aid our present purpose, which is chiefly
to show the absolute concurrence of opinion amongst all prac-
tical men who go out and see with their own eyes. Above and
beyond all this, however, it may and must be said, so convinced
are the founders of the colony themselves of the absolute neces-
sity of a railway, that in the event of possible Government
refusal, or unreasonable delay, they themselves will undertake
the work. If the present economic or parsimonious craze con-
tinues, Chaffey Bros. Ltd. will be prepared to submit a scheme
whereby they will undertake to construct a railway from War-
racknabeal to Mildura, to work it in connection with the Govern-
ment railways, and to hand it over at any period to the Govern-
ment on a fair estimate of value. It is not likely, however, that
this extreme course will be necessary. The clearly expressed
views of executive and administrative officers, when placed before
Parliament, must carry conviction, and the scheme, which com-
mends itself to the common sense of the people at large, cannot
possibly be flouted by their representatives in Parliament.
Two years, or three at the latest, should see that rail-
way completed, and then —Mildura is within a 300-miles
railway journey, within a possible eight hours and an easy
fifteen. Then, day by day throughout the fruit season, we may
expect to see specials coming down with full freights of such
fruits as we have never seen before, filling the markets of Mel-
bourne and Sydney, running alongside the pier at Williamstown
to be shipped and sold to the world-wide multitude of consumers.
That road once opened, I imagine the “ boom ” in Mildura pro-
perty will astonish Australia. There will be no doubt about


returns then. They will be quick, sure, and ample, and the four
and five year old plantations will be precious to those who hold
them, and as much desired by outsiders as shares in Mount
Morgan or Broken Hill claims. Also, be it remembered, they
will never work out.


00N0LUS
«HE initiation of tins new system in Victoria, the nature and
conditions of the agreement with the Government, the
soil, the water supply, the methods of tillage and culture,
the possible products, the markets, and the roads to the markets,
having thus been fully described, little remains to be added to this
short pamphlet beyond a general summing up of advantages, and
possibilities, and commendations to all whom its ultimate re-
sults may possibly concern.
The terms which Chaffey Bros. Ltd. have been enabled to
offer have been fully set forth. To the man of muscle, and in-
dustry, and moderate stock of brains, there is, first, employment,
with the chance of quick investment in a commodity of ever-increas-
ing value. The workman can begin from bed rock, can by thrift
become a freeholder in his first year, and by five years of labour
place himself in an infinitely better and safer position than the
ordinary 820-acre selector under the Land Acts of the colony.
He can plan and work with certainty of returns. He knows the
nature of the soil he deals with ; he can easily estimate the
quantity of water required for the fertilising and maturing of
any variety of crop, and he is assured by his contract that this
will always be available. He has no stubble of autumn, no
dried lands of winter, no budding of doubtful promise in the
spring. He plants a crop that will last for a lifetime, yielding,
with due care and tilth, an increasing harvest every year. With
ten years of labour all his future should be secure. He should


watch his family growing around him with contentment, and
free of the slightest apprehension. He will be, by his own
labour, supplied with all the necessaries, and not a few of the
luxuries, of life. He will be surrounded by more than ordinary
natural beauties, and will have become one of a prosperous,
well-living, intellectual community, without parallel in Aus-
tralia, and not excelled in the world.
Still it is not desirable that workmen, “ bed rock ” men only,
should crowd into Mildura, That these may make a fair
beginning it is necessary that there should be also employers,
men of moderate capital, employers of labour from the start, and
never was a surer field of speculation opened to such as these.
There is no prospect of sudden and colossal fortunes, nor, on the
other hand, possibility of the utter loss and ruin inseparable
from all speculations of the gambling sort. But surety of good,
healthful, prosperous life there is, and amongst such beautiful
natural surroundings as hitherto semi-tropical Australia has
never known. It will need much proof, much practical
demonstration, to bring the facts of such prospects as these of
Mildura home to the English farmer, who, year by year,
keeping always to his old familiar staples, and pressed
unceasingly by outside competition, becomes more and more
discontented with his lot. He probably will not move
till he actually sees and hears others jingling the guineas,
and then will curse his own luck or folly in tarrying so
long. But in Melbourne, and Sydney, and Adelaide there must
be many hundreds of men in good circumstances, with sons
growing around them, for whom no opening appears. All the
professions we well know are terribly overdone in Australia. We
have lawyers and doctors by hundreds, when tens would well
suffice ; and in the Civil Service, and all branches of commercial
life, if even a single clerk is wanted, applications pour in by
thousands. What outlets have the colonies for all this vast
surplus of human energy ? “The Crown lands,” may be the reply.
“ Go west, young man ; go west,” as Horace Greeley said in


America many years ago. Few of us, however, understand, or
even care to understand, that going west in Australia is hardly
practicable to the unaided man, even if backed by moderate
capital. The half-section of 820 acres in Victoria, or the full-
section of 640 acres in New South Wales, or even the home-
stead lease of 12,250 acres, involves labour and hardships and
risks which very few of the Australian city-bred youth will care
to face. But on such settlements as Mildura andEenmark risks
and hardships may at once be rubbed out. ' Labour, of course,
must remain. Hard labour, if a young man takes his block in
its original condition and proposes, by his own efforts, to bring
it under cultivation ; but he is not clearing an acre for the sake
of paltry returns through grass or cereals. He plants trees
when he removes scrub, and makes just as sure an investment
for all his future years as piling up bricks and mortar into a city
house. A little monetary assistance behind him, far less than
is required to get him through for any profession, will do very
much to quicken his returns and lessen his labours. Or, if
parents really desire to make early provision for their sons, the
purchase and planting of an allotment in their infancy is a far
better investment than any offered by any insurance office.
Within five years premiums will be returning, and by the time
a child thus endowed at five reaches the age of twelve the
profits of an unhampered estate will well suffice for his
education.
Now these are facts which should win an easier way into the
general understanding, for surely they are of importance to us
all as men and citizens. None can doubt that it is a good thing
to get our young folks out on the land, out of the city that is,
by some means or another ; and none but those on whom heavy
family responsibilities are thrown know how difficult it is, in or
out of the city, to find a way. There would doubtless have been
much more settlement of this sort on Mildura but for the evil
counsels and influences of many croakers. A few would-be
investors have gone up to the colonies with the idea of a per-


fectly-kept English estate or a model township (created by art
magic within three years), all fountains, and flowers, and
orange groves, and avenues, and marble halls, with dark-eyed
houris for their entertainment may be. They have found,
instead, broad and deep foundation-laying, with very few
people having any idle time on their hands, the duty and the
stir of labour all around, and only the bud of promise of harvest
yet appearing—and they have returned in foolish disappoint-
ment, some others in perfectly unjustifiable disgust. Perhaps it
is better that they did thus return, for certain it is that by such
as these great results are not achieved. And yet if they would
have compared not the progress only but the comfort —the
true fruits of civilisation, even from earliest days available on
Mildura and Eenmark—with those of any other Australian settle-
ment, they surely would have found no reason to complain. And
every day and every year, be it understood, all the essentials,
refinements, and luxuries of life will increase in Mildura, and
free of the slightest or most remote possibility of decline.
The almost imbecile cry for returns for fruits before even buds
have had a chance to appear will probably be quietened for
ever after the harvest of this year, as from raisins, currants,
apricots, figs, lemons, profits will certainly be realised, and of
those profits I propose to speak, and from personal investigation,
at the time of their gathering. Meanwhile, as a close to this
brief essay, I have obtained from a half-dozen of the best-known
and most substantial settlers statements of their own actual
experiences and prospects. These will be found included in the
form of an appendix.


DICES
Appendix A.
(Replies received from hond-fide Settlers on Mildura.)
Mildura, Nov. 2, 1891.
Dear Sir, —
I came to look at Mildura in latter part of January,
1888. The place looked very rough. There were several tents,
but the only buildings were the old station, engineers’ shop, and
Williams’ store facing the river. There was no actual planting
to guide me as there is now, no settlers to give their experience.
What helped me to make up my mind was the straightforward
manner in which Mr. W. B. Chaffey answered my .long list of
questions ; in fact, choosing the land and planting it was left in
his hands, it has been cared for by the firm for two years. I
can only say they have given every satisfaction, and all their
transactions have been O.K.
When I first settled here with my wife, Aug., 1889, we had
to put up with all sorts of inconveniences till a decent house
was built, but now things are more like town —with the milk-
man, butcher, baker, and store-van calling.
Last year my eight acres of vines, then only eighteen
months old, realised £ll per acre gross ; this included the third
crop of grapes, which were sold fresh.
As to the future prospects, judging by last season’s returns
and the show of fruit on the vines and apricots this spring, I
consider them good, also the splendid growth the trees and vines
make is most encouraging.
Finally, I have no wish to return to city life again.—Yours
truly, ;
V 'i' V 'i'
F. Myers, Esq., care of Chaffey Bros., Melbourne.


Mildura, Oct. 30, 1891.
Dear Sir, —
In complying with your request (to give a brief
account of my experience and prospects of Mildura), I may
state that I settled on my land July 11, 1889. At that time
ten acres had been grubbed and cleared. lat once started the
ploughing and fencing, which I let by contract. I then laid off
and planted two acres of fig, three apricot, four vines, one acre
reserved for house garden, &c. On Sep. 1 commenced planting,
and finished on 19th. Trees and vines all took well and made
splendid growth, and have continued to so to the present time.
First week in December gathered ripe apricots and figs, and on
Jan. 17, 1891, commenced cutting ripe grapes. At the end of
the season I had sold from this ten-acre block fruit and
vegetables amounting to £196 ; thus giving a return of nearly
£2O per acre from trees and vines sixteen months after planting.
I have a few orange trees, two years planted, which are growing
grand and showing for fruit.
This season I have planted another ten acres with apricot,
peach, pear, pursemmon, vines, and lemon, and have every
reason to hope will do equally well with the others. Up to the
present all things that I have attempted to grow have exceeded
my expectations.
I may state I am perfectly satisfied with my present and
future prospects at Mildura. With our fine climate, good land,
and splendid water-right, any man, with energy and persever-
ance, cannot fail to make a comfortable home.—Yours faithfully,
'K v


Mildura, Oct. 29, 1891.
Dear Sir, —
lam duly in receipt of your letter of 22nd inst., and,
in reply, beg to give you a few remarks in respect to my ex-
perience in Mildura.
I may premise my story by stating that having beard of
the colony in England in August, 1890, I made some enquiries
and became so convinced of the soundness of the whole scheme
that I induced several other families to come out after me.
Before leaving England I gave instructions for my 20 acres to be
cleared and made ready for planting.
On arrival at Mildura—Wednesday, July 29, 1891 —I found
19 acres (about) cleared and partly ploughed. My son (a young
fellow of 21 years) and myself immediately set to work to clear
the land of roots and sticks, and so well covered was the land in
this respect that it took us four weeks to clear and burn the
heaps. When this was done we at once set to and cut down
pine and beilar trees for fence posts, and for this purpose we
felled 643 trees. We then dug 563 holes, each two feet deep,
and put all the posts (563) in the ground, and with the help
of a friend put up the rabbit-proof wire netting, the distance
round the two lots being not far short of a mile. All this was
not accomplished without downright hard work from twelve to
fourteen hours a day, also with many a sore hand and aching-
back ; but the work was to be done, and we meant to do it. I
had previously entered into a contract to have the land planted
with Gordo Blanco Muscat vines, and this was done by the
10th of the present month, so that in about ten weeks I had
the satisfaction of seeing the nineteen acres in full leaf.
Not bad work when I tell you that neither my son nor myself
had any experience of such work, and neither of us had ever
handled an axe before in our lives. My previous experience in
the army quite unsuited me for this work, but it is work to my
taste.


I have full faith still in the scheme, and confidently look
forward to drawing as a result of my labour some £7OO or £lOOO
a year from the sale of the fruit grown on the land.
I have still ten acres which, in April next, I mean to have
planted with figs, lemons, and apricots.—Hoping this short
account will meet your requirements, I remain, yours truly,
* * *
P’S- I forgot to mention that in addition to the work pre-
viously mentioned, I have had a house built (four rooms, with
detached kitchen, &c.), the whole outside painting of which was
done by my son and myself. We also cleared of underwood
some four acres of the remaining lot of land. We are still
pegging away, finding too much to do to be idle, and feeling all
the healthier for having so much to do.
■~^C




•
..... — — —
•
,
MILD UR A.
Jhe Australian (Irrigation (olonies.
9
i
RENMA RK.
