

“Is it Well With
the Child ?"
An Address by
THOMAS RYAN, Esq.
Chairman of the
South Australian
Education Com-
mission.
With which is included INTERVIEWS
by “The Daily Herald” Newspaper
on
“UNIVERSITY RESIDENTIAL COLLEGE”
and the
“SCHOOL BOOK PROBLEM”




“Is it Well with
the Child ?"
An Address by
THOMAS RYAN, Esq.
Chairman of the fik' ,.U y\ f
South Australian
Education Com-
:: mission. ::
With which is included INTERVIEWS
by “ The Daily Herald ” Newsp aper
on
“UNIVERSITY RESIDENTIAL COLLEGE”
and the
“SCHOOL BOOK PROBLEM.”
Printed by the Co-operative Printing and Publishing Company, Ltd.
1914.


T. RYAN, Esq.
Who, as member for the District of Torrens in the
South Australian Parliament, on July 27th, 1910,
moved for the appointment of a Select Committee
to report on the best methods to be adopted to mate
available facilities for higher education at the
Adelaide University. Mr. Ryan was elected Chair-
man of the Commission, which was subsequently
empowered to enquire into and report upon all
nches of education.


Educational Ideals of the United
Labor Party of South Australia
As adopted at the Annual
Conference, 1913
EDUCATION.
(a) Compulsory age of attendance at schools to be
raised from 13 to 14 years;
<b) Extension of free education to all citizens of the
State up to and inclusive of Universities;
(c) School books and requirements for school
children to be free.


STEPS in EDUCATION
Reproduced from Report of Education Commission


"Is it well with the Child?"
Address by Mr. T. Ryan, Chairman
of Royal Commission of Education.
At Hindmarsh, on 5th March, 1914
Quite in keeping with the' day and the occasion of our
gathering is a text which I wish to submit, from 2nd Kings,
4th Chapter and 26th Verse, in which we read : “Is it well
with the child. And she (his mother) answered, ‘lt is well.’ ”
This is a story that will live as long as memory and lan-
guage last. Beautiful in its simplicity—just an everyday
story of everyday life. A boy went out to watch the men in
the fields reaping, and after being there a little while was
sun struck, and he cried to his father, “My head, my head”;
and the father was busy, could not afford to lose any time,
so he called one of the lads, and said, “Take the boy to his
mother.”
A little while later w r e find the mother approcahing the
prophet Elisha, who made the enquiry that we to-day make—
“ls it well with the child?”
Progressive Legislation.
“Is it well with the child?” This enquiry, although
nearly two thousand years old, is still exercising the minds
and attention of the world’s wisest and best. The question
has constantly rung through the corridors of time, and
in South Australia, as in all the States of the Com-
monwealth, it has not only been heard, but an attempt
has been made, even if only an attempt, to give an
answer. This has generally been in the way of edu-
cational legislation, and it is a tribute to the progressive
spirit of our people that our educational laws and acts are
more often found in the crucible than those governing any
of the great departments of life. Not that we have by any
means arrived at an ideal system, but we have recognised
that the dead hand of the middle which has been so
heavy on the young life of the scholars in a progressive age,
is detrimental and must be removed, although in the


removing of it to-day we substitute some other Act which may
be obsolete even before to-morrow. Thus the educational
legislation is being constantly amended and replaced. We
had a bill in October, 1875, providing for a Council of Edu-
cation, which, in its day, was considered a most radical and
revolutionary proposal, especially as it provided—first, that no
child should be refused admission into a public school on
-account of the refusal or neglect of the parents of the child
to pay the fees that were due; and further, insisted that on
.35 days in the quarter at least every child should attend
school. Radical as that Bill was in October, 1875, an am-
endment and a fresh Bill was passed in November of 1878,
the main purposes being to provide better and more schools
than the old Act allowed. This battle again was not final;
and in 1891 another Bill was introduced and passed, the
.salient features of which were that no fees should be charged
.any child.
The University Grant.
Do not for a moment think that this was by any means
the beginning of what has come to be known as “free educa-
tion.” Free education in part was inaugurated with the es-
tablishment of the colony. All that this did was to secure
fresh allocation of the education vote, for you will see that
we were already providing a large slice of society education
to the men and women of the Adelaide University—at least
“three times the amount per head that was available for the
•children of the State schools.
Let it be distinctly understood that those of us who are
anxious to know if it is well with the child do not begrudge
the University- grant, but we feel that this question is not
answered by simply providing for the University, if we are
in way guilty of neglecting to help the boys and girls who are
less favored, and that we hold with Huxley, who, in speaking
in 1871, said, “I believe no educational system will be worth
the name af a national system or favor the great objects of
education unless it is one whose scholarships are a great
ladder, the bottom of which will be in the gutter, and the
“top in the University.”
Genesis of the Education Commission-
Then again, in 1905 another Education Bill was passed,
“but I think the most practical attempt to answer the ques-
tion, “Is it well with the child?” was one with which I am
“pleased to say I have been spared long enough to be in some
way connected. The answer was embodied in a motion to
provide greater financial assistance to deserving students
at the Adelaide University. Unfortunately it was not car-
ried, but the showingAto the people of South Australia the
•fad that while some of the States, for a period of some years,


had increased their Education grant by many thousands, that
we in South Australia had only increased ours by a couple
o£ hundred pounds, caused fresh consideration to be given
to our query, “Is it well with the child!’ And when the
election of 1910 took place, by the means of speeches and
pamphlets —among them my own, “A plea for Higher Educa-
tion”—the public insisted that the question should be again
asked. This I had the honor of doing on July 27, 1910,
when I was permuted to again repeat the educational ideals,
of the Labor Party in a speech on my motion, “For the
appointment of a Select Committee to report on the best
methods to be adopted to make available the facilities for
higher education at the Adelaide University.”
During the course of the debate it was recognised that
©ur schools, our systems, and our methods were at least not
so perfect that they could not be improved on. In fact, it
was shown that we had not until recently attempted to ans-
wer the question, “Is it well with the child?”; and a pro-
gressive spirit had made such headway that it was recognised
that in education was the key of the future; that the first
people is that which has the best schools; knowing that if it
was not the first to-day it will be the first to-morrow; and on
the occasion of the second motion we had the satisfaction of
seeing the motion for an enquiry parried without a single
dissentient voice. Thus the question of “Is it well with the
child?” was not only recognised, but eventually a Commission
was appointed to enquire into and report upon the best con-
ditions available to help that child in after life. Of the work of
that Commission, unique in many ways, let me say that no
more honest attempt has been made to answer this question;
and it is reassuring in these days, when so much is heard
about caucuses and caucuses, to be able to say that every one
of the members of the Commission was asked by my-
self to become a member of the Commission, and
every man came into the enquiry room recognising alle-
giance to no party, but to the greatest need in life—the well-
being of the little child. That Commission at first consis-
ted of Messrs. Thompson Green, Young, Coneybeer, Peake and
myself as Chairman, and Mr. Sineock as Secretary. No officer
in the Government service could have more whole-heartedly
entered into our work, aiding guiding, and directing, than
did this energetic, able, and enthusiastic officer. It was
ultimately enlarged and strengthened by the inclusion of
Messrs Cowan and A. W. Styles, and latterly on the
retirement of the Hon. F. W. Young, his place was
taken by Mr. MacDonald, and although for over three
years they sat closely at work and travelled all over this
great Commonwealth of ours, contending earnestly for the
view's they each held and knew to be yet none but the
most pleasant memories linger concerning our association.


Among the witnesses we examined were the Directors of
Education of most of the States, the Chancellors of most of the
Universities, the administrators of technical, secondary, agric-
ultural and continuation schools, the work of which had one
common purpose—the seeing if “It is well with the child.”
I am most anxious that you will not for a moment think
that I wish to commit to many of the views I am about to
express my colleagues on the Commission. Excepting where
I quote the recommendations I individually take the responsi-
bility of my statements,, and although to some of them they
may not be prepared to subscribe, yet in the desire to make it
well with the child every member gave of his best, and will,
I am sure, continue to do so.
National Conception of Education Needed.
In our own State we found many gaps and needs, the first
I think being the need of a national conception of education,
and the recognition that there can be no national system of
education unless it be one which will tend to reduce the
numbers of our children and our people who are on the
bottom rungs of the ladder, and one in which the higher
advantages and best piizes will be detetrmined by the effi-
ciency of the child rather than the purchasing power of the
parent; and this can only be possible where there is a
complete system of co-ordination right along the edufcational
line. Of course, we were quickly impressed with the fact
that this would mean expenditure, and that we in South Aus-
tralia must be prepared to spend as much per head as our
neighbours—more, in fact, because of the sparseness of our po-
pulation, and the indisputable fact that for years and years it
has been the State policy to eliminate or strangle private schol-
astic institutions, rather than co-operate with them, as is done
in almost all the other States. The figures of expenditure
do not describe in full our backwardness; they are, however,
as follows : ,
To.tal Cost per Head of Population for 1912.
New South Wales 19/71
Victoria 17/1
Queensland 17/8
South Australia 13/9
Western Australia 22/0
Then in other States a good deal more is done in provid-
ing school materials, so altogether we had not only the need
of enquiring if it were well with the child, but the duty of
doing something to see it was well with him.
We found further that much of the work in the primary
schools was carried op/ under such conditions as could not
make for the welfare of the children. We found many
8
“IS IT WELL WITH THE CHILD?”


■cases where instead of teachers having classes of from 30 to
40 scholars, they had 70, 80 and 90 children in crowded rooms,
where the sanitary arrangements were simply vile; such a thing
■as a common room for students and teachers being practically
unknown, and not one single school in the whole of South
Australia with the facilities of a swimming hath, one of the
■essentials of successful education. We realised that these
conditions were not well for the child, and so I we recom-
mended an alteration making 50 children the maximum for
■any male teacher to instruct!and 40 for a female teacher.
Wanted—A Living Wage.
Despite our recommendations, there is still to-day a large
section of our teachers doing their, work loyally and faithfully
under the most trying conditions, banished in many eases into
isolation, dragging out an existence on a miserable pittance of
little better than 5/9 per day, and this in a day when the
prevailing w'age for a woman at the wash tub is from 6/ to 8/
per day, and that for our men who attend to the streets, from
8/ to 9/ per day. If we would have it well with the child we
must have it well with the teacher. For any education officer
over the age of 21 years to be getting less than the generally
recognised minimum wage for a laborer is an insult to .the
community, and one wonders why educational administrators
with any respect for their calling have not long ago insisted
on such remuneration as would recompense for labor and pre-
paration, rather than the pittance which would be scorned by
a working girl in our city.
We readily recognised the great need of kindergarten
work, and appreciated the voluntary efforts which had been
made by those managing the free kindergarten, and recom-
mended a yearly grant to people so employed.
Medical Inspection.
We were further brought face to face with the great need
of medical inspection and medical supervision. We had
ample demonstration that a badly lighted school could only
deformed and inefficiently equipped children. None
of these conditions could he considered as being well for the
child, and so the recommendation was instantly made for
the appointment of a medical inspector and nurse. So far
only one doctor and one nurse have been appointed, but the
doctor was able to say up to the date that we had examined
her that she has examined a large number of children, and
that from 23 to 24 per cent, of the children were suffering
from defects, which if not attended to were likely to interfere
with their educational progress.
We have one doctor and one to attend to 50,000
children; New South Wales, twelve doctors and as many


nurses; Victoria, four doctors; Queensland, eight doctors; Tas-
mania, four doctors. So we will have to increase our staff
and pay special attention to dental inspection.
We found that the lavatory accommodation in many of
the schools is inadequate, that the seats have no backs in
many cases, and the hygienic conditions of the schools have
been utterly neglected, that in many schools it was a scramble
for a child to reach a wash basin, it was dreadful to think
of a school of 500 using six towels which were only changed
once a week. No wonder our advocacy of swimming baths 1
Re-Organisation of the Education Office.
We were disgusted and shocked to think that this important
medical officer and her staff, whose time should be devoted en-
tirely to relieving the distress of our school children, was un-
able to get an office clerk to to the rudimentary and clerical
work. This leads one strongly to think that the great need in
the education system to-day is undoubtedly the re-organisation
of the Education Office. I am fully conscious of the enthusi-
asm, energy, and devotion of Mr. Mr. 'Maughan and his staff,
as well as the difficulties under which they are laboring. They
are doing their best, but too much is left to them. What a
burlesque to say that we have a Chief Inspector of Schools,
and an able and efficient officer, if not the most able and
efficient officer of the present staff, Colonel Neale, undoubt-
edly is, and yet his whole time is taken up with office rou-
tine, and I question if he sees with the eyes of a chief in-
spector one school a year.
Then for some reason or other there is an Assistant Chief
Inspector of Schools, who, I believe, since his appointment,
has been tied to a desk in the Adelaide office in-
stead of being out at his work among the schools.
You will understand why I say that the curse of
Cain does not rest more heavily on the human family
than the curse of inspeetorialism does on the Education De-
partment. What is wanted is not an impetus for men to-
throw down their books and pick up a whip, but rather a;
system of interchange of headmasters for the purpose of re-
viewing each other’s work, and encourage the tired and
fagged assistant, who would ever look to their visit as that
of a friend and an adviser, instead of fault-finding, carping
critic, which our present system has a tendency to make of
its biggest hearted, best inspectors. Of the devotion to duty
of the education staff too much cannot be but it is
questionable if we are answering our question, “Is it well
with the child?” by taking a girl of 17 to 19 years of age
out of a school, giving her six months the Adelaide Observa-
tion School, and then,, labelling her “school teacher,” sending
her out to some little outback school where many of the
pupils are physically her superior, and on the generosity of
10
“IS IT WELL WITH THE CHILD?”


whose parents depends this teacher's chance of being de-
cently housed and fed. Ido hope that when the inspection
of schools comes to be an organised factor in the new Bill,
that instead of making an attempt to bring to a dead level
the great private institutions of the day, we will devote a
little of our inspectorial supervision to these outback schools,
when I am sure the public conscience will demand that
.something better than a tin hut and a 17 to 19 year old
teacher is necessary to successfully answer our query, on
behalf of the country residents, “Is it well with the child?”
Advisory Council of Education.
So that the education system may no longer be dominated
by the dead hand of the past or by some one man in the future,
the Commission purpose bringing into existence an honorary
■education council, representative of the interests of the commu-
nity, and from this we expect a great and lasting benefit. The
Commission first recommends that the work of the Education
Department be extended to cover the following : Primary
education, secondary education, technical education, and agri-
cultural education. That opportunities be provided for boys
and girls to pass from the primary schools to eontiuation
schools, high schools and juvenile, technical and agricultural
schools and domestic art schools; from the high schools
through the State colleges to the University, and from the
juvenile technical schools to technical! colleges, the Eose-
worthy Agricultural College and the University, so that they
may face the world well-equipped for the particular occupa-
tion for which they are best fitted. The duty of inaugurat-
ing and managing such a system calls for the superintendence
of more than one man, and we suggest that there should be
a Director of Education in charge of the whole department,
who should also be secretary to the Minister. The Director
would be particularly responsible for the work of the primary
schools, and he should have under him superintendents of
secondary, techniaal, and agricultural education. In addition we
recommend the appointment of an honorary Couii;’ 1 of Edu-
cation to watch the whole system, and to give such advice
to the Minister as they may consider necessary. This does
not mean the handing over of the work of the department to
outsiders, but it simply provides that there shall be an Ad-
visory Council elected for general purposes.
This Advisory Council of Education would be constituted
as follows :
Five representatives of the Education Department the
Director (who shall be chairman;, and the superinten-
dents of secondary, technical, and agricultural educa-
cation, and the principal medical inspector.


Four representatives of registered efficient schools to be
nominated by the headmasters of such schools.
Three representatives of_ the University of Adelaide, to be
nominated by the Council of the University.
One representative of country technical schools, to be
chosen by the Government.
One member to be nominated by the Chamber of Manu-
factures.
One member to be nominated by the Trades and Labor
Council.
One member to be nominated by the Institute of Archi-
tects.
Two representatives of agriculture, one to be the Director
of Agriculture and the other to be nominated by the
Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society.
The High School Movement.
We examined with pleasure the extensions of the high
school movement, and the idea of opening district high
schools throughout the State is one which cannot be too vigor-
ously supported. Only remember that these schools are .he
aids to children who are voyaging on the ocean of life, and
these schools are only the life belts which are better than
nothing; but what is really necessary is not only a life belt
but a life boat, and that can be best described by a term
which we call “scholarships”; scholarships for every boy and
every girl who has the ability and the merits. ,
Of all the statements made to the Commission or made in
the attempt to answer the question of how to make it well for
the child, let me submit that which we received from Pro-
fessor David, easily one of the greatest authorities in Australia
on education. He said, in reply to a question as to the
proposed abolition of University fees —“It seems to me it is the
inborn right of every one in this country if they are worthy
of the highest education the country can give to get that
education free.” This should be printed in letters of gold.
It is a true recognition of the enquiry “Is it well with the
child?” i
Scholarships for Private Schools.
It is well to remember that at the present time there are
many thousands of children who are not covered by the Slate
primary or secondary schools. It was a revelation to find
that one-sixth of the children of all ages are being educated
in private schools, and any system of education to be adopted
in the future cannot afford to ignore, nor have we the right
to ignore these children or their parents or their teachers.
They must be part and parcel of a great scheme, and it must
be admitted that up to the present no section of the com


rnunity has greater cause to complain than those who make
themselves responsible for the up-keep of these schools. The
system has, in effect, said to the parents of South Australia
that, "Unless you are prepared to accept every penny as it is
spent on education by this State you tshall have none.” Now
there are always people in the community who will use pri-
vate educational institutions at either the beginning or the
ending of their children’s educational careers, many people
saying, “My child is very young. I will send him to a
private school so that he may become used to school con-
ditions.” Others again will say, “Now that my boy has
gone through the splendid primary schools of the State I will
let him go to one of the various denominational colleges for a
while.” And how have we dealt with those people? We have
said to them, “This State is providing 48 scholarships; 40 of
these must be exclusively reserved for State school attendants;
8 of these will not be reserved for private schools, but private
schools will be able to compete”; and the result shows that'
in 1910, 49 prizes were allotted by the State, 48 of which Were
won by scholars of our Government schools. In 1911, 46 were
awarded and 46 were taken by the scholars of our Govern-
ment schools. In 1912, 48 were available and 46 were re-
tained by the children of State schools, or the State school
children really had the opportunity of competing for 133
prizes whilse the children attending private schools, numjcer-
ing one-sixth of the children of school-going age, were only
eligible to compete for 24, and further, the State school children
were protected from comptition for 120 of these prizes, while
children attending privatte schools were protected in none, but
were limited in the struggle for success to the 24 prizes given.
The mistake that has been made, and is being made of the
best friends of the education system, is that, we have allowed
our vision to be blurred arid we have looked that this ques-
tion too much in the past as to how it will benefit or affect
this State school or that denominational school. If we would
have it well with the child, then let us eliminate the ques-
tion of school and teacher, and remember the prize belongs
to the child, that the child is fhe centre of interest, and that it
is the State’s duty to assist the children with ability entirely
without regard to the school from which they come or where
they may desire to do. I have always objected, out of regard
to the child of the worker, to the existing system of educational
prizes, and as a democrat I say because the public funds from
which the scholarships are given are contributed by all of
the taxpayers, it appears to be a mere question of common
justice that the benefits conferred by such scholarships should
not be limited to the pupils of any particular school, and
that every boy and girl in this community shall stand on a
common footing. Further than that I think that should the
non-State scholars of this community be able to draw on


the exchequer through scholarships to the extent of say
£20,000 a year, it could only be done by doing the
work for which the S tate would have to pay £Bo,ooo r
and if my neighbour, instead of taking £45 from the
State for the education of his child, is satisfied to take
£ls, then I realise that • there is at least an additional
£3O left for the children who, like my own, can look for no-
other than the State system. I know bogies that have been
raised in the past (let us hope not to be raised in the future).
On the one hand the denominationalists tell us we are rais-
ing a breed of Godless children, and on the other hand we-
are warned of the bogies of sectarianism. Let us worry
about neither.
“Heed not the sceptic’s puny hands,
If near your school a church spire stands:
Heed not the bigot’s blinded rule,
While near your church spire stands a school.”
The Commission said, “This system shall be mended.”
The number of scholarships must at least be doubled, some
being reserved exclusively for private t schools and safeguarded
from invasion in proportion to their attendance.
This was the only subject upon which the Commission
did not come to a unanimous decision. I cannot help think-
ing it was our greatest mistake. Still it is a'great, advance-
on existing conditions, though I am hopeful that I will live
to see the time when a more democratic and just system of
equal rights will prevail for children as well as adults.
The following figures will show that the question of assis-
tance to private schools must be seriously considered :
Attending State Schools .. ~ 36,585 49,412
Attending Private Schools .. 6,047 10,634
Educated at Home 831 1,579
School not stated 913 1,413
University 387
Total 44,381 63.425
Technical Schools Leading >to Industrial
Universities.
Perhaps the greatest need for the development of a com-
munity like ours is the extension of technical education.
Here our State has lamentably failed —in fact were it not for
the marvellous energy and enthusiasm of Sir Langdon Bony-
thon and his colleagues on the School of Mines Council, we
would not have found any effort being made at all. These
men have labored under great disabilities, and have labored
wisely and administered well, but their system has been out-
grown by the needs of the community. It must have been


Government Grant.
Cost per
Student.
Adelaide
£7,238 0
0
.. .. £4
16 0
Gawler
500 0
0
.... 5
1 0
Kapunda
300 0
0
.. .. 3
9 11
Moonta
700 0
0
.... 3 19 6
Mount Gambler
350 0
0
.... 2 17 0
Port Pirie .. ..
750 0
0
.... 3
6 li
obvious even to them that their administrators should either
be the elects of a constituency or their institutions become
co-ordinated in the general scneme, the line of demarcation
being drawn between that portion of their work which is
industrial or trade education and the higher science, which
must become part and parcel of the University work; and
whatever happens they will at least have the knowledge that
.by their eflorts has the public mind been rivetted on the
need of handicraft education, and although the University
to-day will gladly undertake the work they are performing In
the School of Mines, yet it is the School of Mines to whom the
honor belongs of doing this when it was friendless and un-
popular. Unfortunately for technical education, the same
thing cannot be said of the branches in the country. The cost
to the (State demands that very much more shall be done than
can be shown. Then the extension of the high school movement
has meant in some cases the State being called upon to pro-
vide similar appliances for the educational advance of stu-
dents in State high schools, in the country high schools, and
country technical schools. This was detrimental to both, and
was not w 7 ell for the child, and so we recommended the co-
ordination of the whole of the system under a director of
technical education, and I am sure that it will add to the
■wealth of the community, for after all
“the riches of the Commonwealth
Are strong, free minds and hearts of health,
And more to her than gold or grain,
The cunning hand, the cultured brain.”
The work of the Adelaide School of Mines and five schools
of Mines in the country districts can best be shown by the
following table :
Trade Schools.
Although somewhat new in South Australia, though well-
"known in other parts of the world, was the establishment of
a trade school as an answer to our question—“ls it well with
the child?” Oh, the tragedies of life that have been enacted
by fond mothers and fathers in their attempt to make doctors,
lawyers and clerks of their sons, and music teachers of their
daughters instead of making them tradesmen and trades-
women may I say. There has recently come an answer that
15
“IS IT WELL WITH THE CHILD?”


men and women are most likely to be well when they are-
useful rather than when they are wealthy or even well-
dressed, and the establishment of these schools for the teach-
ing of trade education and manual work is one of the great
revolutions of modern times, when a jack-knife and a piece of
wood will show a boy the accuracy of his w 7 ork more clearly
than many lectures. His life will stare him in the faoe,-
and the higher moral educators hold that manual training
is the best means of developing an upright character. Straight
testing, perserverance, order and method once clear in physi-
cal operations are readily translated into the mental plane.
Mental imagery is enriched and the resources of the mind are-
laid open by manual training.
We actually saw boys in their trade school leading their
classes, who, in their primary work were best known for
both indolence and truancy. As of boys, so with girls. To
be able to make a good scone or mend a frock or wash a
little sister is rendering a greater service to the community
than by badly playing a hundred guinea piano or tying rib-
bons round a ten guinea dog;
Compulsory Apprenticeship.
Sir Langdon Bonython gave evidence as to the ■ need of
technical training in South Australia as follows:
You have fio doubt arrived at some opinion with regard
to the wonderful progress made in Germany as regards tech-
nical schools. Are we doing as much for our boys in this
State?—“No; it is a great pity we are not.”
Then we must lag behind"?—“Yes; unless action is taken
shortly; and no time should be lost in doing so. I have
been advocating such steps for years and years past, but, un-
fortunately, I have been like a voice crying in the wilderness.”
Then you would advocate compulsory apprenticeship if
necessary?—“Yes, I would. There is no doubt that a very lav
system is becoming prevalent in regard to lads. The system-
may be all very well at present, but in years to come it will
prove increasingly disastrous to both employers and employ-
ees.”
It would be disastrous to the employer of labor also? —
“It would be a general disaster.”
In order that our boys should be properly apprenticed,
would it not be well to arrange for their having some daily
tuition in technical subjects?—“l have already expressed an
opinion favorable to your view.”
And so the education system of the future which the
Commission recommends will promote the extension of domes-
tic arts, cooking and household duties, and we will be able
to say, “Be useful, sweet maid, and let who will be giddy.”


There is no doubt but that these trade schools, one of which
we hope will be established near, Thebarton, are going to
supply a great need in the education system, as great, if not
a greater need, than the high school movement is filling. It
will bring to the aid of the community a more experienced
and highly cultured class of mechanics, and after, all man’s
greatest need is the trained man.
“For Heaven’s eternal wisdom has decreed
That man of man should ever stand in need.”
For the benefit of those who foolishly think that the
present high schools are supplying this need, let me tell you
in the New South Wales system a record is kept of the
boys who leave these high schools and their choice of career
is shown as follows :
Three hundred and thirty-one boys and 100 girls became
shop assistants; 260 boys became carpenters, 230 min-
ers, 52 mechanical engineers, and 211 boys and 102
girls went into factories; 364 boys were returned as
having left school to become laborers, and 311 became
messengers. It is somewhat curious that 16 boys were
returned from the High and Technical Schools as
having left school to become paper hoys, while one
lad left the high school to become a barber. One
lad left to become a domestic help, 3 to become cooks,
30 to become rabbiters, 2 to become jockeys, and 1 boy
elected to become a shearer. 5,471 girls, out of a
total of 6,939, left school to take up home duties; 289
entered domestic service, 216 took up dressmaking, ana
115 became tailoresses; 3 girls were returned as dairy-
maids, 1 as a waitress, and 1 as an actress.
“The purpose of education is to face the unsolved prob-
lems of the present position, not to fly to fresh ones.”
“Not wealth, but the power to produce wealth, is the ttue
measure of commercial prosperity; not men, but minds, the
first requisite for superiority in production; not handi-eraft,
but brain-craft, is the prime source of excellence. The brain
power of the people is its best capital.”
So after all it is to trade rather than to the academic
side we will have to look in the future, so our proposals for —•
(1) The establishment of trade schools; (2) Compulsory at-
tendance of apprentices; (3) Fuller recognition of manual work
will do much to alter the present insane method by which
the State contributes £97 for the purpose of making a lawyer,
£124 towards making a doctor, £B7 towards making a literary
man, £43 towards equipping a clerk, and £6 12/ towards mak-
ing a blacksmith. Of their values to the community I think
we are agreed.


Agricultural Education.
Then we find another great weakness in keeping with
the curse of centralisation, was the utter neglect of agricul-
tural education, and after visiting schools in Queensland,
Victoria and New South Wales, and then visiting our own
Roseworthy College, we felt that South Australia was but
groping to-day where her farmers had previously led, so the
recommendation for the establishment of agricultural schools
will meet a great need. It may be contested as to whether
these schools shall be established where we have suggested,
near the city, instead, as was generally thought, they should
be in the country, but the following evidence of the man on
the spot is the justification in locating them near the city.
Mr. F. C. Grace, farm manager of the Agricultural High
■School at Warmambool, gave the following evidence
Do you think an agricultural high school, established
somewhere in or close to one of our big cities, would be a
profitable undertaking, so far as securing the boys from the
city to go into such a school is concerned?— You are refer-
ring to a city such as Melbourne?”
Yes or Adelaide. Any big city?—“l should say it was
a sound proposition, and would be successful from the
* tar if we were thinking of establishing such a school as we
have seen here, do you think it would be advisable to put it
in the country or near the eity?-“The Education Department
is finding out now that they cannot expect the rural popu-
lation to send their boys to an agricultural high school when
the parents are wanting the help of those boys at home.
They cannot get help for love or money, and they are not
educated up to the state of having their boys taught agricul-
ture scientifically. In the town, however, the parents ex-
pect to train their children for whatever profession they wish
to put them to. In the rural districts those agricultural
high schools are bound to be failures. ~ . ,
Valuable suggestions were made as to the advisability of
schools for irrigation by the whole-souled irngationist, Mr.
Mclntosh.
Leaving Certificates.
An important recommendation is that dealing with leav-
ing certificates. It is indeed necessary that something shall
he done at once to put an end to the insane race for
ations which have turned our Universities into boodle-hunt-
ing institutions. In fact, to-day, the only way to escape from
"the examination craze is to become an examiner. oo_ we
see that the boy who is able to pass the sth cliss standard
shall be given a leaving certificate which will save him the
trouble of examination should he attempt to enrich his day


and generation by accepting service as a railway porter or a,
policeman, while the boy who passes the various stages in
the high school movement will be able without further exam-
ination to get into such branches of the service, Federal and
State, as to-day demands the public service and ei.il ser-
vice examinations. But we go further that that we say that
the schools themselves shall be declared to be efficient and
the boys who pass the standard in our high schools will not.
need to go through the farce of University, primary or sec-
ondary examinations. This is no new scheme. It has long
been in vogue in the Scottish Universities, and although I
think I may claim to be among the pioneers of this sugges-
tion, as I publicly advocated it when Premier of the Milang
Parliament, getting on for 20 years ago, it was left for the-
New South Labor Ministry to be the first in the Australian
Commonwealth to put this scheme into effect.
The Adelaide University-
This brings me to the apex of our educational institutions-
—the Adelaide University—and remembering how bitterly X
criticised this institution, its -administration'and its methods
in the past (not without good reason), yet I am glad to have-
been spared long enough to say to-day that after having seen
something of every University in the .Commonwealth, having
visited many of them two and three times, I look with pride
and gratitude to the work of the Adelaide University. Their
greatest ghost was their poverty, but through the broad-mind-
edness and big-heartedness of its staff, they are living nearer
to the heart of the community than can be said of any
university in this Commonwealth. When I tell you that
until this Commission came into existence it was the most
sweated of any institution in Adelaide; that its brainiest men,
equal to any of their confreres, were getting from £4OO to
£6OO per year less than their fellow-workers in other universi-
ties; chat they were cribbed, cabined, and confined in un-
derground rooms without as much as a common room for
either teachers or students, you will realise how devoted
thev must have been to their work. And it seemed to me,
as I said in 1910, the powers governing the University were
guilty of one great omission—they should have written over
the doors of the University professors’ rooms “Your wis-
dom will keep you humble, and your Council will keep yotr
poor.” If the spending of national money in any other chan-
nel can give the return which has been received as the result
of University expenditure, then it would be well for those in
control of State and national finances constantly to ask them-
selves, not “how much is the least you can do "with?” but
“how much is the most you can use?”


The University was the first to gain a very great advantage
from the appointment of the Commission., They asked for a
grant of £6,000 for the purpose of building, and we gave them
£12,000. We also set aside an endowment of £lOO,OOO so
that they might have the interest on it, thus raising
their revenue from £7,000 to nearly £12,000 per annum. It
is still considerably below that of the other States, but we
feel that it is not desirable that the highest educational in-
stitution in-the State should be compelled to live, as it were,
from hand, to mouth, and that its operations each year should
be governed by the amount received from fees, which may
vary .from time to time. Under such a system it is practi-
cally impossible for the University to extend its operations
without special assistance, and it will have to get an increased
grant of £20,000. But the reform of voting by post will have
to be instituted if wide interest is to be taken in this work.
Reforming the Constitution of the University
Council.
Realising the cost to the community it was natural that
we insisted that the people should be more fully represented
on its government than was hitherto the case, so we instantly
demanded that three members of the Assembly add two
from the Legislative Council should have a place on
the Council. That was the best we could do then. Further
investigation has shown that a further change will be neces-
sary and so the Commission recommended that it' would be
in the interests of the University if the Council were
made more representative of the general community,
by the appointment of one member each by the Cham-
ber of Manufactures, the Chamber of Commerce, the
Trades and Labor Council, the Adelaide Hospital Board, and
the Minister of Education.” But I regret that they could not
have gone a little further, tor the ideal Council in my mind
would consist of three members to he elected of and by the
professorial staff, seven by the graduates, one of whom should
be a woman, three by the Assembly, two by the Legislative
Council, two to be elected by the combined membership of
the Architects’ Association, Chamber of Manufactures, Cham-
ber of Commerce, Royal Agricultural Society, one by the
under-graduates, and one by the Trades add Labor Council.
Director of Education, one each from the Adelaide Hos-
pital and Public Library, three to be elected by the people of
the State on the Assembly roll at the Senatte Elections, those
to elect the Chancellor and University Pripcipal. We would
then have a Council as versatile as the University should be,
and as the demands of this community should more and
more insist that it should be.


11l this matter of representatives on the Council, speaking
■on the ne'ed of some change, Professor David said, “There
are some that are very essential. The chairman of the Trades
Hall is, I think, most essential, and also the chairman of the
■Chamber of Commerce. You ought to make sure of getting
them. They are bound to be good men. They have stood
■election from a big community.”
The University and the Working Class.
We have recently been favored with a John the Baptist
.among university educators in the person of Albert Mans-
hridge, and before long there will be found as the result of
his labor men and women in the University of Adelaide whose
mothers and fathers before them were more familiar with the
wash tubs and picks and shovels, but, nevertheless, they will
take to the University a new strength and new resolutions,
and perhaps re-impress a lesson not altogether unnecessary
by the students to-day, that in return for the expenditure
that this State is incurring to-day, we will demand State
services and State leadership. I have no fear but that our
men and women will answer that call as faithfully as they
have done elsewhere, as is shown from the following :
“Yes, do you know that since the visit of Mr. Mansbridge
the working classes have devoted more attention to the uni-
versity life than ever. We are realising what university life
means in the general leadership of the people. I have
a report which shows that out of 27 students who
matriculated at three universities on the Con'inent, 112
were sons of working men earning from on an aver-
age less than 6/ per day. Those students availed them-
selves of the municipal grants. All the great American
■Colleges have housing facilities, ancl it is realised that a uni-
versity training is an essential to successful leadership. What
the university is doing for the community is revealed by an
examination of the history of the occupants of the 975 most
eminent positions in England, the figures being culled from
the magazine “Nature.” We find it revealed that the uni-
versities are responsible for training as follows: —Oxford, 382;
Cambridge, 177: Scotland, 76: foreign universities, 112. The
remaining positions are filled by men who have not been
trained in a university. The American statistics, however,
reveal to a greater extent the influence of the uinyersities on
the country’s progress. Investigations conducted in America
and Canada show that of the 8,144 most successful
men. 5.775 held universHy degrees, 1240 Rad passed through
the high schools, and 313 had been privately educated: of tlio
■8.144 positions only 808 were held by men who had stopped
at primary schools.”
21
“IS IT WELL WITH THE CHILD?”


Residential Colleges.
But an immediate start is necessary in the way of resi-
dential colleges not quarters to perpetuate the curse of
caste; not clubs, but homes; not places for leisure, but
places for the formation of character and the development of
energies and of efforts, for over our University doors must,
ever be written :
“The toil of it none can share,
By yourself must the way be won,
Through fervent and frozen air
’Till the overland journey be done;
And I would not take for your own dear sake
One thorn from your back, my son.’’
The Claims of Minda.
We have not been blind to the great necessity for exten-
sion in the realms of physical culture, nor will we ever ”orgefc
the look of sadness and sense of sorrow that surrounded us
when visiting the Minda Home, for weak-minded children.
Dreadful, indeed, it is to think that there are still marry
mothers and fathers endeavoring to keep their children in
the public schools because there is no room to effectively deal
with them in Minda Home, and I have no doubt' but that
as a result of that visit, made by some of the members for
the first time, though in my own ease it is a home with whose
official management I have long been connected, much will
be done to ease the lives of those who, however long they
live, in life and character and conduct will always be children.
The Reformatories-
Time will not permit of reference being made to more-
than one other thing, if we would have it well with the
child, and that is to examine how the State has tried to
answer this question. It has done so by the establishment:
of reformatories. May the Lord forbid that my audience
should ever be put to the ordeal of examining them. When
we did we found a great building, large grounds, a staff of
eight or nine men to look after 31 boys, to say nothing of
the leg irons which would have been exhibited more in an
old convict hulk than in an institution brought into exis-
tence to see if it were well with the child.
First of all we were told that the building was situated
in the wrong place. I wonder if it occurred to those in
charge that the real reason was that the work was entrusted
in the wrong hands, and the conception of the reformatory
was more in keeping with the spirit of the days of Marcus
Clarke, than our time. My statements in this connection


have been frequently questioned, but let us look at the evi-
dence from the pripeipal officers. First the President. He
said: “If the boys were situated a little further away from
the city where they could do more pioneering work, I think
we could do better with them.” And he went on to say,
“We have no education at Magill, with the exception of a
little night school, owing to the boys being over the school
age.”
When the Commission visited Magill we found that
there was practically nothing being done there towards
the further education of the boys, and we were
.greatly surprised. There were 32 boys there, and six of them
had passed the compulsory standard, 12 had been in the
fourth class, four had been in the third class, and one in
the second class. We also noticed that several of the boys
were in leg-irons. On whose authority are those leg-irons put
•on the boys at the Magill Reformatory? “I think it was on
the recommendation of the Superintendent, confirmed by the
■Council, and approved by the Minister.” What is the long-
est period that the boys there are allowed to have those
•chains on? “Between four and five weeks.” Those boys
we saw had them on for six weeks. “I was not aivare of it.”
Then the Secretary, Mr. Gray, bore eloquent testimony to
the management by telling us officially, “If the State will give
me the money they are spending at Magill now, I will do
the work better and have something over.”
But perhaps the testimony of its superintendent will be
more agreeable to the auihorxcies than any statement of mine.
Let me give it to you. We asked what part of the day’s
work at Magill is set aside for the education of the boys at
.your institution? And he replied, “I may say, none ■• hat-
ever. Sometimes there is a little night school, but that is
by accident.” Even the backward boys who are over the
school-going age are put into the ranks of the working boys
at your institution? “Yes. My clerk, who is supposed to
act as teacher, might, when he feels well enough, give those
boys who are not too tired a few lessons in the evening.
There is, however, nothing practical about it.” The only
■school you have up there is a Sunday school? “Yes, and
very little of that. It all depends on whether the ministers
•or the teachers can spare the time.” Is there no body which
undertakes the religious instruction of the boys dur;ng Sun-
day afternoons ? “I do it myself, and so does my wife.
There is no body outside. Of course, all the boys go to
church on Sunday mornings.”
But how different was the positions so far as the Salva-
tion Army and Roman Catholic Institutions were concerned.
Alongside of where I speak to-day. Father Healy at Brooklyn
Bark, has a reformatory, two men looking after 25 boys, minus
23
“IS IT WELL WITH THE CHILD?”


leg-irons. And Mr. Gray bore most eloquent testimony to
the value of this reformatory by saying, “I give him great
credit for the way he manages the place. The boys who go
from that institution to service very seldom retnrn.” And he
added, “I wish I could say that of the other.” I hope you
will not think these gentlemen of the State Children’s Coun-
cil are unmindful of their public duty. I think they made
this very plain to us.
They were not successful as far as their own institutions
were concerned, for we find that it cost them £1 17/6 per week
to keep the boys at Magill, the figures being :
Magill £95 0 0 per year.
But by the sale of produce by
labor of those boys who ought to
have been at school it was re-
duced to £79 0 0 per year.
Brooklyn Park £2O 10 0 per year.
Mt. Barker Salvation Army Home
for boys £22 6 0 per year.
Salvation Army Home for Girls £23 8 0 per year.
Industrial School, Edwardstown. £37 4 0 per year.
Redruth £53 12 0 per year.
Is it any wonder that the Commission’s recommendation
reads :—‘‘But we are convinced that the sooner the majority
of the boys can be removed from the deadening influence of
the Magill Reformatory the better.”
Scriptural Instruction.
On the vexed question of Scripture reading in State
schools. Please understand that I express no opinion
at this stage on that question, but it is fair to point
out that though the advocates did not ask to be
heard we saw a great deal of the work. I wonder if
people know that, in addition to the time taken lor the read
ing of these Scripture admirable though they un,-
doubtedly are, there was still m 1912 in Hew South Wales,
52,000 visits to the various schools from the ecclesiastical re-
presentatives of the Church' of England, Roman Catholic,.
Methodist, Presbyterians, and other denominations.
The Late Director.
Before the work of our commission had finished this
State was deprived of Alfred Williams, who, indeed, laid down
his life in the fulfilment of his duty as truly as has ever been
done on the battlefields of the ages, but his work will live
in the hearts and minds of our people everywhere. When I
put it to him that he should retire on three years’ leave, as


he might have done, he answered—“ Tell Mr. Verran I have-
dedicated by life’s work to the children.” Let us hope that,
his own widow and children will not be denied that pro-
vision which he earned by his life’s labors. We can well say—
“ Rest, toiler, rest,
Whose ardor never rested,
Thy teeming brain has borne abundant fruits,
Though blossoms fall the fruit will yet mature,
Thy works and thy young nations will endure;
Deep runs thy well-struck roots.”
Other Educational Institutions.
The educational development of the child is dependent on
more than simply school. There are great educational insti-
tutions like Art Galleries, Museums, Public Libraries, and
Hospitals, all of which, we hope, will'benefit largely from the
'vork of this Commission. The Public Library and Art
Galleries are really in themselves a University for our
hardest working men and women, and the storehouses to
wffiich we fly in our struggle to become efficient. The Pub-
lic Library has had its work recognised, and we hope shortly
that they will have the land and funds necessary for their
extension. In a promise for the land they have got ’ half
of what they seek, and a beginning is half of the whole. Wo
all prize a good beginning.
Of the hospital department nothing but good can be said,
but the interests of the human family demands something
more than an odd bottle of medicine.
One of the most pressing needs of the Adelaide Hospital
to-day is the reduction of its managers by two-thirds, whilst I
think the whole question of hospital administration and the
allocation of its funds and the employment of its officers should
be part and parcel of a great system of public health, and
the responsible guides might well be a small body represent*
live of the University, medical, commercial and Government ad-
ministrators. True these schemes which we have outlined
will mean expenditure, but who among us will not willingly
do what lies in his power in this connection? A man’s value
to society to-day is more clearly recognised than it has ever
been. As Wordsworth says : “For man is dear to man, and the
poorest poor long for a moment in their weary lives to feel that
they themselves are fathers and dealers out of a single bless-
ing.” But one thing is certain, that as time moves, the
struggle for wealth and prosperity will become more keen.
In times past fortunes were made through sparsely settled
places becoming popular, through the finding of mines of
gold; but to-day it is to effort and efficiency alone that we
look, and in the rush for existence let us not lose the touch


-of the divine. “There is nothing of a more divine nature
than the training of himself and those who belong to him.
.Education softens Our natures by improving our reasoning
faculties, giving an evenness of temper and a sound judg-
ment.” And as Marshall, in his “Economies of Industry,”
.says, “Since the manual labor classes are four or five times
as numerous as all other classes put together, it is not un-
likely that more than half the best natural genius that is
born into the country belongs to them; and of this a great
part is fruitless for want of opportunity. There is no ex-
travagance more prejudicial to the growth of national wealth
'than that wasteful negligence which allows genius that hap-
pens to be born of lowly parentage to expend itself in lowly
•work.”
“Conquer we shall, hut we must first contend,
’Tis not the fight that crowns us—but the end.”


UNIVERSITY RESIDENTIAL
COLLEGE
During past years few men have beem
more prominently connected with the struggle for
university reform than Mr. f. Ryan, who when
Labor member for the District of Torrens secured
the passihg of Vhe motion fbr the establishment of
a Royal Commission (of whidi he was subsequently
elected chairman) to enquire into all branches of
education. In that capacity he visited the univer-
sities of Australasia. To a representative of “The
Daily Herald” he yesterday expressed his views on
the vexed subject of a university residential college,
.which was announced some time ago as having
been decided upon after a conference held at the
Adelaide University between Sir Samuel Way
(Chancellor), Mr. C. R. Hodge (Registrar), Mr. R.
Barr Smith, Mr. A. H. Peake (Premier), and Sir R.
Butler.
“I viewed .the announcement with a consider-
able amount of interest,” observed Mr. Ryan,
“realising that when residential colleges are estab-
lished a great need in the education system of
the State will be filled.”
How do you connect a university residential
college with the State education system? Is it not
a private institution?
“There is a danger that residential colleges-
may, as with many other branches of university
education, be considered private institutions*.


whereas, as a matter of fact, the major portion of
their revenue, like that of the university, would be
derived from State taxation. So far as my memory
serves me, I think Mr, Barr Smith has promised
for the establishment of residential quar-
ters, with common rooms. When I spoke on my
motion in the House of Assembly for the appoint-
ment of an Education Commission on October 30,
1909, the need for a residential college was very
•great. When I again addressed the House on July
27, 1910, on my motion for the appointment of a
Select Committee to report on the best methods to
be adopted to make available the facilities for
higher education at the Adelaide University a little
—but very little—-had been done. The position at
that time I explained in the following words;—
‘Take, if you \Vill, the question of university build-
ings. I speak with the greatest confidence when I
say that the conditions forced on university
students owing to the inadequacy of its buildings
is such that it could not be tolerated in the factory
life of the community, If you visit the building
you will find that is most learned men—those whose
every investigation is of public interest—are so en-
vironed that their best work cannot be done. Many
of the rooms occupied by the professors are such
that no decent workman would use them for his
workshop. They are buried in cold stone cellars.
I do not think there is in that building to-day a
decent room common to all students which is so
necessary. I do not think for a fagged student
or teacher there is such a thing obtainable as a cup
of tea or a decent place to take in company the
midday lunch. I believe it is true that many of the
professors are so circumscribed in the accommoda-
tion available that their specimens, so very neces-
sary in the teaching of chemistry and other
sciences, cannot be unpacked ! That is practically
the position to-day.”.


But how will a residential college overcome
that difficulty?
“The Education Commission visited all the
universities in Australia, paying particular atten-
ton to those of Melbourne and Sydney. A feature
of these institutions is the residential colleges,
which are situated within, the university grounds,,
thus forming a valuable auxiliary to the universities
and providing as they do a ‘home from home’ for
the student. To realise what this means you, have
to remember that the great idea in education to-day
is not to have a University of Adelaide, but a Uni-
versity of South Australia, situated in Adelaide.
You cannot take the university to every little ham-
let, but there is no reason why every effort should
not be made to bring deserving students to the
central university. But what mother or father
would care to allow their boy or girl, just at that
age when they are needing the most attention, to
come to the city, and as tired, overworked students
take their chances in city boarding houses?”
What is the general idea of the scheme?
“The general idea of the residential college is
that students shall pay from £jo to £l2O per
annum for board and residence. In most cases a
separate bedroom would be provided for each
student, although two students might share in
common a bedroom and sitting or studying room.
The supervision of the college would include to a
great extent the giving of lessons, perhaps in ad-
vance, of the course of study upon which the
student would be examined. In this connection
these colleges have come to be looked upon in some
quarters as, to use a familiar term, ‘cramming’
hostels. This is a mistaken view, for nowhere else
can the desired scholastic environment be so well
obtained as by communion with kindred spirits
under good supervision.”


The question of supervision, then, is the es-
sential of a successful college?
“That is largely the case; but there is another
factor. Let me illustrate the point. On the occa-
sion of the visit of the Education Commission to
one of the foremost residential colleges in Australia,
I think it was the present Premier (Mr. Peake) who
raised that point. The reply of the witness interro-
gated was the effect that the men and women
in the colleges became very largely the guardians
of the reputation of the institution. He illustrated
the point with a story. He stated that some time
previously the had reason to believe that one or two
of his men students had been overstepping the
mark in the matter of keeping late hours. On the
afternoon of one holiday several of the older men
in the institution told him that if he heard a little
extra noise during the night he was not to worry,
as it would be all right. He agreed. Towards
early morning there was a terrific noise. He did
not intervene, but at breakfast enquired the cause,
and was inforoaed that some of the students had
waited up for a ‘night bird’ and had forcibly im-
pressed upon him the fact that he was the guardian
of their reputation as well as his own by immersing
him in a water trough and keeping him there until
Tie found repentance by ‘seeking it diligently and
with tears.’ ’’
As the chairman df the Commission you ap-
prove, then, of the residential college idea?
“I approve strongly of the establishment of a
residential college, but I would be sorry to think
that such an institution would be so governed as
to perpetuate the curse of caste which has so long
helped to damn our educational institutions.
Though the generous donor —Mr. Barr Smith—


might donate a sum towards erecting the
building the people of South Australia will not only
have to give the land, but will from time to time,
in view of the Commission’s recommendations, be
held responsible for the adequate upkeep of the
university and all buildings attached to it, and will
ultimately have to spend many more thousands on
the college. And rightly so. I should like to see
the true spirit of educational reform maintained by
making the college one in which, provided there is
room, a home could 1 be made available for those of
our country teacher-students who at present com-
plete their courses at the university. Further than
that, there is no earthly reason why students of the
School of Mines should not be allowed to share in
the advantages of the college, or why country boys
and girls who win scholarships should not be also-
allowed to avail themselves of the privilege of such
a home. Failing this, I hesitate in my welcome to
this new domicile. Not long ago many of -our
country scholarships were not availed of. Parents
would say that not even for the satisfaction of their
children having a successful scholastic career
would they send them, especially girls, to the
strange city life. We have passed the day when
any differentiation should be made between one
student and another. The University of Adelaide
is easily first in the hearts of the people so far as
the universities of Australia are concerned, and
deserves the highest praise for the wonderful work
accomplished by its students and professors. Yet
it is a fact that its students enjoy such rare
privileges because the taxpayers of this State pay
three times as much towards his or her personal
education as they do for the students in State
schools.
So that, after all, there is unlimited free edu-
cation?
“Hardly unlimited. The Education Bill intro-
duced some 20 years ago has been wrongly looked


upon as the inauguration of free education. All
that Bill did was to rearrange the distribution or
allocation of the educational grant. I want to re-
peat, however, that every student at the university
has three times as much expended on his or her
education as the State school child, and it is well,
I say, that this is so. The university has benefited
largely from grants. The commission first loaned
it £ 12,000, which will never be repaid; then set
aside £IOO,OOO to increase its endowment fund,
and will be compelled within the next five years to
increase the grant by £B,OOO or £IO,OOO per an-
num, as its yearly grant must be increased to
£25,000. I don’t see how it will be possible for
the institution to exist on its limited menas, and
unless the proposed residential college is large
enough to accommodate all students requiring a
home it must mean the establishment of another
college to accommodate the Education Depart-
mental students, which will cost anything up to
£15,000. Then who will say that the religious de-
nominations will not want their denominational
residential colleges, for which the Government will
at least have to find the land? They have these
colleges in the other States.”
You have some misgivings concerning the suc-
cess of the venture?
"Not altogether misgivings; but I extremely
regret that the proposal seems likely to be the ter-
mination of the habitation of the Adelaide Univer-
sity—that is, in its present locality. There is no
doubt that at Mitcham, or even as near the city as
Parkside, from 40 to 80 acres of land could be
found which would be ample for the accommoda-
tion of the University and those corporate collegiate
institutions which are such strong factors in edu-
cational extension.”
Will the everyday rank-and-file students feel
the need for university home life?


“Yes. Do you know that since the visit of Mr.
Mansbridge the working classes have devoted more
attention to university life than ever. We are
realising what university life means in the general
leadership of the people. The Oxford Conference
quickly realised that home life was the great factor
in education extension. I have a report which
shows that out of 727 students who matriculated
at three universities on the Continent, 112 were sons
of working men earning on an average less than 6/
a day. Those students availed themselves of the
municipal grants. All the great American colleges
have Housing facilities, and it is realised that a uni-
versity training is an essential to successful leader-
ship. What the university is doing for the com-
munity is revealed by the examination of the his-
tory of the occupants of the 975 most eminent
positions in England, the figures being culled from
the magazine ‘Nature.’ We find it revealed that
the universities are responsible for training as fol-
lows:—Oxford 382, Cambridge 177, Scotland 76,
foreign universities 112. The remaining positions
are occupied by men who have not been trained in
a university. The American statistics, however,
reveal to a greater extent the influence of the uni-
versities on the country’s progress. Investigations
conducted in America and Canada reveal the fact
that of the 8144 most successful men, 5775 held
university degrees, 1240 had passed through the
high schools, and 313 had been privately educated.
Of the 8144 positions only 808 were held by men
who had stopped at primary schools.”
A last question—You think then that a residen-
tial college would result in an extension of univer-
sity life in this State?
“It would certainly be forced to do that owing
to tHe fresh distribution of scholarships as recom-
mended by the commission, for these will at least
be doubled. The commission decided that a num


her of these should be set aside for State school
children and a number for children educated at
private institutions. I did not hold with the sug-
gestion, as I consider that the gift of the taxpayers
should not be earmarked for one section to the ex-
clusion of another. The university ought to
step out and do something in this connection itself.
The most alarming discovery I have made is the
comparatively small interest taken in the university
by its own graduates. The institution is wisely
governed, I will admit, but largely so by a few men
in Adelaide who will sooner or later be forced to
institute the reform of voting by post for all elec-
tions for university positions. Then it will be
availed of more and more by the community. The
college, if properly organised and managed, will
create a spirit of comradeship. Perhaps some day,
too, there will be a common university badge, in-
stead of, as at present, one badge showing the
student’s ability to pay for sports, and another for
arts and sciences, but none for the university itself.
The new Bill recently passed in the New South
Wales Parliament will mean the addition of at least
200 scholars to the Sydney University by means of
scholarships each year. There seems to be some
fear that these scholarships will become gifts to
the section living nearest the university gates. I
sincerely trust that this will not be true of the Ade-
laide University, but that by ensuring a passage for
deserving students from the kindergarten to the
university we will realise, as did the Athenians,
that the ideal State does not consist of walls or
ships, but of men—trained men, able to perform
justly, skilfully, and magnanimously all the duties
necessary to the service of the State.”


THE
School Book Problem
Unrestricted Scholarships Favored
Free education is not always free education—
in South Australia. The paradoxical statement
calls for an explanation. Some 20 odd years ago
“free education” was announced by the Govern-
ment of the day with a flourish of trumpets and
welcomed as a great boon by parents who had
been accustomed to paying for the education of
their children. They quickly realised that it was
not such a blessing after all. True, the weekly
payment was no longer demanded, but in its place
was retained payment for the schoolbooks and
materials required by the children. The whole
■question was thoroughly investigated by the Edu-
cation Commission, and certain recommendations
were made to the Government. Like numerous
other recommendations of that Commission they
have not yet been given effect to. Possibly some
provision will be made in the Education Bill pro-
mised for next session.
Annual Cost of Schoolbooks.
Asked yesterday if the Education Commission
had gone very fully into the matter, Mr. T. Ryan
(the chairman) replied—“ Yes, we did investigate
the question, so much so that we called for a return
from the Education Deparment giving the depart-
mental view of the cost to the children per annum
for books and school material. That return was


Primary schools., 12,4-00 juniors at 3/3 each
£2015
0
0
8190 first-class scholars, at 7/2 each per
2934 15
0
7767 second-class scholars at 11/3 each
4363 18
9
7278 third-class scholars at 12/2 each .
4427
9
0
10,955 fourth and fifth-class scholars at
13/11 each
7622
17
1
A Grand Total of .. ..
£21368
19 10
based on the figures for 1913, and covered the
primary and secondary schools of the State. The
figures were as follows;
The cost to the scholars of secondary schools
was set down at £9867, and the cost of labor, rail,
and transit of books, £I4OO, or an aggregate of
£32,635 19/10.
That was the estimate, but I wish to emphatic-
ally state that I disagree very much with the totals.
I have studied the system of free schoolbooks in
vogue in New Zealand and Western Australia, and
base the statement on those studies. The South
Australian Department is right in saying that from
35 to 40 per cent, of the children in the Dominion
and Western Australia do not avail themselves of
the offer of free schoolbooks, and that they prefer
to buy their own. Allowing that the same percen-
tage of children in South Australia also purchased
their own books and materials, it was stated that
the cost to the State of Free schoolbooks would be
£21,757 per annum. This I do not consider cor-
rect either. While I was in Western Australia in
the early part of 1913 I paid special attention to
the question of the distribution of schoolbooks, and
I found that many of the disadvantages which we
were led to expect would result if the State pro-
vided the free books did not actually follow. Where
school books were provided I hnd that by offering
36
THE SCHOOL BOOK PROBLEM


cash prizes to the student who leaves his or her
books in the best order on being promoted from
one class to another, keen rivalry is excited. Books
are not allowed to be taken home. lam sure that
by offering some such inducement a similar
condition of things would become general in
South Australia. We are easily the most niggardly
State in this respect.
What the Teacher has to Provide.
The Commission elicited the fact that much of
the material necessary for the actual school work
has to be provided by the teacher. Included in
this list are drawing boards and easels (although
these are sometimes bought by the scholars),
material for charts, chart protectors, hangers for
the charts, and shells for junior counters,
yardsticks, material for weather charts, teachers’
textbooks, blank map of Australia for instruction
purposes, relief map materials, sand trays, anatomi-
cal charts for temperance teaching, blackboards,
compasses, set squares and T-squares, triangles*
trapezoids, models of various kinds, peck and
bushel measures, scales and weights, barometers
and thermometers, rain guage, school chromo-
graphs, boxes for sewing, map racks, wheelbarrow
for yard, clay for modelling, school vane for
weather observation, portion of school library,
school clocks, and in some cases pianos, although
these instruments are usually purchased with the
cash raised by concerts, etc.”
Teachers’ “Out-of-Pocket Expenses.”
What does it cost the teacher per annum to-
provide these books and materials?
“I should say in the case of a big school the
expense would be between £ls and £25, and I
think that in many cases the teachers certainly
provide a good deal of the funds. If the depart-
ment is not prepared to find the whole of the books


it should certainly provide the copy books, scrib-
bling papers, pens, pencils, and a good deal of the
material that is absolutely necessary.”
Would such a course aid in the extension of
•education?
“I am sure that the cost of the books is a
serious handicap to very many parents. It is no
uncommon thing for a working man to receive a
bill for £5, when after an examination three or four
•of his children have passed into a higher class.”
Could the State afford the expenditure?
“The policy of the Labor Party is compulsory
free education up to the university, with all school
material supplied gratis, and that is a policy which
will be carried out to the letter if possible. We
shall fight strenuously for it at the next elections.
It should not be a question of how much the State
can afford to spend on education, but how dare the
State not afford to spend it. lam perfectly satis-
fied that if the State had to provide materials and
schoolbooks the first cost would be very much less
than is supposed. The Department could purchase
a three or five years’ supply of certain lines of
goods, and further than that, could manufacture
on a much more extensive scale than has yet been
attempted. In New South Wales the school furni-
ture is manufactured in local factories. This must
be done in South Australia at the earliest possible
date. From the experience I have had I don’t think
the cost of providing books to the children at pre-
sent attending school would be anything like
£21,000, as stated. I am inclined to think that
£ho,ooo or £12,000 would be ample for some time
to come. I base my calculations on the propor-
tionate expenditure in this direction in New South
Wales, Western Australia, Queensland, and New
Zealand. I suppose a boy on passing from the
fifth-class into a high school would have to spend


at least 15/ or £\. Under an efficient system of
State provision in this direction I think a, saving
of at least 50 per cent, would be possible.”
You quite agree with ‘‘The Daily Herald” that
this is one of the great needs of the education
system ?
“Yes. ‘The Daily Herald’ is right, and lam
delighted that, in the course of its attention
to matters of deep public interest it is devoting
space to the education question, for in efficient edu-
cation lies the hope of national development.”
The Duty of the State.
Do you consider it is the duty of the State to
go all the way with the education of the child?
I agree with Professor David, who has long
been recognised as a leading university man. In
reply to a question I put to him when in Sydney
with the Commission, the professor said ‘lt seems
to me it is the inborn right of all in this country,
if they are worthy of the highest education a
country can give, to get that education free’.”
To what extent do you think, then, the educa-
tion vote will be increased by the carrying out of
such a policy?
‘‘The money that could .justly be contributed
to such expansion and extension must be kept
separate from the ordinary vote. Personally, I
think that if a just system of open scholarships
was established very many persons who are to-day
allowing the State to provide the entire cost of
their children’s education would be prepared to
voluntarily provide half the cost. One of the rea-
sons for the great expense of the present system
of scholarships is that its best friends have helped
to make it more expensive than it need be by
placing hedges around the scholarships. I deny
absolutely the right of fhe State to earmark any
gift for any special section of the children. School
books, medical inspection, and all the attendant


advantages provided by the State purse should not
be reserved for any special class or clique, but
should be free for every child.”
Would a system of State free school books be
of assistance to private schools?
‘‘Not so much to : day as it will when the re-
commendations of the Commission are adopted, be-
cause the State will first of all have to declare
private schools efficient. The State will further
determine the nature of the work that will be con-
sidered essential. Much of the curriculum of the
State and private schools will be identical, hence
the State could easily, in its provision of free school
books provide for outside scholars as well, and if
an institution is prepared to provide its school
building and teachers and to carry out the lessons
considered essential by the department, surely
there can be no objection to providing it with either
free books or medical or other inspection. Let us
get the idea of school out of our minds, and remem-
ber that the only thing that can add to the wealth
of the community is the child.
For the riches of the Commonwealth
Are strong, free minds and hearts of health,
And more to her than gold and grain
The cunning hand, the cultured brain.
During your investigations did you form any
opinion regarding the charge that has been levelled
against the South Australian Education Depart-
ment that it was Godless?
“Yes. We had the pleasure of examining the
lady who made the statement, and I rather think
she spoke first and thought afterwards. We need
not worry along those lines. There is a couplet
that runs—
Heed not the sceptic’s puny hands
If near your school a church spire stands;
Heed not the bigot’s blinded rule
While near your church spire stands a school.”


MEMO.
With the desire to create and sustain interest
in the problems of Education, this booklet has been
printed for free distribution; additional copies will
be supplied on request to T. Ryan, Grenfell Street,
Adelaide.
