

IS IT RATIONAL
TO BELIEVE IN GOD?
TWO NIGHTS' DEBATE
BETWEEN
JOSEPH SYMES
(Representing the Australasian Secular Association,)
AND
REV . D. M. BERRY
PRICE ....SIXPENCE.
Melbourne:
“LIBERATOR n" PRINTING & PUBLISHING Co.
Limited,
1884.




IS IT RATIONAL TO BELIEVE IN GOD?
DEBATE Between Mr. JOSEPH SYMES and
Rev. D. M. BERRY.
THIRD NIGHT.
The third night’s debate between Mr. Joseph Symes and
the Rev. D. M. Berry took place on Thursday evening, 26th
June, before a large audience in the Hall of Science, on the
question,, “Is it rational to believe in God ?” Mr. Donovan
being in the chair.
Mr. Berry first spoke. He said:—The question before us
this evening is, “Is it rational to believe in God ?” I
would have you observe that the question here is one
between. Theism and Atheism. Theism means a belief in
God, no matter what God is meant; Atheism is the reverse
of this, it is a belief in no God at all. The question is not
whether it is rational to believe in the God of the Bible. If
my opponent had challenged me to a debate on that subject I
would gladly have accepted it; but that is not the question
before us this evening. It is whether or not it is rational to
believe in God. In other words, whether Theism or Atheism
is the rational position for the human mind. Now the first
thing that strikes me is this, that if it is not rational to
believe in God,, we must, say that the vast majority of the
human race have been irrational, because it is a well-known fact
that the vast majority of men—certainly all nations, taking
them as a whole—have believed in a god of some kind or other.
The Egyptians, of whose wisdom and science we heard something
last night, were believers in many different gods, whose temples
are standing to the present day along the banks of the Nile.
Again the Greeks, of whose literature and philosophy


and art we all know, were not Atheists. I believe
that amongst Greek writers there are a few names
of Atheists, but they are by no means the most
celebrated names, and you are aware that Greek poetry,
is full of the gods in whom the Greeks believed ; and coming
again to that great Roman Empire about which I have
spoken so much in connection with the laying of the foundation
of our modern civilisation, it was at no time atheistic. I
think I said that the Roman Empire contained within itself
the religions of all the nations of the world that had been
conquered by it, and the Pantheon still exists where all the
statues of the gods of other nations were collected together.
Atheism is decidedly in the minority, a very small minority
indeed, and the great work of the world, the work of those
who prepared our modern civilisation—Egyptians, Syrians,
Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans—has not been
done by atheistic nations, but by nations which all had their
several beliefs in God or Gods, and therefore you see has not
been done Atheists. Ido not know, indeed, what good work
has been done by Atheists. I am unable to see anything
that they have done in helping forward the progress of man-
kind. If they have done so, if their name has come down to
us, associated with any good thing, I should like to hear
about it. It may be my ignorance, but I don’t know that any
such could be named. What is the conclusion to be drawn
from this? According to the opinion which my opponent has
undertaken to support Atheism is the most rational position, and
consequently the Atheist must be the most rational man. N ow,
when a small number of people tell you that they have a monopoly
of wisdom, and that the rest of mankind are, compared with them
irrational,younaturallyinferthatthey are making some mistake,
that there must be something wrong in their idea; that it is
hardly likely they should hare the monopoly of wisdom they
assert, and you naturally ask them to fell something they
have done. Don t tell us something you are going to do.
Tell us something you have done in 4?ie past, in order that
we may be able to judge of you as working for the future. Now
my first reason for saying that it is rational to believe in God
is this; that not to believe in any god is to believe that there
is nobody in the universe possessed of higher intelligence


than man; and if you consider that carefully you will find it
difficult to come to that conclusion. Try to imagine this,
that in all the universe there is nothing higher than man.
Suppose we could bring here a man who is the wisest, most
intellectual, and most learned of his time, and suppose he is
now 50 years of age. Forty years ago he had not much
wisdom, and 49 years ago he was not much to speak of, only
as our great poet has it,
The infant,
Puling and puking in the nurse’s arms;
and 50 years hence all his wisdom will have gone. Am I to
suppose that that is the greatest and wisest being in the
universe ? I find it difficult to believe it. Of course we
must not talk of possible beings in other worlds, because the
Atheist refuses to believe in the inhabitants in other worlds, hav-
ing no proof of their existence. Another reason I have for my
opinion is, because I see so many things made, and so many
things arranged in this world, which I am sure man could
never have made or arranged, so many effects of which man
could not be the cause, and here I shall reiterate that axiom
I gave you before, that every effect must have a cause. When
we see the works of man we naturally infer that man must
have been there. Some time since flint implements were
found in the valley of the Somme in France. From their
position it was seen that they were older than any known
historic inhabitants of that country, No remains of men were
found with them, but these worked flints were taken as
conclusive scientific evidence that men must have lived in the
Somme valley before the times of history. In the same way,
looking at other different things, they present to me the same
kind of appearance, and lead me to conclude that some one
must have made them. Let me give you an example. Let
ns take the brain of man. You must be aware that the brain
is of delicate organisation, and can be disarranged by a slight
shock. For instance, if I were to spring from this platform
on to the floor I should, by the shock, become insensible if
there were not something to arrest the effect. This is how
it is done. First, the brain is enclosed in a strong casket of
hone. The casket is called the skull, and is poised on the
spinal column, and between each of the bones of the spine


there is a soft pad of jelly-like substance, which forms
a sort of buffer, and gires springiness to the whole column.
The buffers placed between the different vertebrae prevent you
from feeling the full effect of a shock. This column again
is placed on the top of a springy arch formed by the leg and
thigh bones, which meets in a keystone, and the keystone of
the arch has also a jelly-like substance, so that it is
elastic at the top of the arch, and this arch rests again
upon two other arches, formed by the bones of the feet, so
that you have three springy arches and a column at the
top of them, and this pillar arranged with a series of
springs so as to prevent the shock which that delicate organ,,
the brain, might receive. Now I find it hard to believe that
there was not someone who contrived and made this
arrangement for the brain of a human being, and I
might go on for a very long time giving instances
of a similar nature. There is, for example, the wing of a
bird. That is an instrument which has been studied for a
very long time, and even until now naturalists are not agreed
as to how a bird flies. When the movement of a bird’s wings
'is simply up and down, there is no reason why the bird should
go up rather than down, but for this ingenious contrivance :
When a bird’s wing moves up, the feathers open and the air
passes through them without resistance; but when the bird’s
wings go down the feathers lock together, so that the air cannot
pass through. But a bird goes forward. How should a vertical
movement send a bird forward? The feathers open upwards
at the rear, and so, instead of ascending or descending
quite vertically, they do so in a slanting manner, and
thus give the bird a slight impetus forward, and it is
so shaped with its beak like an arrow that a slight
impetus forward will send it on through the air with great
speed. If a man had done that, we should call
it a most ingenious machine, but man has never
yet been able to make a flying machine. When we look
at it what must we call it ? Has it been made or has it not
been made ? I might speak of the different formations of
leaves and the remarkable shapes that they take. If you trace
them on paper they make the'most beautiful patterns ; but so
far as science tells us, there is no particular use in one leaf
4


being one shape and one another. If you ask a botanist
what it is that determines the shape he will tell you
it is the arrangement of the fibres. But what is it that
determines the arrangement of the fibres ? Can any one tell ?
That leads the mind irresistibly to the belief that there must
be some one who designed all this. You have doubtless
heard of a fish called the electric eel that has within itself a
galvanic battery. For ages there have been in existence
animals with a complete electric battery within them, with which
they can electrify other animals, and which has beautifully
arranged coils. Whll then, does not that suggest a mind of
which the human mind is almost an image? You know we
are told in a certain book, that is not believed here, that
man was made in the image of God. Now I might go much
further, and speak of things outside this world, the wonderful
arrangements of the heavens, and I understand my opponent
possesses a good deal of knowledge regarding the science
of astronomy. Here may Ibe permitted to say a word
in explanation ? I hope no one will understand that when I
spoke of my opponent’s want of science, I referred to any but
one department of science. In other departments he may, for
anything I know, be a very able man. But to return to our
subject. Herbert Spencer says that “ the assumption of the
existence of a First Cause of the universe is a necessity of
thought,” in other words, that you must believe there is a
first cause, and what can that be but God ? A first cause
which makes contrivances, and which originates rational beings,
must be an Intelligent First Cause. Herbert Spencer
would never commit himself to the position that my opponent
has taken up, freethinker as he is. He would not say that
it is irrational to believe in a God ; all that he does say is
that God is unknowable, that is, that we have no means, no
possibility of knowing God. That is the position that Herbert
Spencer takes up, and those who think like him are called
agnostics ; and most of our sceptical scientific men
in the present day are agnostics. The position of
agnostics like Tyndall and Huxley, and I believe also
Darwin and many men learned in natural science is, that at
present we do not know God. But they are not Atheists ;
they only say we can’t know, while my opponent denies that


God exists at all. Another reason which I have for believing
in God, and which I hope to put before you more forcibly
to-morrow evening, is the existence of the human conscience.
There is a faculty implanted within us, which tells us what
is right and what is wrong, which accuses us when we do
wrong, and which justifies us when we do right. I remember on
one occasion sitting by the deathbed of a poor infidel in Paris,
This poor man had absolutely no religion, and he said to me:
Ever since I have been a little boy I have had, as it were, a
voice within me, saying, Do not do that, when I was going to
do that which was wrong, and I have disobeyed that voice;
and he was disturbed about that on his deathbed. In some
men, of course, the faculty is not so strong as it is in others;
but it exists in all, and it naturally leads us towards the
belief in God. There must, we feel, be a Supreme Conscience
without, to account for the Conscience within. Thus, when
we see injustice and misery prevailing in the world, what are
we to say about it ? The Atheist may say that there is
no God, but his saying that does not cure any of the evil of
the world. But Conscience inclines us to believe in a Supreme
Being, who will make all these things right and restore
the balance of Nature. At present we do not see the
end, but only the beginning; we see things going wrong
in the world, but we do not see them put right, but
it is one of the articles of natural religion that things
eventually will be brought right, because there is a
Supreme Being whose sense of right and wrong corresponds
to that sense of right and wrong which is written in ourselves;
and, therefore, I say that the human conscience witnesses
to the existence of a God. There must be something outside to
correspond with what my conscience tells me inside, and the
only assurance I can have that truth will be found to be eternal,
and that righteousness will be eternal and almighty, and will
in the end prevail is the assurance that a Supreme Being will
take care that it shall be so. When you put all that together it
amounts to this, that there is a supreme being who is the
cause of all things, and who is also the judge of all
the earth, who will eventually right every wrong, and vindicate
every right. I must again repeat what I stated just now.
There is no question here about the God of the Bible, and my


opponent has no right to ask whether the God of the Bible is
this supreme being who is right and just, and who will yet
bring all things right. I should have been ready, had I been
so challenged to vindicate the God of the New Testament, and
the God of the old Testament also, from anything an Atheist
might say against him, but that is not the question this evening.
I will just tell you a short anecdote which seems to me to
illustrate very beautifully what I have been trying to say. I
suppose the general grounds upon which a man would deny
the existence of God, would be that we have not the evidence
of the senses that there is a God, yet how many things do we
believe that we do not see. Here is a parable on this subject
written for children, but it is also good for men. A little insect
called a dragon-fly grub was living at the bottom of a muddy
pond, and this dragon-fly grub got into its head to inquire
what was outside the world, that is the pond in which he
lived. Some of the other dragon-fly grubs laughed at him ;
one positively declared there was nothing ; while others were
interested in the question, and so it was agreed that this
dragon-fly grub should go and ask some one who had been
outside the world. Well, he went to a frog, and the frog told
him there was plenty outside the world, but said the grub would
not understand. “ However,” said the frog, “ I will try to
tell you. In the first place, there is dry land.” What is dry
land ?” asked the grub. “It is something like the mud at the
bottom of this pond,” replied the frog, “ only it’s not wet
because there’s no water.” “ Then what is there ?” “ Why,
there is air.” “And what is air?” “Oh!” said _ the frog,
«it is very hard for me to explain to you what air is. It is
about the nearest thing to nothing at all, that you can think
of. Do you understand ?” The dragon-fly grub did not
understand. So, after a time he crept up to the top of the
pond, promising to come back and tell his companions what
he saw, but no sooner did he get to the top then he fell back
insensible. But the time came when his nature changed, and
he was able no longer to live in the muddy atmosphere of the
pond, and he went out of the water, and his old brown
skin broke, and fell off, and he emerged with a beautiful
pair of wings, and then he saw what was outside the world,
(Applause.)


Mr. Symes rose amidst loud applause, and said:—When I
undergo a change like that dragon-fly grub, if you happen to
be by, I will tell you what changes my mind has undergone.
Until then I don’t anticipate any change such as my oppo-
nent has described; consequently I don’t understand how I
shall feel and think. Before proceeding to criticise the speech
of my opponent, I desire to acknowledge the explanation he
has made respecting personalities. It is perfectly satisfactory,
and I have nothing further to say on the point. My friend
tells you very carefully that the god of the bible is not the
god that is to be discussed here this evening, and yet he
trenched very closely on bringing him in, and told you be would
have been prepared to defend him. Well, he did not fairly
bring him in, and I will leave him alone. He told you that
if Theism is not rational, most people in the world have been
irrational, for the great majority of men have been Theists.
Suppose that is so, it is not a very monstrous conclusion
to come to that most men have been irrational. I rather
thought that was an undoubted fact of experience, that most
men had been irrational on most subjects; and surely it is not
surprising that they should be irrational on this subject of
Theism. Besides, I doubt if the majority of men have been
Theists in the strict sense of the word. I know this, that
mankind have been irrational upon many points. They have
been like the dragon-fly in the crude state, and thought that
heaven was a solid vault. Modern astronomy, however, lias
shown in this respect that the whole of the ancient
world fell into a blunder, and continued in that blunder
for periods that can’t be calculated. So that modern
astronomy has shown that the whole world was
irrational on that point. I think that the argument
from the irrationality of mankind is of small account, and is
answered by this, that mankind has also been irrational on
some other points, and in some as important as this. My
opponent tells you that Atheists are in the minority. We
grant you that we are in the minority. Well, there was a
time when the Christians were in the minority. Was their
system wrong then ? There was a time when Liberals were
in the minority. Were they therefore wrong because they
were in the minority ? Every system that you can name—


its professors and adherents hare at some time been in the
minority. This is true as to astronomy. Copernicus had
the great mass of mankind against him. It is the same with
chemistry and Darwinism, or, as it is called, evolution ; and,
indeed, every system of science and philosophy and religion
has been in the minority for a long period of time ; but that
being so is no argument against its truth. If my opponent
argues that we are in the minority—well, be it so, but we
are not wrong on that account, and by-and-bye, if he only
waits, we may be in the majority ; for everywhere we are
growing in numbers, and most of those who are joining us
are gained from those who once were Theists, but have seen
the error of their ways, and have come over to what they
consider is more rational. We are quite prepared to admit
that the great nations of mankind were believers in deity. Does
my opponent put that forward in favor of one god or of many?
There are no less than thirty or forty millions of gods in India.
Does a belief in these prove the existence of one god or of all ?
does he argue in favor of Polytheism or Theism as he
understands it ? If you are going to argue from the great
nations of the world believing in god, make it plural, and ask
the question, Is it rational to believe in gods, not god ?
Most nations have believed in more than one god, and hence
the argument can be used only in favor of Polytheism.
You might argue the same thing with regard to every
superstition that has ever existed. I suppose there never was
a nation that did not believe in ghosts. Must we therefore
still believe in them—and witches also ? Must we still believe
in them too ? I suppose there never was a people that did
not believe in multitudes of subordinate gods, angels and
devils ; and must we therefore continue to believe as our
fathers did ? because the argument is just as good in favor of
any superstition that you can name as it is in favor of Theism.
There is also Astrology. Most nations have believed in that
false science for hundreds and thousands of years. Must we
still go on believing in Astrology ?—that the planets and
heavenly bodies have an influence for good or evil upon our
destiny and character? I think this argument will prove a
great deal more than Mr. Berry wishes to use it for ; and if
it is used for Theism, it can be used for every other


ancient doctrine he can name. It has never been denied
that there are beings greater, higher and nobler than
ourselves. We don’t say there are such beings ; we don’t
deny ; we leave it an open question. There may be or there
may not be. It is not a question that is involved in Atheism.
And here I complain that my opponent has not given us a
definition of god. He ought to have laid down carefully
what it is we have to prove. Now, my opponent has left us
in the dark as to what he means by god. I don’t say he
should have given us a perfect definition of god ; but there
should have been a definition given that would have served
the purposes of this debate. He ought to have told us
plainly what he was going to prove, but as he has left the
whole thing totally undefined, we are entirely at sea as to
what he means by god; and,therefore, we can only take up the
question in the loose manner in which he lays it before us. There
is no Atheist, no typical Atheist certainly, no intelligent Atheist,
so far as I know, who denies the existence of a god. I will tell
you what some of us Atheists do deny, and that is, the god
shown to us in the bible, say the Christian god. We deny
that in loto, but we do not deny the existence of a god
until we know what is meant by the word. When we have
the term defined, laid out in its various parts, we shall be able to
say whether or not we reject it, we can criticise it, and perhaps
partly deny and partly affirm. I should like my opponent to
give us a definition, and then I will tell him whether
I deny or whether I affirm or accept or deny a part
as the case may be. Here we come to one chief point,,
and I am now really beginning the debate. He says
every effect must have a cause; and I am delighted
to find that my opponent agrees with me on cause and effect,
because that admission is absolutely destructive of the belief
in a god, unless he means one of a series and not a real
beginning. I will put it this way: Every effect must have a
cause, and I thoroughly admit it; but there never was a
cause that was not an effect before it became a cause.
Go back step by step. Suppose we take a thousand out of a
series ; what right have you to stop at any given point
along the whole line and say this is a cause that had
no cause prior to it ? You have no right to stop


there. That cause must have had a cause, as well as the 1
thousand others. A man must not only have had a great
grandfather, but his great grandfather must have had a great
grandfather too; and if you go back as far as you like that is-
equally true. Don’t you see, that the doctrine of cause and
effect is absolutely destructive of the doctrine of a first cause? -
I will undertake to prove against my opponent, if he can
prove a first cause, that there was a first moment.
The one is just as sensible and rational as the other. You go
back to the thousandth step, and you say here is a cause that
had no prior cause. Perhaps you say this is an infinite being. I
care not what you call it. He must have also had a cause,,
according to the doctrine of cause and effect, and if not, it
altogether breaks up the doctrine of cause and effect. He‘told
you there were many things in the world that were not made
by man, and I agree with him ; but I would ask, Were they
made by anyone ? Ido wish that word had been defined.
What do you mean by a thing being made ? Suppose I help
you to come to a conclusion. My coat was made, but the
wool of which it consists was not made ; that grew. The
coat is a manufactured article, but the wool is not; it is a
raw material, a natural product, not a manufactured thing ;
and until you can prove that the wool was made in the same
sense as the coat you have no right to talk of the maker of
that which was not made, but grew; until you can show that
it was made in the way that a man makes a manufactured
article, you can have no logical right to say it was made.
He told you about spines, but he forgot to tell you
there were spines and spines. Some spines are distorted.
Did god make a crooked spine ? and did he know what he
was about when he was making it ? Don’t you see what my
opponent is trying to do ? He is giving you only a partial
statement. He wants you to fix your attention on the good
parts of nature, and omit all the bad parts. Unfortunately
the world is as full of bad as of good things. If we look for
design in one thing, we must look for design everywhere. In
the case of the spine, we are told that all this beautiful
arrangement is to prevent the shock to the brain being too
great in falling and jumping; but suppose in place of
coming down from the platform, I came right down from the


ceiling to the floor, I should get the shock strong enough in
spite of all the things Mr. Berry talked so much about. In
■coming down from the platform I should not perhaps get any
very great shock; but if I were to come down from the
ceiling I should get as much shock with the pads as without
them, and it would then be but a cold consolation to a poor
fellow to tell him about a splendidly arranged spine and fine
padding, erected upon a grand arch, constituted by the legs,
and that the legs were erected upon other grand arches
constituted by the feet, so as to keep him from a shock in
coming down. This doctrine, my friends, won’t bear investi-
gation, especially when you take into consideration that there
are many distorted spines in the world; and then the
question comes, too, who turns out the others if god turns out
the perfect ones ? If he makes one man in this respect strong
and perfect to prevent the shock to his brain and impairment
of his reason, does he make the others imperfect for the purpose
of upsetting their reason altogether ? The argument is as
good in the one case as it is in the other. Then my opponent
told you about the construction of the wings of a bird, and
•sought to show you how grandly they displayed the wisdom
of god; but he forgot to mention the penguin and
some otlier birds that are possessed of wings, and yet are
unable to fly. It appears to me that you must explain these
phenomena in some other way. It won’t do, you see, to say
that god made those wings that are useless to the birds to
enable them to fly. If design is shown anywhere, it must be
everywhere. What could be more admirably adapted to kill
people than yellow fever or an epidemic of any kind ? or a
deluge of water from a water spout ? or the bursting of some
river bank, or the raising up of the sea by a tornado ? and
where is there anything better calculated to destroy vegetation
■than a swarm of locusts ? where is there anything better
calculated to nip the early blossoms than a sharp frost at the
wrong season ? If we look for design in nature, we shall find
ourselves in a difficulty :—we must admit the existence of a
god, who is as evil as he is good. Besides, it seems to me
after all, if it be true that there is some one who makes all
these things, we are landed not in divinity, we only get to a
hig man who is greater and stronger than ourselves.


Suppose he works from design, he must have hopes and fears
as we hare them ; and he has to make his way in the world,
and work out his plans mentally, and then contrive
to put them into execution. All that only proves that
there is one or more than one wiser than we are.
Mr. Berry by his argument has not landed you in
another order of beings, but in the same order of beings as
ourselves. A poor savage can make a boomerang and many
other things ; but he can’t make a steam engine, and he
looks with astonishment at the fact that there is someone who
can make a steam engine or an electrical machine, and sup-
poses it is made by a god. But information reveals to him
the fact that the being who makes these machines is the
same as himself, and belongs to the same race, and has the
same attributes, only more intensified and more developed as
must be the case; and what my opponent has landed us in,
if he has proved his case, is that there is a bigger man than
we who knows more than we, and can do more then we can
do—some one who is stronger and wiser than we are, and
yet not perfectly wise—some one like ourselves, though greater
in his degree. And that is all. My opponent has told you
about the electric eel that is able to give such a shock. I
fancy those who get the shock from it will not praise the
wisdom of the god who made that machine. It is all right
for the eel, no doubt; but what of the animals that became
its prey through the operation of the machine ? I fancy they
would object to the arrangement entirely. And supposing this
being who made it were to come in contact with the creature,,
and he himself were to receive a severe shock, would he not
object to it ? This doctrine requires to be looked at all
round, and we require to put ourselves in the position
of those who suffer, as well as of those who enjoy
the blessings ; and when we put ourselves in that posi-
tion, I fancy our opinions will undergo a considerable change;
and we shall doubt the wisdom of the arrangement that we
formerly admired so, but not now we are in the midst of the
suffering caused by that arrangement. My opponent told
you something about mind. I wish he had told you what it
was. I know nothing of mind except in connection with
matter, with living, beings like myself \ and I very much


doubt if Mr. Berry knows any more. lam here, though, to
learn as well as to teach. I know nothing of mind except as
a series of states of consciousness, perception, feeling, hope,
fear, thought, and the rest of it; that is all I know of mind.
I have never found it in anything except in connection with
organised beings. If it were true that there was a divine
mind, a supreme mind, say, that made an electric machine, or
made the wing of a bird, or anything you like to name, we
must supposs that there is something more than a mind ; for
we have never found a mind alone ; and, therefore, we are
forced to conclude that that mind exists in some brain, in
some animal; and so we are landed in this, that we only find
someone something like ourselves ; we only find an animal
with the same feelings, the same hopes and fears, and fail-
ings, and wants which we ourselves possess. Is that what
he means by god ? If it is not, let him define as clearly as
he can what it is, and then we can say whether we accept his
proposition or reject it.
Mr. Berry said:—My opponent has raised a great many ques-
tions in place of confining himself to one. One important ques-
tion he has raised is the existence of evil in the world, and he
requires that the Theist, one who believes in a God, should
account for the evils that exist—that is for crooked spines
and other examples of suffering and of imperfection;
and lie seems to imply that that nec-ssarily shows that
if there is a God, he must be an imperfect being. It
only shows that this is not a perfect world, and no Theist
maintains that it is so. We don’t see things in perfection
here in this world, and it is because we don’t see them in this
world that we are led onward, to hope, to reason, to infer that
there must be a Supreme agency that will one day set all
these things right. The religion to which I belong
.acknowledges this Supreme Agent. Mr. Symes has com-
plained that I have not defined what I mean by a God.
Neither has he, and lw is just as much bound to define
what he means by not believing in God, as I am to define
what I mean by God. But I thought I had sufficiently
defined a God when I spoke of a First Cause. I quoted
Herbert Spencer, Who says that the assumption of a First
Cause is a necessity of our thought, and I said that this


great First Cause is God. What we are to believe about God
is another matter, but I am willing to offer this as my
definition of God—“A Supreme Being of infinite power,
wisdom, and goodness.” This is the Being in whom my
opponent refuses to believe, because he finds imperfection and
evil existing in the world. But his objection is not valid.
The existence of evil in the world is no doubt a great
mystery, but you don’t make it less a mystery if you take
away God out of the world. You only have an evil world
left, and no good God above it to set it right. You can’t make
evil less, or injustice or suffering less by getting rid of the
Supreme being ; but where the idea of the Supreme being
comes in with the greatest comfort to us, is that we know
there is one who will make it all come right by-and-bye. It
is a comfort for a poor creature like me to be acquainted with
this Supreme being, and to know and believe that he made
me and fashioned me, and that when the appointed time
comes that I must return to the dust, I shall but fall into the
care of one who was before all material things, in whose hand
is my breath, and whose are all my ways. It is a comfort to
believe not only in a Supreme being, but in that supreme God
whom we Christians believe in, and whom we trust as our
heavenly father. You won’t rectify evil by getting rid of the
existence of God. I asserted the other day that there was a
certain natural punishment for drukenness, a punishment
which we call delirium tremens , and I used that argument
because it was said that the God of the Christians
inflicted fiendish punishment upon men. Well, is not
delirium tremens a fiendish punishment ? but you do
not say that a fiendish punishment is inflicted ; you say
it is only the natural consequence of what the man did.
And what, I ask, may be the natural consequences of a lifetime
epent in choosing evil instead of good ? The guilt of such a
life is far greater than the guilt of drunkenness, and therefore
its natural consequences must be worse. But what you call
natural consequences, we call the punishment inflicted by
God. If you deny God, you do not get rid of the punish-
ment. My opponent made a statement about Atheists,
He says they don’t deny the existence of a God. Now
at all events materialist Atheists do, because their assertion


is that there is nothing in the universe that is anything but
mere matter. Something was said about the sequence or
cause and effect. The law is that every effect must have a
cause, and my opponent argues that as you go back each
cause is an effect of an antecedent cause, and that you go
back and back and never get to a first cause. Well, Mr.
Spencer says exactly the opposite of that ; he says that an
uncaused cause is a necessity of our thought; that it is, in fact,
absolutely necessary to believe in some unoriginated r irst
Cause, and the Theist says that that cause is God. Unless
you believe that you must have an everlasting, sequence —that
is, cause and effect going back to all eternity, which to most
minds, including the mind of Mr. Spencer, seems absurd. In
dealing with these metaphysical subjects we get to the verge
of our intelligence, and we may be involved in contradictions
and not know in what to believe; but my opponent is not
correct in saying that all causes must have causes, for still theio
is a first cause, that is, one that proceeded all the effects that
followed it. My opponent said that certain things were said to
be made that were not really made but grew, and it reminded
me of the story of Topsy, in “ Uncle Tom’s Cabin, ’ who said,
« I ’specks I grow’d.” That seems to be the theory chiefly
favoured by my opponent. I could hardly believe my ears
when my opponent asserted that what I had proved was not
the existence of God, but the existence of “ a big man, that is
to say, of a being higher than man, but still like man. j u
granting the works of such a being are found in the world he
has granted the existence of a God of some sort. Well,
then, he would say you are a Polytheist, and I do certainly
say that Polytheism is more rational than Atheism;
and in saying this I am backed up by no less a thinker than
John Stuart Mill, who, in his essays on Theism asserts niuch
the same thing. At all events, the most irrational position
of all is Atheism. Search the history of the world and see
if you can find that Atheists have done anything for
humanity. I think the people who have done something in
this direction —even the poor Egyptians who worshipped goats
.are more rational than they, and have proved it by having
done something for humanity. I would just like to add a
short story. An astronomer who was an Atheist, was invited


by a friend to come and see an orrery, which is a kind of
working model, showing the motions of the planets round
the sun. After admiring the ingenious machine, the astro-
nomer asked, “ Who is the maker ?” “ There is no maker,"
said his friend; “itis a fortuitous concourse of atoms.” The
Atheist felt rebuked, and it was right that he should be
rebuked.
Mr. Symes then rose and said The misfortune is that
there is no resemblance between the universe and the orrery.
The universe is not a machine. My opponent told you in his
first speech that conscience was one of the proofs he had of
the existence of a god. Unfortunately the conscience is not
uniform. Sometimes it tells you to do what at other times it
tells you not to do. We find that there is in different places
and countries, and in different periods of the world’s history,
the greatest diversity of moral opinion. Our forefathers, for
instance, thought it was quite right to burn people for witch-
craft; and yet the conscience of those people was no doubt as
strong and active as ours. And it is strange that conscience
has been pleaded in hundreds and hundreds of cases as the
occasion of the greatest crimes that have been committed in
the history of the world; and that must show, if it shows
that there is a god, that he is an immoral god, becauses he
incites people to commit crimes under the influence
of conscience. My opponent spoke of there being
so much wrong in the world. How came it into
a world created by a perfect god ? My opponent tells
you that there is a perfect god, and yet an imperfect world,
and I say that a perfect god never made this world; that it
is an utter impossibility that a perfect being should make an
imperfect thing. It is an inconceivability. The god who
made this world, supposing it was made, was more foolish
than wise, for there are more evil things than good things in
the world ; and it seems to me that the hope and comfort
which my opponent spoke about, as existing in the belief in
a god, and that he would yet put all wrong right, is the
most irrational hope you can possibly conceive. It seems very
much like asserting that a being who has done wrong all his
life will put everything right hereafter. That seems to be
one of the most comical arguments I ever heard. If your
B


neighbor has been a bad liver for years and years, you would
not trust him with five shillings, because he had not been
trustworthy in the past. Do you expect because people have
been rogues all their lives that they will be honest hereafter ?
And yet that is just parallel with this argument, that there
is a god who will undo every wrong that he has done in
the world, and make all things right. This sort of argument
won’t bear investigation. I should argue thus : That god
who has made this world as it is, and ruled it as he has ruled
it, will keep on so for all time ; as he has been capricious till
now, so he will be capricious in future; and as this world has
been a mixture of good and evil heretofore, so it will be for
ever and ever. Some people tell you that evil is decreasing, but
evil grows side by side with good, and though in some cases
the good preponderates, yet, if a balance were struck, I
think you would find that there is more evil in the world than
good. "And Herbert Spencer certainly seems to believe so.
That shows either that the creator had the power to make
everything good, and did not use it, or that he had not the
power, and, therefore, was not a perfect being. My opponent
told us that god was perfect, and he also told us he was the
first cause, and he thinks it is more rational to believe in a
first cause than in an eternal series of causes. John Stuart
Mill is as great an authority as Herbert Spencer, and here is
what he says:—“ The cause of every change is a prior change;
and such it cannot but be; for if there were no new ante-
cedent, there would be no new consequent. If the state of
facts which brings the phenomenon into existence, had existed
always, or for an indefinite duration, the effect also would
have existed always or been produced an indefinite time ago.
It is thus a necessary part of the fact of causation, within the
sphere of experience, that the causes as well as the effects had
a beginning in time, and were themselves caused. It would
seem, therefore, that our experience, instead of furnishing an
argument for a first cause, is repugnant to it, and that the
very essence of causation as it exists within the limits of our
knowledge, is incompatible with a first cause.” So you see,
my friends, we can quote one philosopher against another.
My opponent and others wish you to suppose that in
going back through the chain of causes and effects, you


abruptly come to one cause, which never was an effect.
You are told suddenly to stop here; you are not
to continue your flight further, and you are to take it for
granted that this is the first cause. Yet this destroys the
doctrine of cause and effect, for, in point of fact, you may
stop in one place as well as another. The only rational con-
clusion we can come to is that that which is a cause to-day was
an effect yesterday, and so on through eternity. We can’t grip
eternity, but that is the only rational conclusion we can come
to, and I can give you an exact parallel in regard to time.
My opponent won’t say that time had a beginning. I don’t
say it had not a beginning as to measurement, but the
duration must have been eternal. There never was a first, a
middle, or a last moment which was not preceded or followed
by another; and just so is it in cause and effect. Though
we cannot measure it, it must be looked upon as eternal, for
that is the only rational conclusion we can come to, just as
in time or duration. When he speaks of there being a punish-
ment in nature I think he has forgotton about nine-tenths of
the argument. What do you mean by it ? If we rightly
interpret the argument, an injury done to an innocent person
is not a punishment. If, for instance, some big man should
go and knock down a little child and break its leg, would you not
say that was a wanton outrage, and not a punishment ? But
if a man struck you and you hit him back, that would be
punishment; and if the policeman came and arrested
the offending party, and he were sent to prison, that
would be a punishment. Now let us see about delirium tremens.
If a man goes in for drunkenness and gets delirium tremens ,
that is a punishment for a sin; but suppose a barbarian made
his child drunk every day, in time that child would be smitten
with delirium tremens ; but would that be a punishment? Nature
cannot distinguish between crime and accident. If a man
falls into the water and is drowned, that is an accident;
but suppose a person jumps in with the intention of drowning
himself, we call that suicide. But suppose anyone were
picked up by a third party and pitched into the water and
drowned, we should call that a crime. Yet nature does not
distinguish between the three of them ; she drowns them all
just as if they were all equally guilty. I lay it down as a


broad proposition that nature, outside of society, does not
recognise any distinction between moral right and moral
wrong ; and we can only conclude that, if there be a
god who created nature, and if nature be an exponent of god r
he is equally indifferent to right and wrong ; and perhaps
that explains how it is that the earth is so bad as it is. My
opponent says that the materialistic Atheist denies the
existence of god, because he denies everything except matter.
We believe in both matter and force, and, of course the
phenomena which spring out of these two. If you tell us
there is a spirit, we say we can form no conception of what
you mean until you explain what it is. We only say we
know nothing about it, though we do undertake to criticise what
you say, and sometimes we undertake to show that you are
as much in the dark regarding it as we are. We don’t
deny the existence of spirit, simply because we don’t
know what it is. If it is not matter, and if it is
not force, we don’t know what it is ; but the moment you
begin to explain, when you define what you are explaining,
we can take up your proposition and deny or admit it, or
criticise what you say with regard to spirit and god, but we
don’t undertake to deny until you tell us what you mean.
But as my opponent has told us that he believes god to be
the first cause and a perfectly good god, I deny that in toto.
Mr. Berry said: —My opponent has dwelt for a long time on
the fact of the imperfections of the world as being a conclusive
argument aginst a Supreme being. That is, I think, entirely
inconclusive. You would not say that because a building is un-
finished, therefore the architect knew nothing about his work.
We only see things at present in a preparatory state. We
see a great many things that we don’t understand. The
origin of evil is a mystery that we do not understand. But to
argue about what can be and what must be, when we do not
see the end or the beginning, but have only a very small
and fragmentary knowledge of things, must be a mistake. The
religion to which I belong gives us at least a partial answer
to such questions as my opponent has raised. He has told
us about the imperfections of nature and about suffering,
and many tilings that are wrong. But the Bible account
of what God is gives an answer to all that. It tells us that


there is a Supreme being, the Creator of all things, and it tells
us about evil coming into the world, and holds out a promise of
a time when the kingdom of God shall be established upon the
earth. As yet the world is like a province in a state of anarchy
not yet brought into order. But because a new country is not yet
civilised ; because a rebellious province is not brought into
obedience to the government, would you say that the
government is unjust ? We think that we shall one day get
the whole of the Australian continent into order and proper
cultivation, but a great deal of it is very much out of order
still ; there is a great deal that is yet wild bush and not
habitable ; but it is a matter of progress that will come in due
time. We look forward to bringing it all into some sort of
order some day. Don’t you see then, that while you are
reasoning about these things not being complete, and finding
fault with the author or maker of them, you must be
making a mistake ? Now I should be very sorry indeed, if I
had led you to suppose that I had yet brought forward my
strongest argument for believing in a God. I don’t believe
that the existence of God can be proved, I mean in the same
scientific way as you can prove things by experiments. I
believe that we can only certainly know of the existence of
God by a revelation from himself. Many philosophers have
I know, held the contrary. In the beginning of the 17th
century there came the French philosopher, Descartes, who
thought that the existence of God could be proved from the
consciousness of man, but afterwards Kant showed that
Descartes would not have had a notion of God unless
it had been got antecedently. Some have held that it could
be proved, and some have held the reverse; and I know that
the opinion of some of the infidel philosophers is that you
cannot know of the existence of God. Well I hope to dwell
more fully to-morrow night on the Christians’ reasons for
believing in God. It is not by searching that we can find
out the Almighty to perfection. My opponent spoke of
coming up abruptly against the First Cause, an expression
sufficiently absurd to refute itself. My opponent made
you a promise that when his time came to go through
that change that must come to all, he would let you know
what he saw and felt. In the story I told you the dragon


fly grub made the same promise. He said he would come
back and tell them what he saw, so they waited but he did
not come back, and some said that he had forgotten them,
and some thought that he had gone out of existence
altogether, and they were all disappointed because he could
not get back and tell them; but what happened to
him was this, when he did get his dragon-fly wings, and
saw what there was outside the pond which to him had been
the world, he resolved to go back to his friends, but he found
it as impossible for him to descend now, as it was impossible
for him to ascend before. There was a great gulf fixed
between him and them, and it was not until they also went
through that change that they knew from observation what
there was outside the world, and so it will be with us, my friends.
Speaking of things which we can’t see, and yet which we
must believe in on the principle that every effect must have a
cause, we know that both in science and practical life that
is a most essential postulate. I remember once being invited
to dinner by a friend of mine, who was an agnostic. I wrote
to him about God and his soul, and I thought I should have
offended him ; but he wrote back and said, don’t think I am
offended, for I am never offended at what any man tells me
about the Unknown, and he asked me to come and talk matters
over with him. He telegraphed me to come and we dined
together, and discussed great subjects, and hammered at one
another’s heads for a long time without making any impression.
At last I said, you won’t believe anything unless you have the
evidence of the senses. On your principle I ought never to
have come on your invitation. The telegram was not in
your handwriting, and I could not see that it was
from you, and I never ought to have been here at all.
So you see that in practical affairs it is necessary to postulate
things that can’t be shown by the senses. Men of science,
men versed in the science of astronomy, tell us there is a
substance which pervades all nature, and which is yet perfectly
intangible. They call it Ether. The force which attracts the
earth to the sun, must have a medium to work through, and
this medium is the Ether. It can’t be seen either by the
telescope or by the microscope, and yet it must be an
immensely mighty thing, because it is the medium of that


force which keeps the earth working in a regular course round
the sun. "Wh are also told tliat it is that which causes light,
and so you see the universe is pervaded by a mighty substance
which cannot be ascertained by experiment, and there are
phenomena which can only be accounted for in this way.
Is that not like the belief in God, the belief in a being who
can’t be appreciated through the senses and yet who must
exist, because of the effects which can only be produced, I will
not say by Almighty power, but still by a power which practi-
cally is Almighty, a power which ranges through boundless
regions of space, but which yet is unseen. That, power is the
power of the Deity.
Mr. Symes said : —I may as well say at once that much of
what my opponent has said is founded in a fallacy. W e don t
refuse to believe what we cannot feel or see or hear ; we have
too much common sense for that. W e not only believe
these things that are recognised by the senses, but we believe
everything else that can be proved by rational means. Wdien
my opponent talks about a power that pervades the universe,
I shall have to agree with him; but then I say that is not
god. As to divine personality, I don’t know what that is,
but I want to know to-morrow evening. I can only under-
stand a being like myself with blood and with biain, and
constituted in all essential particulars like myself; and that
being cannot be perfect, and cannot pervade all space, and
cannot be that god which the Christians preach, or a spiritual
god, for a person never yet was purely spiritual. My opponent
told us that Theists had done much more than Atheists for
the human race. He ought to have told you that Atheists
had never yet won the right to live. He ought to have told
you that every species of tyranny had been invented and
brought to bear to prevent Atheism spreading in the world.
Now, in the face of these facts, I think it does not become
my opponent, speaking for those people who don’t wish
Atheists to live, to complain that these people have not done
more for mankind, especially when he reflects that his party
have not yet given us the right to live. But we now
demand it, and we mean to win it. In his last speech my
opponent said that it was wrong to judge god by this world,
because it was unfinished, just like an unfinished house.


Then what right had he to put mankind into an
unfinished house ? A father on this earth would not do so
to his child; and, besides, it is contradicting the bible,
for that tells us, in the second chapter of Genesis,
that “ thus were the heavens and the earth finished, and all
the host of them and in another part we are told that god
saw everything that he had made, and behold it was very good.
My opponent does not deny that there are bad things in the
world, but he says the work is so unfinished that we have no
right to speak of the ultimate upshot. That is just what
they have been dogmatising upon. They have been taking
this world that is going to be finished, I don’t know when,
and have dogmatised and preached a god ; and yet they
refuse to allow you to preach to the contrary without roasting
you or sending you to prison ! Now we don’t pretend to
know how the world began. It is rather too big a problem
for us, and we find that it is equally so for them. We can
criticise what they say, though we cannot tell how the world
began. And if they could, there is another problem and still
another running through all eternity, which the human mind
cannot grasp or formulate in any absolute theory. When my
opponent says that we should not speak in these words, but
should treat the idea in a different way, 1 throw down the
gauntlet. We say we don’t know how the universe was
created, and neither do you, and we challenge you to give
a rational account of it. My opponent told you in his first
speech that he was not going to discuss the god of the bible, and
then in his last speech he brought him in. My opponent tells you
that the world is in a state of anarchy. Well, that shows the
incapacity of its maker and ruler; it shows that the divine
ruler is not competent for the work he has undertaken, as he
has allowed the world to get into a state of anarchy. That is
just the reason why we want to dethrone this divine ruler,
and put something better in his stead. And how my friend
can argue that this divine ruler, who has allowed his farces to
get into this confusion, is going to do better in the future I
can’t understand. He has been ruling this world according
to bible chronology for 6,000 years, and the Pope tells us that
things in the present day are going from had to worse—that
they are worse now than they were in the heathen world; and


how, then, are things that are always going from bad to worse
to be righted by a god who has allowed them to get into this
confusion ? My opponent says that Australia is not yet in a
proper condition to live in. Is that not of blasphemy ? Here
is the work of god, and a Theist is criticising it; and not
only so, he has condemned it. I presume god made Aus-
tralia; yet he says it is in parts unfit for people to live in,
and that touches a most important point, which I must dwell
upon for a moment. The world as god left it is unfit to
live in. It is so full of evil that god has been trying
to kill mankind from the first until now, and it
is only by dodging that we can escape. To what do we
owe the preservation of our life ? Take any great
nation ; what do they owe their greatness to? Not to god’s
goodness, but to their own brains, their own hands. What is
civilisation but putting the world right, which god had left
wrong ? making that fit to dwell in which you could not have
dwelt in without that civilisation ? And I will tell you where
the fallacy of the Theist comes in. He looks abroad in nature
in its naked bareness and unfitness for human beings to live
in ; but he feels comfortable with those clothes upon him that
god did not give him ; and feels comfortable after he has
taken food that human industry has given him ; and then he
thanks god for what man has bestowed upon him. He finds
this place a tolerable place for him to live in, and thanks god
for what he has done for him. If civilisation could be wiped
out so that man could be left as god made him, what would
be the result? Decimation. Yes! in less than a fortnight
not more than one in a hundred of the human race would be
alive. Then you would understand what sort of a it is
who has made this world ! You would understand that it is
much more rational to be an Atheist, or even to say that
there is no god, than that there is a foolish and incapable
one, who has created so many evils that he does not seem to
care to remove. I say it is more rational to believe in
Atheism and take that standpoint than the Theistic one.
Mr. Berry asks what you would gain by going to Atheism ?
j will tell you what—You lose all the heartbreak over this
od, Is not that something ? If I meet with an accident I
n V ay regret it; but there is no indignation, there is no anger.


If I break my leg I have all the pain to suffer ; but
if somebody else breaks it for me, there is the sense
of injustice, there is anger. Look at the universe with-
out a god and there is no crime in it, except what man
commits. Look at the universe as the creation of god, as
that which god governs, and it becomes a gigantic crime.
There is a great difference between the two. We get rid of
that which outrages our best thoughts, our noblest feelings.
Some people fancy we are bad because we don’t think as they
do. I myself was a Theist; no one indeed more so than I
was; but I say that the noblest feelings, as far as sentiment
goes—l speak now not of the intellectual reasons for being
an Atheist—but the noblest sentiments known to mankind
made me an Atheist and keeps me so.
A vote of thanks to the chairman terminated the third
night’s debate.
FOURHT NIGHT.
The fourth night’s debate between Mr. Joseph Symes and
the Rev. D. M. Berry, took place in the Hall of Science, on
Friday 27th June, and there was again a very large attendance.
Mr. Smith being in the chair.
Mr. Berry said :—Last night I called upon my opponent
to show from history the reasonableness of Atheism, by
adducing examples of Atheists who had materially helped the
progress of Society. He did not respond to that appeal ; he
did not produce any examples of any great work that’had been
done by Atheists ; but he made great promises for the future,
promises that reminded me of a story in an American book
of a young man who used to tell his mother a great deal
about what he was going to do, to which she replied, I am
glad to hear about it Sam ; but I’d a good deal sooner see
it. It was asserted last night that Atheists were not allowed
to live under the laws of our country. I was a little puzzled
to know what this meant, but I am glad to see that it does not
mean anything very serious, for my opponent is still with us


in good liealtli, as well as a number of bis friends. There was-
something said about the roasting of Atheists. lam a little
sceptical about this, and I should like some historical person
brought forward as a witness of it, I have heard of cold
boiled missionary, and of some savages who had tasted that
delicacy, but I think it would be difficult to find any one
who had tasted roast Atheist. Two admissions were
made by my opponent. He admitted that it would be
foolish not to believe in God, merely on the ground that
we cannot see him, that is to say, that it would be irrational
to believe nothing but what we could see. This was an
important admission, because it removed one ground against
which I had been directing my attack. Again, he said the
arguments I had used proved the existence of a big man,
that is of a being of superior power to man, and yet
working as a man would work in the way of contrivance and
design. If this is proved by anything I said last night, then
the whole question is given up in favour of Theism. If there
is a being who is superior to man, then that being is the one
we postulate as God ; and if I proved anything, I proved that
this being is the maker of man, and the fact that he works in
the same way as a man would work —for example in that
contrivance for the preservation of the brain —does it not look
like what is said in a certain book about God making man in
his own image ? It is true that my opponent could
not conceive of the mind even of a God working without
the instrument of a brain ; but surely it is not
reasonable to maintain that because we have never seen such
a thing that therefore the thing is inconceivable—indeed we
often conceive of our own minds without at the same time-
recollecting anything about the instrument through which
they work, and we regard ourselves as something apart
altogether from our material organism. This is an important
admission, aad I might say he had virtually given up his-
ground of atheism, but I don’t insist upon it; because
I believe that when he challenged me to argue on the-
existence of a God, what he had in his mind was the-
God whom we acknowledge, that is to say a Supreme
being of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness ; and
it is this being that he says he can’t believe in. Last night


lie gave us his reasons, and they were these:—They were
based upon the impossibility of believing in such a being when
we consider the imperfection and the evil which exists in the
world. I could not help being touched by some remarks
which fell from my opponent last night, when he reminded us
that he himself had once been a believer in God, but had
given up his belief under the pressure of this terrible fact of
the abounding evil which exists in the world. He said he
had given up belief from the very best kind of feelings, and I
iully give him credit for possessing these feelings. I know
what are the feelings of a young man, and especially of a
young minister when he first comes in contact with the
prevailing evils of the world, when he has to go as I have
gone into the worst places of a great city. I have felt as
I walked home that it would be a relief to me to throw myself
under the wheel of an approaching tramcar, but still I cannot
see why that should be any reason for people giving up a belief
in a God of infinite power and wisdom and goodness. I think
my opponent spoke of the manifest imperfection of the world
a ; s tending to show that there was an imperfct God, and that
'Civilization was man’s effort to correct the faults of the
Creator, and he said that Australia being largely unfit for
human habitation could not have been made by a perfect God.
Well there are two kinds of evil and imperfection in the
world, material evil and imperfection and moral evil and im-
perfection. The first of these is not a serious difficulty. Surely
it cannot be said that because a country is not fully prepared
foi settlement, therefore it could not have been made by a
perfect God. Surely man cannot expect the Creator to do
everything for him—to plant his garden, build and furnish his
house, and put food on his table! God made man’s hands, and
•surely they were made to do something with for himself;
therefore I will not dwell longer on the subject of material
imperfection in nature. But a far more difficult thing
is the existence of moral evil, which my opponent says
drove him into Atheism. Now I wish to approach the
■question of moral evil with tare, and to show you what
account of it is given in the Bible, and now I am
going to speak of the God of the Bible. The question
between us was not one of a belief in the God of the Bible,


but between belief in any God and belief in no God at all;
but I, holding the position of a believer in the God of the
Bible, have a right enter upon the Bible teaching on this
subject; because if I can prove that it is reasonable to believe
in the God of the Bible, I shall have proved that it is
rational to believe in a God. My opponent, of course, will
also have a right to follow me into this field of controversy,
and criticise what I say. The question, then, is How could an
infinitely good God have permitted evil to exist even
for a time ? How does the Bible answer this question ?
What account is given of the nature and origin of
moral evil ? It does not fully explain this great subject, but it
throws a considerable amount of light upon it. The Bible
account of the origin of moral evil, or sin, is this, that it
consists of the abuse of free-will or moral choice—when a
creature endowed with the power of choice chooses to please
himself instead of his Creator. That which makes the dignity
of man superior to that of all animals is, that which is called
free will, but which I call moral choice, that is the power of
choosing to do good or evil. Let us suppose that a watch-
maker makes a perfect watch that obeys him, so that it will
go to a minute in the way he wants it. Yet the obedience
of the watch has no moral value, because the watch has no
consciousness and there is no possibility of its doing otherwise.
But suppose the watchmaker has a dog, and that dog is
obedient to its master, the obedience of the dog is of a
higher kind than that of the watch, because it is the
obedience of a conscious creature. But take a higher case
still. Suppose the watchmaker has a little child that is
obedient, then that obedience of the child is of the highest
kind, because it is the willing obedience of love. It is
one of the“most beautiful things in nature. And what is
it that constitutes the beauty and admirableness of the child’s
obedience ? It is this, that the child has the power of dis-
obeying, the power of choosing to disobey, and that is what I
call the power of moral choice, Now you will see that this
implies the existence of a temptation to disobey. There is no
possibility of goodness, real moral goodness, in the world,,
without at the same time, the possibility of moral evil ; because
a being that is capable of being morally good, is capable also


of choosing to be the reverse. I will give you an example of
this from one particular kind of virtue, the obedience to
constituted authority. We do admire obedience to consti-
tuted authority and to sense of duty. It is heroism in
our soldiers, who, at the command of the general, advance
often to death for their country. There the temptation to
disobey is of the strongest kind, and therefore, for that very
reason, we admire the heroism of obedience. You all remember
those magnificent liness of Tennyson :
Forward the light brigade !
Was there a man dismayed ?
Not, though the soldiers knew
Some one had blundered.
Theirs not to make reply;
Theirs not to reason why;
Theirs but to do and die;
Into the Valley of Death
Eode the Six Hundred.
You see that our admiration for the conduct of the
Six Hundred is because of the difficulty that they had in
carrying out the heroic virtue which was in this case implicit
obedience. It is the same with regard to other moral virtues.
You can’t conceive of moral virtue without conceiving also of
moral evil. What does the Bible teach us of the way in
which moral evil came into the world? It teaches us that it
began as far as man is concerned, with man choosing to take
a certain pleasure? which was forbidden by his Maker, par-
taking of a certain fruit. You may call it literal of figurative,
whichever you like. The question is, Why was not that
fruit put out of his reach? Don’t you see that if it had been
jmt out of his reach, true moral obedience would have been
made as impossible as disobedience? You can’t have virtue
unless you have the possibility of sin. But it may be
objected that a God of infinite goodness might have
prevented this evil in some way. Knowing all the
consequences, the six thousand years of misery growing
out of that sin, would not a being of perfect wisdom and
goodness have prevented this? Well, here we are not
allowed to penetrate further into the mystery, A complete
answer is not given to us, but we are told this—that a
being of infinite wisdom and goodness is working, and has


been working, and will work, until out of this evil is brought
a good so infinite that the evil itself shall be swallowed up as
a drop is swallowed up in the ocean. That is the
teaching of the scriptures, and that ought to be
sufficient to a rational man. Is not this the declaration
that is held out to us at the close of the Revelation
—“ And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor
crying; neither shall there be any more pain.” This is the
end, and now I assert further, that if you take the Bible and
read it from the first chapter to the last, and examine God’s
dealings with man; if you only examine carefully, you will
perceive that there you have God doing the best
thing that could be done for man, leaving him at the same
time his freedom of will, that moral choice which must never
be interfered with. If he goes wrong he must be corrected,
not by force, but by his being converted to a correct moral
choice by his will being brought into harmony with the will
of his Creator; and I should be prepared to maintain that in
the whole of the scriptures we have nothing but this, God
bringing man to moral virtue in the best way possible, and not
by force, and doing everything possible in the nature of things
for the salvation of man. lam aware that lam opening up a
wide field of controversy, and I expect I shall be asked many
things in the Old and New Testament, which my opponent
regards as totally at variance with that statement; but I will
ask him to forbear doing so this evening. I mean to have it
out with him by-and-bye, and I only ask him now to forbear
because of the impossibility of goinginto the subject, otherwise
there is nothing I should like better. It is the most important
part of my life-work to show my fellow creatures that this is
so. And lam prepared to take any part of the Old or New
Testament and examine it fairly with him. I hope before
long that you will see an article in the Liberator on that
subject that was brought up about stoning the man for picking
up sticks on a Sunday, and I will show that you might just
as well question all our penal laws as accuse that. I will now
speak very briefly of the New Testament, of what is the
teaching of the New Testament as to His work for man.
The New Testament shows God coming into the world
as man, limiting himself to human power, and to human


intelligence, and going as a working man among
working men. Does not that mean sympathy ? It
is true that God does not explain the cause of moral
evil and the misery that abounds in the world; but we
see the manifest sympathy that is shown by his coming into
the world, and how that sympathy is carried out in the
human life of incarnate God in his dealings with publicans
and sinners. Going to them, and sitting down with them as
the Pharisees would not do. You see it in his dealings with
little children, and if he was stern at all, it was to the hypo-
crites, those men who professed to be godly men, when they
were the very reverse, and used their enlightenment with regard
to the law to impose upon their fellow creatures. These men
he denounced. But he was the same who took little children
in his arms, and said, Suffer them to come unto me. Look
again, and see this Christ crucified on the cross between two
malefactors. One of these men seems to have taken the same
view of the universe that my opponent now does. He can’t see
that suffering can be consistent with a good God and a good
Christ, and he feels the evil in its most terrible form, and in
his anguish he cries out, If thou be Christ, save thyself and
us. The other is different. He is nailed to the cross. But
he believes somehow that things will be right in the end, and
that he who will set them right is that man who is crucified
between them. And so he appeals to him. He feels sure
that Christ will not be annihilated by death ; but he appeals
to him, to remember him when His own time of
triumph and glory comes—“ Lord remember me -when
thou comest into thy* kingdom.” And the answer
is not “ By-and-bye will I remember you;” but “ To-day
shalt thou be with me in Paradise,” and that word
Paiadise signifies what we had at the beginning, a
world perfect, as it came from the hands of its Maker. My
opponent made a point when he said that I contradicted the
Bible in comparing the world to an unfinished building, and
he was quite right. What I was thinking of was not the
first book of the Bible, but the last, which tells us of the
completion of God’s purposes, when there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow nor crying, for the former things shall
have passed away.


Mr. Symes said :—I am pleased to find my opponent in
such a good humour as to get off a joke in opening his address.
That is just what I like in an opponent. He said I did not
show anything that Atheists had done ; and he also said that
he does not know of any laws that forbid us to live. W hat
of the blasphemy laws ? Does he know that these exist, and
that they were made by his own party ; and that even during
the past few weeks certain people have been clamouring that they
should be put in execution against us ? The very fact that
these laws exist, shows that I am now doing an illegal thing
in opposing my opponent. I can’t go a single step in
answering him without committing blasphemy, and a police-
can arrest me, or I can be prosecuted. The law is not
against Mr. Berry, but it is against me. Every force that
you can name has been brought to bear against Atheism,,
against what is called blasphemy, against what has been termed
heresy, and it is only within the last few years that people
have been allowed to propagate Atheistical opinions ; and I
say therefore that you have no more right to ask what
Atheism has done, than to ask what Christianity had done
twenty years after it started. You must give us time, that is
all we want. But I will tell you one or two very good things
we have done. The long and short of it is (when you speak
you should speak in accord with common sense), in business,,
in civil engineering, in chemistry, in navigating seas, you must
just act as if there were no god at all ; and that is practical
Atheism. My friend, I am sure, would much prefer to.
take passage in a vessel that was classed A 1 at Lloyd s rather
than in one that was not, though he does believe in almighty
god ; and in this respect he is an Atheist practically, just as
much as I am. Though he might pray before he went to
sea, he would take care to look out for a first-class vessel
and there you see the same sort of Atheism coming out in a
still more practical form. If my opponent were building a
church to preach in, he would not think it complete without a
lightning rod up the steeple ; and a greater act of downright
Atheism you can’t conceive. They cannot trust god with his
own thunderbolt now ! There is another point I should like
to note, viz., in proportion as people have forgotten god, ami
thought about the things of the world, in exactly the same
c


proportion have they progressed. That is how the world lias
advanced hitherto ; and I argue that, if god were forgotten
altogether, the world would get on much better. That is
perfectly philosophical. In proportion as people worship god
so does civilisation go back ; and in proportion as they only
employ religion as a pastime, so does civilisation go ahead.
I therefore argue that if worship and god were banished
entirely from man’s thoughts, the world would progress much
faster than it does at present. Another thing is this, that as
Atheists we lose all thought of crime in nature, and that is
one of the greatest advantages, as far as emotions go.
Atheism destroys the fear of death. I don’t mean the.natural
fear. You know that the fear of death is two fold. There
is the natural dread of it which every living being has, and
probably no individual could live without it, certainly the
race could not survive without it. The fear that I mean is a
theological fear, a fear, of something after death, of meeting
with some grim monster who will plunge you into eternal
misery hereafter. For us all the bug-bears in connection with
death are absolutely destroyed. The Atheist has no fear of
death, no fear about the hereafter. He looks calmly at it, and
does not shrink. It is only the believer that can have fear of
what may come after death. Another thing Atheism does, and
I don’t think anyone will deny:—As long as we are religious
we are split up into creeds and parties, hating each other, and
persecuting each other, when we get the opportunity ; but we
Atheists do not care what opinions you hold if your life is
good. lam glad to shake hands with the orthodox man, as
well as anyone else, but he always feels a shrinking from me,
because I don’t agree with him on points of doctrine. My
life may be just as pure as his, yet he shrinks from me because
Ido not hold his creed. I don’t shrink from him on any such
account. I say that, if Theism were to cease, persecution
would cease ; and people would understand that creeds were
matters of absolute indifference, and they would try to under-
stand as much of what was a benefit to themselves as
they could—try to progress in civilisation, and morality,
instead of wasting their strength on those things they don’t
understand, and must quarrel about in proportion as thev
think of them. My opponent told you that I had admitted


last night he had proved a big man. He should know that I
only put it hypothetically. What I said was that, if he had
proved anything, he had only proved a big man. Then he
contended that god’s mind might exist without a brain. But
if so, it is not what we understand by the word mind. \ou
have no right to juggle with words in that fashion. If you
really mean mind, it must be something i» connection with
an organised being. Let us know what you mean, so that
we may know what we are fighting, if we do fight. He told
you last night that I had no right to discuss the bible. Well,
I did not until he led me into it, and I was quite willing that
he should omit all mention of the bihle, although I knew
that he was a biblicist and thought he would bring it in. I
did think, however, that the discussion would be distinct from
mere beliefs, and that the subject would be discussed on the
broad grounds of philosophy and science, and quite apart
from tlie bible. My opponent also made a mistake on
another point. He spoke of my having given up my
belief in god on account of emotions. That was only
one side of the case. I told you I grew out of Theism
intellectually before I grew out of it morally—l use
this expression in its broadest sense. I grew out of
all intellectual belief in god, before I was prepared to say that
man could do without a god, so far as sentiment went. But
so far as that half of the question is concerned, it was the
best and noblest feelings that man can entertain, that made
me an Atheist. My opponent tells you that the existence of
evil is no real objection to the existence* of an infinitely good
and wise god. Let us test that. If a man knows there is
an evil, whether moral or physical—l don’t care which way
you put it, the worse you make it, the stronger the reason I
am going to enforce—l say, that if a man knows there is an
evil worth mentioning, an evil he does not remove if he gets
the chance, he is notja good Jman. I say that a good man
removes evil and prevents it too, in the exact proportion of
his knowledge and power. Does any one call that in question ?
Well, suppose my opponent to be a good man, and removes
evil to the full extent of his power —that shows him to be a
a good man. But suppose that to-morrow, his power to
remove evil were doubled, and he still removed no more than


lie had done before. I should be entitled to say that he was
not so good as he was ; for unless his removal of evil grows
in the same ratio as his power, you would have the
right to say that he was growing morally worse, that he was
not so good as when you first started with him. Now carry
that out until you come to infinite power and wisdom, and
what will there be ?—will there be one evil left in the world ?
Infinite power and infinite knowledge must remove every evil,
if backed up by infinite goodness. You might as well tell me
there was darkness when infinite light existed—l should
believe that just as soon as that infinite goodness and evil, to
any extent you please to name, could exist together. These
propositions would naturally contradict each other. If evil exists,
then infinite goodness does not. When my opponent told
you that god could not be expected to make countries, and to
plant gardens for us, surely he must have forgotten his bible
once more ! Why, that is the very first thing you are told of
in the creation of man. We are told that god planted a
garden—the very thing Mr. Berry says we have no right to
expect him to do —and he put man into it. That is just what
a good father would have done ; but to bring people into a
world that was unfinished, a world that was not fit for them to
live in—that is not the act of a good being—to put people into a
world that must necessarily kill off most that are born in it;
not only human beings but animals into the bargain; a world
whose evils would decimate mankind but for their own efforts:
This is the work not of a father, it is the work of a fiend! it
is not the work of a good god as my opponent is contending
for. He spoke of moral evil, but I doubt if he can define it;
it is not easy. Then he went on to speak of creatures
endowed with moral choice, and said that evil consists in
this, that people who have this moral choice prefer to please
themselves rather than god. Well, I don't see anything
wrong in that. Does god not please himself in making man?
Then, surely, he cannot do less than allow us to please our-
selves after having made us. If he will not, it shows that he
is not so good as we are. He wants his own way, and has
had it; I must have mine now. I did not ask him to make
me. I was not consulted upon it. He simply made me, and
if lie gave me my will, I mean to exercise it. I maintain that


the rights of the creature are as great as the rights of the
creator. I say the creator has had his way so far. Now my
rights are as sacred as his, and I think they ought to be a
little more so, because I was not consulted as to my existence.
He made me just as he wished, and surely it is most monstrous
to object to my exercising the will he endowed me with. If
there is any moral evil it is on the side of the creator; it lies
in making me as I am, and then refusing to let me have my
own way. My opponent spoke of the obedience of a watch;
that is purely mechanical. Then he spoke of the obedience of
a child. But what is the object of obedience? Is it just to
please the parent? If it is so, then it is selfishness on the
parent’s part. What do you want a child to obey you for?
Surely not for your own pleasure. I apprehend you train up
a child not merely to obey you, but to make that child an
independent self-ruling being; and if you find fault with the
want of obedience, surely it is not out of that selfish feeling
which my friend more than seemed to imply. Then he says
it is impossible for any being to be strictly moral who has no
temptation to be otherwise—that is, unless there is a possi-
bility of going wrong; unless there is a chance of making a
choice, there is no such thing as moral goodness. What of
god, then? Is he liable to go astray? Can he be tempted?
Is he liable to sin? Don’t you see where my friend has
placed himself? He says no being can be morally good,
unless there is a possibility of his going wrong; and if so,
god must be as liable to go wrong as any of us, if he is
morally good; and I must say, if there is a god, he has
embraced the liberty to do evil to the fullest extent. When
he spoke of a soldier’s obedience I did not agree with him. A
soldier is merely a fighting machine, without any will of his
own. And that piece of poetry—if there be a piece
I utterly detest —it is the “Charge of the Light
Brigade.” I say it is disgraceful that any poet
should ever have celebrated a huge blunder, an immense
crime of that description. He ought to be ashamed
of it. Because some one has committed a gigantic blunder,
and men have gone rushing into the jaws of death, trying to
kill other people and risking their own lives, is that man-
hood, or morality, or civilisation ? I protest against it with


all my might! My opponent spoke of moral evil coming into
the world. Where did it come from? It is an awkward
question, and I don’t wonder he asked me not to criticise it.
He wanted it left alone. Still, I most look at it for a
moment. I shall be happy to have it discussed afterwards in
the Liberator, if my opponent cares. Suppose Mr. Berry is
a married man, and has a nursery of fine children, and wants
them to grow up good and moral; and suppose the biggest
scoundrel in the world comes by and wants to corrupt these
children. He knows it all, and yet lets that scoundrel
into the nursery to corrupt them—just to test them,
you know! What would the world say about that
conduct ? If Mr.. Berry did so, could he ever look the
world in the face after it ? especially if his children turned
out to be scoundrels, when he could have prevented it all.
He let that fellow into the nursery, knowing from the
beginning every step towards the result. And would he dare
to plead before the bar of public opinion, “ I did it just to
test them, to give them the power of choice ; I did not want of
them a mere mechanical obedience ; I wished to bring
out what was in them ?” Only an insane man could make
that plea. And what shall we say about god ? He planted
that tree in the garden, and told them that they were not to
t*uch it; and then let the devil in to tempt them ! He knew
when he made that devil what he was going to do. And how
can you talk about the power of choice when on the one side
you have a man, and on the other an infinite god ? If god has
infinite power, he has it all, and I have none. There are no
two ways about that. lam only his puppet. It is his power
that lam using, moral power and physical power—it is all his.
In fact, I am only a marionette ; and god is playing off two
marionettes to-night, one against the other. If there be
infinite power I am no more responsible for what I am doing,
nor is Mr. Berry either, than a marionette or a steam-engine.
And I want to know where the moral features come in if
you have a god possessed of all power. What does he mean by
power of choice ?—freedom of the will ? How can there be
freedom of the will ? Does Mr. Berry remember that passage
in Acts where Peter is speaking at Pentecost, in which he
3rvs it was foreordained by the foreknowledge of god that


Jesus should suffer ?—that Jesus had been taken by wicked
hands and slain ? He says god foreordained it all; and if that
be true, then the Jews had no power of choice in the case. If
god foreknows everything that comes to pass, then it must
come to pass. And so was it in the garden of Eden. Then
one can only say that all this was arranged by this infinite
god ; and no one has resisted his will. Once admit there is
a god who is infinite in power, moral as well as physical, then
the natural, logical outcome of it is—that there is no other
power in the world ; that his creatures only exhibit his
power ; that the whole of the evil in the world is of his own
creating, the offspring of his own will, and nothing else.
Mr. Berry said ;—lt is a very easy thing to say what God
ought to have done according to our ideas ; but it is not a
very safe or a very rational thing to speculate at large upon
such a subject. Let me take an example. Suppose one of
your little children just beginning to be intelligent, were to
reason dogmatically as to its own parents’way of dealing with
it—were to say what the parent ought to do, and to draw
conclusions for itself. Do you not think these conclusions
would be likely to be mistaken ones ? And I can imagine a
number of children talking over these things together and
coming to conclusions, which might seem to them unanswer-
able ; but yet which to a higher intelligence would be
manifestly absurd. And this necessarily must be the case,
if mankind begins to give the rein to his speculations as
to what God ought to do, and to assume that man himself
must be right. It would be indeed surprising if man could
understand all God's ways and dealings with him—quite
as surprising as if the infant child understood the way his father
dealt with him. It is my own fault that ridicule has been cast
on some things that I have said; but I spoke of them purposely,
I wished to speak to you, although I knew I should run the
risk of putting myself in a difficult position, and be met with
sarcastic and humorous replies. I had a great humorous
desire to speak to you on subjects of this kind in a way in
which you are not accustomed to hear them dealt with. On
that great subject of freewill, I don’t know whether my
opponent accepts the position of a fatalist, who believes that
man is not responsible for his actions ; but at any rate we know


that if you were to get rid of the idea of God, you would
not in the least remove the difficulty of these questions, the
difficulty of deciding between the limit of the free will and
the controlling power that is above that free will. I will give
you an illustration by a story. There was a religious man—
we will call him a monk—who was visited one day by a
Fatalist, and the Fatalist said he had two difficulties to pro-
pose, First, saidjhe, I don’t believe there is a God, because I
can’t see one; and then I don’t believe that man is responsible
for his actions, because whatever he does he is fated to do it.
The monk took up a lump of earth and hit the Fatalist on
the head, and made him indignant, and the Fatalist took
out a summons against the monk. The plantiff told the
magistrate his case, and said that instead of answering his
questions this religious man had thrown a piece of earth at
him, and given him a bad pain in his head. The monk was
called upon to answer why he had acted in this way, for it
was considered outrageous for a holy man to so act. “ Well,
your Worship,” said the monk, “I have answered all his
arguments. He told me he does not believe there is a God,
because he cannot see Him, and I don’t believe there is a pain in
his head, because I can’t see it; and besides, he told me I was
fated to do everything I did, and of course I was fated to
throw the lump of earth at his head.” Something has been
said about the will or God and the will of man. I said that
sin arose, when a created being chose to follow his own will
instead of that of his creator, and I was told that this implied
selfishness on the part of the creator. I say no, if the Creator
is what we are taught in the Bible to believe he is, a heavenly
father, and surely, if the will of the father and the will of the
child conflict, the child’s will must be ruled by that of its father,
but the will of the father is the happiness of the child. If
you consider the temptation of Eve, you will see that this was
the very argument of the Tempter. God is selfish, He is
interfering with your rights. Indeed, the serpent made very
much the same kind of suggestions as have been made here
this evening. Yet what was the true state of the case? The
Creator had planted a garden and filled it with all kinds
of fruit that were pleasant to the eye and good for food,
and Adam was told that he might eat of all, with


the exception of one which was necessary for his
moral discipline. The temptation lias been compared to
a father, allowing a villian to go into his nursery and corrupt
his children. Well we all endeavour to prevent our children
being corrupted; but our children cannot always remain
children, for the time comes when, for the development of
their moral and physical powers, they must be thrown into
conflict with temptation ; if not, their moral growth is stopped,
and they remain children to the end of their days. A boy must
go to school, and there he soon comes into contact with the
evil of the world. Just so was it necessary that man should
have this moral discipline, this moral test, otherwise he would
not properly develop ; and the one thing that I would again
insist upon, and which I would earnestly insist upon is this—
that if the Bible teaches anything at all, it is, that the balance
of good and evil is to be restored ; that evil is yet to give
place to good ; that evil is only temporary, and must be
abolished ; and while this is going on, and I know it is a slow
process, don’t let us be impatient, because it is not all
done in a moment; because all things are not at once
absolutely put right. My opponent says that if a being
is infinitely good he ought to do infinite good. And so
he does; but it is quite possible that the infinite God
might require a lapse of something like infinite time
in which to do infinite good. If there is no personal
creator in the world, then the sun is the only creator, for
science has proved, that so far as physical life is concerned,
the sun is the only creator. But you don’t say because
an oak tree does not come to maturity in a moment, that
the sun is to blame for it. And just so when light is
imperfect, you don’t blame the sun for the clouds or the
lightning which is nothing else than sunshine in another and an
explosive form. If you will only accept the idea that God
must be a God of nature and work by natural laws, you will
see that many things apparently strange, are capable of an
explanation. I should be sorry indeed if I thought that any
one considered that the reasons I have adduced, are the only
ones I could bring forward for believing in God. I have only
been trying to remove certain difficulties which have presented
themselves ; because I am sure that God has revealed himself


to us by bis son Christ Jesus. Christ claimed to be the-
Revealer of God to men, and Christians are those who believe
in Christ.
Mr. Symes said :—ls it not trifling with you for a man to
come forward and tell you that he has not brought forward
his strongest reasons for the belief that is in him ? If I were
going to preach Secularism before a Christian audience, I
should be bound by hoMor, as well as by self-interest, to give
the very strongest reasons I had for what I was putting
before them; and I think Mr. Berry ought to have given us
his strongest instead of his weaker ones. He spoke about free-
dom of the will, but he forgot to tell us that the only way in
which the will is moved in the bible is by bribery and intimida-
tion. No higher motives than these are put before a man in
the bible, from one end to the other. Alien he told you that
god became a man. Now, with all due respect to Mr. Berry,,
and without any intention of wounding his feelings—l mean
to say, that I like to speak plainly what I think, whether it
hurts people’s feelings or not (for I value truth more than
any man’s feelings)—but I should like to know how long it
would take to condense the infinite to the size of a man ? I
mean to say that an infinite god never appeared in Jesus. It
would take an infinite time to condense him to that size;
therefore it is an infinite impossibility that anything like that
should happen. I should sooner believe that the sun were
taken and placed in one of your street lamps, though it is one
and a quarter million times bigger than the earth. I would
rather believe that than that Jesus contained an infinite god.
Mr. Berry said that Jesus was sympathising. Well I don’t
think he showed much sympathy, I am still of the
same opinion I previously expressed about “ Gentle Jesus.”
My opinion is quite as strong now as when I spoke of
him in the Liberator. When Jesus spoke of the
Pharisees as children of hell, and when he said that he would
say at last “ Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared
for the devil and his angels,” I don’t think he showed very
much sympathy. I think he showed more hate than you
can find in any other collocation of words in the whole range
of literature. He did not meet with much sympathy, if he
showed it. His own disciples were attached to him by so


slender a thread that they forsook him when lie was in
danger ; and the people amongst whom he lived. crucified him
with every mark of contempt and abhorrence. That does not
show that he was noted for gentleness ; and where is the
sympathy my opponent describes? My opponent speaks of a
child obeying the behests of its parents. But why do parents
wish their children to obey ? Surely not for their own mere
pleasure ; but with the view to training them up to be inde-
pendent members of society. And civilised parents do
not utter brutal threats or kill, or otherwise brutally
punish their children for disobedience. But god behaves to-
his children as no human parent could ; and he forgets that
it is in this unfartherly conduct that the whole of his theology
is founded —in those actions of god which he dare not
imitate. If Mr. Berry will show me by independent
reasoning that there is a god, I will throw up my
objections founded on the evils of nature ; for it is on
the ground of nature that he argues that there is a god. But
I show you that neither nature nor the bible, alone, or both
together, can prove that there is a god. This imperfect
book the bible, can’t prove that there must have been
an infinitely wise god to write it. He wants to know
whether I am a fatalist. I could answer that now,
but I would rather discuss it in the Liueratok. I confess
I am one, in a sense, and I think he is too; one of the 89
articles certainly teaches what is equal to it. There is
also the Calvinistic doctrine that speaks of god having
foreordained whatsoever comes to pass. But I will base it on
another ground. If he believes in a god of infinite power
and knowledge, then god knows everything that is going to
happen from the beginning to the end, and Mr. Berry is a
fatalist; ay ! an automaton. He can do nothing himself; he-
is a puppet : we are both of us mere marionettes in the
hands of god, who is simply playing off one of us :
to-night against the other. He says that we do’nt get rid of
freewill by getting rid of god, and I don’t think so either.
No one who understands the question would claim freewill,,
except in a particular sense. Can you create your own
motives, or are they created for you ? Can you overcome
your motives ? I don’t think you can the strongest of thenu


Bat there is one thing we do get rid of when we get rid of a
god. Supposing a god made this world, then I say he is a
gigantic criminal. But if the world is only a natural thing
the crime is removed. I say that by getting rid of
god we get rid of all the heart-break; and' that is
something that is got rid of. If a god made this world,
we are not only sorry, but indignant. He ought to have
.made it better, and the fact that even Christians are
trying to make it better, shows they really think that
god ought to have made it better. They are dissatisfied
with it, and they are trying to improve it ; and they
will try to improve the bible, too. Some years ago some
publisher brought out a 11 child’s bible,"’ and many portions
were left out. 1 hat is one step in the right direction, and
-the time will come when the book will have to be purified, and
public opinion will force Christians to make it better. If Mr.
Berry and I had written it, we should have made it better than
it is. Mr. Berry will agree with many of these points. I
know what it is to be caught in the throes of theological
development; and Mr. Berry may grow out of those supersti-
tions as I did ; I hope he will, and I shall be one of the first
to congratulate him. It appears I agree with him socially
aheady ; and when he no longer preaches a god he cannot
describe and cannot conceive, a god he calls good, though I
god who created all evils, and evils which Mr. Berry is trying
to remove, although his god does not try to remove them—a
shall be delighted to meet him. He says that god is our
father. lam sorry he brought in that, because I must say
this unpleasant thing :—that this doctrine of god being our
father is a most terrible doctrine. Here is a father who will
allow his children to starve by millions, as in the case of
famines in India and Ireland. I put it to Mr. Berry, whether
he could let one of his own children starve ? lam an Atheist,
Could he let me starve ? I know what his answer must be.
It is not in him. He could not do it. And yet this heavenlv
father would let a thousand children starve ; or he would
‘drown them by millions, as he did in the time of Noah ; or
bum them, as he did Sodom and Gomorrah ; or swallow them
up, as in the recent volcanic disturbances in Java, and
in thousands of other instances that history records—this


heavenly father that Mr. Berry speaks of is doing this ! It
is enough to make one renounce the very name of father, as-
something too horrible to be endured ! (Loud applause.)
Mr. Berry said : —My opponent still persists in holding to
his views about God, about Christ, and about the Bible. It
seems impossible to make him take any other view than this,,
that God is immoral, and that Christ is immoral ; but I
would appeal to him to reflect, if after all there may not be
some mistake in his own mind, because it is not only
Christians, but clever philosophical infidels, men who can
reason as well as himself on those metaphysical points he lias
raised this evening, and men whose learning in other
departments of science is, at least, vastly greater than that of
either of us, who think otherwise. Without arguing further,.
I would ask him to give this fact due consideration. I feel
myself most happy in this hall, even in the presence of
avowed Atheists, and I must say, I could not ask to be
treated better than I have been here. But there is just one
thing that pains me, and it is this. Why can’t we have a
little less dogmatic assertion and a little more questioning 7
Let those attacks that are made on the Bible teaching as to
God and Christ, whether in discussions such as these, or in
newspaper articles, be put more in a questioning form, and less
in the way of dogmatic assertion. Don’t say that the meaning
you yourself attach to any given passage of such teaching
is the only possible. I myself care not how many questions
are raised in a spirit of free, but candid inquiry, nor how
much I am badgered to give an answer. Something has-
been said about God doing as a heavenly father, what no
earthly father would do ; but there is one fact left out..
He is the father of soul, as well as of body, and he has in
view the future existence, as well as the present. I trust
that I may look upon myself, as one whom God would call
His child, and that I may call Him Heavenly Father. I
know that He will, at some time unknown to me,,
take away my breath, and. remove me out of this present
existence. A\ hy mav I not also bcliei e that He v ill
then remove me to a better home than I have here,
for so He has told me in that revelation Z Because of sin I
must die, and because of something else, which I will not
45


name now, there is life, eternal life, for me. That is what
restores the balance. One of the charges against God was
that he had swept away the whole population of the world
by a deluge. My opponent would probably assume that,
according to Bible teaching, these people were sent to hell-
fire, but I tell you if you look into the Bible it says nothing
of the kind. It simply (I have not time to dwell long on
this) tells us that these souls were kept in ward, and it also
tells us that Christ, after his death on the cross, went in
the spirit and preached the gospel to those people. I dare
say you were not aware there was any such teaching in the
Bible. We are not trying to improve the Bible as was
•asserted just now, but to understand it, and for my own
part, I feel that the more I understand it the more I see
Divine goodness in it. I hear so much said about that
subject of hell-fire by people who never stop to enquire what
the expression actually means. The question is, not what
theology at different times lias taken the words to mean,
but what the Bible means by them. What was Gehenna ?
It was the valley of Hinnom outside Jerusalem, where
bodies of executed criminals were burned, and that necessarily
shows that the expression was used figuratively. Then comes
the question, on which we cannot now enter, what the
figure meant. We must not be hasty in deciding the
meaning of figurative language. Let me give you an
example. The Apostle Paul says, if you have an enemy
you are to heap coals of fire upon his head. Could anything
be more fiendish ! Stay, let us read the text. “If thine
■enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst give him drink,
for in so doing though shalt heap coals of fire on his head.”
Don’t let us be too hasty and too self-confident as to what the
Bible teaches. What we want is more searching and less
dogmatising. lam glad to have an opportunity to come and
speak to an audience such as this, to men who hold the views
that you do, and I do feel that in these days we ought to
speak out more to one another than we do. One result of such
freedom of intercourse might be that you would find your-
selves mistaken in your views of what God is, and what Christ
is, and what the 13ible is. I have very nearly come to a
close, but a word about the blasphemy laws. I don’t know


much about law, and I was not aware that in this debate he
was laying himself open to the action of the law, but I know
that if the law were likely to be put in motion against him,
I would say, “ Don't do it ! Don’t put it in motion. Put me
in motion if you like, or some more able of the
truth, but let it be done by reason and not by force.” _ lou
must allow me now to appeal to you in the same spirit. I
will tell you what I. would not do if I were in youi place. If
I were living in a Mahomedan state and wanted to show the
people that their religion was wrong, I would not take the
Koran and ridicule it. I would say, Give me your explana-
tion of this, or tell me what your view is of that, and if I
found no truer explanation than my own, then I should stick
to my own. Another thing I would not do if I lived in a
Mahomedan state. I would not put a caricatuie in my shop
window. If I wanted to show people the absurdity of their
belief, I would show them a real picture and not a caricature
of it before their eyes. And now I am about to fire off my
last shot, and I hope my opponent and I shall meet on the
same footing at some other time. I am now going to give
my best reason against Atheism, and it is this that it lias
so completely broken down in London. Here is a paper,
published by the Rev. J. C. Whitmore, who states that during
the last 30 years of his life he has come into contact with no
le«s than twenty leading Secularist lecturers in London. Of
these twenty he asserts that sixteen had turned from infidelity
-and become Christians, and lie says that for any public
purposes the names of these sixteen will be supplied.
Kow I will ask my opponent when these names come out
from home to print them in the Liberator.
Mf. Svmes said : As for the list of lecturers and writers
Mr Berry has read, I will publish it in the Liberator as
soon as my opponent, or any of his friends can fill up the
blanks and authenticate them. Then the public will know
what to think of it. I know the history of it. The Rev.
Mr Whitmore has been challenged over and over again to
fill "up the names ; but has not done so, unless it has hap-
pened since I left England. There is another thing I ought
-to mention : I was to have met Mr. Whitmore in debate not
many months before leaving. Rut Mr. Whitmore is not Mr.


Berry ; lie is not a man to liis word, and a most abusive man
into the bargain. He declined the debate after it was partly
arranged. I could tell you about one or two of those parties
but at present I must attend to my work. I sympathise with
that appeal Mr. Berry made to me about the caiicatures of
Jesus, &c., but his own party gave the provocation. They
don’t object to ridicule—nobody does, when turned against
their foes. When he reflects upon what his own party say
of us, perhaps he will see that we are more fair than they. I
don’t object to ridicule. All I ask is that I may be per-
mitted, without danger of punishment, to use ridicule in
return. There is always something wrong when you don’t
like to be ridiculed : either you have not got the real
truth, or else you do not feel that you have a safe grip of it.
You know, some people do not like to be shown up in Punch ;
although sensible people don’t object to seeing their pictures
there. Don’t you see the difficulty 7 You put yourselves in
a false position, and say ridicule may be used upon some
subjects, but not upon others. And then comes the question,
Where do you draw the line? What shall I laugh at?
and what shall I not laugh at ? It is much better to leave
every one to his own choice and taste. Let us laugh all round,
and grow fat. If you find your religion ridiculed, you
may think it needs improvement. If investigation shows no
need of improvement, what harm has been done ? So, you see,
ridicule cannot be objected to on rational grounds. To my
mind there is nothing more ridiculous in the world than
religion. There was a time when I should have felt annoyed
at anyone for ridiculing my religion ; but I have grown out of
that. I have become civilised, and can now endure to be
laughed at over any opinion I hold. If religion will not bear
ridicule, so much the worse for religion. My opponent told
you just now that he expected all evil to disappear, that god
would put everything right. Did I understand him to mean
that all the damned are to be destroyed or saved ? that all
sinners are to be turned into saints ? If that were so, what
of the vast quantities of pain and suffering already endured ?
What of the evils that have really existed under the reign of
this god ? Besides, there is a fatal objection to Mr. Berry’s
view" It is this :—You cannot rationally argue that a being.


who tor the past six thousand
chronology) has been doing som f uture> This
tv x s ho^ ns xt u g
"K thTl uS .“aTthe bibl" Christ and god
are immond. But I gave m,r rea^ns itorrtjwhu*
been met l,y u,y opponent |; and I X di „g S to
ErtMT He ought not to forgeAh.t I was brought up
in the Christian religion, very strictly brough up •
reconsider the case unless you wrlte ,-
°Christhin one who J« . **£
on this subject than I. I b»« “ d dnim
ship to Theology, asi Mill never j Ul „| er _
to understand it better inn ', , j n no t above
be happy .«
with him as long disltm’l think
»s ?£sr#t «
risr^x
his"descent in hell, where he P-ehed to the spn s ho
dead. My opponent gives an explanation of that pas „


that few Protestants would accept. There is a purgatory for
sinners, after all, it seems, another chance for them after
death. Now, that passage in Peter has troubled many
Protestants. lam glad to find Mr. Berry growing out of
the superstition of the fatherly punishment, and giving the
sinners and pagans a chance to repent, even after being once
lost. The Protestants don’t give us a chance; but my opponent,
I am happy to find, has, on that point, sided with the Catholics.
When he tells you the fire of hell is not so bad, after all, I
dare say that is pleasant news to many. Still I must say
that Mr. Berry is Hying in the face of the whole theological
history of the church in repudiating hell-fire and endless
torment. Panto gives us a vivid picture of the church
doctrine of hell. And what produced Pollock’s Course of
Time , and the sermons of the Puritans and early Methodists,
and of many in Mr. Berry’s owm church ? Tiie new
testament is at the bottom of it. The fact is, the
doctrine of hell-fire has been taught in the churches from the
beginning. I have grown out of this doctrine myself, and so,
it appears, has Mr, Berry. And yet he seems to suppose that
the future punishment of some parties will be worse than any
temporal punishment. Here Ido not understand him. If a
person suffers worse than the Daily Telegraph would
have us suffer, I do not see what you gain by throwing
away the old doctrine. If a man is liable to be punished
for unbelief, you ought to tell us exactly what he is going
to endure. I must here ask a question ; if god, as my
opponent argues, will remove all evil, does that include the
removal of all sin 7 If so, all sinners will be turned into
saints, and then no further punishment can be needed. And
then why call the punishment, whatever it is, eternal ? If
eternal punishment, of any sort or degree is true, then all evil
will never be removed. There was one thing my opponent
said respecting the heaping of coals of fire upon one’s head
that rather amused me. He very rightly, perhaps, did not
think that so horrible as it at first sight appears ; not so
horrible as the literal exposition would make it. He said it
meant to feed and clothe one’s enemy, &c. Are we then to
understand that when we read about hell-fire, and that god
will heap this upon the sinner’s head, that after all god merely


means by those expressions that lie will feel and dothe
sinners ?' It this is what he means, I mast confess Ins is th
very best explanation of hell-fire I have ever heard m myl.te
(Lind Applause.) My opponent is I do not
think he will ever prove the existence of a god , hut I thin
him so rapidly advancing in liberality and freethought and
attond opinions, that I do not despair of seeing him yet on
the Secular platform defending Atheism. (Applause.)
At the conclusion of the debate, Mr. Donovan rose to move
a hearty vote of thanks to both disputants tor the intellectual
treat they had afforded their hearers. It was not his province
to decide on their respective merits ; each must determine
tint for himself. Such subjects as had been discussed on
that and previous evenings, did not admit of being settled by
show ofhands; indeed, it was the habit to set le too many
important matters by that imperfect method, and it would be
the duty of mankind to provide for a fairer and better repr -
sentation in the future of the many diverse opinions that men
held A vote of thanks was due to Mr. Berry for his couiage
and manliness in meeting the Freethought champion and he
thought Mr. Berry’s actions was a scathing rejoinder to those
bigots who were seeking to put the law in motion to suppress
Is antagonistic to orthodoxy. Thanks were also due to
Mr Symes g for showing what many persons refused to believe,
viz’ that a Freethinker, when treated in a manly, respectful
fashion, can reciprocate such treatment and discuss with Ins
opponent’s with courtesy and gentlemanly behaviour. Only
methods as adopted in these discussions could the
o-ood on both sides be made apparent, and people become
habituated to reason and argument in lieu of the old weapons
-of hatred and force.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Burton, who said that he
did not wish to add anything to what the mover stated,except
that he thought a similar hearty vote of thanks was due to
the audience. It was to him a most agreeable surprise to
find that Melbourne could furnish an assemblage of men, w 10
were prepared to hear orderly and well conducted debates m a
thoroughly fair and impartial spirit.
After Mr. Berry and Mr. Symes had gratefully acknow


lelged tlie vote of thanks, which was unanimously and!
enthusiastically accorded. The meeting terminated with a
vote of tlianks to the Chairman.
52


- JUST PUBLISHED !
\
IS IT RATIONAL TO BELIEVE
THAT JESDS ROSE FROM THE DEAD ?
TWO NIGHTS’ DEBATE
HKTWKKN
JOSEPH SYMES
(Representing tlie Australasian Secular Association), and
REV. D. M. BERRY.
PRICE, SIXPENCE. BY POST, EIGHTPENCE.
“THE LIBERATOR,” :
i Weekly, Badleal, and PmtionjM Joirnal.
Edited by JOS. SYMES.
PRICE -THREEPENCE— price.
By post 3s. (id. per quarter prepaid.
L P & P COMPANY LIMITED, 120 SWANSTON STREET.
