

m AOI -IC= 1 IQI- --IQt^
o o
j IS IT
I Armageddon? |
4
o
“And He gathered them together into a
place called in the Hebrew tongue Arma-
geddon. ” Rev. 16: 16.
8 8
i
o o
o o
SIGNS PUBLISHING COMPANY LTD.
Warburton, Victoria, Australia
o o
— """ •jm — \ntfl


The Signs of the
Times
••TV Religious Home Journal devoted
to the exposition of Bible truth,
the evils of religious legislation, Spirit-
ualism, Theosophy, and intemperance,
as well as to the stirring topics of
present-day issues as seen in the struggle
between capital and labour, the serious
problems in the' political world, and
the fulfilment of prophecy in passing
events.
One of the most widely circulated and
extensively read religious papers
in Australasia
Price per year, posted free to any part of
the Commonwealth, 4/6
To the Dominion of New Zealand, 4/6
SIGNS PUBLISHING COMPANY LTD.
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
° «
= =====/




Price per year, posted free to any part of
the Commonwealth, 4/6
. To the Dominion of New Zealand, 4/6
°
SIGNS PUBLISHING COMPANY LTD.
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
o 2
V ..


Is It Armageddon?
BV I_. A. SMITH
Has the great prophetic battle of Armageddon come at
last ? Is this the meaning of the strife that has suddenly-
enveloped all Europe and threatens to engulf it in a cata-
clysm of ruin ?
From the expressions used by many writers we might
infer that such is really the case. Armageddon seems to
come naturally to the mind when contemplating the
spectacle of all Europe convulsed with war.
Nor can we be surprised that men should think of
Armageddon in view of the spectacle of five of the great
world Powers with several lesser nations engaged in spread-
ing death and desolation around them. Not since the days
of Napoleon has all Europe been swept with war; but
comparing the size of the armies and the implements of
war of that day with those of the present, the Napoleonic
wars dwindle into insignificance.
Never since time began has there been a war to com-
pare in magnitude with the titanic struggle now staged in
Europe. Never before have men been fighting each other
under the sea, on the sea, and in the air, as well as on the
earth. Never have weapons so powerful and so deadly
been employed before in the business of destruction.
What does it mean ? Does civilisation contain the
germ of its own dissolution, which has now been let loose
and is sweeping the nations like a fearful plague ? The
progress of modern science has been the boast of our civil-
isation ; now all the forces of that science are being em-
ployed to blot civilisation from the earth.
The civilised world was supposed to have reached an
era of peace, when nations would settle their disputes by
arbitration. Peace conferences at The Hague, and the
efforts of numerous peace societies in America and Europe
gave promise that war had at last become a thing of the
past. From many pulpits had come assurances that the
world was about entering the long-expected millennium of


peace. Time has now answered the peace predictions by
ushering in the greatest war the world has ever known.
We have been assured that the great armaments of the
world Powers were themselves a guarantee of peace, since
no nation dare attack another that was well prepared for
war. This illusion is now shattered for all time. Instead
of being a protection against war, the ever-increasing arma-
ments, it is now evident, have been leading the nations
toward war. It is well known now that there would have
been war in 1908 when Austria annexed Bosnia and Herze-
govina, if Russia, then weakened by her contest with
Japan, had felt strong enough to fight.
Other Causes
But it is not the arming of the nations alone that has
brought on this cataclysm of strife. There are other causes,
reaching back into the past. For many years the peace of
Europe has been in a state of unstable equilibrium, and
statesmen, knowing this, have been fearful that some un-
looked-for occurrence would upset the'balance and bring on
a general clash of arms. This is what has now happened.
For a long time there has been maintained in Europe
what has been known as “ the balance of power.” This
has been maintained by two grand divisions of the great
Powers —Germany, Austria, and Italy, composing the
“Triple Alliance,” and Great Britain, France, and Russia
composing the “Triple Entente.” It is this confederacy
of the great Powers, formed to preserve the peace, which
has drawn the nations into a war begun by one of them and
involved the whole of Europe in the struggle.
Little was it thought - , when the news of the assassina-
tion of Archduke Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne,
was flashed to the world, what momentous events lay
bound up in the train of that occurrence. That deed, bring-
ing on the break between Austria and Servia, was the
immediate cause of the war. Back of this, however, was
the annexation by Austria of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
1908, which greatly incensed Servia and Russia. And still
further back, constituting what may most properly be called




the real cause, is the ambition of Austria and Germany to
push southward and secure territory and ports on the
JE gean Sea.
The Eastern Question
This ambition is bound up with the settlement of the
“ Eastern Question,” which is the question of the distribu-
tion among the European Powers of the territory now or
formerly occupied by Turkey, and in particular the posses-
sion of Constantinople, which, from its situation is of great
strategic importance. For it is recognised by the Powers
of Europe, and by the Turks themselves, that it is their
destiny to depart ere long from Europe to the Asiatic terri-
tory from which, many centuries ago, they came out.
For many years the empire of Turkey has been shrink-
ing in size, and particularly so in Europe. It has been a
unique spectacle, not paralleled in the history of any other
nation. Piece by piece all the territory comprising the
Balkan States has slipped from Turkey’s grasp, together
with Egypt and Tripoli. This Balkan territory after pass-
ing out from Turkish sovereignty, however, was not
absorbed by the great Powers of Europe, but remained
broken up into small kingdoms, for the reason that the
great Powers could not agree among themselves regarding
the share which each of them should receive. The popula-
tion of these small kingdoms is predominantly Slav, which
makes them allied in race and religion with Russia, the
great Slav nation of Europe.
Now it has long been the ambition of Russia to secure
an ice-free seaport, and in pursuance of this ambition she
has been pushing southward toward the waters of the
Mediterranean. Naturally, her way lies through the
Balkan States, which are friendly to her by similarity of
race and religion.
Russia thus has great interests at stake in the fate of
the Balkan Powers. Russia has set up, in fact, a sort of
Monroe Doctrine with reference to these Powers, and con-
stituted herself their special guardian and protector.
When therefore Austria made war on Servia, Russia
felt bound to come to the rescue of her Balkan protege.


To have left Servia to be overpowered by her larger adver-
sary, would have been to lose all her prestige with the
Balkan nations and all prospect of advancing southward
through Balkan territory to the sea.
The Chief Cause of European firmaments
It is the Eastern Question, therefore, which underlies
the situation in Europe to-day. It is the Eastern Question
which has prevented an alliance between Germany and
Time’s Answer to the Peace Prophets
7
Is It Armageddon ?


Russia. ' Allied with Russia, Germany would have been
secure against attack, and the present general war could
not have happened. But Germany’s interests in the
Balkans clash with those of Russia, making such an alliance
impossible.
And for this reason—because of this aspect of the
Eastern Question, forcing Germany to remain in compara-
tive isolation between two hostile military Powers, Russia
and France —Germany has taken the lead in military devel-
opment, and has drawn all Europe after her in ever-increas-
ing military expenditure, so that the nations have long
staggered under a crushing burden of military taxation.
The present great war represents a new stage in the
solution of the Eastern Question, the final settlement of
which will see the Turk driven from Europe, and his terri-
tory apportioned among the European Powers. The pres-
ent conflict was precipitated because Austria deemed the
hour an opportune one for an advance move, Great Britain
being occupied with the Ulster crisis, and Russia being
menaced with a great strike and a possible revolution.
What is to be the outcome ? Will the titanic struggle
continue until the nations of Europe are exhausted and
Europe is desolated ? Is this the last great conflict preced-
ing the coming of an era of world peace ?
God’s Word Has Foretold the Struggle
Fortunately, we have access to a higher source of infor-
mation than human speculation and guess work on this
great subject. The God whose kingdom rules in the affairs
of earth, and whose Word has so accurately foretold human
history in the past, has not left us in ignorance concerning
a situation so momentous as that which the world has now
reached. Why this situation has been reached, and what
is to follow, His Word plainly reveals to the student of
its pages.
In the light of that Word, the war spirit of the present
age which has converted all Europe into an armed camp,
and finally has plunged that camp into a terrible conflict, is
not the precursor of peace and safety to mankind, but a


development characteristic of the closing days of human
history, when the restraining influence of the Spirit of God
is being withdrawn from the earth.
The irruption of the Mohammedan into Europe, and his
final departure from European soil, are subjects of Bible
prophecy. In the vision of coming events, given to the
Apostle John on Patmos, the invasion of Europe by the
followers of Mohammed was shown by the symbol of a
swarm of locusts coming out of the “ bottomless pit,” having
power to sting like scorpions, and being commissioned to
torment men “five months.” Rev. 9 : 1-11.
The Mohammedan invasion came as one of a series of
scourges which God sent upon the nations to chastise them
for their wickedness. Preceding the Mohammedan, Alaric
the Goth, Genseric the Vandal, and Attilla the Hun, had
devastated Europe with fire and sword, these invasions
being described in the symbols of Revelation 8. But the
Mohammedan invasion filled Europe with greater terror
than any previous visitation, and was to cover a period of
five months (prophetic time), or one hundred and fifty
years (literal time; a day in symbolic prophecy standing
for a year). Historians date this period as beginning in
A.D, 1299 and reaching to 1449.
In the latter year Constantinople, the capital of the
eastern empire of Rome, fell into the hands of the Saracens
led by Mohammed 11. This event marks the beginning of
the period of invasion and conquest allotted to the Ottoman
Turks, described in Rev. 9:14-19 by the figure of the
loosing of the “four angels” which were “bound in the
great river Euphrates.” These were “ prepared for an
hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the
third part of men.” Verse 15.
Turkish History Shows the Hand of Providence
Strange and eventful has been the history of the Mo-
hammedan power in Europe, plainly manifesting the fulfil-
ment of inspired prophecy. They came into Europe a
strange and alien people, from an unknown country, as a
visitation sent from God upon the nations for their wicked-


ness. Had this chastisement not been necessary the
modern history of Europe would have been entirely different
from what is recorded, and there would have been no
Eastern Question to embroil the nations in a general war.
It is sin that lies at the bottom of all the woes, political and
otherwise, by which mankind is made to suffer.
While the Reformation of the sixteenth century was in
progress, God made use of the Ottoman armies to save the
reformers and their work from destruction at the hands of
the papal monarchs. When the latter had unsheathed
their swords and were ready to strike, news would be
received that the Ottoman forces were invading the realm,
and the blow intended for the Reformation would fall upon
the Turk.
Again, it was due to the irruption of the Mohammedans
northward from Arabia that the route from Europe to India
was closed to travel and trade, and an effort was made to
discover a new route to the Indies. The ever memorable
voyage of Columbus westward across the untraversed seas
was the result.
Still another remarkable thing about Ottoman history in
Europe is the steady shrinking of the empire already men-
tioned in this treatise. Mention is made of the Ottoman
Power in the outline of political history given in the eleventh
chapter of Daniel, and it is there declared that this Power,
designated as the “king of the north,” “shall come to his
end, and none shall help him.” Verse 45. Turkey has
been helped at various times by certain of the European
Powers, notably in the Crimean war and in the Russo-
Turkish war of 1877-78. But when the Balkan war broke
out in 1912 and the Balkan armies swept the Turkish forces
before them and threatened to drive them across the
Bosphorus, Turkey looked in vain for European aid. Great
Britain, the friend who saved her from Russia in 1878, had
deserted her, and it was only due to the quarrel of the
Balkan allies among themselves that Turkey was left in
possession of more than the environs of Constantinople.
And it is nowhere expected that even this small foothold in
Europe will be long retained by the Ottoman Power.


A Time of Trouble Foretold
But the ending of the Ottoman Empire, now fore-
shadowed in the near future, brings the world to an event
of the most momentous and solemn character. This is
described in Daniel 12 in the words; —
. “And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince which standeth for the children of thy people; and
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a nation even to that same time: and at that
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be
found written in the book.” Verse 1.
It can be shown from the Scripture that Michael, here
spoken of, is none other than Christ; that his “ standing
up ” refers to the beginning of His reign over the kingdoms
of earth, and that the “ book ” in this description is the
book of life. See Rev. 20 :15.
The momentous events of this prophecy are now,
according to the testimony of Scripture and of history, in
the immediate future. The great European war now rag-
ing is a prelude to the “ time of trouble such as never was,”
which is coming upon all countries because of the proximity
of the end.
Qod’s Restraining Hand Over the Nations
For many years a restraining power has been over the
nations and threatening war clouds have been dissipated
when it was expected that they would burst in a tempest of
strife. This is described in prophecy by the figure of
“four angels standing 5n the four corners of the earth,
holding the four winds of the earth,” that the winds of
strife should not be loosed until a sealing work which God
was doing in the earth should be finished. Rev. 7 ; 1-3.
Many Bible students believe that the sudden and mysterious
revolution of 1848 which swept over Europe, and then as
suddenly and mysteriously subsided, was the beginning of
the loosing of the “four winds” of this prophecy, which
were restrained again at the behest of the angel having a
commission from God to stay the strife and confusion until
the servants of God should have His seal placed in their


foreheads. Such a work, having reference to the seal of
God’s law —the Sabbath of Jehovah —has been going for-
ward among all nations since that time, and is in progress
to-day.
What will happen when the “ four winds ” —which
undoubtedly symbolise strife and confusion —are loosed and
allowed to blow upon the earth ? There is every reason to
believe that this dread period will be marked by war and
strife of every kind; that the restraints which have held
evil forces in check will then be removed, and society will
be engulfed in general confusion and disorder. The spirit
of revolution and of casting off the restraints of law both
human and divine, will have full sway upon the earth.
It is the restraining influence of the Spirit of God upon
the hearts and minds of men, far more than laws, standing
armies, policemen, and courts of justice, that preserves
peace and order in society. Men obey the law and respect
the rights of others not because they are commanded to do
so, but because the disposition thus to do is implanted in
their hearts. Let this restraining influence be removed,
and all the barriers civil government has erected against
crime would be swept aside like straws.
And this restraining influence, there is every reason to
believe, is beginning to be withdrawn from the earth.
My Spirit shall not always strive with man,” said God in
the days of Noah, and Noah’s day affords a parallel with
our own time. Matt. 24 : 37-39. When all have received
the seal of God who will accept it, God will withdraw His
Spirit from the earth and the powers of evil will be left in
full possession.
We Are in the Time of the End
That we are indeed now living in the time of the end
there is abundant evidence. The prophecies of Scripture
have been fulfilled. History shows that all the great lines
of. Bible prophecy have met their fulfilment in human
events until hardly more than the last specification of each
remains, which is the second coming of Christ. Earthquake
and fire, storm and flood, and sudden calamity in various


forms proclaim that the judgments of God are in the land.
Let the reader pause and think how numerous such visita-
tions have become within the past few years.
We are not emerging into an era of peace. Peace will
not come until the coming of the Prince of Peace. He it
is that “ maketh wars to cease unto the ends of the earth.”
Ps. 46 :9. Peace societies and Hague conferences cannot
accomplish such a work. Failure is written in large char-
acters upon their efforts in Europe to-day.
“ From whence come wars and fightings among you ? ”
inquires the Apostle James, and he answers the query by
saying, “ Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war
in your members ? ” James 4:1. It is the lust for power
and for territorial aggrandisement that has caused the war
that is desolating Europe to-day. If the monarchs and
statesmen of Europe were controlled by the spirit of Chris-
tianity, wars could never break out. And while they are
not controlled by this spirit it will be in vain to look for
peace.
The Powers of the earth to-day are largely under the
control of evil agencies. While the nations profess to be
Christian, the wholesale murder in which they are now
engaged presents them in a very different light. It is
Satan, not Christ, whose will is being done in such work.
Evil Influences to ‘Prevail
We are plainly told in God’s Word that Christian influ-
ences will not prevail in the earth in the last days. Here
is the statement, found in 2- Tim. 3: 1-5: This know
also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, un-
holy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof : from such turn away.” Not only is there wicked-
ness in the world, but even the church, says this text, will


be filled with those “having a form of godliness,” but
destitute of its power.
That pride, covetousness, and formality without piety
abound in the churches of this day, is only too sadly evi-
dent on all sides. The Christian church is the salt of the
earth; it is like the ten righteous persons in Sodom that
would have saved the city from destruction by the wrath of
God. But if the salt has lost its savour, if the righteous-
ness of the church is in appearance only, there will be
nothing to stay the judgments of God from the earth. The
Spirit of God, which holds in check the agencies of evil,
will be withdrawn, and the prince of evil will take posses-
sion and work his will in the earth. And even so do we
find it to-day. This is what is filling the earth with war,
revolution, industrial strife, anarchy, and general commotion
at this time.
The Battle of jdrmageddon Yet Future
It is by the agency of evil spirits that the nations will
be gathered to the battle of Armageddon. The Scripture
statement is : “ And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs,
come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth
of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which
go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of
God Almighty. . . . And he gathered them together into a
place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.” Rev.
16 : 13-16.
This is not the day of peace, but of war. Be not
deceived by the cry of peace and safety; “ for when they
shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction
cometh upon them . . . and they shall not escape.”
1 Thess. 5: 3. The Spirit of God is being withdrawn from
the earth, and strife and commotion must be the result.
But these things are the precursors of the coming of the
Prince of Peace, who “ maketh wars to cease unto the ends
of the earth.” Therefore let His followers not despair, but
look up and lift up their heads, for their redemption
draweth nigh. Luke 21: 28.


This War Is Not Armageddon
BY A. W. ANDERSON
Unless care be taken to notice the exact wording of the
Scriptures one is liable to form erroneous conclusions from
a mere superficial reading of the Sacred Word. This is
probably the reason why so many people err by alluding to
the present war as “Armageddon.” There are several
reasons why this war cannot be Armageddon, to which we
desire to call the attention of the reader :
1. The location of the great European struggle forbids
us to look to this war for the fulfilment of the apocalyptic
vision of Armageddon. Armageddon, it should be noted, is
not a term used merely to describe the final great battle of
the nations. It is the name of “a place.” “He gathered
them into a place called in the Hebrew tongue, Armaged-
don.” Geographically, therefore, the battle of Armageddon
will not be fought on the Belgian and French frontiers, nor
upon the plains of Eastern Germany, nor in Poland, nor in
Austria and Hungary, or Galicia. Not in the Balkan
peninsula nor even Constantinople itself. The battle of
Armageddon will be fought in Palestine.
2. The time for the battle of Armageddon to be fought
is not yet due. Prior to this last great battle there are a
number of prophetic specifications to be fulfilled which
have not yet eventuated. These must first come to pass
in order that /the sure word of prophecy which has never
yet failed may be fulfilled. While no date has been given
in the Bible for the battle 'of Armageddon, this great battle
is one of a sequence of events called the seven last plagues.
Five of these plagues are to precede Armageddon, which is
placed sixth in order. As none of these plagues have yet
made their appearance it is manifestly an error to suppose
that Armageddon—the sixth plague —has made its appear-
ance before the five plagues which are to precede it.
* 3. Armageddon is to follow suddenly after the world has
witnessed a mighty effort to inaugurate a universal “ peace
movement.” Although many attempts have been made in
the past to induce the great nations to disarm, their only


reply has been to increase their military and naval equip-
ment. Certain well-meaning philanthropic men have
organised branches of the Peace Societies throughout the
world, but the music of their voices has been drowned by
the ceaseless roar of the armament factories.
These very conditions were foretold by the Hebrew
prophets more than twenty-five centuries ago. Isaiah says:
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that . . . many
people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord. . . . And He shall judge among the nations, and shall
rebuke many people ; and they shall beat their swords into plough-
shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks : nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. Isa.
2 : 2-5.
This is what Inspiration tells us “many people will
say,” and even amid the turmoil of the greatest war in his-
tory, there are many people saying these very words.
Now listen to what God says about these ploughshares
and pruning-hooks:—
Proclaim.ye this among the Gentiles: Prepare war, wake up the
mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up:
beat your ploughshares into swards, and your pruning-hooks into
spears: let the weak say, lam strong. Assemble yourselves, and
come, all ye nations, and gather yourselves together round about:
thither cause Thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord. Joel 3 ; 9-13.
These two prophecies set before us two conflicting
ideas. Isaiah tells us what the people in the last days will
be saying, while Joel tells us what they will be doing.
They will be talking about beating their swords into plough
shares,'while they are actually beating their ploughshares
into swords. And the very time when they will be saying
“ Peace and safety,” the Apostle Paul has singled out as
the time “ when sudden destruction cometh upon them.”
All these things point to the proximity of Armageddon.
Price (postage extra), per do*., 6d.; per 100, 3/4.
SIGNS PUBLISHING COMPANY LTD. Melbourne, Victoria. Australia.
16
Is It Armageddon ?
