

IS IT RATIONAL TO BELIEVE
TEAT JESUS ROSE FROM THE DEAD ?
TWO NIGHTS' DEBATE
BETWEEN
JOSEPH SYMES
(Representing the Australasian Secular Association,)
AND
REV D. M. BERRY
PRICE SIXPENCE.




IS IT RATIONAL TO BELIEVE THAT
JESUS ROSE FROM THE DEAD?
DEBATE between Mr. JOSEPH STMES and
Rev. D. M. BEERY.
FIRST NIGHT.
The first night’s debate between the Rev. D. M. Berry and'
Mr. Joseph Symes took place in the Hall of Science, Bourke-
street, on Tuesday, 24th June, the subject being : “ Is it
rational to believe that Jesus rose from the dead ?”
Mr. J. Donovan occupied the chair, and the building was-
filled to overflowing by a large and attentive audience.
The chairman read the conditions of debate, and said that
subjects were best discussed in a calm and thoughtful spirit,,
and he trusted that they therefore would maintain their old-
reputation for fairness and impartiality.
Mr. Berry rose amidst considerable applause, and said :—I
am here to maintain that it is rational to believe that Jesus
rose from the dead. I will begin by stating facts which no-
educated Freethinker would think of denying. The Christian-
religion now exists all over the world, and the nations which
are called Christian nations, to distinguish them from the
Mahommedan nations, are by far the most enlightened and
civilised nations in the world. Every effect must have a
cause ; every river a source ; every building a foundation.
Christianity has been 18 centuries in existence. It is certain
Christianity must have had a cause adequate to the
effect. If we had time we might trace its history
backwards, as we trace a river to its source, through
each century from the 19th to the Ist ; but for want of time


we must pass over 15 centuries, and come to the 4th century
when that most important event took place, the conversion of
the Roman empire to Christianity. The Roman empire was
the mightiest earthly monarchy that the world has ever seen.
It stretched from the Euphrates to the Atlantic ocean, and
included all those countries in Europe, Asia and Africa, which
border on the Mediterranean sea. It comprehended within
itself, all the Pagan civilizations of Rome, Greece, Syria,
Egypt, and North Africa. It was thus an educated and civilised
as well as a gigantic power, and the source of our civilization.
This Pagan giant had been growing for eight hundred years,
when the Christian religion arose in one of its out-lying,
conquered provinces, Judea, and within four hundred years
more, all the idolatries existing within it were swept away by
the gospel of Christ. It was in the year 325, that a Roman
emperor sitting in a council of Christian bishops drew up
this confession of faith for his empire : “ I believe in God
the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of all
things visible and invisible, and in one lord Jesus Christ, the
only begotten son of God.” I need not repeat it all. You
know it is the Nicene Creed which we say in our communion
service. One sentence is : “He suffered and was buried, and
the third day he rose again, according to the scriptures.”
You can well understand that the preaching which made this
grim old pagan giant give up all his idols, and thus accept
the gospel within four hundred years, must have been
very energetic preaching indeed ; but I have not time to
describe the struggle by which the gospel overcame the
Roman world. The catacombs of Rome are a standing
monument of the dreadful sufferings that the Christians went
throagh before they won this victory of the faith. We must
come at once to the very beginning, and look at Christianity
in its first collision with the Paganism of the world. Let us
see what the educated and enlightened men of the Roman
empire thought of Christianity when they saw r it first. Call
the first witness, Pliny, governor of the province of Bithynia,
about a. d. 100. Pliny, read us that letter that you have
been writing to your Emperor Trajan about the Christians.
Pliny has been asking the Emperor what he is to do with the
Christians, an entirely new sort of criminals who are being


brought before him. He finds that they are guiltylof nothing
but a vicious and extravagant superstition, meeting together
on a fixed day to sing a hymn to Christ, as to a god. Having
examined some of them by torture he can find out nothing
worse about them than this. Still, as they would not give up
their superstition at the command of the governor, he ordered
them to execution ; but the vast number of those people, both
in the cities and in country places, perplexes him, and he
wishes for special instructions how, as a magistrate, to deal
with them. You see that the Christians are evidently very
much in earnest about something, but let us see what it is.
Call the next witness. Tacitus, Roman, historian, friend of
Pliny. Tacitus, what can you tell us about the Christians ?
Tacitus says : The founder of this name, Christ, suffered
death in the reign of Tiberius, under one of our procurators,
Pontius Pilate, and a pernicious superstition thus crushed for
a time, broke out again, not only in Judaea, but even in Rome.
Now comes a most important piece of evidence —four letters
written not later than the year a.d. 58. The genuineness of
these letters is unquestionable. Some of the most learned
and clever critics of the nineteenth century, whose works are
on the table, all of them declared opponents of Christianity—
I will not tell you who they are yet, I wish to see if my op-
ponent knows—have with one voice confessed this. They
have tried to smash up the new testament; but these four
epistles, at any rate, proved too hard for the hammers of their
criticism. Open these letters and you will find that the
writer was a Christian teacher writing to his fellow-
Cliristians in Galatia, Corinth, and Rome, that is ho say,
in places distant from one thousand to two thousand miles
from the city in which Christ suffered death. As you read
these letters you will find that they are full of one subject,
namely, the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.
Not only is the resurrection mentioned by name in 12
different passages ; but is implied in every page. Nothing is
more clear from these letters, than that the writer, and those
to whom he wrote, firmly believed that Jesus was risen from
the dead, and not only believed, but gloried and triumphed in
his resurrection, as the source of a new life to themselves.
This belief was in fact the mainspring of their burning zeal and


devotion. It was the force which gave the original impulse
to that Christianity, which was to conquer the Roman world
within the next three hundred years ; the fountain of that
river which has overflowed the world. The very battle cry of
Christianity may be heard in the words of the 15th chapter of
one of these letters, “ Oh death, where is thy sting ! Oh
grave where is thy victory ! thanks be to God which giveth
us the victory through our lord Jesus Christ.” I shall have
much more to say about these letters to-morrow evening.
But for the present I must stop at this fact, that the story of
the resurrection had spread from Jerusalem to Rome : was
believed by thousands with the most intense earnestness, was
the origin of a spiritual earthquake, that was about to shake
and revolutionise, the whole civilised world, and this within 25
years of the death of Christ on the cross. All this is con-
clusively proved by these letters, the genuineness and
date of which are absolutely certain. If my opponent
questions this he will be doubting the verdict of the most
learned historical critics that the world has ever seen—men
on his own side, being declared opponents of Christianity.
Now what are we to say about this belief held by the disciples
of Christ so soon after his death ? Was it false ? or was it
true ?If it was false, then either the disciples must have
invented it to deceive other men, or they must have been
themselves deceived. Let us look at each of these supposi-
tions. (Ist.) Did the disciplesfraudently invent the story?'
What possible motive could they have had for inventing it ?
What did they gain by it ? Nothing but the hatred of man-
kind, loss of property and friends, labor, danger, imprison-
ment, often death itself, and death with horrible torture. Did
they expect to be rewarded in the world to* come ? What re-
ward could they expect in the world to come for propagating
a lie of tlieir own invention ? Besides, if they were impostors,,
they were the most amazingly clever impostors that the world
has ever seen. If you believe that this handful of Jews could
invent a story which should impose upon the world for 1800
years, you believe in a miracle far greater than the miracle of
the resurrection itself. No, it is absolutely certain that the
disciples were sincere in believing that their master was risen
from the dead. (2.) What then ? Were they deluded ?


This supposition is, if possible, more difficult than the other,
because it requires us to believe that the disciples were at once
supernaturally foolish and supernaturally clever. We are
to suppose that while the dead body of Jesus was mouldering
in the ground, the belief that he had risen from the dead
was spreading like wildfire, seizing first upon the minds of
those men who had known him so well in life ; and we are to
believe that the crazy fancies of those fanatical men and
women were the source of a religion which has lasted 18
centuries, and has overspread the whole modern world. To
believe this is far more difficult than to believe in any number
of miracles. Now look at these books, they are the works of
some of the cleverest Freethinkers in the 19th century. I
will tell you their names bye-and-bye. And they are all
written to explain scientifically how Christianity could have
started in the world without the resurrection of its founder.
These writers do not believe in miracles, and therefore they
try to give a scientific explanation of the origin of Christianity
without miracles, and above all, without the miracle of Christ’s
resurrection. They bring immense learning and ability with
them to this task, and what is the result ? They cannot agree
with one another as to what the right explanation is ; as soon
as one of them starts a new explanation the others criticise
and condemn it. It happens to them as it happened to the
mighty men of Joab and Abner in the battle. They caught
every man, his fellow, by the head, and thrust his sword into
his fellow’s side, and so they all fell down together. Here is
one of them who confesses this is so. After examining all
the explanations that have been given to get rid of the miracle
of the resurrection, he rejects them all, and says that critical
science has no explanation to give, and that if the Christian
chooses to believe that the resurrection of Jesus Christ is a
literal fact, “he is beyond the reach of refutation.” Mark that.
Dr. Keim, a scientific unbeliever says, that I am beyond the
reach of refutation, when I assert my belief in the resurrection
of Jesus Christ, so that before my opponent can refute me, he
will have to refute Dr. Keim. The motion which I have
moved this evening is seconded by Dr Keim, the great
Freethinker. That it is rational to believe that Jesus rose
from the dead.


Mr. Symes then rose, amidst loud applause. He said, my
opponent, unfortunately, instead of bringing forward any
proof that Jesus Christ rose from the dead, has been erecting
barriers beyond which he says, I cannot go in explaining
the phenomena of the Christian Church. Now, supposing I
could not explain those phenomena, still that would not prove
that Jesus rose from the dead; supposing I were not
scientific, that would not prove it, and supposing that Dr.
Keim, or Strauss, or Renan, could not explain certain
things, all that would not prove the resurrection. Supposing
I admit that we have Christanity now, that we had it in the
fourth century, and that in that century it conquered Rome,
which I do not altogether deny, that also proves nothing.
Other religions have sprung into existence, and have spread
more than Christianity has spread ; that does not prove
their founders rose from the dead. Even if the four epistles
of Paul were proved to be genuine, that does not prove that
Jesus rose from the dead. Paul, it appears, never saw
Jesus, and therefore he is not a witness, and you have no
right to bring him into court. If you do bring him, I shall
certainly tear him to pieces; and I don’t think he will prove
to be a witness for the resurrection of Jesus, unless you can
prove that he saw him both before and after he rose from the
dead. My opponent has referred to infidel writers who,
he says, are against me, and that, I admit, is true as to
some of them. But I would ask Mr. Berry if he has not yet
learnt that there are writers in his own church who do not
altogether agree with the new testament, because I shall
I will bring forward one writer who throws very great doubt
indeed upon the genuineness of Paul’s epistles, and I will
tell him the reason. This writer to whom I refe- is one of
Mr. Berry’s own church, and of long standing in the church,
and is known as a great scholar, as great perhaps as Keim,
or Strauss, or Renan. Now, he points out that the book that
is called the epistle of Paul to the Romans is written in
Greek, and in barbarous Greek. Now the people in Rome
never spoke barbarous Greek ; if they spoke Greek at all it
was classical Greek, and hence they would have found it diffi-
cult to understand this epistle. It was the same with
regard to the epistles to the Corinthians, for in Corinth the


Greek language was only spoken by officials, wlio never spoke
the patois of Greece. And then as to the epistle to the Gala-
tions, this gentlemen points out that the Galatians were a
lot of immigrants from France —the old Galatia—just as you
people in this colony are immigrants from Great Britain, and
that they spoke a language which was somewhat akin to the
Gaelic which is spoken in the Highlands of Scotland to-day ;
and yet the epistle to the Galatians is written in this barbar-
ous Greek. I only mention these facts to show that the
epistles of Paul are not so strong an entrenchment as Mr. Berry
thinks; nor can he shelter himself behind it. But I will grant,
for the sake of argument, and for the sake of argument only, the
genuineness of Paul's epistles. Still, it helps you not in the least
degree in showing that Jesus rose from the dead. After
stating this, I will take my own course in this argument, and
I cannot do so without saying some things that will not be
pleasing to my opponent, and I only ask him, and those who
hold with him, to believe that I do so only from a sense of
duty, and not from any desire to harrow his or their feelings.
I want to lay down certain propositions that you will all
agree with. It is not a likely thing that a dead man will
rise to life again. It is an absolute ride, I believe, that dead
people don’t rise again. Mr. Berry, I think, will admit that
this is nearly so, that when once a man is dead he remains
so. That is almost an absolute law of nature; Igo to the full
extent and say that it is an absolute law of nature, just as
really absolute and universal as the law of gravitation itself,
and that therefore being so, you must bring forward the
strongest evidence, if you say that this law has been
violated. It won’t do to tell us that perhaps I can’t explain
the opposite. We have got other facts, and I say you must
show me a witness unimpeachable and strong and unbreak-
able who says that Jesus rose from the dead, and then I
may believe it. How it is much more likely that those
people who said he rose from the dead, —and, by-the-
way, they are totally unknown, —I put it to you
as reasonable men and women, I put it to Mr. Berry, that it is
more likely those people blundered, than that the resurrection
took place. I will put it even stronger than that, and I will
say it is much more likely that those people told a lie,


itlian that Jesus rose to life again. And I would just
like to ask this question, Who was this Jesus that he
should rise from the dead ? who was he ? What was
he ? What did he do ? What did he say ? What does the
world owe to him, that he should be honoured in that
astounding fashion ? Does the world owe anything at all to
this Jesus who is supposed to have risen from the dead?
does the world owe him a single thought, that they should feel
that he should be thus singled out for the astounding honour
of being raised from the dead ? almost the only one who died
and rose once more to life ? The inventors of our civilisation,
those who invented even the commonest aits of life, the’
origin of which runs back to the great dawn of history—they did
not rise again. How is it that the inventors of science, of
•ethics, and of philosophy ? how is that our poets and great
men, our philosophers old and new, our discoverers of
•continents, our grand engineers who, though they could not
remove mountains, could yet tunnel them through ? how is
it that those men who have filled the world, not with the
miracles that you find in the bible, but with greater and
more real ones—how is it that they are all gone, while
this Jesus, to whom the world owes absolutely nothing,
is honoured in this wonderful way ? I may tell my op-
ponent that he requires strong arguments indeed, to prove
that Jesus rose from the dead. I hope he has got
it, and I am perfectly willing to believe that he has, but
I may tell him that I have yet more severe statements to
make. What witnesses, I say, have you 9 I want those
witnesses brought into court. lam not going to be satisfied
with generalities, and I am going to bind him down abso-
lutely to a point. 1 am going to compel him to bring his
witnesses into court, if he does not, then he will, at all
•events, have to confess, even if it is silently, that he has not
shown the belief in the resurrection to be rational. It is
curious that when Jesus was arrested all his disciples forsook
him and fled. Did they go back to him? If they did not,
then they did not witness his trial and crucifixion; and if that
is so, what becomes even of the evidence that Jesus died on
the cross ? Who are the vouchers for this death ? lama
plain man, and Mr. Berry won’t like me the worse for speak-


ing plainly when I say that there is no person known to
history who ever said, I knew Jesus ; I saw him crucified, I
saw him dead, and I vouch for his death, I saw him rise, or
I saw him after his resurrection. I challenged him to name
such a man or woman ; and this is an essential point, for if
Jesus did not die upon the cross, then the whole question about
his resurrection goes for nothing. If my opponent can’t
prove that Jesus died—l won’t say if he can’t repeat the
story told in the gospel—but if he can’t produce some voucher
that Jesus died upon the cross, we may just as well at once
give up the question about rising again. You must prove he
died before you prove that he rose again. And as to the
resurrection itself, it is a curious thing that the apostles did
not write down, either unitedly or separately, any account of
the resurrection of Christ ; and it is, too, a most astounding
thing that Mr. Berry has to fall back upon Paul. Where are
Peter, and Andrew, and John, and the rest of the twelve that
they have not given us their testimony ? There is not one of
them who says I was present; I wrote this ; I witnessed all this;
and I speak as an honest man. How is it that evidence of
this sort is not brought forth ? I presume it is because there
never was any evidence of the kind. Suppose we examine
the stories given in Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. And
Mr. Berry does not know who wrote these; the writers
themselves don’t tell us, and that is a fatal objection, unless
history authenticates the story you have to deal with. Let us
take such witnesses as we have. There is Matthew, and lam
only quoting the name that stands at the head of the gospel.
He tells you that at the end of the sabbath two Marys went to
the grave, and that there was a great earthquake; and Matthew,
you know, is rather fond of earthquakes. There was one, you
will remember, at the crucifixion, and at that many of the
saints came out of their graves, and went into the holy city
and were seen by many. Matthew tells us that an angel
from heaven rolled back the stone from the mouth of the
grave. Until Mr. Berry tells us what an angel is, I
certainly don’t know. lam .aware that the word originally
meant a messenger ; but what sort of messenger was it ?
And then it is said that this angel came from heaven. Does
Mr. Berry know where heaven is ? As far as I know the


idea is merely utopian, and exists only in the imagination of the
world. Then we are told that his face was like lightning, and
the keepers became as dead men. We are told that a watch
had been set; but that this watch got frightened, while the
two women stood it splendidly, although one of the other
gosples says that they were frightened and ran. And then
the angel says that Jesus is risen. I wonder if Mr. Berry
can produce that angel. You remember the story about the
rebellion in Jamaica, how a minister once came forward and
told a judge that a certain man who was accused of treason,
was innocent. How do you know ? said the judge. An angel
told me, was the reply. All right, says the judge ; let the
angel be called. And so say I here. Well, this angel told the
women this, and on that Jesus appeared, and those
two, we are told, held him by the feet: but John says that
he told this same Mary not to touch him, and that she, you
remember, went to the grave alone ; but in this case they
held him by the feet, and worshipped him. Then says this
writer, the watch went into the city and told their story—
how the disciples came and stole away the body. And then
the eleven went away to meet Jesus in Galilee. Some of
them doubted, just as I do, my friends. The writer does not
appear to have been there ; but we are told that Jesus sent
them into all nations to preach the gospel. Matthew says
not one word about the ascension of Jesus into heaven.
Now we come to Mark, and here we get two accounts of the
resurrection. I am quite aware that the latter part of this
gospel is not always treated as genuine, but I give you the story
as it is narrated in the new version. The first story is that
the two Marys went to the grave ; but Mark says
there was another woman named Salome. There is no
angel and no earthquake in his first account, but they find
the stone rolled away and a young man sitting on the right
side in the grave. There is no watch, and the women, after
seeing this man, were afraid and fled, and said nothing to
any man. This is Mark’s first story ; yet Matthew toldms that
they stood the sight quite well. Mark’s second story puts it in
quite a different light. He says that Jesus appeared first to
Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils ;
and I should not be surprised if this was the whole explanation,


that a little insanity was at the bottom of the entire thing,,
and it would not be the first time that insanity had
moved the world. The question is now whether this is
not the root of the whole resurrection story. This
Mary Magdalene out of whom Jesus had cast seven
devils—l am afraid more were left in her, and that it was the
remaining ones that did the mischief (Laughter and
applause). Well she reported that she had seen Jesus ; but
the disciples disbelieved her. Perhaps they said to one
another, “ Oh, it is Mary on again !” perhaps they said so to
themselves on the sly. Then the story goes on to say that
Jesus appeared to two of the disciples, or to speak by the
book, two of them as they went into the country, and these two
report to the others ; but they are not believed. You see,
as those men have no faith in one another, a doubt is at
once thrown on their honesty. They had walked about with
Jesus forthree years, and yet did not believe certain reports which
were told them by their fellows. Surely that showed there
was the want of a common tie amongst them; and if you
put that with the fact of their running away from this master
of theirs, when he got into danger, you will see that those disciples
were not quite such honest and trustworthy fellows as my oppon-
ent would have us believe. Well, he sends them out to preach
the gospel, and then goes up to heaven. Now we come to-
Luke, and I don’t think my opponent knows who is the
writer of this gospel. Luke tells us that the two Marys and
one Joanna went to the grave. What are we to make of
stories like these ? If the one is correct it is certain the
others must be incorrect. Well, these women find that the
stone has been rolled back, but now there is no angel and
no man sitting in white raiment, but there are two men out-
side, and they tell the Marys and Joanna that Jesus has-
risen. Then they go and report to the eleven ; with what
result ? Why the eleven treat the story as an idle tale..
There are the three women going back to tell all that they
had seen and heard about the resurrection, and the eleven do
not credit it! But Peter wants to see for himself, and runs to-
the grave and stoops down and sees the grave clothes laid on
one side by themselves, and what does he do ? Why, he
walks away wondering at those things which had come to-


pass. What is it, my friends, we are dealing with ? Is this
history, or what is it ? Peter found the grave clothes laid on
one side by themselves, and instead of investigating, he goes
away merely wondering at that which had come to pass. Is
this testimony ? I wonder what Peter would say if he were
in the witness box now and I were to cross-examine him.
Then we are told about two of them going to Emmaus,
and as they go along they chat about this crucifixion, and
•Jesus joins them on their way, their understanding is opened,
and they became aware that Jesus should have suffered and
risen again according to the scriptures ; but the fact is that
the old testament does not mention Jesus any more than it
mentions me. My time is now up I find, and so I must
reserve what further I have to say till my next speech.
Mr. Berry next rose, and said :—I honestly cannot see
'that my opponent has at all invalidated my arguments, unless
he is prepared to maintain that there can be an effect without
a cause ; that there can be a building without a foundation ;
a river without a source. What I began with was the evi-
dence of the existence of Christianity at the present time, and I
endeavored to trace it up to its source, and I showed you that
to account for the tremendous phenomenon of its existence you
must admit that there was something behind it all; something
more than the mere tale of credulous Jews. My opponent
has just said that Peter went away wondering at what had
come to pass. If he were in the world now would he not
wonder indeed at what had come to pass ? Suppose Pilate,
who did not believe it, and Caiaphas were in the world now,
and could see what effect the death and resurrection of Christ
has had 1800 years afterwards ; could see that Christianity
was more mighty than ever it had been ; that these books
written by these illiterate Jews had been translated into more
than 200 languages, would they not wonder at what
a stupendous fact it is ? My opponent has objected that
the story is full of marvels ; but I would ask him the question,
are its effects not marvellous ? and it is just because of this
that I assert that the cause of it all was equally marvellous.
I can also show you that all this was predicted, that the
founder of this religion predicted from the first all the
subsequent results, and compared the religion he was preaching


to the grain of mustard seed, which was to become a great
tree, in which the birds of the air should lodge. How was it
I ask, that he was able to foreknow all these things ? I will
now endeavour to notice the points upon which my opponent
has touched. He has thrown out the hint that these disciples-
were not honest and trustworthy. The Jews did not believe they
were more than impostors, and thought that nothing would
come of it; but that it would be like mormonism, as it is
under Joe Smith. But has Christianity passed away ? here
is the very point of my argument, the tremendous effect which-
all this has caused. My opponent has suggested that a little
insanity was at the bottom of all this ; but the system founded on;
this “ insanity ” has lasted for 1800 years, and exists still in the
heart of every civilised nation in the world. I don’t see indeed
how absurdity can go beyond such a suggestion. My opponent
has twitted me with leaving the gospel accounts of the
resurrection of Christ. I was too cunning for that.. I did not
put them in, because I knew I was bringing in incon-
trovertible evidence older than the gospel accounts, for these
epistles are older than the gospel accounts, and it is on
them, more than on any thing else that that the certainty
of the resurrection of Jesus rests. How, suppose you could
prove that the accounts of the resurrection in the four gospels-
contradicted one another, what would you prove ? You-
would simply prove that four independent accounts, written-
many years afterwards, contradicted one another in parts, but
you would not prove by that that the resurrection did not take-
place. The Empress of the French was obliged to fly from-
Paris in 1870, and I heard the account of the way in which
she fled, and I read a different account afterwards, and I
could not reconcile the two, but was I on that account to say
that the Empress of the French never did fly from Paris ? I
admit that each account of the resurrection is a fragmentary
account; that each one tells independently what he has seen r
and that if you put these accounts together and try to make
them into a harmonious article it is difficult. The author of.
the third gospel is the same as the author of the Acts of the
Apostles, and you will see that they were given to Theophilus.
From the account in St. Luke you would think it was-
intended to be understood that Christ ascended to heaven the-


third day that he rose from the dead ; but turn to the Acts of
the Apostles and you will see that it was 40 days after his
resurrection that he ascended into heaven. The same
writer simply leaves out in one account what he supplies in
the other. Do you suppose that the same writer would tell
two stories that were contradictory ? The variations in the
four accounts show the independence and honesty of the
four writers ; and the fact that these works written by
illiterate Jews have lived down to the present age, and
are better known than the best works of the classic writers,
is a proof of the wonderful power that was behind their
writings. My opponent has asked me to bring St. Paul
into court, and I will do so to-morrow evening. Then my
opponent says that there is no person known to history who
has ever said that he knew this Jesus. Have I not as much
right to say that the new testament is history as that any
-other book is history ? I suppose Mr. Symes believes in the
existence of Alexander the Great, and I ask him can he pro-
duce any evidence that Alexander the Great ever lived ? I
imagine he refuses to accept the testimony of the followers of
Christ, and in just the same way I refuse to accept the
testimony of the followers of Alexander. Then there is
Socrates. Ho one, I suppose, doubts that Socrates lived, but
there are only two of his disciples, Xenophon and Plato, that
tell us about him, and we don’t know him from any other
source. My opponent says he wants evidence about the death
of Christ. Well, his death rests upon the same evidence as
his resurrection. The world disbelieved the Apostles then, but
would the world disbelieve now when they saw how the
Apostles’ words have become true, that their words have lived
while the words of other books had perished ? My opponent
says that there are other religions that have lived in the
world, that have spread and flourished, and I suppose it will
be asserted that Buddhism has more followers than Christi-
anity. I believe Buddhism began in India. How, Melbourne
is quite as near to India as Rome was to Judaea ; but Budd-
hism has not extended to Melbourne. There is no Buddhist
Society, no Buddhist young men’s society here. Yet
Buddhism had 400 years start of Christianity. How is it
that Christianity has beat Buddhism out and out in the race ?


And what, I would ask, lias Buddhism ever done for the
world ? My opponent says we wants the strongest proof con-
ceivable that the belief in the resurrection :s rational. I did
not say it was ever anything but a miracle, and the effect shows
that it was miraculous. Mr. Symes grants, “ for the sake of
argument,” the genuineness of these epistles, but we don’t
accept this. We want him to argue the point, and if he does
deny their genuineness he must argue with men of deep
learning—witlilearned infidels, who have asserted over and over
again that their genuineness is unimpeachable. I say that, as
the leader of freethouglit in this city, he ought to be able to
take up the Greek testament itself and give you his reasons for
not admitting the genuineness of these four Epistles. Men of
Melbourne, which will you have to teach you in that matter ?
Will you have the most learned men, the greatest critics of the
19th century, or will you have Mr. Symes ? I fail to see that
my argument has been touched in the slightest degree, and I
declare, as I said at first, that if you don’t admit the resurrec-
tion of Christ then you must simply say that the stupendous
fact of Christanity is an effect without a cause (Applause).
Mr. Symes then rose and said, I have no objection to dis-
cuss with Mr. Berry, either in the pages of the Liberator or
anywhere else, any question on the Greek testament he likes,
and I should not be surprised if he discovers before
we have done, that I know as much about it as he
does. I spent a good many hours over it that I ought to
have spent in something better. But with all due respect to
Mr. Berry, this is not the place to discuss the Greek testa-
ment, and he knows that. He talks about great critics who
support him, what does he say about his own church ? I could
bring up Colenso or the gentlemen I have referred to,
and as far as I know, he is as great as any Mr. Berry could
bring from the opposite side ; and the question is,
whether you will be guided by this great critic of the
Church of England, or bymy opponent. Mr. Berry says I have
not invalidated his argument, unless I can show that there is
an effect without a cause. I told you I didn’t deny the
existence of Christianity. It may have existed, and have
done all the good that is claimed for it, and all the bad too—
and I think it has done more of the latter than the


former—and yet Jesus not hare risen from tlie dead.
And I liave no objection to meet Mr. Berry, or any other
gentleman, and debate that question as to whether Christianity
has done more harm than good. Before we hare done, I
shall deal with that and also my opponent’s argument about
the wonderful effects of Christianity ; but meanwhile I hare
my side of the argument to bring forward, and I want now to
point out some great defects in my opponent’s speech. I
challenged him to point to some one person in history
who had known and seen Jesus. I don’t mind giving
him the new testament, and I say there is no one
in the new testament who says, I knew Jesus, I saw him
crucified, I saw him alive after he was once dead. Mr. Berry,
knowing that I challenged him to produce such a man, and
that for his purposes he can have the new testament,
where is the use of coming forward without a single witness
to back him up ? He has been trying special pleading ; but it
won’t do with us—it won’t do with me. I want something
stronger. I must have some direct evidence; and it is no use
talking to me about Socrates or Plato or Alexander. My
salvation or condemnation does not depend upon them ;
nobody has said they were divinely inspired. If they
had, I should have been as exacting in regard to
witnesses as I now am in regard to Jesus. Julius Caesar
is supposed to have lived and to have done a great
deal of mischief on the one hand, and of good on
another. He has left most interesting books, or some
one else has, and these are just as good, whether Julius Caesar
or another wrote them ; but there is a point about Julius Caesar
which I want to note. No one would doubt that Julius Caesar
lived ; it is probable that he was a warrior, and that he
wrote certain books. I don’t see any improbability in this ;
but Virgil in one of his eclogues, describes Julius Caesar,
after he was dead, mounting up to heaven. It is
there where I part company with the historian. Some
people tell us that Alexander was miraculously born, that
Jupiter was his father, and not Phillip. I see no reason to
doubt that he conquered a great part of the world, and
founded the grand city of Alexandria, and murdered
Callisthenes ; but when you tell me that he was miraculously


born, lat once part company with you. If you tell me that a
man lived in Judea, that he was a noted man, and preached the
sermon on the mount, that he was hated by the Pharisees r
that he walked about over the whole of Palestine, as much of
the probable as you like, and a little even of the marvellous,,
and I will say nothing; but it is the Jesus of the new testament
that I call in question, whom I look upon as a mythological crea-
ture of the same sort as Hercules and many others that figure
in classical works generally. I don’t believe that he
walked upon the sea, and when you tell me that he was a man
who came down from heaven, I know that is not true. And
that is not all I am going to say, for I am going to claim
that Mr. Berry is on my side. If I told you that I came
down from heaven yesterday, there is not a man present who-
would believe it; but yet I am prepared to prove it, if you
prove that Jesus did. When you say the man cast out
devils, or withered up the fig tree with a curse or by a word, or
with a look could cure the most terrible diseases, or open the-
eyes of blind, I at once doubt you. I don’t say you are
telling a lie, but simply that it is extraordinary, and I ask
you what evidence you have. I say, suppose you have got
good, reasonsable evidence, I am willing to examine it; but,
I have gone through all Mr. Berry’s evidence, and I say it is
such evidence as he himself would not accept in a court of jus-
tice if the amount in dispute were only 55., and if he were on such
testimony mulcted in that amount he would certainly say he
was an injured man. Now, Mr. Berry says that this Jewish
carpenter revolutionised the world. I don’t think he did. I
don’t think there is a single doctrine be taught that is not older
than Jesus, older than Christianity ; and if you say that those
doctrines revolutioned the world, I say they were doctrines-
that existed before Jesus appeared ; and unless you can show
that there was something that had not been preached before,,
I think you are entirely out of court, and that it will be diffi-
cult to persuade rational people that Jesus did rise from the
dead. My opponent asks about results, and I will note one r
and it seems to me to be a damning one. He referred in hi 3
speech to the great Roman Empire. Well, lam an admirer
of that Roman Empire. We have seen nothing to equal it
from that time until now. I don’t deny that there were great
B


faults, but in course of time those would have been cured.
This was an educated empire. It had a magnificent literature
that it had. borrowed from Greece, and one also that grew up,
closely akin to that of Greece, amongst themselves. It had
art of a splendid type or types ; it had all the leading
elements of civilization, and was on the road of progress and
conquest, not only material but mental. And now I want to
show you what was the result. In the fourth century Chris-
tianity conquered, and the Roman Empire went down from
that time until it got to a state that was indescribable, until
it fell indeed into what was the blackest part of the history of
the world ; and I charge Christianity with having done
that. And but for the remains of Pagan literature all
civilization would have been destroyed. (Applause.)
Mr. Berry again spoke. He said:—lt appears to me that
my opponent has mistaken the century in which he lives, and
argues as if he lived in the first and not in the nineteenth,
and very much the same as a Greek or a Jew would have done
in the days of St. Paul. You remember that Paul went to
Athens and preached of the resurrection of the dead, and
that some of them mocked at him. I mean the Stoics and
Epicureans who were the clever men of their day, but where
are they now, and where is all their wisdom ? All gone,
while the life of this Jewish carpenter and his disciples’
writings live with us, and have been familiar works in our
households. My opponent attributes the fall of the Roman
Empire to Christianity ; but I will endeavor to show you
to-morrow that so far from Christianity being the cause of
its fall, it really introduced into that Empire an element
that might have kept it alive if anything could ; and I will
■show you the difference between the Roman Christian Empire
and the Pagan Empire. You will observe that though the
Roman Empire has gone down Christianity has not. My
opponent has spoken of Julius Caesar and Alexander as great
conquerors, but what of all their doings have we left to us
now ? Alexander was a great commander, and founded a
mighty empire, but if a common soldier in his army had
founded a mightier empire that would have been much more
extraordinary. Well Jesus was a private individual, but he
has created an Empire based not on force but on love, that


has lasted down to tlie present time. Mr. Symes lias come
here to endeavour to put secularism in the place of Chris-
tianity. Suppose that he succeeds, and that after 1800 years,
men look back to him as the founder of secularism. I will
tell you what will then be said by unbelievers. They will
say, “ What evidence is there that such a person as Symes
ever existed ? Only the testimony of his own followers, and
we won’t believe that !” Something has been said about
Hercules, who is compared with Jesus. Where, I would ask,
is there a young men’s Hercules association ? What do you
know of Hercules at all ? No doubt there were wonderful
things told about him, but they are like a ghost story,
beginning in nothing and ending in nothing. Now the
work of Jesus began by wonders and marvels, at which my
opponent and you have been laughing. But what has been
the result of these things ? Suppose Pilate, who saw these
things, and who asked, art thou a king, and to him Jesus
replied, lam a king. Suppose he could have looked forward
eighteen hundred years and heard us talking about Jesus as
we do, do you suppose he would have treated his claim to be
a king with the incredulity he did. I must return to the
assertion with which I started. Every effect must have an
adequate cause. Christianity is the effect, and the resur-
rection of Christ the only adequate cause for it. I may as
well tell you who these infidel critics are, whose books I
have shown you. They are the writers of what is called the
Tubingen School (after the German University of Tubingen).
Being the best scholars of literature and history, and being
infidels, they tried to account for Christianity scientifically,
without the miracle of Christ’s resurrection, and they failed.
I say that my opponent has not accounted for this stupendous
effect, and still he refuses to believe that Christianity had
any other cause than the delusions of a few Jews.
Well if that had been the case the thing would not have
lasted a century. I say that unless you admit the death and
resurrection of Jesus from the dead, you can’t account for the
way in which this Jewish carpenter has revolutionised the
world. Do you think that any carpenter in Melbourne will
become a great historic character in the world 1,800 years
after this. No one, says my opponent, saw Jesus after he


rose. Why, would those people hare written at all if they had
not had something to write about ? If their Master had been
only dead would they have risen up and proclaimed everywhere
that He was risen, or if they had done so would they not
everywhere have been refuted ? And then one writer says,
“ That which we have seen with our eyes and heard with our
ears declare we unto you.” The apostle John tells us that he
is declaring that which lie has seen and heard; and then he
says, “ This is the victory which overcometh the world, even
our faith.” A Greek or a Roman, if he had heard him, would
have said he was crazy to talk of “ overcoming the world.”
And yet this faith has been fighting and overcoming the
world ever since. Take all the philosophers the world
ever saw, and what have they taught compared with
what the Hew Testament has taught ? There is not one
one of these philosophers who is known to the working man
of the present day. Their names are mere names, and
nothing more ; and you cannot point to any institution in the
world as the result of what they have done. If my opponent
cannot see the absurdity of supposing that such a stupendous
effect would have resulted from such a cause as he seeks to
show, I do not think, that the logical faculty in him
is very strong. (Laughter and applause.)
Mr. Symes then rose, and said I don’t think it is quite fair
to say as Mr. Berry has, that your logical faculty is not strong,,
if you do not accept his reasoning. It seems to me that that
is not convincing, and it certainly is not logic. Is it not just
possible that my logic may be as strong as his ? and yet you
are not bound to agree with me, and I shan’t say that Mr.
Berry’s logic is not so good as mine, because he does not
agree with me. I think it is only fair to put it on the broad
ground, that we have each a certain amount of logic ; but we
don’t agree with one another. My opponent has spoken of
Paul at Athens, and about Plato and Socrates, the Stoics and
the Epicureans, and it is curious to notice hew much of the
Stoic religion has gone into Christianity, perhaps some of
the Epicurean also, though not so much. But these philoso-
phers are not lost. The whole of Europe teemed with intellec-
tual life at the grand awakening, after the night of Christianity
in the middle ages, but it was not to the new testament


men turned when they wanted a guide in the study
of nature and art, but they turned to Plato and Aristotle,
to the great writers of Greece and Rome, to what was
called profane literature, and out of that great seed sowing
sprang the grand harvest of modern literature, as we be-
hold it now. From whence did they draw their guides in
astronomy or medicine, or any art you like to name, was it
from the bible ? No, but from the fragments of Grecian and
Roman literature, which had escaped the ravages of Chris-
tianity. Those Stoics and Epicureans are not studied, because
the priests have abused them, and told their flocks to read the
bible when they ought to be reading nobler works, and works
of far more concern to humanity and civilisation. My
opponent wants to know if Jesus is not greater than
Alexander? I don’t know that I am prepared to draw a
contrast or a parallel, but I would ask Mr. Berry this, what
has Jesus ever done for the human race? He has not yet
met that question with an answer. Well, I know something
that Alexander is at least reported to have done, and it is one
of the greatest deeds that ever were done. lam ashamed of
a great deal that Alexander did, but when he founded Alexandria
he founded one of the grandest centres of civilisation that
the world has ever seen, a city which formed, as it were, a
focus to which the learning and science and art of the world
converged—that splendid city which the barbarians from
England destroyed a year or two ago, out of which arose
nearly all that is noble and grand in Civilisation, and also
much of that which is poisonous—namely, the superstition
known as Christianity. If Jesus had only founded a city
like that, and had brought the nations of the world together
in a city of philosophy and study, and united them instead of
bringing sorrow and disunity; then many things that have been
done we never should have heard of, the burning of heretics and
the burning of witches; we never should have heard of the burn-
ing of Jews, or of the Crusades, and of those frightful crusades
on a smaller scale in the South of France, or of the Christians
from Spain going over to America, and murdering millions of
the inhabitants because they imagined they did not belong to
the same race of human beings that they did, or to that race that
had been redeemed by Christ. If he had done that, fanaticism


would never have cursed America, nor spread to Switzerland
and Italy, and Spain and France, and Great Britain : if Jesus
had only founded another city like Alexandria, instead of
sending out his disciples to preach superstition, and that
bitterest of all creeds, hell fire and eternal torment, as he is
supposed to have done. Mr. Berry wants to know if I shall
be heard of 1,800 years to come. Well I don’t know and I
don’t care ; but I believe I have done more for the human race
than Jesus has, after all ; and if Mr. Berry thinks that is not
correct I challenge him to put me right ; and I will ask him
to name one good thing that the human race owes to Jesus,
one useful art that the world owes to the bible, or one useful
institution. I don’t think he can mention a single one. I
don’t want to be heard of as Jesus is heard of; and I will
tell you one reason why—l am only trying to get equals and
to raise man to man’s proper level. If mankind treats me as
a leader, so much the worse for them. I want them to do
without leaders—to be leaders themselves. Mr. Berry has
said that Hercules had left no institutions. Has lie never
heard that the altars of Hercules were places where those in
danger could run for safety, and that festivals were instituted
in honor of him ? The fact is, those heroes of antiquity have
left institutions attached to their names, just the same as
Jesus has done. And you can trace the one back to its root,
just as easily as the other. Now, I will ask Mr. Berry to tell
us to-morrow night, what institution did Jesus found, that is
associated with his name to-day ? What was his work that
the world should be asked to honour him ? What did he do
that he should be raised from the dead ? And if he can’t do
this, and can’t give us a witness to the resurrection of Christ
from the dead, I say that he has utterly broken down in this
contest; and it must avail him nothing to say that he is a better
man than I, he must show that it is rational to believe that
Jesus rose from the dead. So far he has not put forward
any evidence of that fact. He says I deny the cause while I
admit the effect. I say it does not require a resurrection from
the dead to account for what Christianity has done, and
unless he can show that Christianity could not spread except
Jesus did rise from the dead, it is quite idle to say cause and
effect can in any way support his contention. Will Mr. Berry


tell us how Buddhism spread ? and it spread over a wider
range than Christianity has ever done. I have been told
that Buddhism at the present time numbers about 500
millions of followers, and I apprehend that Mr. Berry will
not contend that Christianity numbers so many. I think lie
will have to put it at something under 400 millions. We
have this gigantic fact that Buddhism has spread over one third
of the human race, and yet I don’t suppose he believes that
Buddha rose from the dead. I need not quote what Max
Muller, Rhys Davids, Spence Hardy, and others say on
that subject. Nor are we bound to believe everything
we are told about Jesus, though we are bound to
admit that Christianity spread. I will endeavour to
give you to-morrow night my theory as to the spread of
Christianity, and it is no use for my opponent to drag up great
men, for they can be brought on both sides. The question is
a matter of fact ; you may bring up dozens of infidels, dozens
of Germans if you like, but the facts have to be discussed
on their own merits after all. I take a direct method with these
matters, and if my opponent wants to go into more recondite
points after, the pages of our paper are open to him, or we
will discuss in any secular paper in Melbourne any question
that is open to dispute between secularists and Christians.
(Applause.)
A vote of thanks to the Chairman, proposed by Mr. Symes
and seconded by Mr. Beny, brought the first night’s debate
to a close.


SECOND NIGHT.
The second night’s debate between the Rev. D. M. Berry and
Mr. Joseph Symes on the question: “Is it rational to believe
that Jesus rose from the dead ?” took place before a large
audience in the Hall of Science on Wednesday evening, 25th
June, Mr. Smith being in the chair.
Mr. Berry first spoke. He said :—Before calling the wit-
ness of whom I spoke last night, I must dispose of some
remarks of-my opponent. He asked why should Jesus rise
from the dead more than any other man ? I answer, in the
words of St. Peter, “ Because it was not possible that He
should be held captive by it.” Heath is the natural conse-
quence of sin. Jesus was without sin. The Jews indeed
accused him of sin, as the Liberator does, but God vindi-
cated His character as the Holy One, who was not to see
corruption. I am aware that the Liberator tries to find
faults in the character of our Lord by putting the most
unfair construction upon His words and deeds, but the
injustice of these trumped up charges is as glaring
as their grossness is revolting. This is a serious
charge, but any candid Freethinker who has read an
article in the Liberator called Gentle Jesus, will, I am
convinced, acknowledge that it is true. My opponent has
said that Freethinkers differ. He says truly; because some
Freethinkers have their freethoughts guided by education,
and by good taste. Such a one is Renan, the author of
one of the many freethinking biographies of Christ. I
regard Renan as a dangerous enemy of Christianity,
but he is a man of immense learning and lofty intellect,
and nothing can be more different from his words
about Christ than the words of the Liberator. I
have only time for one specimen. After describing Christ’s
death, he says : —“ Rest now in thy glory, noble initiator,
thy work is completed ; thy divinity is established. At the
price of a few hours of suffering, which have not even touched


thy great soul, thou hast purchased the most complete im-
mortality. For thousands of years the world will extol thee.
Banner of our contradictions, thou wilt be the sign around
which will be fought the fiercest battles. A thousand times
more living, a thousand times more loved since thy death
than during the days of thy pilgrimage here below, thou wilt
become to such a degree the corlier stone of humanity, that
to tear thy name from this world would be to shake it to its
foundations. Between thee and God men will no longer dis-
tinguish. Complete conquerer of death, take possession of
thy kingdom whither, by the royal road thou hast traced, ages
of adorers will follow thee.” I hope every one in Melbourne,
■even the little children, will understand that a man may be a
Freethinker of the highest learning and ability and yet in-
capable of speaking about Jesus Christ in the way that the
Liberator does. Again my opponent has asked me
to name one useful art or institution founded by
Jesus—l answer. Christ was not a teacher of arts or
a founder of material institutions, but the spirit which he
brought into the world impregnates all our best modern
institutions. I shall prove this with regard to our laws. We
owe our system of law mainly to the Roman Empire ; but not
to the Pagan Roman Empire. It is the Christian empire
which has given us the substratum of our law, as everyone
knows, who knows what is meant by the codes of Theodosius
mid Justinian. Here are a few of the reforms in Roman
law, made by Constantine. That widows and orphans should
always have the right to appeal against a judge to the
Emperor, That widows should be free from the tax laid on
the common people. That no labour except field labour
should be compulsory on Sunday. This was a special benefit
to slaves. The next was a mercy to prisoners. Those
arrested for crimes must be confined in a humane manner.
The cells must have air and light. That the women’s prison be
separate from the men’s prison. That judges should visit the
prisons every Sunday, to see that the prisoners do not receive
cruel treatment. That parents might not kill their children.
That poor parents should receive state relief in order that
they might not be driven by poverty to sell their children.
Time forbids me to enlarge upon this most fruitful subject.


My opponent calls the middle ages the night of Christianity, and!
the Renaissance the awaking of that night ; but the middle age
Christianity was not a Bihle Christianity. The Bible was for-
bidden to the people in their own language during the Middle-
Ages. In the 16th century it was precisely those nations
which received the Bible that came to the front rank
of civilisation, while those which had only the
renaissance and rejected the Bible, Italy and Spain,
fell to the rear. In the 17th century who won for England
her liberties against the tyranny of the Stuart Kings ? The
Puritans, the men of the Bible. Who founded the great
republic of America ? The Puritans, who went to New
England for “ freedom to worship God.” Look at the picture
of the Pilgrim Fathers in your own National Gallery. Im
the 18th century who perpetrated the horrors of the Reign of
Terror in France ? The men who publicly proclaimed that
there is no God and no future life, and who worshipped the
goddess reason in the person of a woman of bad character.
My opponent has more than once hinted in his speeches that
we cannot be sure that Jesus Christ ever existed, and mo:e
than once the Liberator has challenged a correspondent to
prove that he ever did exist. What does this mean ? It
means that we cannot be sure that this is the year 1884. How
does he suppose that the most civilised nations in the
world came to make such a stupid blunder as to date their
calender from the birth of a man who may never have
existed ? I assert that the existence of the Liberator is as
great an insult to the intelligence of the city of Melbourne as
it is to its Christianity. To-night I am going to
call as witness of Christ’s resurrection the writer
of the four letters of which I spoke last night r
the apostle St. Paul. We cannot have him here
in the body because he is dead, but we are as certain that
we have his four letters as if we saw him write them. My
opponent granted the genuineness of these letters “ for the
sake of argument.” I beg his pardon. He granted it
because he dare not deny it. I should at once confront him;
with the unanimous verdict of all the critics, ancient and
modern, Infidel and Christian, and ask him to show his
reason for setting up his opinion against theirs. It is not


enough for him to say, “ We Freethinkers differ amongst
ourselves.” If I were to differ on a point of law from all the
judges in Australia, you would require me to produce pretty
strong reasons for doing so. I doubt if my opponent has the
least idea how the genuineness of ancient writings is deter-
mined. I infer this from his ridiculous objection that these
letters were written in Greek. He ought to know that Greek
was the almost universal literary language of that age. Even
a Roman Emperor, Marcus Aurelius, wrote in Greek. Greek
was written in Gaul (France) in the second century. But he
objects that St. Paul’s Greek was not good classical Greek.
What sort of Greek would you expect a Jew to write ? If
St. Paul’s letters had been written in classical Greek, they
would be proved forgeries. One strong evidence that they
are genuine is that their Greek has a Hebrew colouring. I
come from the Island of Mauritius, where French is spoken;
but it is Mauritian French, which a Parisian would hardly
understand. If I saw a book in that French, I should know
that it was written by a Mauritian. When I read tliese-
letters I know that they w'ere written by a Hebrew. So much
for my opponent’s knowledge of the science of criticism.
I hope you are proud of your leader of freethouglit. r l um
now to the 15th chapter of the first letter to the Christians of
Corinth. St. Paul is writing partly to defend himself against
his opponents in Corinth, who said that he was not an
apostle. In writing to enemies a man is generally careful
not to make false statements which they might contradict.
He reminds them, that he had preached to them that Christ
died for our sins, and that he rose again. He says that
Christ was seen by Cephas (Peter). Paul must have-
heard this from Peter at his first visit to Jerusalem in
a.d. 39, (see Galatians 1, 18) only about four years after the
death of Christ. This was pointed out to me in the work of
the unbelieving critic Dr. Keim. St. Paul continues “ then
(he was seen) by the twelve,” after that by five hundred
brethren at once ” of whom more than half are still alive.
Would St. Paul have dared to make such a statement to his
enemies who would be only too glad to convict him? Mr
opponent objects that I cannot produce witnesses “ known to-
history who declare that they saw Christ alive from the dead.


Suppose sueli a statement had been made and signed by these
five hundred witnesses, how does he suppose it could have
been forwarded to us ? Suppose it had been addressed
•“ To the editor of the Liberator, Melbourne. It would
have been returned from the Dead Letter office with this
comment “ Melbourne not yet built. First number of the
Liberator will not appear for eighteen hundred years,” so it
would have to be redirected “ care of the Corinthians, to be
kept till called for,” and when it was called for it would be
so old that the Liberator would say how do we know
that this is a genuine document? These names are
not “ known to history.” St Paul continues, “ Last of all
lie was seen by me also.” Here it is; St. Paul, a man very
well known to history, tells us that lie saw Christ after his
resurrection; only, as we were not born when he wrote, he
addressed.his statement to the Corinthians to be kept for us.
It certainly has kept remarkably well. When the statement
was first made, it would not have been believed by more than
a few thousand educated people; the rest of the world would
have said about it just what the Liberator would say now—
that it was incredible, that it was irrational, that it was
against an absolute law of nature. This was, in fact, just
what the Athenians thought of it, when St. Paul told the
same story to them. This was what Festns thought of it when
he said: Paul, thou art beside thyself. Tacitus would have
called it “ a pernicious superstition.” When Paul told the
same story to the Jews they said, “ Away w r ith such a fellow
from the earth.” When other witnesses told the same story
of Christ’s resurrection to the Jews they said, “ Did we not
straitly threaten you not to teach in this name?” So you see
that my opponent in the 19th century holds the same views
that were held by the Athenians, the Romans, and the Jews
in the first century. Is this what you call progress of
thought ? Is the 19th century to hold the same views as the
first century ? This is what I should call going backward
instead of forward. But the Liberator is a leader of ad-
vanced thought. I have heard of a dancing master who could
teach his pupils to advanee three steps backward, but if you
follow the Liberator you will advance 18 centuries back-
wards. St. Paul, on the other hand, was not stopped by the


mockery of the Athenians, by the sneers of Festus,. or by the
violence of the Jews. He was not afraid to stand against the
world and testify to the fact of the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead. He said to Festus, “ I am not mad
most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and
soberness.” And he is speaking forth the same words down
to the present day. The Liberator said the other day the
Apostles never did bear witness of Jesus in the uttermost
parts of the earth, but here is one of them, St. Paul, bear-
ing witness now in the Hall of Science. The Liberator
says “ What became of the Apostles you cannot tell.’ I
say yes, I can, here they are, or what is the same thing' here
are the authentic documents of their testimony, telling Us just
what they told men at the beginning. I like a man who
always says the same thing, a man who never needs to alter
his statements. The Apostles have been making the same
statement for 18 centuries. They were the greatest leaders
of advanced thought that the world ever saw. They were 18
centuries in advance of their own age. But my opponent re-
jects their statements ; he says of the Bible, Away with such’
a book from the earth ; he would bring us back to
the views of the first opponents of St. Paul ; iff
place of the New Testament he would give us those"
fragments of Greek and Latin literature of which he is such
an admirer. Well, then, let him produce them. I)o not let
him talk vaguely to you about classical literature, but let him*
show you what it is. I shall be happy to lend him as much
of it as I possess, and he can translate it and lecture vou>
upon it here every Sunday evening. What is the use of de-
nouncing the bible unless you give people something better
in its place ? You ought to insist upon his doing this.
You ought to say to him : Sir, we are glad to hear of the-
beauties of Greek and Roman literature, but we would much
rather see them than hear about them. But I know some-
thing of what this literature is, and I can promise you that
if your lecturer will take it as his subject instead of the Bible
the Hall of Science will soon be empty. St. Paul goes off
to speak of the glorious subject of the resurrection. “ Some
will say, how are the dead raised 7” and then he answers
“ Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except-


it die.” “You object to resurrection,” says St. Paul,
because it is miraculous ; but what about the resurrection
■of the seed you sow in the ground. That is a miracle, too.
But you can’t help believing it, because you see it.”
And then he concludes with this glorious battle - cry
•of Christianity, “0! death, where is thy sting ? 0 !
grave, where is thy victory ? The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law ; but thanks be to God,
who givetli us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
My friends, you and I alike want something to take away the
sting of death. Even poor Renan calls upon the spirit of his
•departed sister to come to him and reveal those truths that
will make death amiable to him. This is my hope as a
'Christian. Wherever death carries me Jesus Christ has
gone before me ; lie has passed through it all, and has
ascended up to Heaven, and he is able to take the weakest
and the feeblest of his people and give to them eternal life.
Mr. Symes then spoke. He said : Talking about the sting
of death ; that is theological belief. A man who does not
believe in a hereafter feels no sting in death. It is only the
believer who fears that sting. I have lost it through growing
•out of theology. Mr. Berry has lost it, in some other way, and
so we are equal. That with which he has closed would do
very well for the pulpit, but not for debate ; and I am sorry
we have had too much of the pulpit, and not enough of the
platform during this discussion, and it seems to me that my
•opponent has wasted time instead of dealing with the question,
Is the resurrection rational ? So far no rationality has been
proved in the case. Some things he has brought forward are
true enough and others are utterly incorrect; and I shall
endeavour to show you that he has mistaken some points
and given them as if they were strong points in favor of his
contention, while they really are not so. How do you know
Jesus was not born in original sin ? You have only
statements on both sides ; how do you know he was not born
with as much original sin as Mr. Berry and I ? I don’t mind
telling you that I was born as pure as lie was. I don’t agree
that Jesus was without sin in his life. That man who
destroyed a herd of swine, that did not belong to him, was a
: sinner just as much as I should be if I destroyed this theatre,


that does not belong to me. Here was an act of wanton
destruction of somebody else’s property ; and that is a sin, if
I understand, that no one lias a right to commit anywhere.
We are told that he treated the fig tree after the
same fashion. It did not belong to him; if it had
belonged to Mr. Berry, no doubt he would have complained
about it. I ask if it is not a sin to intimidate people
to get them to believe in you ? If Mr. Berry told you
to-night that, if you did not believe in him, he would have
you broken on the wheel and roasted, and you thought lie had
the power, would that he a just thing on his part ? It would
be a great sin to threaten poor people with horrible punish-
ment for not believing in you. Now, one half of Christ’s
teaching was intimidation. We are told that those cities that
did not believe were to receive a doom worse than Sodom and
Gomorrah; and that those men who did not believe would be
■damned. That is intimidation. Not only so, but Jesus was
a deceiver. Mr. Berry has been pitching into the Liberator.
That seems to he a bug-bear, and I am glad to see that it is
rousing them so. I take it that that is a compliment, and
it shows it has truth in it or they would not care. The
long and short of it is, I have stung them, and I mean to
sting them again. If the paper were not true, they would
leave it alone ; but you see how they act ; you hear how
they complain. Now, I say that Jesus was a wholesale
deceiver, that he taught the people in a language they
could not understand, with the object of deceiving them.
He says to his disciples, I speak to the people m
parables so that they may not understand me, but you, my
disciples, I will tell you what I mean. As for the people
•outside, I don’t want them to understand. Now, is it not a sin
to tell people one thing and to a mean another ? He deceived
the Jews, and he deceived Pilate. The Jews crucified him
under a mistake. Had they known he was the son of god
they would not have crucified him. They would not have
■crucified him if they had known that he was to rise again ;
but he kept the secret to himself. If he had almighty power,
he could have told the story so that they would understand him.
Jesus alone is to blame for that crime of the crucifixion. He
was the cause of it from the beginning to the end of the whole


concern, every item of it, every feature of it. He knew that
these Jews were doing it under a mistake, and he would not
enlighten them, but preferred to allow them to go on, pre-
tending that he forgave them ; but at the same time resolving
to damn them for what they were doing. You can’t find a
worse case of hypocrisy in the whole history of mankind.
Jerusalem was destroyed 40 years later, and the chief cause
was, it is said, this crucifixion of the son of god. He knew
what he purposed doing, and yet all the time he was pre-
tending to pray for his enemies, while cherishing bitter
enmity against them and their city. Is that being without
sin ? I challenge my opponent to show a worse character in
the history of the world. Now we come to John Stuart
Mill and Renan. These are prime supporters of Mr. Berry;
and yet he told you that they denied the resurrection. But if
they don’t agree with him on that, they are of no use to him,
for that is what he has to prove. If he does not prove that,
he loses this battle. These great critics say a few words in
eulogy of the character of Jesus, but are against him on the
resurrection. The long and short of it is, theirs is a case of
recommending a patent medicine that the parties recommend-
ing have not taken. They are not Christians; but if they
believed so much about Jesus, how could they help being
Christians? If I believed half as much as Mr. Berry quotes
from them, I should be a Christian. John Stuart Mill and!
Renan ought to have been Christians, and this throws a dis-
credit on what they have written; and, besides, they don’t
bring forward a single fact to substantiate what they say
about the character of this splendid man. I will give Mr.
Berry facts from the New Testament to show that the character
known as Jesus was the worst and most fiendish that you can
mention in history or literature. Now if that be so, where is-
the probability that he rose from the dead ? that he was
raised up by almighty power, unless god is fiendish ? He
says we owe something to the Roman Empire. Tes; we owe
more to it than we do to Christianity. Mr. Berry says that
Roman laws are the foundation of our laws; but there are
others who say that Christianity is that foundation. The old
Romans taught Europe and taught Great Britain how to
conduct a nation and an empire; taught Great Britain


how to administer the laws, and though we have
improved on the Roman laws in some respects, if not :'n
others, yet they pointed out to us the way we should take.
You can’t find in all the bible a single honest trial; only
such a trial as you would find in a barbarous age, or such
as no civilised people could put up with. How do they
execute law there? Let us see. You remember the story of
the Sabbath breaker and the blasphemer. Did they get a
trial ? Hot a shadow of one. They are put in ward over
night, and taken out next morning and stoned to death ; and
that was done by the order of the lord given to Moses. Come
down to the new testament, and take the 25th chapter of
Matthew ; and there we have a model trial, which is put for-
ward as the last trial of the human race. Here we are
presented with a picture of what Christians call the last day.
The son of man is here in power, and what sort of a
character is he ? All nations are brought before him, and
what for ? for execution or reward. How, there is no trial,
for the whole thing is decided before-hand. The first
thing done is to separate the one from the other—
to separate the sheep from the goats. There is no
indictment. Ho one knows what he comes there
for, but at once the reward is pronounced to the
sheep ; and to those on the other side he pronounced a curse,
more frightful than anything you can name:—depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels. Was it that that influenced the Romans
make good laws to hand over to the rest of the world ? That
is the sort of law you find in the bible, that Christianity
handed over to the Roman Empire. If the bible now ruled
in Great Britain, that is what we should get there. We
should get no trial, and be dealt with just in that way,
and without a chance of protesting against the barbarity that
was brought to bear upon us. How, Mr. Berry says that
Christianity improved the condition of the Roman Empire.
I deny that. I say it made it worse. Mr. Berry spoke of
the great effects of Christianity. I believe it has had great
effects, and here is a curious phenomenon, that he can perhaps
explain. Christianity is supposed to have arisen in the first
century ; and what a ridiculous idea that was about the
c


number of tlie year! that we should not know what year it
was, if Jesus had not been born ! A stupid fool once asked
how we could substitute a republic for a monarchy, for said he,
whose head could we put on the coin ? And Mr. Berry, is equally
ridiculous about the number of the year. He did not tell you,
however, that Christians did not begin to number the years
from the birth of Christ until some 525 years after the sup-
posed birth of Christ, Ptolemy Exiguus being the first to
propose it. So you see the value of the ridiculous point
that he has brought forward. Still Christianity, we
are told, rose in Syria, which includes Palestine. What
is the state of Syria now ? What is the state of Palestine ?
What has been its state for a thousand or fifteen hundred
years ? It is one of the most backward countries in the
world ; it went gradually down until it became one of the
most bankrupt countries existing. Go to Egypt, where
Christianity spread, and there civilisation is almost wiped out.
Go to North Africa, where Christianity prevailed, and you
find an intellectual and moral desert. Go to Asia Minor,
there civilisation is almost destroyed. Christianity went on to
Rome, and there the same thing happened. Wherever you
go, wherever Christianity was allowed to rule, there civilisa-
tion went to the dogs, and was destroyed ; and destroyed just
in proportion as this religion was allowed to rule. Mr. Berry
told you that in the Roman Empire men were allowed to
kill their children. In the law of Moses fathers are allowed
to do exactly the same thing. And he forgot to tell you
the story of Jephtha and his daughter. If the bible im-
proved the Romans it must have done so by teaching them
something they did not know before the bible came amongst
them. What was that new thing ? It may be true that the
people in general during the middle ages had not got
the bible, because they were unable to read it; but the
question is—Was- the world improved by the spreading abroad
of the bible ? Suppose we come to Germany and take Martin
Luther. He began to preach what is called Protestantism.
He made the bible infallible to an extent that it had not been
in the old church, and what came of it ? A seven years’ war
followed, and more than a hundred thousand of the peasants
of Germany were destroyed; and that was when the bible was


let loose as the word of God, everybody interpreting it
according to his own opinions. Luther and Zwingle fell out
about it, and the inhabitants fell out, and said, “We have as
much right to have our way as any one else.” And Luther
hounded on the princes against the peasants of Germany, and
and the result was the seven years’ war. Come to England.
Here there was a quarrel between the Puritans and the church
to which Mr. Berry belongs; and the quarrel was over the
bible and nothing else. The Puritans thought that certain
things were right and proper, and the stronger party
set to work to destroy the weaker, as far as they
were able. Mr. Berry says they fought for liberty
of conscience against the Stuarts. Those Stuarts were the
heads of his church. The people fought against the doctrine
of the divine right of kings ; and yet that is the doctrine of
the bible. There is no right of subjects in the bible ; but the
divine right of kings is held up from beginning to end. Mr.
Berry seems fond of Paul. Let us take him. In the 13th
chapter of his epistle to the Komans, he says : “ Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers.” Then he goes on to
say that if you don’t submit you will be damned ; and that is
the doctrine of the church to which my opponent belongs. . I
am glad to find that he is growing out of the bible. I claim
him as an incipient Freethinker, and I should not be at all
surprised if he helps me yet in the Liberator ; and it is
there that I want to work out that incipient liberty that he
himself claims. And what is Protestantism but the right of
private judgment ? and what is liberty but the outcome of the
right of private judgment ? If he denies the right of the
Liberator to private judgment, it is no more than the Papists
have done with Protestants ; and no more than his own church
has done with dissenters. It is the old story over again ; we are
the advance guard of liberty and progress, and I am happy to
find that they are bringing up the rear. And though they
are grumbling about the Liberator now, they will glorify it
one of those days. Just as Protestantism has become an
accepted fact in the history of the world, so will Freethought
become an integral part of the civilisation of the future ; and
then people will praise it instead of denouncing it as Mr.
Berry has done to-night. And Mr. Berry forgot to tell you


one or two other things about Christianity. He boasted of
its spread, but he forgot to tell you that over mighty regions
of the earth the sword had gone first and Christianity
afterwai'ds. He forgot to tell you that it was the sword that
had made way for Christianity over vast portions of North
and South America, in Africa, in China, in India ; that
wherever the English race have gone they have gone as a
conquering people, and they have gone as Christ predicted
when he said, “ Think not I am come to send peace
upon earth ; I came not to send peace, but a
sword.” And that is about the only principle of Christi-
anity that has been fairly carried out. Where, I ask r
is there a spot that has not been drenched with blood
through this religion ? Where is the place in which people
have not been persecuted by the sect for the time being in
power ? Where is the spot where those who professed to bo
followers of Jesus did not persecute the sects that were
weaker than themselves, and trample them out of existence ?
And if you boast of Christianity, don’t forget that it is
through intimidation, through the sword, through brutal laws,,
and through the prison that you have succeeded. And now
that the day of liberty is dawning, and that people are getting
their rights, they are throwing off the yoke of Christ ; they
are taking to liberty and manhood instead of bowing down to-
idols. Your day is over, rather, I mean, you night, for the-
day of liberty is dawning, and the time for liberty is so fast
approaching that you, too, must be carried on, in spite of
yourselves, in that direction in which I am proud to be known
as a pioneer ! (Applause).
The Chairman expressed the opinion that both speakers
had wandered from the subject, and hoped that for the future
they would adhere more closely to their text.
Mr. Berry then rose and said :—I am only too glad ta
return to the question, for I thought I should have been
compelled to answer all that hash of history and philosophy and
scripture we have just heard. lam afraid of wearying you if
I reiterate what I said yesterday, but you will remember that
I constructed a pyramid of facts; that I, figuratively
speaking, traced the river to its source and insisted on this;
that an effect must have an adequate cause; that you can’t


have such a tremendous thing as Christianity without having
something behind it, and my opponent only replied that there
must be some other cause. He thought that perhaps a little
insanity was at the bottom of it all. That is the foundation
on which you build such a structure as Christianity—the
crazy fancies of poor Hebrews who lived 1,800 years ago. I
don’t think the common sense of the audience has been so
altogether deceived as that. When this debate is read and
(pondered over, they will be able to see that not one stone
in my pyramid has been touched, and not a single word said
in real logical answer to what I advanced in my first speech.
Again, I say I am afraid of wearying you, but I ask you to
return to that speech and see what you think of it; and I
shall only be too glad to have flaws pointed out to me. But
my opponent did not bring a shadow of argument against
me; he simply evaded the question from beginning to end.. I
may return to one important point. One important point
was the absolute certainty of the genuineness of certain
letters, and, when I say the genuineness of certain
letters, there is great importance to be attached to the
point. A letter referring to a particular event as recent, is
generally considered to be important evidence of the reality
of the event. If you once establish beyond all question that
it is genuine, then it becomes as true testimony as if the ink
of the letter were not yet dry. I take, then, these letters
as evidence that the first Christian believed in the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. It is not that these letters
should be considered direct proof of the resurrection,
but merely of the fact that it was believed in by the writer of
the letters and those to whom he wrote, and the next question
is what was the cause of this belief, was it founded on truth
or on falsehood ? If on falsehood, then, one of two things
follows, either there was fraud or there? was delusion.
I showed you that fraud was out of the question, because
people usually do not set to work to propagate a lie
that may mean to them certain death and certain temporal
ruin, and they don’t commonly lay down their lives for a
thing which they themselves regard as falsehood. If they
had so regarded the resurrection how could they have imposed
this belief in the rest of mankind, and the fact remains that


they have done so. Then could they have been deluded ? If
so, they must have been weak-minded people, and yet at
the same time astoundinglyi clever to impose upon others
in the way they have done. I referred to some works which I
have, which I should be pleased to tell all about if anyone
wants to know what freethought really is ; what really
formidable attacks of freethought by men of learning are, and
also to let you know all about that remarkable controversy in
Germany, where the subject has been fought out. I thought I
should be able 1o deal with the question in that way, but I find
my opponent absolutely proof against logic. These writers of
whom I have spoken tried the subject in many different
ways, and one suggested one way, and another another way.
My opponent asked me why Mill and Renan did not believe
in the resurrection as they believed so much about Jesus, and
I will tell him. It is because these men are tied down to a
disbelief in the supernatural. Early in the century, Baur
was a disciple of the school of which this is the axiom, that
the supernatural is incredible ; but, thinking it necessary to
account for effects, he said: Here is a phenomenon—
Christianity. Miracles are out of the question, there-
fore I must find out by critical methods what was
the origin of this phenomenon. And so he went to
work and found he could not account for Christianity
coming suddenly out of the Jewish religion without something
between, and therefore he supposed there must have been a half
Christianity and half Judaism, a sort of Judaised Christi-
anity. He wanted it as a kind of bridge between Jews
and Christians ; and though it did not really stop the gap, it
helped to do so to some extent. He looked at the Hew
Testament and found that his theory would not suit; some of
the books there were not Judaising ; and what did he say ? I
must, said he, dissect these, I am sure they are not
genuine. And so he went to work to prove that
these were not genuine ; and, being a good scholar,
and being followed by Strauss and other good scholars he
made it appear that they really had proved that a great part of
the Hew Testament was spurious. My own mind was rather
upset by these facts when I came to look into the critical
writings, I was for a time rather alarmed on the subject, until


X found that it all rested on this theory, that these books
must be rejected because they did not agree with the theory
propounded. And then Renan conducted the theory further,
and said that St. Peter and St. Paul were at variance.
Peter was the representative of Jewish Christianity, and
Paul was the representative of Greek Christianity, and so
everything was raked up, that looked like the least little bit
of evidence that these apostles were opposed to each other.
I only entered upon this to show you why these men did
not accept the resurrection while they believed other parts
of Christianity, and to show you the difference between
criticism in a scientific manner, with regard to Christianity and
the kind of talk we have heard about it this evening.
Mr. Symes next spoke. He said : —All that tall talk of
Mr. Berry’s goes for nothing. It is usual when you have
no case to abuse the other side. The real fact is, that my
first speech last night was so much to the point, that Mr.
Berry cannot answer it. I am perhaps as good a scientific
man as he is, and I will show it to him any day. He may boast
as much as he chooses; he may attack me personally, and I shall
defend myself. Mr. Berry has been insinuating charges against
me, and lam entitled to defend myself. Of course it does not
make any impression upon you, because you know how
unfounded his insinuations are. I don’t think there is any
man in Melbourne who has taught more science than I have
done since I came here. If there is, I should like to see him.
How about St. Paul. Here is a book Mr. Berry is possibly
ignorant of, and I will show it to him. Here I find:—“ The
epistles of St. Paul contain, without doubt, peculiar senti-
ments which indicate an individual and peculiar character;
but why has he written all his epistles in a language which
himself knew very imperfectly, and which he might have
supposed some of those to whom he wrote would not have
known at all ? It is beyond our belief that the Romans
generally could read the barbarous Greek with which the
thoughts of St. Paul have been clothed in his epistle to the
people of that city, which, moreover, he had then never
visited.” This is written by a clergyman of the same church
as Mr. Berry, Dr. Giles, the rector of Sutton; and the work
from which I quote is, Christian Records , one of the most


calmly written books on the subject I have seen; and I
venture to say he agrees with nearly everything I have said
except on the character of Jesus. If Mr. Berry wishes to discuss
this question further, and by writing, I shall be happy to
meet him, and deal with it in scientific method, as he seems
so anxious to do. I leave the work with him now to consult
if he pleases. One point he brought forward at the
beginning of his last speech was that I have brought no
evidence against the resurrection. It is really too bad to
expect a man to prove a negative. He ought to know
that a negative is a difficult thing to prove; and
besides that, I have accomplished all I came here to do,
namely, to show that he has not a single witness to put into
the box, that he can’t name a single person who saw Jesus
dead, and saw him after his resurrection. But now he says,
here is Paul. I shall cross-examine Paul for a bit. Is that
man worthy of credence ? What of that incident on the
road to Damascus ? After that you never know when you
have got him. You know the story of how he fell on the
road, and saw a light brighter than the sun. Of course you
don’t need to believe that. Well, ever after that he was sub-
ject to visions, and he saw Jesus in the temple, as he saw
him also on this occasion as he went to Damascus. He never
saw Jesus alive. How did he know him in vision ? For
aught, he knew, it may have been satan himself transformed
into an angel of light. How are you to know ? After that
he was caught up into the third heaven, whether in the body
or out of the body he does not know, and their saw certain
things which he did not care to mention. This is one of your
witnesses for the resurrection of Christ! The fact is, if he
lived in modern Melbourne he would have to go to
an asylum. lam not joking. A man who had such
experiences as Paul had, according to the new testament,
would have to go to an asylum. And this is the man
who is brought forward as a witness of the most astounding
thing the world has ever heard of ! If I wished, I could
say something about the moral character of Paul, but
here stands the fact, that he never saw Jesus except in
vision. I might have dreamt about Jesus and come here as
a witness to the resurrection ; and Mr. Berry would have


quite as good reason to put me in the witness box as he has
to put Paul in. Now one point I put to you last night was,
How is it Mr. Berry cannot put one of the original apostles into
the box ? How is it that not one of the twelve has left any
evidence that Mr. Berry can bring forward ? Not one of the
twelve, who talked and walked about with Jesus for three
years does he produce ; but he brings forward a man who
never saw Jesus at all. That is a grand testimony, is it not ?
He would not accept an ordinary historical statement on such
evidence, and yet we are asked to believe a thing that is to
decide our eternal destiny on the word of a man who has
something seriously the matter with his brain. Here is a
man who has seen a vision and been up to the third heaven,
Brought forward as a witness ! He hears a curious sound and
sees Jesus. Paul says Jesus was seen by 500 brethren, most of
whom remain until this day. How was it the gospel
writers forget to mention that ? Paul does not say where
those 500 lived. What where they about, that they did not
go forth preaching the gospel ? They ought to have gone
out travelling as original witness for the resurrection, instead
of which they are hidden away as 500 brethren to be referred to
as having seen him at some time or other. Is that scientific
evidence? It would not be received in a company of old women.
These 500 men remain hidden instead of going about the world
telling the people that Jesus had risen from the dead ; and
Paul does not even tell us where and how he had got to
know them. Besides, it contradicts what he himself says,
that he never received his gospel from man. Yet he is
obliged to appeal to human witnesses ; only he has not got
the decency to send these witnesses to the Corinthians ; he
only writes to them. Paul says that Jesus died and rose
again the third day, “ according to the scriptures.” What
scriptures does he mean ? I should like to have Mr. Berry’s
opinion on that point. Don’t you see how the necessity
comes in. He tries to show that Paul’s epistles were the
first portion of the new testament written ; and I should like
to know what scripture told him that Jesus rose again the
third day. The whole thing is artificially concocted. Now, I
will give you what I conceive to be the origin of the whole
affair. The fact is, the old religions had run their race, and


were dying, just as Christianity is dying now. But the
former ideas were, many of them, still afloat amongst the
masses, and the masses still adhered to them. I will refer
to one or two of those. There was the Grecian religion, that
had plenty of revelations. There was Adonis, the ancient
god, who, instead of rising just once after the boar killed
him, used to rise every year. He could come up and up
again as every year rolled round. In the Babylonian, Chal-
dean, and Persian religions the idea of resurrection was one of
the most prominent, and it is referred to in the book of Daniel,
that being closely connected with the superstitions of that
region. In Egypt there was Osiris; and, mind you, thi3
superstition began amongst the Egyptians thousands of years
before Christianity. Well, this Osiris was put to death by
Typho, and rose up to life again and became a judge of the
dead, just as we find it represented in regard to Jesus. That
is what they say Jesus is; but I am sorry to say that Osiris
is an infinitely more just judge than Jesus, as he appears in
the new testament. Those who lived in Alexandria were a
mixed population; and those who lived in Antioch, on the
Orontes, were another mixed population. And in those cities
the philosophies and religions of the ancient world were being
stirred in one common crucible, and out of those old religions
sprang the new religion—if we can call it a new religion.
And there is another point. In the old religions there were
both esoteric and exoteric doctrines; so much was revealed and
so much kept secret; but the whole of the new religion leaked
out. The creeds were first used as symbols, as Masonic signs,
by which people got into the brotherhood; but when they got
abroad people began to think that they contained spiritual
things that had been kept in the background. Time will not
permit me to speak further on this subject; but if you will
allow me I may touch upon it again in my last speech.
Mr. Berry then spoke. He said :—I will endeavour to go
through the points my opponent has touched upon. My
opponent has just been speaking about creeds. They were
written originally for candidates for baptism, heathen, or
Jews, who were admitted into the Christian religion. It was
necessary they should know something of the religion, and
they were catechised ; they were made to read these as a


symbol of the Christian faith. Something has been said
about Rome. I thought I had disposed of that matter of
writing in Greek to the Romans. lam amazed the man is
so totally in the dark on the subject he deals with, and more
especially as to Church history. I can’t understand how a
man can pretend to any knowledge on the subject, and yet
raise the question of writing in Greek to the Romans. Is he
not aware that during the first three centuries the greater part
of the literature of Rome is Greek, and that before the time of
Constantine all the Church writers wrote in Greek. The Latin
Church is something entirely distinct. Something has been
said about Our Lord having spoken in parables, and my
opponent with his usual reasonableness, has construed that into
a charge against Christ, that he spoke intentionally so that
the people should not understand him. His real object, on the
other hand, was to teach the multitudes, who were inattentive
and indisposed to give serious attention to his teaching, in a
way that would make them think, and I will ask you this,
can you give me a single instance of anyone coming to Christ
to whom he did not at once explain his teaching? His
disciples were men whom he himself chose. Take Nicodemus.
He came to him by night, and he said difficult things to
him, but still gave him full teaching, much more so then he
did to multitudes outside. Take again the poor woman at
the well of Samaria. He entered into a conversation with
her, and he never left her until he had revealed to her that
he was indeed Christ. lam almost afraid to bring forward
these things, for I know the way in which they will be dealt
with. They will be met with mockery and insults. We have
heard a great deal about Adonis and Osiris, and of the resur-
rections therewith connected ; but I would ask is there an
Adonis Young Men’s Association ? There is a young men’s
Christian Association; but where is there a Buddhist
Association ? and that is the whole point of my arguement.
Christianity is a living thing. For 1800 years it has been
proclaimed that it was coming to an end. The Jews pro-
claimed it in the first century. In the third century Porphyry
tried to find out contradictions in the Bible, and indeed
anticipated a good deal of what modern rationalists have said,
and so we come down to the time of Voltaire, who pre-


•dieted that the Bible would be an obsolete book in the
19th century; yet it has now been translated into immensely
more languages than it had been in his time, for, while then it
Bad been printed in only about 100 languages, now it is printed
in no less than 250 languages—nearly all the languages of
the world. Does that look like dying out ? Your lecturer
now just takes up the ground that opponents of Christianity
did at the first. He wants to take you back 1800
years to the very depths of heathenism. My opponent com-
plains about St. Paul in much the same way as he complains
of our Lord Jesus, for not sending the 500 brethren to
Corinth; and he seems altogether to forget that the difficulties
of travelling were then much greater than now, and that to
fiend 500 men even in these days would be an extensive
undertaking; and how much more so was it then ? This, I
think, is rather hard upon St. Paul. My opponent, too, has
rather taunted me with not having brought forward any of
the original apostles, and the reason I did not was because I
supposed I had a critical opponent to deal with, and he might
give me trouble to prove the authenticity of their writings, and
hence I thought I would go to authority, which could not in
reason be questioned. lam very sorry now that I did confine
myself to St. Paul, because my opponent does not seem to
know what real criticism of the scriptures is. With regard
to St. Paul’s statement that he had seen Christ, my
opponent persists in saying that it was only a
vision, that what he saw in the road to Damascus was
a mere vision. But it must have been a pretty strong vision
that would knock a man down and keep him blind for three
days. lam sorry I confined myself to the testimony of St.
Paul, because it would have been interesting to me to bring
forward a consensus of the apostolic testimony to the resur-
rection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and the fact that these
books have survived all contradiction and all criticism from
the time of the Jews down to the present time, shows that
there must have been something solid in them, for things that
last for centuries do not spring from nothing. Such systems
as those of Osiris, and Adonis, and Hercules, whatever sub-
stratum of reality may have been in them, never
originally possessed any truth, and therefore they have


perished as all lies must perish sooner or later ; but the*
truly miraculous character of the resurrection of Christ is
shown by the truly miraculous manner in which the testimony
has lived, in spite of all opposition, down to the present time,
and I challenge my opponent to show any books of that time
that could be substituted for them. As long as he amuses
you with attacks on the bible he may be able to keep your
attention, but if he were only to take as a subject some of
that literature which he pretends is superior to the
bible, he would soon empty the Hall of Science. I shall be
extremely happy to assist him. I shall be only too glad to
see the subject changed. I should truly like to see real Free-
thought, real scepticism, debated, but I can have no sympathy
with a man denying, and denying without the slightest
reason, the force of every argument that is brought against him..
Mr. Symes in reply, said :—You must not feel angry with
my opponent for his personality, for he has not accomplished
his end. If he had only succeeded in showing that it was-
rational to believe that Christ rose from the dead, he would
have felt as cool as I do now, and you would not have
heard a word of personality. But it is always so where a
person fails in logic he goes in for the contrary, and abuses-
his opponent. My opponent tells you he would like to see
real freethought in this Hall. But for freethought he would
not have got a hearing here at all, and he cannot say that he
has not had thorough fair play. I will ask him if he was
not tx-eated like a gentleman when he came to our hall the
Sunday evening before last ? and I will ask him fux-ther,.
should I have been treated in the same fashion in a Christian
Church ? We have no blasphemy laws against them, but
they have blasphemy laws against us. Now, I shall go over'
a few things that lie has referred to to-night. I think he
tried to make out that all the early Christian literature was-
Greek. Well that could not affect my argument; and I
have quoted from an old gentleman in his own Church, a much'
better critic than Mr. Berry is, and one of the most learned
and best Greek scholars in the old country, and he says
it is beyond belief that Paul could have written these-
epistles in Greek. The question is—How could St. Paul
write to the Romans in barbarous Greek ? He wrote in a


jargon that those people could not read if they got it; and it
is the same with regard to the epistle to the Galatians, who
spoke a language akin to the Gaelic; and yet Paul wrote
to them, not in classical Greek—which they might have
learned in the schools—but in barbarous Greek, that could
only have been learned as a mother tongue. My opponent
also referred to the esoteric and exoteric doctrines, and
attempted to excuse Jesus speaking in parables, so that the
people should not understand him. I contend you have no
right to speak to people if you do not wish them to under-
stand you. He says that Xicodemus came to Jesus by night;
and I say that Jesus gave him no satisfaction, and when he
pressed him to explain the new birth he said to him, “ If you
don’t understand these earthly things, how can you under-
stand heavenly things ?” In fact, Jesus treated Nicodemus
just as Mr. Berry has been trying to treat me. He wants to
know if there was any Adonis Association before there was a
Christian Association. Yes; they yearly celebrated his
resurrection. He tells you that the story of Osiris had no
truth in it; but he forgot to tell you that in the most
polished and scientific nation, a nation that was ahead of us
to-day in many respects, this doctrine held its ground
for five or six thousand years, that is about three times as
long as Christianity has held its. ground, supposing it is hold-
ing its ground, which Ido not admit. Then he asks what
do I put in the place of the bible ? The newspaper is in its
place to-day, and I should not wonder if Mr. Berry is more
anxious to get his newspaper than his bible at his breakfast
in the morning. He says that I complained that Paul did not
send the 500 men who saw Christ to Corinth. I think he
must know that I did not say that, but I will not press the
point. I did not say that nor anything like it. I said, why
were not those 500 men travelling about the world preaching
the gospel instead of men who never saw Jesus, and instead
of only writing a letter on so important a subject ? Why did
he not send one of those 500 men to Corinth ? He says he
did not bring forward the original apostles, because there is
no criticism in me. That is a poor excuse. He would have
overwhelmed me with witnesses if he had them, and he
would not have been honest if he had not done so. He would


have brought forward the strongest possible evidence he
could ; but he has not yet brought forward one witness. He
says that Paul did not call that a vision that happened to
him on the road to Damascus. I want to ask Mr. Berry
this : Did Jesus come flying back from heaven and really
appear to Paul ? I wish we had heard it before his last speech.
The question is this, did Jesus rise from the dead ; is it
rational to believe that he did ? We are told that this resur-
rection is the greatest fact in the history of the world, along
with the atonement. I think that is the way Christians put
it. lam accused of unfairness. I speak the words of truth,
.and I throw myself open to criticism, and the ablest man in
Melbourne may come and trip me up if I blunder or mis-
represent. A man who is guilty of trickery would not do
that. Now we have a book that cannot be traced back
to the Ist century, and which says that Jesus was crucified
and rose from the dead on the third day. We don’t know
who wrote that book ; w r e don’t know when these gospels
were written ; we don’t know where they were written ; and
there is not one single gospel writer that appeals to any
authority for what he says, nor does he put forward his own
personality so that we could test him. This is not testimony,
this is not evidence. I liqve asked Mr. Berry to bring for-
ward all he could, and he did after all produce Paul, and I
told him I would tear him to pieces as T have done ;
and he cannot reinstate him. There was another point that
my opponent mentioned, and that was that people would not
tell lies if they felt they were going to be put to death for
it. As a matter of fact, you cannot name a person,
an original witness of the resurrection, who ever suffered any-
thing for his testimony regarding Christ; and if Mr.
Berry thinks I am making a misstatement he has a chance
in the daily papers, or if he likes, in my paper, of
■showing that any person who saw Christ alive, or who saw
him dead, and saw him after he was alive again, ever
suffered the loss of even a farthing. If there is any evidence
of that, let us have it. There will be opportunities of
bringing it forward, for the question will be up again, as I
intend to lecture upon it. My case is—That you have pro-
duced no evidence. I have shown conclusively that the


evidence is not forthcoming; that you have no evidence that
it is rational to believe that Jesus rose from the dead, because
you do not know on whose testimony you are receiving it; and
the best reason you can give is exactly parrallel to that which
the Roman Catholic would give for believing in tr an sub-
stantiation and infallibility. We are told that there is no
freethought here. That, I think, is an insult to this
audience. Before I conclude I will give you a piece of advice:
Don’t go away from the debate prejudiced. Let not either
side go away and say, “We have got a victory.” Those who
have secured a victory can well afford to be satisfied with it;
and no personality ought ever to have been introduced into
this discussion. Go and weigh carefully what has been said
on both sides, and if you think Mr. Berry is right, go with
him; and if you think I am right, do what you like; take
your own course. I don’t claim to be your ruler or your
guide. I don’t threaten you if you don’t believe in me, or
promise you a reward if you do. I only say, use your own
judgment. If you think that Jesus rose from the dead,
follow it up ; but if you think he did not rise from the
dead, let the superstition go ; give up fables, follow truth,
science, philosophy; follow general science and physical
science, and try to make this life as noble and true, and manly
and independent as you possibly can. If there is a future life,
that is the best preparation you can make for it. Be honest,
be true. If there be a future life, well, reflect on this :—No-
honest god can damn an honest man. (Applause.)
Mr. Symes proposed a vote of thanks to the chairman.
Mr. Berry seconded the motion and said : If I have been
guilty of any personality, I am sorry for it. It is not the
individual, Mr. Symes to whom I refer ; but the position lie-
occupies.
The vote was carried by acclamation, and the second night’s
debate was brought to a close.




JUST PUBLISHED !
“ it to ii| fed*”
TWO WIGHTS’ DEBATE
BETWEEN
JOSEPH SYMES
(Representing the Australasian Secular Association), and
REV. D. M. BERRY.
PRICE, SIXPENCE. BY POST, EIG-HTPENCE.
“THE LIBERATOR,”
A Weekly, MM, an! freetkoight Journal
Edited by JOS. SYMES.
PRICE-THREEPENCE— price.
By post 3s. 6d. per quarter prepaid.
L. P. & P COMPANY LIMITED, 120 SWANSTON STREET.
