

Is Religion a Fraud?
Populist Series
NO.
A Brief Exposition of Religion in Its
Relation to
MODERN SOCIOLOGICAL QUESTIONS.
BY “VITALIS.”
“A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a cor-
rupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not
forth good fruit is (should be) hewn down and cast into the lire.
Wherefore by their fruits shall ye know them.”— MATT, VII.,
18-20.
Sydney:
PRINTED AT "THE AUSTRALIAN WORKMAN" OFFICE,
97½ BATHURST STREET.
1894




IS RELIGION A FRAUD?
tECOGNISING the fact that “all brains are not equal,”
that “ Ignorance is the mother of Devotion,” and that
“ knowledge is power ” and leads to the discovery of “the
truth,” it behoves us one and all to endeavor to get an
fSP inkling—a general, comprehensive, all-round view—of
? life and social problems, as expressed in the “ writings ”
(more so perhaps than in the extempore spoutings of
our stump orators and political quacks !!) of men of science, cul-
ture, refinement, and “reflection.”
Now, I expect that many will at once snap out, “ Oh, but
little knowledge is dangerous.” Well, admittedly so in “ some ”
cases —still I think that, in people of ordinary mental capacity,
once “interest” is aroused, little knowledge on subjects of
general interest, such as social problems, etc., begets interest and
an ever-increasing desire to learn and “understand” more —
to receive fresh ideas, etc.
All sensible people must hold that person worse than a fool
who, having once adopted a train of thought —of ideas —is not
open to modify, improve, enlarge, or renounce same, if occasion
requires, as his or her Intellectual Development progresses —as it
should do with advancing years and increasing worldly experi-
ence (speaking only from the more youthful side of life, of
course).
Thus, it can be plainly seen that, until we get more people
into one cosmopolitan w r ay of thinking, the work of all good-
meaning social or other reformers falls on barren soil. It is to
the “masses” we must look for the bricks and mortar to “build”
with. The “ brains” of the “few ” are like a bricklayer with-
out sufficient material to work on rapidly.
There are many factors which have contributed, and are
even now contributing, to retard the more rapid development of
the Race at large ; but, amongst numerous others, the question
occurs to me, “Is Religion a Fiaud —and which seems the
most worthy for immediate discussion, shocking as it no doubt
will seem to many of you—“truth” sometimes pricks, does it
not ? But, still, we must first endeavor to find “ truth,” and
there are many diverse ways of looking at the same subject,


however, it does no harm and very, very much good to discuss,
read about, and “ reflect ” upon both—upon all sides of momen-
tous questions such as these ; therefore, I again ask, can we
prove that Eeligion is or is not a fraud ? Is it preached or prac-
tised in such a way as to be of any practical use—is it an aiding
factor of much consequence now in our advancing civilization ?
May I suggest that the above question may prove of interest
to a great number of you. lam treating the subject from the
standpoint of the ordinary, every day “thinking” man,
one who is an earnest searcher after ' the truth, if it be in
any shape or form obtainable. How many amongst us I
should like to know there are, who, brought up (as I have been)
by good religious and moral (as the world goes) paients, who
when emerging from the shadow of boyhood into the days of
thinking manhood, but at some time or other—but many perhaps
would be loth to confess it —have such thoughts, as these that I
am going to mention, perhaps in somewhat different clothing,
but to all intents and purposes tending towards the same end
a revolt of their intellects against the traditions, instilled
into them from earliest childhood, ending perhajm in the
exclamation, pshaw! “Why need I bother myself about such
things, quite enough for me to accept as gospel truth the belief
of my forefathers,” forgetting that with the spread of thought,
advance of civilisation and progress of mankind in scientific
research, whereby new laws and forces in nature are being con-
stantly discovered, and even laws, .which for centuries past, have
been thought as fixed and positively determined beyond doubt,
have been proved to be j ust the reverse of their hitherto accepted
ti anslation or effect, forgetting that the world is going ahead,
and, that as it is with scientific research, so it is with “modern
thought,” which boldly forsaking the beaten track of by-gone
ages, strikes out and seizes upon “ fresh fields and pastures ver-
dant green,” but all verging to one thiDg—the development of
the intellectual capacity of the Eace and leading up to the ulti-
mate goal, viz. : the discovery of the “ truth.”
The average * man is not sufficiently developed. He is
“finite ” in his thoughts, as yet his brain fails to grasp the “In-
finite ”or the unknown. He cannot understand it, it is beyond
his faculty of comprehension, hence under the name “faith ” he
flies to religion for safety, for consolation, from even fear per-
haps, as we would pay a premium to insure the safe passage of
some vessel.
What is faith ? To my mind, it strikes as being a relapse into
childhood, an ignoring of our reason and intellect, The promoter,
or promoters, of that “inspired ” book, The Eible, tell us, “ That
unless ye become as little children, ye cannot enter into the king-
dom of heaven.” Verily I say, if such be so, then why in the name
of common sense, did the something , as yet undiscovered, but which,
to suit some conveniences, we will call God —a spirit or control-
* This applies also to higher intellects, vide Gladstone and others.


ling power of some sort, mind you, who (we are told) is supposed
to know our inmost thoughts, govern all our actions, etc., etc.
If this be the case, then why ? please, why ? Oh ! do enlighten
our poor bewildered brains! Did we have brains, intellect, or
what you like to call it, given us to doubt with, to reason with,
and to frustrate all the “ divine ” good intentions for us ? “ Out
on you,” I can fancy I hear some of the dear old women
say, if they read this, “don’t let Satan put such thoughts
into your head, go to bed and say your prayers,” or in
plain language, telling me to do as we would tell a child or even
do ourselves, to count in order to still the workings of a too active
brain and so get to sleep, in other words, fly to prayer to sub-
merge our higher thoughts beneath a semi-idiotic complacency
induced by much repetition of one thing.
In the course of my life it has been my lot to become
mixed up and thrown into personal contact with, many religious
men, fanatics, I am afraid, who have positively asserted they
were saved and knew it, but who, when asked by me, how they
could be so sure, in many cases, could only reiterate their sense-
less cry, they were saved and “ knew ” it ! and all the comfort,
encouragement or hope that was held out to me, was, go and
pray. I did so night after night—prayed that some light would
come to me and that 1 would be humbled —but all to no purpose,
“reason” would not be satisfied, my brain would not stop work-
ing.
When I look around me and observe the pitiful condition of
the vast majority of my fellow-creatures wriggling like worms,
under the vague, yet almost universal, sense of discontent with
their condition, a feeling that is and will become more apparent
and spread more in the course of time—to use more strong or
allegorical language —I will say, “groaning” under the mani-
fold and manifest abuses and injustices which have from earliest
history, been thrust upon their backs by the hands and brains
of the comparative few, strong, cunning and masterful spirits,
who have arisen in every generation from time immemorial.
Many I know will “try” not to acknowledge this feeling, in
many it is subdued, blunted or almost obliterated. Use or habit
is second nature, and I for one believe it. But to those
intelligent minds, who are not suffering from any mental aberra-
tion, arising from religious sentiment, superstition, bigotry or
fanaticism, to those who have the power to thrust away the tra-
ditions of their training and childhood, as well as the past heri-
tage of superstition, etc., ad lib. - handed down to them from
their forefathers—to those, I say, who can and will do this,
do I specially address the following, as they may perhaps
experience the same feeling as I do and have done.
For instance, what prompted me to suggest the question as
1 have, viz., “Is Beligion a Fraud,” was this: On looking


around on my fellow-creatures, seeing their misery (as I have
very feebly attempted to depict it), and then taking into consi-
deration the terrible amount of bloodshed, cruelty, aye and even
crime and other unheard of miseries, which this self-same religion
lias brought on mankind. Taking all this into consideration
(and I have gone into the subject all too briefly), the awful
thought flashed across my mind, Is this right ? Is it as it ought
to be ? And can any calm, rational, level-headed individual,
after putting into the scales every possible and conceivable
benefit and help towards the progress and development—intel-
lectually, scientifically, and otherwise—of the human race in
general. [To many great men and thinkers, I believe it is a
settled thing, or at any rate a “moot” question, that religion
has had a very deterrent effect on the progress of the world.]
Again I say, can we, after calmly and, if possible, without
prejudice, weighing the question, as here put, “ Is Religion a
Fraud ?” or has it incontrovertably advanced the world’s pro-
gress ? Try and make up your mind in one way or the other
yourselves, and if you can convince our reasons and satisfy the
cravings of our intellects after the truth, then, I say, you will do
something for the good of the world, and stop and silence for
ever this growing disbelief, which is so rapidly gaining ground
[see some official reports of religious Conferences, even], a dis-
belief in which even many, very many of our clergymen—whose
living it is—in their inmost hearts, their inner consciousness,
must but acknowledge to themselves, and who in consequence
become less earnest and more hypocritical with the advance of
time.
This is the question that I would put. I, a fellow creature,
and one who has gone on his knees and prayed —aye, prayed
that he might be put on the right path —and one who, even at
this moment, feels inclined to fall down on his knees and pray,
“ If there be a God, let Him now make Himself manifest, and
refute all this vast w r ave of doubt that is gaining ground so
rapidly.”
When I look around me on the awful misery of my fellow-
creatures (they do say one-half the world knows not how the
other half lives) —when I see this misery and suffering, my
heart goes out in sympathy and bleeds for my poor fellow-men ;
and if, oh, if you can conscientiously settle this question in either
way as I have put it, then I say, men and women, all of you, be
up and doing ! Try and spread your doctrines, bearing in mind
that every little helps to bring your fellow-creatures nearer to
the “truth.” Many would say that if the world ever sees the
dream of Utopia, a perfect land and people, realised : which,
however-, could only be possible with a social regeneration and
purification of mankind —and religion —that element of strife and
discord has signally failed to do this—in such a state I am afraid,


or I should say, hope, that religious sentiment —as at present
we know it —would not form part of man’s nature, hut would he
superseded hy a higher form of intellectual, universal fellow-
feeling and brotherhood, or what you like to call it.
If this puny and incomplete effort of mine, arouse any
'discussion, pray let me heg of you to endeavour to, if you reply
to or notice this, in any way to do so in the language of civilised,
rational, logical and thinking individuals, and not condescend to
vulgar personalities and cheap satire, but to hear in mind that I
am one of yourselves, and above all things let us have good
sound, “up to date ” common sense. Don’t quote from old fos-
sils (Biblical) who should be buried with the mummies, but treat
it purely from the standpoint of advanced and semi-enlightened
“ modern thought ” —convince but don’t try to terrorise.
✓
Full well I know that this vast and momentous question
trenches on and endangers stupendous and varied interests (it has
also direct bearing on the economic and all social questions)—for
instance the dominant classes, the wealthy, the so called privi-
leged classes—Kings, Queens, Emperors, with their nobilities
and their “Flunkies ” and last, but not least, the vast army of
those who in some way derive their “ living” from religion—and
clergymen to whom, after all said and done it is in many cases,
(not all of course) simply a profession,—a manner of earning a
“ crust”—from many of these people it is most natural to expect
strong and most “ violent ” —ergo, if unreasoning opposition. It
can be proved beyond a doubt to any “ willing ” mind that the
interests of religion and those who serve it, is analogous to and
wrapped up in those classes of which I have just made mention.
To speak plainly, the one supports the other; or again, religious
sentiment or superstition is and has been the means by which the
“sharps” i.e. the aforementioned comparative few have
“gulled,” hoodwinked and kept in “proper” subjugation from
time immemoiral, the “flats ” or the “ masses ” so as to maintain
strengthen and foster their selfish and mercenary desires, ambi-
tions, etc., etc. (However, in this issue we must not too sweep-
ingly include all—remember there are exceptions to every one—
we must learn moderation in thought as well as in “ deed.”
Only too well do I know 'that the brevity, which is of neces-
sity enforced on me by want of time and space, leaves the subject
open on many points to the operation of those “ sp>ecious ” and
“plausible ” arguments, or shall we say “ platitudes ” which in
many instances seemed to be taken from some pre-historic
time, when man was unfortunately for the race at large
more easily led and “ gulled ” than he is willing to be nowa-
days, but in these times with the great advance and development
of thought and reason the question is : —Will the masses always
continue to rest content to accept and swallow what has for so
long mislead and hoodwinked them ? No, I say, at whatever


cost, let us get at the “truth.” Let us endeavour to settle it,
for above all earthly questions this is the most momentous, the
question upon which hinge the forward and upward progress and
development of the human species. Let us then endeavour to
banish all false sentiment and face and discuss the question
calmly in all its points, earnestly trying to conscientiously still
all doubts ; then, I say :—“ Tremble all ye hollow mockeries and
whited sepulchres, whether ye be Religion, Freethought or other
forces, the truth will some day (let us hope) become apparent to
all who are capable of comprehending it.
That there have been martyrs to the cause of religion is but
another instance of the possibilities that lie open before the race.
But though there are amongst us many who, I will admit, are
thoroughly good, true, conscientious men , in whom all these causes,
etc., have taken firm root, and who try to act up to their convic-
tions, both in the “ spirit and to the letter, in their outward and
inward lives; how many others are there—professed pillars of
“Church and State” —who, were it only possible to lay bare to
the gaze of the public their second nature, their inner man, their
second brain, but would be forced to acknowledge that at some
time or another in their lives they have been compelled to admit
to themselves, though very reluctantly perhaps, that what ?
that they are “ humbugs ! ”
History repeats itself. Out of the ashes of one religion
other new creeds have and are springing up. We have but to
study the world’s history to verify this. Each different creed is
a “ doubt ”in itself ! Christianity is dying, is becoming effete ;
its inconsistencies, absurdities and corruptions are consigning it
slowly, but surely, to oblivion. This fact is becoming more and
more patent year by year. Read your papers, go to your
churches, what will you find : Why, that the bulk of the support
and patronage comes directly and indirectly from the fair sex —
who as a component part of the race in the aggregate (there are,
of course, some few exceptions) are inferior to the men in intel-
lectual development and all round mental capacity, doubtless
caused greatly by the “comparative” lack of those causes and
incentives which in men have led to such development and grand
results, viz., “ The struggle for existence,” necessity—the mother
of invention and impetus to bodily and mental development.
These causes have not operated to the same extent in women’
for the simple reason that the great majority of them have been
placed by men beyond the necescity of “earning” their daily
bread; also their “peculiar” mode of education, physically and
otherwise, militates against their getting on an equality with the
men.
We are told that Christianity was essentially a reforming
movement emanating from the “masses” amongst the
“canaille” anyhow, it was —in its pristine purity and glory; and


before its amalgamation and contamination witli Paganism, under
Emperor Constantine (read History), it was essentially based on
the doctrines of benevolence, brotherly love, charity, etc. [N.B.
a socialistic basis.] We are further told that “Christ!! ” him-
self was the greatest Socialist that ever lived. This is a tacit
admission that socialistic doctrines are right, proper and just;
then why do they not try to “ practise ” what they preach?
Therefore, looking at the whole matter from a perfectly un-
biassed standpoint, with due consideration and reflection, and
noting the “signs of the times; —now we see that side by side
with the decadence in religious sentiment the world is progres-
sing temporally with leaps and bounds in the same ratio with this
decadenee on the other hand.
In view of all this then, does it not seem possible that the
Eeligion (if our minds must still continue to know this feeling,
this idea under that name) or goal of the future
will be “ Socialism ” —allied with “natural” science—to inter-
pret the “seeming” mysteries and wonders of our age, and miti-
gate or do away with many of the ills, etc., our poor bodies have
to put up with.
Socialistic doctrines and scientifie discoveries from their very
nature appeal most “ strongly ” to the “masses.”
•
Further, it is to be hoped —as the Eace at large becomes
more universally, intellectually and physically developed—reli-
gious morals ? | | will be superseded by the individual’s own
“Intellect,” and reason.
Finally, that recognising the influence of “Heredity on Free
will,” it would be better to endeavor to prevent criminals and
persons affected mentally or physically from perpetuating their
abnormal traits, thus improving the Eace “ morally” and physi-
cally.
If the time comes when common sense (or uncommon, which
is it ?) is allowed fuller swing than even at present, then will the
progress of the Eace be more splendid and rapid even than it is
now, and the most wonderful results will be achieved ; what
seems like night to us will to posterity be as clear as the light of
day. Science will triumph, and religious humbug and super-
stition, with its black-coated exponents—fitting emblems of the
vampire and night owl —will be cast aside into well merited
oblivion, or utilised for more human and practical purposes.
Science and Eeligion —as at present we know it, and as
preached and practised —are diametrically opposed, and no
amount of specious cunning and clever speeches, writings, etc.,
can or will weld them together.
Here, in sunny New South Wales, the “ signs of the times ”
seem growing more and more troublous. Then we see in Europe


Anarchists and the other ists; America, unemployed resulting in
Coxeyites, etc.; Australia, unemployed, displaced unionists vetsus
foreign and home; partially stagnant capital, in fact, both,
capital and labor all the world over suffering from same com-
plaint. But the bad results are undoubtedly most felt by the
“producing” portions of humanity.
Though we must deeply regret the dreadful frame of mind
into which men are forced bj r existing conditions, causing them
to adopt such desperate and futile methods for redress of their
just wrongs and grievances as bomb throwing, etc. ; still it’s
a wind that blows no one any good. But (to my mind, at least,
the prejudice these rash and insane acts raise against other bodies
of really good and well meaning men, more than counterbalances
any good which may result from the minds they draw, or force,
to the study of sociological science by the sensational exploits of
the desperate and misled few.”
Superstition and Co. are dying very hard. The human mind
still devours with avidity any news items or literature of sensa-
tional or mysterious nature, perhaps it is resultant of a morbid,
burning desire to get away from ourselves, from our thoughts;
or is it perhaps in a good many induced by sheer vacuity of
thought? Truly, the garden is “weedy” and requires a lot of
patience, time and hard work to clear out the noxious elements ;
still we all know that time, perseverance and work can accomplish
wonders.
Another great evil these bull-headed schemers do, is to place
in their opponents’ hands a very powerful weapon. The govern-
ing classes, by diplomatically throwing the weight of public
opinion (by the weight of the indignation, etc., these short-
sighted, volcanic efforts induce, create a revulsion of feeling—
and what would perhaps develope into pity, sympathy, knowledge,
of causes and ultimate assistance towards the general end.
Progress is turned too often into bitter hostility, etc., of “all”
classes of patriots, of reformers, and thus the cards are played
into the hands of the “cutest” players. In addition, possession
is nine-tenths of the law, you know; a cock generally crows
better on his own dung hill.
Thus the governments, backed up by what is now-a-days
called public opinion, under the ostensible pretence of crushing
or defeating anarchical aims, have placed in their hands more
power to overlook and check, if not extirpate. (Impossible.)
All other advanced societies, etc., such, for instance, as the rapid
growth of Socialism in Germany and elsewhere, at which their
Imperial humbugists have taken alarm, and no wonder, their
fat billets being at stake. Obviously then the moral to be drawn
from this is to get possession of the government , and with a happy
electoral constitution, w r e may not unreasonably entertain hopes
of future benefit, socially and materially, from this source. We


can’t do every thing at once; before we can run we have to first
learn the use of our legs. So with the world. We must educate
and spread liberal ideas amongst the “masses.” The few intel-
lects lead; but the “masses” must be constantly improved,
physically and mentally, thereby pressing on and urging the
intelligent few to increased mental efforts.
Therefore, it behoves us one and all to read, discuss, reflect
and study Sociology as a science to the best of our abilities or
opportunities. Then, after doing so, we have a remedy for a
lot of evils—our ballot-box.
Let us ask each candidate a few pertinent questions as to his
knowledge on that all important factor in the education of a
politician, of a legislator —“The study of Sociology.” Ask him
if he will advocate its study at public schools, etc., ad. lib., and
weigh them all up and plump for the man we “think” will prove
the straightest, most level-headed and “ progressive ” representa-
tive, or “ delegate;” irrespective of class, creed, party childishness
or other mischievous channels, for wasting time and diverting
attention from other more momentous questions—questions that
affect our very existence, both now and more so in the future.
. There is a growing belief or fear in many intelligent minds
that our present civilisation is liable to be overwhelmed or
destroyed by a catyclism. Such will most assuredly be the case
unless we, one and all, rouse up and devote more of our time
and energies to the proper solution of social problems, etc. It is
another instance of the diversity of thought (save the mark !)
that the human brain is capable of. How now. as of yore, new,
progressive,, radical improvements are nearly always universally
condemned, etc., before being finally accepted. We are governed
by the past instead of gathering fresh ideas, knowledge and
experience for the future. Out of what we do and are doing, and
what is going ou around us, the general tendency of thought is
to look back to seek for precedents from a very much less en-
lightened age. Why should this be so ? Why ? Because our
whole system of education is based on superstition ; the past is
not up to date enough as it were. Legislation must be constantly
altered to suit the growing wants and requirements of the age.
Systems of government, religion, educational methods, all must
be changed from time to time as the Bace continues to push on
and develope itself. The ideals of one age are not necessarily
to be the ideals of futurity. The battle between greed and need,
might and right is. has and will be long and stern, but the right
will be eventually reached. It is for each one of us to try and
do his or her share in the great cause. Don’t let us get dis-
heartened, remember we are all slowly improving; but still every
one can help push on and develope by advocating and spreading
all good “ up to date ” sensible, rational ideas.


Another tiling I should like to mention. Supposing, say
you are an employee. Well, to retain your job or billet, it is
but natural that you endeavor to study the interests and wishes
of your employer, even though they may sometimes be at
variance with your own convictions, etc. —at least, this applies to
the majority of us in these days of stern competition. Of course,
we know that there are exceptions to every rule ; so in this.
But, looking at the matter broadly, ’tis but natural that news-
paper editors, etc., should lean to, write for, and be biassed even,
by their employers’ wishes and views. And who are these em-
ployers in most cases ? Why, the capitalistic class, who as a
whole are the most interested in maintaining present absurd
order of things. Well, these editors would, I have no
doubt, if left to the exercise of their own absolute free will, be
in many cases real good-hearted fellows, anxious to do their fel-
low-men a good turn or to help in any movement to better their
social conditions ; but, being tied by certain conventions, cannot
give these qualities the fair play and scope they would like to,
perhaps. Recognising this fact (fact, lam afraid it is as in
the majority of cases, at any rate), it necessarily follows that we
must receive all dogmatic or oracular statements emanating from
cei'tain of these sources with a certain amount of mental reser-
vation, trying to analyse and separate (liberally and broadly,
though) the “ tares from the wheat.”
Ours is a goodly world, but there are some deuced bad sorts
of people in it—which spoils it muchly. What say you all ?
’Tis sad to look around us and see, side by side with huge wealth
and incredible luxury, culture, and refinement (thus was it in the
last days of Roman civilization), misery, poverty, crime, in its
various phases—murders, outrages, bomb-throwing, suicide
galore, commercial depression, ad lib. One naturally is tempted
to be vulgar, bad, stupid enough, as to enquire into the
causes which have brought things to sucli a state. Having found
“some” of the causes—the principle ones—we should be the
veriest pack of idiots if we did not try to seek out some sort of
remedy or cure.
The good time is coming, when Grovernment by the people
for the people will not be the utter farce which in too many
instances it is at present. When this time comes we will
return good for evil; we will better ourselves and yet do good to
all. In doing good (or trying to) and making others happy,
comes the greatest reward and purest happiness. That great
reformer, Jesus Christ, first preached brotherly love, in fact, primi-
tive Socialism. Therefore, ye religious people follow His [don’t
forget the capital “ H,” you know—suppose you can’t think or
conceive of other than a personal God j teachings, if you must still
be governed from the tomb.
I think that one of the finest signs of the intellectual pro-
gress of this age was the Parliament of Religions held in con


nection with the late Chicago Exhibition. Here were got together,
for the first time in modern history, delegates or representatives
of a good number, in fact, the majority of the Religions of this
planet. ’Twould be a capital thing if an annual bona fide (not
packed) gathering of this sort were held, say only three or so
delegates for each Religion (or suivival of primitive man —
which is it ?) If this were done, the hedges of bigotry and
egotism would be the quicker broken down, and a purer
universal creed would be evolved. This is becoming, in fact,
an absolute necessity. Looking back on the histories of all
men, we can see this one palpable truth and hard fact, viz., that
as the man developed intellectually, his Grod had to be improved,
altered, clothed, to suit the times. So it is now. Amidst all the
thousands of beautiful, romantic dreams, conceptions, and
imaginings of the supreme power, the cause, the reason of our
life and being on this earth, which have, are, and will be
mouthed or penned, the yearning after the ideal conception
manifests itself. What is termed Christianity, if revised and
modernised by a committee or conference of scientists and
philosophers would be (of course, dismissing with a smile such
childishness as believing in its first originator’s supernatural
origin) admirably adapted to reach some of those minds (strange
some of our ablest politicians and others included) who are so over-
whelmed with a sense of their “ nothingness ” as compared with
Nafure, and their inability to account (as yet ) for many of the
phenomena of life. For such people, it would do for the nonce.
In too many cases it is only by playing upon these super-
stitious feelings that any good can be knocked out of them —for
the benefit of themselves and the Race at large on this mundane
sphere. Moral. Would-be social reformers must fight cunning
with cunning and simplicity with simplicity in a ludicrous shape.
To come straight to the point at once, we waste too much time
thinking about and considering the future, of which no man ever
knew, knows, or ever will know anything. Instead of minding
our own business —that is the present —thinking how we can best
make ourselves and others comfortable, happy and contented on
this earth —on which we are born, live and die, come from and
return to just the same as all other forms of life—which is endowed
(as being alive) with the same motive power as ourselves —of us
“man,” the summit of all this mass of life which from the crudest
beginnings has been so slowly evolved that the average present
human brain cannot conceive perhaps of the period of time—the
ages it has taken to produce —to evolve.
Humiliating as it doubtless is to our self-conceit, we will
have to admit that the idea we have so gladly grasped hold of
and around whicli we have weaved a pretty little (or big) web of
beautiful poetry and romance, viz., the subtle side of our natures,
that which we vainly and egotistically call our “soul” and
glory in its supposed immortality; but which is really only the


motive power in us—tlie vital spark—the as yet undiscovered
principle of life, common to all forms of life emanating from
“nature” (the only creator or God we know) and which natural
science is slowly but surely revealing for us. If we can only
have patience to wait for the solutton of these seeming wonders.
Finally let me ask you all one little question, With what word
or words in the English language is “ Free ” synonomous ? To
me it sounds as the emblem of love, liberty and progress. There-
fore, if it sounds the same to you, go just out of curiosity and
read some standard pamphlets or books of modern, advanced
Freethinkers, (and therein you will find the grandest thoughts
and aspirations for the benefit and happiness of mankind it is
possible to conceive of) —in order to more effectually “ down ”
their arguments ?!
There are two ways of looking at the crucial question, which
year by year is verging nearer; the catyclism overhanging our
semi civilisation, the inevitable “ must be faced ” —we will take
the pessimistic side first.
The present unhealthy, ungodly, unreasonable, existing,
chaotic commercial system in vogue pretty universally; combined
with land and every other kind of monopoly, will in time so
grind the masses—the poorer, less efficient, less favored or lucky
ones—down, that from human beings, with vast possibilities be-
fore them, they will degenerate and lapse again to barbarism,
turn like wolves or insensate madmen, and indiscriminately
butcher all who become objects of suspicion, etc., to them. Fill
in and paint the rest of the picture yourselves!!
But let us now turn with a sigh of relief, and just glance at
the more optimistic view of the situation.
By the untiring and intelligent efforts of the vast and ever
increasing army of those who are openly and insidiously, wit-
tingly and unwittingly, hammering away at the granite walls of
superstition, bigotry in all its phases, ignorance—both in persons
of high and low degree ; by the noble efforts of the ever increas-
ing army of these true religionists, patriots, or whatever you
can call them—the age of reason, love, the millenium, in
fact, will be reached by no, supernatural means, however,
but simply by the splendid energies of the Race itself.
Let us then endeavor to take a more optimistic view of things,
and instead of being, as so many of us are, apathetic, let us one
and all be up and doing; each individual atom doing his or her
best to push round the wheel of our civilisation. Let us not con-
demn any fresh ideas, etc., until after giving them a fair trial;
and before rejecting any “progressive” measure, let us all
endeavor to understand its merits and demerits.
To rouse more interest in some minds, I cannot do more than
by recommending, all who have not done so, to read that child


of Donnelly’s genius, “The Gulden Bottle,” (price only 6d.) ;
and though we may not entirely agree with him on all points,
still it’s good to imbibe these great thoughts and aspirations for
poor humanity. Bellamy’s “ Looking Backward ” is also another
very interesting specimen of this new era in literature.
In the world’s history of its social evolutions something akin
to Donnelly’s ideas will first be worked out—is even now being
gradually worked out; then, as a sequel, Bellamy’s ideal and
their higher ideals still I suppose.
Any person who says these things cannot be practicable, be
possible, and that you are a fool for dreaming of such absurdity,
can be told to go think. Put two and two together, compare
past, ever increasing present progress, every great innovation or
improvement, which in the majority of cases met with ridicule,
becoming realities and accepted as a matter of course. Let
him do this and perhaps, if he has ordinary intelligence, he
will be somewhat shaken in his dogmatic opinions. It only lays
with oui-selves, in our unselfishness, perseverance and noble self-
abnegnating practical hard work.
Let Progress and Excelsior be our beacons of light beckoning
us ever on and on. Hope, persevere, work.
. Humanity may be likened to a band of amateur performers
practising a new piece of music. Some few of the players under-
stand and can play their part, but others have to be dinned and
drummed at before they grasp the spirit of the thing. Same
with humanity. Some minds are laws unto themselves, others—
well, you know! ! To put the matter in a nutshell —Religion is
a survival of primitive undeveloped man—but still pro tevi a
necessary evil for some minds. AVe may finally and curtly say
that in its intrinsic ethical sense Religion is not a fraud, but it is,
as a factor of,human development, gradually becoming obsolete;
it is outliving, or has outlived its tortuous usefulness. Thus, in
this instance, again substantiating the grand doctrines of evolu-
tion as applied to things human.
“Autalis” gives his “tip” to coming generations, viz.:
Parents, seek out some more practical, profitable and permanent
“ profession ” for your children “than the church.”
Before dismissing the subject, let us just take a glance at
Spiritualism in its relation to existing religious beliefs. Pending
my further investigation into this subject, can only give my
qualified impressions; they are : that Spiritualism may be the
means of getting theological proofs, or far more likely,
merely the golden gate opening up fresh fields for scientific
research, involving as it does the more subtle and complex side
of our natures (electricity, animal magnetism, and kindred forces).
Undreamt of discoveries and possibilities arising therefrom,


will result from communing with “nature,” on a pui’ely scientific
basis, however. In the future lies the solving of the problem.
What is truth ? when applied in the abstruse sense of the ques-
tion. For the present let “ Humanitarism ” assert itself more
generally.
SUMMARY.
Here is an analogy. A young man and woman marry ; in
due course the female becomes pregnant, the living germ ad-
vances through gradual and successive changes until its birth,
after birth consciousness gradually grows, the child grows, by
very slow degrees it begins to gather interest in life, it crawls, it
essays to walk—at first it has to be taught, held up, led,
gradually it acquires more confidence—perhaps a few tumbles
make it timid, but, again plucking up courage, it has another go,
and then some day, to its great glee commences to toddle about “on
its own”—the same process is repeated in afterlife in the course
of its intellectual development.
This analogy will serve to roughly illustrate man’s progress
in civilization. From the crudest, feeblest beginnings has our
social civilization been reared up, intermingled with occasional
relapses —but “ necessity ” has effected our progress so far, and
“ necessity ” will effect it now and in the future. No standing
still is possible. It’s ever on, on—or down, down !
The majority of brains are not fitted to stand alone’
Nature, in her inexorableness, awes them ; their own utter insig
nificance, awes them. To these people Religion is an instinct —
the instinctive want of support —of a leaning post. If they
attempt to go too far without their prop (Religion), their brain,
backed by the tremendous influeuce of “ Heredity on Free Will,”
refuses to support them. This accounts for the anomaly of some
of our bolder spirits climbing almost to a top pinnacle of intel-
lectual emancipation, and then meeting something new, startling
—something their reason cannot meet and overcome—something
which strikes a half-covered vein of fear, of superstition. Con-
fronted with the seemingly inscrutable, mysterious, wonderful,
they strike a “snag,” come a “cropper” (I allude here to the
higher Spiritualists, Theosophists, and “sich like cults.”)
But when science gradually shows man the way to overcome
nature, to defeat the very elements themselves, then all this will
be changed. Futurity will wonder how it was “ the present ”
was so timorous and afraid to stand intellectually alone without
the leaning post of Religion. The baby of our civilisation is
learning to walk—how long before the supports will be discarded?


Looking back in reliable history, we can now understand
Avliy religious people (hypocrites or sincere) in all ages have taken
up such an antagonistic position to science ; they saw, “ felt,” in
it, a power superior to superstition and ignorance, over which
and with which they alone could satisfactorily work.
Without this belief in a future existence —without the beauti-
ful conception, dream, hallucination of the immortality of the
soul —of a better state of existence in the future “ unknown ”
state (of extinction), without the submission or meekness,
lieligions (Christianity in particular) have taught, have incul-
cated—do you think the laissez-faire policy of inertia, of in-
difference to existing anomalies, wrongs, absurdities, and
such like would or could have lasted and flourished in our midst ?
Intellectual scepticism and freedom of thought mean pro-
gress—i.e. railway-like progress. “Average” religion means
progress —stage coach with a very bad team in.
It is a somewhat significant fact, that the most go-ahead,
smartest, most up to date nations, say America, New Zealand,
Australia, are becoming conspicuous by their marked irreverence
and scepticism and other abominations —from the conventional
“ devout ” man’s point of view !! !






the populist series
or
z»!i MPHLEIS.
No. I—ls1 —Is Religion a Fraud ?
To be published shortly ;
No. 2—A common-sense View of the Probable
Origin of Human Life in this Sphere.
No. 3—Who and what Jesus Christ really was
—the pruning and dissecting knife of
Modern Reason and Common-sense
applied to superstitious old time
Traditions and Myths.
No. 4—Music—-Its Effect and Results on our
Higher Natures.
No. 5 —Chaos or Humanitarianism- which is
it to be ?
In preparation, and others to follow in due
course'.
No. 1, Only to hand yet. —Terms to Agents, 2s. per
dozen ; single copy, 3d.
N.B. All orders must be accompanied by remittance in full
and stamps to defray cost of postage. Failing compliance with this
no notice can be taken of order.
All communications to he addressed. —
MR. F. I. FEUARD,
Agent, “Populist Pamphlet Series,”
89 Yule Street, Petersham.
Agents and Canvassers wanted everywhere.
