

ONE PENNY
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 21
IS THE
VATICAN
IN THE WAR?
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard Pty. Ltd.,


THE CHURCHES AND ENLIST-
MENT.
Statesman and Mining Standard, June 28, 1917.
At length, some figures have been put for-
ward officially concerning the enlistments in
the A.I.F. according to denominations. The
figures are not complete, extending only to a
total of 209,500 men; but they afford a very
good indication. Of the total, 50.95 per cent,
were Anglicans, 18.57 Roman Catholics, 14.94
Presbyterians, 13.11 Methodists, Congrega-
tionalists and Baptists (who, rather stupidly,
are all bracketed together), and .32 Jews.
On the male population statistics, these figures
should have been —Anglicans, 40.48; Roman
Catholics, 23.09; Presbyterians, 13.25; Metho-
dists, Independents, and Baptists, 16.05; and
Jews, .42. On these figures, Anglicans had
sent about 22,000 men more than their pro-
portion, Roman Catholics nearly 10,000 less
than their proportion, Presbyterians between
3000 and 4000 more, Methodists, Indepen-
dents, and Baptists about 6000 less, and Jews
about 200 less.
Let us look at the figures from another
angle. We find that over 12 per cent, of the
male Anglican population has gone to the
front—indeed, no doubt, far more than that;
probably from 18 to 20 per cent., for the
number of those who have departed on active


service is now over 300,000. Where the Angli-
can percentage was over 1,2, the Roman Catho-
lic was a shade over the Presbyterian
nearly 11, the Methodist, Independent, and
Baptist a trifle under 8, and the Jewish a little
over 7. Now let us suppose that the other
Churches had all enlisted up to the Anglican
standard, that is to say, about 12.18 per cent.
The Roman Catholic contribution would in
that case have been increased by nearly
23,000, the Presbyterian by nearly 4000, and
the Methodist, Independent, and Baptist by
over 15,000. But if, instead of acting up to
the level of the Anglican, the other Churches
had acted down to the level of the Roman
Catholic (7.7 per cent.), where should we
have stood then? In that case, the Anglicans
would have supplied nearly 39,000 less than
they did, and the Presbyterians 9000 less.
As we have said, it is a great pity that the
Methodists, Independents, and Baptists should
have been grouped together, because it is quite
possible that one of them may have acted as
patriotically as the Presbyterians or the Angli-
cans, and another even more unpatriotically
than the Roman Catholics. If we knew,
we would be glad to speak out about them
as plainly as we have done about the
Roman Catholics; but, even if all three
had enlisted as badly as have the
Romans, there is at least this to be said
for them, that they have not bragged
about what they have done and have not lied
about it; whereas the bluff and boasting that
have gone on in the Roman Catholic press
and on Roman Catholic platforms as to their
enlistments have been nauseating. Their utter


IS THE VATICAN IN TEE WAR.
falseness is shown by the figures. These
people were continually boasting, even though
they well knew that the contrary was the case,
that they had enlisted far more than their
proportion. We now see that they have en-
listed very much less than their proportion;
and it is to be'borne in mind that these figures
are showing the Roman Catholic contribution
at its best, for in the early days of the war
the Roman Catholics enlisted twice as well as
they have since done. Those of them who
dared to think for themselves and were not
going to submit to priestly control in such
matters went promptly. Since then, the
Church’s determination to prevent their en-
listment has borne its fruit, and we may be
quite sure that, if for the first 200,000 the
Roman Catholic enlistment was between 18
and 19 per cent, it is now very much lower
than that.
It would he interesting to know how the de-
nominations have contributed in the various
States, but this we are not told. This paper
has, however, compiled statistics for a total of
some 106,000 men, rather more than half of
those for whom the figures are given; and
these may be considered to be fairly represen-
tative. They show that in New South Wales,
where the Church, under Archbishop Kelly,
has been far more patriotic than it has been
in some other States, the percentage was
nearly 19 (where it should have been over
24), while in Victoria, under the sly and dis-
honest discouragement of Archbishop Miannix
and his abettors, the Roman Catholic enlist-
ment has been only 15 per cent, (instead of
over 21 per cent.) of the 'State’s total. Th?


other States show up thus: South Australia ■
about \Sy 2 , instead of nearly 19; Queens-
land 17, instead of over 23; Western Aus-
tralia instead of nearly 22; and Tas-
mania 16, instead of a trifle less than 17.
It will be interesting to see, in view of the
publication of these figures, what line Roman
Catholic apologists will now take. Will they
ignore the statistics, and continue their lying
assertions, as if they had never been refuted?
or will they deny their correctness? or will
they confuse cause and effect in their usual
way, by asserting that it is a result of “the
wicked sectarian campaign”? or will they de-
clare that it is due to the treachery and blood-
thirstiness of the British Government in its
dealings with the Irish “patriots”? They are
capable of taking up any of these lines, and
not incapable of understanding the complete
dishonesty of any and every one of them.
[Since the above was written, it has been
pointed out that the statistics are not reliable
so far as concerns the Protestant, bodies,
since they were compiled from papers filled
in by Recruiting Sergeants and others who
were content to ask the men whether they
were Protestants or Roman Catholics, and
who, in many cases, credited all Protestants to
the Church of England. This is to be greatly
regretted, because it may be doing a great
injustice to the other Protestant denomina-
tions —Methodists, Presbyterians, Congrega-
tionalists, Baptists and others —but it is to be
noted that it does not affect our remarks con-
cerning Roman Catholic enlistments. The
broad fact to be borne in mind is that Pro-
testant sects, numbering less than 73 per


cent, of the male population, contributed
about 80 per cent, of the first 209,500 troops,
while the Roman Catholics, numbering nearly
22 per cent, of the male population, furnished
only about 18>2 per cent. The Protestant
enlistments then were considerably in excess
of the Protestant proportion, and the Roman
Catholic enlistments considerably below the
R.C. proportion. These are facts from which
there is no get-away.]
GERMANY AND THE VATICAN.
Statesman and Mining Standard, June 28, 1917.
A cable message informs us that Mon-
signor Gerlach, the Pope’s vestiario, has been
found guilty of high treason and sentenced to
imprisonment for life. Unfortunately, though
the cable does not say so, the scoundrel es-
caped, and so is likely never to serve the sen-
tence he so richly deserves. The infamies of
Mgr. Gerlach included the conveying to the
Central European Powers of information re-
garding the strategical intentions of the
Allies of which the Vatican came into pos-
session, the organisation of a system of trans-
port of contraband from Italy into Switzer-
land and thence into Germany, and the carry-
ing into effect of a vast system of sabotage.
It may be remembered that, soon after Italy’s
entry into the war, two of her big warships
were mysteriously blown up. These are among
the deeds of which this high Vatican dignitary
has been guilty; and he has also effected the
destruction of several industrial plants.
Mgr. Gerlach has been found guilty of the


crimes with which he has been charged; but
the question arises—at least it will arise here,
but will scarcely arise in Italy, where every-
one has answered it long ago —whether Ger-
lach’s treachery was that of an individual or
that of a high dignitary of the Church. In
this connection, we have to remember that he
was perhaps the closest confidant of the pre-
sent Pope, who, only last December, selected
him for the high honour of bearing the Red
Hat to the three newly-appointed French
Cardinals. When Gerlach’s financial agent
was arrested in January for being concerned
in the destruction of two Italian battleships,
the Italian Government insisted, on behalf of
itself and its Allies, on his removal from the
Vatican, and it was only then that the Pope
dispensed with his services. To imagine that
the head of the Church was not aware of the
activities of his right-hand men would imply
a woeful lack of infallibility of judgment on
the part of His Holiness. If there were any
loyal Italians among the Papal entourage, as
is possible though not perhaps probable, it is
inconceivable that no suspicion of the actions
of this master-spy should have reached the
ears of Benedict XV. It is, of course, possible
that the Pope may have been quite innocent of
all knowledge of the man’s crimes; but a
great simplicity of mind is necessary for such
a belief, especially in view of the marked sym-
pathy that His Holiness showed with the
German cause until doubts began to emerge
as to its ultimate triumph.
Why should the Vatican connect itself with
the cause of an Imperial House that is not
Roman Catholic? When one considers the


readiness that the Vatican has always dis-
played to use anybody and anything for the
furtherance of its own ends, the answer is not
hard to find. In the first place, Germany is in
alliance with the House of Habsburg, the one
royal family in the world that remains con-
sistently susceptible to clerical influence. In
the second place, Germany has been the only
country in the world where, of recent years,
Roman Catholicism has been advancing, its
party in the Reichstag being very compact
and practically holding the balance of power,
so that Germany is the one country over
which the Church has a real hope of gaining
control. Thirdly, Germany is arrayed
against France, against which the Vatican
entertains a deadly hatred, because of the way
in which the French Government nipped its
treacherous political movements in the bud,
deprived it of its ill-gotten wealth, and took
from it most of its power to influence and
warp the minds of the young, and because
also of the spirit of sceptical independence
with which the French people, for a hundred
years past, have mocked and derided the
Vatican’s pretensions, even though they have
continued nominally to belong to the
Church, and because it is from them that has
come the flood of scepticism which has over-
whelmed the whole world, and is slowly but
surely sapping the strength of the Church.
And fourthly, the Vatican finds on the side
of France that kingdom of Italy which keeps
the Pope out of those temporal possessions
which he appears to value more highly than
spiritual power. It is known that the late
Franz Ferdinand of Austria had set before


himself as one of the objects of his life the
restoration of the temporal sovereignty of the
Pope; and there need be little doubt that, if
the Central European Powers emerge from
this war victorious, the price of Papal sup-
port will be the restoration of the Papal
monarchy. Such a restoration would be
altogether opposed to the best interests of the
Church; but the Vatican has always shown a
gross failure to understand the supremacy of
the spiritual over the material. It has always
liked to exercise control over the souls of men,
but its instrument has always been fear; of
moral strength it has never shown the slightest
appreciation; therefore, we may well believe
that this bait of the restoration of the tem-
poral sovereignty is one which the Vatican
cannot resist; and we may be certain, too, that
Jt sympathises with the Central Powers be-
cause they are autocratic, and because it finds
the democratic forces of the world arrayed
against them.
Here, in the Commonwealth, the Church is
pro-German largely because it is anti-British
and pro-Irish; but the Pope and his advisers
are probably too well pleased with the ex-
treme latitude granted their Church in Eng-
land to be.particularly hostile to the United
Kingdom ; and for Ireland they do not care
2d., except indeed for its value as a pawn in
the game. If they are pro-German, it is for
the reasons we have given above; and that
they are pro-German need scarcely be ques-
tioned. They are none the less on the side
of Germany that their support is underhand.
Had they not been, it is incredible that during
two years of war a German spy should have


occupied one of the very highest posts in the
papal court, have been able to use the Vati-
can’s “diplomatic valise” for the despatch-
ing of precious information to Germany, and
have had a free hand to carry on his nefari-
ous schemes. As, in 1870, the Vatican blun-
dered badly when it urged Napoleon 111. to
an attack on Germany in the hope of crush-
ing Protestant Prussia, so it is to be hoped
that now too it will prove to have made a
false step when it entered into partnership
with the Kaiser; and it is also to be hoped
that it will be made to pay heavily for its
intriguing and its treachery.
Rank Blasphemy.
Statesman and Mining Standard, June 28, 1917.
This paper in its last issue discussed several
definitions lof ‘ * sectarianism. ’’ There is ap-
parently another: it is sectarianism of the worst
type to tell a story against anyone with a Celtic-
Irish name. That is the crime of which the
“Federal Public Service Journal” has been
guilty. It told in a recent issue how a lady, who
gave her name as Quigley, was on election day
directed by an official to a “ P to S ” table, but
demanded to be directed instead to the “L ’ ’
table because she wished to vote Labour. Now
this story would doubtless have been thought very
amusing if the lady’s name had been Smith or
McDonald or Williams; but, as the name was
good Hibernian, and she was referred to as hav-
ing a brogue, this is, in the eyes of our Irish
Roman Catholic contemporaries, blasphemy of the
first order. One of them attacks the paper
that tells it, declaring that it “should be non-
party and altogether free from sectarianism,”
and professes to regard the story as an unwar-


ranted reflection on the appearance and intelli-
gence of the Irish women folk in Melbourne. “It
is, ” it says, “a gratuitous insult to Irishwomen
generally. ’ ’ The other refers to the same
matter, and is almost equally silly, winding up
very amusingly by paying that ‘ ‘an Irishman can
give and take a joke.” This is only another in-
stance of the way in which these people make the
men and women of their nationality ridiculous, and
it affords another example of the unlimited impu-
dence of their desire to rule the community. The
Irishman must be sacrosanct; no story must be told
of him unless he be the hero of it; no joke must be
cracked at his expense; if he make himself ridicu-
lous, the incident must not be reported. Papers
may tell what tales they like of absurd be-
haviour by Englishmen or Welshmen or Scotch-
men, but the Irishman must be regarded as a holy
personage of whom it is blasphemous to state any-
thing disrespectful. We should probably have legis-
lation to that effect if these remarkable individuals
had their way; but happily the very stupidity
which makes them see an insult to the race in every
joke of which an Irishman —at least, a Celtic Irish-
man—is the object is sufficient to prevent them
from obtaining the dominance in Australian affairs
which they would like to possess. We would
have to be brainless indeed to allow ourselves to be
governed by such people.
THE IRISH NEUTRAL
Morning Post, April 24, 1917.
It may become necessary to false the mili-
tary age and further to restrict whole trades.
The efficient prosecution of the war is the
paramount necessity. But the country is by
no means satisfied that the emergency has
arrived, not because it does not recognise
the needs of the Army, but because there is
a potential reserve of at least 250,000 men,


find probably double that number, of which
the Government do not avail themselves.
The representatives of the Irish people
informed the late Government that the
Irish “would not stand” Conscription, or, in-
deed, any other military measure binding
upon the rest of the United Kingdom. It was
no doubt difficult to defy the Nationalist
Party in the House of Commons; and no
doubt the imposition of military service in
Ireland would have been troublesome outside
Ulster. But there is no course of action in re-
spect of Nationalist Ireland conceivable by
the mind of man which would not bring
trouble, for the simple reason that the Irish
will have it so. Doing nothing brought the
worst trouble of all: the murder of English
soldiery, riot and arson, and the rise of the
Republican Party, which despises the Nation-
alists as much as the Nationalists hate Eng-
land. The present Government have inherited
from their predecessors two sets of rebels in-
stead of one, of which the Sinn Fein faction
is the stronger and the more dangerous. At
this moment it is restrained from another re-
volt solely by the presence of British armed
forces in the country. Mr. Dillon is the real
leader of the Nationalist Party. A gloomy
fanatic, he is the victim of a single idea, and
that idea is a wrong one. Over against him
is the leader of the Sinn Fein Republicans,
the ineffable Count Plunkett (of the Holy
Roman Empire), who succeeded in getting
himself elected to Westminster in order not to
sit there, and who has recently announced
his intention of taking his share in settling
the terms of peace with Germany. National-


ists and Republicans between them have suc-
ceeded in depriving Ireland of her proper
part in the war. While political manoeuvres
and rebellions have been going on over their
heads, the Irish have been methodically mak-
ing money out of the war. Never has the
Irish farmer been so prosperous. Neither he
nor his sons are required to fight; English law
does not run in Ireland; and the Irishman,
with plenty of English money in his pocket,
can afford to attend race meetings, eat and
drink as much as he likes, and indulge in
diatribes against the tyrannical English to his
heart’s content. Yesterday we published a
letter from a friendly Irishman, generously
offering the fruits of the Land of Canaan.
Potatoes, sugar, white flour, pastry; of these
rare or forbidden luxuries Ireland has great
store, no man interfering.
The other day an Englishman, exhausted
with war work, asked a friend to suggest a
neutral country whither he could go for a
time to escape the atmosphere of war. “Ire-
land, of course,” said his friend, and he was
right. Now the Government are considering
proposals for some form of “settlement,”
which Mr. Dillon, writing in the “Freeman’s
Journal” on Friday, thinks will be found un-
acceptable by the Nationalist Party. Of
course they will. 'And what the Nationalists
would accept —if there is such a thing—the
Sinn Fein party would promptly reject. Lord
Dunraven, writing in these columns yester-
day, affirms that “a temporary scheme capable
of development might be introduced if it is
based on federal principles reversed in appli-
cation.” Lord Dunraven’s opinion is to be


received with respect; but we doubt if his
suggestion would be regarded for a moment
by the Republican Party. Moreover, there are
England, Scotland, and Wales to be consulted,
not to mention the men of the Irish regiments,
both of North and 'South, now serving abroad.
The people of Great Britain are sick of Irish
politics and Irish treason and Irish oratory.
They are contemplating an Ireland which has
deliberately cut itself aloof from the civilised
world; which refuses a measure of military ser-
vice the United States is prepared to accept;
which takes everything from England and
gives nothing back except malice; which,
under cover of British and Irish fighting men,
makes money out of their necessities. A more
contemptible spectacle than the Irish political
leaders of the South and West present at this
moment is not to be found. On the top of all
the English are asked to break the Union to
please the Irish.
THE IRISH IMPASSE.
A Forgotten Element.
Dr. R. L. Marshall.
Morning Post, April 12, 1917.
It is rightly urged in these days, when
remedial legislation has removed every legiti-
mate Irish grievance, that the kernel of the
problem is largely a matter of sentiment. But
while this is at last recognised by English
parties there seems to be grave danger of for-


getting the fact that the Nationalist has no
monopoly of this attribute.
It is true that the latter has a past, and
however much the Nationalist may deplore it,
that past has cast its enduring shadow over
the Irish Celt. Thus to this day on windy
nights he hears the cry of his hunted fathers,
and, forgetting present security and freedom,
his scarred soul goes out across the years to
march beneath the moonlight with the pike-
men. His mind is still filled with visions of
banishment and oppression, and his memory
is haunted with pictures of desecrated altars
and fair lands held forfeit. The poison of a
partial conquest has entered into his blood,
and it works in a continual ferment of unrest.
But because the currents of the Ulsterman’s
soul run silent and deep there is a foolish ten-
dency to overlook the fact that beneath his
political and economic objections to National-
ist domination there lies also a sentiment still
and strong and deathless. For he, too, has
had a past. Vague visions float before him
of wild nights when his fathers held the bawn
against the howling Irish kerns, of long years
of constant strife, when sword-won lands were
held by the might of the naked blade. He,
too, has his memories of black, foul treachery
and cowardly crime. Lean, famine-wasted
arms wave greetings to him across the strug-
gling centuries, bidding him guard the faith
for which his fathers died and hold aloft in
an Imperial Province the flag that never fell.
[There is still for him a Crimson Sign on
Derry’s crumbling walls, and it is his fathers’
graves that line the banks of the Boyne. And
so rooted deep in his silent soul there is the


IS THE VATICAN IN THE WAR.
conviction that he has a tryst he owes to his
gallant dead, that he is the guardian of a free-
dom handed down from bleeding sire to son,
and with all the obstinate pride of his race he
will keep that faith. To yield submission to a
Dublin Parliament would be for him the
negation of his whole past history, the sur-
render of his trust and the degradation of his
people.
Thus, if sentiment is the secret of Nation-
alist persistence in the demand for self-govern-
ment, and this seems generally recognised,
sentiment is also the overwhelming obstacle
in the path of Ulster’s inclusion in such
government. And were every other objection
removed, her economic and political fears dis-
pelled, and every right safe-guarded, this same
sentiment would effectively bar the way to any
settlement without clear-cut partition. Those
who think otherwise are living in a land of
unreality, and will yet have a rude awakening.
For they will yet be forced to recognise that
no pressure devised either by Unionist perverts
or truckling time-servers will avail to over-
come this legacy of heredity. One thing is
sure: whatever else she may lose, and she has
lost much in these last years, Ulster will keep
her soul.
Hr. Mannix, at Mansfield ( V .), Sunday, June
24, 1917: —“It was said he had absolutely no in-
fluence. In the next breath it was said he was
responsible for the defeat of Conscription last
October; all these things could not be true.”
Surely Hr, Mannix must realise by now that the
people who, in their ignorance, were inclined to
follow him in October last have turned their baclcs
upon him in disgust. He has, in his own vernacu-
lar, been ‘ ‘ Iciclced, cuffed, and spat upon ’ ’ by the
loyal Australian Roman Catholics of this country.
It is to be hoped that Hr. Mannix will, during his
visit here, try to gauge Australian sentiment
more accurately.
Harold Smith, 376 Flinders-lane, Melbourne.
16
