

ONE PENNY.
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 30.
IS THE
PAPACY
ANTI-BRITISH ?
the
Rev. T. E. RUTH,
Melbourne Auditorium Address, Sunday Evening,
April' 28, 1918.
Published by Critchley Parker.
Obtainable at
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
305 LITTLE COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE,


THE NEXT AUDITORIUM
MISSION.
We have conducted in the Auditorium a “Mission to the Modem
Mind,” a “Mutual Understanding Mission," a “Mission to the Social
Conscience,” and a “Mission to * Citizens (concerning principles usually
called Protestant).” Mr. Kuth is now considering a “MISSION TO
CATHOLICS (With a Small ‘c’).” This would be a frank and friendly
consideration of the series of “Simple Talks to Non-Catholles ’ to be
delivered on Monday evenings at the Cathedral Hall.
If it can be arranged, Mr. Ruth proposes to attend the Cathedral
Hall meetings, and on the following Sunday evening consider the appeal
made to non-Cathollcs on the various subjects announced, under the
general title of “Religious Foundation Stones.” ' t
“The object of these talks is certainly not attack, nor is it defence. It
is exposition,” both the Roman Catholic papers announce. “It will readily
be admitted that a knowledge of what the Catholic Church really teaches
is at least as important, and as interesting, as any other great depart-
ment of history. It is, however, a regrettable fact that, for those outside
the Catholic Church, this knowledge has become so encrusted with mis-
conceptions of all kinds, that' multitudes will have no accurate know-
ledge whatever of the Catholic Church, beyond the fact of her existence.
It is hoped that these lectures will give to enquirers some first-hand know-
ledge in this matter, and will, by simple exposition, devoid of all con-
troversy, state the Catholic position as it really is.
‘“All Catholics are earnestly requested to bring under the rlotice of
their non-Catholic friends this opportunity of learning the truth about
our Church and her teaching.” «
That is to say, the Roman Catholic Church is making its appeal
to Protestants. Mr. Ruth proposes to consider the appeal made to non-
Catholics in a series of talks on precisely the same subjects, using the
Cathedral' Hall lectures as his subject matter. There is nothing in the
Protestant conception of religion to prevent Protestants attending the
Cathedral Hall lectures. Is there anything in Roman Catholicism to pre-
vent Roman Catholics attending the Auditorium services ? It would seem
advisable, in any case, to make the appeal to Catholics (with a small
“c”)..
The subjects announced are:—“The Divinity of Christ and The
Claims of Christ” (Rev. J. O’Dwyfer, S.J.), “Infallibility” (Dr. Mannix),
"Accidentals and Essentials” (Rev. E. Boylan, S.J.), “The Blessed Sacra-
ment” (Very Rev. W. J. Lockington, S.J.), “The Sacramental System”
(Very Rev. Dean Hegarty), “Confession” (Rev. P. Dwyer, S.J.), “Unity
and Sanctity of the Church” (Rev. J. Sullivan, S.J.), “Catholicity and
Apostolicity of the Church” (Rev. J. Mullins, C.M.), Devotion to Our
Lady” (Rev. J. J. Malone), “The Mass” (Rev. J. P. O’Connell), “Saints,
Relics and Indulgences” (Rev. P. A. Maher, 0.C.C.), “The Church and the
Bible” (Rev. F. Merner), “Conclusion” (Dr. Mannix).
At the moment, it looks as if Mr. Ruth’s “MISSION TO CATHOLICS
(with a small ‘c’)” will begin in the Auditorium on Sunday evening,
June 2, with an introductory address on “Why a Small ‘c’V” and be
continued every Sunday evening to SeptemHhr 1, making, with the
monthly service on May 26. a continuous series of fifteen Sunday
evenings at the Auditorium.


IS THE PAPACY
ANTI-BRITISH ?
On the Tuesday following our last Auditorium service,
the IrisJt. Catholics held a monster indignation meeting
at the Exhibition Oval. I was there, and, incidentally,
prior to the speeches, heard myself discussed and helped
discuss myself. Apart from the speeches, I was im-
mensely impressed by two things: first, the vast crowd
of apparently eligible men —I should not have thought
it possible that at this critical period of our life and
death struggle so many eligibles could have been mus-
tered in any part of the British Empire, outside Ireland;
and, second, the intense hatred of the Prime Minister,
the real*passion with which thousands of muscular men
of military age blended their religion with their politics
and sang, over and over again, “Glory, glory, hallelujah,
Billy Hughes wants a phenyle bath.”
The next week the Loyalists held a monster demon-
stration in the' Exhibition Building. My church duties
prevented my attending until late, but I notice that Dr.
Mannix in his Castlemaine speech says, “It was a very
remarkable meeting. It was a meeting of, ineligibles”—
that would make it a very remarkable meeting from the
Irish Catholic point of view. “They were so loyal,”
says Dr. Mannix, “that nothing but their isex or their
age or creeping paralysis would keep them from going
to the front.”
Now, comparing my own impression of the Irish
Catholic demonstration with Dr. Mannix’s impressions
of the Loyalist demonstration, I find some suggestion of
a rbply to the question, Is the Papacy Anti-British?


IS THE PAPACY ANTI-BRITISH?
♦
But I want to be much more fair to the Roman Catho-
lic community of this city and State than Dr. Mannix
seems inclined to be. And it is no part of my ministry
to be as unjust to Roman Catholics as the Roman Catho-
lic “Advocate” is, in its current issue.
I am not assuming, as Dr. Mannix seems to assume,
that Roman Catholics are necessarily and essentially
anti-British. I know many Roman Catholics who are
thoroughly pro-British, and who are so thoroughly
anti-Mannix that, if it were necessary, I would guarantee
to collect in less than a week a thousand pounds of
Roman Catholic money to cover the cost of his transit,
in his customary comfort, to some more congenial clime.
At the beginning of this conflict, and before Dr. Man-
nix entered upon his violent anti-British crusade, the
Roman Catholic citizens of the Southern Cross responded
as magnificently to the call of the Empire and to the
call of humanity as did Protestant citizens. All honour
to them! There was nothing in their religious* church-
manship to prevent Roman Catholics enlisting. The
preventing power was presently found in th % eir Arch-
bishop's anti-British propaganda. And the question, Is
the Papacy Anti-British? is suggested by the consistency
of the Archbishop’s attack and the fact that it synchro-
nises with what is happening in Quebec, in Italy, and
in Ireland. Now, does Dr. Mannix, in running counter
to the British sentiments of many of his fellow Roman
Catholics of this country, represent the political policy
of the Papacy? That is the question. When he repudi-
ates such Roman Catholic loyalists as Mr, Justice Hey-
don, Mr. Justice Duffy, Sir Thomas Hughes, and Mr.
Benjamin Hoare, is he the ordinary victim of Hibernian
hate of everything English, or is he the w.illing instru-
ment of a far-reaching politico-ecclesiastical enmity
against the Allies? »
Every element of my political desire and of my re-
ligious faith prompts me to respect my fellow Christians
of the Roman Catholic communion. In season and out


of season I have advocated the most sympathetic study
of their creed and the utmost co-operation with them
in withstanding the common enemies of the Christian
faith. I have publicly expounded and unreservedly
commended all that is catholic —with a small “c” —in
their religious faith and practice, as all who attend my
ministry and all readers of “Wake Up, Australia!” are
aware.
I have never said anything so sweeping, or anything,
as I hope, as untrue of Roman Catholics as that said
and implied in the Roman Catholic “Advocate” of yes-
terday’s date. It# comments on the fact that in June
last, in reply to one of their common charges against
Protestant speeches, I wrote to that paper saying that
I had never in word, or deed, directly or indirectly sug-
gested that Roman Catholics should be boycotted—a
statement which was true then, which is true now, and
which I trust may always be true, for I still hold a higher
opinion of Roman Catholics, apparently, than the “Advo-
cate” does. The “Advocate” quotes from my address
on “The Enemy Within Our Gates” this: —
“British Parliamentary positions should not be
open to anti-Britishers. British public service is
for British public servants. Britishers want union,
comprehension, brotherhood, common struggle; if
others want Sinn Fein, let them pay the proper price
and clear out of British employment, public and pri-
vate.”
That is what I said; I stand by every word of it.
But the “Advocate” accuses me of suggesting a Roman
Catholic boycott. Yet I did not say “British Parlia-
mentary positions should not be open to Roman Catho-
lics.” I said, “British Parliamentary positions should
not be open to anti-Britishers.” It is left to the Roman
Catholic “Advocate” to suggest that they are the same
thing. But lam not' going to proceed on that assump-
tion. I know, even if the “Advocate” doesn’t, that many
Roman. Catholics are not anti-British. Great Britain
entered this world war primarily in defence of a small
Catholic nation and, the “Advocate” notwithstanding,


there are many Roman Catholics who are loyal to Great
Britain and the Allies. And Dr. Mannix notwithstand-
ing, Australia is. at the moment, British. The Austra-
lian Government is British. When I was speaking of
the “enemy within our gates,” I was obviously dealing
with the enemy within the Australian gates. When I
said British public service is for British public servants,
I was referring to this Commonwealth. That was the
“universe of discourse.”
The question, Is the Papacy Anti-British? is more than
an Australian question. It is an Imperial question.
More—it is a question that concerns the entire English-
speaking world. It concerns—and every lovec of Ire-
land should recognise that it concerns —the United
States of America. And even more. It concerns all the
Catholic countries with which Great Britain and America
are allied. It concerns the entire fabric of civilisation.
It concerns, and intimately concerns, the heritage of
the Catholic faith and the content of the Christian re-
ligion. The answer to this question will mark the part-
ing of the ways for tens of thousands of Roman Catho-
lics who distinguish between the political power of the
Papacy and the spiritual genius of Roman Catholicism.
In a flamboyant editorial on ‘*The Enemy Within the
Gates” the Roman Catholic “Tribune” refuses to face
the facts of the situation, and declares that the alleged
intrigues between the Holy See and Germany have
been shown by every reputable writer to be absolutely
incorrect; but the “Tribune” is careful not to mention
the name of any reputable writer who has essayed this
impossible task.
The Cardinal Secretary of State and Cardinal Bourne
both failed to answer the charges made by the London
“Morning Post.” The “Morning Post” declared —


“The recent Italian reverse was largely due to the
influence of treacherous representations dissemi-
nated among the Italian armies,”
and that
“the Vatican was implicated in that propaganda/
and pointed out that
“in every quarter of the globe, in Italy, in Spain,
in Quebec, in Australia, in Ireland, in whatsoever
place the influence of the Vatican is predominant,
there is both open and secret hostility to the cause
of the Allies.”
The “Morning Post” declares —
“That while affecting strict neutrality, the Vatican
does in practice espouse the cause of the Central
Powers.”
The main facts upon which the “Morning Post” based
that assertion were
“the failure of the Vatican tp protest against the
violation of Belgium by Germany, the terms in
which the Papal Note was framed, and the active
exertions by the Roman Catholic clerical party in
every country in which their influence is powerful
with one exception. That exception is England.”
According to the “Tribune,” I suppose are no
“reputable writers” on the “Morning Post.” The Car-
dinal Secretary of State and Cardinal Bourne are “re-
putable writers,” but they lamentably failed to prove
the “Morning Post” “absolutely incorrect”; and after
their lame attempts the “Morning Post” concludes—
“We consider that the Allies cannot afford to
ignore the attitude of the Vatican, and if it does not
suit the Holy See to declare its policy, there is the
more reason why the Allies should define it.
“As for the policy itself, we cannot but apprehend
that English Roman Catholics, who with us dis-
tinguish between the political action of the Vatican
and the spiritual authority of the Pope, very largely
share our misgivings,”


Mr, Joseph McCabe would scarcely be acknowledged
a “reputable writer” by the “Tribune”—he is an ex-priest
and knows too much. In the “National Review” for
January he writes an article on “The True Inwardness
of Vatican Policy,” in which he points out that
“The Pope’s programme was precisely the pro-
gramme which at that time Berlin conceived as its
ultimate terms,”
and you, of course, remember the German Chancellor’s
expressed admiration of the Papal Note.
“Quite apart from rewards, the policy of the Vati-
can is the policy of Germany and Austria,”
writes Mr. McCabe
“If they lose; it loses; if they win, it gains con
siderably,”
he' points out.
‘*The perfect identity of interest of the Vatican
and the Central Powers. . . .
“The Vatican would like to stop the war before
Germany incurs the penalty of its crimes. . . .
“It would like to stop the war when Germany is
at its height. . . ,
“. . . The collapse of Russia and Italy encourages
higher hopes both in Berlin and Rome. Perhaps,
after all, Belgium and part of France can be retained
under the eagle! It will suit the Vatican as much
as it will suit Wilhelm 11, to see Belgium pass under
a Power which, in the event of victory, will crush
Socialism and rebuke anti-clerical Liberalism! . . .
“Benedict XV. has hot even been impartial. Par-
tiality to the criminals has distinguished his work
from the start. ....
“Our duty is to rescue Belgium, Serbia and Rou-
mania, and to smite an aggressive bully in sucfy
fashion that none may be moved again to imitate
his adventure. It happens that the Papal interest


lies the other way, and the facts ought to be clearly
realised throughout the Allied nations. . .
But Mr. Joseph McCabe is not a “reputable writer.”
Guilty of the crime of thinking for himself, he left the
Church of Rome," and no “pervert” is “reputable.” And
though his works ate on the “Index,” you will find on
sale at Hutchinson’s and on the book-stalls a penny re-
print of his article on The. True Inwardness of the
Vatican Policy.
Now let us, come to a Roman Catholic writer, Mr,
Richard Bagot, who was in Italy from the outbreak of
the war until last year, and in a position to follow very
closely and intimately every ramification of the’ pro-
German and anti-British propaganda in every part of
the Italian kingdom and in every class of Italian people.
He declares in an article on “The Neutrality of the Vati-
can,” in the “National Review” for February, that—
“The so-called neutrality of Benedict XV. is a
neutrality devoted to the furtherance of German
political aims.” j
•
He reminds us that since 187 Q no year has passed with-
out an official reclamation of the temporal perogatives
and a protest against the existing temporal conditions
of the'Papacy being addressed to the world l?y the Popes.
And the Pope is described by Mr. Bagot as
“an independent Sovereign, surrounded by his Court
and by the ambassadors of other Sovereigns, and
housed in the most magnificent palace in the world.”
That is a JRoman Catholic ■ pen-picture of the poor
“Prisoner of the Vatican.” According to Mr. Bagot he
“enjoys every right and every privilege accorded
by custom and by international law to foreign
States.”
Mr. Bagot writes of the
“method of moral warfare which the Vatican has
invariably employed against Great Britain whenever
British armies hav*j been engaged in fighting a foe,”


And speaking from personal knowledge, he says that
from the outbreak of the war.
“the highest officials of the Papal Court, both eccle-
siastical and lay, vied with each other in abusing
Great Britain and the British, and openly declared
their hopes and conviction that 1 the Kaiser and his
troops would soon be in Paris and in due course in
London.” . >
Incidentally Mr. Bagot speaks of
“the spiritual neutrality of the Holy See toward good
and evil, which never did, nor ever could, exist save
as a direct and logical consequence of a political
Power owing its origin to forgery and supierstitious
fraud.”
I am sadly afraid the “Tribune” will not include him
among its “reputable writers.” Mr. Joseph McCabe,
an ex-priest, and Mr. Richard Bagot, a Roman Catholic
layman, agree with the “Morning Post that the Papacy
is anti-British.
The “Morning Post” made its charges in November
and December of last year, and Mr. McCabe and Mr.
Bagot in January and February of this year.
Now let us take our question a little further back,
confining ourselves, however, to this century and con-
sulting for a moment only such witnesses as the “Tri-
bune” would consider “reputable,” ignoring, therefore,
the evidence of Mr. Richard Bagot who, in an article
in the “National Review” in May, 1900, entitled “Anglo-
phobia at the Vatican,” said —
“The whole campaign against England was due
to the intrigues of the Vatican, which is working


as it has ever worked, and ever will work, to pro-
mote and encompass the humiliation of England,”
ignoring that Catholic testimony in 1900, let us turn to
a trinity of reputable witnesses'in 1902 —the Pope, the
German Ambassador, and the Kaiser. In a speech at
Aix-la-Chapelle in 1902 the Kaiser Related “with pride
and joy” how the Holy Father had commissioned the
special Ambassador to tell his Sovereign that the Pope
“had always kept a high opinion of the piety of the
Germans, and especially of the German Army,”
and
“that THE country in Europe where control, order
and discipline still prevailed, together with respect
for authority and regard for the Church, and where
the Church could live, was the German Empire, and
for that the Papal See was indebted to the German
Emperor.”
In the Kaiser paid a State visit to the Pope, and
according to the Catholic press, which is always reput-
able,
“the Emperor promised to use his influence to re-
move disabilities existing in Germany with regard
to certain Catholic Orders, and to allow the Jesuits
who were expelled by Bismarck to return, and that
a permanent representative of the Holy See was to
be received in Berlin.”
A month June, 1903, the Kaiser received from
English Catholics an address of welcome in which this
sentence occurs—
“While Governments less progressive and en-
lightened than your own have shown bigotry in
dealing with the See of Rome, and have in some
cases refused official recognition to that ancient
Sovereignty, your Majesty, with a large and true
appreciatibn of the issues involved, has placed the
relation between your Empire and the Holy See on
a basis of reciprocal respect and confidence.”


And now back from Rome and England to Germany.
In 1906 the Kaiser found himself facing a political crisis.
The Centre Party failed him. Then suddenly the Centre
Party changed its policy, and the Roman correspondent
of the German “Tageblatt” remarked that
“everybody at the Vatican is confident that the
Kaiser must govern with the aid of the Catholics
whether he wants to or not,”
And the Roman “Stampa” purs it —
“The Pope will not only advise but command the
Catholic leaders in Germany in order that the Kaiser
may be put under valuable obligations to the Vati-
can.
That brings us to the beginning of 1907. In 1902, the
Pope and the Kaiser through the ministry of a special
ambassador indulge in mutual admiration. The Pope
praises the German Army, the German Empire, the
German Emperor. The Kaiser publicly praises' the
Pope. In 1903 the Kaiser pays a State visit ho the
Pope, and from English Roman Catholics receives an
address recognising the reciprocal relation between the
German Empire and the Holy See. In 1906, the Pope
intervenes in Germany s domestic politics to please his
“best European friend,” the Kaiser.
What was the meaning of all this? In 1909 the ex-
planation was given and a solemn note of warning
sounded by Dr. Alexander Robertson, of Venice; but
with our national characteristic of unimaginative trust-
fulness we took no more notice of Dr. Robertson’s warn-
ing than we did of Lord Roberts’s—and they were both
warning -us of precisely the same thing—“A Military
Invasion,” with this difference, that Dr, Robertson was
exposing the intrigue between the Kaiser and the Pope


and proclaiming Italy’s warning to England, “Wake up,
John Bull!”
In the light of what happened in August, 1914, read
what Dr. Robertson published five years before, in
I 9°9 —
“The Vatican looks to the Government of Austria,
its bond-servant, to restore the temporal power; but
England blocks the way. The Pope and the Church
must find a Power that will dare to make war upon
England. The Pope and the Church have found
such a Power in Germany, and in the person of the
Kaiser the very man to inspire and lead the nation
in this enterprise.
“It has long been known in Italy, and Italy has
warned England of the fact that the original date>
fixed upon by the Pope and the Kaiser for carrying
out their nefarious enterprise was 1911-1912. This
date has been mentioned in the British Parliament
and in the Press. The partial awakening of England
to the danger of the situation has probably spoilt!
the project for so early a date as the one indicated.
. . , It will not be the fault of,Britain's enemies if
the scheme be not carried out later.”
You know what has happened. Was the publication
of this book five years before the war merely a remark*
able coincidence or a remarkable prophecy, as remark-
able a prophecy as that of Cardinal Manning, who, in
1874, dealing with the difficulty of restoring the tem-
poral power, said;
“There is only one solution of the difficulty, a
solution I fear impending, and that is the terrible
scourge*of a Continental war, a war which will ex-
ceed the horrors of any of the wars of the first
Empire. And it is my firm conviction that, in spite
of all obstacles, the Vicar of Jesus Christ will be
put again in his own rightful place. But that day
will not be until his adversaries will have crushed
each other with mutual destruction.’ ’
Was it prophecy or the revelation of a plan, the expo-
sure of intrigue?


Writers of current history date the war from the
murder of an Austrian Archduke in Serbia on June 28,
1914. Presently they will find the immediate cause in
the concordat consummated between the Serbian
Government and the Pope on June 24th. ,
But the conclusive evidence that the Papacy is anti-
British is found not in what the “Morning Post” says
happened in Italy last year, or in Mr. McCabe s exposure
of the “Peace” policy, the “German victory” policy of
the Papal Note, or in Mr. Bagot’s evidence of Vatican
Anglophobia; the conclusive evidence is not the recip-
rocal relations of Pope and Kaiser in the first decade
of this century, nor in Dr. Robertson’s amazingly accu-
rate reading of the trend of events five years before the
war. The conclusive evidence is seen in Ireland to-day.
So thoroughly anti-British is the Papacy that the
Roman Catholic Church in Ireland is permitted officially
to side with the enemies of England and even to asso-
ciate the solemn mass with their enmity.
“The Vatican looks to the Government of Austria,
its bond servant, to restore the temporal power,’
and Austria is a conscript country in the sense in which
no one has ever proposed that Ireland should ever be
conscript. The Pope, the , Kaiser declares at Aix-la-
Chapelle,
“had always kept a high opinion of tht* piety of the
Germans, and especially of the German Army.
And'Germany is conscript in a sense in which England
has never been and in a sense yi which England never
will be conscript unless Germany and Austria and the
Papacy win, which God forbid. Catholic countries are
conscript as Ireland would be conscript if it were allied
to Germany or Austria.


But so inveterate is the anti-British policy of the
Papacy, 3o determined is the Papacy, in the words of
Cardinal Manning - ,
“to subjugate and subdue, to bend and to break
, , the will of an Imperial race,”
that it will use any weapon, sacrifice millions of men
and drench the world with blood to accomplish its poli-
tical purpose.
The Papacy stands now in the eyes of the world in
its true light—it is a political Power, which challenges
civilisation and humanity. And it must be fought.
Loyalists must awake! Loyalists must amalgamate!
Loyalists must agitate.
Yet let it be clear. No man must be penalised for
his religion. One man has as much right to be a
Sacramentarian as another has to be an Evangelical.
The other man has as much right to be a Roman Catho-
lic as you have to be a Protestant. But no man, Papist
or Baptist, has any right to make his religion a cloak
for political treason.
I would insist on every man entering any branch of
the Public Service, taking an oath of allegiance to King
George and make double allegiance impossible. Men
who own allegiance to any foreign prince, potentate or
sovereign, who substitute Pope or Kaiser for King
George,, have no proper place in the British Empire—
but that is a subject calling for further treatment.
There are other witnesses I want to examine, other evi-
dence I want to consider. I leave the conclusion of
this subject to another month.*
I call you in the name of the catholic Christ, for the
sake of His comprehensive, religion, for the sake of
human freedom and international peace, to stand fast
in the liberty with which Christ has made us free, to
fight our common foes with swords bathed in heaven,
and to build with the trowels of truth the Kingdom of
God on earth.
*Next Auditorium Address (May 26) —The Real Issue :
Pope or King?


M. L. HUTCHINSON,
305 Littfe Collins Street,
Melbourne.
Wake Up, Australia!
While men slept the enemy sowed tares
among the wheat
SECTARIANISM.
SINN FEINISM.
SEDITION.
Sez'enteen Auditorium• Addresses
REV. T. E. RUTH.
One Shilling.
Postage, One Penny.
[Library Edition, 2/6.]
Other Pamphlets dealing with different .phases of the
Disloyal Movement in Australia are obtainable from—
Wholly Rpt-np nnd Printed In Australia
by Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
