

IS THE
REPRESENTATION
MINORITIES
ESSENTIAL TO THE
PERMANENCE [AND STABILITY
DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS
POPULAR GOVERNMENT'!
l&eM&e:
JOHN THOMAS SHAWYER, PRINTER, 71, KING WM. STREET.
1867.
-flCfkiq




IS THE
REPRESENTATION
MINORITIES
ESSENTIAL TO THE
PERMANENCE AND STABILITY
DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS
POPULAR GOVERNMENT 1
JOHN THOMAS SHAWYER, PRINTER, 71, KING WM. STREET.
1867.




-llepreseiitaticm of 31Unodties.
Whenever unbiassed, dispassionate, and disin-
terested men examine with calmness and thoughtful
enquiry into the working of the several Australian
Constitutions, they cannot fail to discover many
weak and incongruous points in each of them, the
evident tendency being to place all governing
power in the hands of the numerical majority.
They are all decidedly republican in every feature,
notwithstanding their seeming attachment to mon-
archical mixed government, as shewn by their
receiving as their chief magistrates, Governors
appointed by the Queen.
That numerical majority will always be mainly
composed of the great mass of persons, who living
by labour, are not possessed of much property, and
who—as a rule —are but superficially educated.
Although there is no deficiency of strong common
sense, deep powers of discernment, and much
political acumen, in very many of that class, the
very nature of their daily life deprives them of
opportunity for cultivating these qualities in a
manner that would best fit them for discharging
with judgment the important duty of selecting for
representatives the persons most likely to serve the
country with zeal, talent, and honesty.


The broad principle of no taxation without consent?
is the basis upon which all these colonies erected
their constitutions; but in seeking to do ample justice
by the majority, which had been heretofore debarred
of their rights in this matter, the interests of the
minority were altogether forgotten, to its utter
exclusion from any valuable participation in the
choice of representatives.
It is needless to add, that the minority here spoken
of is composed—for the most part —of those persons
who possess by far the largest portion of the wealth
and property of their country; that they are generally
more highly educated; and that, through the ad-
vantages of intercourse with educated, well-informed
men of other countries—men acquainted with the
general policy, finance, credit, trade, and internal
government of various states —they have opportunity
for acquiring knowledge on these matters, tending
to expansion of intellect, and improved powers of
forming correct judgment.
It can hardly be said, even by the most rabid
radical, that excluding these men from a participa-
tion in the management of the affairs of their
country can tend to its welfare ; or that, because
some men through the advantages they possess in
a superior education, better talents for business, and
greater steadiness and perseverance, succeed in
raising themselves above the majority in social
position, they should therefore be shut out; and yet
such is the actual result of manhood suffrage
wherever it is in force; and that, not of necessity,
but through the unjust manner in which voting for
representatives is conducted.
The principle of representation has grown out of
the right claimed by all, not to be taxed without
consent; for as all could not attend the general


assembly to notify tbeir wishes, it was found con-
venient for neigbour hoods to join in electing a person
to act for them. This arrangement is convenient,
but, in practice, not always just. Just, when each
elector names one person to represent him; but
unjust, when he names two or more; for, as he could
only give one vote in the assembly, if he went there
himself, he cannot have any right to give two or
more votes by proxy. And herein lies the injustice
of the matter.
Mr. Thos. Hare, in his work on “ The Election
of Representatives,” states in his introduction, that
“the object of his treatise is to shew that the
attainment of a perfect system of personal represen-
tation is not opposed by any difficulties inherent to
the subject; and that such a system is not only
consistent with the due and just representation of
every class and interest in the kingdom, as well as
of the public which comprises all, but that it affords
the most permanent and certain mode of representing
and expressing the special views and opinions of all
interests and classes; and that it also goes very far
to remove, even if it does not entirely obviate, all
sinister influences which have been hitherto found
to prevail in the collection of the suffrages of the
electors. It will be seen that personal representation,
to be perfectly carried out, must be founded upon
the basis of individual independence; that such
independence may be obtained without departing
from any of our traditional forms of electoral incor-
poration ; and that it even affords peculiar facilities
for giving greater scope and expansion to such
local and traditional combinations.”
Mr, Hare’s proposition is that each elector should
be furnished with a list of candidates, and a printed
form upon which to write the name of him he would


vote for. He might also enter on the same form
the names of other candidates for whom he would
wish to vote in succession, in case the first-named
had enough votes without his ; and so on with the
others ; but he could only record one vote.
This scheme of Mr. Hare’s, although it appears
very just and fair, has not met with much support;
for although he cannot see any difficulty in working
it, to others it appears complex, and likely to puzzle
and confuse the casual persons usually employed at
elections.
Mr. Hare says in another place, “ With regard to
the character of government by a numerical majority
when there is no constitutional provision for giving
due weight to the minority, it is useful to listen to
republican statesmen,” and quotes from the writings
of “ Mr. Calhoun, who occupied at different times
some of the highest offices in the Government of
the United States, and who studied American
institutions with the aid of long experience, and
employed his latest hours and his most elaborate
efforts, in a work designed as a warning against the
dangers of that absolutism which would result from
committing the destinies of the country to the
uncontrolled government of the numerical majority.”
“The right of suffrage,” he says, “is indeed the
indispensable and primary principle; but it would
be a great and dangerous mistake, to suppose as
many do, that it is of itself sufficient to form con-
stitutional governments. To this erroneous opinion,”
he adds, “may be traced one of the causes why so
few attempts to form constitutional governments
have succeeded; and why, of the few which have,
so small a number have had a durable existence.”* *
“ The more extensive and populous the country, the
more diversified the condition and pursuits of its


population, and the richer and more luxurious and
dissimilar the people, the more difficult it is to
equalise the action of the Government, and the
more easy for one portion of the community to
pervert its powers to oppress and plunder the other.”
“The dominant majority for the time,” he repeats,
“would have the same tendency to oppression and
abuse of power, which, without the right of suffrage,
irresponsible rulers would have.” * * * * “ The
dominant majority for the time would in reality,
through the right of suffrage, he the rulers—the
controlling, governing, and irresponsible power—
and those who make and execute the laws would,
for the time, in reality be but their representatives
and agents.”
Mr. Burke, in his reflections on the French Revo-
lution, says, “Of this I am certain, that in a
democracy the majority of the citizens is capable of
exercising the most cruel oppression upon the
minority whenever strong divisions prevail in that
kind of polity, as they often must; and that the
oppression of the minority will be carried on with
much greater fury than can almost ever he appre-
hended from the dominion of a single sceptre.”
It may not he needful to look beyond these
colonies for a full affirmation of the truths set before
us by these great and truly liberal politicians; for
it may be traced in the overbearing conduct of the
majority in Yictoria in the tariff and other matters,
and in that of our own upon the squatting question,
while New South Wales and Queensland have both
suffered under the injurious coercion of their
despotic and irresponsible majorities.
The danger of creating overwhelming numerical
majorities has been the great difficulty all English
reformers have had to contend with; all of them


have desired to provide in some manner for the
representation of minorities, but the vast variety of
constituencies into which the people of England are
divided has hitherto presented insurmountable ob-
stacles to anything being done which would be
equally just to all. Lord John Russell in his Reform
Bill of 1854, attempted something of the kind; and
its necessity has been argued by Lords Brougham
and Grey, by Mr. Mill, Mons. Guizot, Be Toqueville,
and nearly every writer upon policy, of the past
and present time; who —warned by the destruction
wrought out for the ancient republics of Rome and
Greece by their own numerical majorities; who
witnessed the horrors which had been perpetrated
in France when the same power ruled there; and,
who with ourselves have had their attention fixed
upon what has been passing in the United States
of America under the same mighty, irresponsible,
and most oppressive influence—would guard the
countries and people to which they belong from
those disasters they cannot but see must be the
inevitable result of permitting their governments to
fall under the control and dictation of numerical
and altogether irresponsible majorities.
Mr. Hare goes on to say that “ Those who in this
country, or in the colonies, have advocated the policy
of conferring on minorities some power of securing
at least a partial representation, have been stigma-
tised as unsound reformers, as enemies to the
sovereign will of the majority. ” “ The majority here
meant is not the true, and as it is termed by Mr.
Calhoun the concurrent and constitutional, majority
of the nation —the result of a free and comprehensive
organisation of all interests and all opinions—but
the majority of mere numbers, at whose shrine all
interests and all opinions are to be immolated.”


“The principle,” says Mr. Calhoun, “by which
constitutional governments are upheld is compromise;
that of absolute governments is force. By giving
full, and no more than full weight to opposing and
conflicting interests, a salutary check is interposed
to all precipitate resolutions.” * * * * “They
render deliberation a matter not of choice but of
necessity; they make all changes a subject of
compromise, which materially begets modera-
tion; they produce temperaments preventing the
sore evil of harsh, crude, unqualified reformations,
and rendering all the headlong exertions of arbitrary
power for ever impracticable.” ■» * * * *
“The highest moral obligations, truth, justice, plighted
faith —much less prudence and propriety—oppose of
themselves but feeble resistance to the abuse of
power. The basis of union and permanence in
ordinary partnerships, by which most of the com-
mercial transactions of the world are carried on, is
the necessity of mutual attention, forbearance, and
respect. If this is not rendered by one to the other,
the partnership is dissolved.”
Although the difficulties which stand in the way
of effecting such an adjustment of the constitu-
encies in England as would provide for a fair
and equitable representation of all classes appear
to be insurmountable, nothing of the kind inter-
feres here. The division of the country into con-
stituencies or electoral divisions, each returning
two members, renders it apparent that if each
elector was in all cases limited to one vote
which in fact is all he is justly entitled to, —whenever
the two members were to be elected at the same
time, the probability would be that one of them
would be returned by the minority; and by this
means, —although the majority of electors would


always command a majority of representatives, be-
cause it would always have the advantage when
only one member was to be elected, —the minority
would be sufficiently supported to temper the pro-
ceedings of the majority in the manner so ably
defined by Mr. Calhoun. *
Although it might have been expected that the
limited population of South Australia would have, as
yet, saved her from the evils of oppressive measures
forced upon the government by an excited numerical
majority, such has not been the case ; as was suffi-
ciently made manifest by the destructive outcry
raised against the squatter class, who were held
up before the people as the plunderers of their grass,
and whose exclusion from the legislature was made
the electoral cry. Happily, the great injustice of that
accusation, and the injury inflicted upon all classes by
the oppressive measures pursued towards this, has
opened the eyes of the oppressors; who are now
equally anxious to apply a remedy, and to restore
confidence in that most important—and indeed only—
means by which to derive any benefit from the untold
millions of acres of our widespread unoccupied terri-
tory. Still, this reaction affords no warranty against
the recurrence of similar acts of injustice by an
excited numerical majority where no counterbalance
exists; for the experience of all ages, and all coun-
tries where democratic influences have predominated
goes to show, that as population multiplies and
becomes separated by a diversity of interests the
greater becomes the power of a mere numerical
majority to inflict injury upon any one of them, and
to overrule and dictate to the ruling powers.
If there is any validity in the generally admitted
axiom, that a well-regulated balance of power is the
best warranty for permanent strength, for enduring


prosperity, and for equal-handed justice, must it not
be the dictate of common sense to seek to place that
balance on a sure and lasting basis ? And in pro-
portion as that balance is equably poised, affording
to all classes in these democratic countries a just
and fair share of representation, so far, it may be
affirmed, will they enjoy steady prosperity and in-
ternal peace.
It has already been pointed out how easily that
fair participation in representation may be accorded
to all classes in South Australia at the present time,
without interfering with the rights or interests of
any; but, if it is postponed to a future day, diffi-
culties may arise and conflicting interests interpose,
until, like England, they could be only surmounted
by injustice to some, as it is there shewn by with-
holding the franchise from the many who claim it as
a right; or like America, where the numerical
majority, which is mainly composed of the outpour-
ings from the tail end of the populations of Europe,
has become so powerful, and so overbearing and
despotic, as to exclude the minority—and, conse-
quently, the property of the country—from any part
in the legislation, taxation, and government of the
country.
Why—if England’s politicians could contrive an
entire reconstruction of her electoral districts, so that
each should return two members and no more, and
then adopt the one vote principle—there would be
nothing to fear for the stability of her constitution,
though manhood suffrage in its full extent should be
accorded to the people. England—it will be ad-
mitted—has always prospered more, and been better
governed when there has been a well organised and
strong opposition party in Parliament; and for mixed
governments, such as hers and ours, there cannot be


a doubt of its value, which may he described in these
memorable words of Mr. Calhoun—“ It renders
deliberation a matter not of choice but of necessity;
it makes all changes a subject of compromise, which
naturally begets moderation ; it produces tempera-
ments preventing the sore evil of harsh, crude,
unqualified reformations, and renders all the head-
long exertions of arbitrary power for ever impractic-
able.”
It may not be out of place here to refer to some of
the opinions on these matters of Mr. Mill, a man
who, in the political circles of England, is looked up
to as an authority of high standing.
Mr. Mill is well known to be a strenuous advocate
for universal suffrage, and would even extend it to
the gentler sex; but, probably, it is not equally well
known, that so far from granting it without reserve
or qualification he would have the education test an
indispensible ordeal to registration. He argues
that “ in every system of representation which can be
conceived perfect, every human adult being would
have the means of exercising, through the electoral
suffrage, a portion of influence on the management
of public affairs,” ‘‘But,” he asks, “ought every-
one to have an equal voice? This is a totally
different proposition, and in my judgment is palpably
false, as the other is true and important.”
He then goes on to set forth his views upon the
use and application of the education test, the various
grades or divisions under which education may be
classed for electoral purposes, and the scale of
plurality of votes he would allot to each, rising in
gradation even to six or more. However, as uni-
versal suffrage, on its broad unrestricted basis, has
already been established in these colonies, that part
of Mr. Mill’s scheme, which, it may be remarked,


bears evidence on tbo face of it of bis being sensi-
tively alive to the necessity for providing for the
representation of minorities, cannot now be used
here, it is needless to bestow any further notice upon
it, but pass on to consider what he says bearing
directly upon the representation of minorities.
He goes on to say that “ Another principle, only
second to this in value, which might also on the
present occasion be admitted into the constitution, is
the representation of minorities.”
“I am inclined to think that the prejudice which
undoubtedly exists in the minds of democrats against
this principle arises only from their not having suffi-
ciently considered its mode of operation. It is an
eminently democratic principle. The elementary
propositions of the democratic creed imply it as an
inevitable corollary. Even the government of mere
numbers requires that every number should tell in
proportion to its amount. What is anti-democratic
is, that the minority should be allowed to outweigh
the majority ; but the principle of universal suffrage
requires that, as far as it is consistent with practic-
ability, every minority in the constituency should be
represented by a minority in the representative body;
and a mode of voting which does not keep this object
in view, is contrary to popular government; it does
not sum up the opinion of the community correctly.
There is no true popular representation if three-fifths
of the people return the whole House of Commons,
and the remaining two-fifths have no representatives.
Not only is this not government by the people, it is
not even government by majority of the people:
since the government will be practically in the hands
of a majority of the majority.
“ A Parliament may be obtained by universal
suffrage which may represent the opinions of a bare


majority of tlie people ; and again, when this Parlia-
ment proceeds to legislate, it may pass laws by a
bare majority of itself. The governing body, reduced
by this double process of elimination, may represent
the opinions or wishes of little more than a fourth of
the population.
“If numbers are to be the rule, a third of the
people ought not indeed to have two-thirds of the
representation; but every third of the people is en-
titled to a third of the representation; and though
there is no possibility of securing this with any
degree of precision, it is better to make some ap-
proach to it than to ignore minorities altogether.”
Although this clear, sound, explicit, and incontro-
vertible reasoning—emanating from about the wisest
head among England’s most respected reformers—
ought to suffice in establishing the value, or, as may
be fairly said, the necessity for providing the equit-
able representation of minorities, as the sure, perhaps
the only means whereby to establish our free institu-
tions on a sound, just, and lasting footing, a few
more words from that wise head may not fall use-
lessly on the ears of their hearers.
Mr. Mill, referring to Mr. Hare’s treatise on
Representation, says: “Though Mr. Hare has de-
livered an opinion—and generally, in our judgment,
a wise one —on all the questions at present in issue
connected with representative government, the origi-
nality of his plan, as well as most of the effects to be
expected from it, turn on the development which he
has given to what is commonly called the representa-
tion of minorities. He has raised this principle to an
importance and dignity which no previous thinker
had ascribed to it. As conceived by him, it should
be called the real, instead of nominal, representation
of every individual elector.


“ That minorities in the nation ought in principle,
if it be possible, to be represented in corresponding
minorities in the Legislative Assembly is a necessary
consequence from all premises on which any repre-
sentation at all can be defended. In a deliberative
assembly the minority must perforce give way,
because the decision must be either aye or no ; but
it is not so in choosing those who are to form the
deliberative body: that ought to be the express
image of the wishes of the nation, whether divided
or unanimous, in the designation of those by whose
united councils it will be ruled ; and any section of
opinion which is unanimous within itself ought to be
able in due proportion to the rest, to contribute its
elements towards the collective deliberation. At
present if three-fifths of the electors vote for one
person and two-fifths for another, every individual of
the two-fifths is, for the purposes of that election, as
if he did not exist; his intelligence, his preference
have gone for nothing in the composition of the
Parliament. Whatever was the object designed by
the constitution in giving him a vote, that object, at
least on the present occasion, has not been fulfilled;
and if he can be reconciled to his position it must be
by the consideration that some other time he may
be one of a majority, and another set of persons
instead of himself may be reduced to cyphers;
just as before a regular government had been
established, a man might have consoled himself for
being robbed by the hope that another time he
might be able to rob some one else. But this
compensation, however gratifying, will be of no avail
to him if he is everywhere overmatched; and the
same may be said of the elector who is habitually
outvoted.”
It is possible that the views and opinions of these


able men may have weight in convincing reasonable
and reasoning persons that the representation of
minorities is a matter of much greater importance
than has hitherto been in general accorded to it by
Englishmen, owing no doubt, to its not being re-
quired for the existing limited distribution of the
electoral franchise in England. But as the extension
of that privilege to its utmost limits in these Colonies
exposes fully the glaring injustice inflicted upon a
portion of the population through the want of such.a
provision, the compiler of this pamphlet has been
led to adopt this means of bringing it under the
consideration of his fellow colonists; and as Mr.
Mill roundly asserts that representation of minorities
“is an eminently democratic principle,” it is to
persons professing that creed that these pages are
more particularly addressed. Foremost among these
may be placed the great majority of our farmers;
and are they satisfied with the manner in which
their interests are represented and supported in the
Legislature? Have they, as a rule, been able to
send to Parliament the men in whom they could
place dependance ? or have they not generally been
outvoted by the numerical majority of electors who
really had but little interest in the matter? If this
is so, what other class of the community is there
more deeply interested in procuring an equitable
readjustment of the electoral laws of the province,
that will provide for a fair proportionate representa-
tion of minorities ?


3 1508 00811516 9


