

Snd Example of ghridt ?




We earnestly request the attention of those who occupy
the responsible stations of Ministers and Teachers of the
Christian religion to that which is advanced in the following
pages, because whatever affects the character of religion, or
opposes its progress in the world, seems peculiarly to claim
their notice. We would suggest that the fact of our
country being at the present time engaged in tear furnishes a
strong reason for entering into a careful examination ,
whether, under the Gospel Dispensation, there is any sanction
for war; we would also ask ivhether those pacific princi-
ples by ivhich the church in the apostolic age (and indeed
during the first and greater part of the second centuries) was
so remarkably distinguished, are inculcated by the Christian
teachers of the present day icith that clearness and fulness to
ivhich they are justly entitled.




s liar reconcilable with the teaching
and the example of Christ?
AN APPEAL TO CHRISTIAN S.
Synopsis. —The teaching and example of our Saviour—
irreconcilable with war —view taken of this by the Apostles
and the immediate disciples of Christ—the testimony of the
early Christians—also of thoughtful men in modern times
cases of individual piety in the army not an authority for
war —the teachings of our Lord, though chiefly in regard
to individual actions, also affect the actions of indivi-
duals as a nation. Is war a necessity ? —Government on
pacific principles put to a practical test—the limits of defen-
sive war difficult of definition —the midst of a dilemma not a
proper basis for argument —the power of the magistrate and
the military system distinguished. War will not cease by
making it more terrible—the abolition to come through the
ascendancy of Christian principles, and by the submitting of
national differences to an impartial judgment. A historical
retrospect of the gradual triumph of law over brute force.
Supposed danger to unarmed nations from foreign aggres-
sion—do Christians really believe in the reality of a Divine
protection or only profess to do so ?—were the golden rule
observed in national transactions, there w'ould be much less
cause to fear foreign interference —conclusion.
The writings chiefly used in this compilation are addresses frem the London
Yearly Meeting of the Society of Friends, and one from the New York Yearly
Meeting; also pamphlets written by James Backhouse, Jonathan Dymond, and
other Friends. The passage on “the gradual triumph of law over brute force ”
is abridged from a pamphlet of that title by Henry Richard, M.P.




AN APPEAL TO CHEISTIANS.
Our country is dear to us, we honour our Sovereign, we
prize our free institutions; and, constrained by the love of
Christ, it is in the spirit of true patriotism that we make
this appeal; desiring that our national policy, and that of
other professedly Christian countries, may accord with the
spirit and precepts of our Holy Eedeemer, who came “not to
destroy men’s lives, but to save them.”
The events of late years, as well as what is passing around
us, have led us very seriously to review the grounds which
justify a portion of the Christian community in -standing
apart from their fellow Christians, and in testifying by word
and deed that war is irreconcilable with the Christian religion.
But this review has only confirmed the conviction, which we
dare not shrink from avowing, that war, on whatever plea
of policy or of necessity, is directly at variance with the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. May grace and strength be given
us in our daily intercourse among men to act consistently
with this conviction, and to show out of a good conversation
our works with meekness of wisdom.
We unreservedly make our appeal to those inspired records,
which as Christians we all profess to accept as a revelation
from heaven. True it is, that in the Old Testament we find
war not only permitted, but, under certain circumstances,
commanded. As regards the command, we presume that no
such commission to fight against the Lord’s enemies as that
given to his chosen people formerly, is claimed or expected
now. And, as to its permission, it is sufficient to say, that
the fulness of time was not yet come; the more excellent
way was not yet revealed. No permission under the law can
sanction for the Christian that which the Gospel condemns.
How conclusive is the emphasis with which our Lord con-
trasts the Mosaic allowance of divorce, with his own precepts,
for the purpose of showing that that which was permitted to
them of old time, by reason of the hardness of their hearts,
is prohibited by the higher and holier morality of the New
Covenant. In like manner, does He, by His own supreme
authority, foreclose any argument in favour of retaliation,
drawn from the words “an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth;” and thus also does He solemnly disallow the
maxim, “ hate thine enemy.”


Peace is the ever-recurring burthen of the prophetic song,
as a marked and essential feature of the Messiah’s reign;
and through the mouths of two inspired witnesses, and in the
same emphatic words, does the Holy Spirit proclaim, con-
• cerning the Gospel times, “ They shall beat their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks; nation
shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they
learn w r ar any more.” —(Isa. ii. 4; Micah iv. 3.) In
view, then, of the glorious anticipations of prophecy
in regard to the peaceful reign of the Messiah, and of the
deep significance of that name by which He is called, “ The
Prince of Peace —in view of the annunciation of the
Heavenly Host which characterised the new dispensation as
that which Avas to bring “ Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace among men in whom He is well pleased—
in view of the express commands of our Redeemer
himself, “ Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that des-
pitefully use you and persecute jou —how can the subjects
of His kingdom have any authority or justification for war ?
And not by precept alone, but by his example also, has our
Lord and Saviour emphatically taught us the lesson of
forgiveness, forbearance and love. How touching is His
prayer for his bitterest enemies ! How wondrous the for-
bearance of Him who said, “ Thinkest thou that I cannot now
pray to my Father, and He shall presently give me more than
twelve legions of angels?”—a forbearance exercised, not
merely Avith a vieAv to the accomplishment of that most
precious sacrifice Avhich He made of himself for our sins;
but also as a holy example for our imitation. For, as is
declared by the Apostle, who Avas himself “ an eye-witness ”
of the sufferings of his Lord, “ Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that avc should follow his steps :—who,
Avhen He Avas reviled, reviled not again ; when He suffered,
He threatened not; but committed himself to Him that
judgeth righteously.”
We ask for no iioav or strained meaning to the precepts
and example of our Lord and Saviour ; we accept the words
of Holy Scripture in their plain and literal import: and
thus they Avere evidently accepted by the Apostles and
primitive believers. If we recur to language of the former as
it is presented in the epistles to the churches Ave shall meet
Avith injunctions, and exhortations, and entreaties in strict
accordance with the precepts of their Divine Master. “Be
not overcome of evil, but overcome evil Avith good.” “See
that none render evil for evil unto any man ; but ever follow
that Avhich is good, both among yourselves and to all men!'


“ Love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering
evil for evil, nor railing for railing; but contrariwise Mess-
ing ; knowing that ye are thereunto called , that ye should
inherit a blessing.” “ Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves
but rather give place unto wrath ; for it is written ‘ ven-
geance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord.’” Is it possible
that language could be framed more strongly prohibiting the
indulgence of the spirit which produces war, than that used
in the preceding passages ?
The testimonies of the earliest converts to Christianity
should also receive a thoughtful attention ; and ecclesiastical
history establishes the fact that the early Christians not
only insisted that they were forbidden to fight, but they
manifested their sincerity in offering up their lives rather
than violate what they deemed an injunction of their
Divine Master. A few cases may be here cited: —Maxi-
millian, a Roman youth, on being brought before the
tribunal to be enrolled as a soldier, refused, saying to the
proconsul, “ I am a Christian, and therefore I cannot fight.”
On being told there was no alternative between bearing arms
and being put to death, he promptly but firmly replied—“ I
cannot fight if I die.” He continued firm to his principles
and was led to execution. The primitive Christians not only
refused to enlist as soldiers, but those in the army who em-
braced Christianity immediately abandoned the profession
without regard to consequences. Marcellus, a Roman cen-
turion, on becoming a convert to Christianity, promptly
resigned his commission, declaring that having become a
Christian he could serve no longer. “It is not lawful,” said
he, “ for a Christian to bear arms for any earthly considera-
tion.” He continued firm in his refusal, and suffered death
on that account. Casian, who was a notary in the same
legion, on embracing Christianity, resigned his commission ;
and firmly adhering to the sentiments avowed by Marcellus—
like him was led to execution. And we are informed by
Sulpitius Severus, that when the Emperor Julian was engaged
in bestowing upon his troops a largess, with a view to some
approaching battle, his bounty was refused by Martin, a
soldier in the army, who had been recently converted to
Christianitj'-. “ Hitherto,” said he to Cajsar, “ I have fought
for thee: permit me now to fight for my Gfod. Let those
who are about to engage in war accept thy donative ; 1 am a
soldier of Christ; for me the combat is unlawful.’ ’ Cyprian,
in his epistle to Donatus, considers war as differing in
nothing from a single murder, but in its enormous wickedness.
These are not isolated cases—many more might be adduced


if it were necessary —but the fact we aim to establish will not
be denied. Christians, however, afterwards became soldiers.
And when ? When their general fidelity to Christianity became
relaxed ; —when in other respects they violated their prin-
ciples ; —when they began “ to dissemble” and “ to
falsify their word” and “to cheat;” —when “Christian
casuists ” persuaded them they might “ sit at meat
in the idols’ temple.” In a word, they became soldiers
when they had in fact ceased to be Christians. The depar-
ture from the original faithfulness was, however, not
suddenly general: like every other corruption war obtained
by degrees. Up to the middle of the second century not a
Christian soldier is on record: in the third century, when
Christianity became corrupted,Christian soldiers were common.
After the long night of error, of superstition, and of oppres-
sion, it is worthy of notice, that with the arising of a more
healthy religious feeling, with the dawning of the present age
of enlightenment, with the increase of knowledge, came again
the belief that war is irreconcilable with the teachings of our
Lord and Saviour. And from that time to the present, there
has not been wanting a testimony from thoughtful men that
“ morality and religion forbid war in its motive, conduct, and
consequences that “itis an instrument entirely inefficient
towards redressing wrong, and multiplies instead of indemni-
fying losses.” The following are a few of these testimonies,
beginning from the 14th century, and onward in order of time
to our own day. Jomsr AVtclipfb.—“Friars say Christ
bade his disciples sell their coats and buy them swords, but
whereto if not to fight? Thus they make a great array and
stir up many men to fight. But Christ taught not his dis-
ciples to fight with a sword of iron ; but with the sword of
God’s word, which standeth in meekness of heart, and in the
prudence of man’s tongue. * * * Men of the gospel, by
patience and the prospect of rest and peace, have vanquished
through the suffering of death; just as we may do now. But
here men of the Avorld come and say, that by this wise,
kingdoms would be destroyed; but our faith teaches us that,
since Christ is our God, kingdoms should be thus established
and their enemies overcome. Well, indeed, I know that men
will scorn this doctrine; but men who would be martyrs for
the law of God will hold thereby.” Erasmus. —“ There
is nothing more unnaturally wicked than war, nothing more
productive of misery, more extensively destructive, more
obstinate in mischief, more unworthy of man as formed by
nature, much more as professing Christianity.” Sir
Walter Baleigh. —“The practices of war are so hateful to
God, that were not his mercies infinite, it would be in vain


for those of that profession to hope for any portion of them.”
Jeremy Taylor. —“ If men he subjects of Christ’s law, they
can never go to war with each other. As contrary as cruelty
is to mercy, tyranny to charity, so is war and bloodshed to
the meekness and gentleness of the Christian religion.”
Dr. Johnson. —“ We may observe what strained arguments
are used to reconcile war with the Christian religion ; but if
public war be allowed to be consistent with morality, private
war must be equally so ; and, in my opinion, it is exceedingly
clear that duelling, having better reasons for its barbarous
violence, is more justifiable than war, in which thousands,
without any cause of personal quarrel, go forth and massacre
each other.” Jeremy Bentham. —“ Nothing can be
worse than the general feeling on the subject of war. The
church, the state, the ruling few, the subject many, all, in
this case, seem to have combined to patronise vice and crime
in their widest sphere of evil.” Professor Smith (of
Cambridge).—“ All wars destroy the morals of mankind by
habituating them to refer everything to force, and by neces-
sitating them so often to dispense with the ordinary sugges-
tions of sympathy and justice.” Egbert Southey. —
“ Whence is it that wars still disgrace the self-styled Chris-
tian world P It is owing to the doctrine of expediency. If
Christians had boldly looked in the face of their duty as
developed in the New Testament, this senseless and infernal
system must long ago have ceased.” Sir David Brewster.
—“ Nothing in the history of the species appears more in-
explicable than that war—the child of barbarism, should exist
in an age enlightened and civilized. But it is more inexplic-
able still, that war should exist where Christianity has for
nearly 2,000 years been shedding its gentle light, and that it
should be defended by arguments from the Scriptures them-
selves,” Earl Eussell. —“ On looking at all the wars
which have been carried on during the last century, and examin-
ing the causes of them, I do not see one of these wars in which,
if there had been proper temper between the parties, the ques-
tions in dispute might not have been settled without recourse to
arms.” Dr. Arnold. —“ Could there by any possibility
have been another war in the world, if we had accepted the
mercies given us ? * # * The sermon on the Mount
cannot be read by any good man without the strongest
feeling of shame and humiliation, for the contrast between
the picture of Christian principle there drawn, and the reality
he sees around him.” “ The Times ” newspaper.—“ You
cannot redeem, under any circumstances,the naked and horrid
aspect of war—the offspring of brutality, and civilization’s
adopted child. War in itself is a mighty evil, an incongruity


in the scheme o£ social harmony, a canker at the heart of
improvement, a living lie in a Christian land, a curse at all
times. Custom has taught us to regard systematic war as
necessary to our condition ; and reason and revelation appeal
against custom in vain. We regard with infinite satisfaction
every endeavour, come whence it may, to destroy the supre-
macy of this cruel deity. Kings who preach to their subjects
the advantages and. sacred character of peace are more than
kings. Men who unite to promulgate the same doctrine,
feeble instruments though they be, and liable to ridicule,
claim respect for their mission.”
It is very common to refer to cases of individual piety in
the army as strong evidence that “ the military profession ”
is not one which is necessarily hostile to Christianity. That
such instances do occur is unquestionable, and heartily we
rejoice to find them. But the connexion with the army of
such men as Havelock and Vicars, no more proves that the
Gospel of Christ gives authority or justification for war,
than did the sense of the Divine favour and presence,
experienced by John Kewton while engaged as captain
of a slaver, prove the infamous system of slavery to
be right in the Divine sight. And when we look at the real
character of war, and mark its antagonism to every
Christian virtue, are we justified in concluding more from
these, than that such cases wonderfully illustrate the depth
of Divine forbearance and condescension extended to erring
man, when the heart is sincere ? The light of truth may not
yet have dispersed the mists of error, nor dissolved the clouds
of educational prejudice. Man is rarely given to see at once,
on conversion from the unregenerate state, all the snares
which his soul’s enemy may lay at his feet; nor all the con-
trivances by which that enemy may strive to hinder its
heavenward progress. Many may be the stages of experience
and illumination, that the Christian may have to pass through
—long and severe may be the hidden conflict, —before he
comes to know the light of truth to shine “ unto the perfect
day.” It may be said that, if a man’s religion be genuine,
he would be led out of everything that is contrary to
the Divine Will. So, no doubt, he would be thus led,
if, as he grew in the knowledge of the Divine Will,
he at all times faithfully followed it: but do not the
workings of self-interest in. some form or other, or the
influence of educational bias, too often retard or counteract
its effects ? How often does man shrink from the light lest
his deeds should be reproved P How often does he choose a
path for himself, and cftencards , without examining whether


that path is a right one or not, ask for Divine protection and
blessing P And who can contemplate, without a shudder,
the death even of a Christian soldier, who is hurried into
eternity amidst the maddening din of war, and whose deadly
weapon, has just been steeped in the blood of those
“ enemies ” for whom the same Saviour died! Divine mercy
is doubtless infinite ; —fathomless is the loving-kindness of
Him who blotteth out our transgressions and healeth our
diseases ; but because errors may be forgiven, and sore diseases
mercifully healed, we have no right to regard them Divinely
sanctioned.
Although it may be admitted that the precepts and example
of our Lord have a primary reference to the conduct of
individuals, they can surely be no less binding upon nations
professing allegiance to Christ, the Supreme than upon
the individuals of whom the nations are composed. Nor can
we be too strongly impressed with the importance of individual
influence in the formation of the national mind. If each
waits for others before he takes the course to which his
convictions lead him, it is plain that all right progress must
be stayed. If the principles for which we are pleading be
essential parts of pure Christianity, it is for the Christian,
in simple faith, to act upon them; that through his life and
example, the heavenly leaven may be more and more diffused.
Let us never forget that the Gospel is not a transitory, but
an abiding dispensation; that it is the dispensation under
which we are now actually living; and that these principles
are among its most glorious and essential characteristics.
To affirm that they are impracticable, or not to be practised,
is to put dishonour upon their Divine Author, and to set at
nought his supreme authority. To postpone their application
until all shall act upon them, is, in scarcely a less degree, to
deny his present authority; and involves the practical
contradiction of supposing that He has prescribed a series of
duties for a future state of things, when the occasion for the
exercise of these duties shall have ceased to exist. It is now ,
in this still tossed and conflicted world, that the Christian is
called upon to learn, and to practise these lessons. It is now
that he is bound to prove his allegiance to his Divine Master;
and by his influence to promote the spreading of Christ’s
kingdom upon the earth That kingdom is one of righteous-
ness and peace ; and all who adopt the petition, “ Thy king-
dom come,” not only confess the duty of their own present
subjection to it, but pray for its universal establishment.
In view of the precepts and the example given by its
Holy Head, —and may we not add, of such an experience


as its own past history presents,—what has the Christian
Church, or what have its members, to do with the moral or
political standard of ancient Greece or Eome, nations which,
with all their brilliant qualities and intellectual refinement,
knew not the Gospel of Christ? Yet must it not be con-
fessed that it is from sources such as these, that the maxims
of the military code, and the prevailing ideas of glory in
connection with successful bloodshed, are principally drawn ?
And what has been the result of this heathen standard upon
the professed followers of the Lord Jesus ? Without carry-
ing our thoughts back to past times, we turn with deep
sorrow to the affecting details of the wars in which our
country and the other nations of Europe have been engaged
during the present century.
If we advert to the consequences resulting from war —its
tendency to lower the standard of public morals —the
slaughter and misery which it produces, the domestic bereave-
ments, anguish and mourning inseparable from it, a subject is
presented to our view possessing the strongest claim to the
serious reflection of the professors of the benign religion of
Jesus Christ. And it is affecting to think how many young
men, some of high Christian profession, and who in moments
of serious reflection would refuse to take the life of a single
human being, even to save their own, have been induced
under a plea of patriotism, or the seductive influence of
companionship, to join volunteer corps or rifle clubs—thus
entering into pursuits and associations the avowed object of
which is to acquire dexterity and certainty in the destruction
of human life. It may be said—indeed it is often said—that
war, though a great evil, is an evil that cannot be avoided in
the present state of the world ; and this conclusion may serve
to quiet the consciences of many, whose feelings revolt at
the fearful realities of war. It is affirmed in effect that war
is not a cause , but a consequence of wrong; and though it is
our belief, that entirely apart from the wrong of which
actual warfare is the consequence, the war spirit in its various
manifestations carries with it a wrong of its own making; yet,
granting war to be the consequence of wrong, we would ask
our fellow Christians—they who earnestly desire “ to follow
the Lamb whithersoever He leadeth ” —we would ask them
seriously to reflect whether the precepts of their Divine Mas-
ter admit of wrong being used against wrong: we would
also ask them to consider whether it is not possible so to
influence public opinion, that society will stand between the
evil passions of men and the means of giving them full scope ?
Even now the feuds of individuals are to a great extent pre-


vented from developing into open combat, through the
restraint imposed by public feeling. Society can abolish
—it has already abolished evils which it sees are injurious
to its interests, even although they have been fed thus far
by its own vices. Slavery maj r be abolished; and yet the
selfishness and pride, in which it originated, remain behind.
Still, while they remain, they have lost their most favourable
field of exercise, and we may expect them to diminish ac-
cordingly in their activity and strength. Let the church
unitedly declare that war is not to be entered upon by any
bearing the Christian name: she will not eradicate all the
evil passions from the human heart; but she will remove
one of the fields most conducive to their action, and the
opportunity most favourable for their running riot. We
are not now writing in regard to the course which should be
pursued by statesmen, whose actions are influenced not only
by Christian men, but also by those who practically know
not the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ; we are writing in
regard to the course which should be pursued by Christian
men w r ho may mould the minds of statesmen and of their
fellow country-men ; to those who are firm in allegiance to
their Heavenly King, and who seek to glorify God in their
bodies and their spirits which are His —it is they whom
we ask carefully to ponder whether war is a necessity;
for if it is a necessity, then it must be permissible by
Him whom we call Lord. We trust that those who differ
from us will acquit us of writing in any spirit of Pharisaical
conceit; well we know that there is, in itself, no merit
in holding any particular form of belief —that “it is the
life that tells ” ; but being fully persuaded of the things
concerning which we write, we cannot but urge them
upon the consideration of our fellow men. Believing,
therefore, that war is under no circumstances necessary
or admissible for Christians, we proceed to point to
the possibility of a nation being governed upon pacific
principles; then to the difficulties which encompass those
who plead for defensive war; and lastly to shew that the
military system is not, as it is sometimes alleged to be, an
extension of the magisterial office.
Though no instance of a strictly national character has
yet occurred to test the practicability of the principle
for which we plead—an unconditional reliance upon the
Omnipotent Arm for protection and defence; there is,
however, a case to which we may refer of a strong
character, and sufficiently national for all the pur-
poses of our argument. Pennsylvania, it is known, was


settled by men who believed that Christianity forbids war
under any and every pretext. They acted in strict accordance
with this belief, and planted themselves in the midst of
savages —men who knew nothing of written treaties, nor the
obligation of revealed religion, men who were addicted to
war in its most sanguinary and revolting forms—and yet for
more than seventy years, up to the time that the Government
of the colony passed into other hands, the state enjoyed unin-
terrupted peace. The “Pennsylvanians,” says Clarkson, “be-
came armed though without arms, they became safe though
without the ordinary means of safety. For the greater part of
a century —during the administration of William Penn,
and of his proper successors —there was not a quarrel or
a war.” Whatever the quarrels of the Pennsylvania Indians
were with others, they uniformly respected and held sacred,
as it were, the territories of William Penn. And when was
the security of Pennsylvania molested and its peace destroyed ?
—When the men who had directed its counsels, and who
would not engage in war, were out-voted in its Legislature,
when they who supposed that there was greater in
the sword, than in Christianity, became the predominating
body. Prom that hour the Pennsylvanians transferred their
confidence in Christian principles to a confidence in their
arms ; and from that hour to the present they have been
subject to war. There are, besides the
Society of Friends, other religious communities, such as
the Moravians and Mennonites, who have uniformly been
willing, at any personal sacrifice, to testify that war of
any kind cannot be reconciled with the Christian dispen-
sation; and as shown previously in this address, there
have been, and are now, individual members of other
sections of the church of Christ as earnest in their
endeavours for its abolition : but the instance above given, of
a state being governed upon pacific principles, is tlie only
opportunity ,so far as we are aware, in which a community,
professing these principles, has been able to put them to a
practical test in this way.
[Since the above was written, we have heard that the Hawiian Govern-
ment, about the year 1873, relinquished their naval and military defences.
We are not aware of its present position in this respect, but about the time
mentioned, though the French three times threatened the independence of
the nation, and it was in peril from American and English visitors, though
some rash councillors advised fighting, the people gave heed to the teaching
of the missionaries ; and the King and Council sent a proclamation over
the group to unite in prayer to Him from whom alone help could come.
On one occasion the islands were taken by a foreign power and kept in
possession for several months ; but not a sword was drawn, nor a gun fired.
The missionaries, and they who trusted in the Lord, ceased not to pray for
deliverance. The Hawiian flag was again hoisted, and the people breathed
again the fresh air of liberty.]


Let us examine for a few moments the ground which those
take, who, while professing to deprecate war in general, still
plead for what is called “Defensive War” Many persons
limit their ideas of “ defence ” to the protection of their own
land against foreign invasion: some including the defence also
of colonies (irrespective apparently of the process by which
those colonies have been gained or annexed). A third class
of the pleaders for defensive war, do not limit their ideas to
mere questions of possible invasion, but to the protection of
trade and commerce; while a fourth, not only plead for
these, but also for the protection and upholding of the
nation’s name and 'prestige throughout the world. All these
are, in their own estimation, advocates of “defensive war”
only. Between the apparent justice of the one plea and the
other, it is impossible to draw a definite line. To say that
the inhabitants of a country are justified in protecting their
own land, but that they must not go further, is obviously
unjust towards those whose emigration to their distant
colonies they largely promote. Because homes of these are
distant, or their numbers few, the nation cannot and
may not overlook them. And on the same ground it may be
argued, that if it is right to defend our persons, it is right
also to defend our property; and that if right to defend
property, it is obviously justifiable to protect and defend our
trade and commerce, the success of which depends largely
upon our name. But what does all this lead to P —Even
during the past 50 years wars have been thus justified,
which are now looked back upon as blots in England’s
history. Upon the plea of defensive war and “ protecting
British interest,” have we not entered into war with China,
to compel the introduction into that country of a poisonous
drug, which we had bound ourselves by a solemn treaty to
prohibit and prevent ?* Eor when the Chinese authorities,
seeing the danger arising from the use of this smuggled
article, destroyed it in large quantities, did we not declare
and carry on war against them to compel compensation for
our loss; and finally cause the Chinese government to pay
to the British nation several millions sterling to cover the
expense of that war ?
* Though the ostensible ground of the war was the seizure of British
subjects by the Chinese, yet this act was directly connected with the smug-
gling of opium, the emolument arising from which then constituted one of
the main sources of revenue to the Government of India.


It is not fair, neither is it safe, to argue from the midst of
a dilemma without reference to its cause and its origin. The
“necessity” arising out of along line of injustice does not
sanction the means used; nor does the fact that good was
eventually educed in any way prove that the course pursued was
therefore justifiable. We may not do wrong at home, and then
justify our attempts to suppress the result of that wrong, by
pleading the Divine sanction of the magisterial office; nor
may we do wrong abroad, and then plead the “ necessity ” for
maintaining a standing army in order to “ secure ourselves ”
against foreign foes. If injustice mark our foreign policy, —if
under the plea of protecting our commerce, our honour,
or our prestige, we violate the great principle of eternal
justice, which includes the Chinese, and savage races, no less
than ourselves, we cannot expect that as a nation we shall
escape the chastening rod. If injustice and wrong have sown
their poisonous seeds, these must, by Divinely ordained
natural laws, sooner or later bring forth their bitter fruit:
and if injustice in any degree produces results that
make force “ necessary ,” the justification and sanction for
that force proportionately cease. It will be said, no doubt,
that so long as the heart of man remains naturally prone to
sin, lawlessness and crime are sure to break forth and require
suppression by force. This is true, so far as that class
of offences is concerned, which come within the pale of
ordinary magisterial action, where, be it remembered, sentence
is only pronounced on clear evidence of guilt. We must
expect occasional instances of outrage, and it may be even of
those crimes which involve the extreme penalty of the law. But
we have strong ground for believing that extreme cases, such
as riot and open rebellion in which the magisterial agents act
the part of soldiers, would almost, if not altogether, cease to
exist, were Governments and municipalities really to act at all
times in accordance with the spirit of the golden rule.
Would there not also be less mutual repulsion —much less
occasion for mutual distrust between the powerful nations
of the earth, if, acting by the golden rule, each nation were
less influenced by national pride, and endeavoured, when
there were matters in dispute, to look from the standpoint of
the other ? But seeing that Christian precepts are almost
excluded in national negociations, how can Christian men
justify “ the necessity ” which naturally follows ? The
present war in the Soudan, far from being an exception to
that which is above set forth, is linked with a long chain of
unjust acts, and with long standing political complications :
—the British Nation is taking the place of the Egyptians in
fighting a people, who, it is notorious, have suffered many


abuses and cruel wrongs during past generations ; for —
setting aside the religious element in the war, which might
not have occasioned the interference of our nation —British
interests “ necessitate ” taking part with the Egyptians
against the Soudanese ; and, again, British interests in
Egyptian affairs are entangled with political intrigues
extending over many years. Australia has now taken part
in the Egyptian difficulty ; and her people, whose national
progress has been unchecked by many hindrances which the
old world has been unable to shake off, has now, by the
coup de main of a colonial statesman, suddenly become
mixed up with old world wars. In whatever light this action
may be viewed, the result may be the bringing upon the
colonists, evils from which hitherto they have been free;
and, however our fellow Christians may differ from us
in regard to war, they cannot but see how readily the means
adopted for the defence of the country may be turned in the
direction of offensive war.
It is frequently urged that the Magisterial office is one
which is directly sanctioned in the New Testament; and that
as, without recourse to arms, magisterial authority cannot be
upheld in extreme cases, therefore the military office is
virtually sanctioned also : —that, in point of fact, an army is
merely a company of men organised for this purpose ; and
that if it be justifiable to use force in a solitary case, circum-
stances may make it needful to do so on a large scale.
We have indeed at times to deplore the existence of these
extreme cases, in which the disturbances seem to involve the
reckless slaughter of war; but though certain actions may
thereby seem “ imperatively necessary” to avert direct and
impending mischief; yet we must not therefore confound
expediency with principle or blend self-imposed “necessity”
with Divine sanction. The principle which must regulate
the actions of all, whether in or out of “office,” has been
distinctly laid down by Christ himself ; and as such is binding
upon Christians under all circumstances. The question
naturally arises, how far a magistrate may go in fulfilling
the duties of his office, without disobeying the Divine
law; yet we must not be led astray by supposing that
because we cannot, in this matter, lay down any fixed
rule for every emergency, there is no essential difference
between the military system and the magisterial function.
“ The essence of war,” says Lord Macaulay, “is violence; and
moderation in war is imbecility.” The “ efficiency ” of an
army is measured by its ability to destroy life. Science and
skill are taxed to the utmost to make the implements of war


as murderous as ingenuity can devise. Policemen,
on the other hand, are not, as a rule, allowed to carry
those arms which most endanger life, and they are always
held responsible for any reckless violence, even in case
of riot, because the aim of magistracy is to ensure justice,
and on no account to take life without the strongest proof
of guilt. But though the professed aim of contending
nations or armies, may, in a primary sense, he to secure
the object sought without bloodshed, yet the soldier is
trained to destroy , and his aim in war is to kill. Moreover
he kills without caring for, or making any attempt to prove,
the individual guilt of his victims. He intends and endea-
vours to destroy to the utmost of his power, knowing that the
fatal use of the weapons placed in his hands will be applauded
rather than condemned. AVhen war is declared, every one
belonging to the enemy’s force, is regarded as having forfeited
his life without respect to his individual guilt. Then again
the parties acting under a magistrate are amenable to the law
of the land, and answerable for any infraction of that law ; but
an army, during a military campaign, is subject to no civil
authority whatever, but only to the dictum of its General, whose
word is absolute. Besides, there is an obvious
difference (to say nothing about right and wrong) be-
tween the position of opposing nations who act for
themselves, and upon their own responsibility endeavour
to settle disputes or injuries by force of arms: and
the position of a police force who act as the agents and
upon the responsibility of magistrates, whose business it is to
administer justice impartially. To say that the army acts by
“ government authority” constitutes no parallel, because one
government obviously cannot arbitrate between its own
claims and the claims of a rival government, in the way that the
magistrate decides between the claims of parties whose cause
is brought before him. In the former case parties act for
themselves, without appeal; the strongest or most skilful
gaining the victory ; might and not right being the principle
upon which all military struggles are decided : in the latter
case they act at the bidding of others to whom they are res-
ponsible ; and who are expected, by virtue of their office, to
administer justice in accordance with truth aud equity.
Thus the restraining or compulsory force of a system which
seeks pre-eminently .to protect life is widely different in
principle from the force of a system, the express object of
which is to destroy life. The calm decision of an impartial
legal tribunal, even where it involves the sentence of death,
affords no parallel to the random violence, and indiscriminate
slaughter of the battle-field. Both the governing and the


operating principles of the two are diametrically opposed to
each other. The one is calm and impartial : the other is
irritated and self-interested. Justice (as far as man can
discern it) regulates the issue of the one; brute force the
issue of the other. There is still one point in reference to
the comparison between the military system and the magisterial
office to which we would direct attention, yiz., in regard to
the acts of magistrates. If magisterial acts are at times
questionable—if the authority for them is continually and
justly open to doubt, it must surely be seen that no precedent
can be drawn from them. Touch “ the authority ” only, and
every conclusion from it falls to the ground. Paul and Silas
testified plainly enough, both by their words and their actions,
that in the breach of justice involved by their imprisonment
and stripes, they no longer recognised the authority of a Divine
sanction. “ They have beaten us openly uncondemned. . .
and do they thrust us out privily ? Nay, verily, but
let them come themselves and fetch us out.” If, therefore,
the military function be an enlargement of an unsanctioned
magisterial function, then it is a “ development ” of that very
feature which the apostles distinctly condemned. If force,
rather than justice, be the governing principle, and alone
decides the issue, it is so. And this is undoubtedly the case ;
for it is well known that right does not decide the issue of a
battle. We have no evidence that “physical might” will
sustain moral right any more than the reverse. If it has
done so in some cases, in far more tyranny and wrong have
triumphed. “ Standing armies have ever been the bulwarks
of despotism,” and they are still the most powerful of all
engines to compel the enforcement of oppressive laws, and to
withhold from people their just rights. The vast chain of
injustice and wrong which has crushed so many nations with
an iron yoke for centuries, has always been rivetted by these
very means.
The deliverance of the world from the curse of war is to
be effected mainly by the force of Christian principle. It is
this that would make war impossible, by removing the causes,
pretexts, and practices which perpetuate the system. This
we would earnestly urge upon our fellow Christians, many of
whom doubtless are as solicitous for the public good as men
can be, and deeply regret the war system, but, neverthe-
less believe that the way to secure peace is to be prepared
for war —some even looking forward to the prevention
of war by the invention of implements of slaughter
which shall forbid armies opposing each other. But
do not these overlook the fact that “ all men think all men


mortal but themselves ” —that, however terrible the instru-
ments of destruction, there is ever a trust that the evil effects
may be avoided ? War is not by this means prevented, the
method only is altered. In naval warfare we see that inven-
tions in one direction call forth corresponding inventions in
another; and so the race of resources goes on even in times
of peace, diverting an enormous amount of the national
wealth. In the army, too, the result of the many inventions
has only been that contests are turned in the direction
of strategy and of expensive war material. With all
the skill that has been brought to bear in the production
of destructive machinery during the last 20 years, dread-
ful as much of this is, can it be affirmed that this has
caused the attitude of the European nations to be any less
warlike ? The words of our Lord come forcibly to our
minds—“ How can Satan cast out Satan” P—evil is to be
removed only by the triumph of good. Often is it proved to
us “ that which a man soweth, that shall he also reap ”:
and as “ that which is born of the flesh is flesh,” and “ that
which is born of the spirit is spirit,” so “ a good man out of the
good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good,”
and “ an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth that
which is evil.” We cannot therefore expect that harmony
amongst nations will be begotten by a spirit which is
continually planning means for the destruction of man-
kind. Tinder the plea of being prepared against
foreign aggression, not only has the language used in our own
nation in relation to foreign powers often been of an
irritating or hostile character, but the preparations made
both by the government and by the people themselves have
been but too well calculated to give occasion of offence or
jealousy to the government and inhabitants of other
countries, and to diffuse a martial spirit among our own
population;—consequences which it would have been far
easier to prevent than to remedy. How strikingly does this
result show the difficulty, not to say the impossibility, of
drawing a distinct boundary line between offensive and defen-
sive war, —of saying in effect thus far will we go in violation
of Christ’s law of universal love and no further. So
long as Christian men tolerate war and are willing to
engage in it, so long as it is recognised as a possible remedy,
so long as we are all the time getting ready for it and looking
forward to it, it will continue to be, practically, the inevit-
able resort as a mode of settling the most serious disputes ;
but other and vastly better and more effectual remedies
would be found, the moment the world once looks upon it as
established that war, as a remedy, is utterly inadmissible and


out of the question . The case is precisely analogous to that
of private violence. So long as in any community, fists, or
clubs, or pistols, are regarded as proper instruments for
avenging insults or settling disputes between man and man,
they will be used, and used frequently. The moment that an
enlightened public sentiment has set the brand of its repro-
bation upon such barbarous instrumentalities, they will be
abandoned, and men will find that they can adjust their
differences, more easily and satisfactorily than before, by
candid argument, or arbitration, or the regular course of
law. This is no fancy; it is the well-known experience of
mankind in the matter of private violence. Even duelling
has been well-nigh extirpated in all civilized countries, and
the day is not far distant when it will be no more known for
ever. And why cannot that which has been done in. the nar-
rower field be done in the wider ? The Avorld is finding out,
more and more every day, that in ethics, political economy,
and everything that concerns social life, there is not one law
for individuals, and another for States.
The tendency to bring larger and still larger communities
under the authority and protection of general law is clearly
traceable in all history. Judicial Combat, or trial by battle,
was, in the time of William the Conquerer, an authorized
mode of ascertaining the offender in the case of quarrels be-
tween individuals; and the vanquished was fined or hanged
according to the nature of the offence. The abolition of this
cruel appeal to superior prowess and strength involved a
struggle of centuries: it would appear that the clergy
frequently protested against the practice, and strenuously
sought its abrogation. But by degrees all cases of difference
or wrong were brought under the authority of the courts of
law ; and now in the relations of individuals in civil society
the triumph of law over brute force is complete. The only
lingering remnant of this ancient practice is the custom of
duelling, which still prevails to some extent in continental
countries, but has happily quite disappeared from our
own. Private War by persons of noble birth,
was for centuries as common in Europe, and as distinctly
acknowledged a right, as public war (or war between nations)
is in our own day. All disputes between serfs, between
the inhabitants of towns, and between freemen of inferior
condition, were decided in courts of justice: but such
submission to law was deemed inconsistent with the
dignity of men of rank ; just as there are persons now who
think it would be inconsistent with the dignity of a sovereign
state. Even the higher order of ecclesiastics asserted their


right to prosecute war on their own account. The invasion
of the most barbarous enemy could not be more desolating
than these intestine wars. They prevailed more or less up to
the fifteenth century ; and maintained their hold so long by
dint of sheer prejudice, against the voice of reason, religion,
humanity, and law. But they yielded at last, slowly but
surely, to the influence of more just sentiments concerning
government, order, and public security. “ How slow,” says
Robertson, “is the progress of reason and civil order ! Regu-
lations, which appear to us so equitable, obvious, and simple,
required the efforts of civil and ecclesiastical authority during
several centuries to establish them.” And these petty wars,
such undeniable relics of barbarism, differed from the inter-
national wars of the present day, only that they were on a smaller
scale. Provincial Wars amongstthe many States of those
great countries, into which Europe is at present divided, were
fought as fiercely as the contests of to-day, and these separate
communities who had, or imagined they had, divers and
antagonistic interests, watched over each other as jealously,
and vowed against each other eternal enmity as emphatically
as the larger bodies, who now call themselves the nations of
Europe, are still in the habit of doing. In process of time
province after province became gradually annexed to a
central power —the floating masses of society being drawn
into an ever enlarging unity. Perhaps it will be affirmed
that this process has been brought about by war, and could
be effected in no other way. Yet in the history of countries
it will be found that, just in proportion as policy has been
substituted for force, and justice for violence, has this unity
become extended and confirmed; that this has been effected
by renouncing the continual employment of force, and by
calling into operation intellectual superiority—in governing
through mind, and not through the ruin of existences. The
fact, however, remains that in different portions of the world
a chaos of fiercely contending elements has fused into a homo-
geneous and solid commonwealth, cohering in a perfect social
unity; and disputes between districts are now, like
those of individuals, adjusted by ordinary courts of law. Thus
we see brute force banished yet further and further back in
an ever widening circle. Eirst individuals have submitted
their differences to judical reference ; then the feudal barons
with their large following of clients and vassals; then
separate tribes of the same nation united in allegiance to a
common central authority ; then distinct nationalities, though
aliens to each other in race, language, and religion, were
brought into a closer relationship of mutual sympathy and
dependence. And is there any reason why the feuds of still


larger bodies of people should not bo brought under the
cognizance of an impartial judge ? We believe the obstacles
in the way of this consummation are far less formidable than
those which have been already surmounted in smaller
bodies of men, by introducing, alike into political means as
into political ends, justice instead of selfishness, and publicity
in place of lying fraud. At the tribunal which met at G-eneva
to adjudicate on the matters in dispute between Great
Britain and the United States, who agreed to submit their
differences to its judgment, the two nations were re-
presented by their respective counsel, who produced their
evidence and pleaded for their clients as in other courts.
President Grant in his message soon afterwards said most
truly, that an example had been set which he hoped would
be followed by other civilized nations, and be finally the
means of returning to productive industry millions- of men,
now maintained to settle the disputes of nations by the
bayonet and the broadsword.
The argument, that the grasping and ambitious policy of
other nations, and also the lawlessness of many in our
own land, make the maintenance of an armed force abso-
lutely necessary for the defence of life and property, may
be met by a solemn appeal to every Christian, as to whether
there was not a greater degree of danger, in regard to
both life and property, at the time when He who was
Truth itself, —and whose words were the basis of all political
as well as religious truth, —gave forth to the whole world
those great principles of action and conduct, which are alike
binding upon all nations. Moreover, in giving these com-
mands, did He not see all the dangers and all the difficul-
ties which would attend the path of His followers until the end
of time ? In reference to the possibility of foreign
invasion the question is often pointedly asked, “ What would
you do in case of an invasion?” “Would you allow the
enemy to take your property or your life, or insult and
outrage those that are dear to you without effort to
prevent it?” Let all that ask this question faithfully
put the query to their own hearts as to whether they
do really believe that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom
of men, or whether they only profess so to believe? —
whether they really believe that not a sparrow falleth
to the ground without His knowledge and permission ?
If the very hairs of our head are all numbered, can any dire
calamities such as have been referred to, take place without
His permission ? Has not the Christian the strongest ground
for believing, either that he toil I he protected whilst faithfully


endeavouring to carry out his principles and doing all in his
power that is not at variance with the precepts of his Lord ;
or that, if it be the Divine will that he suffer, he will be
enabled more fully to glorify God in so doing, than could
possibly be the case were he to pursue an opposite path. If
the Great Master forbore to shield Himself against the
violence of wicked men, should not His servants be willing to
“ commit the keeping of their souls unto Him, in weR doing,
as unto a faithful Creator ?” “Be just and fear not," ought
ever to be the Christian’s maxim. We have the highest
warrant for believing that, if we use our utmost endeavours,
both as individuals and as a nation, to administer justice at
home, and promote and maintain friendly intercourse abroad,
Ave shall be protected, not by a miraculous intervention of
Providence, but by the healthy results of a sound policy
by an influence, far stronger and more lasting than military
strength, —goodwill and mutual interest: those social bonds,
which unite all in one common brotherhood.
We readily admit, that as the love of enemies and the
returning of good for evil between man and man require the
exercise of faith and of the highest Christian virtues, so for a
government practically to carry out these principles of action,
demands not only a strong sense of duty and a real confidence
in that God who judgeth in the earth, but discretion as well
as righteousness in the various acts of international inter-
course. And as an individual who forms the truly Christian
resolve never to fight a duel, is called upon by this very
circumstance, not only to avoid taking offence, but to abstain
from giving it; so would a nation desirous of succeeding in a
policy which should enable it wholly to clear itself from the
sin of Avar, feel bound to be just, inoffensive, and discreet in
conducting its own affairs, and to avoid all needless inter-
ference with the affairs of its neighbours. Well might the
nation which had the moral courage and wisdom to adopt
such a course, commit her righteous cause to the blessing of
Him Avho ruleth in the kingdoms of men, and Avho can, when
a nation’s ways please Him, make even her enemies to be at
peace with her. The word of the Lord standeth sure
“ Whoso hearkeneth to me shall dAvell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil.” If we really believe that the
Avords of Christ and his personal example arc, at all
times and under all circumstances, to be the Christian s
rule of action, then our path is plain. No apparent
necessity, —no pretence of expediency is admissible.
We must simply obey, and leave the result to God. It
is always safe to obey the commands of Christ, and always
dangerous to deviate from them under any plea. Nothing


which is directly opposed to the principles and example of
our Saviour can permanently contribute to the well-being of
a country. The pathway of the Christian is clear enough,
if only he is willing to see it. The Bible tells us, that “ the
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
Him, and delivereth them “ as the mountains are
round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about His
people from henceforth and even for ever.” It
will perhaps be insisted that, in extreme cases, to rely
simply on Divine protection, without using all the means
within our reach, is not genuine trust, but rather tempting
Providence. Certainly it would be, unless those “ means ”
involved the infraction of the Divine law, or a course of
action opposed to the example of Christ. We may never
violate principle even “to secure our own safety.” The
Christian’s stronghold of defence is the assurance that his
Lord is ever near, and ever able to deliver to the uttermost.
Let us remember the noble and confiding reply of three ser-
vants of the King of Kings, to the haughty command of
an eastern monarch, under circumstances of personal danger,
calculated to unnerve the stoutest heart: —“ If it be so, our
Hod whom we serve is able to deliver us, and he will
deliver us out of thine hand, 0 king ! but if not, be it
known unto thee 0 King! that we will not serve thy gods
nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.”
It will doubtless be said that though the above should be the
outcome of a truly Christian life, yet in regard to the matter
of war we must take a common-sense view—that inasmuch
as, in the most enlightened nations, the number of individuals
who walk in the light of the glorious gospel of Christ is
proportionately very small, we cannot expect a high standard
in the national conception of duty ; and that in proportion
to national advancement will the laws be pure or otherwise.
But whilst it is true that the national ideas of right and
wrong must largely influence the government of a nation, we
submit that Christian teachers should have a jealous care that
they do not in any wise lower the standard of religious teaching
to this national conception. Should not Christians be willing
instruments in the Lord’s hand to bring about a better state
of things ? Of must the church, unwilling to use the strength
already given to her, wait for a greater display of Divine
light and power ? Let us bear in mind that no unfaithful-
ness on the part of others, will serve as an excuse for our
deviating from a course of rectitude. Even though those
who uphold the Christian standard before others, may fall
into error, or fail to act their part aright; still the language


remains unshaken, that “ Truth is truth, though all men
forsake it.”
In conclusion, we would make an earnest and respectful
appeal to all who, whether as ministers of state or as senators,
may have to decide or to influence the decision of the solemn
questions of war and peace. Wo implore them to use every
Christian effort for the maintenance of peace ; remembering
that what is morally or religiously wrong, cannot be politi-
cally right, and that the non-recognition of the peaceable
doctrines and precepts of the Gospel by the nations opposed to
us, constitutes no valid plea for our violation of them. We
appeal as Christians to our fellow-Christians, beseech-
ing them to view their responsibilities and duties calmly and
temperately, and with that practical wisdom which recognizes
it as a political, not less than a religious truth, that righteous-
ness exalteth a nation. More especially would we entreat
those who are regarded as Ambassadors for Christ, seriously
to consider their responsibilities as the professed ministers of
the Gospel of Peace, and as such to use that authority and
influence of which they are stewards, not in stirring up the
martial spirit of the nation, or in nerving the arm of war,
but in promoting universal peace on earth and good-will
towards men.
We pray the Almighty Father of the Universe to breathe
the spirit of conciliation into the hearts of the children of
men everywhere, and to guide them to the promotion of their
mutual well-being, by conforming themselves to His universal
law of love.
Compiled from writings previously mentioned, with additions thereto, and
printed by direction of the Annual Meeting of Friends in Tasmania, held at
Hobart, Third month, 1885.
N. H. Propsting, Printer, 75, Elizabeth-street, Hobart.
