

IS
WOMAN’S PLACE
IN THE HOME?
DISCUSSION
NUMBER NINE
TWOPENCE


Amabel Williams-Ellis has been a socialist since
1920. She is the author of a number of novels
(most of them with a political background), of
biographies, of children’s books and of school
text-books on history and science. As an active
author, and in journalism, she has had personal
experience of the demands of a profession plus
husband and children. A short book bearing on
the present topic is her Women in War Factories
(Gollancz).


IS WOMAN’S PLACE IN
THE HOME?
Preliminary
This subject, especially in view of the 1944-46 “Royal Commission on
Equal Pay, which issued its report in October, 1946, is important for two
reasons:—
(1) Half the problems which it involves appear today in an entirely
new light. This is because we have now for the first time in Britain a
Government which puts maximum production, and its by-product of full
employment, in the forefront of its policy. As part of Labour’s prosperity
drive the country needs not only increased production-per-man-hour, but
a larger working force and very many more trained personnel’ (see
page 11). Every industry is short-handed. Thus the dread of competition
for jobs between men and women (which has for years been in so many
people s minds when they thought about this subject) is an idea which
has now to be discarded.
(2) The subject of Women in Employment is not only economically
vital, but a fascinating human subject. The employment of women outside
their homes cannot be, and never ought to be, considered entirely as a
matter of industrial economics. It is unrealistic to think of it without
bringing in a great many other considerations—for instance, children’s
welfare, and the well-being of men workers in their homes and in their
leisure. It is also a good instance of those many political and economic
subjects upon which “Old sins cast long shadows.” To study it is to
find you have a key to other puzzles.
Each one of us, man or woman, is apt to come to it, not fresh, but
with a mind already occupied by a whole crop of feelings. For the question
of Women in Employment is bound to affect each of us closely and
fundamentally. It will be found to touch our self-conceit, our love of
comfort, our sense of insecurity, or our feelings towards sons, daughters
brothers, sisters, husbands or wives.
For this reason we are apt to find that, before studying it, and without
much reference to new factors, we have already, at the back of our minds
taken one of two sides. For the moment we will call one of these opposing
sides “Freedom, Independence and Opportunity for Women” and the
other “Woman’s Place is in the Home.”
In these pages the material is arranged as follows:
First
A brief statement of the view we have called above “Freedom Inde
pendence and Opportunity for Women.” This statement is based on the
official views and statements of the Labour Party and the T.U C
3


Second
A brief statement of the view we have called “Woman’s Place is in the
Home.” This includes extracts from the report of the Royal Commission,
1944-46 and an historical section which may help to make clear how it
happens that democratically minded men and women sometimes hold a
view which some of us have come to associate with Fascism.
Third
A selection of further facts, figures and new knowledge in the light of
which it is essential to view this subject. This includes further extracts
from the Report of the Royal Commission and a few points from theory
and practice in other countries.
Fourth
A short note for discussion groups.
SECTION 1
“FREEDOM, INDEPENDENCE AND OPPORTUNITY
FOR WOMEN”
The Labour Party and the Trades Union Congress stand and have
always stood for equal opportunities and pay for men and women and
also for improvements in conditions and pay in jobs in which only women
are employed. Here is a statement from the issue of The Labour Woman
for August 15, 1946: —
“In discussions on the economic position of women there is often
a tendency to concentrate attention on two questions—‘equal
pay,’ and the admission of women to what have hitherto been
‘men’s jobs.’ . . . These two questions are very important, but they
do not exhaust the problem of women’s work and wages. Inequality
of pay between men and women, where both are doing the same
or comparable —work is one aspect of the wider problem of the
underpayment of women in every field of work, whether they have
the field to themselves or share it with men. .. .” In many women’s
employments there is in fact “no rate for the job. There is a rate
based on conventional ideas of what is a suitable rate, not for the
job, but for a woman! ... a woman doing a fairly skilled industrial
job, has been lucky if her wage rate has been more than half the
rate of a man in an unskilled job in the same factory. . . .
The T.U.C. supports the view embodied in the constitution of the
International Labour Office (Treaty of Versailles, 1919): “The principle


that men and women should receive equal remuneration for work of
equal value.” As the reader will see later, the comparisons implied in
this statement are not always easy to make.
In their written evidence to the Commissioners on “Equal Pay,” the
T.U.C. pointed out that it had always been difficult in peacetime to make
an exact comparison between the payment of men and women in industry
because of “fairly clear and well-established demarcation between men’s
work and women’s work.”
“In the factory industries, however, a large proportion of the work-
people employed (about one-third) have been women, but here their
work has been mainly confined to repetitive operations which do
not require a high degree of skill. Accordingly the majority of
women employed in industry have been remunerated on a piece-
work basis. . . . There are, however, many other forms of
work, including labouring, which either because of the physical
effort required or their rough and unpleasant character, have been
considered the exclusive province of male workers. . . . All the
same, even where demarcation exists, men and women are often
engaged on work which, if not identical, is of a comparable nature
either in its unpleasantness or in the skill and effort required.”
In spite of this, “wherever minimum time-rates have been estab-
lished, either by trade boards, by joint industrial councils or by
collective agreement, there is always a considerable difference between
the rates for men and for women. In regard to the minimum time
rates established by trade boards, the relationship between women’s
and men’s rates before the war was in some cases as low as 50 per
cent and rarely exceeded 65 per cent.”
During the war these ratios rose a little—in light engineering to 68 £ per
cent and in the clothing trade to 64 per cent.
Three of the four women members of the “Equal Pay” Commission—
Dame Anne Loughlin, Miss L. F. Nettlefold and Dr. Janet Vaughan—
make the following comparison of piece-rates in a Memorandum of
dissent:—
“In the few cases in which men and women are paid the same piece-
rates on identical work, where we were able to obtain figures, the
difference in earnings, if it existed at all, was considerably less than
these ratios. In the wool trade .. . the women’s hourly earnings for
one-loom weaving represented about 91 per cent of the men’s, and for
two-loom weaving about 85 per cent. ... In the case of a small
sample of men and women engaged in identical work in the clothing
trade paid on the same piece-rate, the average hourly earnings for
men and for women were approximately equal (3s. 4|d. for men and
3s. 4d. for women). ... In the case of cotton-weaving, by far the


largest overlap area in manufacturing industry, the average weekly
earnings of women on all the various systems of working, with no
corrections introduced for any disturbing factors, were 88 per cent
of those of men on the same systems.”
In discussing the reasons for a system of lower piece-rates for women,
the following points are made in the T.U.C. evidence:—
“Only in a very few cases do trade union agreements provide for
a shorter working week for women as compared with men. . . .
the employment of women and young persons on night work is
prohibited by law. ... In any case, most collective agreements
recognize that there should be extra payment for night shift work
to compensate for the added inconvenience involved, so that it
can hardly be argued that in general a different remuneration
of the two sexes could be justified or explained on these grounds.”
An effort is often made, the T.U.C. evidence continues, to explain the
differences between men’s and women’s pay rates as representing their
relative efficiencies:—
“It would be a great mistake to attempt any general judgment on
the way in which the relative efficiencies of men and women
compare. There are clearly some jobs in which, because of their
greater physical strength or for other reasons, men are capable of a
greater output than women, but there are other forms of work,
especially those of a repetitive character, in which women have shown
themselves to be more adaptable and dexterous than men.”
Mr. Bevin’s words, when he was Minister of Labour, are often quoted on
this:—
“We thought it would need three women for the output of two
men, but, by the help of our production engineers, new devices and
labour-aids in one way or another, I am glad to say that the output
is almost equal one for one.”
What explanation of the facts does the T.U.C. suggest?
“In our view wage rates —at least for manual workers—have
largely been determined by the relative strength of the contesting
parties in the process of collective bargaining. . . . The main reasons
for the difference between the rates of wages paid to women as
compared with men have to be traced to the relatively weaker position
of women in the process of collective bargaining.”


Of the argument that women should be paid less because they have less
financial responsibilities they write thus:—
“In presenting wage-claims trade unions have sometimes called
attention to the position of a married man with an average sized
family to illustrate their contention that the man was not even
receiving a wage which would enable him adequately to meet his
minimum responsibilities as the bread-winner.... Although the force
of this argument can hardly be questioned, it can on no account be
taken to imply that wage rates should be fixed only so as to provide
the absolute minimum to keep a married man and his family. . . .
Today, in wage negotiations it is the value of the workers’ output,
the character of the work on which they are employed and the degree
of skill involved which are the most important considerations. The
trade unions have always held the view that increasing productivity
should be accompanied by correspondingly increased wages. . . .
We do not believe that wages are today based upon any such calcu-
lations of subsistence levels, and it is certainly our view that they
should not be so determined.”
Another argument used to justify lower rates for women is that absentee-
ism and poor time-keeping are much greater among women. In the case
of sickness in the family it is more often a woman than a man who stays
at home to look after the patient.
Three of the women members of the “Equal Pay” Commission com-
ment as follows on this in their Memorandum of dissent:—
“We dissent from the view that these factors justify lower rates
of pay for women than for men on comparable jobs. It is both
unfair and economically undesirable that an individual woman
should be penalized, even if she is never absent, and an individual
man benefited, even if his attendance is poor, because, on the average,
men have a better record of attendance than women. Some incentive
for good attendance, irrespective of sex, would be the appropriate
way of dealing with this problem.”
Trade Unionists argue further that it is dangerous to working-class
standards if the male worker has to compete against “cheap female
labour,” and that “the rate for the job” has thus great importance even
if it is viewed only from the point of view of the male workers.
The T.U.C., then, stands, as far as industry is concerned, for the rate
for the job and for “Freedom, Independence and Opportunity for
Women.”
The Labour Party has always stood for these things.
At the Annual Conference in 1943 a resolution was passed which urged
“the Government to institute without delay the necessary machinery to
work out, in close collaboration with employers and trade unions, plans


for the guidance of industry and trade, and that in all such plans the
principle of equal pay for men and women engaged in equal work should
be adopted.”
In the present situation national needs emphasize the point. Labour’s
programme not only requires more production, but we require, in many
spheres such as the Civil Service and Local Government Service, many
more well-trained brains for a great many urgent skilled jobs. The
nation is short of scientists and of professional workers of all sorts.
Not every man or woman has it in them to become a first-class doctor,
architect, engineer or scientist, but modern investigators show that nearly
an equal number of men and women are so gifted. We cannot, in the
present situation, afford to throw away so large a proportion of gifted
individuals. Yet unless women are encouraged to train for the professions
by a reasonable expectation of suitable employment, we risk finding that
they will not go to the labour of qualifying and that the nation will
still be short-handed where special gifts and at titudes are essential.
Opponents of “Freedom and Opportunity for Women” often talk as
though the Labour Party and the T.U.C. advocated a policy of forcing
women out of their homes. Even with the present much longer expecta-
tion of life and activity (when by no means all a woman’s active years
are likely to be spent in raising even a large family) many gifted women
can, and do, find a perfectly satisfactory as well as a most honourable
career in home-making. Such women obviously should and must also
have “Freedom and Opportunity” to pursue this vocation. Here the
Labour Party’s policy is clear. There should never again be an economic
system which forces women out of their homes, as economic necessity
has so often forced them out in the past. Better social services, family
allowances, and in general a greater recognition of the home-maker’s
vitally important and responsible work will, it is hoped, also gradually
give the woman who elects to stay at home a much greater degree of
“Independence.”
SECTION 2
“WOMAN’S PLACE IS IN THE HOME”
A woman can, and should, say those who take the other point of view,
be fully engaged in the important work of home-making, caring for her
menfolk and for her children. Mentally and emotionally they say women
are better suited to this work than to any other and add that with a well-
planned house, proper social services, and provision for leisure-time
activities, a career confined to home, husband and children provides
sufficient outlet and scope for all the ambitions and all the capabilities
of all women.


A new argument for the exclusion of women from outside work is
drawn from recent opinions on the mental and physical development
of children in war-nurseries. The conclusion reached by many qualified
observers is that there is no substitute for the mother in the care of small
children.
Another argument is that women become hardened, coarsened and
defeminized and thus unattractive if they work outside their homes. A few
women and some men will say that they find all women workers less attrac-
tive than the “home girl.” During the course of the 1914-18 war, and even
during the 1939-45 war, men in certain industries objected to the intro-
duction of women workers, declaring that, when at work, they like to
“have the place to themselves,” and that they have to be on their best
behaviour and mind their language if there are women about. Some
men teachers object to “equal pay” on grounds of their own prestige.
Sir Maurice Holmes of the Ministry of Education in evidence before
the “Equal Pay” commission is quoted as expressing the view that, among
teachers:—
“Equal pay would be likely to discourage male recruitment, and
not only because of its effects on comparative standards of living.
There would be a psychological disinclination to enter what would
tend to be regarded as a women’s profession,”
In some sections of the community, husbands feel that it is a slight on
them if their wives work. During this war quite a number of women
dropped their war work on marriage at their husband’s request, even
though the husband was away on war service. This kind of view is quite
often held today both by working-class husbands and by those in the
higher income groups, in agricultural and mining communities and among
men of factory-manager or higher commercial status. It is rare among
textile workers and professional people. The request that the wife should
drop, or not take up work, is sometimes made on personal grounds and
sometimes because the husband would “lose caste” among those with
whom he works. Wives sometimes take this view very seriously, and
where strong reasons exist for the wife’s working, she may conceal the
fact. Or, having given up paid employment on such grounds and finding
her home lonely, or in some other way cramping, she will substitute for
it some form of voluntary work equally strenuous.
The reasons behind such feeling may be sought (in the first place) in
the economic history of this country.
Historical Section
From the Mediaeval and Tudor periods up to the time of Charles 11,
we find a gradual process of change going on. At the beginning nearly
everything is made at home —families keep sheep, spin, weave, sew the


finished garment, boil the tallow for candles, cure the mutton, tan the
hides—and so on. Only a few crafts are practised by village specialists,
such as cobbler and smith. Specialization increases—but it is families,
villages and districts that specialize, so that Luton makes straw hats,
Bala woollen stockings. But still the straw-growing and plaiting, and
the sheep-keeping, carding, spinning and knitting are done at home by
the family as a whole.
As large farms replaced small plots eked out by common rights, as
the factory or mill became the centre of manufacture, the question arose:
“Is the woman as well as the man to follow the work out of the home?
She can rock the cradle as she spins, but what is to become of the young
children and of household comfort if she is out at work?”
The labourer in field and workshop fought a battle which lasted two
centuries for a wage which would enable him to keep his family without
his wife having to “go out to work.” Employers said it had always been
customary for the whole family to help in production. There was no
need for the women, or indeed for children over five, to be “idle at
home.” It is less than a hundred years since this battle was won in
Britain, and in many countries it is still to win. The struggle here was
grim. The history of the hand-loom weavers, whose own work was “not
wanted,” but who must arouse their wives and little children in the
dark winter mornings for yet another fourteen-hour day, is well known.
It is easy to lose sight of another terrible hardship. Queen Anne had
sixteen children, not one of whom survived, and the maternal history of
her women subjects was similar. And though medical knowledge grew
and the number of hospitals increased greatly in the second half of the
eighteenth century, infant mortality rate still remained high. The proof
is statistical. The great jump in the numbers of the population in the
forty years between 1830 and 1870 was not due to an increase in births ,
but to a fall in the infant mortality rate. It was, up to about 1870, the
usual thing for women of all classes to bear from ten to fifteen or more
children of whom we know (since the population rose so slowly) that
before 1830 not more, on an average, than three or four survived. The
wives who worked in mill and mine were during most of their working
lives either pregnant, or only just recovered from child-bearing.
Add one more factor. When women and little girls over five worked
“out,” there was soon no longer such a thing as comfort in the working-
class home. Many contemporary observers (Hannah More, for instance)
noted that little girls who had been “employed” since babyhood never
got the chance to learn how to sew, wash or cook. When they married,
they had neither knowledge nor time for the arts which make a home.
We must bear this struggle in mind. It is a background to the traditional
objection to Opportunity for women. We are, however, entitled to ask
those holding the view that “Woman’s place is in the Home” to look
round and to think whether their feeling is still the right answer to
circumstances that have now greatly changed ?


SECTION 3
FURTHER FACTS
In view of the prevalent 35 to 50 per cent difference in the rates for
men and women, we are entitled to ask: Are employers being led to
make greater use of female labour ?
The T.U.C. report says that the proportion of men and women employed
in industry has remained remarkably stable. Comparisons between 1913
and 1924 figures suggest that the substitution of men by women during
the last war did permanently, though not greatly, increase this proportion.
The proportion of women to the total labour force is roughly as follows:
Industry, 25 per cent.
Distributive trades, 40 per cent.
Teaching, 72 per cent.
Civil Service (non-industrial), 25 per cent (48 per cent in 1944;
present figures not available).
Local government, 22 per cent.
Have We Enough “Manpower”
P.E.P. (Political and Economic Planning), an independent research
organization, answers the question thus:—
“Over a long period of years a very serious difficulty faces us.
By 1949 or 1950 we shall have nearly 18 millions as our civilian work-
ing population—rather less than those available in 1939. There-
after the age distribution of this population, as a whole, grows
older, and later on the total numbers are bound to shrink. With
those human resources Britain has got to restore and maintain
home consumption, to build up a larger volume of exports in order
to make good the loss of invisible exports, and to add again to this
volume in order to repay het overseas indebtedness. Moreover, the
working population cannot be used to the same extent for physical
production. The expanding social services demand more teachers,
more administrators, more professionals withdrawn from physical
production. In addition Britain will need a larger core of scientists
in all fields if it is to retain its place as a world leader in scientific
thought. ... It is easy to say that Britain must live on her brains
and her administrative skill; but we have got to pay for better
education by means of a greater volume of production from fewer
men. . . .”
Civil Servants
Till 1946 the overriding disability of women in national Government
employment was the retention of the “marriage bar.” This has now been
removed.


The “Equal Pay” report summarizes the situation in regard to salary.
Women doing the same work as men are as a rule paid 80 per cent of the
salary except that the difference must never exceed £175 per annum.
This is known as “Fair Relativity.”
Men and women compete on equal terms at the entrance examinations
for the administrative and executive grades, and there is fluidity between
departments and interchangeability between men and women. Women
are eligible for all posts, including the highest, except where specifically
excluded. For instance, 12,000 professional and technical posts were
(in 1939) reserved to men. These included posts as architectural assistants,
civil engineering assistants, quantity surveyors, education officers in the
Air Ministry, etc.
In the case of industrial work (Ordnance factories, etc.) time and piece-
rates discriminate between the sexes. The majority report of the Royal
Commission on “Equal Pay” comments as follows:
“In these establishments, there are, as the Treasury say, ‘ignoring
war conditions, few cases where men and women are employed on
the same work. ... Further, in fixing rates of pay for their industrial
employees, the Government keep in line with the agreements or
awards relating to the particular industry. . . .’
“Hence, if equal pay is to be introduced immediately and as an
act of deliberate policy in any sphere, the area of its introduction
would have, it would seem, to be confined within the limits of non-
industrial government employment, central and local, including the
teaching profession.”
The argument was “strongly urged by the Treasury, that in this
matter it would be peculiarly inappropriate that the Government
should take action independently of employers in the country at
large. Such action, it is contended, would be incompatible with the
principle of ‘fair relativity’ by which the Government as employer
should especially be bound. . . .”
Local Government and Teaching
There are at the time of writing (November, 1946) much the same
distinctions in these spheres between the pay of men and women with
the same reservation of a long list of the better paid jobs for men. This
has come in for special attention in the case of the teaching profession,
the “Burnham Scales” stabilizing a difference between the salaries of
men and women. The N.U.T., representing three-quarters of all teachers
(men and women), favours equal pay for teachers. The Joint National
Council for Local Authorities’ Administrative, Professional, Technical
and Clerical Services, has decided to recommend the adoption of salary
scales which still differentiate between men and women in the clerical
divisions, but are equal in the higher divisions.


New Knowledge
As everyone knows, “intelligence” tests are now used extensively in
schools. Similar tests were used in the case of entrants to the Army and
Air Force who were being picked for particular jobs. These tests and
the results of all systems of ordinary examination (“achievement tests”)
seem to suggest that pure intelligence is a faculty about equally divided
between the sexes.
We find, however, that after the examination stage is over, males seem
to be superior in achievement. Can we give any reason ? Feminists have
usually been content with the answer that women of superior endow-
ments meet with so much social discouragement. But perhaps many of
the jobs hitherto offered to women have not been such as to attract them.
The interests of the majority of women and girls seem to be a little
different fropi those of the majority of men. Where students have been
really free to choose (this, however, in our society is rare) girls are said,
by those experienced in co-education, to be more interested in living
things than in inert matter —e.g. biology rather than physics—in the
social sciences than in the abstract sciences. In factory work observers
during the war said women and girls were “more interested in the human
side” —affected more by whom they worked with —than by the job itself.
Have women failed—as yet —to make more of a name for themselves,
because of the stage which society had reached when the possibility of
restricting the number of children in the family first gave them their
chance ?
All through the nineteenth century “progress” was mainly in mechanical
improvements and the abstract sciences, i.e. in the sphere in which women
seem least interested. Two wars have, however, suggested—especially to
Socialists—that one of the things that has gone wrong is that progress
on the human side has failed to keep pace with mechanical progress.
Today, we see an endeavour to correct this, we see a swing toward the
social sciences. In industry attention is on “workers’ incentives” and
on industrial psychology: in housing and town planning on “amenities”
and on correctly sized “communities”: in education on child psychology:
in preventive and curative medicine the emotional and mental well-being
of the patient is increasingly held to be an important factor. Thus many
women today feel that “things are coming their way.” Modern trends
are more relevant to the things that interest women than those which
were thought of as “Progress” during the last two centuries. So far
women have chiefly distinguished themselves in Literature.
Outside Britain
Up to 1918, it was in the smaller democracies of Northern Europe—
Scandinavia and Holland —and in the United States that women had the
best economic, legal and political status. In Catholic countries there has
never been much sex equality. In Europe the status of women was
probably lowest in Germany.


In 1918, Soviet Russia declared for complete sex equality and every
profession was thrown open to women, while there were special laws to
protect them in their capacity as mothers (e.g. in the U.S.S.R. as in
Sweden, women receive leave on full pay for two to three months during
pregnancy, employers must reinstate the woman worker who has been
absent on these grounds, not only in employment, but in her own job).
In the U.S.S.R. women do, in practice, hold important posts in all
branches of the administration.
In the industry of the U.S.S.R., with equal pay, women’s earnings
were in 1930 computed at between 67 per cent and 78 per cent of men’s.
In 1939 women represented 43 per cent of the total labour force and
20 per cent of technical and skilled personnel.
In Germany in 1918, under the Weimar Republic, many sex inequalities
were abolished and women students began, for instance, to flock to German
universities. It was part of the Nazi doctrine to reverse all this and to
declare that women were inferior to men and existed to be the “recreation
of the warrior” and the mothers of German sons.
Primitive Peoples
We used to think that we could judge what was “natural,” in this as
in other matters, by reference to what “primitive man” does or did.
It had long been supposed that in primitive societies women were ex-
ploited, and that their position was always bad relative to that of men.
This, like most other generalizations about primitive peoples, has now
had to be abandoned.
The new findings of the anthropologists are in fact bewildering. In
some primitive societies it seems natural that men should dominate
women, in others that women should have a privileged position. In
some, what we should consider the most inborn characteristics of the
sexes seem to be reversed. One such reversal is entertainingly described
by Miss Margaret Meade in her Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive
Societies. In a certain New Guinea tribe it is the women who do the
productive and commercial work of the community. They shave their
heads (because it is practical) and are careless about their dress. It is
the men who love to adorn themselves, take to music and art, are the
support of the local religion, are fond of gossip and compete for the
favour (economic and otherwise) of the women. In another tribe it is
assumed that mothers have no special affection for their children, and
must be kept up to the job; the tradition is all about “father-love.” In
some tribes housework is done by men because it is “too sacred” for
women. In one mountain tribe where produce must be carried a long
way up to hill villages on the heads of bearers, men are not considered
up to such work—“ Their heads are not strong enough.”
It is not suggested that these reversals are excellent. They just warn *
us that we should be careful how we say (as the Nazis did) that it is
“natural” for men to like one thing and women another, or “natural”


for men and women to think and feel differently. Miss Margaret Meade
takes the view that great differences in temperament and ability exist
but that they do not run along sex lines at all. The result, she believes,
in any society of cramping either men or women into a ready-made
pattern of what is thought “natural,” is frustration, unhappiness and
waste of talent.
SECTION 4
NOTE FOR LABOUR DISCUSSION GROUPS
Most discussion groups should find material here to start off a number
of evenings’ discussion of about an hour. If the group is one that likes
a fresh subject each time, it will be essential to select only one well-defined
aspect of the topic. Methods for the break-down into either four topics
or one are suggested below.
Industry and Distributive Trades
(1) What is new in tonight’s topic? Women are no longer competing
with men in a limited labour market. Labour’s Prosperity Programme
needs maximum production in industry. Local examples. Allude to the
text “The expanding social services (and increased leisure) mean that
more people must be withdrawn from physical production” (see page
11). Put suitable figures on blackboard, e.g. women’s productivity and
pay. Age-group distribution in the 1950’s (page 11). Contributions from
older members on the time when there was “under-cuttingfrom younger
members on what ideas may now have to be scrapped. What jobs do
local girls in fact favour? Does anyone know?
Professions and Non-productive Jobs
(2) Sum up last discussion. Women in the professions and social
services. In transport, trades and arts (catering, music, etc.) which must
expand if the 40-hour week and “holidays with pay” are not to be a
mockery for millions. Women have not risen very high in Government
and Local Government employment. Figures on blackboard of compara-
tive pay, jobs reserved for men, etc. Do these figures account for it?
Home and Children
(3) Sum up last discussions (be sure to include “Man-Power Needs”
point). The other side of women’s work. Can women be freed for the
work the nation needs so urgently without detriment to the survival rate
of really tip-top children, and to the other needs of the home? Do women
even want to be freed ? If they do, why was it so long assumed that they
didn’t? What is it “natural” for women to want and do?


Women in Socialist Britain
(4) Sum up all three discussions and get the group to consider what,
in view of their conclusions, they think will be the effect on women in
their locality of present trends under such heads as (say) greater
mechanization in the local industry, Trade-Union developments, the
planning of houses and towns, the 40-hour week, education (both of
boys and girls). Finally try to get two summaries of (a) what ideas the
group thinks will now have to be scrapped and ( b ) what ideas seem
since 1946 to have gained a new importance.
A Single One-hour Discussion
The essential new point is that women are no longer competing with
men in a limited labour market.
From there, branch off according to the locality and group. For
instance, what ideas can be brought forward on whether, and, if so,
how, the needs of the nation can be reconciled with the needs of the
home? This could be discussed under either of two heads: (1) by freeing
women for productive work; by lessening their domestic work through
better house-planning, laundry services, day-nurseries, canteens, etc.;
(2) by adapting the work itself—part-time employment, further mechaniza-
tion, etc. To keep the topic compact and factual, it will be best to consider
either professional and administrative work or the most important local
industry.
For Reference
Royal Commission on Equal Pay 1944-46 Report (Cmd. 6937) Stationery
Office, 4s. net.
Minutes of Evidence Nos. 13 and 14. Stationery Office Is. 4d. (T.U.C.
Oral Evidence).
Appendices vi-viii to Minutes of Evidence. Stationery Office Is. 4d.
(T.U.C. Written Evidence),
Obtainable from:
THE LABOUR PUBLICATIONS
DEPARTMENT,
TRANSPORT HOUSE,
SMITH SQUARE, LONDON, S.W.I
At the following prices:
1 copy, post free - 3d.
12 copies, post free, Is. 6d.
100 copies, post free, 10s. Od.
Printed by the Victoria House Printing Co., Ltd., (T.U. all Depts.), 14-15, Elm St., Grays Inn Road,
London, W.C.I.
