

ITsaac IRatban
AUSTRALIA’S FIRST COMPOSER
A LECTURE DELIVERED AT THE CON-
SERVATORIUM OF MUSIC. SYDNEY
CHARLES H. BERTIE
(FELLOW ROYAL AUSTRALIAN HISTORICAL SOCIETY)
WITH A FOREWORD
HENRI VERBRUGGHEN
DIRECTOR OF THE CONSERVATORIUM
AUSTRALIA
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
CASTLERBAGH STREET, SYDNEY.


*


Isaac flatban
AUSTRALIA’S FIRST COMPOSER
A LECTURE DELIVERED AT THE CON-
SERVATORIUM OF MUSIC. SYDNEY
CHARLES H. BERTIE
(FELLOW ROYAL AUSTRALIAN HISTORICAL SOCIETY)
WITH A FOREWORD
BY
HENRI VERBRUGGHEN
DIRECTOR OF THE CONSBRVATORIUM
AUSTRALIA !
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY.
1922




FOREWORD.
Tradition is perhaps the one thing which the new
countries can envy Europe. Western civilization has
been transplanted here “ en bloc,” but the stem of it,
“ tradition,” remains in the old world. Yet who knows
what the future has in store for us ; who can predict
what the conditions of the world will be two thousand
years hence ; what cataclysms may occur and what
changes will take place ? Possibly, according to the
laws of development and decay, Australia may then be
the supreme force in the world, as Egypt, Persia,
Greece and Rome once were. The early activities of
this country will then be of the greatest interest and the
records of the past will be searched for information as
to the process of evolution.
History is being made every day, and in regard to
music, the name of Nathan should be duly recorded.
Not that he may be claimed to rank as a great musician
but because, together with a few others mentioned in
this pamphlet, he was among the first to stimulate and
gratify a taste for music of the best type. His connection
with Lord Byron gives him added historic importance,
and it is to be hoped that copies of this lecture will soon
be found in every official library in Australasia. It
was delivered at the Conservatorium at my instance,
and was very much enjoyed by a large gathering of
cultured enthusiasts, who fully realised that in the realm
of art, Nathan’s activities were of equal importance
to those of any of the other illustrious pioneers, and it
is with feelings of real gratitude that I thank Mr. Bertie
for compiling this record of his life and early influence
upon music in Australia.
H. VERBRUGGHEN.






Isaac Nathan.
From a painting in possession of Mr. V. V. Nathan.


ISAAC NATHAN.
THE first sub-title I selected for my lecture this
evening was “Australia’s First Musician,” but on
second thoughts and a consideration of the history
of music in Australia, I came to the conclusion that the
title would not be fair. We had at least two men worthy
to be classed as musicians before Isaac Nathan arrived.
In 1836, there arrived in Sydney, William Vincent
Wallace, who, after a period on a station, returned to
Sydney and gave some concerts. It is very probable
also, that he composed here part of the opera “ Mari-
tana.” In the same year there arrived in Tasmania
the Deane family, the head of which had been a per-
former in the London Philharmonic Society’s concerts.
This family afterwards settled in Sydney and in con-
junction with Wallace gave the first string quartette
performance in Sydney. The Deanes for many years
occupied a foremost position in the musical life of
Australia.
But I think we cdn safely claim for our subject the
title of “Australia’s First Composer.” Wallace was
only a bird of passage, and did nothing of an Australian
character, whereas, as we shall see, Isaac Nathan set
to music a number of aboriginal airs and was the
composer of the first opera written and produced in
Australia. He had, moreover, a great influence on the
musical life of the young community, and was the first
musician of wide reputation to settle in Australia.
Isaac Nathan was born of Hebrew parents at Can-
terbury, England, in 1790. His forebears, according


to tradition, were refugees from Poland. His father
was a man of wide knowledge, and Isaac in after years
told how his father would gather his family round
him and tell them stories gleaned from legend, history
and mythology. Young Isaac was destined for the
Jewish ministry and to that end was sent to Cambridge
in 1805. But the Church did not call the youngster ;
there was another love in his heart. Like the Spirit
in “ Comus ” he could say :
I was all ear,
And took in strains that might create a soul
Under the ribs of Death,
All his pocket money went in the purchase of music
paper. The call of music was so strong, so insistent,
that his parents listened to the call and Isaac was
apprenticed to Domenico Corri, and devoted his ener-
gies to singing and composition. We are told that the
“ embarrassments ” of Mr. Corri kept the youngster
sometimes long without a lesson, which “ added
stimulus to his own exertions.” In the attic of his
father’s house was an old harpischord, considered as
useless, and this the young student made the seat of his
indefatigable efforts. “At this instrument did he
regularly place himself by four o’clock in the morning,
and so intent was he on application that no inducement
would tempt him from it, his provisions often remaining
untouched the whole day.” This quotation gives the
keynote to the character of the man. As the supreme
test of greatness, I rank getting up, of one’s own free
will, at four o’clock in the morning to study. Eight
months after his apprenticeship to Corri, Nathan
produced his first song, “Infant Love,” which was
followed in subsequent years by some two hundred.
In 1813, Lord Byron published “ The Bride of
Abydos—a Turkish Tale.” The imagery and the
music of the verses so captivated Isaac Nathan that in


a few hours he composed, and afterwards published,
the music to those lines beginning “ This rose to calm
my brother’s cares.” Other lines soon followed, and
then came the day when he was introduced by the Hon.
Douglas Kinnard to Lord Byron. There followed a
partnership and Nathan emerged from obscurity when
he became associated with Byron during the years
1814-22 in the production of the “Hebrew Melodies.”
The association of these two men appears to have
been a happy combination. Byron wrote the poetry —
in many cases especially for Nathan, who composed the
melodies. In his introduction to the published work
Nathan explains the origin of the melodies in these
words :
The Hebrew Melodies are a selection from the favourite
airs which are still sung in the religious ceremonies of the
Jews. Some of these in common have, with all their sacred
compositions, been preserved by memory and tradition
only ; their age and originality, therefore, must be left to
conjecture ; but the latitude given to the taste and genius
of their performers has been the means of ingrafting on the
original melodies a certain wildness and pathos, which
have at length become the chief characteristics of the sacred
songs of the Jews.
And of form he says :
Recitative may be traced many centuries before its
having been heard of in Greece, for it was known and in
general use in the earliest patriarchal times of the Jews ;
it was then, and still is, materially connected with their
religious ceremonies : every word of prayer offered to the
Deity, whether in their private or public devotions, is given
in a kind of chant; which although it may not come under
the exact character of legitimate recitative, still bears the
sound of song.
When the “ Melodies ” were in preparation for the
press, Byron and Nathan were, as the latter informs us,
“in frequent communication.” Byron on one occasion


referred to him as “ Sun-burn Nathan.” In the volume
of “ Hebrew Melodies,” Nathan has interspersed,
anecdotes of Byron and observations upon the subject
of the verse, which enliven the pages. Time will not
permit me to quote extensively, but I must give two or
three as illustrations of the relations of the author and
composer, and illuminating the verses as well as the
character of Byron.
Of the poem “ she walks in beauty,” Nathan
writes ;
When arranging the first edition of the Hebrew
Melodies, it was remarked that his Lordship generally
requested to hear this melody sung and not infrequently
join in its execution.
Nathan was of the opinion that the lines were inspired
by Byron’s sister, “ whose countenance was as beau-
tiful as her disposition was amiable This
opinion is much strengthened by the anxiety he betrayed
whenever the composition was executed in her
presence.”
“if THAT HIGH world.”—The first verse of this
poem runs :
If that high world, which lies beyond
Our own, surviving love endears ;
If there the cherish’d heart be fond,
The eye, the same except in tears ;
How welcome those untrodden spheres !
How sweet this very hour to die !
To soar from earth, and find all fears,
Lost in thy light—Eternity !
Nathan told Byron that the “ If ” would doubtless form
the basis of charges of Atheism. The prophecy was
correct and Byron in subsequent conversation said;
“ They accuse me of Atheism ; an Atheist I could never
be ; no man of reflection can feel otherwise than doubtful
and anxious when reflecting on futurity Alas !


Nathan, we either know too little or feel too much on
this subject, and, if it be criminal to speculate on it
{as the gentlemen critics say), I fear I must remain
an awful offender.”
“IT is THE HOUR.’’— There appears no rele-
vancy in a discussion on the pronunciation of Byron’s
name and this poem, but Nathan relates that as such a
discussion was raging, Byron entered the room and was
asked which he thought correct, By’ron or Byr’on.
“ Both were right,” he replied, but catching the eye of a
beautiful young lady near him, he asked which she
preferred. “ Oh, By’ron, certainly,” said she. “ Then
henceforth,” said he, “ By’ron it shall be.”
He told a lady discussing the subject of happiness
in a future state, that his idea of such happiness was
“ The pleasure, madam, of seeing you there.”
“ THE HARP THE MONARCH MINSTRELS WEPT.”—
When Nathan received the lines of this melody they
terminated at
Its sound aspired to heaven and there abode.
This did not complete the verse, as the first verse had
ten lines and the second only five. He spoke to Byron,
who said : “ Why, I have sent you to heaven, it would
be difficult to go farther.” “My attention,” continued
Nathan, “ for a few moments was called to some other
person, and his lordship, whom I had hardly missed,
exclaimed, ‘ Here, Nathan, I have brought you down
again,’ ” and presented him with the additional five
lines.
“MY SOUL IS DARK.” —This poem was composed
by Byron in Nathan’s presence, without a word being
erased.
“WE SAT DOWN AND WEPT BY THE WATERS OF
BABEL.” —This beautiful lament comes from the
period when the Jews were carried captive to Babylon


and were solicited by the Babylonians to sing one of
the Songs of Zion, to which the captives replied “ How
shall we sing the Lord’s song in a strange land ? ” and
then “ If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget its cunning.” To me the most haunting and
pathetic words in the language.
Nathan published in 1829, a small book called
“ Fugitive Pieces and Reminiscences of Lord Byron.”
There is only one recorded instance of Nathan’s
appearance on the stage and even that was more or less
enforced. When one of those periods of financial
embarrassment (to which we are all, more or less, sub-
ject) fell upon our composer, he was pressed by his
creditors to take the stage and reluctantly consented.
He appeared at Covent Garden as Henry Bertram in
“ Guy Mannering,” and in the unaccompanied duet
“elicited enthusiastic applause” (I quote from a
biography), “but when accompanied by the band, his
want of sufficient power totally deprived him of the
advantage which his acknowledged science would
otherwise have given him and failure was the conse-
quence.” I have been told by one who has heard Isaac
Nathan sing, that even at three score and ten he pos-
sessed a sweet voice.
In 1823, Nathan published in London a work called
“An Essay on the History and Theory of Music and on
the Qualities, Capabilities and Management of the
Human Voice.” A second edition enlarged and
improved, was published in 1836, under the title
“ Musurgia Vocalis.”
I cannot claim sufficient knowledge to criticise this
work from the point of view of a musician, but even to
a layman it is evident that the author was a man of wide
knowledge and radical musical views. Here, for
instance, are his views on opening the mouth :
Opening the mouth to the fullest extent is by many


persons considered the very acme of perfection ; and the
more persevering a master may be in distending that
beautiful feature beyond nature’s limits, the greater
becomes his success and reputation as a profound and
well-studied professor. Those pretty mouths, which at
other times are watched with the anxiety of maternal vigi-
lance, lest they should exceed the dimensions of a moderate
sized button-hole, are suffered, under the all-commanding
sway of the singing-master, to distend wide enough to
admit a friend.
The voice can neither improve in strength, nor in
quality, if the mouth be distorted like that of a person
writhing in convulsions, or suffering under violent corporeal
agony. All extravagances are absurd, and destroy the very
purpose which they were intended to promote. When the
countenance is so painfully disfigured, however surprising
may be the singer’s abilities, the principal pleasure antici-
pated by an audience with impatience, must be the conclu-
sion of the performer’s exertions.
Here again is the beginning of his views on Expres-
sion :
On the subject of expression, I can scarcely find
language sufficiently nervous to impress the singer with a
just sense of this invaluable and soul-exciting charm ; this
mental polish to harmony, which stealing to the inmost
recesses of the heart, fills it with chastened, yet exquisite,
sensations of rapture, such as none but the sensitive can
feel, and none but the sensitive impart.
Judicious expression is the very acme of the art: it
is the charm that leads to the highest estimation of the
singer, the finishing stroke to the works of the painter,
poet, and musician. This excellence may be acquired by
great observation and perseverance, but true expression
can only be the result of natural feeling, the child of innate
sensibility, instructed by the Muses and the Graces ; without
whose aid, the most perfect voice and rapid execution,
though they may astonish for a time, can never reach the
heart. An insipid singer, who has not sufficient judgment
to vary his expression, may with propriety be compared to a
marble statue, the symmetrical proportion of which please
the eye, but, wanting the animation of existence, compel us
to turn, after a while, tired by its inanity, to contemplate a
less beautiful object of life.


Be it remembered, these words were written a hundred
years ago.
One is struck, in turning over the leaves of this book,
at the appositeness of the illustrations given by the
author. He draws on a well stored memory, garnished
by a well read mind. * In his chapter on the swelling
and dying of the voice, Nathan gives no less than two
pages of quotations from Shakespeare, Milton, and
other authors to illustrate his theme. How well they
illustrate let me show by the first quotation. The
subject, as I have stated, was the swelling and dying
of the voice.
Soft as evening dews
Sinks in the heart, and the soul subdues.
Sweet as iEolian sounds, that gently rise,
As blows the fragrant breeze, or languid dies ;
Now tremulously sweet the Zephyr’s wing
Touches with tones of heav’n the trembling string ;
Now gradual swells, as on the distant shore,
At crimson eve, the crested billows roar.
—(Rome, Pt. I, line 344.)
The author is no less happy in emphasizing a point by
an anecdote. He had, for instance, occasion to refer
to Abbot de Baigne, and in a footnote he gives a story of
the Abbot which I am sure fixed his name immovably
in the minds of his readers. Perhaps, as an interlude,
you will allow me to fix the name in your minds.
/
The Abbot de Baigne, a man of great wit, had invented
many things relating to musical instruments ; and being in
the service of the king, was once commanded by him to pro-
cure him harmonious sounds from the cries of hogs, imagin-
ing the thing was absolutely impossible. The Abbot was not
in the least perplexed at such a command, but asked the
king money to perform it, which was immediately delivered
to him, and he effected the most surprising and remarkable
thing that was ever heard. He got together a large quantity of
hogs, all of different ages, and put them into a tent or pavilion


covered with velvet, before which tent there was a wooden
table all painted, and he made an organical instrument,
with a certain number of stops, so contrived that, when he hit
upon those stops, it answered to some spikes, which,
pricking the hogs that stood behind in due order, made
them cry in such harmonious manner that the king and all
the attendants were delighted with it.
With the fame acquired by his production of the
“ Hebrew Melodies ” and his connection with Lord
Byron, Nathan found that the way was open to him to
the operatic stage, and I have unearthed the following
operas which he composed and produced in London.
Part of the music to “ Sweethearts and Wives a
comedy which was staged in 1823, at the Theatre Royal,
Haymarket, was written by Nathan. One of the songs
in this piece, “ Why are you wandering here, I pray ? ”
became very popular and ran into a number of editions.
A comic opera, ** The Alcaid, or the Secrets of
Office,” the libretto of which was written by James
Kenney, was first performed at the Theatre Royal,
Haymarket, on Tuesday, August 10th, 1824.
In 1827, an operatic farce was produced with Nathan
as the composer, called “ The Illustrious Stranger.”
This opera was staged at the Theatre Royal, Drury
Lane.
That Isaac Nathan had a definite standing in the
musical community of his day is demonstrated by his
appearance at Drury Lane, and the fact that such
favourites as Madame Vestris, Miss Paton, Mrs. Geerin,
Mr. Harley, and Messrs. Liston and Braham were
‘associated with his operas and his songs places this
beyond doubt. Not one of the operas has lived, how-
ever, they have gone to join that vast array of musical
ghosts—unwept and unsung.
Judging from an advertisement, Mr. Nathan, in


the late twenties, was in business as a music seller.
At the bottom of a page announcing his works, it is
stated “ The whole of the above compositions may be
had of I. & B. Nathan, at their music warehouse, Mount
House, Assembly Rooms, opposite the Asylum, West-
minster.” In 1835, he appears in a new light. He
gave evidence in a case on behalf of Lady Langford
against her husband, and in a subsequent disagreement
with Lord Langford, Mr. Nathan relates that he was
“compelled to knock his lordship down.” He was
tried in October, 1835, for the heinous offence and
acquitted. lam not surprised in reading this. Isaac
Nathan did everything intensely. When he deals with
a critic it is with no uncertain voice. One who dared
to discover a false accent in one of the Hebrew Melodies
emerges from a deluge as a “grovelling critic,” a
“ rusty brained gentleman,” a “snarling critic,” a
“ self dubbed critic,” and is finally consigned to
oblivion as “ The critique of this long eared gentleman,
so like that specie of animal on which Balaam rode.”
Lord Langford received the equivalent of this translated
into more primitive language.
We now arrive at the period when Isaac Nathan
decided to leave England for Australia, and I am sure
you will ask why a musician with an established repu-
tation should of his own free will embark on such a
venture. I think it necessary to emphasize the words
“of his own free will.” Quite a number of professors
of the arts arrived in Australia in its early days, but
they were unwilling guests—they “left their country
for their country’s good.” Not so with Mr. Nathan,
he made his own choice, and the events which cul-
minated in his departure have an air of mystery and
romance surrounding them.
On March 9th, 1837, he wrote to His Majesty, King
William IV., offering his services to carry out a mission
“ seeking only your Majesty’s Royal promise of protec-


tion and indemnity from expense.” Although Nathan
printed the letter to His Majesty in the “ Southern
Euphrosyne,” a magazine he published in Sydney, he
leaves out all the parts descriptive of the objects of the
mission and replaces them with a series of tantalizing
dots. He states that he does so “ from motives too
pure for Whigs to appreciate.” His offer was accepted,
and he embarked on his quest. Success followed, but
a “ ruinous liability ”of £2326 was incurred. The King
died, however, before Mr. Nathan could present the
result of his labours, and on November 29th, 1837, he
handed to the Duke of Sussex the documents in the case.
The receipt he received gives us an inkling as to the
purpose of the mission. It is therein stated that “ Mr.
Nathan stating his decided feeling that such documents
might, in improper hands (such as they have been in
hithertofore) be the cause of much mischief.” Mr.
Nathan endeavoured after delivery of the documents
to recover the £2326 he had become responsible for.
We cannot follow him in his innumerable interviews
and communications with the members of the Melbourne
Government, but all that he could recover was £326.
This was in 1839, two years after the expense was
incurred. In 1840, Mr. Nathan, in a letter to the
“ Sunday Times,” ventilated his grievances, then, as
he says, “After this letter appeared in print, we became
so annoyed and harassed by our creditors that we
sacrificed what little property we possessed, discharged
as many claims as possible, and quitted England for
Sydney, where we have resided for nearly eight years,
the victims of Loyalty, prosecuting our profession
among a depressed people, and in consequence, without
that success which our professional standing would
otherwise have commanded.” Mr. Nathan arrived in
Melbourne on February sth, 1841, where he gave some
concerts prior to his departure for Sydney. While in
Sydney, he had five hundred copies of a memorial


printed which he sent off to England for presentation
to both Houses of Parliament, but the circulars, he says,
by “ some hobgoblin or hocus pocus freak ” vanished
from the Customs House and never reached their
destination.
This then, is how Sydney came by her first resident
musician of any standing, and Sydney has reason to
be grateful that His Majesty William IV. ardently
desired certain documents and that the Melbourne
administration refused to honour His Majesty’s promise.
But for Mr. Nathan it must have been a most unwelcome
change. He says that he exercised his profession
amongst a “ depressed people,” and it was a fit adjec-
tive to use. The Colony in 1841 was still in the throes
of convictism, and in the early years of the forties it
passed through a financial depression which swamped
any interest in such unfinancial things as the arts.
But our subject was not of the type to be suppressed
by circumstances, he rode over them. As an illustra-
tion of his indomitable character and of the difficulties
faced by our pioneer, let me quote from an introduction
he wrote to one of his pieces published in Sydney.
“ The most High and Wonderful Geometrician of the
Universe,” he says, ‘‘has in His infinite mercy and
goodness granted me that health and strength which
enables me to stand over my letterpress and music
fount, nightly and daily, week after week, for at least
twenty hours out of every four and twenty, setting up
type for the whole of my musical works, with my own
fingers, thus doing the duty of compositor and composer.
Worthy critic, I have not, for the last five and forty years
of my life, taken more than two hours sleep out of the
24 hours of each day, nor do I desire more. I drink
two gallons of water daily— not after the fashion of
‘ Mynheer Van Dunk ’—but in its perfect purity : I
find, however, that my memory at three score and ten
is not so good as ‘ it used to was ’ [then follow direc-


tions as to adding the time to a previous piece]—“ and
kindly bear in mind that I work as a compositor, not
from choice, but from necessity—to satisfy the vulgar
inward cravings of bairns who are still unprovided for—
strange as it may appear, among the many first rate
printers in Sydney, there is not one of them can set up
music type.”
Surely a man who could survive twenty hours*
work, with two hours sleep and two gallons of water
“ pure et simple,” per day, deserves a niche in the hall
of fame.
Soon after his landing in Sydney, Mr. Nathan was
invited by the clergy of St. Mary’s Cathedral to give an
Oratorio on the occasion of the opening of the fine organ
in that building. He has left us a humorous account
of the occasion. “In the selection of music on that
occasion,” he writes, “ were performed two beautiful
fugues, one from Beethoven’s Mass in C, and the other
from Mozart’s 12th Mass. One part of the audience,
who had only been accustomed to listen to simple
melody, on hearing these scientific compositions,
looked at each other with interesting wry faces, such as
sucking babes make on the first taste of an olive.
Another part of the assembly whispered aloud, in the
seeming agony of those convulsed with certain symp-
toms of cholera. ‘There, do you hear, they are all
behind—they can’t keep together ; how they are scam-
pering after each other —they are no musicians—they
know nothing of time. Can he be Nathan, the com-
poser of the Hebrew Melodies, Lord Byron’s protege
and friend ? No ! He is no more that man than he is
Nathan the Prophet.’ They * looked unutterable
things,’ and judging from their looks, seemed to say,
‘ Why are you wandering here, I pray.’ Since the
epoch of doubt and suspicion, my orchestral arrange-
ment, extemporaneous performances on the organ—


the thirst for good music inspired by the constant
introduction of works from classical authors —the
variety of music composed in this Colony—together
with the number of musicians made^—and voices culti-
vated—and a few other striking coincidences of incon-
trovertible stubbornness concomitant with these
efforts, all combine to identify me, as being no other
person than myself, the acknowledged author of ‘ Dicky
Dolus,’ ‘Billy Lackaday,’ ‘ Skippity whippity nippity
hop,’ and a few other trifling productions.” As illus-
trating the low ebb of musical tide in Australia, when
Mr. Nathan arrived, he relates that Mr.Leggatt, a first
rate oboe and clarionet performer and the only musician
in Sydney who was sufficiently versed in the theory of
music to arrange orchestral parts correctly, and who
had been military bandmaster for forty years, had re-
ceived so little encouragement in his profession that he
had been compelled to turn publican.
Mr. Nathan lost no time in continuing the musical
education of Sydney, and in teaching the citizens to
appreciate the taste of the musical olive. He formed
two musical societies, known as St. Mary’s and St.
James’ Choral Societies, and on May 27th, 1842, he gave
a madrigal concert in the hall of the present Grammar
School. At this concert, Nathan’s composition of
* t Koorinda Braia ” was first performed. This was the
first of the aboriginal melodies which Nathan has
preserved for us. A number of these airs were har-
monised by him and thereby preserved from oblivion.
Speaking from an antiquarian point of view, this was a
most useful service. “ Nations write their autobio-
graphies,” it has been said, “ in three manuscripts—
the book of their deeds, the book of their words, and the
book of their art.” Some philologist of to morrow
might even murmur, as he chanced upon some illu-
minating aboriginal word in these airs—


All the charm of all the Muses
Often flowering in a lonely word.
In describing the “ Koorinda Braia,” Nathan
writes that it is a song of rejoicing, sung at the cor-
robories, “ their mode of singing this and all their
native strains,” he says, “ whether the subject be plain-
tive or cheerful, is somewhat singular Before
they commence ‘ Koorinda Braia,’ which is in 2/4 time,
they first (by striking two pieces of stick against each
other) beat two or three bars in perfect measure to
triple time, seemingly as if trying to excite inspiration ;
they then continue beating and marking the time and
rhythm, with accuracy not to be surpassed by the best
musicians at the Italian Opera, of the melody which is
sung with equal correctness, repeating the song several
times; each repetition with increased energy and
animated gestures—until the singers become com-
pletely exhausted by their enthusiasm. It is perfectly
ludicrous to see, as we have seen, one of these wild
aboriginal music directors or time keepers, with all
the grimace, gestures, and consequence of a connoisseur,
stop his sable faced singers and compel them to re-
commence their song—at the slightest innovation or
defect of time, rhythm or accent.”
Mr. Nathan had a pleasant custom of prefixing a
disquisition to his published pieces. Speaking as a
historian, this is a most commendable practice and, I
think, as musicians, you would not be unmindful if
Beethoven or Mozart or Bach had prefaced their works
in the same manner. An unusually long preface ac-
companied “ The Aboriginal Father, a Native Song of
the Maneroo Tribe,” and I propose to quote this in
full, illustrating as it does what I have just said as to
the importance of preserving these lays, and I think


you will find enough humour in it and a connection
with Handel, which will prevent the quotation from
becoming tedious :
THE ABORIGINAL FATHER.
A Native Song of the Maneroo Tribe.
Versified from the original words by Mrs. E. K. Dunlop.
The Melody, as sung by the Aborigines, put
into rhythm, and harmonized with appropriate
symphonies and accompaniments and respect-
fully inscribed to
THE LADY MAYORESS
Isaac Nathan.
On my arrival in Australia, I felt anxious for the honour,
pride and glory of musical tradition to make myself ac-
quainted with the characteristic peculiarities of the native
Aboriginal airs. I was favoured with a lithographic copy
of this beautifully pathetic melody, so deformed and muti-
lated by false rhythm, so disguised in complete masquerade,
by false basses and false harmony, that I cast it from me
with no small share of regret the poor chance thus afforded
me of adding anything in favour of the claim of the Aborigines
to the pages of musical history. My astonishment, however,
a short time afterwards was only equalled by the delight I
experienced at hearing the same melody sung in all its
genuine purity and simplicity, by one of the Maneroo tribe.
I at once discovered the key to its latent rhythm and excel-
lent scope for good basses and rich transitions and pro-
gressions of harmony.
There is in the first bars of this melody, so striking an
affinity to one of Handel’s compositions, that those who are
acquainted with the works of that great master might find
difficulty in divesting themselves of the belief, that the
Aborigines had been guilty of piracy. Sceptics, on that
point may, however, remove all doubt from their minds,
when they reflect on the little probability of any of these
sable-faced gentlemen ever having graced Drury Lane or
Covent Garden, by the sunshine of their polished counten-
ances, to Witness the performance of Handel’s Oratorios.
I have in early life read of a Gruntling (in company with its
accomplished mamma) who, like Selwyn in-search of a
daughter, or Japhet in search of a father, flew with all the


epicurean taste of a gourmand, across the Atlantic, after
the more fascinating allurements of the Calipash and Calipee
—and we have all been made acquainted with the full par-
ticulars of Mahomet’s very interesting journey to Heaven
on his ass (Ali Borak), but as we have no authenticated
record of either the Loobras or Gins of the aborigines taking
flight to England for the purpose of engaging composers,
and selecting sacred music from the works of Handel
for their Antipodal words, we must give them credit for
originality and prevent hostile proceedings in the Court of
Chancery, against them—by way of an injunction for their
seeming infringement of the Laws of Copyright. As to the
affinity of the four bars alluded to, to Handel’s song, we
must exclaim with Bowdich—that there can be no stronger
proof of the musical powers of these beings—nor of the nature
of Handel’s compositions. For the satisfaction of the
curious I take leave to subjoin the following quotation from
Bowdich’s Mission to Ashanti—-(page 451) ;
After giving an account of the musical powers of a white
negro' from the interior country of Imbekee— describing
his person—his harp, &c.—he says : “ The Negro sat on a
stool, supporting his harp on his knee and shoulder when he
proceeded to tune it with great nicety : his hands appeared
to wander among the strings, until he performed a running
accompaniment to extraordinary vociferations. At times
one deep and hollow note burst forth and became broken ;
presently he looked up, pursuing all the actions of a maniac ;
and whilst the one hand continued playing, he rung forth
a peal which vibrated on the ear long after it was produced.
He became silent, the running accompaniment revived again
as a prelude to loud recitative uttered with the greatest
volubility, and ending on one word, on which he ascended
and descended far beyond the extent (in pitch) of his harp,
with the most beautiful precision. Sometimes he became
more collected and a mournful air succeeded the recitative
without the least connection and he would again burst
out with the whole force of his powerful voice in the notes
of the Hallelujah Chorus of Handel. To meet with this
chorus in the wilds of Africa, and from such a being, had an
effect I can scarcely describe. I was lost in astonishment
at the coincidence ; there could be no stronger proof of the
nature of Handel, nor of the powers of the Negro. I natur-
ally inquired if this man was in his sane senses and the
reply was, he was always rational but when he played, at


which time he invariably used the same gestures and
evinced the same incoherency.”
Loobra—A girl.
Gin—A wife.
I. Nathan.
Mr. Nathan’s activities as a composer did not end
with his aboriginal airs. During the rest of his life in
Sydney, a constant stream of music poured from him.
The fifty-eighth Anniversary of the Colony, in 1846,
provided him with inspiration for “ Currency Lasses—
a song inscribed with the utmost devotion and respect
to the Fair Sex of Australia,” while the inauguration
of the City Council, in 1842, called forth “Australia—
the wide and free—as sung at the great Civic Dinner,
December 21st, 1842.”
In 1845, the fate of Leichhardt, the explorer, then
on an expedition to Port Essington, was unknown, but
it was believed that he had perished. Lieut. Robert
Lynd, the barrack master at Sydney, composed an ode
on “ Leichhardt’s Grave,” which Nathan set to music,
but the explorer confounded his mourners by arriving
in Sydney soon after the ode was sung, and I have little
doubt relished the opportunity of listening to his own
funeral elegy. Nothing daunted, Mr. Nathan promptly
produced “ The Greeting Home Again—a paean on
Leichhardt’s Return.”
Historically speaking, the most interesting portion
of Mr. Nathan’s work in Sydney was the production of
the opera “ Don John of Austria,” which has the honour
of being the first opera, written, composed and per-
formed in Australia. This interesting event took place
at the Victoria Theatre, Pitt Street, on Monday, May
3rd, 1847, “to an elegantly crowded and delighted
audience ” as the composer modestly records. The
production was under the direction of the composer
“ who (I again quote Mr. Nathan) through the liberality
of the spirited proprietors, Messrs. Wyatt and Knight,
was not suffered to die of hunger in the lobby of the


Theatre, like the great Athenian author during the
representation of his labours.” The “ Sydney Morning
Herald ” waited until the following Saturday to deliver
itself of a criticism of the work. “We refrained,” the
critic writes, “ from giving an earlier notice of this
production, as we were unwilling to form an opinion
amidst the mistakes and confusion inseparable from
first performances.” The play was received with
“ decided approbation.” The plot, according to the
critic, “ is somewhat tame and gloomy and wants re-
lief ; there is no counterplot, nor are there any striking
dramatic effects ” and sums the opera up by declaring
that there are several pretty songs in the opera which
are certain to become favourites, but, on the whole, the
music is “ much more adapted to the drawing room
than the stage.”
Another operatic drama composed in Sydney was
“Merry Freaks in Troublous Times—an historical
operatic drama in two acts.” The libretto was written
by Charles Nagel, Esquire. It deals with the time of
Charles 11., and according to the preface to the pub-
lished work exhibits that merry monarch as “ not so
‘ basefully ungrateful ’ as he has been represented.”
The opera was written about 1845, but the complete
score was not published until 1851. So far as I can
discover, the work was not presented on the stage.
There are other aspects of Mr. Nathan which I could
present to you, as for instance, his facetiousness, a
sample of which is found in his little song called
“Humbug,” which he directed should be “Executed
by amateurs,” and that it was “ composed and inscribed
to all Professors of the Art,” but I must pass on to the
end of his career. Like Mr. Nathan’s life generally,
his ending was out of the ordinary. Sydney in 1864
possessed a horse tramway, which ran from Circular
Quay to the Railway, along Pitt Street. On the after-
noon of January 15th, 1864, Mr. Nathan alighted from
the tram at the corner of Goulburn Street, with the


intention of reaching his home at 442 Pitt Street, but
before he could get clear of the rails, the tram started
and Mr. Nathan was crushed to death beneath the wheels.
Mr. Nathan was married twice. His first wife was
Eliza Worthington, whom he married in 1812. Miss
Worthington was an Irish authoress and had written
several books. His second wife was Henrietta Buckley,
whom he married in 1826, in Bristol, England. Two
daughters of Mr. Nathan are still alive—Miss Zillah
Nathan and Mrs. Walter Fell. His descendants,
including the late Dr. Charles Nathan, the well known
surgeon, the late Alfred Nathan, and Henry Lynd Nathan,
and Lady MacLaurin, have by virtue of their reputation
as good citizens, added lustre to the name of Nathan.
To two of his grandsons, Messrs. E. A. and V. V. Nathan,
I am greatly indebted for assistance in gathering
material for this paper.
It is difficult with this space of time to assess the
influence of Isaac Nathan upon the musical life of
Australia. What we do know is that he came to this
country when the tide of music was at a low ebb ; that
he brought with him a mind well stored in literature
and music, and with a reputation as a composer ; that
in Sydney he gave classical concerts, lectured and
organised musical societies, wrote and composed. As
he writes himself, he induced “ the thirst for good music
inspired by the constant introduction of works from
classical authors ” and having drunk of the Pierian
spring, the people of Sydney would not be content with
the things which pleased them aforetime. The stream
of musical thought has widened since Isaac Nathan’s
day, but we must remember that there would have been
no stream without a source, and the man who dug and
moulded the source in Australia is worthy to be classed
amongst those whom we should honour.
I cannot do better, nor confer more honour on Isaac
Nathan, than by naming him as the “ Verbrugghen
of the ’Forties.”


*
•
A
<
- -
»
■
•
•
■
4




S*wtf ISSAC NATHAN
In a letter to the Editor, Mr. Richard Poul-
ter refers to Isaac Nathan, a musical giant
of the early days, who was mentioned in a
recent “Herald” article. Mr. Poulter, as a
young man, was employed at Grocot’s printing
office in Bathurst-street (between Kent and
Sussex streets), and there met Isaac Nathan.
“I soon found ou,” writes Mr. Poulter,
“what a clever old gentleman Mr. Nathan
was, for he not only composed good songs, but
set them up in music type. Two of the
songs were the ‘Land of Gold’ and ‘Our Aus-
tralian Christmas.’ I still sing the latter
song when the season comes along. The
poor old composer was killed by the first
tram that ran in Pitt-street.”
