

ISLES OE THE PACIFIC.
ACCOUNT
OF THE
MELANESIAN MISSION
AND OE THE
WBECK OF THE MISSION YESSEI;
fire gisjjttp o,f |l,eto Manfc's Btnmx
ON THE CONSECRATION OF THE REV. J. C. PATTESON, M.A.,
IN ST. PAUL’S CHURCH, AUCKLAND, N.Z.;
WITH A LETTER FROM THE MISSIONARY BISHOP.
MELBOURNE;
PUBLISHED BY SAMUEL MULLEN, 55 COLLINS STREET EAST.


N.B.—The whole of the proceeds arising from the sale of this compilation
will be handed over to the Hon. Treasurer of the Church Missionary Society
of the Diocese of Melbourne, for the purposes of the Melanesian Mission.
Donations and Subscriptions will be thankfully received by the Hon.
Treasurer, Mr. E. Grice, and by the Eev. E. B. Dickinson, the Hon. Secre-
tary of the said Society, and also by the Union Bank of Australia,
Melbourne, and its Branch Banks throughout Victoria.


Wl5
MELANESIAN MISSION.*
The object of this Mission is to carry the knowledge of the gospel to
the heathen islands of the South Pacific, and specially to those groups
which lie in a north-westerly direction from New Zealand. Melanesia means
‘ ‘ islands of black people this name, therefore, is very appropriate, as the
natives of these western islands are much darker in colour than the Poly-
nesian race.
In Eastern Polynesia there seems to be but one language, with many
very distinct dialects—one of these is spoken by the New Zealanders ; but
in Melanesia the very structure of the language is often different, and
several distinct dialects are sometimes found on the same island.
Melanesia comprise the Loyalty, Bank’s, and Solomon Islands, the
New Hebrides, and the Santa Cruz, and many other smaller groups. Many
of the islands are of large size and thickly populated.
The Bishop of New Zealand paid his first missionary visits to these
islands many years ago in the Undine, a small schooner of 21 tons ; and in
1849 the first Melanesian scholars were brought to New Zealand. At that
time but little had been done in the way of missionary work in those west-
ern islands ; some of them had been visited, indeed, by the martyr
missionary John Williams, who perished in his Master’s service on Eromango ;
and native teachers of the London Society had been sent to the Loyalty
Islands, and to some of the Southern New Hebrides, but few, if any, had
as yet received their teaching. One of the first to accept Christianity on
the Loyalty Islands was a young man named Siapo, of Nengone; he ac-
companied the Bishop three times to New Zealand, and, had he lived, he
would before this have been ordained as missionary to his own people.
Many of those who then knew him are now most useful themselves as
teachers, and they have often spoken of the steadiness and courage with
which he persevered in acting up to what he had been taught in New Zea-
land, despite the mockery of his countrymen and the threats of the chief,
until he became the means, under God, of converting many of his country-
men to the new faith.
* This account of the Mission, from the pen of one of its active supporters, has
already been published in the New Zealand papers for general information.


In 1851, the Bishops of New Zealand and Newcastle together visited
many of the Melanesian-islands in the Border Maid, which had been pur-
chased for this mission by its friends in Sydney and elsewhere. This was
one of the voyages in which the Bishop nearly lost his life. He and his
boat’s crew were attacked by the natives at Mallicolo, when getting water,
and but for the courage of the Bishop, who bade all walk straight on
through the crowd which had assembled on the beach to prevent their re-
turn to the boat, the whole party would have been put to death by the
natives. The next day the very men who had made this attack were most
friendly, and accounted for their previous ferocity by saying that they had
mistaken the vessel; that another had been there some time before, the
crew of which had ill-treated them, and that they had done this in retalia-
tion, not at first recognising the Bishop. Two lads were brought away from
this place to New Zealand ; but even to this day no teachers have been located
on this large island, and the people continue as much heathens as ever.
In 1852, 27 scholars were brought to the Melanesian School, speaking
seven languages. A large proportion of these were Loyalty islanders, who
had received Christianity, and were most earnest in pressing the Bishop to
send a missionary to their land. Accordingly, the next year, Mr. Nihill
was left on Nengone, one of the islands of this group, by the Bishop. Here
he remained until his death, in 1855, and during that time he translated the
Gospel of St. Mark and other books into the native language, and Chris-
tianity was established over half the island. Nengone is now occupied by
two London Society’s missionaries ; but the untiring labours of Mr. Nihill
among this people will never be forgotten by them, and numbers of his
former scholars are most anxious to imitate his example, and in their turn
carry the Gospel to other lands.
The Bishop went to England this year, so no missionary voyage was
made again until 1856, when he again visited the islands with Mr. Pat-
teson,* in the schooner, the Southern Cross. Thirteen scholars were brought
to New Zealand ; two from Nengone, accompanied by their wives and
children. Four of these were baptised—in one case, a father with his child;
and five Loyalty islanders were confirmed by the Bishop, and admitted to
Holy Communion.
In 1857, a long voyage of more than four months was made to
Melanesia, and more than 70 islands were visited; 33 scholars were obtained
from nine different islands, and speaking eight languages. One of these was
the Regent Chief of Lifu, the largest of the Loyalty Islands, a scholar of
the Bishop in former years ; he was accompanied by his wife to New Zea-
land, and was exceedingly anxious that the Bishop should send a missionary
to his land. Ten Loyalty Islanders arid one lad from San Christoval were
* A son of the Right Honourable Mr. Justice Patteson, and now the Missionary
Bishop of Melanesia.


baptized this summer, and, with one exception, all have conducted them-
selves perfectly well ever since.
The following winter Mr. Patteson stayed behind in Lifu, with a small
party of twelve scholars from the New Hebrides and Solomon Islands.
During this time he translated the Gospel of St. Mark into the Lifu language,
and 3000 copies were printed. In 1858 the Melanesian School numbered 47
scholars, from 11 different islands. The printing press was this year in con-
stant requisition, and books were printed in four Melanesian languages. The
Loyalty Island scholars were several of them very useful this year and the
next as class teachers; but it became more and more evident that the
summer school in New Zealand, to be thoroughly effective and of permanent
advantage to the natives, required to be followed up by teaching and super-
vision on their own island during the winter months, partly because of the
difficulty of ascertaining the real character of a jterson away from his own
land, and entirely in our power, and partly because of the great danger and
temptation to which a person is exposed, going back, half taught, to his own
land, into the midst of heathen customs and practises, and without any
friend to stand by and encourage him.
Accordingly when the scholars of 1860 were taken back to their homes,
Mr. Patteson and a party of teachers with the lads from the more distant
Solomon Islands were left behind in the Bank’s Island, there to carry on
school and missionary work for the four months of winter which would,
elapse before the mission vessel would visit them again. The frame of a
small house had been kindly given by a builder of Auckland, and a boat
was also left with them, to enable them to make missionary visits from
time to time to the neighbouring islands of the group.
The Bank’s Islands are a small group to the north of the New
Hebrides, in latitude about 14° south. The islands are for the most part
fertile, and support a large population ; there is a fine harbour at Varma
Lava, the largest of the group, first discovered by the Bishop in 1857, and
named by him Port Patteson. The natives of this group are very friendly
and confiding, not having yet been much visited by sandal-wood traders.
The Mission Station for the winter was fixed at Amota, about eight miles
from the large harbour. It has a population of 1500. Besides Mr. Pat-
teson there were five teachers (four of them Loyalty islanders who were
working in the Mission, with the hope of being ordained before long), and
the plan was, that each teacher should take a certain number of villages for
school purposes, while Mr. Patteson superintended the whole. Arrived at a
village, the teacher was at once surrounded by the greater part of the
population anxious to see the stranger who had come from beyond the
horizon to their land. After the curiosity of the natives had somewhat
subsided, the card was produced, on which had been printed in large type a
few simple sentences in their language, containing a brief account of the


principal truths of Christianity. This was read over and explained to the
best of the teacher’s power. After the first few times of holding these
open-air schools, the numbers of course fell off, but still in most of the
villages there were some few who came diligently to learn to read, and to
hear some more about Him who came down from Heaven to die for man.
The natives of this group have a most complicated system of religion
of their own. At an early age the males are separated from the females,
and have to pass through many strange ceremonies and perform many
curious rites before they are permitted to eat of the food cooked at the
“ay tapu” or sacred fire in the men’s house. The greater number of New
Zealand scholars, on their return home, went back to their old heathen cus-
toms, and the remainder were compelled by their friends against their wills
to join in them.
They seem to have very little knowledge of a future state ; they speak
of a place called ‘ * Panui, ” to which they believe all spirits go after death,
but they can give no further account of it.
When a person dies, his spirit is supposed to retire within his body.
On the fourth night, it comes fourth, and is driven away by trumpets
sounded over the grave, and in different parts of the village, and on the
next day, the yams, pigs, etc., of the deceased are eaten by his friends and
relatives in the village.
They are very reckless, and when enraged think little of committing
suicide. This is done, on one side of the island, by j limping off the cliff
(200 feet in height at least); a woman did this, a few days before the return
of the vessel, with her child in her arms ; the child was killed, but she was
saved by being caught in the branches of a tree. On the other side, there
are no cliffs, and here the natives usually seek death by swimming out to
sea, but their courage generally cools when they have gone a short distance,
and they either return, or swim across to the next island. One woman
during the stay of the party here actually swam across to the neighbouring
island and back, a distance of 18 miles, in about as many hours.
By the time that the vessel x-eturned, things were looking much more
hopeful. In some villages, the scholars had received rewards of clothing,
and were fast learning to read in their own language, and some few had
joined the teachers with the distinct understanding that they should come
again and again to New Zealand, with the intention of becoming hereafter
teachers to their own people. Three of these are now in New Zealand, and
promise exceedingly well. On 3rd of October, the party bade farewell to
the natives, and proceeded on their voyage towards the Solomon Islands.
Of the results of this, the first stay of teachers up this group, it is at
present difficult to judge accurately. The old religion has evidently received
a great shock, and on the island of Amota at least, fighting has to a great
extent ceased. Even the older men, although they still cling to their old


heathen customs, acknowledge that they cannot long stand before the pure
religion of Christ, and many of the younger people would give them up
altogether, did they dare do so. Should it please God that teachers should
he located next winter in this group, greater visible results may be hoped
for. But it is not in small groups alone that missionaries are needed. The
large islands of the Northern Hebrides, Santa Cruz, and Solomon groups
lie still in heathen darkness. Missionaries from Nova Scotia have for some
time been stationed in the Southern New Hebrides, and God has greatly
blessed their labours. On Aneiteum there is scarcely a single heathen left,
while on Eromango the very man who killed John Williams is new under
Christian instruction.
Only 16 scholars have been brought this year to New Zealand ; the
illness on board of some of the party made it necessary to shorten the voyage
as much as possible. The loss of the Southern Cross also will be a heavy
blow to the finances of the mission, unless she is replaced by its friends.
She was not insured, as the premium demanded on a vessel sailing among
the Coral islands is so great, that by this time she would almost have paid
her original cost. The Melanesians are brought to Kohimarama, a place
admirably suited for the purpose, about six miles from Auckland, and having
a good anchorage opposite for the mission vessel. Stone school buildings
have been erected and paid for through the liberality of Miss Yonge, who
gave the whole proceeds of the “Daisy Chain,” more than £l6OO, for that
purpose. The boys are taught to read both in English and their own lan-
guages, writing, and arithmetic. The afternoon is generally given to
catechetical instruction, to making translations and learning new languages.
The morning and evening prayers are generally in four or five languages,
and a native hymn is sung very nicely by them. Their orderly and reverent
behaviour on these occasions is most pleasant to witness.
In this account the amount of mission work carried on may seem insig-
nificant, but it is the only mission of the Church of England in the whole
Pacific. Besides, though the results have as yet been very small, still a great
pioneering work has been done by the Bishop of New Zealand ; more than
80 islands have been visited, and most friendly relations established on the
great number of them. More than 150 scholars have been to New Zealand
from 23 different islands, and on many of these, were a teacher to be
stationed, he would find these young men ready and willing to co-operate
with him, although perhaps they have not courage to stand alone.
This short outline of the past history of the Melanesian mission will
perhaps be sufficient to show what has been hitherto done, and the need
on the part of all those interested in it, of earnest prayers for its future
success.


The following Extracts from “ The Journal of a Visit to the
Islands, in the Melanesian Schooner the ‘ Southern Cross’
with an Account of the Wreck of that Vessel, published bg
the Rev. B. T. Ashwell, of the Taupiri Mission Station,
Waikato River, New Zealandwill give some idea of the
nature of the work.
“ It will be necessary, in order to have a correct view of tire nature of
tire work among tbe Melanesian Islands, to classify them.
“ First —The dangerous; or where risk is incurred in visiting.
“ Secondly —Those where the natives are in a wild, savage state ; but
who are acquainted with the Mission vessel, and some advance towards a
friendly communication has been made.
“ Thirdly —Those with whom a friendly intercourse has been established;
the parents having committed their children to the Bishop to be taken to
spend the summer months in Hew Zealand for instruction.
. “ My Journal refers more particularly to the last two classes of Islands.
“ With respect to the first class, the manner of visiting is as follows ;
The whale-boat is manned with four good rowers. The Bishop and Rev.
J. C. Patteson keep a good look-out whilst approaching the island, the
natives having previously shewn their willingness for communication by
lighting fires and calling. If, as the boat approaches, a part of them
retire into the bush with their bows and arrows, and send their women and
children away, it is a bad sign—mischief is intended ; —but if all remain
together, the Bishop and Mr. Patteson generally swim through the surf to
the beach, leaving the boat at a short distance—the risk being lest the
boat touching the shore, the natives might detain it for the sake of the
iron, which they are anxious to obtain. After the party have landed,
they distribute fish-hooks, beads, See., to the chiefs, exchange names,
write them down, &c. After staying a short time, they swim back to the
boat: thus an intercourse is begun. These preliminary visits are some-
times perilous. I know of two instances in which they were shot at—one
at Santa Maria, the other at Mallicollo, —but a kind Providence has
always kept them from harm.
“ The second class, some of which I have visited, are to be approached
with caution. But very little danger is incurred, although the natives are
wild—cannibals—and mostly fighting with one another. They know the
Mission vessel and that Pisopi (i. e. Bishop) is their friend.
“ The third class are those friendly, which can be visited at any time,
and are prepared for Missionaries. In the preceding voyage above sixty
islands were visited by the Bishop and Mr. Patteson, and about forty Me-
lanesian scholars were brought to the Institution at Kohimarama, near
Auckland, for the summer months.
“ I now proceed with my Journal.
April 28th, 1860. —After the Bishop had commended ns to the protecting
care of our Heavenly Father, we went from the chapel to the schooner, the
Southern Cross, a vessel of about seventy tons, admirably fitted up for the
.boys. Our party consisted of the Rev. J. C. Patteson, Messrs. Kerr and
Dudley, members of the mission, myself, New Zealand Native Teacher,
school-boy from my station, and thirty-seven Melanesian scholars, viz., six
from Solomon Isles, twenty-one from Banks’ Isles, four from Loyalty Island,
six from New Hebrides.
“ April 29 th, Sunday. —After service on board, we lost sight of the
shores of New Zealand at Cape Brett. The wind increased to a gale. All
the boys wei’e very sick ; but each had his hammock and many comforts on


board. The gale continued a whole week, and we were obliged to lie-to
with close-reefed sails; it was not till
“ May Ith.— That the merry laugh of the Melanesian boys was heard,
and that they again ventured on deck. During this gale the sea was run-
ning very high, and as I observed an expression of fear on the face of the
New Zealand teacher, I said to him “Nana te‘ moana” (“the sea is His”).
These three words were of great comfort during our fearful shipwreck.
With regard to the Melanesians, I must say I never met with a more cheer-
ful, good-tempered, happy set of boys; although from several Islands, each
of a different language, there was no quarrelling as among English boys.
1 heir love to their teachers is quite remarkable: I think they would do
anything for Mr. Patteson, who speaks the language of nearly all of them.
“On May 11th, we fell in with the S. E. trades, and in the evening
were 22° 13' E., long. 168° 56', and on Saturday,
“ May 12th, we were off Nengone, one of the coral islands of the Loyalty
Group, where we landed at 8 a.m., and proceeded immediately to the
Mission station of the Rev. Mr. Creagh, of the London Missionary Society.
* * * * I was much pleased with the congregation here on the Sunday :
between 400 and 600 natives were assembled in the chapel, all clothed, and
during service the greatest attention prevailed; the singing was excellent,
and my hearty was filled with gratitude to God, while hearing these so lately
heathen, singing the praises of the Triune Jehovah. After service we ac-
companied Mr. and Mrs. Creagh to their hospitable home. Whilst con-
versing on the nature of the work, I observed that the whole weight of the
service rested on the missionary, which must be very fatiguing, whilst,
among the New Zealanders, a part was borne by them, and they enjoyed the’
responses. My Christian friends thought with me that responses would en-
liven the services, and were better adapted for converts from heathenism.
We enjoyed social prayer and communion with each other in a strange land,
and at the request of my Christian brother, I told 600 natives of Nengone
what God had done for New Zealand, he interpreting for me. They were
exceedingly interested, and on our leaving we found piled-up presents of
yams, taro, cocoa-nuts, &c. Being Sunday we did not like to take them,
but left them for the Native teachers of the Island, who took them away
on the following morning. While returning to our vessel more than 500
natives lined the beach, crying “Aloha/ aloha!” (i. e. “Love! love!”)
which is also the meaning of the New Zealand aroha. The Raratonga
teachers had taught the Nengonese this mode of salutation. The New
Zealand and Raratonga languages are so similar that the New Zealand
teacher could talk with Mrs. Creagh, who was a Miss Bugacott, from Rara-
tonga. What struck me was the great difference at once discernible in the
heathen and Christian natives as they stood together; the former naked,
with painted bodies, and weapons in their hands ; the latter clothed, and
the countenance altogether different. It is most remarkable how the re-
ception of the Gospel changes and softens a fierce and savage expression.
This beautiful coral Island is considered healthy : groves of cocoa-nut and
other tropical trees render the scenery good, but it is tame when compared
with the New Hebrides and Banks’ Isles. Temperature about 74° Earn. ;
length of island, about 20 miles ; breadth, 10 miles; population, between
3000 and 4000, two-thirds of whom are Christians. There are eleven whites
on the island besides the missionaries. We said farewell to our kind friends
and sailed for Lifu Island, about 60 miles north of Nengone, where Christi-
anity has made great progress. It is to be regretted that tire French claim
these Loyalty Islands as appendages to New Caledonia, and have sent a
Romish priest to Lifu, quite against the consent of the majority of the
people. The wind was contrary, and blowing a gale; we could not reach
the isle, although three attempts were made ; therefore, to the regret of all,
we were obliged to continue our course without visiting it. We called,
however, at the beautiful island Toka, 20 miles from Nengone. Mr. Patteson
was anxious to seek a stray sheep, one of the Melanesian scholars, a young
man who had not been going on satisfactorily ; the lost one was found, and


accompanied us to the vessel. Most of the Natives of this Island are well
disposed to Christianity. The principal chief of Lifu, “ John Cho,” had
been to New Zealand with the Bishop, who baptised him there as well as
the daughter of the principal chief of Toka, to whom he was married after
their baptism. This union strengthened Christianity both at Lifu and Toka,
and John is using his influence to keep the people from Popery. We now
sailed for Mai (or the Three Hills), an Island dreaded by the sandal-wood
traders, but where the Mission vessel is always most warmly welcomed, and
where the Bishop is anxious to form a Station which shall take in many of
the neighbouring Isles.
“ May 16th. —Trade winds light; thermometer 80°. S. Latitude 20° 34'
E. Longitude 167° 50'. Lightning vivid.
“ May 17th. —Instead of the trades we had a strong westerly wind.
Sighted Erromanga, where the Missionary Williams was murdered. We
also passed the S.W. coast of Eate, or Sandwich Island, which has a bad
name, nevertheless two Samoan teachers are living here. This beautiful
Island is richly wooded to the summit of its lofty hills, which are from 2000
to 3000 feet in height. Eearful atrocities have been committed here by the
sandal-wood traders, one of which I will mention :—After purchasing a cargo
of sandal-wood and getting it conveyed to the vessel, they sailed away with-
out paying the Natives, consequently when another vessel visited the Island
one of their men was murdered by the Natives. To revenge this, several
vessels joined their crews, and after firing upon the Natives, followed them
to a cave where they had taken refuge with their women and children.
These white savages piled up brushwood at the mouth of the cave, fired it
and smothered them all. Can we wonder that they are not willing to re-
ceive the white Missionary. The Bishop has landed here several times.
In the evening we reached Mai, where we had to leave four Melanesian
boys. When we landed, the cry was, “the vessel of Pisopa, and our
children.” We had a most hearty welcome, the excitement was very great,
running from the villages, assembling to see their children and the white
Missionaries, bringing yams, cocoa-nuts, &e. At last the Chief, by" smacking
his lips, enforced silence, and Mr. Patteson, in their own language, pointed
to the “ Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world.” Mr. Dudley,
who well understands the language of Mai, also addressed them; the greatest
silence and attention prevailed, and when we all knelt in prayer with these
poor heathen, who, for the first time, bent the knee to the true God, i could
say, “My soul doth magnify the Lord and my spirit hath rejoiced in God
my Saviour;” it was an earnest that these Isles should seethe “salvation
of our God.” The Natives were anxious that one of us should remain with
them, and when we told them that possibly a Mission Station might be esta-
blished among them, they were much pleased. At 11 p.m. we reached our
vess.el; I felt thankful for this happy day.
“ May 19th. —Sunday services on board, with Europeans and Melane-
sians ; our little schooner ran close to the shore of Tasiko, where, with a glass,
we counted more than 400 natives, in the short space of about half a mile,
who were calling us to visit them, but it being Sunday the boat was not
lowered, as no one could speak their language, and we feared least any might
be tempted to trade on the Sabbath. Erom Tasiko we crossed to Ambrim
(where there is an active volcano), Lupavi, Whitsuntide, and Aurora,
islands of from 20 to 30 miles in length. Of the scenery I can only say the
grandeur and beauty of creative goodness here is overpowering. Never
did I witness elsewhere such a rich verdure, very much superior to Sierra
Leone, although its scenery is grand: the most beautiful parts of New
Zealand are tame when compared with these splendid islands ; the rugged
broken character of Whitsuntide and Aurora, with their immense chasms,
so densely wooded that no naked rock nor spot of earth can be seen, groves
of lofty cocoa-nuts, the beautiful bread-fruit tree, the jack-fruit, and palms,
lofty and huge banians forty yards in circumference, was so magnificent a
sight, that we felt sad to think that “ only man was vile,” but when once
the Gospel has won its way, how wonderful the change. * * * * *


“ May 23 rd. —In the morning we landed at the north end of Aurora, and
left two of the Melanesian boys. Mr. Patteson addressed the Natives, all
of whom were armed, and looked very wild; they were attentive. At
4 p.m. we drew near Mara Lava, an island about 12 miles in circumference,
with a population of 600 ; it consists of a large volcanic hill about 1800 feet
above the sea, very beautiful; here we landed two other of the scholars,
and again Mr. Patteson addressed the Natives, speaking of the love of
Christ, and shewing them that war and bloodshed was wrong : this they all
acknowledged ; every man and boy was armed with bow and arrow ; they
were rather noisy and clamorous, but when Mr. Patteson addressed them,
quite quiet. They wanted the vessel to go to Santa Maria in search of a
boy, whom some sandal-wood dealer had carried away and left there. They
feared he had been murdered and eaten; the poor father was very earnest in
his entreaties.
“ May 24th. —At G a.m. we came to the extent of our voyage, Amota, a
little Paradise, where the first Mission Station in Banks’ Islands was formed ;
about 8 a.m. we landed; the Natives shewed great joy at seeing Mr. Patteson,
and when we began to land the boards for the Mission House, and they
knew that he and Mr. Dudley would remain with them, their joy increased ;
some carried the boards from the vessel, and others brought food of all
sorts, bread fruit, cocoas, yams, &c., for which they would not receive any
payment. When the house was landed, we sailed over to Vanno Lava, a
large and beautiful island only eight miles distant, where the Bishop dis-
covered a short time ago a splendid harbour, which he named Port Patteson;
here we let go our anchor. The scenery most grand, hills 2000 feet high
sending forth volumes of smoke from hot springs at their summit, the sides
richly clothed with verdure ; two rivers run into the harbour, and a sandy
beach nearly surrounds it. We filled our water-casks, these friendly Natives
standing anxious to assist. These, and those of Amota, were the only
unarmed Natives which we saw. A way for the Gospel has been prepared
under God, by our Missionary Bishop; and a great work commenced. The
people of Vanno Lava were most anxious that one of us should remain with
them, and each was invited. This island is decidedly unhealthy. Elephant-
iasis is very prevalent; there are also many Albinoes. Miasma prevails
during the rains when the low lands are flooded. Thermometer in the shade
85°. On Whitsunday we partook of the Lord’s Supper on board the
schooner, after which we all accompanied Mr Patteson to the villages on the
beach, where he preached to and catechised the Natives, inviting them also
to ask questions; all seemed interested, and again entreated for a Missionary.
I believe we all prayed most earnestly that a Pentecostal blessing might be
given to these islands ; this was a day to be remembered, and which we
closed with social prayer.
“ Whit Monday. —Messrs. Patteson and Dudley crossed in a whaleboat
to Amota to see to the erection of the house. The Natives were very
anxious for barter, crying “ Talle, Talle ” (i.e., Iron, Iron) ; another cry was
“ Sim, Sim,'" (i.e., Empty Bottles,) which they break up and use for shaving.
They brought cocoa-nuts, yams, coral, bows and arrows, &c,, &c., for sale.
The wind springing up, but being light and against us, we had to beat, and
it was evening before we could near Amota.
“ Tuesday, we landed ; the house was nearly finished ; the Natives had
unroofed some of their own houses in order that the Mission house might
soon be covered ; about 100 of them were at work. I walked alone to
several villages, and everywhere received a welcome and their fruits offered
me. This lovely island is equal to Aurora in beauty; from the Mission
Station you see five islands —Vanna Lava, Bligh’s Island, Vanucollo, Santa
Maria, and Mara Lava ; the site of the Mission is well chosen, it is sur-
rounded by bread-fruit, cocoa, and jack-trees, and a huge banian, which we
measured was forty-five yards in circumference ; a most lovely spot and well
shaded. Thus I had the privilege of seeing the first Mission station in
Banks’ Island commenced. In the evening, Mr. Patteson preached to the
people, who were very attentive. *****


“ After mutual prayer, commending one another to the care of God, we
said farewell to our Christian brethren. More than half of the Melanesian
boys had been restored to their respective islands; the remainder stayed with
Mr. Patteson at Amota, as the vessel will not go to the Solomon’s Islands
till the next voyage. Our party now consisted of Mr. Kerr, my two Natives,
and myself. Mr. Patteson requested us to call at Erromanga to see if any
of the Scotch Missionaries were in want of anything, or, if out of health,
they were welcome to a passage to New Zealand. The Rev. Mr. Gordon,
of Erromanga, told me how much he and his brethren felt the disinterested
kindness of the Bishop, whom he looked upon as a father in the Gospel.
After several days of light winds it was not till
“ June 6th, Tuesday, that we came in sight of Erromanga, a beautiful
coral isle; we ran along its rugged coast, richly covered with trees, amongst
others the much desired sandal-wood, which has been the source of so much
misery to the poor Natives. ***** We received a most hearty
reception from Mr. Gordon; the hours flew away in social chat and mutual
prayer. My Native Teacher told the Erromangas of the progress of the
Gospel in New Zealand, which interested them much. Mr. Gordon said
that the heathen Priests were doing all they could to oppose them, charging
them with being the authors of the epidemic which had prevailed there so
fearfully, and also at the neighbouring island of Tanna, where the Rev.
Mr. Paton was labouring; he had lost his wife and child about twelve
months ago, and as yet he has had no success to cheer him in his lonely
labours ; the Natives threatened to kill him, nothing softened by the sorrow
which they saw he suffered by his bereavement. The Bishop, in his last
trip, begged him to come to New Zealand for a change, but he declined, as
he said he was getting on with the Tannese language, and he hoped ere long
an impression would be made. He had lately been joined by the Rev.
N. Heutson and wife. Yery different is the account of the work at Aneiteum,
where the Rev. Messrs. Inglis and Geddie are labouring. This island is a
short distance from Tanna, and nearly the whole of the people have received
the Gospel. It was nearly midnight before we parted, being moonlight.
****** We reached the vessel at 2a. m.
“ June Bth. —A strong westerly wind with a high sea, wind fair.
“ June 9th and 10th. —Gale continued. On this day we saw Norfolk
Island, but could not land, as we intended, the surf being too heavy. I felt
much disappointed, having a great desire to see the state of the Pitcairn
Islanders, who have had so much done for them. The gale continuing, we
passed the Island, at 7 p.m.
“ June 1 Mil. —The anniversary of the foundation of the Melanesian
Mission ;we had special prayer for a blessing upon this great work. We
did not forget our friends at Amota.
‘* June 13th, 2 a.m.—Off the Three Kings (New Zealand), nearly a calm.
We thanked God for bringing us again in sight of our adopted land.
“ June 14th. —Yery light wind at 4 p.m., whilst off Wangaroa the wind
changed to N.E. We could not weather Cape Brett; went out to sea, as we
feared being too near the land ;it had now increased to a gale. All felt
dispirited, as we had hoped (8.V.) to have been in Auckland the next day.
Hark tempestuous night, gale very heavy.
“ June 15 ih. —Gale increasing, a very high sea. Our little vessel was
almost under bare poles, rising beautifully to the billows, and shipping but
little water. ******
“June 16th. —Rained in torrents, 4 a.m., which caused the sea to go
down ; and at twelve we were becalmed. 2 p.m. a Northerly breeze sprung
up, and we hoped to be in Auckland on the Monday.
“June nth. —Sunday. * * * * * * At 4.50, we sighted the
Poor Knights, having passed close to leeward of them hauled to S.E., in
order to pass Eastward of the “ Hen and Chickens.” About this time the
wind backed to the N.E., and increased to a gale, with very thick weather
and rain. At 10 p.m., we were surprised by the report of “ land on the lee
bowby press of sail we were providentially enabled to weather a small


islet, which, from the course we had made, we supposed to be the Eastern
Chicken. We now stood on S.B. by S., intending when half way to Cape
Rodney to wear and stand to the Northward, having the harbour of Wan-
garei under our lee, the wind now blowing a violent gale. At 1 a.m. land
on the lee bow. About Patawa river we were to the Northward, the wind
shifting S.E. and blowing with redoubled violence soon after we were round.
In about half an hour we again saw land on the lee bow, the South Head of
Ngunguru bay; standing on we made the Islet at the North Head of
Ngunguru bay, the same Islet we had seen at 10 p.m. ; the weather being
so thick, the hills were not visible. Finding we could not weather that Islet,
the helm was put up to pass to leeward; having again lost sight of land,
thinking we had accomplished our purpose, the ship’s head was brought up
to North ; we then took the ground on what appeared happily to be a spot
somewhat sheltered from the full violence of the sea—the range of our
vision being the end of the breakers. Imagining deep water to be beyond
them, and with’ the rising tide the ship being gradually brought nearer, we
were alarmed lest we should be carried right over and founder in the deep
water beyond, for in less than half an hour the surf had completely filled
the ship, and we were all obliged to take to the rigging, the masts most
providentially not having been cut away, although repeated attempts had
been made to do so. The boats were soon washed away, and with them our
last hopes of getting to the shore, and from 2 a.m. till daylight we remained
at the mast’s head in the most dreadful suspense. As day dawned we dis-
covered we were in a bay, and near the high-water of its low sandy shore,
which the darkness of the gale prevented our seeing; we were also gladdened
by the sight of European houses. By nine o’clock the tide had so far left
us that we were enabled to get a line to the shore ; and through the mercy
of Cod, after seven hours in the rigging, we were all drawn through the
surf safely to land. We received a hearty welcome and every kindness and
assistance from Capt. Stewart and his guests, and the Europeans at
Ngunguru. The gale had now somewhat abated. ***** I have
only to mention a few additional particulars. When the ship struck, all the
seamen cried “We are lost; farewell, Sir.” Mr. Kerr came into the cuddy
and said “we must trust in God, nothing more can be done.” In a quarter
of an hour after striking, the cuddy filled, and we were up to our waists in
water. We now went to the main cabin, which we were soon obliged to
leave, for a sea broke over us, extinguishing the lights and filling the cabin.
We feared being swept off the deck, but went forward and got a little shel-
ter under the lee of the anchor ; we were, however, soon obliged to take to
the rigging. My own mind was calm, much strength and comfort was im-
parted from the hymn,
“ Just as I am without one plea,
But that Thy hloocl was shed for me,
And that Thou hidst me come to Thee,
Oh Lamb of God I come.
Just as I am and waiting not,
To rid my soul of one dark spot,
To Thee whose blood can cleanse each spot,
Oh Lamb of God I come.”
“ This I begged all to use as a prayer, and repeated it aloud, reminding
each one that our time in all probability was short. I was so cold that it
was with difficulty I held on to the rigging ; Mr. Kerr helped me greatly ;
we both felt the privilege of Christian communion, particularly under such
circumstances ; after again speaking to the seamen a silence of three hours
ensued, when I spoke a few encouraging words to my poor Natives. Oh !
how welcome was morning light. Taniora was the first to try to get a rope
on shore, but the drawback from the ebb-tide was so strong that he was
glad to swim back to the wreck. After waiting another hour, the tide had
gone out so far that he, with one of the sailors, again tried and succeeded.
Thus, through the mercy of God, we were all saved. We all knelt down
on the beach and thanked God for our wonderful deliverance.


The Consecration of the Ely. John Coleridge Patteson,
M.A., to the Missionary Bishopric of Melanesia toolc place
at St. Paul's Church, Auckland, on Sunday, Pehruary 21dh,
1861, according to the fallowing JRecord of Consecration;
and the annexed Sermon was preached hy the Bishop oe
New Zealand on the occasion.
RECORD OF CONSECRATION OF THE REV. JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON,
M.A., FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD, TO ACT AS MIS-
SIONARY BISHOP AMONG THE WESTERN ISLANDS OF THE SOUTH
PACIFIC OCEAN.
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME
We, GEORGE AUGUSTUS, by Divine Providence, Bishop and Metro-
politan of New Zealand, send greeting.
Whereas in a Valedictory Letter written by the late William,
by Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, on the
part of the Committee of Bishops appointed to manage the funds
for the endowment of Bishoprics in the Colonies, and bearing
date on the thirtieth day of November, one thousand eight
hundred and forty-one, We were directed not to confine our
views within the limits of the New Zealand Islands, but to regard
the See of New Zealand as the central point of a system extending
its influence in all directions over the islands and coasts of the
Pacific:
And wheeeas divers of the Western Islands of the South.
Pacific Ocean have been visited by us, and for some years past
certain young people of the aboriginal inhabitants have been
brought away to the Islands of New Zealand for education,
whereby the Christian faith is beginning to be known among
them:
And whereas Lands have been bought in these Islands, by
means of funds contributed in England for the endowment of the
Melanesian Mission, and a School-house and other requisite
buildings have been erected in the neighbourhood of Auckland:
Know all Men by these Presents, that we, the said
George Augustus, Bishop and Metropolitan, by and with the
advice of our Suffragans, judging it expedient for the more
effectual prosecution of the aforesaid Mission, that it should be
placed under the charge of a Bishop specially appointed to this
work; and having ascertained that no license or mandate of our
Gracious Sovereign would be needed for the consecration of a


Bishop for the spiritual oversight of countries out of Her
dominions, did admit on Sunday, February 24th, 1861, our
beloved in Christ John Coleridge Patteson, Clerk, Master of
Arts, Fellow of Merton College, Oxford, and heretofore our Mis-
sionary Chaplain, of whose sufficiency in learning, soundness in
the faith, and purity of manners we were well assured, to the
office of Bishop, and did canonically consecrate him publicly in
the Church of St. Paul, Auckland, according to the manner pre-
scribed by the Church of England, the Royal mandate only being
excepted.
In Testimony whereoe we have caused our Episcopal Seal
to be affixed to these presents.
Given at Auckland, Hew Zealand, on the second day of
March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-one, and the twentieth year of our consecration.
G. A. Hew Zealand,
Bishop of Hew Zealand, and Metropolitan.
We, Charles John, Bishop of Wellington, and Edmund,
Bishop of Helson, were present and assisting at the Consecration
above mentioned.
C. J. Wellington.
Edmund Helson,
Which I attest, having been present,
William Bracet,
Hotary Public.


SERMON
PREACHED AT THE CONSECRATION OF THE MISSIONARY BISHOP,
BY GEORGE AUGUSTUS, BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND
AND METROPOLITAN.
Acts I. 24.
And they prayed, and said: Thou, Lord, which Tcnowest the hearts of all
men, shew whether of these two Thou hast chosen.
Ip a reason be asked for the peculiar character of this congre-
gation, it is given in the first words of the text—
THEY PRAYED.
On other occasions the House of God is as free as the air of
Heaven. The sojourner, the wayfaring man, the friendless, the
rich, the poor, the old, the young, the full communicant, and the
proselyte of the gate, all may enter freely through its open doors,
for the Church is the House of Prayer for all people, where every
one may come to cast down his own burden, and to pour out his
soul before the Lord.
But this is a season of special prayer, and of that most solemn
act of prayer which is offered up in the Holy Communion. And
therefore the invitation has gone forth far and wide to all who
have partaken of the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ, to meet the Bishops and Pastors of our Church at the
Lord’s Table, and to pray with us and for us.
We ask for these special prayers in a season of special need,
for the solemnity in which we are engaged is one of fearful re-
sponsibility. We have not come here in a spirit of boasting, but
of fear and trembling. We have not met together to exalt our-
selves above our brethren in Christ, because we are Bishops or
Presbyters or Communicants of the Church: for the day reminds
all Pastors of the Church of him of whom Christ said: “ Have
not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil ?” and the
place reminds us, that it was from that Holy Table that the first
Communicants rose up, one to betray his Lord, one to deny Him,
all to forsake Him.
Was not that a season of fear and trembling, when the eleven
Apostles met in that upper room, in which they all abode after
the Ascension, and continued with one accord in prayer and sup-
plication F Prayer was their comfort even then, though the Holy
Ghost was not yet given. We can well understand why they


prayed. The Bridegroom had departed from them. They were
a hand of mourners. There was Mary the mother of Jesus
weeping for her Son. And there was Mary Magdalene weeping
for her Saviour; and Peter mourning for his denial of his Lord;
and Thomas mourning for his faithlessness; all mourning for the
brother who had fallen from his bishopric and gone to his own
place.
A book was unrolled before them, in which were written
lamentations and mourning and woe. The dark word of prophecy
had been then fulfilled. The Shepherd had been smitten, and the
sheep of the flock had been scattered abroad. One habitation
was desolate, and no man to dwell therein. Each in his own
degree had been offended because of Christ; even that Apostle
who said, “ Though all men shall be offended because of Thee, yet
will I never be offended.” Judas, Peter, all the Apostles, had
stumbled at that stumbling stone : and all this had been foretold
by prophecy as foreordained by God: and yet they could not
excuse themselves, by alleging Ood’s foreknowledge. Their Lord
had said, “ It must needs be that offences come, but woe be to
that man by whom the offence cometh.”
And now to this sorrow for the past was to be added fear for
the future: for this word also of prophecy was to be fulfilled:
“ His bishopric let another take.” Another soldier of the Cross
was to step at once into the place in which he had seen his
comrade fall. There was no special guidance of the Holy Glhost,
as when Paul and Barnabas were separated for the work where-
unto God had called them. All the past was full of bitter proofs
of their own unfitness for their Master’s service. They had not
known their own hearts. They had fancied themselves ready to
go up to Jerusalem, to die with Him : they promised to go with
him to prison and to death; yet they had denied and forsaken
Him. They had not known their own deceitful hearts: how
should they know the hearts of other men? One source of
comfort and of light had been opened to them by their Divine
Master, and to that they resorted. They prayed, and said
“ Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew
whether of these two Thou hast chosen.”
They did not pray alone. The same Blessed Saviour who had
borne their griefs and carried their sorrows, who had prayed for
them in His agony, while they were sleeping, would not forsake
them in their act of prayer. He knew that Satan had desired to
have them, that he might sift them as wheat: and He prayed for
them, that their strength might not fail.
In the power of that intercession, Peter stood up in the midst
of the disciples ; Peter foremost in the blessing, “ Blessed art
thou Simon Barjona,” and foremost also in the offence, “ Get
thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offence unto me.” Had he
forgotten his own bitter tears for his threefold denial, or his
grief at his Lord’s threefold exhortation to him to feed His


sheep p Was his hearing that of the primate of the Apostolic
brotherhood, prond of his own office, and confident in his own
strength ? If he had been righteous in his own eyes, he would
have brought a railing accusation against his brother. But his
words are not of condemnation, but of sorrow. He speaks of
Judas not as a traitor, but as the guide of them that took Jesus.
He does not deny that Judas was an Apostle, but puts it forward
as a sorrowful fact, that he was numbered with them, and had
obtained part of their ministry. In fear and sorrow he recognised
the fulfilment of prophecy in Ids brother’s fall; in fear and hope,
he called upon his brethren to fulfil the same Word of Hod by
appointing another to take part of that ministry and Apostleship
from which Judas by transgression fell.
I have endeavoured to explain the feelings with which the
Apostles must have offered up those fervent prayers at the election
of Matthias, as some guide to our own thoughts and feelings on
the present occasion.
We, too, must come to this work in a spirit of prayer, because
it is to us a work even of greater fear.
I speak first of the Consecrating Bishops.
We are called upon to execute this office of the Apostles, in
an age when the Bridegroom has been taken away, and when all
outward gifts and guidances of the Spirit of Hod have been with-
drawn. We are not like those holy men, who were with the Lord
Jesus “ all the time that he went in and out among them, begin-
ning from the baptism of John, unto the same day that he was
taken up.” We cannot choose from men who have enjoyed the
like privileges as eye-witnesses and ministers of the Word. We
are inferior to them both in respect to the power to choose, and
of the field of choice. Compared with them, we are but “ blind
leaders of the blind.”
And yet the office of the Apostles is laid upon us. They have
long gone to their rest: but the commandment still remains in
force r “Ho ye into all the world and preach the Hospel to every
creature.” Hod neither gave immortality to the Apostles, nor a
sudden spirit of conversion to the world. It is seen, then, to be
the will of Hod, that the fulfilment of prophecy, and of our
Blessed Lord’s commandment, should be a gradual work, to be
carried on by successive generations of the Christian ministry.
Through a hundred steps of spiritual lineage that Apostolic
ministry has been brought down to us. At this distance from
the source of blessing, we fear lest we be found wanting. We
are called upon to exercise the office of Apostles, but without the
special gifts and graces of the Apostolic age. What are we that
we should have power to carry on the Lord’s Word in obedience
to His commandment ?
When we look to the side of prophecy, the thought is no less
fearful. The whole volume of Holy Scripture seems to be unrolled
before us with its warning of woe. “ Woe be to me, if I preach


not the Gospel.” Is the promise yet fulfilled, that in Abraham
and his seed shall all the nations of the earth he blessed F Has
Christ already received all the heathen for His inheritance and
all the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession ? Is there
no wilderness which has still to blossom as the rose ? Ho islands
that still wait for the Lord P Ho kingdoms that must become
His ? Are all idols utterly abolished ? Are there no Gentiles
yet to come to His light; no doves to come hack to the windows
of His ark; no sons to come from far ; no daughters to he
brought to he nursed at His side ? Has His Church been
established in the top of the mountains as a city set upon a
hill?
The vastness of the scope of the prophetic visions at once
humbles and enlarges the mind. “ Thy heart shall fear and he
enlarged ”is God’s promise through Isaiah. However little our
work may he, it is part of that purpose of God which can never
fail. We pray for our little one in fear and humility, and while
we pray it becomes a thousand. It is hut a drop in the ocean,
hut that ocean is the fullness of God.
But when we thus recognize the work as of God alone,
ordained by His determinate counsel and foreknowledge, a new
cause of fear arises, and brings with it a new motive to prayer.
In this work of God, belonging to all eternity, and to the Holy
Catholic Church, are we influenced by any private feelings, or any
personal regard F The charge which St. Paul gives to Timothy,
in words of awful solemnity, “ to lay hands suddenly on no man,”
may well cause much searching of heart. “ I charge thee before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou
observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing
nothing by partiality.” Hoes our own partial love deceive us in
this choice ? We were all trained in the same place of education;
united in the same circle of friends ; in boyhood, in youth, in
manhood, we have shared the same sorrows, and joys, and hopes,
and fears. I received this my son in the Ministry of Christ Jesus
from the hands of a father of whose old age he was the comfort:
he sent him forth without a murmur, nay, rather with joy and
thankfulness, to these distant parts of the earth. He never asked
even to see him again; but gave him up without reserve to the
Lord’s work. Pray, dear brethren, for your Bishops, that our
partial love may not deceive us in this choice, for we cannot so
strive against natural affection as to be quite impartial.
And yet, as standing in the “ presence of God, and of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and of the elect angels,” we solemnly declare
that we are not laying hands suddenly on this dear friend and
brother : so far as we can search our own hearts, and judge of our
own motives, we are doing nothing by partiality. In frequent
conference and in solemn communion, we have spread the matter
before the Lord ; and we have received at least this satisfaction,
that no one single whisper of the voice of conscience within has


warned us to forbear. "We have risen from our prayers more and
more resolved to go forward in the name of God, and in the full
belief that this is indeed His work, and that this is His chosen
servant.
Here again was the need of prayer, that we w r ere left to our
own unassisted judgment. It is true that I had received Com-
mission, now nearly twenty years ago, from the Primate of the
English Church, to regard New Zealand as a fountain to diffuse
the streams of salvation over the coasts and islands of the Pacific
Ocean : and that supplies have been furnished by the Church at
home with no sparing hand to enable me to begin the work. But
in this special act of the consecration of a Missionary Bishop, the
authorities in Church and State at home have advisedly left us to
exercise our own inherent powers; with the kindest expressions
of sympathy with our undertalcing, but with no division of re-
sponsibility. And yet we do not stand alone in the work, for at
this very time the sister Church in the Cape Colony, with the
active support of a former Governor of New Zealand, is sending
out a Missionary Bishop to Central Africa. We too have received
the same encouragement from the Officers of the Crown in New
Zealand, their attestation of the fitness of the person whom we
have chosen, their assurance of the lawfulness of our act. We
have called upon the Laity in all our Churches to come forward,
if they know of any just cause or impediment. The general con-
sent of Church and State, of the Clergy and Laity, both here and
at home, seems to justify our act. I have not heard of one dis-
sentient voice. We humbly trust, that we may go on with this
our work, with a conscience void of offence toward God and
toward man.
Having asked your prayers for us the Consecrating Bishops,
I now ask them for him who is to be consecrated. And these
are the reasons :
Because, like all others of his brethren, he will have care of
many Churches : the stewardship of the Mysteries of Christ: the
guardianship of the purity of His Word: the administration of
godly discipline : the oversight of the flock, which the Son of God
has purchased with His own blood.
But, especially, because he will go forth to sow beside many
waters, to cultivate an un known field, to range from island to
island, himself unknown, and coming in the Name of an unknown
God. He will have to land alone and unarmed among Heathen
tribes, where every man’s hand is against his neighbour ; and bid
them lay down their spears and arrows, and meet him as the
messenger of peace. He will have to persuade them by the
language of signs to give up their children to his care : and while
he teaches them the simplest elements which are taught in our
infant schools, to learn from them a new language for every new
island. Surely then, dear brethren, we must pray earnestly that
this our brother may have a large measure of the Apostolic gifts ; a


power to acquire divers languages ; and also boldness with fervent
zeal constantly to preach the Gospel to all' the nations now to be
committed to his charge. Already sixty islands will come under
his care, and at least one hundred others, stretching westward as
far as New Guinea, are among the number of the islands which
are waiting for the Lord. I can but indicate the outlines of this
great work: your own minds fill up the details, by that lively
Faith, which springs from a hearty acceptance of all the prophecies
and of all the promises of the Bible. It may be that your prayers
will be more earnest for objects which you see as through a glass
darkly ; like those solemn prayers which faithful men offer up in
the darkness of the night to the God who seeth in secret.
One duty yet remains : to commend our dear brother to the
work to which we believe God has called him.
It was the privilege of the Apostles to elect Matthias out of
the number of those “ who had companied with them all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and out among them, beginning from
the baptism of John unto the same day that He was taken up.”
Our privilege, though different in degree, may be the same in kind;
for faith supplies what is denied to sight.
So may every step of thy life, dear brother, be in company
with the Lord Jesus.
May the baptism of John be in thee, to fill thee with that
godly sorrow which worketh repentance not to be repented of:
a foretaste of that comfort which will be given to them that
mourn, by the baptism of the Holy Ghost and of fire.
May Christ be with thee, as a light to lighten the Gentiles ;
may He work out in thee His spiritual miracles: may He through
thee give sight to the blind, to see the glories of the God
invisible : and open the ears of the deaf to hear and receive the
preaching of His word: and loose the tongues of the dumb, to
sing His praise; and raise to new life the dead in trespasses and
May Christ be with you when you go forth in His Name and
for His sake, “ to these poor and needy people ; to those strangers
destitute of help to those mingled races, who still show forth
the curse of Babel, and wait for the coming of another Pentecost;
poor alike in all worldly and spiritual goods, naked to be clothed,
prisoners to be loosed, lepers to be cleansed. To you is commit-
ted Christ’s own Ministry, to seek for His sheep that are dispersed
abroad; to hold up the weak, to heal the sick, to bind up the
broken, to bring again the outcasts, to seek the lost. Your
office is, in the widest sense, to preach the Gospel to the poor.
May Christ be ever with you; may you feel His presence in
the lonely wilderness, on the mountain top, on the troubled sea.
May He go before you, with His fan in His hand, to purge His
floor. Fie will not stay Flis hand, till the Idols are utterly
abolished.
May Christ be ever with thee, to give thee utterance to open


thy mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel.
Dwelling in the midst of a people of unclean lips, you will feel
Him present with you to touch thy lips with a live coal from His
own altar, that many strangers of every race may hear in their
own tongues the wonderful works of God.
_ May Christ be ever with you : may you sorrow with Him in
His agony and be crucified with Him in His death, be buried
with Him in His grave, rise with Him to newness of life, and
ascend with Him in heart to the same place whither He has gone
before, and feel that He ever liveth to make intercession for thee,
“ that thy strength fail not.” Amen.
The following Letter has heen received from the Bishop of
Melanesia, hy a Triend, since his Consecration : —
A uckland, Feb. 6, 1861.
My dear Mr.
You have asked me for some information about the present
circumstances of the Melanesian mission. You are so well acquainted with
the general plan of the work, that you will easily fill up the outline which I
will attempt to draw for you.
The object which we have in view, in common with all other missions,
we are obliged, by the peculiar nature of our work, to pursue in a manner
somewhat anomalous. We have a very large number of islands to visit,
and in each island we have to contend with the difficulty of a new language
or dialect.
At present there are four distinct groups of islands, exclusive of the
Loyalty group, in each of winch five harbours exist for a mission vessel to
drop anchor in, and in three of which we have islands already in a state to
receive a missionary.
The northern portion of the New Hebrides, from the Island of Fate (or
Sandwich), at the southern boundary to the Island of Aurora at the north,
constitutes one archipelago. Then going northward, follow in order the
Banks’ Islands. Again, to the north we have the Santa Cruz archipelago;
and from thence a westerly course of some 300 miles brings us to tho
easternmost islands of the Solomon group.
We have visited all the islands of the New Hebrides, and many of them
we have often touched at. At Mai (or Three Hills Island) we are well known
to the people, and here a missionary might be at once located. We spent
last winter in the Banks’ Islands at Amota (Sugarloaf Island), and I passed
a month in visiting the remaining islands of the group in my boat, excepting
only Santa Maria.
There are at least three different places in this group ready for the
reception of missionaries and native teachers. Of the Santa Cruz archi-
pelago we cannot speak with the same certainty. The small reef islands to
the north of the island of Santa Cruz are inhabited for the most part by a
Polynesian race. We know the islands, and the people no doubt know us;
but we have not as yet obtained any scholars from among them. This last
year I could not reach the group, not having a vessel like our little
“ Southern Cross,”


These large islands of the Solomon group, San Cristoval, Gurdelcamar,
and Malanta have yielded scholars to us for some time. Ulanva is now
open to us, there being two young men from the island with us at this
time. The smaller islands of Santa Anna and Santa Catalina, with Ugi
and others, we are also acquainted with.
At San Cristoval every thing is ripe for the location of a missionary.
Our hope is, that we may educate young men from these islands to become
eventually the teachers of their countrymen.
We trust that we may have as many English missionaries at work as
may be necessary for training up and overlooking the native teachers and
native missionaries located in every island of every archipelago.
For this purpose we divide the scholars brought to New Zealand in the
summer months into different classes, and each section of the central school
is placed under the immediate charge of the missionary who is appointed to
the particular group of islands from which these scholars laave been
brought away.
At first these new comers can only be useful as grammars and dic-
tionaries. After we have acquired something of their language from them,
we can begin to teach them the objects with which we take them to New
Zealand, and we try to induce them to rejoin us year by year. Some of
the more earnest young men are found to do so, and these we trust may in
time become the first fruits of these islands unto God.
When at the approach of winter we take them home again, it is most
desirable that a missionary should remain in the group of islands to which
they belong, and we try to persuade our scholars to remain with them and
go on with their education. They of course repeat to their own people the
history of what they have heard and seen, and the more they know the
more becomes known by them in their respective islands.
When we first visit an island, we try by signs to convey to the people an
idea of our friendly disposition; we give small presents of fish-hooks, &c.
On a second or third visit we succeed perhaps in obtaining one or two young
men to accompany us in the mission ship. Then the old process is repeated
once more of learning the new language from our new scholars, returning
them to their home, beginning to speak a little to their people, going under
the protection of our scholars inland, then walking about the island,
sleeping a few nights on shore, spending a month or two, finally locating a
teacher or missionary. Such is the process of preparing the way for the
communication of the Word of Life to these islanders.
We want men enough to “officer” each group of islands; one or two
in each archipelago, visiting in their boat the adjacent islands, training up
teachers, and keeping school in the different villages, winning the good-will
and confidence of the people, and by their example recommending the Gospel
of Peace to the heathen.
In some cases the missionary would be left for a considerable length of
time on the islands, in others he would be brought with his chosen band of
scholars to spend the summer at the central school in New Zealand. In any
case he would be very frequently visited by the mission vessel, bringing
stores, &c., and always ready to remove him in case of sickness, &c.
You will see that a mission vessel, to enable us to keep up a constant
system of visitation, is quite essential. If men located among already 70 or
80 islands are to be watched over and cared for, as it is most desirable that
they should be, we need a vessel peculiarly adapted to the circumstances
of the mission. She must be constructed not for freight but for the con-
veyance of passengers, fitted with a large number of water-tanks, lockers
for stores, &c.; she must be very fast and weatherly, for we have to work
our way some 1000 miles against the trade wind ; she must be recognised in
the islands as the familiar mission vessel. In all these respects we are now
feeling sadly the loss of our schooner the “Southern Cross,” which was so
admirably suited to our wants.


We are in hopes that the friends and well-wishers of the mission will
assist in raising a special fund for replacing her, and we have now written
to England to that effect, and are endeavouring to stir up the churches of
Australasia to contribute towards this object.
Our working staff consists at present of Messrs. Dudley and Kerr—the
former you know well. He has been with us for five years, and you know
how valuable he is in all respects to us.
Mr. Kerr is an officer in Her Majesty’s Navy. He has long desired to
engage himself in Missionary work, and his connection with this Mission is
a great gain to us. The Rev. L. Prittwill spend this winter with us (D.Y.)
in the Banks’ Islands, with a view to obtain some more accurate acquaint-
ance with the nature of the work ; he hopes ultimately to join the Mission ;
but we think a preliminary trial necessary in such a peculiar work as this.
We have, besides, a few Native teachers, of whom your two friends
Wadrokal and Harper Malo are tried and excellent fellows.
The Mission is supported by the—
1. Income derived from the Endowment Fund of £lO,OOO, of which
£3,500 has lately been invested in the purchase of land near Auckland, and
the greater part of which is still standing in English securities.
2. By the moneys annually subscribed by our friends in England, who
meet at Eton on St. Barnabas Day to commend this Mission to God in
prayer and holy communion. Last year they subscribed the large sum
of £775. -
3. Subscriptions in New Zealand and Australasia.
4. Rent of 5 acres of land at Remuera, near Auckland, part of the
endowment of the Mission, and in future years (D.V.) the profits arising
from the farm of 157 acres on which the Mission College of S. Andrew
stands, at Kohimarama, near Auckland, on the south shore of the harbour.
5. The sums paid into the Mission on the private accounts of the Bishop
of New Zealand and myself.
We can, however, hardly pay our way ; and we trust that the members
of the Church of England in Australasia generally may be brought to view
this work as in a special sense a work committed to their prayers and
Christian charity.
We have already many islands ready for the missionary and the teacher.
We need greatly men and funds to carry on the Mission. Above all, I
commend this work to the earnest prayer of all Christian men who recognise
the sacred responsibility laid upon us all, of fulfilling our Blessed Lord’s
command, to “go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.”
I remain, my dear Mr.
Very faithfully yours,
J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.
Printed at the “ Herald” Office Bourke Street East, Melbourne.
