

It's a Long Way to Dear Australia.
Air Tipperary.
Off to fight for England our Contingent sailed away,
No one was downhearted as the transport left the Bay,
Singing songs of dear old Sydney as they cleared the gang,
Everyone was happy and this is what they sang —
Chorus.
“ It’s a long way from dear Australia.
Where we have to go ;
It's a long way from dear Australia,
To fight the German foe.
Good-bye, Sydney city,
Farewell everywhere,
It’s a long, long way from dear Australia,
But we’ll get safe there.”
One went down with fever on that Egypt desert plain,
Thoughts of home and Sydney then ran madly through his brain
He raved about his sweetheart as he tossed upon his bed,
And as he spoke of mother these tender words he said :
SPECIAL CHORUS.
( Continue singing these words).
“ It’s a long way to dear Australia,
To the land of my birth.
It’s a long way to dear Australia,
To the dearest girl on earth.
Good-bye, Sydney people,
Farewell, mother dear,
It’s a long, long way to dear Australia,
But my heart lies there.”
He knew that he was dying, for the doctor shook his head,
And the nurse was looking tenderly beside him at his bed ;
He heard his comrades singing as they gently passed along,
He saw their heads all drooping as they sang this touching song :
EXTRA SPECIAL CHORUS.
(Continue singing this Chorus).
“ It's a long way to dear Australia,
Which he’ll see no more ;
It’s a long way to Australia,
To the girl he does adore.
Good-bye, Sydney people,
Farewell, mother dear ;
It’s a long, long way to dear Australia,
But his heart lies therel
READ THIS HUMOROUS SHIT.
Paris mailers' Slang. Grilles of Trend) tm .
“ AIR SOUP (Hare) with two Hard-Boiled Eggs to follow—in a
""hurry,” says a Customer. “ Zeppelin Soup, with two Bombs to follow,”
shouts the Waiter, “ And make ’em run ”
“ A Glass of Milk and Water,” says a Customer. “Hoist the White
Flag and make it Sain,” shouts the Waiter.
“Beef Steak and Strong Onions,” says a Customer. “John Bull,
and make him Cry,” shouts the Waiter.
“Where’s my Baked Potatoes?” asks a Customer. “Mr. and Mrs.
Murphy in Tipperary Jackets,” shouts the Waiter.
“German Saur-kraut and Limburger Cheese,” says a Customer—“ in
no hurry.” “Hold your Nose Tight, Open the Window, and Let’Em
Walk,” shouts the Waiter.
“ One Frankfurter —to be Well Cooked,” says a Customer. “ Kaiser
Bill, Done Brown,” says the Waiter, “ and let him sizzle.”
Special Notice. —Extra Copies of this
New Song will be posted to any address on
receipt of Stamps or Postal Note for amount
required.
News Agents and others can be supplied on Eeasonable Terms.
Address--
H. WARD,
P. 0., North Sydney.
