

t\o r
[For Private Circulation On I ij. | ;
SHORT BIOGRAPHY




MR. J. G. O’CONNOR.
[“The white hat of J. G. O’Connor, like the wnite plume
of Navarre, pressed to the front as it did on the arrival of the
Redmond Brothers, in 1883.”—Sydney “Freeman’s Journal,"
St. Patrick’s Day, 1905.]
When a man is known to, and habitually spoken of by, his
contemporaries as “T.P." or “Pam," or the “G.0.M.,” it is
pretty certain that he is a personality of considerable magnetic
force—an attractive, even when not a lovable individual.
In “J.G.” of “The White Hat,” Australia can boast of a citizen
who is a living proof of the truth of that observation—particu-
larly when it refers to one who is amiable as well as attractive,
seeing that it is questionable whether there be another unit of
the Commonwealth’s population more honestly appreciated by
a greater number of his fellows, for a goodlier record of patri-
otic, self-sacrificing service, than my dear old friend, Joseph
Graham O’Connor.
He is now in the evening of his days —after a youth
and prime of singularly strenuous activity—loyally ser-
ving the Mother State at Newcastle, as a member
of the administrative staff of the Water Supply De-
partment. ’Tis a useful life, but, oh! how tame in compari-
son with that which, as eager journalist and politician, he led
for more than three decades in the forefront of the Fighting
Line. In all the vicissitudes of his chequered career, “J.G."
proved unadulterated “white man” —true friend, staunch com-


rade, honourable citizen. An uncompromising Irish-Austra-
lian Catholic, yet brimful of the kindliest tolerance for all
honest men and women of whatsoever other creed or nation-
ality. Much of a Conservative is “J.G.,” but still much more
of a Democrat, the two strains in him producing by their happy
blend a very consistent type of genuine Liberal. There is
nothing of the time-server or the lip-server about “J.G.” His
voice and action have ever responded, clear and direct, “when
foe or freedom called.” Others might play the butterfly, who
dares not show its wings but to the Summer—he, never! In
stress and storm, ay! and in real danger, he was ever to be
found in the van.
I think it can honestly be said of “J.G.” that the watch-
word of his public career was ever “Defence, not Defiance. ’
Against those who cast aspersions on the fair fame of either
the Land or the Faith of his forefathers, he fought resolutely,
relentlessly; but he never so abused his position of journal-
conductor or of politician as to make it the stand-point whence
to sling mud at others, simply because they didn’t see eye to
eye with him concerning this, that, or the other moot ques-
tion of the day.
A native of King’s Co., Ireland, he arrived at the age of
2 years, with his parents in Sydney.
From early boyhood he was wont with observant eye to
note the busy scenes of crowded life. When the gracious
Archbishop Folding (whose beautiful life was a Benediction)
formally founded the A.H.C. Guild, “J.G.” aetat. 6, was present
at the ceremony, brought thither by his father, who was No.
io on the Society’s roll.
By way of preparation (after leaving school) for the battle
of life, young O’Conrtor was articled to the late Thomas Clay-
ton, to learn the art of a wood engraver, and also the mystery
of letter-press printing. In iB6O he started a small magazine
—“The Sunbeam”—devoted to the interests of .the Catholic
Young Men’s Societies of the day, and for the fostering of


Catholic literature. In 1864, with W. B. Dailey, William
McLeay, Charles Harpur (first Australian poet), J. J. Harpur
(his brother), and other well-known public men of the day, he
founded the “Sydney Times,” as an organ for encouraging
colonial industries and fostering colonial literature. In 1867,
he started “The Balmain Reporter,” the first western suburban
paper published in New South Wales. In 1877, he published
the “Catholic Times” (subsequently sold to Archbishop Vau-
ghan, but “J.G.” retaining a share in it), afterwards the “Ex-
press” : and still later on the “Penny Nation.” He also owned
and edited “Sydney Punch” for a year. During the 13 years
he edited the “'Catholic Times” and the “Express,” he was fear-
less in the expression of the social, political, and religious faith
that was in him. He aimed not to win popularity, but to main-
tain the just rights of the Irish and Irish-Australian element
in the population as against the designs of hypocritical bigots
like Parkes and self-seeking renegades like Martin. During
the visit to Australia of John Dillon, Sir Thomas Grattan Es-
mond, and John Deasy, in 1889, “J.G.” issued a special “Green
Paper” reporting all their principal speeches in New South
Wales. As a newspaper proprietor, “J.G.” was generous to a
fault. As a newspaper conductor he was (to his literary staff)’
the kindliest, the most idea-suggestive of editors. His “subs”
could truthfully have chorused:
“Under our chief’s gay dominion
What varying shades of opinion
In our happy circle are formed!
But it may be urged by the hyper-critical, that inasmuch
as none of “J.G.’s” journalistic ventures survive to-day, he
cannot be credited with having achieved success as a news-
paper man. (He had to close down the “Express” and “Na-
tion” with £ 12,000 on his books, after 8 drought seasons.)
Success of the financial kind he did not win. He could only
harm won that by being recreant to his convictions. His jour-
nalistic work, however, was of the utmost assistance to the
Irish-Australian cause during a very stormy and trying period.


He kept the Flag flying through a most troublous time.
When “downed” by misfortune, as he often was, he was im-
mediately “up” again with astounding alacrity and cheerful-
ness—and with most of us (as with Joaquin Miller) is not the
heart’s warmest sympathy less for the successful man than
the plucky one who fails ?
—-“Who fails and still fights on—
To! he is the twin-born brother of mine.
“J.G.” did not step into the political arena, that is, as an
actual politician, till 1870. But long prior to that he had played
a minor (though not unimportant) part in parliamentary af-
fairs. In 1857, the then Emigration Agent of N.S. Wales, one
Hutchinson Hothersal Brown, in a report to the Governor-
General, Sir. W. Denison, traduced the characters of the Irish
orphan girls, arriving as immigrants. Mr. W. M. Davis,
“J.G.” and other members of the old Celtic Association, pre-
pared a petition for a Parliamentary Committee of enquiry into
the matter. It was presented to Parliament by George Thorn-
ton, M.L.A. Its prayer was granted—with the result, that
Hutchinson Hothersal Brown was proved a slanderer, and
compulsorily retired from the Emigration Department of the
public service. In 1859, under the New Electoral Act, “J.G.”
was a most energetic member of the committee to secure the
return of John Hubert Plunkett and D. H. Deniehy for West
Sydney. Plunkett won a seat, but Deniehy was unfortunately
defeated. In the days, in 1868, following the shooting of the
Duke of Edinburgh, by the unfortunate madman, O’Farrell,
when the bigotry of Protestant malignants sought by infamous
methods to impute treason to the Irish-Australians; when a
Felony Act of hellish concoction was set up by those coalesced
apostates from Seemliness and Humanity, Martin and Parkes :
when suspicion and fear crouched in the street; when craftv
delatorship went about avid for reward; when a well-known
pressman played the base role of eaves-dropping reporter at
the door of O’Farrell’s cell —in those days “The White Hat”
showed itself wherever Duty summoned. Of the cogent evi-


dence taken before the Select Committee of the N.S.W. Assem-
bly, appointed on the motion of William Macleay to investi-
gate Parkes’ historic speech at Kiama, none was more con-
vincing of that historic speech’s abysmal falsehood and devilish
malice than that given by “J.G.”
In all probability, it was an outcome of the horror genera-
ted in all the honourable minds by the shamelessness of the
conditions of the Martin-Parkes coalition of 66-68, that led to
“J.G’s.” entrance upon the political stage in 1870, at the time
when a second coalition —that between Parkes and Robertson
(a coalition every whit as shameless as the previous one)
had just been consummated. “J.G.” was the candidate in the
Opposition that vigorously fought this coalition at the Minis-
terial re-elections —the struggle, though unsuccessful, inciden-
tally proving (what some parliamentarians are content to
forget) that re-election on acceptance of office is a salutary
institution, since it affords the country an opportunity of criti-
cising and (if need be) of denouncing unholy alliances.
In 1871, the genuine Liberals of Mudgee made an unsuc-
cessful effort to dismiss Parkes from the misrepresentation of
their electorate. His return was opposed, at the eleventh
hour, by the nomination of “J.G.” (although not present on the
occasion). His printed address to the men of Mudgee was a
caustic impeachment of Parkesian political methods; and it
largely helped to decide , the next election in a few months
thereafter. A year later, “J.G.” with the miners of Gulgong,
to a man, behind him, and his old friends of Mudgee, including
the present Right Rev. Monsignor O’Donovan and the present
Bishop of Bathurst, Dr. Dunne, again contested the seat, win-
ning by a triumphant majority, in spite of the fact that the
other side had spent over £4OOO in backing their fancy. At
the general election for the Bth Parliament (in 1875), “J.G.”
made a brave effort to secure one of the seats for Central
Cumberland. Though only 48 hours in the field, he was but


a very few votes behind those polled for “Joe” Wearne, the
second on the list (the late Sir John Lackey being first) when
the numbers went up.
With all the prominent politicians of those stirring days,,
“J.G.” was on terms of friendship—with all save Parkes. At
that designing, hypocritical and dangerous Sophist, he drew
the line: nor would he ever listen to the overtures made to
him at different times by that most corrupt and artful of
political dodgers.
Before referring to “J.G’s.” connection with Catholic and
Irish-Australian affairs, I would here mention that he served
the Corporation of Sydney as one of its auditors for three suc-
cessive years —1870, 1871, 1872.
In matters connected with the Catholic Church in Aus-
tralia, “J.G’s.” record as that of a loyal, untiring lay-worker
has been a most distinguished one. So long ago as 1859, he
was instrumental in raising about £BOO for the erection of
Mount Carmel Church. The blessing of this Church was the first
public act performed in Australia, by the first Bishop of Bris-
bane, Dr. James O’Ouinn; and “J.G.” was one of a deputation
of five, from St. Benedict’s Church, who presented him with
the first public address he received in Australia.
“J.G.” was the first to suggest to the late Rev. M. A.,
Corish, 0.5.8., the way to pay off the debt on St. Benedict’s.
Church, so that it might be consecrated —as it was by Arch-
bishop Folding, in 1862. In 1878, in 1879, in 1881, and in 1882,.
he organised musical parties, whose gratuitous services at
Wagga and Temora realised for the Catholic churches and
schools in those districts sums totalling over £6OO (not to
mention nearly £lOO handed over to the local hospital at the
latter place). He largely assisted in the efforts made for the
rebuilding of St. Mary’s Cathedral after the two disastrous
fires. Often and often did he act on the committees, and as


Chat lesion.
Mr. J. G. O COrmOR, J.P.
Newcastle..


honorary secretary to St. Vincent’s and the House of the Good
Shepherd bazaars. But probably his best work as a zealous
churchman was that put in by him during the 1867-1873 period
as lay secretary to the Catholic Association, the late Rev. E.
J. Luckie being the clerical secretary. This six years’ work
was incessant, the two secretaries (whose labours were as on-
erous as they were purely honorary) working day and night
during much of the time. The Association raised thou-
sands of pounds for the support of the Catholic
Schools at the time of the introduction of the Pub-
lic Schools Act, which Parkes so vainly boasted was
to prove “death to the calling of the priesthood of the Church
of Rome”; and it may now be said, with perfect truth, that
what the Association then achieved was nothing less than
establishing a sure foundation for that splendid system of
sound religious, yet brilliant secular Education, by means of
which the Catholic Church in New South Wales yearly turns
out a long array of scholars, proven by strict University Rest-
ing to be nulli secundi. It was about this time that the Rev.
Brother Ludovic, and three colleagues of the Marist Order
arrived; and the Association took a very active part in estab-
lishing them in Harrington-street. The strides the Order has
made is a matter of history.
During the years abovenamed, “J.G.” conducted the
“Catholic Association Reporter and School Journal ’—a pub-
lication that vastly aided the good work. In 1873 and 1874
“J.G.” interested himself in regard to the question of the grants
for Church and school purposes, which were being resumed
by the Crown for non-fulfilment of conditions; and by his
personal influence with the then Secretary for Lands (Par-
nell) secured the issue of the said grants, including that of
St. Francis’, Haymarket, and the splendid Church property at
Nowra, Shoalhaven, on the promise (since faithfully kept)
that the prescribed conditions should be fulfilled. Phis action
saved the Church from the loss of many valuable lands and
buildings.


If 1 remember right it was in 1866 that “J.G.” took an
active part in the battle of York-street.” The late Rev. John
McGibbon, a firebrand of the Dill-Macky type, attempted to
repeat at the old Masonic Hall, in York-street, a blackguardly
lecture on “Nuns and Nunneries ” he had delivered in the
Temperance Hall; but to his complete discomfiture a party
followed Mr. B. Gaffney and “The White Hat” into the old
Masonic Hall, disorganised the meeting, and so effectively
silenced the “reverend” bigot’s false and filthy tongue.
And now a few words about “J.G.” as an Irish-Australian.
It was in 1858 that he took a leading part in raising a fund
for the relief of the awful distress in the County of Donegal.
Over £7OOO was obtained; and with it the passages to Sydney
paid of scores on scores of families, descendants of whom are
now well-to-do citizens of our Commonwealth. But even
previous to that he was one of a committee (hon. sec. St.
Benedict’s division) appointed to raise £lO,OOO for the pur-
chase of “Tarmons,” the property of Sir. Charles Nicholson,
for the nuns of St. Vincent’s. St. Vincent’s College and
.Schools, in Victoria-st., now occupy the site of the old grounds
of “Tarmons.”)
“J.G.” is the only layman living who took an active part
in raising the fund. Arch-priest Sheehy is the only clergy-
man.
In 1866 he was one of the treasurers of the
N.S.W. fund to assist the wives and families of the
State prisoners in Ireland. Parkes, in the “Treason Fel-
ony” days, when “J.G.” was labelled “dangerous,” sought to
make out that the fund in question was raised for Fenian pur-
poses ; but “J.G.” was able to prove before the Macleay Com-
mittee (of the Assembly) by letters, received from the great
Archbishop M’Hale, of Tuam, that the money had been, every
penny of it, devoted to the charitable purpose for which it was
■subscribed.


There is one event which happened about this time to
which “J.G.” always refers with great pride. It was the meet-
ing' with the Right Rev. Dr. Murray, Bishop of Maitland, and
being the first in Australia to bid him welcome to New South
Wales. The vessel, the “Empress,” arrived in the harbour
at about 7 a.m., and “J.G.” and his friend, J. J. Hayes, were in a
waterman’s boat on the look-out for her. As she took up her
moorings near Bradley’s Head they went on board and bid the
rev. prelates—Drs. Murray and Quinn (of Bathurst) welcome.
Dr. Byrne, afterwards Bishop of Bathurst, was also one of the
passengers, besides a goodly number of other religieuse —
including the Rev. Mother Croke, a sister of the great Arch-
bishop of Cashel, who founded the Order of Mercy in Bath-
urst.
For fully forty years “J.G.” took a most active part in
inaugurating the celebration of St. Patrick’s Day, either as
a Committee-man, Secretary, Treasurer, or Chairman. In the
latter capacity notably on the occasion of John Redmond’s
visit, when he delivered the great oration at Botany to a meet-
ing of 12,000 Irish men and women and Irish-Australians.
On the following day, the sura of £5OO was cabled to the
Treasurers of the Irish National League in Dublin, as the re-
sult of the day’s doings. And that meeting at Botany did much
to pave the way for the Redmond Bros.’ success throughout
the Colonies. The Mission realised, in all, something like
£ 13,000.
In 1871, “J.G.” was to the fore in welcoming the Irish
State Prisoners (including the late John Flood), from West
Australia. In 1881 he took the chair at a meeting to sympa-
thise with the then imprisoned Parnellite, M’s. P., and he had
a special letter of thanks from Charles Stewart Parnell for his
action. Soon after, when J. W. WTlshe and Hugh Mahon
arrived in Sydney, “J.G.” was the chairman at several meet-
ings addressed by them ; and on the arrival of the Redmond
Brothers, he took the chair at the three great meetings—at


the Music Hall; at Botany; and at the Opera House. It was
John Redmond, who along with J. W. Walshe, called on "J.G.”
three days prior to the first Oration, and asked him to take
the chair. “I would do so willingly,” responded '‘J-G.,” “but
there are more capable chairmen and men higher up in public
life who should be asked to fill the position.” Said John Red-
mond: "But, my dear "J.G.” it will be a poor compliment to
you, if they fail us, to come back and ask you? ” Replied "J.
G.”: "The compliment will be all the greater; and, in any case,
you are sure of a chairman.” "Well done, Joe,” cried Walshe,
"ever the man in the gap!” And so (as I wrote above) “J.G.”
was the chairman at those great historic gatherings.
When trouble came on the Irish party, and poor Parnell
was down, the "White Hat” did not desert the cause, but took
the chair at a meeting of sympathisers in Sydney. On the
motion of John Redmond, the “White Hat” was elected first
President of the Irish National League in New South Wales;
in 1883, and at the great Conference of 300 delegates, from all
the Australian colonies, held in St. Patrick’s Hall, Melbourne,
later in the same year, "J.G.” was elected one of the Vice-
Presidents of the Grand United Irish National League of Aus-
tralasia —Reviii Izod O’Doherty, M.L.C., being the president,
and the Hon. Francis Longmore, Minister for Lands (Victoria)
the other Vice-President.
The "White Hat” took a special part in the arrival of
John Dillon and his colleagues; and at a picnic held at Clon-
tarf, Mr. Dillon presented "J.G.” with a valuable gold watch
and chain and a sovereign purse—on behalf of some Irish
friends. On the watch is inscribed; "As one of the Old Guard,
for services to Ireland from boyhood to the present day.”
Since 1892 the "White Hat” has been quasi-buried in the
coaly city of Newcastle; but when Michael Davitt appeared
there, some few years ago, "J.G.” took the chair at the Com-
mittee meetings to give him a reception, and was at his right


hand on the platform at his great meeting in the Victoria
Theatre. And when Mr. W. Redmond made his third visit to
Australia —some eight years ago —he made a special trip to.
Newcastle to see the “White Hat,” and give “J.G.” a full an-
swer to the question : “And how is poor old Ireland, and how
does she stand?” Finally, Mr. W. Redmond brought “J.G.”
to the front again by inviting him to be his guest, and the guest
of the Queensland Irish Association, on his tour to Brisbane
and southern Queensland in February and March, 1905 —the
occasion of which must be fresh in the memory of your many
readers. Always in speaking, Mr. Redmond referred to him
as “his dear old friend and fellow-worker in the cause—J. G.
O'Connor.”
From this rapid survey of “J.G.’s” career, it may be gath-
ered at what a number of points he has touched the life of his
times. How intensely interesting would be his reminiscences
if given to the world in book form—reminiscences concerning
prelates and priests, politicians and literateurs, sturdy Com-
monwealth builders and pioneer Archbishops and priests :
Foldings, Vaughans, Therrys, McEncroes, Hanleys, Lynchs,
Rigneys, Kennys, McCarthys, Birminghams,Dunnes, McAlroys,
Keatings, O’Donovans and a long line of men who did early bat-
tle for Church and State ; Harpurs and Kendalls, poets and press
writers, the men who played their various parts in the pageant
of a strenuous generation that has vanished as a dream. They
were —“and O! how many sorrows crowd into those two brief
words.” But for him, his innumerable friends wish cheerily: —-
Ad multos annos! Many more days of quiet usefulness in an
atmosphere of love and respect, musing, not sadly, on tender
memories, and ever enheartened by the gracious Hope that
finds its sweetest emblem in the green immortal Shamrock,
So much do we wish for dear “J.G.”


RETIREMENT OF MR. J. G. O’CONNOR.
(Condensed from the “Maitland Mercury.”)
On Saturday evening, November 6, 1909, the president and
members of the Hunter District Water Supply and Sewerage
Board, with the professional and clerical staff, assembled at
the Centennial Hotel, Newcastle, at an official leavetaking,
which also celebrated an historic occasion, to Mr. J. G. O'Con-
nor, chief clerk of the head office staff, prior to his retirement
from the service of the Board.
Mr. Percy Allan, M.1.C.E., M.A.I.C.E. (President of the
Board), presided, and said they had gathered together to say
good-bye to a very old officer of the Board, who had done his
work faithfully and well. He had much pleasure in asking
Mr. O’Connor to receive a substantial present from his fellow-
officers, which he felt sure he would appreciate. He wished
him good health and prosperity, and concluded by proposing
the toast of “Our Guest.” (Cheers.)
Mr. O. G. Steel (Vice-President) endorsed the President’s
remarks. Mr. O’Connor had been a very honourable officer of
the Board, as he knew from his own knowledge for the past
twelve years that he had been a member of the Board. He
wished him success during the remaining years of his life
( Cheers.)
Mr. Magnus Cromarty, another member of the Board, en-
dorsed all that had been said.
The Secretary (Mr. A. E. Fry) said that he could not
speak too highly of the faithful and efficient way Mr. O’Connor
had carried out his duties since the inception of the Board -
now over seventeen years. (Cheers.)
Messrs. J. B. Henson, M.I.C.E. (the Board engineer), P.
de Mestre Hart (assessor to the Board), M. E. Cooke (assist-
ant accountant), E. Nash (district inspector), and James Rich-
mond (superintendent of plumbing) also supported the toast,
which was given with musical honours.


Mr. J. G. O’Connor, in reply, thanked the President for the
happy way in which he had proposed the toast, and all present
for the way in which they had honoured it. This world was
made up of partings and farewells, and though on account of
the age limit he was leaving the service of the Board, the words
of praise were always welcome to ,the human ear. He was sin-
cerely thankful for this magnificent send-off, and the presenta-
tion. The little purse he would keep as a memento
of this bright occasion. Age had come on, and brought
with it the time for him to retire from the Board’s
service, and he thanked the Board for the kindness
extended to him. He felt in June last he was due for a holi-
day, and handed in his resignation. The President and the
Board were kind enough to meet his wishes, and since then
he had enjoyed the benefit of the holidays. He hoped the
Board would advance as rapidly in the future as it had done in
the past. He had looked upon every officer, from the oldest
to the smallest boy, with a friendly spirit, and the parting was
somewhat sad, as he had always had nothing but respect and
consideration from the staff. He would conclude, in the some-
what unorthodox words of Tom Moore—■
“Ah, well may we hope, when this short life is done,
To meet in a land of more permanent bliss;
For a smile, and a claso of the hand hast’ning on,
Is all we enjoy of each other in this.”
Mr. Owen Gilbert, M.L.A., proposed the toast of “The
President and Members of the Board,” and took occasion to
pay his meed of praise to Mr. O’Connor for the many years he
had known him, and said from his observations while he was
a member of the Board, and from his knowledge of the Gov-
ernment departments, he had no hesitation in saying there was
not a better-run institution in the Government service. One
thing that had struck him most forcibly was the discipline in
the offices, which reflected the very highest credit on all con-
cerned.
The President and Vice-President suitably responded.
The Vice-President then proposed “The Secretary and
Clerical Staff,” which was responded to by the Secretary,
Board Engineer, and heads of branches.
The Secretary thanked the President and members of the
Board, and Mr. Gilbert, on behalf of the staff, for their attend-
ance, and the remainder of the evening was spent in harmony.
