





JAIL MANUAL;
OR
A SELECTION OF PRAYERS,
FOR
THE USE OR PERSONS
CONFINED IN JAILS OR PENITENTIARIES.
OR UNDER
SENTENCE OF HARD LABOR.
PRINTED UNDER THE SANCTION OF
THE VENERABLE W. G. BROUGHTON, ARCHDEACON
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
LAUNCESTON :
PRINTED .<ND SOLD BY 11. DOWLING, - ADVERTISER OFFICE,
PATERSON STREET.
1834.


LAUNCESTON:
PRINTED BY HENRY DOWLING,


TO THE READER.
THIS little Manual has been drawn up, in the hum-
ble hope that it may be useful to some who are not capable
of selecting from our incomparable liturgy, what may be
suited to them; and in order to afford, at a very trifling
cost, the means of supplying them with a “ form of sound
words” by which to address Almighty God; which at the
same time may be used by the Chaplains of Jails and Pe-
nitentiaries ; and especially by the Lecturers of Road Par-
ties in the Interior.
If there be any merit in the compilation it belongs to
others; for its imperfection I alone am responsible. Still,
I trust, it may be accepted as a sincere, though feeble


attempt to minister to the service and praise of our Lord and
Saviour, Jesus Christ, “ who is over all, God blessed for
ever; Amen.”
W. H. BROWNE,
Chaplain
Launceston , March , 1834.


JAIL MANUAL.
SENTENCES OF SCRIPTURE.
WHEN the wicked man turneth away irom his
wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that
which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken
and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.
To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgive-
nesses, though we have rebelled against him: neither
have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to
walk in his laws which he set before us.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our-
selves, and the truth is not in us; but, if we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our gins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
DEARLY beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth
us in sundry places to acknowledge and confess our
manifold sins and wickedness; and that we should
not dissemble nor cloke them before the face of Al-
mighty God, our heavenly Father; but confess them
with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart;
to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same,
by his infinite goodness and mercy: and although we


ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins
before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when
we assemble and meet together, to render thanks for
the great benefits that we have received at his hands,
to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most
holy word, and to ask those things which are requi-
site and necessary, as well for the body as the soul.
Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are
here present, to accompany me with a pure heart,
and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly
grace; Saying after me:
ALMIGHTY and most merciful Father; we have
erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep; we
have followed too much the devices and desires of
our own hearts; we have offended against thy holy
laws; we have left undone those things which we
ought to have done; and we have done those things
which we ought not to have done: and there is no
health in us. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon
ns, miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O God,
which confess their faults; restore thou them that are
penitent; according to thy promises declared unto
mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord ; and grant, O most
merciful Father, for his sake, that we may hereafter
live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory
of thy holy Name. Amen.
ALMIGHTY God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he may turn from his wickedness and
live; and hath given power and commandment to his
Ministers to declare and pronounce to his people, be-
ing penitent, the absolution and remission of their
sins: He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly
repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel;
Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repent-
ance, and his holy Spirit, that those things may please
him which we do at this present; and that the rest
of our Jives may be pure and holy; so that at the
last we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.


Minister. —O Lord, open thou our lips.
Answer. —And our mouth shall shew forth thy
praise.
Minister. —O God, make speed to save us.
Answer.- -O Lord, make haste to help us.
IF Then shall follow the Psalms and Lessons in order, as
they are appointed.
Psalm cxxx.
1 OUT of the deep have I called untothee, O Lord:
Lord, hear my voice.
2 O let thine ears consider well: the voice of my
complaint.
3 If thou. Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is
done amiss: O Lord, who may abide it?
4 For there is mercy with thee: therefore shalt
thou be feared.
5 I look for the Lord; my soul doth wait for him :
in his word is my trust.
6 My soul fleeth unto the Lord; before the* morn-
ing watch, I say, before the morning watch.
7 O Israel, trust in the Lord; for with the Lord
there is mercy: and with him is plenteous redemption.
8 And he shall redeem Israel: from all his sins.
I BELIEVE in God the father Almighty, Maker
of heaven and earth:
And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord; who
was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin
Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried ; he descended into hell; the third
day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into
heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the
Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead :
I believe in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic
Church; the Communion of Saints; the forgiveness
of sins; the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.
OUR FATHER, which art in heaven, hallowed
be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy will Be done


on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our
daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us; and lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; for
thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for
ever and ever. Amen.
REMEMBER not Lord our iniquities, nor the
iniquities of our forefathers; neither take thou ven-
geance of our sins : spare us, good Lord ; spare thy
people, whom thou hast redeemed with thy most pre-
cious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.
Answer. —Spare us good Lord.
Let us pray.
Minister. —O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us;
Answer. —And grant us thy salvation.
Minister. —Turn thy face from our sins ;
Answer. —And blot out all our iniquities.
Minister. —Send us help from thy holy place;
Answer. —For thy indignation lieth hard upon us.
Minister. —O Lord, hear our prayers.
Answer. —And let the sighing of the prisoners come
before thee.
PRAYERS.
O LORD, we beseech thee mercifully hear our
prayers, and spare all those who confess their sins
unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are
accused, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, who hatest
nothing that thou hast made, and dost forgive the
sins of all them that are penitent, create and make
in us new and contrite hearts, that we, worthily
lamenting our sins and acknowledging our wretched-
ness, may qbtain of thee, the God of all mercy, per-


feet remission and forgiveness through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
GRANT we beseech thee. Almighty God, that
we, who for our evil deeds do most justly deserve
to be punished, by the comfort of thy grace may
be mercifully relieved, through our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. Amen.
O GOD, who art the author of peace and lover of
concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal
life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend us thy
humble servants in all assaults of our enemies; that
we, surely trusting in thy defence, may not fear the
power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesuis
Christ our Lord. Amen.
For the Morning.
O LORD, our heavenly Father, Almighty and
everlasting God, who hast safely brought us to the
beginning of this day, defend us in the same with
thy mighty power; and grant that this day we fall
into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger; but
that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance*
to do always that is righteous in thy sight; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
For the Evening.
LIGHTEN our darkness, we beseech thee, O
Lord; and by thy great mercy defend us from all
perils and dangers of this night; for the love of thy
only Son, our Saviour, Jesus Christ. Amen.
O GOD, from whom all holy desires, all good
counsels, and all just works do proceed, give unto
thy servants that peace whichthe woyld cannot give;
that both our hearts may be set to obey thy command-
ments, and also that by thee we being defended from
the fear of our enemies may pass our time in rest and
quietness; through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Saviour. Amen.
O GOD, who sparest us when we deserve punish-
ment, and in thy wrath rememberest mercy, we hum-


bly beseech thee of thy goodness to comfort and suc-
cour all those who are under reproach and misery
in the house of bondage; correct them not in thine
anger neither chasten them in thy sore displeasure;
give them a right understanding of themselves —and
of thy threats and promises, that they may neither
cast away their confidence in thee, nor place it any-
where but in thee; relieve the distressed, protect the
innocent, and awaken the guilty; and forasmuch as
thou alone bringest light out of darkness, and good
out of evil, grant that the pains and punishments
which these thy servants endure through their bodily
confinement, may tend to the setting free their souls
from the chains of sin, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
O GOD, whose mercy is everlasting and power
infinite, look down with pity and compassion upon
the sufferings of these thy servants, and, whether
thou visitest them for trial of their patience or punish-
ment of their offences, enable them by thy grace
cheerfully to submit themselves to thy holy will and
pleasure; go not far from those, O Lord, whom thou
hast laid in a place of darkness, and in the deep, and
forasmuch as thou hast not cut them off suddenly,
but chastenest them as a Father, grant that they,
duly considering thy great mercies, may be unfeign-
edly thankful, and turn unto thee with true repent-
ance and sincerity of heart, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
O GOD, the Creator and Preserver of all mankind,
we humbly beseech thee for all sorts and conditions
of men; that thou wouldest be pleased to make thy
ways known unto them, thy saving health unto
all nations: more especially we pray for the good
estate of the universal Christian Church; that it may
be so guided and governed by thy good spirit, that all
who profess and call themselves Christians may be led
into the way of truth, and hold the faith in unity of
spirit, in the bond of peace, and in righteousness of
life. Bless, we beseech thee, our sovereign lord the


King, and all that are placed in authority under him ;
grant that they may execute justice and mercy in this
land, to the punishment of wickedness and vice, and
the maintenance of thy true religion and virtue. Give
grace, O heavenly Father, to all the ministers of the
Gospel, that they may, both by their life and doctrine,
set forth thy true and lively word, and rightly admi-
nister thy holy sacraments: finally we commend to
thy fatherly goodness all those who are any ways
afflicted, or distressed, in mind, body, or estate; [es-
pecially those for whom our prayers may be desired,}
that it may please thee to comfort and relieve them
according to their several necessities, giving them
patience under their sufferings, and a happy issue
out of all their afflictions. And this we beg for Jesus
Christ, his sake. Amen.
ALMIGHTY GOD, Father of all mercies, we
thine unworthy servants do give thee most humble
and hearty thanks for all thy goodness and loving-
kindness to us, and to all men; [ particularly to those
who desire now to offer up their praises and thanks-
givings for thy late mercies vouchsafed unto them.]
We bless thee for our creation, preservation, and all
the blessings of this life; but above all, for thine in-
estimable love in the redemption of the world by our
Lord Jesus Christ; for the means of grace, and for
the hope of glory. And, we beseech thee, give us
that due sense of all thy mercies, that our hearts may
be unfeignedly thankful, and that we shew forth thy
praise, not only with our lips, but in our lives; by
giving up ourselves to thy service, and by walking
before thee in holiness and righteousness all our days;
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee
and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory, world
without end. Amen.
ALMIGHTY God, the fountain of all wisdom,
who knowest our necessities before we ask, and our
ignorance in asking, we beseech thee to have com-
passion upon our infirmities, and those things which
for our unworthiness we dare not, and for our blind-


ness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us, for the
worthiness of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
ALMIGHTY GOD, who hast given us grace at
this time with one accord to make our supplications
known unto thee, and dost promise that when two
or three are gathered together, in thy name, thou
wilt grant their requests, fulfil now, O Lord, the de-
sires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most
expedient for them; granting us in this world know-
ledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life ever-
lasting. Amen.
THE GRACE of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost,
be with us all evermore. Amen.
PRAYERS
FOR
PERSONS UNDER SENTENCE.
To be used after “ O God, whu sparest f Sfc.
O HOLY JESUS, who of thine infinite goodness
didst accept the conversion of a sinner upon the
cross, open thine eye of mercy upon this thy ser-
vant, who desireth pardon and forgiveness, though
in his latest hour he tumeth unto thee; renew in him
whatsoever hath been decayed by the fraud and ma-
lice of the devil, or by his own carnal will and frailty,
consider his contrition, accept his repentance; and
forasmuch as he putteth his trust only in thy mercy,
impute not unto him his former sins, but strengthen
him with thy blessed Spirit, and when thou art pleased
to take him hence, receive him into thy favor; this
we beg through thy merits, O Lord, our Saviour and
Redeemer. Amen.


O FATHER of all mercies and God of all comfort
we fly unto thee for succour in behalf of this thy ser-
vant who is now under the sentence of condemnation,
the day of his calamity is at hand, and he is accounted
as one of them that go down to the pit; blessed Lord,
remember thy mercies, look upon his infirmities, hear
the voice of his complaint, give him we beseech thee
patience in this his time of adversity, and support
him under the terrors which encompass Am-,* set be-
fore his eyes the things he hath done in the body which
have justly provoked thee to anger; and forasmuch
as his continuance appeareth to be short among us,
quicken him so much the more by thy grace and holy
spirit, that he being converted and reconciled unto
thee, before thy judgments have cut Mm off from the
earth, may at the hour of death depart in peace, and
be received into thine everlasting; kingdom", through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
O SAVIOUR of the world who by thy cross and
precious blood hast redeemed us, save us and help
we humbly beseech thee, O Lord.
In the midst of life we are in death; of whom may
we seek for succour but of Thee, O Lord, who for
our sins art justly displeased.
Yet, O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty,
O holy and most merciful Saviour, deliver us not into
the bitter pains of eternal death.
Thou knowest Lord the secrets of our hearts; shut
not thy merciful ears to our prayers; but spare us Lord
most holy, O God most mighty; O holy and merciful
Saviour suffer us not at our last hour, for any pains
of death, to fall from thee.
A t the time of Execution .
O ALMIGHTY GOD, with whom do live the spi -
rits of just men made perfect, after they are delivered
from their earthly prisons, we humbly commend the
soul of this thy servant into thy hands, as into the
hands of a faithful creator; and most merciful. Sa-
viour, most humbly beseeching thee, that if may be
precious in thy sight; wash it, we pray thee, in the


blood of that immaculate lamb that was slain to take
away the sins of the world, that whatsoever defile-
ments it may have contracted in the midst of this
miserable and wicked world, through the lusts of the
flesh, or the wiles of satan, being purged and done
away, it may be presented, pure and without spot,
before thee; and teach us who survive in this and
other daily spectacles of mortality, to take warning
from the examples that are before us, and so to num-
ber our days, that we may seriously apply our hearts
to that holy and heavenly wisdom, whilst we live
here, which may in the end bring us to life everlast-
ing, through the merits of Jesus Christ, thine only
son, our Lord. Amen.
The Minister shall say,
THE ALMIGHTY GOD, who is a strong tower
to all them that put their trust in him, to whom all
things that are known, in earth, and under the earth, do
bow and obey, be now and evermore thy defence;
and make thee know and feel that there is none other
name under heaven given to man, in whom, and
through whom, thou mayest receive salvation, but
only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
UNTO GOD’S gracious care and protection we
commit thee; the Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the
Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious
unto thee; the Lord lift up the light of his counte-
nance upon thee, and give thee peace both now and
evermore. Amen.
For Persons Troubled in Mind or Conscience.
O BLESSED LORD, the Father of all mercies,
and God of all comforts, we beseech thee look down
in pity and compassion upon this thy afflicted ser-
vant : thou writest bitter thiiigs against him, and
makest him to possess his former iniquities; thy
wrath lieth hard upon him, and his soul is full of
trouble; but O merciful God, who hast written thy


holy word for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of thy holy Scriptures, might have hope,
give him a right understanding of himself, and of thy
threats and promises, that he may neither cast away
his confidence in Thee, nor place it anywhere but in
Thee ; give him strength against all his temptations,
and heal all his distempers; break not the bruised
reed, nor quench the smoaking flax; shut not up thy
tender mercies in displeasure, but make him to hear
of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast
broken may rejoice; deliver him from fear of the
enemy, and lift up the light of thy countenance upon
him, and give him peace, through the merits and me-
diation of Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen,
For the Gift and Grace of Repentance.
ALMIGHTY and Eternal Lord God, who art of
purer eyes than to behold evil, and hast enjoined all
who come to thy footstool, to wash their hands in in-
nocency, vouchsafe to me unfeigned repentance for
my past sins, which are more in number than the hairs
of my head; and as it is the voice of thy wondrous
goodness and mercy, that if the wicked will forsake
his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, thou
wilt have mercy on, and abundantly pardon them, be
favorable, O Lord; be favorable to me in my neces-
sity ; turn thou me, and so shall I be turned; lead
me to that repentance that is not to be repented of;
have mercy upon me, O Lord; and according to the
multitude of thy mercies, blot out all my transgres-
sions, for thy mercies sake, in Christ Jesus, the Son of
thy love; whom thou hast set forth to be the propi-
tiation for our sins: grant this, O merciful Father,
for the sake of my blessed Saviour and Redeemer.
Amen.
See Psalms vi, xxv, xxxii, xxxviii, li, cxxx.
For Faith in God’s Mercy, through Christ.
ALMIGHTY GOI>, our heavenly Father, who
has graciously promised in thy holy Gospel, “ that
whosoever believeth in thy Son Jesus Christ, shall
not perish, but have everlasting lifeand that this


is life eternal to know Thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent: increase this
knowledge, and confirm this faith in me, for the re-
mainder of my life: O let me not rest in a cold be-
lief, but grant me a lively faith that will influence my
affections and dispositions; give me a sense of thy
infinite mercy, through him; enable me to believe that
my sins are blotted out of thy remembrance, in his
atoning blood, which cleanseth from all sin. Accept
of my imperfect sorrow, repentance, faith, and reso
Itttion; and let the precious merits of my crucified
Saviour supply all that is wanting in me: O let me
now die to sin, and rise to righteousness, and peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost. Grant this, O most mer-
ciful Father, through the same, thy Son, Jesus Christ,
our Lord. Amen.
See Psalms xix, lyii; Ephesians ii, vi, 11 ver.
For the Grace of Charity.
O LORD who hast taught us that all our doings
without charity are nothing worth, send thy Holy
Ghost and pouf into our hearts that most excellent
gift of charity, the very bond of peace, and of all
virtues, without which whosoever liveth is accounted
dead before thee. And now especially when lam
preparing to appear in thy presence, let not my heart
be destitute of love towards any of my fellow crea-
tures; possess me with kindness and good-will to
Wards all mankind; dispose me to a full forgiveness
of all those who inky at any time have injured me in
thought, word, or deed; and in particular, rid me of
any unkind feelings towards those who have been in-
strumental in bringing me into my present state; do
thou, O God, grant them thy forgiveness, and ex-
tend the same to all my enemies, persecutors, and
slanderers, ; turn thou their hearts, shew them their
errors, lead them by thy mercy to unfeigned repent-
ance in this life, and receive them hereafter into thine
everlasting kingdom, for JesUs ,Christ, his sake, our
only mediator and advocate. Amen.


PSALMS.
PSALM LXIII.
O GOD, my gracious God, to thee my morning pray’rs shall offer’d be :
For thee my thirsty soul doth pant;
My fainting flesh implores thy grace, within this dry and barren place,
Where I refreshing waters want.
O to my longing eyes once more that view of glorious pow’r restore,
Which thy majestic house displays!
Because to me thy wondrous love than life itself does dearer prove,
My lips shall always speak thy praise.
My life, while I that life enjoy, in blessing God I will employ,
With lifted hands adore his name :
My soul’s content shall be as great as theirs who choicest dainties eat.
While I with joy his praise proclaim.
When down I lie sweet sleep to find, thou, Lord, art present to my mind;
And when I wake in dead of night:
Because thou still dost succour bring, beneath the shadow of thy wing
I rest with safety and delight.
PSALM XXXYIII.
THY chast’ning Wrath, O Lord, re- though I deserve it all;
Nor let atonce onmethestorm [strain, of thy displeasure fall.
In every wretched part of me thy arrows deep remain ;
Thy heavy hand’s afflicting weight I can no more sustain.
My sins, that to a deluge swell, my sinking head o’erflow,
And for my feeble strength to bear too vast a burthen grow.
Forsake me not, O Lord my God, nor far from me depart;
Make haste to my relief, O thou, who ray salvation art


PSALM LI.
HAVE mercy, Lord, on me, as thou wert ever kind ;
Let me, opprest with loads of guilt, thy wonted mercy find.
Wash off my foul offence, and cleanse me from my sin ;
For I confess my crime, and see how great my guilt has been.
Against thee. Lord, alone, and only in thy sight.
Have I transgress’d, and, tho’ condemn’d, must own thy judgment right.
In guilt each part was form’d of all this sinful frame;
In guilt F was conceiv’d, and born the heir of sin and shame.
Yet thou, whose searching eye doth inward truth require,
In secret didst with wisdom’s laws my tender soul inspire.
With hyssop purge me, Lord, and so I clean shall be;
I shall with snow in whiteness vie, when purified by thee.
Make me to hear with joy thy kind forgiving voice ;
That so the bones which thou hast broke may with fresh strength rejoice.
Blot out my crying sins, nor me in anger view;
Create in me a heart that’s clean, an upright mind renew.
PSALM CXLIII.
LORD, hear my pray’r, and to my cry thy wonted audience lend;
In thy accustom’d faith and truth a gracious answer send.
Nor at thy strict tribunal bring thy servant to be tried;
For in thy sight no living man can e’er be justified.
Hear me with speed; my spirit fails; thy face no longer hide,
Lest I become forlorn, like them that in the grave reside.
O ! for the sake of thy great Name, revive my drooping heart:
For thy truth’s-sake, to me, distress’d thy promis’d aid impart.
Thou art my God, thy righteous will instruct me to obey;
Let thy good Spirit lead and keep my soul in thy right way.
PSALM CXXXIX.
THOU, Lord, by strictest search hast known my rising up and lying down ;
My secret thoughts are known to thee, known long before conceivtl by me.
Thine eye my bed and path surveys, my public haunts, my private ways;
Thou know’st what ’tis my lips would vent, my yet unutter’d words’ intent.
Surrounded by thy pow’r I stand, on ev’ry side I find thy hand;
O skill, for human reach too high ! too dazzling bright for human eye !
O could I so perfidious be, to think of once deserting thee,
Where, Lord, could I thy influence shun ? or whither from thy presence run t
Search, try, O God, my thoughts and if mischief lurks in any part;
Correct me where Igo astray, [heart, and guide me in thy perfect way.
PSALM XXIII.
THE Lord himself, the mighty Lord, vouchsafes to be my guide ;
The shepherd, by whose constant care my wants are all supplied.
In tender grass he makes me feed, and gently there repose;
Then leads me to cool shades, and where refreshing water flows.


He does my wand’ring soul reclaim, and, to his endless praise,
Instruct with humble zeal to walk in his most righteous ways.
I pass the gloomy vale of death, from fear and danger free ;
For there his aiding rod and staff defend and comfort me.
Since God does thus his wondrous love through all my life extend,
That life to him I will devote, and in his temple spend.
PSALM XXXIV.
THRO’all the changing scenes of life in trouble and in joy,
The praises of my God shall still my heart and tongue employ,
Of his deliv’rance I will boast, till all that are distrest
From my example comfort take, and charm their griefs to rest.
O magnify the Lord with me, with me exalt hig'Name;
When in distress to him I call’d he to my rescue came.
Their drooping hearts were soon re- who look’d to him for aid;
Desir’d success in ev’ry face [fresh’d, a cheerful air display’d.
Behold, say they, behold the man whom Providence reliev’d;
The man so dang’rously beset, so wondrously retriev’d!
O make but trial of his love experience will decide,
How bless’d they are, and only they, who in his truth confide,
PSALM XLII.
AS pants the hart for cooling streams, when heated in the chase;
So longs my soul, O God, for thee, and thy refreshing grace.
For thee, my God, the living God, my thirsty soul doth pine:
O when shall I behold thy face, thou Majesty divine!
One trouble calls another on, and gath’ring o’er my head,
Fall spouting down, till round my soul a roaring sea is spread.
But when' thy presence, Lord of life, has once dispell’d this storm,
To thee I’ll midnight anthems sing, and all my vows perform.
PSALM LXII.
MY soul for help on God relies, from him alone my safety flows;
My rock, my health, that strength supplies, to bear the shock of all my foes.
How long will ye contrive my fall, which will but hasten on your own 1
You’ll totter like a bending wall, or fence of uncemented stone.
God does his saving health dispense, and flowing blessings daily send;
He is my fortress and defence, on him my soul shall still depend.
In him, ye people, always trust, before his throne pour out your hearts;
For God, the merciful and just, his timely aid to us imparts.
PSALM LXV.
FOR thee, O God, our constant praise in Sion waits, thy chosen seat;
Our promis’d altars there we’ll raise, and all our zealous vows complete.
O thou, who to my humble pray’r didst always bend thy listening ear,
To thee shall all mankind repair, and at thy gracious throne appear.
Our sins, though numberless, in vain to stop thy flowing mercy try ;
Whilst thou o’erlook’st the guilty stain, and washestout the crimson dye.


Blest is the man, who, near thee plac’d, within thy sacred dwelling lives
Whilst we at humbler distance taste the vast delights thy temple gives.
PSALM LXXVII.
TO GOD I cried, who to my help did graciously repair ;
In trouble’s dismal day I sought my God with humble pray’r.
All night my fest’ring wound did run, no med’cine gave relief;
My soul no comfort would admit, my soul indulg’d her grief.
I thought on God, and favors past, but that increas’d my pain;
I found my spirit more oppress’d, the more I did complain.
Through ev’ry watch of tedious night thou keep’s,t my eyes awake
My grief is swell’d to that excess, I sigh, but cannot speak.
Has God for ever cast us off! withdrawn his favor quite ?
Are both his mercy and his truth retir’d to endless night?
I’ll call to mind his works of old, the wonders of his might;
On them my heart shall meditate, my tongue shall them recite.
PSALM CH.
WHEN I pour out my soul in pray’r, do thou, O Lord, attend
To thy eternal throne of grace let my sad cry ascend.
O hide not thou thy glorious face in times of deep distress;
Incline thine ear, and, when I call, my sorrows soon redress.
Each cloudy portion of my life like scatter’d smoke expires ;
My shrivell’d bones are like a hearth parch'd with continual fires.
My heart, like grass that feels the blast of some infectious wind,
Does languish so with grief, that scarce my needful meat I mind.
My days, just hast’ning to their end, are like an ev’ning shade;
My beauty does, like wither’d grass, with waning lustre fade.
But thy eternal state, O Lord, ' no length of time shall waste,
The mem’ry of thy wondrous works from age to age shall last.
PSALM cm.
MY SOUL inspir’d with sacred love, God’s holy Name for ever bless ;
Of all his favors mindful prove, and still thy grateful thanks express.
’Tis he that all thy sins forgives, and after sickness makes thee sound ;
Prom danger he thy life retrieves, by him with grace and mercy crown’d.
The Lord abounds with tender love, and unexampled acts of grace;
His waken’d wrath dobs slowly move, his willing mercy flows apace.
God will not always harshly chide, but with his anger quickly part;
And loves his punishments to guide more by his love than our desert,
PSALM CVI.
0 RENDER thanks to God above, the fountain of eternal love;
Whose mercy firm through ages past has stood, and shall for ever last.
Who can his mighty deeds express, not only vast but numberless ?
What mortal eloquence can raise his tribute of immortal praise?
Happy are they, and only they, who from thy judgments never stray r
Who know what’s right, nor only so, but always practise what they know.
Extend to me that favor. Lord, thou to thy chosen dost afford;
When thou return’stto set them free, let thy salvation visit me.


HYMNS.
For the Morning.
AWAKE, my soul, and with the sun.
Thy daily stage of duty run;
Shake off dull sloth, and early rise
To pay thy morning sacrifice.
2.
Redeem thy raispent moments past.
And live this day as if the last ;
Thy talents to improve take care ;
For the great day thyself prepare.
3.
Let all thy converse be sincere,
Thy conscience as the noon-day clear
For God's all-seeing eye surveys
Thy secret thoughts, thy works and ways.
4.
Wake, and lift up thyself, my heart,
And with the angels bear thy part;
Who all night long unwearied sing
High glory to th’ eternal King!
HYMN I.
Come, ye sinners, poor and wretched.
Come to mercy’s open door;
Jesus ready stands to save you,
Full of pity, love, and power.
He is able,
He is willing; doubt no more.


2.
Ho! ye needy, come and welcome,
God’s free bounty glorify
True belief, and true repentance,
Every grace that brings us nigh
Without money,
Come to Jesus Christ and buy,
3.
Come ye weary, heavy laden.
Wholly ruin’d by the fell;
If you tarry till you’re better,
You will never come at all:
Not the righteous,—
Sinners Jesus came to call.
4.
Lo! the incarnate God ascended,
Pleads the merit of his blood
Venture on him, venture wholly
Let no other trust intrude:
None but Jesus
Can do helpless sinners good.
HYMN 11.
COME, Holy Spirit, come,
Let thy bright beams arise;
Dispel the darkness from pur minds.
And open now our eyes.
2.
Cheer our desponding hearts,
W ith visitations sweet;
Give us to lie, with humble hope.
At our Redeemer’s feet.
3.
Revive our drooping faith,
Our doubts and fears remove,
And kindle in our breasts the flame
Of never-dying love.
4.
Convince us of our sin,
And lead to Jesus’blood,
And to our wond’ring view reveal
The secret love of God.
HYMN HI.
LORD, when we bend before thy throne,
And our confession pour,
Teach us to feel the sins we own,
And hate what we deplore.


2.
Our broken spirits pitying see,
True penitence impart;
Then let a kindling glance from thee,
Beam hope on every heart.
3.
When we disclose our wants in prayer,
May we our wills resign,
And not a thought our bosoms share,
That is not w'holly thine.
4.
May faith each weak petition fill,
And raise it to the skies,
And teach our heart ’tis goodness still
That grants it or denies.
HYMN IV.
Oh for a heart to praise my God,
A heart from sin set free, —
A heart that’s sprinkled with the blood
So freely shed for me.
2.
A heart resign’d, submissive, meek, —
My dear Redeemer’s throne, —
Where only Christ is heard to speak,
Where Jesus reigns alone.
3.
An humble, lowly, contrite heart,
Believing, true, and clean:
Which neither life nor death can part
From him that dwells within.
4.
Thy nature, gracious Lord, impart ;
Come quickly from above;
Write the new name upon my heart,
Thy new best name 'of love.
HYMN V.
THE hour of my departure’s come
I hear the voice that calls me home;
At last, O Lord, let trouble cease,
And let thy servant die in peace.
2.
Not in my innocence I trust;
I bow before thee in the dust;
And thro’ my Saviour’s blood alone,
I look for mercy at thy throne.


3.
I leave the world without a tear,
Save for the friends I hold so dear;
To heal their sorrows, Lord, descend,
And to the friendless prove a friend.
4.
I come, I come at thy command,
I give my spirit to thy hand,
Stretch forth thine everlasting arm,
And shield me in the last alarm.
5.
The hour of my departure’s come,
I hear the voice that calls me home,
Now, O my God, let trouble cease,
Now let thy servant die in peace.
For the Evening.
GLORY to thee, my God, this night,
For all the blessings of the light;
Keep me, O keep me, King of kings,
Beneath thy own almighty wings!
2.
Forgive me, Lord, for thy dear Son,
The ill that I this day have done;
That, with, the world, myself, arid'thee,
I, ere I sleep, at peace may be.
3.
Teach me to live, that I may dread
The grave as little as my bed;
Teach me to die that so I may
Rise glorious at the awful day.
4.
O let my soul on thee repose!
And may sweet sleep mine eyelids close;
Sleep, that shall me more vig’rous make,
To serve my God, when I awake.
5.
If in the night I sleepless lie,
My soul with heavenly thoughts supply;
Let no ill dreams disturb my rest,
No powers of darkness me molest.
H. DOWLTNO, PRINTER, LAUNCESTON




