

3 £234
A Fantasy For Children
Illustrated by STAN H. CLEMENTS




antasyForChildren
V i /p
w * u Ky ■ ■ mcMl
m. & A
Illustrated by STAN H. CLEMENTS
vt-w*L i: -. ■ '•k.' -S!?
„ “fe s
Str r ''A
< J rM
s
1
* / -''* •*- V* I JBW#(| ■*- -W- /- rf


ET t i
IT WAS a cold morning with the wind blowing strong from the sea. When Teddy
woke and rolled sleepily out of bed he heard the surf on the small beach and
the boom and crash of the breakers as the gale flung them against the rocky coast.
Standing up near the window he could see the little promenade below, deserted
except for a couple of dogs. There were no holiday makers taking a before-breakfast
stroll, and no one m the water. Teddy didnt blame anyone for wanting to
The Boars Head, as the foreland was called, was half hidden in spume.
j and the great splinter of rock near tne snout, known as the Boars
V •/ T
— /


C l Bs' *0
Tusk, was almost smothered in white foam. Further out, the hidden reefs
ringed with spray.
It was a good day for a little boy to play near the fire.
Teddy heard his mother moving about downstairs, preparing to go to work, so
he began to dress himself. Dressing was a tremendous job for Teddy. It was so hard
to know which was the front of his pants and which the back, and as for his
shoes, hard as he tried to figure it out, he could never tell which shoe went on
his right foot and which on his left. Fie thought his mother was very clever
because she always knew
without
much abc
A pirate ship, laden with treasure.


To-day was Teddy's birthday and he was four. It worried his mother a good
deal for she only had a few crusts of bread for breakfast and not a penny in the
house to buy her little boy any kind of a present at all. Mrs. Griffin (Teddy s
mother) worked at the boarding house on the hill, but the weather had been cold
and miserable all the summer and visitors were few and little help was needed. At
the best of times it was hard to make a living in Jamaica Bay, so called because it
was supposed to have a fair amount of sunshine. There was a romantic reason, of
course. Two hundred years ago a pirate ship, laden with treasure, had been wrecked
on the reefs which ran out from the Boar’s Head, and not a single member of the
crew had been saved. Every visitor was told this story and part of the enjoyment


was a treasure hunt among the caves, rocks and little inlets of the bay. At the
village Inn a Spanish doubloon found nearby was displayed for all to see.
It had been found on the beach about ten years ago and the excitement had not
yet died down. Somewhere in the bay itself, or further along the coast, everyone
believed a great treasure one day would be discovered.
Teddy s home was a little rough cottage built of stone and boulders. It belonged
to his father, a fisherman whose smack was lost, soon after Teddy was born, in
a terrific gale. Just below was a little inlet where the fishing boat used to be pulled
up almost high and dry at low tide.
Teddy s mother had tears in her eyes this morning. A stormy day always brought
sad memories. She called to Teddy and he crawled downstairs backwards on his


hands and knees. He was still afraid to go down unless
he held his mother s hand. As usual his pants had to
be reversed, and his shoes too. His mother kissed him
but said nothing about his birthday. Teddy crunched
a dry crust, drank half a cup of milk and sat on the
front steps in the sunlight to watch the sea gulls and
the sea horses romping in.
A little later his mother told a neighbour she
would not be home till evening and asked her
to keep an eye on Teddy. The little chap needed
little watching. He never strayed far away.
About six o’clock that evening Mrs. Griffin
was on her way home. In her pocket was a bright
half-a-crown. She had found it in the gutter of the promenade. She had tramped
to a neighbouring village for work, and felt very tired and despondent as she had
met with no success. Now she and Teddy would not go hungry to bed. After
buying some food, she had a shilling over in the pocket of her overcoat. At the
end of the promenade, a little shop sold confectionery, toys, and all sorts of odds


and ends. Yes, she would buy Teddy a birthday present if she could get one for a shilling.
There were drums and bugles, swords and guns, trains and ships, and quite a
variety of toy animals in that shop. Teddy had always wanted a toy animal, one
that he could pull after him during the day and take to bed at night. But toy
animals, it seemed, were expensive nothing under half-a-crown. Disappointed, Mrs.
Griffin turned to go, when she caught sight of a little toy donkey with cute little
cane panniers, standing in a corner of the top shelf. The little donkey nodded its head
to her so plainly that she could not mistake it. Surprised, she glanced at it again
and the little donkey nodded once more.
How much is that little donkey up there? Mrs. Griffin asked.
“Oh, that,” said the shop lady, T could let - you have that cheap. It has stood
there since Abdul Aziz, the Merchant from Baghdad, died in the Inn, six years ago
come Christmas. I bought it with some rubbish at an auction sale.
She climbed on a chair, lifted the donkey down and gave it a good dusting
before placing it on the little counter. It was a very excellent little donkey, as natural
as life and in good condition.


"I suppose you are buying it for your little boy." she said
"Yes." Mrs. Griffin replied, looking at the toy. “Its Teddy's birthday.”
Very well, you can have it for a shilling. I got it cheap enough.”
That night little Teddy, well fed and warm, went to sleep very happy with his
little donkey lying beside him
In the light of day, the donkey looked
He had nice long ears, a dark grey coat, and
even more beautiful
a darker coloured
cross on his back as every good donkey should have. Teddy
trundled him round and round the cottage on the little
sandy path, stopping now and again to pick him up
and give him a good hug.
The donkey, called Belshazzar, really
brought some good fortune to ,
that little house because
At the end of the promenade was
a a little shop.
Jk
H —-
r .(£}S&


m
“How much is that little
donkey?”
h a
\\^


-- ' ~ | ,
jpv —_ —
although little Teddy and his mother lacked many things, they did not go really
hungry to bed again.
Nearly a vear went by. Jamaica Bay steadily became less popular as the weather
ont cold, and at length Nlrs. Griffin made up her mind to leave it for an inland
town where she might obtain regular work. Teddy cried when his mother spoke
about leaving Jamaica Bay. He loved his little home, the rocky coast, the freshness
and tang of the sea. and he was sure Belshazzar would pine away if he could not
t
be exercised around that old familiar path while he listened to the sea gulls calling
on windy days.
■ j j
There are rovs which always remain just
toys. There are others
that children love so
deeply that they are as
1 -
0
CD
Teddy trundled the donkey
round and round.


real and as comforting as though they were alive. Some children have a number of
toys, but little Teddy had one and so he took the greatest care of it. Belshazzar
was never out of his sight. The little donkey stood by his plate when Teddy had
a meal. He had a warm place by the fire when the nights were cold. and. of course,
always shared Teddy s pillow when he went to bed.
Teddy always told Belshazzar a little story before he went to sleep. It was often
a story the little donkey had heard over and over again, but he did not seem to
mind. Often long before Teddy got to the end of the story he'd put his arm tight
round Belshazzar, and give a tired little yawn and that’s all Teddy would remember
till the sun was shining through the window pane.
Teddy talked to Belshazzar a great deal. He was rather a lonely little child as no
one took much notice of the widow’s little boy who lived in that queer stone
cottage down near the beach. Belshazzar always went just where Teddy wanted to
take him and he never quarrelled or argued the point.
But that did not mean that Belshazzar never spoke at all. As a matter of fact,
Teddy and his little donkey earned on long conversations. Other people may not
have understood what Belshazzar was saying, but Teddy did. You see. Belshazzar
always said the very thing that Teddy wanted him to say.


Teddy cried when his mother spoke of
leaving Jamaica Bay.
(S
• «
One really warm and fine afternoon, following a particularly bad storm, the
villagers sauntered along the promenade, glad to be out. Teddy, after carefully
brushing Belshazzar, took him for a run round the garden path. Something very unusual
happened as they were having a short rest at the back of the cottage. Belshazzar began
to grow. Teddy's eyes opened so wide that they almost popped out. In two minutes
he was as big as a spaniel, and in five as big as a retriever dog. Teddy watched
Belshazzar with wonderment, too astonished to speak. In fact, it was the donkey who
spoke first.
"Climb on my back, Teddy,” Belshazzar said in a very quiet voice, “I’m taking


%#
/ / \ \
‘Climb on my back, ”
Belshazzar said.
I I
* \.
&
if*


you tor a ride.' He was then almost as big as a real donkey!
Teddv clambered on Belshazzar's back and placed a leg in each pannier. Even
when he was up there and saw the donkey really wiggle his ears he could not believe
the donkey was alive.
You re wunnerful." said Teddy as Belshazzar stepped out.
The excitement of it had left him almost breathless. Belshazzar passed
through the gate, struggled up
broke into an easy trot.
the little track to the promenade, and there
Of course, there were other
donkeys on the beach beloved by little boys
and girls who only saw a donkey at a seaside resort, but none like Belshazzar.
He could run without being beaten or sworn at, and he tore
along that promenade at such a pace that Teddy dreaded they
in
J mi ght meet the local policeman.
r "


fife
There wat a little crowd ''
15
Teddy was now really enjoying himself, and seeing a little crowd
behind him, he thought they were chasing Belshazzar, and so encouraged
the donkey to run still harder. In a very short time they had gone
such a distance that even the boarding house, which could be
seen by ships quite far out to sea, had disappeared from view.
On one side were farm houses and cows peacefully chewing
the cud, and on the other the steep cliff with the sea swirling ?
below.
Now what happened after this was told by Teddy and
must be set down here. The only one who can confirm
the story is Belshazzar, but as he took the principal part
in the adventure no one has dared to question him
about it. It must be remembered, too, that Belshazzar
came from Baghdad where all sorts of strange
things once happened, and he really
did nod to Teddy’s
J 77


m
wMSIAi Ifc^^wJ
i .\nmm v\\ f
PWjl
- ■
_ O-J\W _J I
La a \ Jtfcr fY'V'yu: £—=
Ifp. 1 ,-A fa fr^Z/ST
llbßfeS^wSt
O —o
On one side were farm houses.
!I|A r"C^>—' o^ ( % 'A nsr>-CAfe
j (
r j •-• _ > l A 7 :~ a y r
L - <=£
S M ////f <=^=>
f f v/L -
>* m&W.
/ i
■ r M




mother when she first saw him in the little shop on the promenade.
Belshazzar, a very wise donkey indeed, quietly jogged on till the sun set and the
moon rose like a great silver globe out of the sea. Teddy, strangely enough, was not
the least bit tired or sleepy, and. of course, did not feel afraid, with dear old
Belshazzar giving him a cheery word now and again. He had to cling hard to the
donkeys mane when he climbed down a very steep and narrow track to a little
cor e. Nobody but a donkey, and no donkey but Belshazzar, could have clambered
down so dangerous a path in such a safe and sure-footed way. At last he passed
through a short dark cavern and stood on a little beach covered with shells, no
wider than Teddy s garden, and there, as though cast up by the sea, Teddy saw a
little metal chest, black with age and covered with barnacles. He had heard his
mother and others speak about the wrecked pirate ship and now one thought came
into his mind as he leaped to the ground - that chest contained TREASURE.
Belshazzar knelt down and said. The chest is not heavy. Tift it up and place
it in one of the panniers.
Teddy lifted it and found it heavy enough to tax his strength.
Now climb up again, said Belshazzar, and without further ado the donkey


iV-
v J 0 *
' MM jr i I 1 *
* .'v ,• o \ \^4u.
started off for home at a slow and easy pace.
Teddy did not remember much about the return journey
but when he woke Belshazzar was standing near the garden
fence overlooking the inlet, breathing hard and looking very
tired indeed. The moon shone fitfully out of a cloudy sky.
Teddy jumped off the donkey’s back and with a big effort
lifted the treasure chest down, but the weight of it was too
much for a very weary little boy, and Teddy overbalanced
and fell. The chest probably slid down the loose bank where
Teddy failed to see it. Anyway, he was far too tired to look
for it. But what was more alarming, Belshazzar had disappeared
too. Teddy was just about to burst out crying when his
foot touched something soft, and there stood dear Belshazzar.
a little toy donkey once more.
It was late when Mrs. Griffin came home. She
had hurried along till she was quite breathless,
fearing something might have happened to her


Ja
The moon rose like a great
silver globe.
little son. She had been unable to find work
and it seemed to her that they were fated
to live in Jamaica Bay for the rest of their
lives with hardships and want as their daily
lot. She hoped Teddy had gone round to a
neighbour before it became dark. But when
she entered the kitchen and lit the lamp,
she saw Teddy asleep on the sofa with his
little arm around his beloved Belshazzar. He
did not waken when she carried him
upstairs and put him to bed.
She did not retire till late. Then a storm
blew up and the ram and wind buffeted
the house until it shook. Her-
~ anxieties did not grow less
Every night she closed her
eyes wondering
? w
SB.#,
7^^


~ They on a


fern
- "V-*,
«• si ° -“i
V
how much longer she would be able to carry on. Nothing seemed to go right.
She woke at dawn. The sea was rough but the wind had died down. As she
looked through the kitchen window, she noticed that a corner of the fence
overlooking the inlet had been blown down. Ruefully she went out to /
inspect the damage. Portion of the garden had slid down too,
and half exposed in the sand and pebbles was a dark square
object that looked very much like a small chest. It did
not take her long to dig it out and carry it into
the house. Although covered with barnacles she
recognised it as a large jewel case made of /J{ ./Sa\
metal. Trembling with excitement she jj %\f
placed it on the kitchen table and \^
began to scrape it. All the stones
she had heard of the pirate f
ship and the vast treasure Vi
it had contained, ran
through her


mind. She could not work fast enough. Presently she had cleaned the chest
sufficiently to see it was beautifully embossed. Just then Teddy came down the
stairs backwards, with his pants on-back to front.
“That’s my treasure chest!’' he shouted, his blue eyes dancing. “Belshazzar found
it and we brought it home.
Teddy told his story as he stood on a chair and watched his mother trying to
prise the lid of the chest with the hammer and the carving knife. She knew Teddy
was a fanciful child and had heard many stones about hidden treasure in Jamaica


K The chest slid down the o j /
\ loose back. j
2^2
(
\ I
■^J
u_
O’.
Bay. The sight of the chest probably had started his
imagination to work and she felt quite proud that her little
son could concoct so quickly such a romantic story. Perhaps he
dreamed it, and again, strange things do happen in this world. She felt >
that anything might happen with Belshazzar around. Many wonderful stories
had come from Baghdad, and perhaps old
leave his country. Who knows?
Abdul might have been forced to
Soon after Teddy had finished telling
story his mother
prised the lid
24


I M J
B' y
| r
of the chest open. It was not full of gold or silver coins, but
jewellery so beautiful that it set her brain in a whirl. Bracelets,
necklaces, rings, bangles, ropes of pearls and other precious
stones, the loot of a palace at least, all heaped together. She
emptied them out on the table. The sun, peeping through the
window, touched the gems and she was almost blinded by
saw Teddy asleep on the
sofa.
t >
s>r\'


and robbers to steal the chest, so she took it upstairs and placed it
under the bed.
Teddy caught her hand, and, with a cute look, said, Belshazzar will look after
it, Mummie, and then she felt nervous no more. There was only room in her
heart for gratitude. It was a bright and beautiful morning and the little waves


w
dimpled and sparkled in the sun. They broke with a soft, musical swish in the
little inlet where Teddy's father used to moor his fishing boat. If only he were
with them now to share their good fortune!
Teddy and his mother did not leave Jamaica Bay. They live very happily in a
beautiful house on a hill overlooking the bay and are rich enough to help
and do good to a number of
unfortunate people.
There came a day when
Teddy ceased to play
with Belshazzar and then
his mother
little donkey in
She prised the lid open.
r i
29


S'
—
L—-—
Belshazzar watches Teddy doing his
homework every night.


right hand corner of the mantelpiece. From that warm spot, Belshazzar watches
Teddy doing his homework every night. Mrs. Griffins eyes become moist when she
glances up at Belshazzar and think' how much she has to be grateful for, and
then, it may of course only be the flames flickering in the fire, but Belshazzar
gives her a very knowing nod.
THE END


'X A
bPc
NPUil^ATlO^/
SERIES E 9




==. C THE HOUSE OF )
0 « A II r « «i HMCTKIW
