

wb Fp
Ri o
Price One Penny


Oxford Bible for Teachers.
Containing the texts of the Old and New Testaments, with or
without marginal references, and in either the Authorized or
Revised Versions, together with the Oxford Helps to the Bible, and
124 full-page plates. In many styles and bindings, from 3J. to
The Palestine Pictorial Bible.
The Holy Bible (Authorized Version). With a series of illustrations
made from pictures painted in the Holy Land by J. Clark, r.i.,
and H. A. Harper, for the Scripture Gift Mission. With 56
full-page Illustrations in Colours, 60 in Black and White, and 15
Maps, from /[s. net; on Oxford India paper, from gs. 6d. net.
With 32 Illustrations in Colours, and Maps, from 2 s. net. With
32 Illustrations in Black and White, and Maps, from is, net.
My Counsellor:
Holy Scripture arranged as Daily Meditations
throughout the Year.
Large type editions, from 25.; on Oxford India paper, from 2s. 6d.
“Thumb” Edition, from is. net. In separate volumes.
1. MY MORNING COUNSELLOR.
2, MY EVENING COUNSELLOR.
In large type, 241110., from u. each ; also in a Miniature “ Thumb ”
Edition on Oxford India paper, from 6d. net per volume. The
original edition printed in red and black on Oxford India paper,
from 3J. 6 d. Ninety-fourth Thousand.
The Life, Teaching, and Work
of the Lord Jesus Christ.
The R.V. text of the Gospels arranged as a continuous narrative.
By G. Wyld. New popular edition (sixth thousand). Foolscap
Bvo. u. net.
OF ALL ‘BOOKSELLERS .
London: HENRY FROWDE, Oxford University Press,
Amen Corner, E.C,


T ames Chalmers
of New Guinea
Prepared by
W. GRINTON BERRY, M.A.
LONDON
THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
4 Bouverie Street and 65 St. Paul’s Churchyard


The only authorised and complete life of the martyred missionary of New
Guinea is ‘James Chalmers: his Autobiography and Lettersby the Rev,
Richard Lovett, M.A., published by the Religious Tract Society, at 3 s. 6d.,
and now in its seventh edition. The materials of this short sketch are
derived from that enthralling volume, which may be cordially commended to
the notice of those who have not yet read it.


ONE OF TAMATE’S NUMEROUS SCUFFLES WITH
CANNIBAL SAVAGES.
James Chalmers of |lem Guinea.
MISSIONARY AND MARTYR.
JAMES Chalmers, whose heroic career was crowned
by a martyr’s death at the hands of savage cannibals,
was a Scotsman, born at Ardrishaig, Argyllshire, on
August 4, 1851. His father, a stonemason, had migrated
to the Western Highlands from Aberdeen, and his
mother was of pure Highland blood. The life of young
Scots born in the station of life to which J ames Chalmers
belonged was stern and rather hard. One of Chalmers’s
earliest memories was that of his mother taking him to


school and giving the master strict injunctions not to
spare the rod.
Though a vigorous, healthy boy, quite prepared for
roughing it, he was quick to resent an injustice, tender and
sensitive of heart. On one occasion he received a very
severe thrashing from the master for a fault he did not
commit. In the violence of his wrath the dominie broke
several canes over the boy. More than thirty years
later, when Chalmers, now a missionary of approved
worth and great reputation, revisited his old home, the
sting of this injustice was still fresh. The old school-
master, who had long ago discovered that he had made
a mistake, expressed his sorrow, with a quiver in his
voice ; Chalmers, who was equally touched, turned the
conversation to more pleasant memories.
Strength, fire, and tenderness—a powerful combina-
tion of qualities—were all equally prominent in the
character of James Chalmers.
Boyish Adventures.
Young Chalmers was a thoroughly boyish boy, fond
of the fresh air and the sea, ever ready for an adventure.
In his early days he acquired that strength and fearless-
ness and skill which enabled him, as his biographer states,
to steer his whaleboat through wild seas and the wilder
Pacific surges which thunder over the coral-reef. When
he was about ten years of age, Chalmers, by his presence
of mind and courage, saved a boy from drowning. For
this exploit he was rewarded by the admiration and
cheers of the master and the scholars. Some years
afterwards he made another gallant rescue from drowning.
A little child had fallen into the sea and was being
carried away by the current, when Chalmers jumped into
the water, seized hold of it, and brought the child safely
ashore. The child seemed to be dead, but was soon
brought round to life by friends.
The parents of James Chalmers were simple, God-
fearing folk. In all weathers, wind or calm, rain or snow,
sunshine or storm, the father went to church, taking
James with him. At eleven years of age Chalmers came


under the influence of the Rev. Gilbert Meikle, minister
of the United Presbyterian Church at Inveraray. Mr.
Meikle was superintendent of his own Sunday school,
took a lively interest in each individual scholar, and
would walk many miles to inquire the reason of absence.
Decides to become a Missionary.
While still a boy in Sunday school, James Chalmers
made the great decision of his life. One Sunday after-
noon Mr. Meikle read to the children assembled together
in the church a letter from a missionary in Fiji, printed
in a missionary magazine. The letter spoke of the
power of the Gospel even over cannibals. At the close
of the reading Mr. Meikle’s eyes were wet, and, looking
over his dimmed spectacles, he said, ‘ I wonder if there
is a boy here this afternoon who will yet become a
missionary, and by-and-by bring the Gospel to cannibals ? ’
James Chalmers answered the appeal in his heart, ‘Yes,
God helping me, I will/ He left the Sunday school
without saying a word to anyone, and in the course of
his long walk home knelt down by the wayside, prayed
to God to accept him, and make him a missionary to the
heathen.
This impression was like the deep scoring of lead
pencil upon thin paper. It was erased, but the indenta-
tions upon the heart remained, and in days to come were
filled in again. The attendance of James at Sunday
school became irregular, and though he loved Mr.
Meikle, his conscience was so uneasy that there was
hardly anything he disliked more than meeting him in
the streets. Mr. Meikle was short-sighted, and if young
Chalmers saw him coming towards him he got out of
his way as quickly as possible, climbing a wall if necessary
for that purpose. Thus conscience makes us cowards.
Chalmers’s first experience of the world of toil and
business was in the office of some Inveraray lawyers. He
was a youth of many pranks, but there were pranks for
which he received credit that was not due to him. ‘ I
was generally blamed,’ he wrote many years afterwards,
‘ for everything out of the ordinary that took place,


whether I had taken part in it or not* Though he had
not yet set himself in the path of right, young Chalmers
was prevented from going far in the path of wrong by
his love for Mr. Meikle and Mr. Duncan Munroe, a
Christian merchant in the town. The continual message
of the latter to Chalmers, as he met him in the street,
was that Jesus loves us and wants us much to love Him.
The Entrance of the Light.
In November, 1859, two evangelists from the North of
Ireland arrived in Inveraray at the request of Mr. Meikle
to hold a series of meetings, Chalmers and some other
young fellows had resolved to make trouble, but an earnest
friend got hold of him, presented him with a Bible and
persuaded him to attend the meetings in the right spirit.
The younger evangelist chose as his text, ‘ And the Spirit
and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say,
Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whoso-
ever will, let him take the water of life freely ’ (Rev. xxii.
17) ; and Chalmers felt that the preacher was speaking
directly to him, and was deeply impressed. The following
Sunday night, in the Free Church, he was pierced through
and through with conviction of sin, and felt lost beyond
all hope of salvation. The next day Mr. Meikle dealt
with the anxious soul, into whose heart gladness began
to enter. The full light of God soon dawned upon his
soul, and he believed unto salvation.
Immediately after his conversion, Chalmers, who was
eighteen years of age, became a Christian worker,
addressing gatherings in public, and establishing several
cottage meetings in the town. His vow, that he would
be a missionary to the heathen, was recalled. But how
to carry it into effect ? —that was the question of great
practical difficulty. His parents were too poor to give
him a University course, and his scholastic attainments
were too slender to warrant him in the hope of winning
a scholarship. Mr, Meikle eagerly helped the youth in
his study of Latin and Euclid, and sustained him with the
information that many students supported themselves
whilst at college by doing work as missionaries in


connection with the Glasgow City Mission and Churches.
In 1861, accordingly, Chalmers joined the Glasgow City
Mission. His ultimate object was to enter the University
and become a minister of the United Presbyterian Church.
But he was diverted from this project by Dr. Turner, a
well-known South Sea missionary, who was then in
Scotland, carrying through the press an edition of the
Samoan Scriptures. Dr. Turner advised Chalmers to offer
his services to the London Missionary Society. He did
so, was accepted and sent to Cheshunt College, Thus
his work in Glasgow, after eight months, came to an
end.
In after years Chalmers blamed himself for living at
Cheshunt on the ‘ charity,’ as he described it, of the
London Missionary Society. But at the time he was
grateful for this help, and only lamented that the
year which the Society allowed for personal expenses
could not in his case be augmented. The missionary
zeal grew stronger each day of his life. Chalmers was
very happy at Cheshunt; he worked hard to supply the
deficiencies of his early education, and, although he won
no reputation as a scholar, left a very distinct impression
on the life of the place. He had his full share in the
practical jokes which so generally form the main diversion
of young collegians.
A Raft on the New River.
Fellow students have given vivid descriptions of the
manner of man Chalmers was in these days. ‘He was
a real man of God/ says one, ‘and a tender-hearted
Christian disciple/ ‘What he did/ says another, ‘he did
with both hands earnestly.’ The New River ran through
the beautiful grounds at Cheshunt. ‘My most vivid
memories of Chalmers/ wrote another, ‘are of him on
that river —steering a raft or being upset and floundering
in the water! ’ As a rule he worked his craft with the
skill of a Canadian lumber-man. ‘ His heart was always
beating for the things of God and His kingdom. The
great enthusiasm for humanity kindled by Jesus Christ
made his life a living sacrifice I * His faith was simple,


unswerving and enthusiastic, and while he could throw a
giant’s strength into all kinds of work, he was gentle as a
child and submissive as a soldier. His abundant good
qualities were recognised by his fellow students, with whom
he was very popular. Not that he was without his faults ;
for he was too impulsive, inclined to be very strongly
prejudiced, and difficult to remove from an unreasonable
position, once he had placed himself there.
Chalmers was not meant by nature for the life of a
student, and there is nothing in the least derogatory to
Cheshunt in saying that he probably quitted it with relief.
The spirit of Christian adventure was untameable in
Chalmers, and he was eager to get at the work of his
life. After leaving Cheshunt, Chalmers spent a year at
Highgate in the home for students soon going to the
field. Then for some months he studied Rarotongan with
the Rev. George Gill, of Rectory Place, Plumstead. Mr.
Gill had laboured for many years as a missionary in
Rarotonga
Marriage.
Before proceeding to the mission field, Chalmers was
married, on October 17, 1865, to Miss Jane Hercus; ‘a
whole-hearted missionary, 5 her husband described her.
He wrote that his desire to preach Christ among the
heathen was even stronger than it had been three years
before. The more he became acquainted with redeeming
love, the more he longed to spread the story and the glory
of it in the dark places of the earth. Chalmers was ordained
two days after his marriage, and the young couple set
sail for their far-distantdestination in the South Sea Islands
in the second John Williams on January 4, 1866; but
it was not until May 20, 1867, that they set foot upon
Rarotonga.
An Adventurous Voyage.
Their experiences in the interval were very adven-
turous. All went very pleasantly until the vessel reached
Sydney. ‘ The Bible class and prayer-meetings with the


men have been blessed/ wrote Chalmers ; ‘ prayers offered
on our behalf have truly been answered, and God has
blessed souls. The careless have been led to inquire
for salvation, and the praying on board have been
aroused to greater earnestness. Our Sabbath services
and prayer meetings in the saloon have been to thirsty
ones well-springs of salvation. Souls and God’s glory are
all that we desire.’
In August the John Williams left Sydney and stood
away for the New Hebrides. She went on the reef at
Anelicahaut, and was so badly injured that she had to
return to Sydney for repairs. Twenty-two natives came
on board to keep the pumps going night and day.
Chalmers and his wife remained at Sydney six weeks,
staying with a widow lady and her four children. When
the John Williams was ready, they resumed the in-
terrupted voyage, and reached Niue or Savage Island
without mishap. They were to sail for Samoa on
January 9, 1867, but during the night of January 8-9
the John Williams became a total wreck on the reef.
Fortunately no lives were lost. ‘Do not for a moment
suppose that we feel discouraged/ wrote Chalmers in
describing the catastrophe, ‘we have no intention of
turning back and leaving our mission work. God forbid!
If possible, we shall go on now. God is our strength.
All our trust is in the Lord.’ Chalmers and his wife had
to remain six weeks on Niue, and then took passage in a
schooner to Samoa. Six weeks more were spent in Samoa,
and on the eve of setting out on the last stage of his
journey Chalmers was presented by the foreign residents
with a testimonial in money, in recognition of the great in-
terest he had taken in their spiritual welfare. The crew of
the John Williams , having saved the forecastle Bible, made
a gift of it to Chalmers as a token of gratitude for the
religious instruction they had received from him on the
vessel.
A Bully of the Pacific.
The last stage of this adventurous voyage was made
in a brig of 150 tons owned and commanded by ‘ Bully’


Hayes* one of the most notorious of Polynesian despera-
does. Hayes, however, had no objection to religious
services on board his vessel. ‘My ship is a missionary
ship now,’ he answered, ‘ and I hope you will feel it so.'
For the time being the desperado behaved like a perfect
gentleman. So marvellous was the influence of Chalmers
even upon wild, passionate, tempestuous men with whom
he came into contact, if only for a short time. ‘lf only
you were near me/ said Hayes to Chalmers, ‘ I would
certainly become a new man, and lead a different life/
Yet a few days after Chalmers had left the ship, Hayes
nearly killed his supercargo with a bag of dollars which
had been given him as the last instalment of payment
for the voyage!
Arrival at Rarotonga.
On May 20, 1867, the Mission party anchored in
the harbour of Avarua, Rarotonga. ‘ I was the first to
land,’ wrote Chalmers, ‘ and on being carried ashore from
the boat by a native he asked, “ What fellow name
belong you ? ” so that he might call it out to the shore.
I answered, “ Chalmers,” and he roared out, “ Tamate/'
hence the name.’
The difficulties and dangers which Chalmers had met
and overcome on the voyage to Rarotonga had only
strengthened his faith and enthusiasm. He now settled
down to quiet, active, fruitful labour, within the limits of
one Pacific island. This term of service was to last ten
years ; if Chalmers had known this from the beginning,
the prospect would have dismayed him, for the work on
Rarotonga was of too routine a character and too free
from personal peril exactly to suit the large, irregular,
adventurous, danger-loving nature of Tamate. ‘ For
years/ wrote Chalmers, ‘ I had longed to get amongst
real heathen and savages, and I was disappointed when
we landed on Rarotonga and found them so much civilized
and Christianized.’ But he soon discovered that there
was much corruption of life and heart under the fair
semblance and that there was plenty of hard, necessary,


most fruitful work awaiting him «n this sweet island of
the Southern Seas.
Fighting the Drink Curse.
Though there were less than 2,000 souls on Rarotonga
the curse of drink was working terrible havoc. Chalmers
waged unceasing and relentless war on this evil, and soon
acquired a position of great moral authority on the island.
Some of his methods strike one as no less novel than
forceful. Hearing loud crying, as of one in distress,
proceeding from a house, he entered it and found a
husband drunk, and beating his wife. After some per-
suasion Tamate got the man to accompany him, Mrs.
Chalmers gave him tea with a good quantity of carbonate
of soda in it and this brought him to his senses. The
sobered drunkard told the missionary that the King, the
Chief Judge, and others could all be found drinking.
Tamate used to burst in upon meetings in the bush where
the natives had assembled to drink beer or orange rum.
Naturally he was not welcome on these occasions, but the
culprits, as a rule, said nothing and, when commanded,
meekly emptied out their rum upon the grass. And then
Tamate began to talk to them about the Christ.
Starts a Newspaper.
There was an organized Christian community with a
training institution in Rarotonga, the whole being under
the supervision of Chalmers, Many of the students were
anxious to carry the Light of Truth to dark lands and in
days to come great Gospel triumphs were won in savage
New Guinea by simple, earnest, devoted Rarotongans. To
enable him to deal with subjects hardly suitable for
handling in the pulpit Tamate began a monthly news-
paper of four pages, containing news of the islands, short
articles on topical subjects and on history, and small
pieces on Scripture. There was no home on the island
where he did not preach Christ. The standard of
manners even in this Christianized island was not high.


There is a shameful significance in the statement that
when a native was drunk he generally swore in English
rather than in his own tongue, and Chalmers heard natives
cursing and swearing in English with a vigour which
would have put the most hardened English blasphemer to
shame. Yet there was much to encourage.
Triumphs of Grace.
When Vainemuri, a Christian girl, was dying, the
native deacon said to her—
‘ My child, do you hold firmly on to Christ ? ’
‘He holds me , I cling to Him,’ was the beautiful
answer. A true and deep religious experience is
revealed in that response.
An old man upon whom Mr. and Mrs. Chalmers
called was very ill. ‘Jesus has a good hold on me and I
have a good hold on Jesus. The ship is anchored on
Christ, and it cannot be broken on the reef’
A native pastor, in his closing days on this bank of the
flood, found his greatest delight in having Chalmers by
his side and going over with him the story of the
Pilgrim's Progress. A short time before he died, with
the true and immortal dream in his mind, he said, ‘ I
think the messenger has come to fetch me.’ This was
a man who in his youth had captured men in cruel battle,
cooked and helped to eat them.
Removal to New Guinea.
Yet the passionate desire of Tamate’s heart was not
completely satisfied. ‘ The nearer I get to Christ and
His cross,’ he said, ‘the more do I long for direct contact
with the heathen.’ His heart ever turned towards New
Guinea. Everything that rendered the most savage and
most degraded region of the globe repulsive to an
ordinary mortal heightened its attractive power over
Tamate. Towards the close of 1876, accordingly, the
L.M.S. decided that Chalmers should remove to New
Guinea. The directors desired to confer with Chalmers


personally, and as he had been ten years on the field it
might have been thought that the prospect of furlough
would be attractive to him. But no, he could not be
happy except in the high places of the field, at the post of
difficulty and danger, and, as a matter of fact, eleven
more years elapsed before he saw the shores of England
again. The successors of Mr. and Mrs. Chalmers arrived
in Rarotonga in April, 1877, and in the following month
the heroic missionary and his wife quitted the island to
which they had become bound by many ties of affection
and friendship. Tasks of far greater difficulty and greater
glory were set before them.
Among the Cannibals.
New Guinea was at this time practically an unknown
land, full of terrors, savagery, and human degradation.
It had an area about three times that of Great Britain,,
and was inhabited by a tall, strong race. The prevalent
religion consisted in a slavish fear of evil spirits and a
belief in the deathlessness of the soul. Tamate’s first
sphere of work was among the cannibals of Suau. He
knew something of the conditions which he would have
to encounter, because he had, while at Rarotonga, sent
forth native evangelists to carry the good news to the
New Guineans. These devoted men had had to endure
great hardships and went in continuous peril of their
lives. They often had to keep watch all night, lest they
should be attacked unawares; for the people among
whom they had come preferred that style of fighting.
But they were faithful to their mission, and did not
scruple to rebuke any Europeans who were setting a bad
example to the heathen. The reader will peruse the
following anecdote with amusement, and affectionate
pride in the sound type of Christian reared by Tamate.
The Native and the Sabbath-breaking Scotsman.
A German had erected a store in New Guinea at
the back of the mission ground over which Rua, from


Rarotonga, presided. To the store was added a cook-
house, and on a certain Sabbath day, when Rua was
holding the forenoon service, a Scotsman was busy making
an iron roof for the cook-house. Rua stood the hammer-
ing noise as long as he could, then, dismissing the
congregation, he went to his own house to get an English
Bible in which he found the chapter and verses containing
the Fourth Commandment. He then marched to the
cook-house. The German and a friend, seeing the
teacher coming with a solemn countenance, wondered
what it might, portend. The Scotsman was on the top
of the cook-house. Rua, pointing to the man on the
house, commanded, ‘ Say, come down.’
The white man, astounded at being addressed in a
peremptory manner by a coloured man, answered not
at all.
‘ Say, you know savee, I speak come down,’ repeated
Rua.
The Scotsman exploded in wrath and swearing,
‘What do you talk?’ continued Rua. ‘You white
fellow send missionary along my country, and my
country he get good, and he like Sabati much. Before,
my countrymen he eat you, but no now. I come along
New Guinea, I speak man Sabati he tapu, no work, no
fish, no hunt, no build house on Sabati; and New Guinea
man, he say, you make lie, white man, he work Sabati.
What for you make him ? Come down.’
Rua has his way. The Scotsman descends. Rua
hands him the Bible and orders him to read the Fourth
Commandment at once. Then he says, ‘ God, He
speak, you no work now. Put down hammer belong you.’
There is a quiet Sabbath for the remainder of the day.
The Delights of Cannibalism.
Tamate soon came into contact with the genuine
savage he had so longed to meet. ‘ Several of our new
friends,’ he notes, ‘ wore human jaw-bones on their arms,
and also many bones from other parts of the body.’
Chalmers once had a conversation with an old can-
nibal converted to Christianity. '


‘ Is man good to eat ? ’ asked Tamate,
‘You savee Unlamakan ?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, no good. You savee pig?' continued the
converted cannibal.
‘ Yes.’
‘Well, no good. You savee sheep?’ persisted the
ex-cannibal, leading up to a climax,
‘Yes,’ replied Tamate.
‘ Well,’ replied the veteran, ‘no good ; man he too
much good,’ and he smacked his lips.
One of Tamate’s earliest adventures in New Guinea
was to find his house surrounded by an armed ugly-
looking mob of painted savages. The men were
demanding tomahawks, knives, hoop-iron, and beads,
and gave Chalmers and his party to understand that if
they did not get them there would be murder. Chalmers
perceived that firmness at the beginning, though not
without serious risks, would probably be the safer policy
in the end. ‘You may kill us,’ he answered, ‘but never
a thing will you get from us.’ He refused to come to
any terms with men who approached him armed ; from
this position no menaces would make him budge. After
a while the mob retired to the bush behind the house,
and next day the ringleader came to express to Tamate
his regret for what had happened. Tamate was now glad
to make friends with him and to give him a present.
A Dainty Morsel for the Missionary’s Wife.
The natives then began to show the strangers kind-
ness. They received numerous invitations to feasts,
some of them cannibal feasts. A certain affable, scantily-
clad gentleman, as a kindly attention to the missionary’s
wife, offered her as a present a portion of a man’s breast,
already cooked !
Mrs. Chalmers proved herself, in the situation of
constantly impending horror amidst which she lived, a
woman of truly heroic mettle. The idea of Tamate’s
work, namely pioneering, necessitated on one occasion a


prolonged absence from her side. She was left behind
at Suau at the mercy of savages, with two or three
MAN-CATCHING : A METHOD OF WARFARE AMONG THE CANNIBALS
OF NEW GUINEA. THE MAN CAPTURED IS SLAIN AND EATEN.
Rarotongan teachers and their wives as her only helpers.
Her courage was sublime, but the strain upon her health
was great. The confidence which Tamate placed in the
natives awoke a noble response, for in his absence they


showed his wife no little kindness. They brought her
constant supplies of food, always impressing upon her,
ONE OF HIS MAJESTY’S SAVAGE DEPUTIES IN NEW GUINEA,
ANNEXED IN 1884.
however, that she must be sure to report their goodness
to Tamate when he returned.
During this first great exploration trip Chalmers
visited over 100 villages, at most of which a white man


had never been seen before. He went entirely unarmed,
and made some appalling discoveries of heathen degrada-
tion. A woman of a certain village, whose husband had
been dead a few days, dug up the body and made a feast
of it for her friends! The possessions which won for
Tamate most admiration were his nose and his boots !
He encountered hardships and perils innumerable, but he
never complained of these. * I think the word “ sacri-
fices,” ’ he said, ‘ ought never to be used in Christ’s service.
Leave the twaddle of sacrifices to those who do not
appreciate the sacrifice of the Cross.’ Difficulty and danger
were among Tamate’s chief delights.
Death of Mrs. Chalmers.
A great sorrow befell the intrepid missionary in the
death of his beloved wife; she had been compelled to
leave New Guinea by the state of her health, and at
Sydney on February 20, 1879, she died. Tamate’s first
intimation of his loss was a paragraph in a newspaper
shown to him at Cooktown. To the last she delighted to
talk of missionary work, and it is no exaggeration to say
that she was one of the brightest heroines the mission field
has known, Tamate’s characteristic remark amidst his
sore bereavement was : ‘ Leave me to bury my sorrow
in work for Christ, with whom my dear wife is.’ He
dismissed the idea of returning home for rest and holiday.
‘ I must to work,’ he replied. ‘lt would have a bad
impression on our teachers were Ito go home now. They
have suffered, and some of them have lost their wives,
and with them I must be. The Master is with us, and all
is well.’ Yet he was constrained to confess, in a letter
to his old minister, Mr. Meikle, that there was a great
blank in his life now. ‘ God help me to bear patiently
mv lot! ’ he exclaimed.
A Gospel of Tomahawks and Tobacco
Tamate considered that his special work lay in
reconnoitring the field, in discovering suitable places for


stations and in superintending the first settlements. In
many cases he was received more cordially than he had ex-
pected, but he was not deceived concerning the motives
which prompted this outward friendliness. ‘To-day’s
gospel with the natives is one of tomahawks and
tobacco ; we are received by them because of these. By
that door we enter to preach the Gospel of Love.’ It is
not to be wondered at that some friends at home, not
understanding that tomahawks were part of the currency
in savage New Guinea, did not like the distribution of
lethal weaoons as entrance money for the Gospel of
T ove.
Signs of Progress.
Tamate, who was never in a hurry to jump to con-
clusions favourable to his hopes, reported that there were
signs of progress— ‘ a few who really pray, and whose
lives are working parallel to their prayers.’ When he
landed at the east end of New Guinea in 1878 the ‘ death
of heathenism ’ reigned. But by 1882 a wonderful change
had been wrought—no cannibal ovens now, no feasts, no
human flesh, no desire for skulls. Tribes that would not
formerly meet except to fight now met as friends, and
sat side by side in the same house, worshipping the true
God.
Tamate at this time was again receiving pressing
invitations from the directors of the L.M.S. to come home
for furlough ; his chief reasons for deferring the acceptance
of these invitations were his absorption in New Guinea,
and his passionate love for the natives and for the glory
of the Kingdom, and his abhorrence of the deputation
work which falls to missionaries on furlough. He greatly
distrusted—as it turned out, altogether without reason—
his capacity for performing such work in a way that would
seize the interest of the Christian public. ‘ Rather than
go home engaged to do deputation work,’ he said, ‘ I would
risk climate, savages, and sea and land travelling, the
former in open boats, and the latter carrying my own
swag in New Guinea.’
We are purposely refraining from burdening the


attention of the reader with geographical details, for such
are unnecessary in a sketch such as this, which merely
aims at setting forth, in broad outline, the kind and
manner of Tamate’s work and the simple grandeur of his
character.
Service in a Cannibal Temple.
We may note here, however, that the most extra-
ordinary of Tamate’s many remarkable expeditions was
to Vailala and Orokolo on the Gulf of Papua. He was
cordially welcomed by the cannibal chiefs, who placed
a ‘temple’ at his disposal. In each of the courts or
divisions of the temple were skulls of men, women,
children, crocodiles and wild boars. The human skulls
had belonged to people who had been eaten. The
passage down the centre of the temple had the appear-
ance of glazed cloth, with figures carved on it. It was
carpeted with the outer skin of the sago palm, glazed by
the blood of the victims so frequently dragged over it.
Tamate’s two native helpers preached in this huge
temple to a crowd of savages, real cannibals, described
by Tamate as a most attentive congregation. The
service began at sunset, and when the sun rose it was
not yet over. At the conclusion the savages exclaimed,
‘No more fighting, Tamate, no more man-eating; we
have heard the good news, and we shall strive for peace.’
‘We preach the Gospel in many ways,’ wrote Tamate to
Mr. Meikle. ‘ One of our best at present is making
peace between tribes.’
A really great Englishman.
The British Government established a Protectorate
over South-Eastern New Guinea in 1884. Tamate ren-
dered the Government officials indispensable service in
communicating to the natives the purport of the various
ceremonies by which the Protectorate was formally
declared. Commodore Erskine testified to the invalu-
able help which he had received from Chalmers and


Lawes. ‘ The wonderful confidence shown by the
natives, 5 he said, ‘ must be entirely attributed to their
influence, 5 and he expressed the hope that some official
recognition of their services would be made. It need
scarcely be said that the Government paid no attention
to this recommendation. Chalmers and Lawes were
only missionaries! Tamate’s relations with the British
officials on the spot were most cordial. Vice-Admiral
Bridge, in a letter to the Times , paid a tribute to Tamate’s
vigilance, readiness and resource, and extraordinary
influence over savages. ‘ I can honestly say, 5 wrote
Admiral Bridge, ‘ that I do not know how I should have
got on without him. He had an equal power of winning
the confidence of savages quite unused to strangers and
the respect, and even love, of white seamen. 5 Admiral
Bridge described Tamate as a ‘really great Englishman.’
The only possible objection to this tribute is that he was
a Scotsman !
Chalmers and the R.T.S.
Tamate made his first visit home in 1886, leaving
New Guinea on May 11 and reaching London by way
of Sydney, Melbourne and Bombay on August 10.
Within a few weeks of his arrival in England he became
—much to his own amazement —one of the most popular
missionary speakers of the nineteenth century. He had
looked forward to this class of work with something like
dread. He found himself in situations that had a great
strangeness for him. ‘ There is to be a ladies 5 working
party for the Sevendaks bazaar, 5 we find him writing.
1 Oh horrors ! fancy me addressing a ladies’ meeting! ’
His description of himself was ‘ a bronzed savage, 5 He
was approached, in a tentative sort of way, as to whether
he would accept a Government situation in New Guinea,
but he never gave any encouragement to these overtures.
He was a missionary, a missionary first and only. In
May, 1887, Tamate addressed the annual meeting of the
Religious Tract Society. He acknowledged ‘the very
great assistance 5 which he had received from the Society.
The hymn-books used by all the natives in the Hervey


group were prepared by the Religious Tract Society, and
it was by the help of the Society that he had published a
monthly newspaper in Rarotonga.
Second Marriage.
During this visit to England Tamate became engaged
to the lady who shortly afterwards was the second Mrs.
Chalmers. She was originally Miss Elizabeth Large of
Leeds and a bosom friend of the first Mrs. Chalmers.
Miss Large became Mrs. Harrison ; and her home was
at Retford in Nottinghamshire. On the publication of
Tamate’s book Work and Advenhire in New Guinea a
long-lapsed correspondence was renewed. Chalmers
wrote to her in a very friendly and intimate strain.
‘ Lizzie, dear/ he says, ‘ in work for Christ I try to forget
my sorrow ; the wound remains and will bleed/ He
laments, in half humorous strain, that he is getting ‘ very
old and rheumatic, stiff as an old horse and lazy as one.’
A visit to Retford was one of the earliest engagements of
Tamate during his furlough in England. Mr. Harrison
was suffering from a heart affection and shortly afterwards
died. A year after Chalmers had returned to New
Guinea Mrs. Harrison came out to him to be his wife.
They settled at Motumotu, much further west than Port
Moresby which had been Tamate’s chief centre previously.
From Motumotu as headquarters he intended to explore
fresh and unknown parts of New Guinea, carrying the flag
of the Gospel into the strongest citadels of heathendom.
An Amusing Telegram.
A telegram which Tamate sent to England early in
1887, and which found its way into the newspapers
produced a considerable amount of innocent amusement ;
‘ Send one gross tomahawks, one gross butchers’knives,
going east, try to make friends between tribes/ Toma-
hawks and butchers’ knives seem ill-adapted for the
promotion of peace. But as Tamate’s biographer points
out, these articles are the most serviceable currency in the


wildest parts of New Guinea and Chalmers was simply-
asking for the replenishment of his store of barter.
Fruits of the Gospel.
Tamate rejoiced to see continually in the course of
his journeyings the good fruits of the Gospel. For
example, when a mission party was anchored off Vaga-
vaga, a deputation of clothed natives came on board.
Tamate noted that in the course of a few years a great
change had been wrought in the very appearance of
these people. When asked if they ate human flesh now,
they replied, ‘No. No eat man now, all fellow missionary
now.’ It was almost impossible to realize that these
former savages, cannibals, and murderers, were now
seeking to worship God.
The second Mrs. Chalmers soon proved that she was
made of the stuff wanted for a missionary’s wife. She
was a woman of remarkable bravery, and high Christian
principle. Naturally it was not easy for a middle-aged
woman who had spent all the former part of her life in
England to adapt herself to the conditions of discomfort,
hardship, and peril which prevailed in New Guinea.
There was also a natural repulsion towards some of the
manners and customs of the people which it needed a
strong effort of will to overcome. But she was dominated
by a sense of duty, by devotion to her husband, and to
their common Lord and Saviour.
At this time Robert Louis Stevenson, the famous
novelist, and Tamate became acquainted with each other.
Stevenson conceived the highest admiration and love for
Tamate and regarded his work with true and loving
sympathy. Says Stevenson, writing to his mother con-
cerning Tamate, ‘ He is a man nobody can see and not
love. He has plenty of faults like the rest of us ; but he’s
as big as a church.’ The novelist described the mission-
ary as ‘ a big, stout, wildish-looking man, iron-grey, with
big bold black eyes, and a deep straight furrow down
each cheek.’ Stevenson’s advice to those who deblaterated
against missions was to come and see them on the spot.


An Enthusiastic Reception.
Tamate was at this epoch able to pay a visit to the
island of Rarotonga which he had left more than thirteen
years before. He had a reception of extraordinary
enthusiasm. ‘At every house/ says Mrs, Chalmers,
‘ people came out to join us, many old people embracing
us, some throwing themselves at Tamate’s feet, embracing
them with tears rolling down their poor old faces, saying
they had never thought to look upon his face again on
earth! His name was a household word, the very children
knew all about Tamate. One poor old lady turned eighty
threw herself at Tamate’s feet, sobbing and crying, and,
clasping his legs, would not leave him for some minutes.
Mr. and Mrs. Chalmers returned to Port Moresby in
May, 1891, and Tamate was soon very busy again in
visiting the stations and striking out new pathways for
the Gospel. Perforce the devoted wife had to be left
alone at Motumotu for considerable periods. Her
sufferings during one of these occasions were acute. She
was brought to death’s door, with no one to get her
proper food or medicine. ‘ One day,’ she writes, ‘ they
carried me into the store to the medicine shelf, and
touched all the bottles until I nodded at the aconite one.
Then how to get it dropped was the question. I signed
them to steady my elbows until I dropped the quantity.
I was tenderly carried back to bed and, after the aconite,
I slept and awoke feeling much less feverish/
A Man of Resource and Boldness.
Tamate in a letter to a gathering of Cheshunt students
describes an incident in which are illustrated the boldness
and resource which carried him through many a crisis
which might have proved fatal to a less lion-hearted
man.
‘We were holding our Sunday forenoon service,’ he
wrote, ‘ and had a very good congregation, amongst them
many youths, one of whom was particularly troublesome,
especially at prayer-time. When the last prayer was


concluded, I got up, caught the youth, and made him sit
down by me, so that when all had gone out I should
speak to him alone. Some went out hurriedly, others
lingered.
‘ Waiting for all to leave, I was looking out through
a window on to a main street, when I saw a number of
excited men, armed with clubs, bows, and arrows,
rushing along towards the church. The leader carried a
large wooden broadsword. I sprang to the door just in
time to meet him as he ascended the steps, and
wrenching the sword out of his hands, I shouted. He
sprang back and the others, seeing me armed, betook
themselves in all directions, rushing helter-skelter into
the bush close by, anywhere they could get. I cleared
the house, spoke to the youth, and let him go.
‘ My own boys were sure it was a case of murder, and
they got away at the back, through the bush to our
house, informing everyone that I was murdered. It was
suggested to me I should get quietly away by the back,
but that would never have done. So, getting my few
boys and young men together, we marched home through
the village, I carrying the broadsword, to the great
amusement of those who had taken no part in the affair.
The braves had a bad time of it from the others. They
were coming to release the boy by force.’
The Fly River.
Chalmers now began to turn his thought towards the
carrying of the Gospel to the tribes on the Fly River.
The use of the word ‘ river ’ hardly covers the suggestion
of the wide and tempestuous flow of water which in fact
the Fly River is. The launch that was needed for this
work had to be provided with boilers of special strength,
‘The Fly River is a river,’ said Tamate, ‘but a bad, bad
river.’ He began his exploration by ascending it as far
as Howling Point and was well received. Here, as else-
where throughout New Guinea, he had to fight the awful
curse of drink. It is, indeed, hard to measure the
enormity of the guilt of those who supply intoxicating
liquors to savages. The question of language was an


ever-recurring difficulty. At that time in New Guinea,
within the sphere of operations of the L.M.S., there were
spoken at least seven different languages ; and every
newly opened-up district had a new tongue to be
mastered. Yet Chalmers pressed on undaunted. He
opened innumerable doorways into savage districts—that
was his distinctive work.
In the meantime he was cheered with the growth in
grace of the converts at Motumotu. He was much struck
by the description which one of them gave of heaven as
‘ the place of laughter.’ This idea of bliss was very
natural; for after a day’s work and the evening meal is
consumed the natives sit down together and peals of
laughter ring out as the story of the day’s sayings and
doings is told. It is their hour of peace, of fellowship, of
freedom from labour and care, hence the idea of heaven as
* the place of laughter.’
Tamate in England.
1894 was the year of preparation for the centenary of
the L.M.S. in 1895, and it was thought very desirable to
secure the magnetic and heart-stirring advocacy of
Tamate at the great meetings which were to be held all
over the country. Accordingly Tamate spent the latter
part of 1894 and almost the whole of 1895 in England.
Wherever he went he had very cordial receptions. The
climate of the homeland from which he had so long been
absent did not suit him. He was a man of majestic
physique, of a frame which seemed fitted to oppose a
stout resistance to ail vagaries of weather, but the wind
and the rain and the mists of England were much more
trying to him than the blazing sun and the torrential
rains and the pestilential swamps of the tropics. A
pleasing incident of this visit to the home country was
the presentation of the freedom of Inveraray, the ancient
royal burgh, situated near the place of Tamate’s birth.
The Duke of Argyll had described him as ‘ a man to be
proud of.’ The Town Council declared that it conferred
upon him the highest honour in its power in recognition
of his career as a missionary, and his eminent services in
26
James Chalmers of New Guinea.


the cause of civilization and the spread of the Gospel
among the heathen. Tamate made a speech of simple,
modest pride and satisfaction, though he confessed after-
wards that he was nervous.
The Gospel’s Power,
With his return to New Guinea towards the end of
1895 begins the last epoch of Tamate’s life. Hence-
forward, until the end, his work lay mainly among the
tribes on the Fly River. It was part of his deliberate
policy to pay repeated visits to the native teachers that
he had placed at the various stations he had established,
only by this means could their work be maintained in
efficiency. The attitude of the natives to the white man
was generally very friendly at the beginning, for their initial
anxiety was always to ascertain the chances of presents or
plunder; tobacco, calico, tomahawks, or knives were the
first desires of their hearts. Tamate, of course, recognised
the actualities of the situation, he was not deceived by
the first enthusiasm, nor discouraged by its cooling off.
The solid results attained in the past forbade depres-
sion. In the island of Saibai, for example, on one of his
visits he found the natives celebrating the opening of a
new church, built and paid for entirely by themselves.
‘ These people,’ he writes, ‘ were savages when I came to
New Guinea, and a couple of years before inveterate
skull-hunters. Now they have the finest church in all
the New Guinea and Torres Straits missions. If that is
not evidence of the Gospel’s power, what can be ?’
Tamate’s Idea of a Tonic.
Tamate was struck with severe illness while visiting
Thursday Island and was very slow in casting off its
effects. Writing from Saquane in characteristic style, he
says that he has a good deal of nausea, and no appetite,
and almost longs for ‘ a jolly big row ’ so that he might
be roused up. He describes how, on a previous occasion,
a fracas in the village had done him a great deal of good


when he was run down. We quote the passage as
illustrating Tamate’s idea of a tonic.
‘ One morning there was a big row in the village and
I was soon fetched. Getting my favourite walking-stick
I went over, and before me the combatants fled, and I
pursued some distance, overtook the leaders, and talked
fatherly to them. Some had nasty cut heads, and others
bruised bodies.
‘ It was all about a girl who ran away from her friends
because of her dislike to the youth they wished her to
marry. I hoped it was over, and had the bell rung for
school. Shortly after we had begun I heard them begin
again with their fiendish bowlings and screamings. A
friend fetched me, saying they had got the girl, and she
was likely to be murdered between the parties. I seized
my stick, and felt militant.
‘The arrows were flying, but I hurried on to the
centre, where there was a fearful scrimmage and heavy
sticks at work. Holding my stick above my head for
defence, I got to where the girl was pulled every way by
arms and legs, and in a faint. One flourish of the stick,
and a proper shout, and I had the girl in my left arm!
‘They attempted to close round me, but I warned
them as they had never been warned before, and I
carried the girl triumphantly inside of our fence, and
delivered her to the charge of friends, and gave orders
that no outsider was to be allowed in. Poor girl, she
was “ close up gone.”
‘ Now, the whole business was quite refreshing, and
I felt much better after it.’
Death of his Second Wife.
A stunning blow fell upon Tamate in the death of
his beloved helpmeet in 1900. They had dreamt of a
little rest together in a cottage out of London some-
where before they crossed the flood ; but this was not
to be. For fourteen weeks Mrs. Chalmers was ill, suffer-
ing a good deal, and steadily growing in the love and
knowledge of Christ. Her son by her first marriage
was studying for the ministry, and the anxious desire of


her heart was to see him ordained and married. But
she learned to be content to leave that and all other
matters to her Lord. ‘lt is strange, dear,’ she said
one day to Tamate, ‘but I have no longing now to
see Bert, and I feel it is all right. How good our
Father is ! ’ Often she was heard to say, ‘ Peace, perfect
peace! * ‘ln my Father’s house are many mansions,’
‘Jesus is near, very near.’ A few days before her death
her husband said to her, ‘We shall all soon meet over
yonder.’ Unhesitatingly she replied, ‘Yes, but lam so
tired. I want a long rest first with Jesus, and then I
shall be waiting for you all.’ She died in peace on
October 25 on the island of Daru, and was laid to rest
in the native cemetery.
A curious incident, worth recording for the sake of
those who are interested in the ‘ occult,’ occurred a week
before the death of Mrs. Chalmers. Tamate found his
wife sitting up in bed and in visible distress.
‘Oh, James, dear,’ she said, ‘I am in great trouble,
and don’t know what to do. A great —a very great —
sum of money has been left, and I am ill and weak, and
I cannot see to it. It has been left for the work, and for
me to arrange.’
‘We shall get our vessel now, dear,’ replied Tamate.
‘ That is nothing —merely nothing,’ rejoined the dying
woman. ‘The money left is thousands and thousands
and thousands, and whatever am I to do ? ’
‘ You have only been dreaming, dear, so be quiet.’
‘ No,’ she replied, ‘ I am not dreaming, but wide awake.
And it is all right; but what am Itodo ? ’
‘ Well, dear,’ answered Tamate, ‘if the Master has
given you all the money to arrange for Him, you may
be sure that He will give you health and strength and
grace and wisdom to arrange it.’
‘Of course He will,’ she replied. .* How very stupid
I am not to remember it. I am so tired. Lay me
down, dear.’
Tamate laid her head on the pillow, and she went
off to sleep.
‘ Months after her death,’ wrote her husband, ‘we
found that Arthington of Leeds had died about that time


and had left the London Missionary Society a quarter
of a million, and that a Scotch minister had left it
£ 20,000. What revelation had my beloved ? ’
Tamate’s testimony to the dear one that he had
lost was that she was a good, true, loving wife, a faithful,
earnest follower of Christ, aye blithe and hearty.
A few months after Chalmers wrote these words he
received his own summons into the presence of the King.
He solaced himself in the meantime by contemplation on
‘ the sweet will of God ’ and by the strenuous prosecution
of his work. ‘ I cannot rest/ he said, ‘ and so many
thousands of savages without a knowledge of Christ near
to us.’ In reply to an invitation from a cousin to come
home, he stated that he was ‘too much attached to New
Guinea. lam nearing the bar, and might miss jesting
amidst old scenes, joys, and sorrows.’ Nevertheless he
laments his great loneliness and a gnawing pain at the
heart-strings. But he knows it is well, and ‘He never
errs and is never far off/
His Last Expedition.
On the morning of April 4, 1901, Tamate sailed away
from the island of Daru, on the voyage from which he never
returned. Before proceeding up Fly River he resolved to
visit the region of Goaribari Island. Goaribari lies to the
west of the delta of the Aird River, and it had for years
been the desire of Tamate’s life to make friends with
the savage tribes in that quarter. On the evening of
Easter Sunday, April 7, the Niue , the vessel in which
Chalmers sailed, was at anchor off the eastern end of
Goaribari Island. Directly the vessel anchored the
natives came off and stayed on the vessel till sunset,
when Tamate persuaded them to go ashore, and promised
to visit them in their village the next day. At five
o’clock the next morning a great crowd of natives came
off and crowded the decks so that there was no room to
move. The canoes in which they came were filled with
bows and arrows, clubs, bamboo knives and spears.
Tamate then decided to go on shore himself, thinking
he might thereby induce the natives to leave the v issel.


The Rev. Oliver F. Tomkins, a young missionary who
had come to New Guinea only a year before, at once said
he would accompany him. They got into the whaleboat
(the gift of the second Mrs. Chalmers to the L.M.S.) with
the mission boys and a native chief. Tamate said he
would not stay more than half a hour, and would return
to the Niue for breakfast, after which they would make
for another village. About half the natives followed the
whaleboat, the rest remained on the Niue. The Niue
skirted the coast in the neighbourhood all day and until
eight o’clock on the following morning, and still Tamate
and his fellows did not return. In the meantime the
natives who had remained on board completely looted the
vessel.
The Crown of Martyrdom.
What had happened ? Chalmers and Tomkins had
been slain. The only account of the massacre which could
be obtained was derived from a native who was captured
by the punitive expedition at Dopima, the scene of the
horror. The villainy had been carefully planned. The
inhabitants of surrounding villages had been summoned
to take part in it. Tamate and his party were to be
enticed on shore and there set upon. When they got on
shore Tamate, Tomkins, and a few boys entered the long
house, the rest of the boys remaining to guard the whale-
boat. These last, however, were also enticed inside the
house on the pretence of being given something to eat
Tamate and Tomkins were attacked from behind with
stone clubs and fell senseless on the ground. Their heads
were immediately cut off and a general massacre begun.
The bodies were hewn in pieces, handed over to the
women to be cooked in sago, and eaten that same day.
Tamate died, as he would have wished to die, in the
execution of his duty. His death was a glorious close to
a noble life. For a man who had faced death a hundred
times the King of Terrors had no dread. The
courageous, self-denying life, successfully spent by God’s
grace and sustaining power in leading men out of the
darkness of savagery into the light and liberty of the


Gospel, received its terrible but glorious coronation, when
in the horrific dubu of Dopima there descended upon
Tamate and his colleague the blood-stained crown of
martyrdom.
MAP OF FLY RIVER DELTA, ALSO OF GOARIBARI ISLAND, WHERE
TAMATE WAS ASSASSINATED.


THE REGIONS BEYOND
MISSIONARY UNION
EXISTS
To Lighten the Darkness in the
Regions Beyond.
In its EAST LONDON TRAINING INSTITUTIONS it has
62 men and women preparing for the foreign field.
ON THE CONGO it has 42 Missionaries evangelizing the
distressed natives inhabiting the country surrounded
by the river’s horse-shoe bend.
IN PERU it is the only British Society at work. Its 16
Missionaries are engaged in pioneer work in Cuzco,
Arequipa, and Lima, and are inaugurating a new
movement to evangelize the Inca Indians, Peru’s
degraded native race.
IN ARGENTINA it has 25 Missionaries at work in the
capital city, and in five towns in the province of
Buenos Aires, a province as large as France,
IN NORTH INDIA, in the Province of Behar, its 11
Missionaries represent one-fifth of the total Protestant
missionary force seeking to evangelize 21 millions.
THE WHOLE OF THIS I NTER-DENOM INATION AL
WORK IS DEPENDENT UPON THE FREE-WILL
OFFERINGS OF GOD’S PEOPLE.
For further particulars apply to :
H. GRATTAN GUINNESS, Esq., M.D.,
Acting Director ,
Harley House, Bow Road, London, E.


Specimen Copy Post Free.
“ interdenominational missionary interests are
best followed in the columns of
(Kljnsiian
which makes a special feature of home every
. n THURSDAY.
and foreign reports.
ONE PENNY.
It is welcomed by missionaries whenever and
wherever it is sent.
Other Features!—
NOTES AND COMMENTS. SPECIAL ARTICLES.
PORTRAITS AND BIOGRAPHIES.
THE DAILY WATCHWORD. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A.
FOR TEACHERS—AND OTHERS.
CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR TOPIC
YOUNG PEOPLE: THE BIBLE SEARCHER.
EVANGELISTS AT WORK. ABOUT BOOKS.
“FIRST THINGS FIRST”—
LOYAL TO EVANGELICAL DOCTRINE.
OF ALL NEWSAGENTS.
MORGAN & SCOTT, Ltd., 12, Paternoster Buildings, London, E.C
