

Jams and
Pickles
Supplement to the
Australian Home Journal.


Jams and Jellies
The time to think about preserving is
now. It is no use waiting till fruit is
gathered before you check over your
equipment, and find at the last moment
that something is missing.
The preserving pan must be kept for its
special use only, and on no account be
used for cooking greasy food. It answers
best if it is shallow, and it is well to
choose a pan with a handle over the top
rather than one with two side handles, as
these soon become hot, and it is difficult to
move the pan quickly when the preserve
threatens to boil over. Enamelled iron is
really the best material for a preserving
pan but it needs constant attention to keep
the jam from burning. Well-tinned iron
is another good material, but the iron
without the tin destroys the beautiful
colour of the red fruits. Copper and brass
preserve the colour well, but there is a de-
cided danger in the use of either of these
materials with acid fruits, unless they are
kept scrupulously clean and dry.
Jams, which should be lifted from the
pan by means of a silver or enamelled
ladle or even a cup, should be tied down
while hot (except where otherwise in-
structed), Or as soon after making as pos-
sible. A good plan is to cover jam with
melted wax or brush the top of the paper
with white of egg before tying up.
In storing the pots see that they are
put in a dry, cool place, and that the
shelves are not damp; leave a little space
between each pot and do not build them
one above another.
At the first sign of fermentation, which
may be recognised by bubbles of air, the
jam should be placed in the preserving pan
with a little extra sugar, and be boiled
fast for a quarter of an hour or twenty
minutes.
If the jam when opened is covered with
a layer of sugar the rest will turn sugary
as soon as it is exposed to the air. To pre-
vent this, place a tablespoonful of water
in the jam jar, and stand it in a saucepan
half-filled with boiling water, and keep
the water boiling half an hour for each
pound of jam in the jar. When cold, the
jam will taste as though freshly made.
The same treatment is useful in the case
of honey which has become hard through
being kept.
When jam becomes too stiff and dried
up it may be made like new by adding 4
tablespoongful of boiling water to a 2-lb.
jar, placing the same in a pan of cold
water which reaches half-way up the jar;
boil gently for i hour, remove the jar, and
stir the contents, which will taste like
newly-made jam.
Clean and dry all bottles and jars; see
that glass lids are free from flaws and
that tin lids are not rusty. Always
purchase new rubber rings; old ones are
unsatisfactory.
The smallest flaw in the neck of a bottle
where the rubber band comes will prevent
its being air-tight, so do not use bottles
with chipped edges.
When making jam or jelly it is most
important that fruit should be gathered
on a dry day, and that it should not be in
the least over-ripe. Over-ripe fruit is a
frequent cause of jam or jelly not setting.
If you are thorough in your preserving
work, you will always have good results.
All fruits should be washed.
A i teaspoonful of salt to every 4 lbs. of
fruit improves the flavour of preserves and
helps them to keep.
When You Make Marmalade.
Be sure to cook your marmalade until
the peel is quite soft before adding the
sugar. It will not Soften after the sugar
has been put in.
Do not over-cook marmalade, or it will
turn out dark and lacking in flavour. As
it thickens, test it often, and put into jars
as soon as it jellies.
Don’t neglect the importance of soaking
the pips in water, and using this as dir-
ected. The pips contain a quantity of
pectin, and the water they are soaked in
helps to set the preserve.
If you want your marmalade to keep
well, the method of storing is very import-
ant. The jars must be perfectly dry and
warm. Pour in the preserve while hot,
but do not cover until it is cold. Cover
first with waxed paper the size of the top
of the jar, and tie parchment or gelatine
covers over. Then store in a cool, dry,
airy place. A warm place will cause it to
ferment; while, if stored in a damp place,
or one without ventilation, it will turn
mouldy.
Amber Marmalade.
One orange, 1 lemon, 1 grapefruit, water,
sugar.
Shave the orange, the lemon and the
grapefruit very thin, rejecting nothing but
the cores. Soak the pips in water. Measure
the fruit, and add to it three times the
quantity of water, using the pip water and
discarding the pips. Let it stand in an
earthenware dish overnight, and next
morning boil for 10 minutes only. Stand
another night, and on the second morning
add pint for pint of sugar, and boil stead-
ily until it jellies. The product should
have a lumpy appearance quite different


from most marmalades, the strips of fruit
being well defined in a clear pale Jelly. To
bring this about, stir as little as possible
during the two hours or more of cooking
which is required.
Tutti-Frutti Marmalade.
One cupful diced watermelon, 1 cup-
ful diced tart apple, 1 cupful diced
peaches, grated rind and Juice of 1
lemon, j cupful cooked pineapple (fresh
or tinned), 2J cupsful sugar.
Combine all the ingredients. Cook
rapidly until the mixture is thick and
clear. Pour into clean hot jars and
seal.
Peach Marmalade.
Two quarts dried peaches, sugar, 10
quarts apples.
Soak peaches and stew until very
tender, mash through colander and add
to apples which have been cooked and
put through colander. Add half the
quantity of sugar and cook slowly till
thick, stirring often to prevent burn-
ing. Prune jam may be made in same
way.
Prime Marmalade.
Wash and soak the medium-size
prunes and cook till tender; then re-
move the stones and cut the pulp into
small pieces. To each lb. of prunes
allow I orange, cut into minute par-
ticles. Add the orange to the prune
pulp. Cook very slowly, then stir in
sugar in the proportion of 1 lb. to 1|
lbs. of prunes. Continue to simmer
gently until quite thick, then add 2 or
3 tablespoonsful of coarsely-chopped
nuts, walnuts or peanuts being the best,
and cook 10 minutes longer. Pour into
glasses and seal when cold.
Carrot Marmalade.
Three lbs. carrots (weighed after scrap-
ing), 4 lemons, 4 pints water, 4 lbs. sugar.
Grate the carrots, rind and pith of the
lemons, cut the flesh of the lemons into
thin slices. Put into bowl, add the water,
and let stand overnight. Next day put
into preserving pan, and bring to the boil;
boil for | hour, add sugar, stirring until
dissolved. Boil until the marmalade sets;
test by dropping a little on a saucer and
placing it in a cool position to set quickly.
Cool a little before bottling, then seal
down.
Loquat Marmalade.
Remove the stalks and seeds from the
loquats and put the fruit into a preserving
pan, barely cover with boiling water, and
simmer gently until perfectly soft. Pass
the whole through a fine sieve and return
the pulp to pan. To each pint add from 12
to 16 ozg. of sugar, according to degree of
sweetness required, and boil from 20 to 25
minutes, reckoning from the time the
whole mass reaches boiling point. Stir
occasionally. When ready, pour into jars.
Cover when cold with paper brushed over
on both sides with white of egg and store.
in a cool, dry place. It is advisable to
place a round of white paper smeared 'with
glycerine on both sides on the jam before
covering if making to keep for some time.
Fig-Orange Marmalade.
Three large oranges, 1 lemon, I cupful
chopped figs, 5 cupsful sugar, cold water.
Put oranges and lemon through the
meat-grinder. Cover with cold water and
let stand over-night. Cook until peel is
tender, adding more water if necessary.
Chop figs, cover with cold water and soak
overnight. Cook until tender. Add to
orange mixture, add sugar, and cook until
thick. Put in hot, sterilised Jars. Time
in cooking, about 2J hours.
Hollywood Marmalade.
Two quarts of grated pineapple, 3 Sev-
ille oranges, S lbs. of sugar, enough rhu


barb to fill 2 quart jugs when cut in -J inch
lengths.
Remove rind from the 'oranges, take
away the pips and cut the fruit in small
pieces. Mix together all the fruit. Spread
on dishes, sprinkle with the sugar, and
leave until next day. Put the orange pips
in a tea-cup of cold water, slice the orange
rind finely and soak in enough cold water
just to cover. Cook the rind in the water
it was soaked in, adding the water in
which the pips were soaked, until the rind
is tender and the water has almost boiled
away. Add the fruit and sugar and cook
until thick. Stir well, being careful it
does not burn.
Lemon Marmalade.
Six lemons, cold water, 6 cupsful sugar.
Slice lemons very thin. Cover with cold
water and let stand for 24 hours. Cook
until peel is tender (about hour). Let
stand 24 hours. Add sugar and cook until
the mixture jellies when a little is tried on
a cold plate. Pour into hot sterilised jars.
Pineapple-and-Loganberry Marmalade.
Pour cupsful loganberries, 1 tin pine-
apple, 1 cupful pineapple-juice, 1 cupful
water, 1 cupful golden syrup, i cupful
brown sugar.
Wash loganberries, and strain pineapple.
Add chopped pineapple and pineapple-juice
to loganberries; add water, cover, and sim-
mer 20 minutes. Put through a sieve, re-
turn to saucepan, add syrup and brown
sugar and boil 10 minutes. Pour into jars.
Loganberry-and-Orange Marmalade.
Two lbs. loganberries, 3 lbs. oranges, 1
pint water, li cupsful golden syrup, 3
lemons, 2 lbs. sugar.
Pick over and wash loganberries, and
wash and remove peeling and seeds from
oranges. Reserve one-fourth of peel, and
cut in small lengthwise strips. Put the
oranges, loganberries and orange peel
through a food-chopper, using the finest
knife. Cover with the water and golden
syrup, and allow to stand over-night. In
the morning add juice from the lemons and
boil for 10 minutes in an open preserving
pan. Add the sugar, and allow to stand
12 hours. Place over the fire again, and
cook until marmalade is of jellying con-
sistency.
Apricot and Lemon Marmalade.
Two large juicy lemons, 2 lbs. of dried
apricots, 1 oz. of sweet almonds, 7 lbs. of
preserving sugar.
Wash the apricots well and cut them in
small pieces, put them in a bowl, cover
them with 4 quarts of boiled water and
leave for two days. Blanch the almonds
and cut them into small pieces to look like
kernels. When the apricots have soaked
sufiiciently, put them into a preserving pan
with the water they were soaked in and
boil gently until the fruit is quite tender.
Then add the juice of the lemons and the
yellow part of the peel of 1 lemon very
finely grated, also the sugar. Bring to
boiling point, add the almonds and boil
gently until the marmalade sets when
tested.
Orange Marmalade.
Take 2 lbs. bitter oranges, 2 sweet
oranges, 2 lemons, and 12 lbs. of sugar.
Grate all the oranges and lemons into a
basin. Put all the left-over pieces of fruit
along with the pips into a separate dish.
Now add to the grated fruit in the basin
23 teacupsful of water, and to the pips,
etc., in the other dish add 3 teacupsful of
water. Set both dishes aside for 24 hours.
Next pour the contents of the basin into
a jelly saucepan, and strain the water off
the pips into the saucepan also. Then set
the saucepan on the fire, and boil for J
hour. Now add the sugar, and boil for
hour longer.
Grapefruit Marmalade.
Two grapefruits, 2 oranges, 2 lemons,
sugar.
Wash fruit. Remove core and seeds of
grapefruit. Remove thin, yellow outside
rind, and cut half of it in fine strips.
Remove the thick white peel, but do not
use. Mix shaved rind with the cut-up
fruit pulp. Put into preserving pan
with three times as much water and let
stand over-night. Put on stove, let come
to boiling point and boil for two minutes.
Repeat this for two days. The third day
measure, add an equal amount of sugar
and boil 1 hour or until thick. Turn into
jelly glasses.
Marmalade Jelly.
One orange, 1 lemon, 1 grapefruit.
Cut fruit up fine, add three times as
much water, let stand over-night. Boil for
10 minutes next day; let stand over-night
again. Then add 1 cupful of sugar to 1 of
liquid, and boil about 2 hours till it jellies
a golden colour. Bottle when cooled. A
very special recipe.
Remember—
Perfectly dry, clean jars. Pour in the
jam or jelly while still hot. Tie down
when cold. Cover first with wax paper.
Then parchment or kitchen paper dipped
in milk. Label neatly, writing the name
and date on strips of gummed labels. Store
in a cool, dry, airy place. Have one glass
jar in every batch to see that all is well.


Pineapple Marmalade.
Choose ripe, sound pines; pare them, re-
moving eyes; weigh the fruit and allow
an equal weight of fine crystallised sugar.
Boil the parings in water, allowing | a
pint to 1 pineapple, for 20 minutes; then
strain, add the grated flesh of pine to the
liquid, simmer gently until soft. Add sugar
very gradually, and boil mixture until
thick and clear. Turn into warmed jars;
cover in the usual way.
Carrot and Lemon Marmalade.
Take 3 medium-sized carrots, 4 Lisbon
lemons, 11 cupsful of water and 4 lbs.
sugar.
Slice carrots (which should be young)
very thinly. Take lemons, discarding tops
and bottoms; remove white pith from
centre and slice. Place carrots and lemons
in a basin with the 11 cupsful of water
and leave stand over-night. Next morn-
ing bring to the boil and boil 1 hour (or
until the carrots and lemons are soft).
Then add the sugar and boil again till it
Jellies.
Fruit Marmalade.
Ten apples, 10 peaches, 4 oranges, 10
cupsful sugar, | cupful water (small cup).
Core and cut up fruit, put in saucepan
with water; bring to the boil, then set off
to cool. When cool, add the sugar, boil for
3 minutes and pour out immediately. A
mixed preserve that is delicious and dis-
tinctive in taste.
Prune and Apple Jam.
One lb. prunes, 3J pints water, 4 cooking
apples, 3 lbs. sugar.
Soak the prunes and cook in 2J pints
water until tender, then beat to a pulp in
a colander. Cook to a pulp the 4 large
cooking apples in 1 pint of water. Place
all together and reheat, add sugar and boil
gently until a little placed on a cold saucer
will set in a few minutes. Remove from
fire, bottle while hot, cover when cold.
Prune and Banana Jam.
One lb. prunes, 3 pints water, 3 lbs.
sugar, 12 bananas.
Soak the prunes in the water for 24
hours. Boil til] tender; then add 3 lbs.
white sugar and 12 bananas, sliced into
rings. Bring to the boil and boil fast for
i hour longer, or till a, little tested on a
cold saucer will get.
Carrot and Beetroot Jam.
Equal weights of carrots and beetroot,
sugar, lemons.
Wash the beetroot, scrape the carrots,
and boil them separately until tender. Pass
through a coarse sieve, measure the puree,
and to each pint allow 12 ozs. of sugar and
the juice of 2 lemons. Place the whole in
a preserving pan, boil gently for | hour,
and turn the preparation into jars. If in-
tended to be kept some time, a little
brandy should be added to each pint of
jam before bottling. Keep closely covered
in a dry, cool place.
Fruit Cheeses.
To each lb. of fruit allow | lb. of sugar
in the first place, and to each lb. of pulp
obtained therefrom add 1 lb. of sugar.
Use sound, ripe fruit, and add 1 lb. of
sugar to each lb. of fruit, and simmer
gently until the fruit is quite 'soft. Then
rub through a hair sieve by means of the
back of a wooden spoon. To each lb. of
pulp, which should be weighed, add | lb.
of finely broken sugar, an<l place in the
preserving pan. This'should be allowed


to heat through slowly to permit the sugar
to dissolve, and then boiled over a slow
fire for 1J hours, carefuly stirring all the
time, as this is a preserve which rapidly
burns if not attended to in this way. When
the mass is “tacky,” put into warm jars,
and when cool tie down in the usual way,
placing a wax tissue or paper soaked in
brandy on the surface. All fruit cheeses
can be made this way, an exception being
that made from greengages, which requires
rather less sugar on account of its being,
in itself, a very sweet fruit. Damsons,
gooseberries, apples, crab apples, black
currants, quinces, blackberries and mul-
berries make exceptionally fine fruit
cheeses. !
Loquat and Pineapple Jelly.
Use brewers’ crystals instead of ordinary
sugar, as it makes a better jelly. The
skins and core of a pineapple are sufficient
to give the jelly a good flavour. Wash
loquats and place whole in preserving pan,
cover with water, and boil for 10 minutes.
Bruise loquats well with a wooden spoon,
add pineapple skins, and boil for hours.
Strain through a jelly bag, and measure
the juice into a clean preserving pan. Add
as many cups of brewers’ crystals as liquid
and Stir until it boils; then allow to boil
quickly for 20 minutes. Bottle when warm
and tie down when cold.
Watermelon Ginger Preserves.
Pare off the green and red portions of
the melon and weigh. For every 5 lbs. of
the rind allow 1 quart of water and a pint
of vinegar. Scald, add the rind and cook
10 minutes. Eemove with a skimmer and
drain perfectly dry. Put a pint of water
and 3J lbs. of sugar in the preserving pan.
Boil, skim, add drained rind pieces and 2
ozs. of green ginger cut in slices. Cook
until the rind is clear and tender, remove
with a skimmer, cook the syrup 15 or 20
minutes longer, pack the rinds in glass
jars and fill to overflowing with the boil-
ing hot syrup. Seal.
Oriental Jam.
Six lbs. rhubarb cut small, 2 ozs. can-
died lemon peel, 4 lbs. granulated sugar,
2i lbs. figs chopped, 1 oz. candied orange
peel.
Pound the rhubarb with a wooden spoon
so that the juice runs freely. Do this in
a deep china bowl, and then stir in the
sugar, figs and shredded candied peel.
Cover the bowl, and let it stand for 24
hours. Turn the mixture into a preserving
pan, bring it to the boil, and cook stead-
ily, with frequent stirring, for at least 1
hour. Shred the peel very thinly; if you
are afraid the jam will be too sweet, add
the juice of a small lemon.
Saratoga Jam.
Six lbs. of stemmed currants, 1 lb. of
seeded raisins, 6 lbs. of sugar, 4 medium-
sized oranges.
Cook all together for 40 minutes, stirring
frequently. Let this stand for two days
before sealing. This is an old-fashioned
recipe that is hard to be improved on.
Watermelon Jam.
Take 4 lbs. watermelon, 4 lbs. white
sugar (the dark sugar would spoil colour
and flavour), 4 large fresh lemons.
Peel and remove seeds from melon, cut
into pieces about 1 inch in diameter, place
in preserving pan, and sprinkle with half
the sugar. Let stand all night. In the
morning, wipe lemons with a damp cloth
but do not wash them. Place in preserv-
ing pan or enamel saucepan. Just cover
them with boiling water and boil slowly
for 2 hours, changing the water 3 or 4
times during this process; in each ease the
clean water must be boiling. Cool the
lemons slightly, then cut them into thin
slices, removing all the pips and about half
of the pulp. If all the pulp is used the
jam will be too sour. Start the melon
boiling, and when about half done add the
lemon and the remaining 2 lbs. of sugar.
Let all boil up quickly and boil altogether
for 2 hours. The syrup should jelly.
Loquat Jam.
Wash loquats, remove seeds, etc. To every
lb of fruit allow i lb. of Sugar. Allow
fruit to stand over-night in a preserving
pan, with the sugar and sufficient water to
cover. In the morning, boil slowly for 5
hours until the jam is a rich colour. If
jam is to be kept a long time before using
it is advisable to use 1 lb. of sugar to
every lb. of fruit. Bottle when cool, seal,
and store in a dry place.
Melon and Pineapple Jam.
To 4 lbs. of pie-melon, put 2 lbs. pine-
apple. To every lb. of fruit put i lb. sugar.
Place fruit in a dish over-night with 1
lb. of sugar sprinkled over it. Next morn-
ing boil the two together for 3 hours,
slowly. Now add the remainder of sugar
and boil for 1 hour. Keep stirring to keep
from burning. Bottle while hot, and when
cold cover tightly with greaseproof paper.
_ An easy way to cover jam is to boil a
little sago with a dessertspoonful of vine-
gar, and rub with the fingers over both
sides of pieces of brown paper. Cut the
desired size, and press down over the jam
jars. This forms an airtight covering, and
is most effective and inexpensive.


Grape Jelly.
Select grapes not too sweet or too ripe.
Wash the bunches carefully and remove
the fruit from the stems. Put the grapes
into the preserving pan, add a little water
to prevent scorching, and boil them
until they burst open. Place them in a
jelly-bag and allow the juice to drain
without pressure. Measure the extracted
juice and add an equal amount of sugar,
and cook rapidly in a porcelain preserving
pan, skimming off all sediment and test-
ing it frequently. When it begins to
harden, pour at once into jelly glasses. If
a light-coloured jelly of mild flavour is
desired, an equal amount of apple-juice
extracted from tart apples may be added
to the grape-juice. If the jelly does not
become firm quickly, a little vinegar or
lemon-juice may be added. This makes a
delicious jelly.
Grape Fruit and Lime Jam.
To every 1 lb. of grape fruit add 1 large
or 2 small limes or rough lemons, 5 pints
water, and 5 lbs. of sugar.
Slice grape fruit and limes very thin.
Cover with the water over-night, and
let stand till next dav. Then boil for
H to 2 hours. Take off and let stand
till next day. Add sugar. Boil briskly
for 1J hours, or till it jellies.
Cherry Jam.
Stone the cherries, put into an enamel
or china basin, allow f lb. of sugar to
each lb. of prepared fruit. Sprinkle
about 1 lb. of sugar over the cherries,
and let stand a few hours until there is
a fair amount of juice. Then put into
the preserving pan, and bring slowly to
the boil. Add rest of sugar and boil
gently until right consistency. Cherry
jam does not jell; do not let it become
too dark. About 1J to 1J hours’ boiling
gives good results.
Nectarine Jam.
Six lbs. nectarines (stoned), 4} lbs.
sugar, 2 cupsful water, 1 dessertspoon-
ful butter. Kernels about J of the fruit.-
Wash but do not peel the nectarines,
and cut each into 8 pieces. Put into
a pan with water, butter and kernels,
and place on a moderate fire. When
warm, add the sugar in portions about
1 lb. at a time until all is used. Boil
slowly, stirring well for about 2 hours.
Try a little on a saucer, and if it sets
it is ready to bottle. If liked, the
juice of a lemon may be added.
Fig Jam.
Twelve lbs. figs, juice of 3 lemons, 9 lbs.
sugar, little ground ginger, and few
blanched almonds. Out the figs up the
night before and cover with half the sugar.
Use the rest of the sugar when boiling.
Put no water on the figs and it will keep
longer, as there will be a syrup after lying
all night in sugar. Next morning add
balance of sugar and a little ground ginger
and boil for about } hour or until it will
set on a saucer, add blanched almonds
and lemon juice a few minutes before
taking off the fire.
Blackberry and Plum Jam.
Ten lbs. of blackberries, 4 lbs. of plums
(any kind with a good sharp flavour), 1
quart water, 10 lbs. sugar.
Stew the plums in the water for a few
minutes; add the blackberries, and boil
together for about 15 minutes, taking care
it does not burn. Heat the sugar in a bak-
ing dish, stir into the jam and boil for 1J
hours. The sugar may be heated in three
lots, if more convenient. A teaspoonful
of tartaric or citric acid put in 10 minutes
before the jam is done is an improvement.
Sour apples may be used instead of plums.


Quince Honey.
Take 1 pint of water, 6 lbs. of sugar and
boil them together for 10 minutes. Mean-
while, take 5 large quinces and 1 large
pineapple. Peel, then mince, and add to
the boiling syrup. Boil for 30 minutes,
when the jam should set well, and should
be golden in. colour.
Blackberry Jam.
Look over the berries and rinse them
carefully; then drain well and crush
them over the fire with the potato masher.
Cook the fruit until it is well softened,
then measure and add the sugar, which it
would be well to heat first to facilitate the
boiling process. Allow threequarters as
much sugar as fruit, and cook until the
jam, tested on a cold saucer, seems thick
and jelly-like. Cool slightly; then fill the
glasses, and when cold cover with paraffin.
Pumpkin Jam.
Pour lbs. pumpkin, J cupful lemon juice,
2 cupsful golden syrup, peel of 2 oranges.
Choose a very ripe, red pumpkin, cut
into little cubes and cook in a saucepan
with a small glass of water. When half
cooked, which will take about J hour, add
the syrup, orange-peel and lemon juice.
Cook on a low fire for about 1 or 1J hours.
Stir often, so that the lumps will melt
and not burn.
Strawberry Jam (Whole).
Pick the fruit dry. Weigh it, and put
an equal weight of loaf sugar into preserv-
ing pan, with a teacupful of red currant
juice drawn from ripe red currants. Let
sugar dissolve in the juice and come to the
boil. Then put in the fruit, and boil 40
minutes, skimming well, when it should set
quickly. Pill the jars and stand them in a
sunny window 12 hours before tying down.
The slight acid of the currants greatly
adds to the flavour and colour of this pre-
serve.
Strawberry and Gooseberry Jam.
To each lb. of strawberries add i lb. of
firm gooseberries, put over slow fire for i
hour, then add J lb. of sugar to each lb.
of fruit. Boil for 1 hour, turn out into
jars and when cold, seal down. The straw-
berries will turn the gooseberries a nice
red, and the jelly in the gooseberries will
make the jam set firm. Rhubarb can be
used instead of the gooseberries.
Black-Raspberry-and-Cherry Conserve.
One cupful pitted cherries, 2 cupsful
sugar, 1 cupful black raspberry pulp.
Cook the cherries in a very small amount
of water until the skins are tender. Add
the raspberry pulp and the sugar and cook
the mixture until it is thick and clear.
Cover when cool with hot paraffin.
Greengage Jam.
Ripe greengages, i lb. sugar to each lb.
of fruit (before being stoned).
Stalk and stone the fruit. Put it with
a little water into the preserving pan,
bring to the boil, and simmer gently for
i hour, then add the sugar, previously
warmed; stir until it has dissolved; boil
up, again and continue to boil gently until
the syrup sets when tested. Pour at once
into jars, and cover.
Quince Jam or Preserve.
Peel the quinces and cut into nice small
quarters, taking out the cores; put peel-
ings, cores, and any poor quinces into a
pan-and just cover with water; boil till i
quite soft, then strain. To every pint of
syrup add li large cnpsful of sugar, put
back on to fire, and stir till sugar is dis-
solved. When the syrup boils, drop in the
pieces of quince carefully, and boil till
they are soft and a nice colour. Allow }
lb. sugar to each lb. of quartered quinces.
Damson and Mulberry Jelly.
The fruit should not be over-ripe and
not gathered directly after rain. Stalk
fruit, put in a jar, and place in a pan with
boiling water just to come halfway. Let
the water boil till all juice is extracted
from the fruit. Strain juice off, measure
it, and allow to each pint of juice 1 lb.
sugar. Put the juice and sugar in a pre-
serving pan, let the sugar dissolve, then
boil to a syrup. Try some on a saucer, and
if it jells when cold it is done. Bottle and
seal in the ordinary way.
Mulberry Jam. \
When picking the berries, pick some red
ones that look full of juice, not too ripe,
as well as ripe ones. Put berries through
a mincer. Rinse the dish you minced the
berries in with a cupful of water, add this
to the pulp. Put on fire in an enamel pan,
and boil 15 minutes, add sugar (a lb. of
sugar to every lb. of berries), weigh the
berries before mincing. When sugar is
dissolved and reaches boiling point, boil
quickly for 20 to 30 minutes, stirring well
to keep from burning, and keep scum from
rising.
Paraffin wax, bought at the. chemist’s,
appears expensive, but is not in reality, as
it can be saved, washed, dried and used
repeatedly. It should be melted in a small
jug with a good neat spout, in a pan of
boiling water, and enough to cover com-
pletely is poured while hot on to the hot
jam. Rotate the jar gently to run the wax
a little way up the side, and so effectually
seal the crevice. Jars should be as full as
possible. Cover with paper when the jam
is cold.


Passion Fruit Jelly.
Cut the fruit in halves, using the rind,
the use of which gives the jelly a good
colour. Put in preserving pan and lightly
cover with water. Boil gently for two
hours, keeping pan covered to lessen eva-
poration. Careful skimming and Slow
boiling are necessary to success in making
this jelly. Remove pan from the fire;
stand it in a slanting position, so that the
liquor will filter to the side. Allow it to
remain in this position over-night. Next
morning strain the liquor through a clean
calico bag into a jar. Care must be taken
not to disturb the pulp or the jelly will
not be clear. Measure liquor into the pre-
serving pan; place it on stove, and when
warm add 1 cupful of sugar for each cup-
ful of fluid. Stir till the sugar is quite
dissolved. At this stage cease stirring. It
now needs careful skimming only. To dis-
continue stirring at the right time is most
necessary, and proper skimming is essen-
tial to success. Add a little citric acid
(in quantity to suit taste). Besides giv-
ing flavour, citric acid assists in bringing
the scum to the surface. After an hour’s
steady boiling, test in the usual way, by
placing a spoonful on a plate and allowing
to cool. If it congeals, it is cooked. Be
sure to avoid over-boiling.
Banana Passion Fruit and Tomato Jam.
To every lb. of tomatoes add 6 banana
passion fruit, 1 lb. of sugar and the juice
of 1 lemon. Pour boiling water over the
tomatoes, which makes them easy to peel.
Peel and cut up tomatoes, add the peeled
banana passion fruit and lemon juice,
place all in a pan together, and bring
gently to the boil, then add sugar and boil
until a little will set when tested.
Apricot and Plum Jam.
Take equal quantities of ripe apricots
and the sourest of plums available (use
plums that are acid when stewed). Put
fruit into a preserving pan and boil well;
add 1 lb. of sugar to every lb. of fruit.
Boil until it sets when tested.
Apricot Honey.
Crush very ripe apricots without paring
or removing the pits, then cook them over
the fire with only enough water to prbvent
sticking until reduced to a pulp. Rub the
fruit through a fine sieve and measure the
pulp; to each pint allow J lb. of sugar;
cook the pulp 5 minutes; then add the
sugar, which should have been heated in a
warm oven, and cook till thick, stirring
often. When finished, the product should
be like honey in consistency. Pour into
small sterilised glasses or bottles, and seal.
Dried Apricot and Pineapple.
One lb. dried apricots, 1 large tin pine-
apple, 3 lbs. sugar.
Wash apricots well and soak over-night
in li pints of cold water. Next day put
this into a preserving pan, and boil for J
hour. Add the pineapple cut in small
pieces, the juice and, the sugar, and boil
till it sets —about an hour.
Dried Apricot and Pineapple Jam.
Soak i lb. dried apricots in 2 cupsful
hot water all night. In the morning add
3 cupsful grated pineapple and 2 more
cupsful water. Boil for | hour, add 6 cups-
ful sugar and boil i hour. Will keep for
months.
Apricot Jam.
For jam-making, slightly under-ripe
apricots are best. The skins should be re-
moved. By holding the fruit with a “cake
server’’ or “cake-scissors” each apricot will
be kept whole. Dip each one for i minute
in hot water, when the thin, indigestible
skins will come off easily. Allow to every
lb. of apricots } lb. preserving sugar. If
the skins are not removed as suggested,
wipe each apricot with a damp, clean cloth,
then cut in halves, using a silver fruit-
knife.
Remove the stones. Spread out the fruit
on a large dish, and sprinkle with part of
the sugar. Leave them for 12 hours. Next
day, pour off the liquid or syrup into a
preserving pan and add the rest of the
sugar, stirring till all is dissolved. Break
the stones, remove the kernels and blanch
these, like almonds, in hot water, remov-
ing the bitter brown skin. Put the apri-
cots into the preserving pan with the dis-
solved sugar; adding about half the ker-
nels, after blanching and slicing. Bring
to boiling point, then gently boil for about
i hour, or until the fruit turns clear. Test
by dropping a little on a cold plate, and if
it sets, the jam is ready. A little longer
time may be necessary for boiling; some-
times } hour. This depends on the fruit.
Do not seal until cold.
Rhubarb Jam.
Three lbs. rhubarb, $ lb. figs, \ lb.
orange peel, grated lemon and juice, 2J
lbs. sugar.
Cut rhubarb in inch length pieces. Cut
figs in pieces. Put a layer of rhubarb,
figs, orange peel, lemon and sugar and re-
peat until all is used. Cover and let stand
over-night. In the morning boil until thick,
about 1 hour. This is delicious and very
nice for sweet sandwiches for afternoon
tea.


Rhubarb and Fig Preserve.
Two lbs. rhubarb, 4 lb. figs, 2 lemons
(juice and rind), 2-J lbs. Sugar.
Wash figs and rhubarb and cut in small
pieces. Grate the lemon rind, add sugar
and lemon juice and stir often until juice
is formed. Place in preserving pan, cook
gently for 30 minutes, add the grated
lemon rind, boil 15 minutes longer until
thick and clear. Place in jelly glasses and
pour paraffin over top.
Rhubarb and Date Jam.
Seven lbs. rhubarb cut in 1-ineh pieces,
14 lbs. dates (stoned and cut up), 2 lbs.
sugar, 2 teaspoonsful ground ginger, 4
bitter almonds (chopped small).
Put 1 teacupful of water in preserving
pan with rhubarb and gently simmer for
1 hour. Then add the other ingredients,
prepared as above directed, and boil gently
for 2 hours, keeping it well stirred. This
is a useful conserve in spring.
Marrow and Quince Jam.
Three lbs. marrow, 1 lb. of quince
(pulped), rind and juice of 1 lemon, 1 oz.
whole ginger.
Peel the marrow, take out seeds, and
cut in small pieces. Put it in a deep ves-
sel with sugar, allowing J lb. of 1 lb. of
fruit. Let it stand for 12 hours. Bruise
the ginger, put it in muslin, add the pulp,
and boil for 2 hours. Half lb. of sugar to
each lb. of fruit is sufficient if well boiled.
Apricot and Rhubarb Jam.
Wipe and cut up 4 lbs. rhubarb, and put
in a jar with 2 lbs. sugar over it to draw
out the juice. Cover and let stand for a
day or two. Put into preserving pan with
4 lbs. apricot pulp, either fresh or made
from the dried apricots by soaking. Allow
to boil for 4 hour, or until it looks rather
thick. Add 5 lbs. sugar—that will make
it 7 lbs. in all —and boil fast until the
preserve sets.
Orange Honey.
Take 1 large orange, 1 small teacupful
of water and 1 lb. of granulated sugar.
First, boil the sugar slowly in the water
for 10 minutes without stirring, and then
take off the fire and add the juice of
orange. Finally stir with a wooden spoon
until it becomes creamy, and while it is
still liquid pour into a jar. It will set to
the consistency of honey.
Strawberry, Pineapple and Orange Con-
serve.
Peel, core and shred fine 1 pineapple.
Pick over, stem and wash 1 quart of straw-
berries. Remove the peel from 3 large
navel oranges, keeping it as whole as pos-
sible. Remove the pulp from the oranges
with a sharp knife, discarding as much of
the pith as possible and saving all the
juice. Boil the peels in plenty of water
until very tender, then remove and with a
spoon scoop out the bitter white inside,
leaving just the orange outer part. With
a sharp knife cut the skins in tiny thin
strips about 4 inch long. Now put the
pineapple in a large enamel pan and add
a pint, of water. Boil for 20 minutes. In
the meantime, put the orange pulp and
juice in another enamel pan with 24 eups-
ful of sugar and boil for about 15 min-
utes. Then add the rind and continue
cooking slowly. When the pineapple is
cooked add the strawberries and 44 oups-
ful of sugar. Bring to the boil, then add
the orange and let it all boil together for
22 minutes, no longer. Skim the jam while
cooking, and stir carefully to prevent
sticking. Put in sterilised jars and seal
the next day with wax.
Yellow Pear Tomato and Orange Jam.
Pour quarts yellow pear tomatoes, 5
oranges, 5 lbs. sugar.
Grind tomatoes and oranges. Mix with
the sugar and boil until thick and clear.
Fill into jelly glasses. Cool and cover with
paraffin.
Golden Chip.
Six lbs. pumpkin, 6 cupsful sugar, 4
lemons, 2 ozs. green ginger root, 1 quart
water.
Cut pumpkin into balls with cutter or
into cubes, and ginger root and lemons in
small, very thin slices, and put into sauce-
pan. Add water and let stand over-night.
Cook very slowly until tender, add sugar,
cook until it will jell, and is a light amber
colour. Put in jelly glasses.
Rhubarb and Orange Jam.
One quart of finely-cut rhubarb, 6
oranges, 14 lbs. of preserving sugar.
Cut the rinds of the oranges into sec-
tions, remove them and scrape off as much
of the white pith as possible. Free the
pulp from fibrous skin and pips, put it
into a preserving pan, with the sugar, rhu-
barb, and orange rinds, previously finely
shredded. Bring slowly to boiling point,
skim well, and boil until the jam stiffens
when tested on a cold plate. Cover closely
and store in a cool, dry place.
Choko and Orange Honey.
Peel and cut up into small squares 12
chokes; put into a dish and cover with a
cupful of sugar, the juice of 6 oranges,
and 1 cupful of water. Leave stand 12
hours. Next day put into a preserving


pan and boil for 1 hour. Then add the
shredded rind of 2 oranges, 2 lbs. sugar
and a little preserved ginger, and boil till
it jellies. It should be a dark honey
colour, and is delicious.
Orange Peel Jam.
One cupful cut up orange peel, 1 whole
lemon, 3 cupsful of water.
Cut up lemon and mix with orange peel
and water, and soak 24 hours. Boil | an
hour. Set aside 24 hours. Measure and
allow 1 cupful of sugar for 1 cupful pulp.
Boil till it jellies. This is a very good
and economical jelly jam, using up peel
that would otherwise be thrown away, and
tastes delicious.
Fruit Salad Jam.
Three large cooking apples, 3 bananas, 2
lemons, 2 sweet oranges, 5 cupsful water,
4 large cupsful sugar.
Peel apples, core and cut into pieces
about 1 inch square. Cut bananas in thin
slices, slice lemons finely and cut up, use
pulp of oranges. Soak the lemons and
orange pulp in the 5 cupsful of water
over-night. Add rest of ingredients, boil
about 1 hour, then add sugar and boil
quickly about | hour. A delicious jam for
anyone whose taste is not too sweet.
Tomato Jelly.
A useful jelly to make and keep on hand
is tomato jelly. It can be melted and reset
with any left-over meat, fish or vegetables.
It is delicious with fried or grilled lamb
cutlets. You will require 3J cupsful of
sliced tomatoes, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon,
1 teaspoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful sugar,
2 tablespoonsful gelatine, 2 slices onions,
J cupful cold water, pepper to taste.
Cook sliced tomato, minced onion, cinna-
mon, sugar, salt and pepper for 10 min-
utes. Strain through a fine sieve and re-
heat to boiling point. Add gelatine dis-
solved in | cupful cold w'ater. Pour into
small jars to set and when cold tie down.
Pickies and Chutneys
When making pickles and chutneys have
all the ingredients ready before you start.
Often different spices are required to get
the right flavour, and an omission of any
will spoil the result.
Pickles in corked containers can be
made airtight by firmly pushing the corks
in, and then brushing tops with liquid
paraffin wax. If you use a screw top with-
out a cardboard disc inside, cut small
rounds of paper, dip into liquid paraffin
wax, put in top of cap, and screw on. It
will be airtight when it sets.
Use white vinegar if possible; onions
always look better done in white vinegar.
Vinegar is better poured hot on such
things as plums, walnuts and gherkins;
but cold (boil first with spices and then
cool) on such things as cabbages, onions,
etc.
Chutneys, sauces and pickles should be
left for sometime before using, to let the
flavour go through them.
Use a stainless knife for cutting, and a
wooden spoon for stirring.
To make pickles successfully the vege-
tables or fruit must be perfectly dry, fresh
and not over-ripe. Vinegar should be
boiled in an enamelled pan, or, failing this,
in a stewpan placed in a saucepan of boil-
ing water. If a metal pan must of neces-
sity be used, one made of iron produces the
least injurious effects. Fatal results have
followed the use of copper vessels for
pickling purposes.
Chutneys are like children’s parties—
the more varieties and surprises you intro-
duce into them the nicer they are. They
may be used as a change from pickles or
jam, and are extremely useful in curries.
Pickled Peaches.
Seven lbs. fruit, 4 cupsful vinegar, 8
cupsful sugar, J cupful whole cloves, J
cupful bark cinnamon.
Wash and peel the fruit. Loosely tie
the spices in a white muslin container.
Boil the sugar and vinegar for 10 minutes
before adding the spices and the fruit.
Boil gently until the fruits are well glazed
and very tender. Pour into jars and fill
to overflowing with the hot syrup. Seal
and store in a cool, dark, dry place.
Pungent Pickle of Vegetable Marrow.
Six lbs. full-grown and nearly ripe vege-
table marrow cut into 1-inch square cubes,
2 quarts vinegar (need not be the best
white vinegar), 1 lb. loaf sugar, 1 oz.
ground ginger, 1 oz. turmeric, 12 chillies,
i lb. eschallots cut up small, and 1 salt-
spoonful cayenne pepper.
Spread cut up marrow on a large dish
(a well dish if possible), and let it Stand
for 12 hours to drain. Boil all the other
ingredients together for 20 minutes, then
put in the marrow and simmer till tender.
Place in jars, seal and store.


Lemon Pickle.
Six large soft lemons, 2 large Spanish
onions, 1J lbs. brown sugar, 6 ozs. seed-
less raisins, 1 teaspoonful ground ginger,
2 ozs. mustard seed, 2 level tablespoonsful
salt, i teaspoonful cayenne, 1J pints vine-
gar.
Wipe the lemons with a soft cloth, then
slice them, carefully removing all pips.
Peel the onions, and chop them finely. Mix
the lemon slices, and chopped onions, and
place in large bowl. Sprinkle the salt
over, and leave 24 hours. Then put into
preserving pan —with the mustard seed
well crushed —the cayenne, ginger and
sugar. Add the vinegar and simmer gently
to a soft pulp. Then bottle.
Pie Melon Pickles.
Take 3 lbs. firm melon, out up into Small
pieces and cover with vinegar and let
stand all night. Take 2 lbs. onions cut
small and put on to boil with melon. Add
1J cupsful sugar, 2 dessertspoonsful salt, 2
dessertspoonsful allspice (pimento), a few
cloves. Boil all for 2 hours, add 1 table-
spoonful mustard and 1 tablespoonful tur-
meric mixed with a little cold vinegar.
Boil for a few minutes longer. Bottle and
seal when cold.
Mixed Pickles.
One quart small silver-skinned onions, 1
quart small tomatoes, 1 head cauliflower,
1 cupful salt, 2 tablespoonsful whole mixed
spices, 5 red peppers, 1 quart string-beans,
2 quarts vinegar, 1J cupsful brown sugar.
Cut all the vegetables except the beans
into good-sized pieces, sprinkle with the
salt, and allow to stand over-night. Drain.
Cook the beans in water with a little salt
until tender. Drain. Mix the vinegar,
sugar and spices together and bring to the
boiling-point. Add the vegetables and let
cook 10 minutes. Pack in jars, fill to over-
flowing with the hot vinegar mixture, and
seal.
Ripe Cucumber Pickles.
Three lbs. pared ripe cucumbers, lime
water, 6 cupsful sugar, 2 quarts water, 2
cupsful vinegar, 2 tablespoonsful cinna-
mon, 2 tablespoonsful cloves, 2 tablespoons-
ful all-spioe, 1 tablespoonful mace.
Cut the cucumbers into lengths and sqak
in lime water 3 hours. Drain and soak in
fresh water 1 hour. Make a syrup by
boiling together the water and 4 cupsful
of sugar. Drain the cucumber and cook
rapidly in the syrup 30 minutes. Add 2
cupsful of sugar, vinegar, and the spices,
tied in a bag, and cook until the cucumb-
ers are transparent. Remove the spice-
bag, pack in hot Jars, and seal. Brown
sugar may be used.
Beetroot Pickle.
Wash 6 young beetroots well, taking
care to keep skins intact. Put into boiling
water with 1 handful salt, boil 1J hours,
drain and pour over cold water; in a few
minutes the skin will rub off. Peel and
slice the beets, place in Jars or bottles,
and pour over spiced vinegar. Boil J oz.
spice, | oz, whole pepper, quart vinegar
together, and put aside till quite cold.
Pour over beet in the jars and seal down;
store in a cool, dry place. Beady for use
in one week.
Tomato Piccalilli.
Twelve lbs. green tomatoes, 6 green pep-
pers, 6 onions, cupful salt, cupful horse-
radish, cupful sugar, tablespoonful cloves
tablespoonful cinnamon, 4 tablespoonsful
all-spice, vinegar.
Chop the tomatoes, peppers and onions
very fine. Stir all together with the salt,
and let the mixture stand over-night. In
the morning pour off the water, add the
remaining ingredients, and cover with
vinegar. Cook slowly until tender, tasting
at the last, and adding more salt if needed.
Seal in clean, hot Jars.
Pickled Bed Cabbage.
One red cabbage, 1 quart vinegar, 4
cloves, 1 teaspoonful mustard seed, 1 tea-
spoonful black peppercorns, about J inch
piece whole ginger, about 6 dried red chil-
lies.
Boil the spice, tied up in muslin, in the
vinegar, for 10 minutes or till well flav-
oured. Choose a nice hard cabbage. Trim
off all coarse outside leaves. Cut it in 4
and remove some of the thickest stalks.
Shred the cabbage as finely as possible,
using a long, sharp knife. Put the shreds
on a dish and sprinkle well with salt and
mix it in. Leave for 24 hours, when it
will have turned a purplish colour. Now
drain off all moisture possible. Pack the
cabbage in glass or unglazed earthenware
Jars. Pour in the cold spiced vinegar to
well cover the cabbage. Put a tiny bag
of spice in each Jar on the top. Tie or
cork down securely. Can be used in a
fortnight. If kept too long cabbage al-
ways loses its crispness, although it is
quite eatable and nice for a very long time
if kept corked and covered with vinegar.
Pickled Quinces.
Three lbs. quinces, 2 pints vinegar, 1
pinch cayenne, 1 tablespoonful cloves, |
teaspoonful peppercorns.
Tie the cloves and peppercorns in mus-
lin. Peel and core the quinces, and out
into small pieces. Put all into a preserv-
ing pan and cook until tender, about li
hours.


Sour Green Pickle.
Half peck each green cucumbers and
green tomatoes, 2J tablespoonsful whole
cloves, 4 sweet red peppers, J cupful
grated horse-radish, 1 cupful salt, weak
vinegar.
Wash the vegetables, slice and pack in
alternating layers in a stone jar, sprinkl-
ing in the Salt. Cover with cold water,
let stand over-night and in the morning
drain, scald the brine, pour it over the
vegetables and let stand over-night again.
Then discard the brine and cover the
pickle with scalded vinegar, the spices,
and horse-radish. Store in sterilised jars.
Worcester Chow-Chow.
Three eupsful of chopped cabbage; 2
eupsful each of green poppers, red peppers,
onions and green tomatoes, all finely chop-
ped; 1 cupful of sugar; J cupful of salt, 2
tablespoonsful of mustard seed; 3 table-
spoonsful of celery seed; 2 quarts of vine-
gar, or enough to cover.
Eemove the seeds and the white parts
of the peppers and when chopped sprinkle
with the salt and let stand overnight; in
the morning add the other chopped vege-
tables, spices, sugar and vinegar; boil 1
hour and seal.
Pickled Damsons.
Place 6 lbs. of damsons in a basin,
sprinkle over 1 lb. of sugar, and pack the
fruit closely in jars or wide-necked bottles.
Pour 1 pint of vinegar into a saucepan,
stir in 2 lbs. of sugar, 1 teaspoonful each
allspice and peppercorns, 12 cloves, and 1
oz. bruised root ginger. Simmer gently
for 20 minutes, and when quite cold pour
it over the fruit, distributing the spice
equally. Cover the jars or bottles, place
on asbestos mats in a warm oven, and
allow to remain until the fruit begins to
shrink. Eemove, and cover securely when
cold.
Cauliflower Mustard Pickle.
Three or 4 lbs. cauliflower, 2 lbs. onions,
1 cupful sugar, 3 tablespoonsful mustard,
J cupful flour, 1 teaspoonful spice, 1
tablespoonful turmeric, i teaspoonfuh cay-
enne, 11 quarts vinegar.
Break cauliflower into pieces, slice
onions, place all in a deep bowl, and pour
over a brine made by boiling 1 lb. salt and
4 quarts water, stand 12 hours; heat just
to boiling point, and strain through a col-
ander. Mix all dry ingredients to a paste
with a little vinegar. Bring remainder of
vinegar to the boil, stir in the paste, boil
5 minutes, add vegetables, and cook about
1 hour. Bottle while hot.
Sweet Pickle.
Threequarters lb. of cucumber, 11 lbs.
marrow (weighed after peeling and remov-
ing the seeds and soft pulp), 1 lb. toma-
toes, J lb. brown sugar, 11 pints brown
vinegar, 1 pint white vinegar, 1 oz. salt,
1 oz. each turmeric and bruised ginger, 1
level teaspoonful each of celery seed,
ground mace and mixed spice.
Cut the marrow into small dice, peel the
tomatoes and cut up roughly. Wash and
wipe the cucumber, do not peel it; cut
into dice. Put into a preserving pan with
the other ingredients, tying the celery
seed and ginger in a piece of muslin. Stir
all till boiling, then cook slowly till a dark
colour and fairly thick—about 2 hours.
Bottle, seal down and label.
Piccalilli.
Two lbs. vegetable marrow, 1 average-
sized cauliflower, 2 lbs. pickling onions, 1
lb. green tomatoes, 1 cucumber, 3 pints
vinegar, 1J ozs. mustard, \ oz. turmeric, J
oz. curry powder, 2 ozs. flour, 1 oz. mixed
spice, salt, 1 lb. brown sugar.
Cut the marrow into cubes after prepar-
ing it. Break up the cauliflower into
small pieces. Peel the onions and cut the
tomatoes in halves. Place these in bowl
and sprinkle with salt. Leave over-night.
Drain away the liquid, and place the vege-
tables in preserving pan, with the vine-
gar, sugar and spice (tied up in muslin).
Boil until the onions are tender (about 1
hour). Have ready a paste made with all
the dry ingredients and water, with which
thicken the pickle. Last of all, add the
cucumber, peeled and cubed. Store in
bottles or jars in the usual way.
Walnut Pickles.
This recipe will keep for 12 months.
About 100 green walnuts, 1 quart vine-
gar, 2 ozs. black peppercorns, 1 oz. allspice,
1 oz. brown ginger (bruised). For brine, 3J
lbs. salt to each gallon of water. To this
quantity can be added | lb. eschallots,
finely chopped, and 12 chillies.
Procure young green walnuts that can be
pierced by a silver fork or darning needle,
with which the nuts should be pierced in
several places. Soak nuts with brine ten
days, changing brine on fifth day. Then
drain nuts on metal trays, dishes or gal-
vanised sheeting and place in sun till
thoroughly black, turning the nuts at in-
tervals till thoroughly dry. This is most
important.
Boil the spices (in a muslin bag) in the
vinegar for ten minutes and pour it over
the walnuts placed in jars. Do not fill the
jars quite full of walnuts, and be sure to
cover the nuts completely with the vinegar.


Mustard Pickles.
Cut up about 6 lbs. of different kinds of
vegetables, such as cabbage, cauliflower,
beans, cucumber, onion. Soak for 24 hours
in salt water, and when soaked, heat
enough to scald, not boil them, strain.
Mix 1 cupful of flour, 6 tablespoonsful of
mustard, 3d. of turmeric, 1 cupful of sugar.
Mix these well into a smooth paste with
vinegar, then add 4 quarts of vinegar,
boiled with 4 or 5 chillies; add the
paste. When these have been boiled for
10 minutes, let them boil until it thickens,
and add vegetables. Boil a few minutes,
and bottle when cold.
Pickled Green Cabbage.
Cut finely 1 large cabbage and 4 large
onions, sprinkle with salt and stand 24
hours. Drain well through colander and
boil slowly in 1 quart vinegar for 20 min-
utes. Mix 1 cupful plain flour, 2 oupsful
sugar, 2 teaspoonsful curry powder and 2
tablespoonsful mustard in a pint vinegar,
pour over cabbage and boil all together
for 5 minutes longer. Bottle hot and tie
down when cold.
Cucumber Pickles.
Cut 2 lbs. green tomatoes, 2 lbs. onions,
2 lbs. cucumbers. Pour over brine made
of i lb. salt and 2 quarts of cold water
and let stand over-night. Put on and boil
5 minutes, lift off and strain. Meanwhile
boil 2 bottles vinegar; when it boils, stir
in the following ingredients, well mixed:
lbs. sugar, 1 small cupful of flour, J
tablespoonful of turmeric, 1 teaspoonful
white pepper, 1 teaspoonful mixed spice,
i tablespoonfnl curry powder, 1 table-
spoonful mustard. Mix all well together
with cupsful cold water, stir well into
vinegar and bring to the boil; then mix
into the pickles. Leave until cold, then
bottle and seal down.
Grape Pickle.
One quart vinegar, 1 lb. sugar, J tea-
spoonful salt, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, 1
teaspoonful cloves, 1 teaspoonful all-spice,
1 teaspoonful pepper, and a little* bruised
ginger.
Put all these ingredients in a saucepan,
bring to the boil and boil for 10 minutbs.
Take about 6 lbs. of grapes (large black
ones or lady’s fingers are best), wash them
and cut from the bunches, leaving a small
stem on each grape. This is most essen-
tial, otherwise the grapes will be soft. Put
the grapes into a jar and pour the hot
spiced vinegar over them. Cover and let
stand for a week. Then boil the vinegar
again, pour over the grapes and seal down.
Will be ready to use in a week.
Apple-and-Quince Pickle.
Twelve lbs. apples and quinces, 1 pint
good vinegar, 6 lbs. sugar, 1 tablespoonful
cloves.
Pare and quarter each apple and quince
and stick a clove in some of them. Boil
the quinces in water until tender, then
skim them out. Add the sugar and vine-
gar to the liquor; when it boils skim well.
Add a layer of the apples, then a layer of
the quinces, and so on until the pan is
filled. Set on the back of the stove and
boil slowly four or five hours. Bottle and
seal in the usual way,
Indian Chutney.
Two lbs. green apples, 1 tin (lark plum
jam, i lb. brown sugar, J lb. raisins, 1 oz.
green ginger, 1 oz, garlic, 1J pints vinegar,
i teaspoonful cayenne.
Peel and core apples, chop very finely,
also raisins and garlic, mix well with other
ingredients; place in a stone jar and put
in hot oven, leave there until it becomes
a pale pulp. Bottle, and when cold it is
ready for use.
Gooseberry Chutney.
Three lbs. green gooseberries, 1J lbs.
onion, 11 lbs. brown crystal sugar, | lb.
dates, | lb. preserved ginger, 3 table-
spoonsful ginger syrup, | lb. sultanas, 2
ozs. salt, 1 oz. ground ginger, 1 oz. chillies,
pinch of cayenne, 1 pint vinegar.
Put the prepared gooseberries and sliced
onions into a preserving pan, pour over
the vinegar and boil gently until soft and
pulpy, stirring with a wooden spoon. Add
the stoned, chopped dates, the sultanas
and the preserved ginger cut into small
pieces. Now add the syrup, sugar, salt
and spices tied in a muslin bag. Cook
gently for 2 hours, stirring frequently,
until a thick, dark consistency. Bemove
the spices, and bottle.
Grape Fruit Chutney.
Wipe 4 grapefruit, slice thinly, and re-
move the pips. Chop 1 lb. onions, sprinkle
with 1J ozs. salt, and leave aside for 24
hours. Then put in a pan and add the
fruit, 1 pint vinegar, teaspoonsful of
ground ginger, } lb. seeded raisins, 1J lbs.
sugar, | teaspoonful of mustard, and a
pinch of pepper. Bring gradually to the
boil and simmer for an hour. Bottle and
seal when cold.
A Pickle Query.
If you like very crisp pickles, add a
pinch of alum to a quart of vinegar.


East-Indian Chutney.
36 tart apples, | lb. sultana raisins,
\ lb. garlic, 6 green peppers, 3 lbs. sugar,
j lb. green ginger-root, 2 ozs. mustard
seed, 5 Spanish onions or 10 ordinary
onions, J lb. salt, 3 quarts vinegar.
Remove the seeds from the peppers
and chop the apples, ginger-root, pep-
pers and garlic very fine. Slice the
onions thin. Put the vinegar, salt and
sugar on and let come to the boil. Add
the rest of the ingredients anti boil 2
hours to a pulp. Bottle while hot.
Apple and Onion Chutney.
Pour lbs. apples (cooking), 4 lbs.
onions, i oz. of chillies, | oz. of mace,
| oz. of cloves, i oz. of all-spice, 4 ozs.
mustard, \ oz. turmeric, 2 lbs. white
sugar.
Peel and core apples, cjut into eighths,
then each piece into half again. Peel
onions, cut finely. Put ajlples and onions
into a china bowl, sprinkle with salt. Next
day pour off liquor. Place apples and onions
in a preserving pan, also sugar, with s
plate on top to keep apples and onions
down. Four vinegar on until it conies over
edge of plate. Tie ail spices loosely in a
muslin bag. Mix mustard and turmeric to
a smooth paste with vinegar. Add when
mixture has boiled 15 minutes. Let all
boil again for 20 minutes. Bottle and seal.
Apple Eelish with Eaislns.
Eight firm, tart apples, 8 large green
peppers, 4 onions of medium size, 1 cupful
of seeded raisins, 1 sweet red pepper.
After paring the apples, chop very fine or
run through the food chopper all the vege-
tables, raisins and apples, mixing them
very thoroughly. Then boil together 1
quart of vinegar, 2J eupsful of brown
sugar, 3 teaapoonsful of salt and 4 table-
spoonsful of mixed whole spices—cloves,
cinnamon and allspice, with a blade of
mace —tied in a piece of muslin. When a
light syrup has formed, stir in the chop-
ped ingredients, and cook for 1 hour, very
slowly. The sauce must be very thick when
finished. Seal hot in sterilised jars.
Cabbage Chutney.
Cut finely 1 large cabbage and 4 large
onions. Sprinkle with a handful of , salt
and cover with a pint of water, or more if
needed; let stand 6 hours, then scald and
pour off liquid.
Mix together | cupful of flour, 1 tea-
spoonful turmeric, 1| eupsful of sugar, 1
tablespoon ful of curry powder, 2 table-
spoonsful of mustard to a smooth paste,
and add to enough vinegar to cover them,
about If to 2 pints. Boil for 20 minutes,
then bottle and seal when cold.
Peach Chutney.
Pour lbs. yellow peaches, 1 lb. seeded
raising, 1 lb. brown sugar, 4 oza. preserved
ginger, 1 small teaspoonful cayenne, 1 tea-
spoonful salt, a clove of garlic, 1 quart
vinegar.
Stone and peel the peaches and cut
them up roughly. Chop the ginger into
small pieces, peel the garlic, and chop it
finely. Put all the ingredients into a pan
and bring to the boll. Boil till the chut-
ney is thick enough, approximately 1 hour.
Sweet Fruit Chutney*.
Pour and a-half lbs. tomatoes, 4| lbs.
mixed fruit (such as apples, plums, pears
or peaches), 2 lbs. pumpkin, 1 lb. onions,
4 lbs. sugar, 4 ozs. salt, 1 quart vinegar,
small bottle Worcestershire sauce, 1 oz.
each cloves, mace, whole pepper, 2 ozs.
whole ginger. Crush all these and put in
a bag with } oz. mustard and cayenne to
taste. Put all, cut up fairly large, in pan
and boil 3 hours till thick and brown. This
will keep well and is very nice in the sum-
mer time with cold meats. A little garlic
is an improvement.
Cucumber Chutney.
Four lbs. cucumbers, 4 lbs. apples, 4 lbs.
onions, 2 lbs. sugar, 1 oz. cloves, 4 ozg.
ginger, 1 oz. garlic, 12 ozs. raisins, 1 oz.
peppercorns, 1 oz. cayenne.
Cut cucumbers, apples and onions.
Sprinkle with salt and stand over-night.
Strain, then add other ingredients. Cover
with vinegar. Bring to the boil gradually
and cook till mixture is thick and soft.


Fruit Chutney.
Three lbs. apples, 3 lbs. tomatoes, 3 lbs.
dark plums, 4 lbs. sugar, 1 lb. seeded
raisins, 2 quarts, vinegar, 1J tableapoonsful
cloves, 1| tablespoonsful white pepper, 1J
tableapoonsful all-spice (whole), If table-
spoonsful ground ginger, 1 tablespoonful
mace, 4 teaspoonful cayenne.
Weigh the apples and plums, after peel-
ing, coring and removing the stones. Skin
the tomatoes. Cut the plums in halves:
the tomatoes and apples in slices. Tie the
cloves, all-spice, and mace in a piece of
muslin. Put all the ingredients into a pre-
serving pan and cook for about 14 hours.
Dried Chutney.
Two lbs. prunes, 1 lb. green apples, 4 lb.
green tomatoes, 2 or 3 large onions, | lb.
raisins, 4 oz. ground ginger, | lb. brown
sugar, 2 ozs. salt, 1 teaspoonful mustard
seed, 1 teaspoonful cayenne, 3 pints vine-
gar, 1. teaspoonful powdered cloves.
Soak the prunes over-night. Wash and
drain, cut open and remove the stones. Cut
apples and onions, small, slice tomatoes.
Place all ingredients in the preserving pan
and cook for 2 to 3 hours, stirring occa-
sionally. Try a little on a saucer and if
there are no watery particles, it is ready.
Bottle while hot, and keep for a few weeks
before using.
Quince Chutney.
Three lbs. quinces, 1 lb. apples (weighed
after peeling and coring), 2 lbs. onions, 2
lbs. sugar, 14 ozs. salt, 9 cloves of garlic,
1 teaspoonful each ground ginger and
ground all-spice, 1 level teaspoonful each
ground mace and cayenne, 3 pints vinegar.
Mince the quinces, apples and onions.
Put all the ingredients into a preserving
pan and simmer for 4 hours.
Cashmere Chutney.
Six lbs. sour apples (cored and peeled),
3 lbs. brown sugar, 14 ozs. raisins (stoned
and cut up), 24 quarts vinegar, 2 ozs. garlic
(peeled), 8 ozs. tamarinds cut up, 4 ozs.
white mustard seed, 4 ozs. salt, 1 oz. red
chillies cut up, 2 ozs. ground ginger.
Chop apples, chillies, raisins and garlic
up fine, and boil in 2 quarts of vinegar
till apples are quite soft; boil the sugar
and tamarinds in the | quart of vinegar,
taking care to have all the fruit off the
stones, and when cold add apples, etc.;
beat up well. The ground ginger, mustard
seed and salt to be added last, and all
heated together and bottled; leave in a
warm place for a few days. It improves
by keeping.
Apricot Chutney.
Eight lbs. apricots, 2 lbs. brown sugar,
2 lbs. seeded raisins, 6 medium-sized
onions, 4 ozs. salt, 1 quart vinegar, 1 level
tablespoonfnl ground cloves, 2 level table-
spoonsful mustard, 2 level tableapoonsful
ground ginger, 4 level tablespoonfnl cay-
enne. Stone apricots and cut in small
pieces. Peel onions and cut in thin slices.
Mix all well together before pouring on
the vinegar. Boil one hour.
Ehubarb Chutney.
Eleven and a half lbs. of rhubarb, 2 ozs.
of ground ginger, 4 ozs. of garlic, 2 ozs.
of cayenne, 8 ozs. of salt, 4 lbs. of chopped
raising, 4 lbs. of moist sugar, the pulp of
6 tomatoes, the juice of 6 lemons, vinegar.
Cut up the rhubarb, put it in a preserv-
ing pan, and just cover with vinegar. Bring
to the boil. Add the other ingredients and
bring to the'boil again. When cold, bottle.
It is improved by being kept a month or
two before using^
i Fig' Chutney.
Six ripe 6 tart apples, 12 dried
figs, 4 cupful of sugar, 1 teaspoonful of
ginger, 1 final! onion, 1 clove of garlic, 1
tablespoonfnl of salt, | cupful of honey, 2
cupsful of vinegar, J teaspoonful of cay-
enne pepper.
Pare and core the apples and chop them
coarsely together with the tomatoes, which
should be of medium size, and the figs.
Mince the onion and garlic clove very fine.
Mix all the ingredients together, place
them in a preserving pan and cook slowly
for 2 hours or more. Pour hot into steri-
lised glass jars and seal at once. This
makes a relish which is decidedly Oriental
in its rich mingling of flavours.
California Chutney.
Two dozen ripe tomatoes (medium size),
6 onions (medium size), 3 red peppers, 3
green peppers, 1 doz. tart apples, 1 lb.
seedless raisins, 1 cupful celery (cut fine),
2 quarts vinegar, 3 cupsful sugar, salt.
Chop the vegetables and the apples sep-
arately. Combine the ingredients and cook
the chutney until it is thick and clear.
Seal in hot, clean jars.
Apple and Date Chutney.
Half lb. of sultanas, 1 lb. of brown
sugar, 1 lb. of dates (stoned and chopped),
1 lb. of onions (chopped), 1 lb. of apples,
1 pint of vinegar, cayenne pepper to taste.
Boil until it is of nice consistency.
Preserves are often wasted because
mould has formed on top. This is avoided
if the covers are dipped in thin starch and
thoroughly dried before they are used.
Try placing a 2 lb. jar full of quick-
lime among the pickle jars. It will gather
the damp and greatly increase its bulk by
doing so, when it must be emptied and re-
filled.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by John Sands Pty. Ltd., Druitt St., Sydney.
