

XnMjdl STANDS
/r 7 ALONE
, I ANNE BRACKEN
S^J
BH!
%; %
%fo$; ,


JANCY STANDS
ALONE
XT ERE is the fourth of the
popular "Jancy” Book
Series.
The setting for this new book
is the South Coast of New
South Wales, that the author
knows so well and, like
"Jancy Wins Through,”
"Jancy Scores Again” and
"Jancy in Pursuit,” deals
with the lively adventures of
this frank, reliable and cour-
ageous girl who has now
grown into a lovely young
lady of fifteen.
We meet the quaint fascinat-
ing old ladies Miss Emmeline,
Miss Euphemia and Miss
Eulalie, the good-looking
young Englishman, Godfrey,
and his arrogant brother,
Geoffrey, the big, shaggy
artist, Jerry Bentham, who
Anne Bracken presents with
affectionate understanding in
this well-written story.








4


JANCY STANDS ALONE


f


J9NCY STANDS AIONE
ANNE BRACKEN
Made and printed in Australia for Jons Productions Pty. Ltd.
by Deaton & Spencer Pty. Ltd., Sydney, Australia.


k %
Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney, for transmission by post as a book.


FOR MY TWO YOUNG NIECES,
MARGARET WILLIAMS AND BARBARA HARTLEY.


1
• «
/
I
'


CHAPTER I
Jancy was sitting reading in the sunroom the evening
her mother came home and broke the sad news about
the Christmas holidays.
It had been arranged previously that, with Christmas
over, the Mitfords and the Richmonds would join forces
and go on a caravan tour of the North Coast.
Jancy and Rusty had been wildly excited at the
prospect, and had talked of nothing else for weeks, and
now, with the proposed trip only two days away, Penelope
Richmond had to develop scarlet fever.
"Oh, Mother,” wailed Jancy when she heard the news,
"are they sure it’s scarlet fever?”
"I’m afraid so, darling. Luckily I just met the doctor
coming out as I was going into the Richmonds, otherwise
I’d have been quarantined, too, I suppose.”
"So there goes our holiday.” Jancy stared glumly at
the floor. Her mother put an arm round her shoulders.
"Poor lamb. It is bad luck, isn’t it?”
"It certainly is. Still, I suppose it’s worse for Rusty,
though. At least I can get about. She can’t even leave the
house. Isn’t there something we can do for her, Mummy?”
"Oh yes, we’ll leave books and games and things like
that to-morrow. You might look among your things
now and see what you can find.” Mrs. Mitford stood up.
"It’s most unfortunate. I did want you to have a good
holiday this year. Is there anywhere you can think of that
you’d like to go?”


"No, not at the moment.” Jancy gave a wry smile.
"I can’t get over the disappointment yet. All our lovely
plans. It is sickening, Mother, isn’t it?”
"It is, darling. But never mind., We’ll find something
for you to do. We’ll have a good sleep on it to-night, and
we’ll probably come up with a bright idea in the
morning.”
But the next morning Jancy was still vague about
what she wanted to do, and at breakfast she said, "Mother,
the period of quarantine for scarlet fever isn’t long, is
it?”
"Ten or fourteen days, I think, Jancy. Why?”
"Well, couldn’t I just stay at home? I can manage a
fortnight by myself, and then Rusty will be free.”
"But she may get the fever, dear. None of the family
has had it, so we must look at that possibility, and I can’t
risk you losing your holiday. You must have a change
away from home before you start school.” Mrs. Mitford
folded her table napkin and pushed her chair away from
the table. "If you’ve got those books and things ready
we’ll go round to the Richmonds’ about ten o’clock, shall
we?”
Jancy nodded glumly, and her father smiled across
the table at her downcast face.
"Cheer up, Jan,” he said. "It could have been worse.
You might have got the scarlet fever yourself.”
She grinned back at him feebly. "That’s so, Daddy.”
"There’s my girl.” He patted her shoulder as he
walked round the table towards the door. "Something
will turn up, you see.”
At half past ten Jancy and her mother drove up to
the Richmond house and were greeted by vociferous yells
from Rusty, Peter and Judy, who waved wildly from
behind the flyscreen of the sleepout verandah, where they
were imprisoned.
Jancy was out of the car almost before it had stopped
and, running across to the path below the sleepout, she
stood and gazed at her friends’ woebegone faces. Rusty,
almost in tears, banged angrily on the windowsill.


"Wouldn’t it make you sick?” she demanded, empha-
sizing every word with a bang. "I’m just so wild I could
bite someone.”
"Oh, Rusty, I know.” Jancy’s face was full of sym-
pathy. "What can I do?”
Judy’s round eyes appeared, straining over the sill.
"You can give me a chocolate,” she suggested brightly,
and then abruptly disappeared from view with an accom-
panying thud.
Rusty gave a half-hearted giggle. "She was standing
on one of Dumps’ building blocks, and it let her down,”
she explained to Jancy, and then her face resumed its
hopeless expression. "There’s nothing anyone can do,”
she continued in a tragic voice that would have done credit
to Sarah Bernhardt. "We’ll just have to stay here till we
rot.”
There was a shout of laughter from Peter. "’Ark at
’er,” he said slangily. "She sounds like a condemned
prisoner.” He struck a pose. "The Countess of Monte
Cristo in durance vile, I don’t think.”
Rusty aimed a sidewise blow at him. "Beast!” she
said. But he evaded her hand and, still laughing, went
into his bedroom.
Jancy, despite herself, laughed, too. "Well, never
mind, Rusty. Perhaps I’ll be able to think of something
we can do as soon as the quarantine’s over. Look, I’ve
got some books and games I’ve brought for you in the
car. I’ll just go and. get them. Half a minute.”
She ran off and was opening the car door when she
heard her mother calling. Mrs. Mitford was standing at
the foot of the steps talking to Mrs. Richmond, whose
slightly untidy head was protruding out of the door.
"Hello, dear,” she said to Jancy. "I’m so sorry about
all this. We’ve ruined your holiday.”
Jancy, who since talking to Rusty, had, for some
inexplicable reason, recovered her spirits, shook her head
almost gaily. "Of course you haven’t, Aunt Lesley. You
couldn’t help it. We’ll think of something to do when
we put our minds to it.”


"Well, I’ve already thought of something,” said Mrs.
Richmond. "Your mother will tell you about it. It’s
just a suggestion, of course.”
"And a very good one,” agreed Mrs. Mitford. "Now
we mustn’t keep you, Lesley. Just go and get the books,
Jancy, and we can put them on the steps.”
Jancy did as she was asked, and then, after saying
good-bye to Mrs. Richmond, went around to the sleepout.
Rusty was still staring disconsolately out of the window.
"I gave the things to your mother,” said Jancy. "You
might get some fun out of them.”
Rusty nodded disinterestedly. "Thanks, Jan, but I
feel as though I’ll never smile again.”
"Oh, Rusty!” said Jancy, unable to take these heroics
without showing some amusement, "you are a lovely
idiot.”
Even Rusty herself smiled involuntarily, and with one
of her usual volte faces, suddenly laughed and said, "Yes,
aren’t I?”
"That’s better,” approved Jancy. "Well, I’m off now,
Rusty. I’ll come and see you again to-morrow. Keep your
chin up until then. Good-bye.”
Going home, Jancy asked her mother what Mrs. Rich-
mond’s suggestion had been, and Mrs. Mitford replied:
"Well, I don’t know if you remember me talking about
the Misses Hilton, do you?”
"Of course. Those old ladies with the fascinating
names, you mean? Miss Emmeline, Miss Euphemia and
Miss Eulalie. The ones you used to stay with when you
were a girl?”
"You have got a good memory, darling. Yes. They’re
the ones. Well, your Aunt Lesley had a letter from them
inviting her and the children down. She was going to
refuse because of our proposed trip, but now that all this
has happened, she wondered if you’d like to go anyway,
and then perhaps Rusty could join you when the quaran-
tine period’s over —that’s if she doesn’t contract the fever,
of course. What do you think of that?”


Jancy hesitated. To stay with three old ladies was not
exactly her idea of an hilarious holiday.
"Doesn’t it appeal to you, dear?” asked her mother,
as the silence continued.
"It’s just that they’re so old, Mummy.”
"I expect they are to you, dear, although I must say
they never seemed so to me. Miss Emmeline was a bit
prim, perhaps, but Miss Feemy and Miss Lally were great
fun. Your Aunt Lesley and I loved going down to stay
with them. They never restricted us in any way.”
"Mm,” murmured Jancy doubtfully. "They live on
the South Coast, don’t they?”
"Yes, a good way down. You’d get plenty of boating
and swimming, and there are horses on the property. Also,
they have lots of friends, and I suppose there’d be other
girls for you to make friends with.”
"Well, I suppose I could try it, anyway, Mummy.”
"Only if you want to, dear. I’m sure you’d find them
interesting. They have a fund of tales about that part
of the country. In fact, their grandfather was the first
white man to build there, and their father was the first
white child born in the district.”
"Gosh!” exclaimed Jancy, after a quick calculation.
"They must be old!”
Mrs, Mitford laughed. "Oh, I don’t know. Their
father was born in 1845 and was 30 years old when he
married. I think Miss Emmeline is in her seventies, but
she’s ten years or so older than Miss Feemy and Miss Lally.
Miss Emmeline, of course, has always been the responsible
one. Her mother died fairly early on, and she took her
place as mistress of the house. I suppose that makes her
seem older and more staid —but you couldn’t apply those
words to the other two. In any case, darling, you just
think it over and decide for yourself. You don’t have to
say yes straight away.” Mrs. Mitford smiled at her daugh-
ter, and patted her knee reassuringly.
That evening, when Colonel Mitford came home,
Jancy mentioned that it had been suggested she visit the
Misses Hilton. Her father looked vacant for a minute,


as though unable to place the name, and then sat up and
slapped his knee.
"Not those three wonderful old girls of your
mother’s?” And, as Jancy nodded, he went on: "Of course
I remember them —mad as March hares, they were.”
"Oh, Robert!” objected Mrs. Mitford, "how can you
say such a thing?”
"Well, it’s true, dear. I admit it’s a delightful madness
—but they’re still crazy. Let me see, there was Miss
Emmy ”
"Good Heavens, Robert! She’d die if she heard you
call her that —she always insists on her full name, Emme-
line.”
"All right, Miss Emmeline then, and Miss Feemy and
Miss Lally. Isn’t that right?”
"Yes, dear.”
"I always liked Miss Lally best. Don’t you remember
when we were engaged, and went down there, she used
to beam on us sitting in the garden together and say young
love always made her feel sentimental?”
"Oh, yes.” Mrs. Mitford’s face dimpled like a girl’s
at this recollection. "And, Robert,” she rushed on eagerly,
"remember Miss Feemy waiting for us as we came up from
the beach and blushing like mad, as she said she always
admired a gentleman with a well-turned leg?”
Colonel Mitford put back his head and laughed
heartily. "Comic old girl,” he said. "I thought she was
much too modest even to admit she saw things like that.”
"Oh, there wasn’t much Miss Feemy missed, believe
me. None of them was slow in that way. But Miss Feemy
was particularly acute. Miss Emmeline always said she
was fey.”
"What’s 'fey,’ Mother?” asked Jancy.
"It’s a Scottish word, dear, and people who are fey
are supposed to have second sight. They always know
beforehand when someone’s going to die, and they seem
to have a knowledge of things outside the usual human
ken.”


"A lot of nonsense, of course,” said Colonel Mitford.
"I think the old dear invented her prophecies half the time.
It made her interesting to people, I suppose, and that’s
why she did it. It’s one way of impressing one’s friends,
after all.”
"But, Robert, don’t you remember even while we
were there she advised that man not to go out fishing, and
he did and was drowned?”
"Well, that was probably a coincidence, an unlucky
one for him and a lucky one for her.”
"Oh, you’re incorrigible, dear,” smiled Mrs. Mitford.
"You find a rational explanation for everything.”
"Every rational man does,” replied the Colonel com-
fortably and, turning to Jancy, added: "You’d enjoy it
down there, Jan. I always did.”
Jancy nodded without conviction.
"You don’t seem very hopeful, dear,” he said. "Can’t
you take your father’s word for it?”
"It’s not that, Daddy. Of course I believe that you
and Mother had a good time there, but that was a long
while ago and the old ladies are much older now.”
"Naturally they are,” Colonel Mitford agreed, "but I
refuse to believe they’ve changed. I’m convinced you’d
like them as much as I did, wouldn’t she, Brenda?”
"I’m sure she would, Robert, still, it’s no good her
going if she doesn’t like the idea. I would like you to get
away though, Jancy, and there doesn’t seem to be any-
where else available at the moment. Perhaps, dear, if you
went for a week, to see what it was like, it might be a
good idea. You could stay longer if you found it enjoyable,
or you could come home if you were tired of it. What
about that?”
Jancy’s face brightened. "Well, it would pass the
time till Rusty is free. That’s something.” She nodded.
"All right, Mum, I’ll go.”
"That’s my girl,” smiled her mother. "I’ll ring your
Aunt Lesley right now and we’ll arrange it.”


CHAPTER II
When Mrs. Mitford came back from ringing the
Richmond house, she announced that Mrs. Richmond had
arranged things satisfactorily.
"We’ve decided,” she said, "that I shall ring the
Hiltons from here. Your Aunt Lesley loathes writing let-
ters, and in any case it would be two or three days before
we got a reply. If I ring the old ladies straight away we’ll
know where we are. I’ll do that now Jancy, and mean-
while you might see if you can give Annie a hand in the
kitchen; I’ve neglected her dreadfully.”
She went back to the telephone and Jancy ran out
to the kitchen. Annie was not in a very good humour
at being left alone to prepare the meal, and she was banging
pots about on the stove in a bad-tempered way.
"Can I help you, Annie?” asked Jancy.
"I should just think you could. I haven’t got two
pairs of hands, although some people seem to think I have.
Here, you can stir that white sauce. Mind you don’t let
it catch now.”
Jancy took the wooden spoon and commenced to stir,
while Annie busied herself with something else. Presently
she regained her usual good temper, and endeavoured to
wipe out the previous sharpness by saying:
was bad luck about the Richmonds, Jancy. You
must be disappointed about your holiday.”
"I was,” agreed Jancy, "but now Mummy’s arranging
something else.” And she went on to tell Annie of the
proposed trip to the Misses Hilton.
When she had finished, Annie, who had memories of
a visit the old ladies had once made to the Mitfords,
laughed and said: "They came to stay here once, and
three old cards they were, too. My goodness, I couldn’t
keep that Miss Emmeline out of my kitchen. She was a


vegetarian then, or something, and what with her likes and
dislikes and her cheese and nuts she nearly drove me
barmy.”
"Oh, Heavens!” said Jancy in some dismay. "Don’t
say I’ve got to live on lettuce if I go down there.”
"No, don’t you worry. Miss Feemy and Miss Lally
like their meat. You’ll be all right as far as that goes.
In fact, I should think you’d enjoy yourself.”
Jancy made a wry face. "You know, Annie,” she
said half-amusedly, "If anybody else tells me I’ll enjoy
it 111 be sure to hate it. I feel prejudiced against the poor
old things already.”
Well, you needn’t be. They’ll keep you entertained
by their goings-on, I can tell you,” and Annie began to
recount some of the more outlandish antics of the Misses
Hilton. These reminiscences lasted until the dinner was
dished up and on the table, and were only stopped by Mrs.
Mitford coming into the dining-room.
"Well, that’s all settled,” she said cheerfully, as Annie
went out. "Miss Lally answered the ’phone and she’s
delighted that you’re going. She thinks you shouldn’t waste
any time, and wants you to go to-morrow. I said I could
have your things ready. You’d have to leave early, of
course. Your father could run you down to the train,
couldn’t you, Robert? It goes at 7.10.”
"Yes, that would be all right.”
But, Mother, said Jancy, I promised to see Rusty
to-morrow.”
Oh, I didn t know that. Never mind, we’ll go over
after dinner and you can see her then. That will do, won’t
it?”
Jancy intimated that it would, and when the meal
was over and Annie had been further soothed by receiving
assistance with the washing-up, Jancy and her mother
left for the Richmonds’.
Rusty was a little brighter than she had been in the
morning, and she grinned at Jancy from the window. But
when Jancy told her about the visit to the Misses Hilton,
she descended into the depths again.


"Oh, Jancy,” she wailed, "I don’t know how you can
do it!”
"Do what?” asked Jancy, mystified.
"Leave me alone like that. It’s the only thing I have
to look forward to —you coming. I won’t know what to
do with myself.”
"But, Rusty, it’s only for a week, and if I don’t like
it I’m coming back. If I do like it, I’ll stay, and then you
can come down, too.”
Rusty abandoned her misery immediately and said
eagerly,'"Truly, Jan? Did Mummy say I could?”
"Yes. I thought you knew?”
"Of course I didn’t know. Nobody tells me any-
thing.”
Well, you know now.”
"Gosh! I hope you like it, Jan, because I’ll be good
and sick of this place by the time the quarantine’s over.
You’ll write and tell me what it’s like, won’t you Write
straight away.”
"It’s no good writing straight away, Rusty, I’ll need
a little time to find if it’s any good. Look, to-day s Sun-
day, so I’ll write on Wednesday. I should know by that
time whether I want to stay or not.”
"All right.” Rusty accepted this, and they chatted
about other things until Mrs. Mitford came to collect her
daughter.
"I’m sorry to part you two, Rusty, but I have to pack
Jancy’s things to-night, as she’s catching the early train.
Good-night now, and I’ll bring some more books to-
morrow.”
After a final reminder from Rusty about writing, the
girls said their good-byes and Jancy and her mother
hurried home to start the packing. There was some dis-
cussion about the size of the suitcase at first. Jancy
pointed out that if she only stayed a week she wouldn’t
need a large one, it was decided that they should pack a
small one for the week, and that if Jancy wished to stay
on she could write to say so and Rusty would take down
a further supply of clothes if and when she went.


"And,” added Mrs. Mitford, "if by a mischance Rusty
should contract the fever I can always send them down by
rail.”
With this settled, the bag was packed and, after
setting the alarm clock, everyone retired to bed in order
to be fresh for an early start.
The next morning dawned warm and clear, and once
in the car with the long journey started, fancy began to
feel a little excited about the holiday and the expectation
of meeting the three Miss Hiltons.
"Mummy’s known the Hiltons a long time, hasn’t
she, Daddy?” she said, as they sped along the wide road
between the tall gums.
"Yes, ever since she and your Aunt Lesley were
children, I think. Of course, it’s ten years or so now since
she’s seen them ”
"But they’re Aunt Lesley’s friends really, aren’t
they?”
"Not particularly, that I know of. They used to go
and stay there when they were young, but they also stayed
with your mother’s people. They were really your grand-
mother’s friends. She and Mrs. Mansfield, Rusty’s grand-
mother, knew them well. They were all girls together.
I remember Mrs. Mansfield telling me once that Miss
Emmeline had been disappointed in love.”
Jancy’s romantic heart was touched.
"Oh, poor thing! How did it happen, Daddy?”
"Well, as far as I could gather it was a misunder-
standing. The fellow she was engaged to went away to the
Boer War and she heard he’d got married in Africa. She
immediately wrote breaking off the engagement and for
a while she was very ill over it. She never heard from the
fellow again, and not long after that her mother died,
and in taking care of the family she managed to forget
him. Later on she got rather a shock when a soldier friend
of his returned from Africa and told her that the report
of the marriage was quite untrue, and that her fiance had
been a prisoner of the Boers for a long time and finally had
died, not a month previously, from blackwater fever.”


"Oh, Daddy, how awful!”
"Yes, it must have been pretty grim. I’ve always
thought that it made Miss Emmeline what she is. She’s
had a difficult life, and one can’t blame her for being a bit
hard to get on with.” He paused. "Well, I shouldn’t say
hard to get on with, that’s not quite true. It’s rather that
she’s just a little stand-offish. I always found, though, that
if one went three-quarters of the way to meet her she was
all right. In other words, if you’re very nice to her she'll
be pleasant to you.”
"And what about Miss Feemy and Miss Lally; why
did they never marry?”
"Goodness knows. Your mother says Miss Feemy was
very flirtatious in her youth, and Miss Fally was engaged
once, so I couldn’t tell you why they’re still single. They’re
quite nice-looking old ladies now, and I’m sure they must
have been very attractive as girls. I do remember hearing,
though, that their father was a bit of a martinet, so perhaps
he made it difficult for them to have men friends. Vic-
torian fathers were inclined to be like that, I know.” He
glanced teasingly at the sweet, serious face beside him.
"You can consider yourself lucky, Jan, that you’ve got me
for a papa.”
Jancy slipped her hand inside his arm and squeezed it
affectionately. "Oh, I do,” she smiled up at him. "Haven’t
I told you before?”
"Yes, but you should do it more often.”
She laughed. "All right, I’ll try.”
They reached the station in good time for the train,
and Colonel Mitford got her a seat in an empty compart-
ment, and bought her a plentiful supply of magazines.
"Now, don’t forget, Jan,” he said, "you leave the
train at Currawong; that’s as far as it goes, and the coach
will be waiting outside. It’ll have Burangi on the front
of it, and if you ask the driver he’ll put you out at the
right stop. Anyway, one of them will be there to meet
you, so you’ll be all right, won’t you?”
"Of course, Daddy. If I can’t look after myself at
fifteen I never will be able to.”


"Hm, I forget sometimes that you’re a grown-up
young woman.” He paused as a whistle blew. "Well, it
sounds as if you re off now,” he said, and bent to kiss her,
but just as he did so someone pushed him violently aside
and wrenched open the carriage door.
"In here,” said a high, excited English voice. "Hurry,
Mother, for goodness’ sake,” and a handsome boy of about
sixteen years of age leapt into the carriage, leaving his
panting parent to climb in after him. Colonel Mitford
took her arm.
Allow me, madam,” he said, helping her on. Then he
glared at the boy. "You’ve forgotten your manners, I
think, young man.”
The train began to move, and he turned his attention
to Jancy. "Good-bye, dear, and enjoy yourself at Burangi.
If you don’t, let us know and you can come home.”
He waved to her until the tram, curving away from
the platform, hid him from view, and as his figure disap-
peared, Jancy settled back into her corner seat and picked
up a magazine. But she was not allowed to read, for the
boy on the opposite seat said abruptly;
"I say, was that your father?”
Yes,” replied Jancy, taken unawares.
"Well, he’s got a pretty good cheek, I must say.”
Jancy frowned. "I beg your pardon?”
"I said he’s got a pretty good cheek, your father,”
repeated the boy belligerently.
His mother, a fair, delicate-looking woman, laid an
ineffectual hand on his arm. Really, Godfrey, that’s very
rude.”
He shook off her hand. "Well, he was rude to me. Who
does he thipk he is?” He got up and flung out into the
corridor, and his mother looked at Jancy with distressed
eyes. "I’m so sorry, my dear,” she said, in a soft, pleasant
voice, "he’s a very difficult boy to control. Please don’t
take any notice of him.”
Jancy was embarrassed by her obvious concern. "It’s
all right,” she murmured, "I don’t mind.”


"Thank you. He’s much better if you ignore him.”
The woman sighed and sat back. "He’s so highly strung,
you see, it makes him difficult, very difficult.” She looked
out at the corridor where her son was standing at the win-
dow, and with another sigh turned back and, to Jancy’s
relief, changed the subject. "Did I hear your father say
you were going right through to Burangi, my dear?”
"Yes, I’m going for a short holiday.”
"How nice for you. It’s a beautiful place. I live
there.”
"Do you? Then perhaps you know the Misses
Hilton?”
The woman’s face brightened. "Indeed I do. I know
them very well. Are they relations of yours?”
"Oh no. They’re great friends of my mother,
though.”
"I see. And have you met them before?”
"No, this is the first time.”
"Then you’ll love them. They are really charming old
ladies.”
Jancy nodded. She couldn’t trust herself to reply,
for she thought if anyone else should tell her once more
how much she would like the Misses Hilton she would end
up by hating the old ladies thoroughly.
Her companion went on, "I think I should introduce
myself, since we shall probably be seeing quite a lot of
each other. My name is Mrs. Chapman, and,” nodding
towards the corridor, "that is my son Godfrey. I have twin
sons, Godfrey and Geoffrey. You’ll no doubt meet Geof-
frey at Burangi after you arrive.”
"And my name is Jancy Mitford,” offered Jancy.
"Jancy. What a pretty name. I don’t think I’ve ever
heard it before.”
"Well, it’s really Jancine, but I never get that. Every-
one calls me Jancy.”
"Then I shall call you Jancy, too, if I may.”
"Of course.” Jancy’s reply was rather absent-
minded, for the name Chapman had a certain familiar


ring, and yet she could not place where she had heard it
before. She seemed also to know the names Godfrey and
Geoffrey, but how, and in what connection she couldn’t
think. She abandoned the attempt to remember as Godfrey
re-entered the carriage, and with what was obviously his
usual ungraciousness, said:
"What rotten trains they have in this country. They
wouldn’t be tolerated for a mintue in a civilized place.”


CHAPTER 111
Mrs. Chapman looked disturbed at her son’s remark,
but with a patience at which Jancy marvelled, merely said:
“This young lady and I have discovered we have mutual
friends, Godfrey. She’s going to the Misses Hilton at
Burangi.”
Godfrey gave a short, unpleasant laugh. “Those old
horrors!” He sent a sneering glance at Jancy. "I wish
you joy of them.”
Jancy smiled as pleasantly as she could and took the
wish as though it had been sincerely meant. “Thank you,
I hope your wish is granted.”
He stared at her suspiciously, slightly taken aback at
this reception of his malice. “You’ll find out,” he said
darkly, “and it won’t take you long, either.”
Jancy picked up a magazine. She was not annoyed
at the boy’s evident dislike of the Misses Hilton; in fact,
it was a refreshing change from the constant praise of
them to which she had been subjected; but neither did she
intend to become annoyed at anything he might say, and
to avoid conversation with him she offered the magazine
to Mrs. Chapman.
“Would you like something to read, Mrs. Chapman?
I’ve got lots of these.”
“Thank you very much, I would. We’ve got a very
long journey in front of us, and one gets so very tired
talking above the noise of a train.”
They both relaxed and opened their magazines, while
Godfrey, after kicking sullenly at the doorpost for a while,
went back into the corridor. Jancy, however, found she
could not read, for her inability to remember where she
had heard of her fellow-travellers teased at her mind. She
had no recollection of them being mentioned by her
mother or the Richmonds or any of her friends, and Mrs.


Chapman had given no sign of recognizing her name, so
she couldn’t have heard about them in Kuruna; and yet
the name was so familiar. She prodded her mind doggedly,
hoping to revive her memory, but to no avail.
She stole a look at Mrs. Chapman over the top of her
book. That lady’s hands were folded over the magazine
in her lap, and her eyes were closed. Jancy covertly studied
the face which, in repose, had a prettiness that was
obscured by signs of worry and strain, that were
no doubt caused by her horror of a son. Jancy’s eyes
moved to the corridor where Godfrey was standing.
He was very like his mother to look at. The same abundant
fair hair and small features; but his expression was very
different, as he stared sulkily out of the window and bit
savagely at his nails. I wonder what the other twin is like,
thought Jancy, hoping he wasn’t much like this one —two
of that kind would be more than enough, particularly as
she would no doubt see something of them if they were
friends of the Hiltons. She returned to her magazine, and
giving up the attempt to place the Chapmans, began to
read.
The next think she knew, she was woken by the
steward going along the train calling for morning tea.
Mrs. Chapman woke, too.
"My goodness!” she said, sitting up and patting her
hair. "I did have a long sleep. Did you?”
"I did. I had to get up so early this morning, I expect
I was tired.”
Mrs. Chapman looked out into the corridor. "I won-
der where Godfrey is,” she said worriedly. "He’s so careless
in trains.” She gave Jancy a self-conscious little smile.
"I don’t suppose he’s fallen out, but I’d better go and
look.”
"He was standing in the corridor when I went to
sleep,” Jancy told her.
Mrs. Chapman went to the door, where she turned
and asked Jancy if she was going to have some tea. Jancy
said she would and Mrs. Chapman said: "All right, I’ll tell
the steward to bring you some, too. He’ll probably come
back this way and perhaps he will have seen Godfrey.”


She went out, and Jancy, feeling untidy after her
sleep, took out her comb and began to comb her hair.
She was just finished when she looked up to see Godfrey
lounging in the doorway, grinning at her.
"Prettying yourself up, are you?” he said, provok-
ingly. "Well, all I can say is you haven’t got much to
work on.” He laughed heartily at this piece of rudeness,
which apparently passed with him for wit, while Jancy,
determined not to satisfy him by becoming annoyed, busied
herself with returning her comb and mirror to her bag,
and collecting the scattered magazines. He watched her
in silence, still grinning, and then Jancy said:
"Your mother is looking for you.”
He did not stir. "Is she, indeed? Then she’ll find me
when she comes back, won’t she?”
Jancy turned around and looked at him. "What a
horrible boy you are, aren’t you?” she said without heat.
"Is it natural or do you cultivate it?”
This treatment of his insolence somewhat disconcerted
young Master Chapman, who was used to rousing anger
in his victims, a circumstance that put them at a disad-
vantage and left him in control of the situation; but this
time the tables were turned, and while he was still at a loss
for something to say, Jancy pushed him away from the
door, passed through and went off down the corridor to
look for Mrs. Chapman and inform her that her odious
son had not fallen from the train, an accident that Jancy
felt she could at that moment have viewed with little or no
dismay. As she searched for her fellow-traveller, she was
aware of a small glow of satisfaction at the thought that
she had come victorious out of the recent encounter. For
still vivid in her memory was the Jancy of a few years
ago, the Jancy who was timid and unable to cope with
unkindness, and her satisfaction grew as she realized that
now she had left all that behind, and become a different
girl, a girl who would cope with her fears and was calm
and self-reliant.
She found Mrs. Chapman in the corridor of the next
carriage down, and informed her of Godfrey’s reappear-
ance. "Oh, thank you, Jancy.” His mother was much


relieved. "I really was beginning to worry. However, it’s
all right now. We’ll go back, shall we? I’ve seen the
steward and he’s bringing tea and toast for the three of
US.
"Good,” smiled Jancy, who was beginning to feel the
consequences of her early breakfast. "Do you know
whether we have lunch on the train, Mrs. Chapman?”
"Oh no, dear, we have that at Currawong. We get
in the ’bus at the station and he takes us into the town,
where we have lunch at the hotel. Perhaps you’d like to
join Godfrey and me.”
Jancy accepted the invitation and thanked her,
privately thinking that she couldn’t ever imagine liking to
join Godfrey in anything; but Mrs. Chapman was a differ-
ent proposition completely, and as Jancy found her
company quite pleasant, she didn’t intend to be driven
away by the son’s abominable behaviour.
Godfrey was still sulking in the compartment when
they returned, and the steward brought the tea and toast
almost immediately. Jancy attacked her toast hungrily;
but Godfrey, in his usual manner, found fault with his.
"What filthy tuck,” he said to his mother. "Hardly
any butter, and as hard as iron.” He tore the middle out
of the bread and amused himself by throwing the crusts
out of the window. A greater enjoyment was added to this
pastime by the fact that Jancy’s head was almost in a
direct line of fire, and it was only by leaning back that
she could avoid being hit.
Mrs. Chapman remonstrated with him, but he took
no notice except to grin infuriatingly, and at last Jancy
silently took her plate and cup and saucer, and moved to
the corner seat near the corridor, where she managed to
finish eating without further interruption. With the
retirement of his victim, Godfrey lost interest in his game,
and, after drinking his tea, dropped the cup noisily in its
saucer and departed down the corridor in search of more
exciting entertainment.
Jancy avoided looking at Mrs. Chapman as long as she
could after he had gone; but when she leaned forward to
put her cup on the table she saw that her companion’s


eyes were full of tears. Pity overcame her embarrassment,
and sitting down beside her, she said:
"Don’t worry about it, Mrs. Chapman. I don’t mind,
you know.”
I m so sorry, Jancy. But it’s useless my trying to
stop him. Nobody can. I always dread these trips to town
for the same reason. He always behaves like this, and
people get so angry.” She pressed Jancy’s hand. "You’ve
been better with him than anyone has; but it’s most
unpleasant, and if you’d rather go into another compart-
ment I’ll quite understand.”
Jancy thought for a moment. The possibility of
completing the journey in peace was very tempting cer-
tainly, and yet she felt that she couldn’t let herself be
driven away since it would be just another triumph for the
wretched boy, and another defeat for his mother. She
decided swiftly, and said to Mrs. Chapman:
I’ll 8° if it will make things easier for you, but I’d
rather stay if it depends on me.”
"Oh, it does depend on you, Jancy!” Mrs. Chapman
assured her. "It’s just your comfort I’m thinking of. I
don’t want you to leave.”
} "Then I’ll stay,” said Jancy firmly, "and perhaps
you’ll tell me about Burangi.”
For the rest of the journey they chatted together
happily enough, only stopping when Godfrey passed the
door, which he did at intervals. He never came in, how-
ever, and Jancy could only conclude that he had found
her unsatisfactory as a subject for teasing, and was in
search of fresh woods and pastures new.
The train reached Currawong just before noon, and
as soon as it stopped Mrs. Chapman hurried out to find her
son. Jancy, left to herself, lifted out her own suitcase and
the two small ones belonging to the Chapmans, and waited
on the platform. Presently Mrs. Chapman returned only
to report that she could not find Godfrey, and Jancy, look-
ing around her, eventually saw him strolling towards the
exit at the other end of the platform.


"There he is,” she said, "down the other end,” and
picked up her suitcase. "Has he got his ticket?”
"Oh, yes. He can get through. He’ll go out to the
coach, I suppose.”
They picked up the bags and followed him. Outside,
the coach driver took their luggage from them and packed
it in the baggage compartment, and they then went to
find their seats. Before they reached the door, however,
sounds of altercation came from inside the ’bus, and inevit-
ably one of the voices was Godfrey’s.
"Nobody was sitting here,” he was saying, "so I’m
entitled to the vacant seat.”
Jancy and his mother, stepping into the coach, saw
him sitting in the front seat (the best available) beside a
protesting woman.
"But a man’s sitting there,” she said indignantly; "he’s
just gone back to the station for a minute.”
Mrs. Chapman, red with embarrassment, stepped for-
ward. "Come along, Godfrey, there are plenty more seats
at the back.”
He thrust out his lip stubbornly. "I’m staying here,
and no one can make me move,” he said.
The woman looked helplessly at Mrs. Chapman. "Is
he your son?” she asked.
"Yes,” admitted Mrs. Chapman, with an understand-
able reluctance.
"Can’t you make him move?”
Mrs. Chapman shook her head resignedly. "I’m afraid
not. I’m sorry.”
"Then I’ll tell the driver,” said the woman, who
seemed to have made the unknown seathofder’s cause her
own.
Godfrey grinned up at her impudently, and she lost
her temper and began to shout, just as a very large man
stepped into the coach.
"Hello,” he said, in a gentle, booming voice. "What
goes on here?”


"Oh, it’s Jerry Bentham,” breathed Mrs. Chapman in
Jancy’s ear.
The woman in front turned at the sound of his
voice. "It’s this kid; he’s taken your seat and won’t move!”
"Oh, won’t he,” said Mr. Bentham good-naturedly
enough. He tapped Godfrey on the shoulder. "Come on,
son, stop fooling about, there’s a good boy.”
Godfrey stiffened at his tone. "I’m not fooling,” he
said acidly, "and I’m not moving.”
The big man stepped forward and grasped the boy
by the neck of his jacket. "And I’m not fooling either,”
he said, quite good-temperedly, "and you are moving.”
With one powerful arm he hoisted Godfrey out of the
seat and placed him in the aisle further down the ’bus, and
without more ado he sat down in the vacant seat.
Godfrey, white with rage, stamped towards him again,
bent on revenge; but the big man rose lazily and, lifting
him under the arms, carried him down the ’bus and de-
posited him roughly on a vacant seat. "Now sit there,”
he said grimly. "I know you of old, and if you move again
I’ll apply my hand to the seat of your pants.” He waved
the said hand in front of Godfrey’s startled eyes, and the
size of it was intimidating. "That’s what you’ll get if
you make any more disturbance as long as I’m in this
’bus,” he said, "and don’t you forget it.”
Jancy had never seen such a change in a human face
as was evident in Godfrey’s at this summary treatment.
His rage seemed to evaporate abruptly, and he looked at
his huge opponent for the first time with fear in his eyes.
Then, averting his gaze, he moved over to the window
without a word. His mother, flushed and unhappy at the
awful scene he had made, sat down beside him, while
Jancy, secretlv jubilant over the whole business, took the
seat behind them.
The rest of the people in the ’bus, according to their
notions, stared curiously at the boy, gazed sympathetically
at his mother, or looked doggedly out of the window, and
in an uncomfortable silence the driver entered the ’bus
and they drove off towards the town.


That Mr. Bentham had had a salutory effect on
Godfrey was still more apparent at the hotel. As they all
entered the foyer he doffed his hat to Mrs. Chapman.
"Sorry to have made a fuss in the coach, Mrs. Chapman,”
he said.
She smiled wanly. "Don’t worry, Jerry. I’m glad
you did.”
' -- - . > 4 1 -w 1 • 1 • • I
"You’d better join me for lunch, I think,” he sug-
gested. "No sense in us sitting apart.” He did not wait
for her acceptance of the invitation, but said to the head
waiter, "A table for four, please,” and as a result of this
manoeuvre the lunch was quite peaceful, and Godfrey sat
throughout in silence and so completely subdued that he
did not even answer when the waiter asked what he would
like, and left his mother to order for him.


CHAPTER IV
To Jancy’s relief, this happy state of affairs continued
for the rest of the journey. Mr. Bentham never looked in
Godfrey’s direction once during the entire afternoon, but
the back of his neck was apparently just as effective a
deterrent to the boy as his large ham-like hand had been.
In any case, Godfrey stared silently out of the window
most of the time, and the only signs of rebellion he gave
were a few muttered words which were inaudible to Jancy.
She and Mrs. Chapman dozed for the major part of
the journey, as did most of the other passengers, since the
heat inside the coach was conducive to slumber, but later
in the afternoon, as the sun moved westward, the at-
mosphere cooled and Jancy was able to take an interest in
the country through which she was passing. It was very
beautiful. The road ran mainly through a forest of tall,
slim gums, behind which the mountains loomed blue and
severe. Occasionally a break occurred in the forest, and
for a time smooth, undulating valleys appeared, and one
could see the lazy smoke drifting from the chimneys of
unseen farmhouses hidden in the hills. Hundreds of curra-
wongs could be heard in the forest, and their lovely liquid
note rose clearly above the noise of the coast. Jancy had
never heard so many, and mentioned the fact to Mrs.
Chapman.
"Yes,” she said, "there are more down here than
anywhere else I know of, and they usually call early in the
morning or late afternoon. I can almost set the clock by
them at home. That reminds me,” She looked at her
watch. "We’ll be in Burangi in about twenty minutes.
You’ll go straight to the Hilton’s, I expect?”
"Yes, they’ll meet me.”
"Well, Godfrey and I get out before you do; we live
a little this side of town.” She smiled at Jancy. "And I’d
like to thank you for being so tolerant on the way down,
my dear. You were a great help to me.”


Jancy blushed. "Oh, please, don’t thank me, Mrs.
Chapman. I didn’t do anything.”
"Maybe not.” She smiled again. "Nevertheless, I
appreciate your doing nothing very much indeed. I do
hope we meet again. Perhaps you’d like to come up and
have lunch with me one day.”
"Thank you. I would.”
"Good. I’ll ring you later and we’ll fix a date. You
can meet Geoffrey then, too. But, of course, you might
see him beforehand. I suppose you’ll be swimming and
sailing, so you 11 probably run into him. He’s always down
near the bay.”
"I expect I will,” agreed Jancy, feeling privately that,
much as she liked and sympathized with Mrs. Chapman,
she could manage to enjoy her holidays without either
of her sons.
Soon after this the Chapmans got out. A hum of
conversation broke out in their wake, and people turned
to stare after them through the windows and make dis-
approving noises. Jancy, however, was too occupied with
seeing where she was going to pay any attention to these
remarks, for the coach began to run down into the town-
ship of Burangi. Not that you could really call it a town;
it was a village rather, with a few buildings clustered
around the edge of the bay and the roof of an odd house
or two seen through the trees behind them.
As the coach approached its stop, Jancy craned her
neck out of the window, and was thus vouchsafed her
first sight of Miss Feemy. It was something to remember.
The old lady stood waiting at the stop clothed in a collec-
tion of garments that would not have looked out of place
in a jumble sale.
She wore a brilliantly coloured dirndl skirt and a
peasant blouse, and her arms and neck were adorned with
motley assortment of strings of wooden beads and silver
bangles. On her untidy head was a dreadful woolly beret.
Jancy gasped and had a moment of panic. Were all
three Miss Hiltons like this, she asked herself desperately,
and why on earth hadn’t her mother told her? But it was


too late to indulge in such speculation, for the coach just
then came to a stop and a few minutes later Jancy was
face to face with the apparition. It greeted her with a hug
and a kiss, saying, "So excited about you coming, dear,”
and then turned to exchange salutations with the other
people alighting from the ’bus, who evidently all knew
her well, for their greetings were very friendly and they
showed no surprise at her curious garb. When everyone
was out of the coach they all went to the rear to collect
their baggage, and a short, weatherbeaten, red-headed man
in a fishing jersey, whose name turned out to be Bluey,
offered to carry Jancy’s bag up to the Hilton house.
"I’ve just got to go to the store before I go home,”
he told Miss Feemy, "but if you don’t want the bag
straight away I’ll drop it in as I go by in half an hour
or so. How’s that?”
"Marvellous, Bluey,” said Miss Feemy, and turned to
Jancy. "Won’t need anything out of it, I suppose?” Jancy
said that she wouldn’t, and Miss Feemy went on, to Bluey,
"See you in half an hour then. Jean will give you a cup of
tea.”
She smiled and nodded briskly at him, and then,
taking Jancy’s arm, walked her away at a fast pace up
the steep hill, her bracelets and beads clicking busily with
the vigour of her movements.
"Live up here,” she said. "Not too far. I expect
you’d like a cool drink.
"I would,” gasped Jancy, who was finding Miss
Feemy’s stride as difficult to cope with as her habit of
talking like a telegram.
Miss Feemy stopped dead. "Too fast for you, eh?
she said.
Jancy nodded breathlessly.
"Slow up then.” And Miss Feemy set off at an ordin-
ary walking pace. This did not last, however, for soon she
reverted to her previous headlong progress, which Jancy
was to find later was her normal way of going about
things.
With Jancy hot and panting behind her, she at last
turned off the main street into a lane lined with pepper


trees. It was a very pretty lane, but she gave Jancy no
time to admire it, for she whisked her through a heavy
wrought-iron gate into a wild garden where she came
to a sudden stop and called in a stentorian voice:
"Lally! Lally!” Her voice returned to its usual level
as she said to Jancy in a confidential tone, "My sister,
y know, and then again she shouted, louder than ever,
"Lally! She’s here!”
She cocked her head on one side and surveyed Jancy
with a pair of bright brown eyes, as she listened for a
movement in the garden.
Sdly girl! she said finally. "Must be here some-
where.”
She bent down and, lifting up the hanging branch
of a shrub, peered underneath. Jancy went red in the face
endeavouring to stifle her desire to laugh, and Miss Feemy
looked at her solemnly.
, Expect you think I m potty, eh?” She shook her
head. "Not, you know. Always find Lally under bushes.
Collects snails.” She looked around her. "Must be about,”
she began again, and then a soft voice behind them both
said:
"Were you looking for me?”
Jancy turned to see a sweet-faced old lady in a grey
dress, who looked exactly like the pictures she had seen of
Quaker women. Miss Feemy answered her. "Course we
were, Lally. Silly question. Here’s the girl.”
Miss Lally smiled. "It’s Jancy, isn’t it?” she said, and
her sister, striking her forehead, dramatically exclaimed:
"Jancy, that’s it. Blest if I could think of it before.”
Miss Lally, who was not much taller than Jancy, kissed
»v' > - niCe t0 aVe you ere ’ my l° ve >” she said.
You re' the image of your mother, too. It brings back
the old days.”
"Now, now,” Miss Feemy reproved her sister. "Don’t
get sentimental, Lally. Child hasn’t had her tea yet.”
What that had to do with Miss Lally being senti-
mental Jancv failed to see, but she was feeling thirsty after
her dusty ride, so she spoke up bravely.


"I would like a drink, Miss Lally, if you don’t mind.”
"Oh, my dear, of course you would. How could we
keep you standing here. Come along, and we 11 get some
tea at once.” She took Jancy’s arm and led her through
a maze of shrubs on to the wide lawn that surrounded
their house.
fancy was stopped involuntarily by her first view of
the big white house with its long-shuttered windows and
broad, vine-hung verandahs. "Oh, what a lovely place!”
she said fervently, and earned a beaming smile from Miss
Lally, for admiration of Burangi House was always an
Open Sesame to that lady’s heart.
"Yes, it is beautiful,” she said softly, looking at it
with loving eyes.
"But it won’t get the child’s tea,” put in Miss Feemy.
"I’ll go and tell Jean.”
She raced off around the side of the house at her usual
headlong speed, and Miss Lally said:
"We’ll go in the front way, shall we?”
They crossed the verandah and pushed open the heavy
door which let them into a lofty hall out of which a broad
staircase rose to the rooms above.
It was blessedly cool inside the house, and Jancy
remarked on it.
"Yes,” said Miss Lally, "it’s always cool in here, even
on the hottest days. Now, would you like to go upstairs
and wash your hands before tea, and I can show you your
room at the same time.”
Jancy said she would, so they climbed the staircase
and, after washing her hands and face in the bathroom,
she was taken to her room. It was quite large and rather
old-fashioned in its furnishings, but it was clean and
bright, with fresh linen curtains and bedspread. She felt
she could be comfortable there, and told Miss Lally she felt
quite at home because it was so like the bedroom at Mrs.
Mansfield’s place.
Th is started Lallv off on reminiscences about the
Mansfields and the Richmonds, and she was still talking
nostalgically of them when they went downstairs and into


the hall. There they met Miss Feemy and a young, fresh-
faced woman bringing in the tea waggon.
"Jancy, this is Jean,” said Miss Feemy. ’'She bosses us
all.”
Jean laughed. "Go along with you, Miss Feemy,” she
said, and to Jancy, "Pleased to meet you, miss.” She con-
to push the waggon, saying somewhat apologeti-
cally, "Miss Emmeline’s waiting for her tea, you see.”
So, with the waggon leading, the small cavalcade
entered the sitting-room doors, which Jean closed behind
her as she left.
The room was rather dark, and Jancy did not see the
old lady sitting on an upright chair at* the side of the
window until she saw a movement as the face turned
towards her.
"Ah! there you are at last,” said a gentle voice. "I
was wondering where you’d all got to.”
Miss Lally led Jancy over to the chair.
Flere s Brenda’s girl, Emmeline. Her name’s Jancy.”
The old lady put out a white hand. "How do you do,
my dear?” she said.
Jancy took the frail fingers in hers. "I’m very well,
thank you, Miss Emmeline.”
"So you’re Brenda’s girl. Well! Well! How time flies!
I was very fond of Brenda.”
mi J an rT Smll 4 " Mumrn Y was fond of you, too. She
still is. She particularly asked me to give all of you her
best love.”
Thank you, my dear. Now, sit down and have some
refreshment. You must be parched after your long Jour-
ney. I trust it wasn’t too tiring?”
"Oh no! I found it quite interesting. This part of
the coast is so beautiful.”
We think so, too. Miss Emmeline smiled. "But I
suppose we’re somewhat prejudiced.” She turned to Miss
Feemv. "You’d better pour, Euphemia.”
"Yes, Emmeline.” Miss Feemy seemed more subdued
in the house than she did out of it, and Jancy wondered


if it was in deference to her sister. And yet Miss Emmeline
did not seem to assert any authority. In fact, she was very
different from what Jancy had been led to believe. She
had expected to find a rather grim old lady, with a cold
manner and a severe tongue, and instead here was this
small, delicate woman with a quiet voice. Certainly she
sat as straight as a ramrod in her chair, and had an air of
dignity; but she was nothing like the description Jancy
had received from her parents.
She took her tea from Miss Feemy and stirred it
thoughtfully as a knock came at the door, and Jean opened
it. She looked angry.
"It’s that Bluey, ma’am,” she said to Miss Emmeline.
"He’s brought the young lady’s bag up. He says Miss
Feemy told him to have some tea.”
Miss Emmeline nodded. "Yes, give him something,
Jean. It was very kind of him to bring the bag. Thank
him for me, will you?”
"Yes’m.” Jean closed the door and departed, and Miss
Feemy gave a little giggle.
Miss Emmeline turned to her.
"Have you been at your matchmaking again,
Euphemia?” she asked. "You know Jean resents it.”
Miss Feemy tossed her head and managed to look like
a restive horse. "I know those two will finally get married,
Emmeline, in spite of their fighting, so I bring them to-
gether as often as possible. Silly to waste time, I think.
Life’s too short.”
Miss Lally backed her sister up. "They’re in love
now, Emmeline, but neither of them is aware of it.”
"Yes,” said Miss Feemy impatiently. "Course thev
are. People always fight when they’re in love and don’t
know what ails ’em,”
Miss Emmeline smiled. "You may be right, Euphemia,
but I don’t believe one should interfere in other people’s
lives. It’s such a responsibility.” /
"Ah! but I interfere the right way.” Miss Feemy
grinned wickedly. "A little push in the right place at the
right time and Bob’s your uncle.”


Miss Emmeline let this pass and turned to Jancy, who
was handing her a plate of sandwiches.
"I should like a sandwich, please, dear,” she said,
ignoring the plate in Jancy’s hand. She leant forward as
she spoke, and her head came into the light from the
window, and Jancy, seeing her face for the first time,
saw the blankness of her grey eyes and realized, with a
profound shock, that Miss Emmeline was blind.


CHAPTER V
So moved was Jancy by this discovery that she sat
with the sandwiches in her hand, and stared at the old
lady stupidly. Miss Lally, aware of what had happened,
took the plate from her and put it under her sister’s hand,
talking meanwhile to cover the silence that had fallen.
"What time did you start from home this morning,
Jancy” she asked. "You’d have to leave very early, I
expect.”
Jancy seized thankfully at the verbal lifeline.
"Y-yes,” she stammered. "I caught the 7.10.”
"That’s very early. Your father drove you to the
train, of course?”
"Yes,” replied Jancy, and then remembered the inci-
dent at the station between Godfrey and her father, and
added: "I met a Mrs. Chapman on the train. She ”
"Mrs. Chapman!” interrupted Miss Lally and Miss
Feemy in unison.
Jancy nodded, and Miss Feemy made a wry face.
"Did she have Godfrey with her?” she asked, and
when Jancy said she did, Miss Feemy said explosively:
"Pig of a boy! Silly woman!”
"Now, Euphemia,” Miss Emmeline remonstrated
softly. "Mrs. Chapman has a lot to bear, you know.”
"Fiddlesticks, Emmeline!” rejoined Miss Feemy, a
little less vehemently. "Should have paddled the child
when young. Rod’s on her own back now.”
"Oh, I don’t know that it would have done any good,
Feemy,” said Miss Lally. "He was probably born that
way. Look at Geoffrey. He’s quite different.”
"Horrid boys! Hate boys!” said Miss Feemy firmly.
"Messy creatures, eh, Jancy?”
"Well, I must say Godfrey was simply awful on the
train. Mrs. Chapman was very distressed.”


"Poor thing,” said Miss Emmeline. "He really does
lead her a miserable life. She dreads that journey every
week. She takes him up to see a phychologist, you know.”
"No, I didn’t know. She didn’t say anything about
that.”
"Yes, he’s rather a problem child apparently. She
had him and Geoffrey at a school somewhere near Sydney
and the wretched boy deliberately set fire to the dormi-
tory. It was in all the papers.”
Enlightenment broke over Jancy.
"Now I remember,” she said. "I read it in the news,
of course. I couldn’t think where on earth I’d heard
the name before.”
"Well, that was Godfrey. Naturally he was expelled,
and Geoffrey had to leave with him. Evidently his twin
is the only one who can manage him at all. He adores
Geoffrey and will take anything from him, so poor Geof-
frey had to forego his schooling.”
"Don’t either of them go to school now,” Miss
Emmeline?”
"No, they have a tutor, a nice young man named
Keith Ames.”
Miss Feemy rolled her eyes expressively. "He’s charm-
ing, too, Jancy.”
Jancy laughed at her look of comic archness and Mis?
Emmeline said, "Really, Euphemia!” an ejaculation that
had obviously become such a habit over the years that it
was now second nature.
"Oh, he’s too young for me,” admitted Miss Feemy.
"Might do for Jancy, though.”
"Feemy!” objected Miss Lally. "How can you suggest
such a thing at her age? Besides, he’s keen on young
Christine Hewett.”
"That milk and water miss,” said Feemy disparag-
ingly.
"She’s not, Feemy!” returned Miss Lally with some
heat. "She’s a very sweet girl. She’s shy, certainly, but
what could you expect with a mother like that?” Miss


Lally turned to Jancy. "You’ll like Christine, I’m sure,
dear. We’ll get her up here one day.”
"But not the mother,” put in Miss Feemy. "Shockin’
woman. Can’t have her.”
Jancy looked questioningly at Miss Lally, who said,
"Christine’s mother is Leonora Hewett, the famous writer.
You’ve probably heard of her, Jancy.”
"Writes rubbish,” supplemented Miss Feemy. "In-
sufferable bore. Runs people’s lives. Organizes every-
body.”
"She is a bit trying,” went on Miss Lally, unperturbed
by the interpolation. "But I have found that a policy of
passive resistance rather spikes her guns.”
Miss Feemy gave a loud gaffaw. "Yes, Lally dishes
her every time,” she said appreciatively. "Worth seeing in
action.”
“But Christine is very different,” continued Miss
Lally. "I’m sure she likes Keith Ames, too.”
“Not while Mammk’s about,” chuckled Miss Feemy.
"Mamma’s looking higher than that.”
Miss Emmeline coughed. "Euphemia,” she said, "I’m
a little tired. I wonder if you’d mind just seeing me to
my room.”
Miss Feemy put down her cup with a rattle. "Of
course, my love,” she said with unusual concern. "It’s my
noise, I expect. So sorry.” She went to her sister, who had
stood up, and took her arm. "Come along.”
Miss Emmeline turned to where Jancy sat. Excuse
me, by dear,” she said, "but I’m used to my rest after tea.
We’re delighted to have you here with us at last, and I
hope you’ll be happy. I shall see you later this evening.
Euphemia and Eulalie will look after you now.”
"Thank you, Miss Emmeline,” said Jancy, and went
to open the door for the two old ladies, who passed slowly
out and went upstairs. When she came back, Miss Lally
was stacking the teacups on the waggon.
"I’m afraid you got a shock to find my sister was
blind, Jancy,” she said. "It happened five years ago—but
she wouldn’t let us tell any of her friends. That’s why


your mother doesn’t know. She’s very sensitive about it.
It’s changed her very much, of course. I’m sure your
mother wouldn’t know her. She was so strong and capable,
you couldn’t believe it looking at her now.”
"No, that’s what I found so strange,” said Jancy.
"Mummy told me about her and how she took over the
family when your mother died. She admired her very
much.”
"We all did.” Miss Lally shook her head sadly.
"Neither Feemy nor I realized how much we leaned on
her until this tragedy happened. She had always been
like a mother to us, you see, and we’d taken her for
granted. It was a terrible blow that she was no longer
there to lean on. However, Feemy and I learned to man-
age somehow, and now perhaps we can help her as much
as she helped us.”
"What made her go blind, Miss Lally?” asked Jancy.
'Did she have an accident?”
"Oh, no! Her sight had been failing her for a long
time, but she didn’t say anything and neither of us noticed
because she was so careful that we shouldn’t. Then sud-
denly, without any warning, she went completely blind.
It was a terrible blow. We took it worse than she did,
poor darling. She’s never really been the same since,
though, and never will be, I suppose. The pity of it is
that something could be done with surgery, I think, but,
of course, we haven’t got enough money for that. It’s
awful to be so poor, though I never minded it until then.”
As Miss Lally finished talking, Miss Feemy rushed
into the room and flopped on the sofa, making all her
beads and bangles click and rattle. "Now where were
we?” she demanded. "Oh, yes, about Christine. As I was
saying, Lally, the Hewett won’t stand for Keith Ames.
Her eye’s on one of the Chapman twins.”
Miss Lally blinked. "How ridiculous, Feemy; they’re
only sixteen.”
Miss Feemy waved a hand airily. "They’ll grow up,”
she said.
"But Christine’s eighteen!” retorted his sister. "Far
too old.”


"Don’t you believe it. The Hewett will wait for all
that money.”
"Rubbish!” exclaimed Miss Lally, and added to Jancy,
"The Chapmans are very wealthy, I believe. At least, it’s
generally supposed so, although I’ve never heard Mrs.
Chapman refer to it. It was Mrs. Hewett who told us.
She’d made it her business to find out all about the Chap-
mans after they came to Burangi. Apparently, the twins
come of a very good English family, and Geoffrey, who is
the elder by half an hour, is heir to a title and a lot of
money. It seems that Mrs. Chapman was married to the
younger son of this English family, and they thought he’d
married beneath him and refused to accept her. She came
to Australia with the twins after her husband was killed
at the end of the war. She intended to cut herself off
from the family completely and give her boys a chance to
make their own way in the new country; but since then
so many members of the Chapman family have died either
in the war or in their beds that now Geoffrey stands next
in succession to the present holder of the title.”
"Good heavens!” said Jancy. "I had no idea there
were any of those sort of families left in England now.”
"Don’t you believe it,” counselled Miss Feemy.
"There 3 s more than you think.”
But why doesn’t Mrs. Chapman take the boys back
to England? The family would want them now, wouldn’t
they?”
"Oh, they do,” said Miss Lally, "but Mrs. Chap man
doesn’t want the family!”
"Good for her,” interpolated Miss Feemy.
"You see,” went on Miss Lally, "she likes Australia
and the life here, and she suffered so much from this family
over there that she doesn’t want the twins to come in
contact with them. I must say I can’t see why the family
rejected Mrs. Chapman, for a more charming woman I’ve
never met.”
"Weak!” pronounced Miss Feemy. "Weak as water.”
"She’s not, Feemy,” insisted Miss Lally. "She’s timid
and gentle—but not weak.”


"Same thing,” said Miss Feemy firmly. "Otherwise
she’d deal with that boy as he should be dealt with.”
"It needs a man to do that, Feemy. Godfrey’s getting
too big to handle, and I doubt whether even a man could
do it now.”
Jancy grinned. "I saw one do it,” she said, with
relish. "This very afternoon.”
"No!” exclaimed Miss Feemy, eagerly. "Where was
this?”
"In the ’bus,” said Jancy, and proceeded to relate the
encounter between Godfrey and the large man.
Miss Feemy clapped her hands delightedly when Jancy
had finished. "I haven’t heard anything that’s pleased me
more for years,” she said. "Who was the man?”
"I don’t know.” Jancy thought for a moment. "Mrs.
Chapman did say his name, but —oh! yes, I remember, it
was Beaton or Benton or something like that. He was an
enormous man.”
Miss Feemy gave a little scream. "Bentham, Lally!
It was Jerry Bentham, of course.”
"Jerry Bentham!” cried Miss Lally. "He’s just the
man to do it, too. You must meet him sometime, Jancy,
he’s an artist and a very delightful person. He lives on a
hill out of town and has the most curious friends, but
Feemy and I like him a lot, don’t we, Feemy?”
Miss Feemy seemed to have fallen into a brown study,
and when she looked up her thoughts were obviously far
away.
"What d’you say?” she asked.
"I said we know Jerry Bentham well and like him a
lot.”
Miss Feemy nodded slowly and then said, "I’ve been
thinking, Lally. Jerry Bentham’s the father Godfrey
needs. Mrs. Chapman’s a pretty woman —he’s a strong,
good-looking man —why not?”
Miss Lally laughed indulgently.
"Really, Feemy, you are the limit, isn’t she, Jancy?”
Jancy, who rightly interpreted this to mean that Miss
Feemy’s matchmaking proclivities were not to be encour-
aged, smiled non-committally.


"Well, it seems a good idea to me,” Miss Feemy per-
sisted doggedly. "They’re fools not to have thought of it
themselves.” She became thoughtful again, and as she was
no doubt hatching ways and means of getting Mrs. Chap-
man and Jerry Bentham together, Miss Lally left her to her
plotting and suggested to Jancy that they wheel the
waggon out.
This they did, and on entering the kitchen surprised
Jean struggling in the embrace of the despised Bluey. She
went red with chagrin at being discovered, and pushed the
young man away with more than feminine force, so that
he brought up with his legs against the seat of the chair
and sat down with disconcerting suddenness. Jean turned
her burning cheeks to the stove and rattled the pans,
which Jancy, remembering Annie’s disposition for doing
the same thing, decided was natural to all household helps
when angry. Miss Lally wheeled the waggon to the side
wall, and then said gently, "I think you’d better go now,
Bluey, and perhaps you shouldn’t kiss Jean when she really
doesn’t want you to.”
Bluey got to his feet with a sheepish grin. "I’d never
get to kiss her at all at that rate,” he said. "A feller’s got
to keep on trying,” and with a last look at Jean’s back
and a "Good-bye, all,” he took his departure.
Jean turned a furious face to Miss Lally. "The im-
pudence!” she fumed. "He’s the rudest man on the coast.
I don’t know why he comes here—but I do know it’s Miss
Feemy’s doing.” She stalked up and down the kitchen and
came to a stop before Miss Lally. "I do wish you’d speak
to her, Miss —Miss Feemy, I mean —she’s always asking
him here and getting him to run up with her fish and
groceries. I know why she does it, and so do you —but
she’s got to stop. After all, I have my pride.” Jean patted
her hair and straightened her apron and added, in a voice
that would no doubt have completely deflated Bluey’s
ego had he been there, "And besides, my ambitions go a
little higher than that —that beachcomber.”


CHAPTER VI
Miss Lally soothed the irate Jean very skilfully, and,
promising that Miss Feemy should be "spoken to,” she
left the kitchen. In the hall she said to Jancy:
"Jean’s a good girl, and I don’t blame her for object-
ing to Feemy’s tactics —they are a bit blatant. But
although I promised to speak to her, I don’t think it would
do the least bit of good—Feemy’s Feemy and that’s the
end of it. However ” She left the rest of her sentence
in the air, and straightening her shoulders like a soldier
going into battle, entered the sitting-room. Her sister was
still sitting on the sofa with her chin in her hand, deep
in thought, and Miss Lally said firmly:
"Feemy, you’ll have to stop interfering with Jean
and Bluey. We can’t afford to lose a good girl like her,
and she’ll leave if it goes on.”
Miss Feemy looked up abstractedly. "What d’you
say, eh?” she asked, obviously not having heard a word
her sister had said.
Miss Lally repeated it, and a bored expression
appeared on Miss Feemy’s face.
"Oh, them!” she said disinterestedly, and waved them
away with a click of her bangles. "They’re hopeless. I’m
concenerating on Chapman and Bentham now.”
Miss Lally showed no surprise at this volte face, but
gave Jancy a conspiratorial look and motioned slightly
with her head towards the door. Jancy took her cue, and
she and Miss Lally left the room, leaving Miss Feemy to
her machinations.
"Would you like to walk round the garden, dear?”
asked Miss Lally. "It’s pleasant in the cool of the even-
ing.” Jancy said she would and, as they walked out, the
old lady went on, "You mustn’t take too much notice of
Feemy’s odd ways, Jancy. It’s a sort of act she puts on
because she enjoys that sort of nonsense. But don’t let it


deceive you; my sister is a very shrewd woman, and she
has plenty of commonsense when she wants to use it.”
Oh, I realize that, said Jancy. Anyway, Mummy
told me. She said, too, that Miss Feemy was fey.”
Miss Lally nodded. she is. I don’t pretend to
understand it, but there s no doubt she frequently is aware
that certain things are going to happen in the future,
and they usually do. It’s very odd.”
The two of them wandered about the paths, while
Miss Lally showed off her favourite shrubs and flowers,
and afterwards they sat on a garden seat and looked at the
house.
Jancy remarked again on its beauty, and Miss Lally
said. Yes, it s a fine old place. It’s a pisa house, you
know?”
"No, I don’t know, Miss Lally. What’s a pisa house?”
Why, it’s made of rammed earth.”
Good Heavens! I thought it was painted stone.”
No, dear, it s just soil packed very tightly.”
How amazing! hy doesn’t it wash away when
it rams, though?”
,Welfi they treat it in a particular way so that it
doesn t. It s very hard, you know.”
"I’ve never heard of it before.”
"Lots of people haven’t,” said Miss Lally, "but in the
old days most of the houses were built like that.”
.. me tbis was tbe first one on the coast,
too, Miss Lally.” ’
Yes, it was.” Miss Lally became very animated at
the opportunity to talk about her beloved home. "My
g u 3 ij u ther bml I t . lt and m 7 father was the first white
c i d born on this coast. I remember my grandfather
telhng us all about it. Would you like to hear the story?”
‘<w C n Sa / d w , ould ’ vei T much, and Miss Lally went on.
Well, he said that after they settled here the Aborigines
for some reason moved away from the area. They were
not hostile to the settlers before leaving, but my grand-
father was worried when they disappeared, for he said


you never knew what sort of mischief they were planning.
Well, there was nothing he could do, so he just kept a
sharp lookout so as not to be taken by surprise and got on
with farming his land. Everything was quiet for many
months, and then one day my grandmother, who was ex-
pecting the birth of her baby almost daily, was walking
in the garden when she saw an Aborigine regarding her
from the safety of the bush. She screamed and he disap-
peared. My grandfather, who luckily was in the house
at the time, came running to her assistance. She was very
frightened, but he managed to get her inside and find out
what it was all about.
"He then sent a young boy who worked on the place
to bring in the men, and issuing them with rifles he
stationed them around the house. This guard was main-
tained for two days and nights, during which time the
Abos. could be heard over in their camp beating drums
and chanting and otherwise creating a disturbance. My
grandfather sent Nela, one of his own Abos., out to see
what was going on, and he came back to report that
the tribe seemed to be preparing for a corroboree. Nothing
much was known about the blacks at that time, and my
grandfather thought that if they were preparing for a
corroboree it was probably because they intended to attack
the house and make its inmates the main course of the
feast they always held at such a time. The first day dragged
by, and as the Abos. seemed to be getting more noisy and
excited, he decided to send to the next homestead for help,
so he despatched Nela with a note which told of his
danger. The next day passed, still without incident, and
on the early morning of the third day my grandmother
had her baby boy. My grandfather attended her (he was
a doctor, you know) and the whole business was safely
over when the most upholy racket broke out in the blacks’
camp, and my grandfather, thinking the attack was
coming, ran outside. His sleeves were still rolled up and
he had a napkin tied around his head to dry up the per-
spiration, so he must have looked a curious sight as he went
around mustering his men.
"They waited for quite a time and nothing happened,
and then they saw the whole tribe in what they thought


was full war regalia advancing through the bush. The
men levelled their rifles, and when the leader, who was
evidently the chief, saw the guns, he waved the tribe to
a stop and, advancing a little way, made signs at my
grandfather.
"He, of course, didn’t know what to make of this,
and calling one of his own Abos., asked him what it meant.
The Abo. said he thought they were signs of peace, but
suggested he have a palaver with the chief and find out.
Grandfather consented to this, and our Abo. walked
towards the chief very cautiously. They saw him approach
to a few feet away from the stranger and stop, and then
the two seemed to have a conversation which ended with
our Abo. moving nearer and the Abo. chief handing him
something. A few minutes later our Abo. came back.
His face was one tremendous white grin, and he carried
a native basket which he gave to grandfather. He was so
excited he could hardly speak, but at last grandfather
understood that the chief and his tribe, far from being
hostile, had come to celebrate the birth of the white baby
and, on being told by our Abo. that it was born, and a
boy, he had given him the basket of gifts, which were
toys made from string and shells. Needless to say, my
grandfather was immensely relieved and delighted at this,
and immediately went over and shook hands with the chief,
who was now surrounded by his smiling warriors. In the
middle of this strange scene, Nela arrived back with ten
militiamen whom he had found camping at the other
homestead, and you can imagine their consternation on
discovering the members of the household they had come
to rescue fraternizing with the enemy that had threatened
them.
"However, it was all explained and ironed out, and
that night there was great rejoicing at both the homestead
and the blacks’ camp. My grandfather sent over a pig to
be roasted at the camp, and they sent back various deli-
cacies of their own, which, although they were not eaten,
were nevertheless appreciated.
"After that, all was well at Burangi, and the Abos.
returned to the district. They became very attached
to my grandfather, who doctored them when they were


ill and fed them when they were short of food. In return
they worked for him whenever he wanted them to, and
it was really through them that Burangi afterwards be-
came such a wealthy property. So, you see, everything
turned out well in the end.”
"What a wonderful story!” said Jancy enthusiastic-
ally, and looked around. "But you can’t imagine it
happening here somehow; it’s all so peaceful and far
removed from warlike Abos. and such.”
"Yes, isn’t it? Nevertheless, it did happen, and I
often wondered how my grandmother felt, lying helplessly
in bed with her newborn son, waiting for the horde of
savages to descend.”
"Yes, it must have been awful for her,” agreed
Jancy. "They certainly had courage, those pioneer women,
didn’t they?”
"Indeed they did,” said Miss Lally, "and now I must
go in and help Jean, dear. What would you like to do?”
"Well, I was just thinking it might be an idea if I
unpacked my bag. I’d forgotten all about it, and my
clothes will be in an awful state.”
Good, you do that then, and come down when
you’ve finished. I’ll be in the kitchen and Feemy will be
around somewhere.”
The two strolled into the house, to part at the stairs,
and on reaching her bedroom Jancy found her suitcase
standing open on a stool, and made a mental note to thank
Jean for bringing it up. She shook out her things and
disposed of them in the large drawers and the huge ward-
robe. They looked quite forlorn hanging there, and she
thought how much better suited to the voluminous clothes
of another day was this enormous furniture. When she
had finished, she sat in the comfortable window seat and
looked down into the garden. She decided she liked
Burangi House and its owners much better than she had
expected. Miss Lally was very sweet, and Miss Feemy more
than amusing, and she felt an urge to write to her mother
and tell her of her favourable reaction. But then her
better judgment prevailed, and she decided she would
wait until the next day and see if she still felt the same;


also, it would be necessary to inquire from Miss Lally
whether she could mention Miss Emmeline’s blindness, a
fact that she was sure her mother would like to know.
She sat at the window for some time, and then, after
combing her hair, went downstairs, where she found Miss
Feemy at the bureau in the sitting-room.
"Oh, there you are!” she said, as Jancy came in and
sat down. "Writing to Mrs. Chapman. Thought we might
have a little tea-party on Sunday afternoon. Just a few
people—Mrs. Chapman, Christine Hewett, Jerry Bentham.
We don’t want too many.” She turned back to the bureau.
"Would you like that?”
Jancy smiled at what was so evidently the opening
of Miss Feemy’s match-making campaign, but she said
dryly enough that she would like it very much indeed.
Miss Feemy bit the end of her pen thoughtfully. "I
don’t think there’s anyone else. Oh, yes, Keith Ames for
Christine. That’ll dish the Fiewett!”
"But won’t she come, too?” asked Jancy. "I shouldn’t
have thought you could ask the daughter without the
mother.”
"I’ve made my attitude quite plain,” said Miss Feemy
with a haughtiness which was strangely at variance with
her usual manner. "Don’t want the woman. Make no
bones about it. I’m going down to post them now. Would
you like to come?”
"I’d love to.”
"Good. FFave a look at the village. Not bad. Get my
hat.”
Jancy stood up at once, but then, realizing that this
was not a command but a statement of intention, sat
down again. "All right,” she said.
"Oh, it’s just in the hall,” returned Miss Feemy. "Get
it as we go through.”
Jancy followed her out, watched her place the woollen
monstrosity on her head, and prepared herself for the
forthcoming gallop down into the town; but their exit
was forestalled by Miss Lally, who called from the end of
the hall.


"Feemy!”
Miss Feemy pretended not to have heard and was
rushing on, but Miss Lally called more firmly than ever,
and followed her voice down the hall. "It’s your turn to
make the pudding, Feemy.”
Her sister turned, looking like a rather ragged small
boy at bay, and put her hands behind her back.
"It’s not,” she said, playing for time. "It’s yours.”
"No, Feemy. I did it last night. Now don’t be like
this.”
Bother the pudding!” said Miss Feemy.
Her sister ignored this.
"What are you going out for, anyway, Feemy?”
"Nothing.”
"But you must be going for something.”
"Show Jancy.”
Oh, I see. Then what are you holding behind your
back?”
"My business.”
"And probably my business, too,” said Miss Lally
gently. "Let me see.”
Miss Feemy managed to look more like a small boy
than ever as she clutched her hands behind her back and
shook her head stubbornly. But Miss Lally just walked
behind her and took the letters out of her hand. She
examined the address of each one.
Just as I thought, Feemy. Interfering again,” she
said.
Miss Feemy covered her defeat with a guffaw.
Almost worked,” she said good-temperedly, and, throw-
mg her beret on the hatstand, she went whistling down the
hall and into the kitchen to make the pudding.


CHAPTER VII
That night Jancy retired to bed early, being weary
from her long journey, and after a long and restful sleep
was already awake when Miss Feemy came in with a cup
of tea at seven o’clock the next morning.
"Breakfast’s at eight,” she said briskly. "Just you
and Lally and me; Emmeline doesn’t come down. After-
wards we’ll go shopping. Come down when you re
dressed.”
She sped away, her beads clicking busily, and Jancy,
after drinking her tea and dressing leisurely, went down-
stairs. She ate a hearty breakfast, which met with Miss
Lally’s approval, and then went out to the kitchen to he p
Jean wash up.
On further acquaintance, Jean proved to be a cheery,
capable girl, with a lively sense of responsibility to her
employers, whom she called "the Misses with every evi-
dence of affection. She chatted to Jancy about them as
though they were her children, a little wayward perhaps,
but more to be cherished on that account, and she was
still talking indulgently about Miss Feemy’s vagaries when
a knock came at the kitchen door that led into the hall.
In answer to Jean’s call of Come in, a slim and
pretty fair girl entered the kitchen.
"Why, hello, Christine!” said Jean. "You’re an early
bird this morning.”
The girl stood near the door and looked shyly at
Jancy. "Yes, I couldn’t find anyone in the front of the
house, so I came through.”
"That’s right,” said Jean. "I’d better introduce you.
This is Jancy Mitford; she’s come to stay for a bit, and,
Jancy, this is Christine Hewett.”
The two girls said "How do you do?” and Jean went
on; "Did you want to see one of the Misses?”


"Yes, but I can’t find them.”
"I expect they’re in the garden. Miss Lally will be,
anyway. She usually goes after snails about this time. Why
don’t you two go and see?”
"That’s an idea,” said Jancy. "Come on, Christine.”
The two girls went through the hall into the garden
and, after a search, found Miss Lally in the rockery.
hy, hello, dear! she said to Christine. "How nice
to see you.”
„ Christine smiled. "Mother sent me down,” she said,
to ask if Jancy would like to come and play tennis this
afternoon.”
"I should think she’d love it,” said Miss Lallv
"Wouldn’t you, dear?”
"Of course.” Jancy laughed apologetically. "I’m not
very good, though, and I haven’t got my racquet.”
Gracious! That doesn t matter. We’ll lend you one.”
Christine smiled back at her. "And none of us are good.
We just have fun. Mother said you and Miss Feemy might
come and have a cup of tea afterwards, Miss Lally. Miss
Emmeline, too, if she feels like it.”
, right. I don t know about Miss Emmeline, she
hasn t been very well this morning.”
"Oh, I am sorry,” said Christine. "Will you give her
my love and tell her I hope she’ll be better?” She looked
at her watch. "I must go now. We’ll see you this after-
noon then, Jancy. Come about two o’clock, as we want to
get an early start. Miss Lally will tell you where we live*
it’s just up the lane.”
She went off across the lawn, and Miss Lally said,
Dear girl. I think you’ll like her, Jancy.”
I m sure I shall.” Jancy had already decided that,
it was nice of her to ask me.”
After this exchange the two of them pottered about
the garden in companionable silence until Jancy heard her
name shouted, and Miss Feemy came loping across the
lawn with her disreputable beret on her head.


"Are you ready, Jancy? I want to be off.”
"Yes.” Jancy looked down at her neat gingham frock.
'Will I do like this?”
"Quite. Don’t need a hat. I wear one to keep my
hair tidy.”
Jancy looked at the wispy tresses escaping from be-
neath the beret, and thought that it failed signally to do
the duty expected of it; but Miss Feemy patted it further
on to her head with an air of satisfaction and, after saying
good-bye to Miss Lally, led Jancy off at a gallop towards
the lane.
The morning was hot, and as they went through the
gate and along the lane Jancy said, "Could you go a little
slower, please, Miss Feemy? You’re much too fast for me.”
"Fiddlesticks, child! You ought to be able to run
everywhere at your age. Old before your time, you’ll be.
Look at me.” She stopped and held herself for inspection,
and at this moment a small tussock of grass came sailing
over the fence behind her and settled dustily on the beret.
"Good Ffeavens! What’s that?” She swept it off, dislodg-
ing the beret at the same time, and when she saw what it
was a wide smile wreathed her face and, turning around,
she craned her neck over the bushes near the fence and
shouted, "Mr. Kovac! Throw your rubbish where you
throw your love.”
A broad red face, crowned by a plume of black hair,
appeared on the other side of the fence. "Is Miss Feemy,”
it said in broken English and in great surprise.
"It is, indeed, Mr. Kovac.” The old lady surveyed him
with mock indignation. "What do you mean throwing
rubbish at me?”
Mr. Kovac looked distressed. "So sorry, I not see
you because the scrubs.”
"Shrubs, Mr. Kovac,” corrected Miss Feemy. She
turned to Jancy. "This is Jancy Mitford. Jancy, meet
Mr. Kovac. He’s a New Australian.”
"You pleased to meet me, little miss,” he said. "She
your nice, Miss Feemy?”


"No! No! No! Mr. Kovac. She’s not my niece (it’s
niece, not nice), and you should say I’m pleased to meet
you, not you’re pleased to meet me.”
"Oh!” Mr. Kovac looked dashed, and then smiled.
"I pleased anywhere.”
Miss Feemy sighed. "Anyhow, you mean.”
Yes, any ow.
"Well, never mind. How’s Mrs. Kovac?”
He wagged his head. "Is sick from her stomach.
Not ’igh class.”
"I’m sorry to hear that. What is she taking for it?”
"Cumphor oil she is tekink.”
"Cumphor oil! Oh, castor oil. I see. I’ll come and
see her later.”
"You not to be a bother, Miss Feemy
She laughed and looked at Jancy.. "Gets in a mess,
doesn’t he?” And to him, "It won’t be any bother, Mr.
Kovac. Is she in bed?”
"Yes, in bad wid hot rubbers.”
Miss Feemy looked puzzled, and then her face cleared.
"Hot water bottles, I expect you mean. All right then.
Must go now. See you later, Mr. Kovac.”
As they went off down the lane Miss Feemy said,
"They’re very nice people. Come from Rumania or some-
where. Been here three years. They have one son, Harry.
Clever boy. Speaks English well. Father and mother can’t
learn at all. Old Kovac” (Miss Feemy must have been at
least twenty years older than him) "was a tomato grower.
Lost all his money. No business man. Harry’ll be all
right though. Very smart.”
"I suppose it’s hard when you’re that age to learn
a new language,” said Jancy. "The children do better. We
have some New Australians, girls, at our school, and they’re
quite good. They even use slang.”
"Expect so. First thing foreigners ever learn. Don’t
you think?”
Jancy nodded, for they had started down the hill into
the town and she would need her breath if she was to keep


up with Miss Feemy. Even so, she brought up panting in
front of the local store, and Miss Feemy, noting her dis-
tress, shook her head at this sad lack of condition.
"You can rest in here, anyway,” she said, and dived
into the grocery section. Jancy followed and sat down
on a small high chair while Miss Feemy did her shopping.
There were no other customers in the shop, and it remained
empty for some time until a tall, handsome woman walked
in.
She was dressed very smartly, rather too much so for
a shopping expedition into a place like Burangi, and she
pulled a canvas shopping bag on wheels. She made straight
for Miss Feemy.
"Ah!” she said in a plummy sort of voice. "Good-
morning to you. Off to an early start this morning, I see.”
Miss Feemy glowered at her and grunted; but the woman
did not seem to notice. "I heard your young visitor had
arrived, so Eve arranged a tennis party this afternoon to
enable her to get to know people. Christine probably told
you this morning.”
"Not me!” snapped Miss Feemy. "Never saw her.”
"Oh, then she told Miss Lally.” The woman, turning,
caught sight of Jancy. "Why, you have her with you.”
She walked over. "I’m Mrs. Ffewett, my dear; Fm so
pleased to meet you. Since Miss Feemy didn’t introduce
us, we’ll have to do it ourselves.”
"How do you do?” said Jancy politely. "Fm Jancy
Mitford.”
Mrs. Hewett looked puzzled. "Mitford. Mitford,”
she repeated, as if trying to place the name, and then
her eyes widened. "Not Colonel Mitford’s daughter?”
"Yes,” admitted Jancy.
"Well, fancy that! Eve always admired your father.
Such a brave man,” gushed Mrs. Hewett, "and such a
magnificent soldier.”
Jancy, somewhat embarrassed, sat silent under this
unexpected eulogy of her male parent, and Miss Feemy at
the counter snorted. "Did his job,” she said loudly. "Most
soldiers do that. Don’t know what all the fuss is about.”


"But, Miss Feemy,” protested Mrs. Hewett, "he was
a hero in the war.”
"So were millions pf others. Silly nonsense.”
Mrs. Hewett shrugged her shoulders and made a wry
face at Jancy. "I still think he was wonderful, and I
expect you do, too.”
"Oh, yes,” agreed Jancy and, remembering her man-
ners, thanked Mrs. Hewett for arranging the tennis.
"I was glad to do it, my dear. One must organize the
young people here or they would lounge on the beach all
day, and that’s not a bit good for them.”
One of Jancy’s favourite pastimes was lounging on
the beach, but she felt there was nothing to be gained
by saying so, so she held her tongue, and Mrs. Hewett
went on: "I’m afraid you’ll find Burangi a little back-
ward socially—one tries to do one’s best, but it’s so difficult
when one isn’t even met halfway. However, we do have
some fun and enjoyment, so it probably won’t be too dull
for you here.”
This prompted a small spirit of rebellion in Jancy.
"Oh, I’d never be dull staying with the Hiltons,” she said.
"They’re so lively and full of energy. I was just telling
Miss Feemy that she goes too fast for me.”
"Ah! yes,” agreed Mrs. Hewett, not without a touch
of malice. "But then Miss Feemy shames all of us. To be
able to get about like she does at her age is positively
miraculous.”
Miss Feemy turned from the counter, and her voice
was sharp. "Well, I’m not in a wheelchair yet, if that’s
what you mean. I’m only in my sixties, and if the truth’s
known you’re not far behind.” Miss Feemy’s face red-
dened, and as she was obviously working up to something
really rude, Jancy thought it was time to intervene.
"Oh! excuse me interrupting, Miss Feemy,” she said
loudly. "I must get some toothpaste while I think of it.
Could I pay you for it after ”
But Miss Feemy, stopped in her headlong speech, said,
"Toothpaste? Toothpaste? Who was talking about tooth-
paste?”


"I was.” Jancy looked at Mrs. Hewett, who decided
to take advantage of the respite given her and, with a
hurried "See you this afternoon,” she departed for another
section of the store.
Miss Feemy watched the retreat of her victim with a
frustrated glance.
"There!” she said as the lady disappeared. "She’s gone.
And just as I was about to give her a piece of my mind.”
"Never mind,” soothed Jancy. "You’ll be meeting
her again.”
"Yes, but I’ll have forgotten what I was going to say.”
Miss Feemy clicked her tongue irritably. "Tchk. Tchk.
I’ve forgotten already. Still, it doesn’t matter.” She
suddenly gave Jancy a wide grin. "I put a flea in her ear
anyway, didn’t I?”
"You certainly did,” agreed Jancy, privately thankful
that the flea hadn’t been any bigger. "But you won’t
forget my toothpaste, will you? I really do need it.”
"Of course.” Miss Feemy, recalled to her shopping,
turned to the counter. There was no one there, and she
tapped impatiently on the glass case. "Goodness me! The
service gets worse every day.” She raised her voice. "Mr.
Darcy, Mr. Darcy!” and as the grocer appeared, "Anyone
would think you don’t want custom, Mr. Darcy.”
Jancy, thinking this was rather hard on Mr. Darcy,
who out of delicacy had walked away when the altercation
began, gave him a smile. Fie smiled back at both her and
Miss Feemy.
"Well, Miss Feemy,” he said with a twinkle in his eye,
"I thought I’d leave you alone to have a chat with your
friend. You seemed to be enjoying it.”
"Who—me?” asked Miss Feemy indignantly. "Bless
my soul, the woman’s no friend of mine, as you well
know.” She looked up and caught his amused eye. "Well,”
she said, and then burst out laughing, "I suppose I was
enjoying it at that, Mr. Darcy.” She gave him a shrewd
look. "And if F’m not mistaken, so were you.” At which
the two of them leaned on the counter and laughed
together.


CHAPTER VIII
When they reached home after shopping, Miss Feemy
went to see Mrs. Kovac, and Jancy cleaned her tennis shoes
and pressed her shorts and blouse for the afternoon’s game.
With these jobs to do the time passed quickly, and
after a light lunch she set off up the lane for the Hewett’s
house. It was a brick house sitting well back in carefully
tended grounds, and walking up the neatly raked gravel
path to the front door, Jancy thought how different the
ordered garden was to the wilderness that surrounded
Burangi House. She was just deciding that she preferred
the old-fashioned wildness of Miss Lally’s garden when a
familiar voice hailed her from the verandah.
"Well, if it isn’t our little travelling companion,” it
said, and she looked up to see Godfrey Chapman regarding
her from the top of the steps. He grinned at her impu-
dently as she walked up the steps and on to the verandah.
She ignored the grin. "Hello,” she said, "do you
know where Mrs. Hewett is?”
He thrust both hands in his pockets and, crossing his
leg, leaned against the verandah post with elaborate non-
chalance. He did not answer her, but continued to grin.
She stood this for a while, and then said dryly,
"Really, Godfrey, you look exactly like a larger edition of
the Cheshire Cat.”
The grin became a little fixed, and, thinking jubil-
antly that she’d punctured him, she went to the door
and rang. She rang three times without receiving an
answer, and Godfrey said in the tones of one reading a
fairy story to a child, "Why don’t you lift up the latch
and walk in, Little Red Riding Hood?”
Jancy came back towards the steps. "I’m going to do
the next best thing,” she said, intending to go and find
the tennis court, but Godfrey moved over and barred her
way.


"You’re not going to leave me so soon,” he said. "We
were getting on so well.”
"Let me pass, please.” Jancy kept her voice steady.
"Oh, don’t you like my company?” he pretended
concern. "What a shame.”
"Get out of my way!” Jancy’s tone had an edge to it.
"Temper! Temper!” Godfrey chided her. "That’s
not the way to ask.”
Jancy looked at her watch. "If you don’t move in
half a second from now I’ll scream the place down,” she
threatened.
"Scream away!” he said carelessly. "No one will hear
you. They’re all at the back of the house.”
He grinned wider than ever, and was about to say
something else when he jumped violently, as a quiet voice
behind him said:
"What are you doing, Godfrey?”
He whirled around and, rather breathlessly, exclaimed,
"Geoff!” and Jancy, looking down on the path, saw God-
frey’s double standing there. The likeness was amazing:
the same handsome features exactly, the same shaped head,
the same height and build. Jancy could hardly believe
her eyes. And yet there was a difference. This boy looked
good-tempered and pleasant; he had an air of quiet
confidence, and there was no doubt he was master of the
situation as Godfrey could never have been.
The change in the latter young man was remarkable.
He had lost all his impudence and was looking sheepishly
at his feet.
His twin said nothing further to him regarding the
scene that had just taken place, but spoke to Jancy.
"My name’s Geoffrey Chapman, and L think you’re
Jancy Mitford, aren’t you?”
"Why, yes,” said Jancy in surprise. "How did you
know?”
"I guessed from my mother’s description of you. Be-
sides, visitors to Burangi are fairly rare.”


"Oh, I see,” Jancy smiled. "Is she here to-day?”
"Yes. She’s round at the tennis court. Shall I take
you there?”
"Yes, please.” Jancy went to walk down the steps,
but hesitated and looked at Godfrey as she did so.
"Are you coming too, Huck?” asked Geoff in a casual
voice.
Godfrey nodded without looking up, and as Jancy
joined his brother and they walked off, he followed behind.
"Huck!” she said. "That’s a funny name.”
Geoffrey gave her a friendly grin. "It isn’t so odd
really. You see, when he and I were kids we had a book of
Huckleberry Finn, and Godfrey was so like the illustra-
tions that I christened him Huck and I’ve called him that
ever since. I’d better warn you, though, that nobody else
is allowed to use the name, only me. Godfrey’s very
peculiar about it.”
"Oh, I wouldn’t dream of calling him Huck,” Jancy
reassured him and added, with a rueful little smile, "In
any case, I doubt whether we’d ever be friendly enough.”
Geoff nodded. "He’s a queer bloke, is Huck. I don’t
think he’s got a friend in the world except me, and I don't
know why I’m favoured either.”
"Well, you’re his elder brother.”
Geoffrey laughed. "Only by the skin of my teeth.
Half an hour’s not much.”
"No, but you seem older somehow.”
"Do I? Mother says so, too. By the way, I believe
Huck was a bit of a problem on the train yesterday.” He
looked at Jancy’s charming, animated face. "I’m sorry
he had to pick on you.”
Jancy blushed. "It had to be somebody, I suppose.”
"Yes, but I’d have rather it had happened to someone
else.”
"Well, it’s over now,” said Jancy, "and I don’t sup-
pose it’ll happen again.”
"Not while I’m about,” Geoffrey said grimly. "I’ll
see to that.”


As he finished speaking they turned the second corner
of the house and the tennis court came into view. It was
a hard court, and on the green lawns that ran up to the
wire-netting comfortable garden chairs stood, shaded by
gaily striped beach umbrellas.
"Gosh!” said Jancy involuntarily. "Doesn’t it look
nice?” And then, with dismay, "Oh, what a lot of
people!”
Geoffrey grinned. "Don’t panic, Jancy. You’re not
shy, are you?”
"A bit,” admitted Jancy; but, heartened by his sup-
port, she added: "This is nothing though. You should
have known me a few years ago. Wild horses wouldn’t
have got me near that court then.”
"There’s nobody here to be shy of. They’re just nice
ordinary sort of people—all except Mrs. Hewett —and,
look out, here she comes.”
The lady descended on them in a cloud of perfume.
"There you are, Jancy. I’m so pleased you came.
You must come and meet everybody.”
Jancy gave a despairing glance at Geoff and was led
off to the slaughter.
It was not such a bad ordeal, however, for she had met
Mrs. Chapman, Jerry Bentham and Christine before, and
she did not feel a complete stranger. Mrs. Hewett intro-
duced her to Mr. Ames and several other people whose
names she failed to remember, and then Mrs. Chapman
took her under her wing.
"Come along, dear, sit near me. Geoff, please get a
chair for Jancy. They’ve already got a men’s four to
start,” she explained, "so we can just sit and rest for a
while. I expect you, Godfrey, Geoffrey and Christine, will
play next.”
"I’m not much good,” said Jancy. "I hope it won’t
spoil their game.”
Mrs. Chapman laughed. "Oh, we’re all rabbits here,”
she said, "so don’t be afraid.”
In a few moments the men went on the court for
their game. Mr. Bentham and Mr. Ames were playing two


young men whose names had failed to register in Jancy’s
memory. She watched them warming up, and then began
to look at the people around her.
Geoffrey and Godfrey were sitting on the grass beside
Christine’s chair, and the rest of the party, which was
mainly women, was in a group, talking busily to Mrs.
Hewett.
Suddenly Mrs. Chapman said, "Why, here’s Marney
Browne. How nice! She stood up and beckoned to a girl
of about Jancy’s age, who was crossing the lawn towards
them. She was a striking-looking girl with black hair and
vivid blue eyes that were, as the Irish say, "put in with a
smutty finger. She had a frank, expressive face, and yet
in it Jancy detected a certain watchfulness or wariness
that was puzzling in a young girl. When Mrs. Chapman
introduced her, however, the wariness disappeared, and she
gave a brilliant smile that immediately captivated Jancy.
Hot, isn t it? she said, reaching lazily behind her
and dragging up a chair. She sank into it with a grace
that was obviously natural to her, and crossed her long
legs. I don t think you 11 get me on the court this after-
noon.”
"Really, Marney,” expostulated Mrs. Chapman
mildly, "you get lazier every day.”
'Yes, don’t I?” agreed Marney, and smiled at Jancy.
"You’re staying with the Hiltons, aren’t you?” and when
Jancy said she was Marney went on, "How lovely for you
They’re really the best fun I know. Which one do you
like best?”
5 "Miss Lally, I think,” Jancy hesitated. "And yet, I
don’t know. Miss Feemy’s so amusing.” She laughed a
little. "Blessed if I know which I like best.”
I feel the same, replied Marney with an understand-
mg nod. "I’ve known them all my life and I can’t make up
my mind. I used to be frightened of Miss Emmeline when
I was a child—she was so—er —overwhelming. She’s dif-
ferent now, of course, but she used to lay down the law in
this town. You know, it was through her I got my name.”


"Really!” said Jancy. "How?”
"Well, when my mother told her she was to be
married, Miss Emmeline hadn’t met her future husband,
and was shocked at the commonplace name of Browne.
'lf you have to marry a man with a name like that,’ she
said, 'be sure you give your children a decent Christian
name to balance it. Your own maiden name’s as good as
any —Marney.’ And my mother, being very tickled at this,
said, 'All right, I’ll see it’s done,’ and she did and,” Marney
raised one eyebrow comically, "I’m it.”
'Jancy smiled. "It’s as good a way to get a name as
any. I like it.”
"Oh, so do I. Imagine if I’d been called Jane or
Martha! It couldn’t be borne.” She stretched luxuriously
and blinked her eyes at the tennis players. "I don’t know
how they can,” she sighed, viewing the antics of Mr. Ben-
tham wonderingly. "Have you met Jerry, Jancy?”
"Yes.”
"You’ll like him. He’s so comfortable and cuddly like
a big bear. Keith Ames is nice, too. In fact, they’re not
a bad lot of people in Burangi—with a few exceptions.
And oh, heavens! here comes one now.”
Jancy followed the direction of Marney’s eyes and
saw an old man walking across the lawn. He was a small,
dapper old man, and wore clothes that had been fashion-
able in another day. About his neck hung a monocle and
on his highly polished shoes were immaculate spats. He
looked excessively clean and neat with his fresh pink face,
smooth white hair and snowy linen, and Jancy was imme-
diately reminded, for some reason, of a gnome. She con-
fided as much to Marney, who surveyed the apparition
judicially. "Mm,” she said, and her eyes were wary again.
"I never thought of it before, but you’re right. That’s
just what he looks like.”
"What’s his name, Marney?”
"Mr. Sheridan. He’s been here for centuries and must
be as old as a tree.”
Jancy laughed at this quaint way of putting things,
and said, "You don’t seem to like him much.”


"Oh, I don’t dislike him. It’s too much trouble to
hate anybody, but he repels me somehow. He’s the local
antiquary here, you know. Specialises in Australiana and
such, and is always digging in Abos.’ kitchens.”
"Abos.’ kitchens! What are those?”
"The places where the Abos. camped ages ago. You
can always tell them by the shells and things in the soil.”
"Oh, I didn’t know. Is there a museum here or some-
thing?” ,
"He has a little one of his own attached to his shop.
He sells antique furniture to the tourists who are some-
times silly enough to buy.”
The little man was much nearer now, and fancy, get-
ting a closer look, said in a whisper:
"But, Marney, he is old!”
"Didn’t I tell you?”
"But he looked so sprightly walking across the grass.”
"Yes, he carries his age well, I must say.”
"At this juncture they were joined by Geoff, who said
to Marney:
"Look what’s turned up.”
Marney nodded. "I was just deploring the fact to
fancy,” and she added out of the side of her mouth, "Look
out, we’re going to be invaded.”
Mrs. Hewett, accompanied by Mr. Sheridan, floated
over to them.
"I want you to meet a very dear friend of mine and
the Misses Hilton, Jancy. Mr. Sheridan.” The old man
smiled, showing a row of large white artificial teeth.
"Delighted to meet you, my dear,” he said, "de-
lighted.” He looked at her more closely. "Quite charming,
and the image of your dear Aunts.” And with this
mysterious remark he moved on to exchange greetings with
the rest of the party.


CHAPTER IX
Marney giggled irrepressibly behind his departing
back.
"Now what would you say he meant by that?” she
asked Geoff.
"I wouldn’t know,” Geoff shrugged helplessly. "You
know what he is.”
"I expect he meant the Misses Hilton,” pondered
Marney.
"But they’re not my aunts,” objected Jancy.
"Of course not. They never had any brothers and
sisters that I ever heard of.” She gave it up. "Oh, what
does it matter? He’s always saying something, and he talks
too much anyway.”
"Yes, he’s a shocker at it,” agreed Geoff. "Nobody can
do anything without him knowing, can they, Marney?”
"No, he’s a real male gossip,” replied Marney, and her
eyes were still watchful. She looked at Jancy. "So be
careful what you say and do when he’s around. He made
my life a misery when I was a kid; always running to my
stepmother with tales about me.”
"Your stepmother?” said Jancy in surprise.
"Yes, didn’t you know I had a stepmother?”
"No, I didn’t know,” said Jancy, and with a sudden
memory of all she had read about stepmothers she added:
"Is she nice to you?”
"Not very,” returned Marney candidly, but without
resentment. "She wasn’t bad until just lately, but she’s
being very tiresome now.”
"And I know why,” said Geoffrey. "It’s because
you’re getting too good-looking. She doesn’t like the com-
petition.”
Marney laughed. "Oh, sir,” he said, and fluttered her
eyelashes in pretended modesty.


Geoff said, "Don’t try that eye-fluttering on me. I’m
impervious to it.”
"My, grandfather,” retorted Marney, "what big
words you use!”
Jancy listened to this fooling with great pleasure,
thinking how nice it would be if she had someone to behave
like that with. It was obvious that the two were great
friends, and just as obvious that Geoff was as wary and
on the defensive for Marney as Marney was for herself.
Jancy wondered idly what had prompted this reaction from
both of them, and came to the conclusion that it must
be the stepmother. Then, privately resolving to ask Miss
Lally all about it, she returned to the conversation. Geoff
was saying:
"I hope you’v come prepared this afternoon, Marney.
We’ve got the court next. I’ve decided to give you the
licking of your life.”
"You!” retorted Marney with great disdain. "You
couldn’t lick a stamp. We’ll fix him, won’t we, Jancy?”
Jancy grinned. "You’ll have to speak for yourself,
Marney. I’m hopeless at tennis. I’ll try my best, though.
I’m sure I’ll be your worst handicap.”
"Well, that’ll make us even anyway,” said Geoff. "I’ll
play with Christine, and she’s no good either—so it’ll still
be between you and me, Marney.”
"Okay,” Marney said. "Then you’d better pull up
your socks because we’ll be on soon.”
They turned to watch the four on the court, who
were having a hard tussle for the last set. Jerry Bentham
was perspiring freely and having some difficulty with his
trousers, which were held up precariously by a striped tie.
Marney laughed. "It’s going to be a toss-up whether
Jerry loses the game or his trousers first, bless him.” She
inclined her head to Jancy. "He’s always the same. He
can put on a new suit, and five minutes later he looks
as though he’s been pulled through a hedge backwards.
Most of the women here have tried to reform him at some
time, but he’ll never change, and now they’ve given it
up.”


Presently the game finished and the four young people
took the court. The first serve fell to Jancy, and to her
vast surprise she won it. Marney was delighted.
"Keep that up, my lamb, and we’re in clover,” she
said jubilantly.
"I’ll try,” said Jancy gaily, and played with a renewed
confidence, the result of which was that she and Marney
beat their opponents 6-3, 6-2 in the last set.
Flushed with triumph, the two victors returned to the
group on the lawn, where they were congratulated on their
excellent game. Geoff took his beating with a good grace,
saying:
"Well, the best men won, but, of course,” he added
teasingly, "it was a flash in the pan on Jancy’s part. Unless
she’s a dark horse, and has been kidding us about how
badly she plays.”
"Oh, no,” said Jancy, much concerned at this reflec-
tion on her veracity. "I wouldn’t do such a thing. I don’t
believe I’ve ever played such a good game.”
Geoff put a friendly arm round her shoulders. "I was
only kidding you, Jancy; don’t worry.”
And Marney said, disparagingly, "Kidding, indeed.
Don’t you believe it, Jan. He’s seething inwardly with
rage because he lost.”
Geoff grinned and nodded. "Of course I am. I’ll
break out in a rash any minute now. Come on, who’s
for a cool drink?” «
They all went over to a table that was set out with
drinks under an umbrella, and Christine did the honours.
"I’m sorry I was such a rabbit, Geoff,” she said apolo-
getically. "I was no help at all.”
"Never mind. I enjoyed your company, Chris. Hello!
Here comes Keith.”
Keith Ames joined them and, after receiving a drink,
stood talking for a while until Mrs. Hewett floated up.
"Goodness me, Chris,” she said playfully, "here you
are enjoying yourself and neglecting our guests. Do go
and see what people want to drink, and, Keith, would you


bring me some more folding chairs oft the verandah,
please?” The two went obediently to do as they were bidden
and, having broken up the little party, Mrs. Hewett floated
off happily. Marney, watching her retreating back,
shrugged.
"Really!” she said. "You’d think she could leave them
alone for five minutes, wouldn’t you? Interfering old ”
"Tut, tut,” put in Geoff. "Speak not thus of thy
hostess.”
"Oh, well.” Marney made an exasperated gesture.
"She does make me tired. Never mind. Look, let’s go
and sit over there on the grass where it’s shady and cool.”
The three of them went across the lawn and stretched
out comfortably, but hardly had they finished their drinks
when Mrs. Hewett was with them.
"My dears,” she cried gushingly, "you’ll catch your
death. It’s most dangerous to lie on the grass after a hard
game. Besides, you’re right away from the rest of the
party. Now, do come over and join them, there’s good
children.”
Marney regarded her with a cold eye and set her chin
stubbornly. "Oh, we’re all right here, Mrs. Hewett,” she
said carelessly. "I expect the adults don’t want to be
bothered with children.” There was a slight emphasis on
the last word.
"And I think Mrs. Dunne is beckoning you, Mrs.
Hewett,” put in Geoff. "She’s over there.”
"Oh!” At this mention of the town’s wealthiest
resident, Mrs. Hewett immediately lost interest in them.
"Well, join us when you can,” she said hurriedly and went
away.
"Geoff!” said Jancy, gurgling with laughter, "no one
was beckoning to her at all.”
"I know,” Geoff grinned, "but she won’t know until
she gets there and yells into the old girl’s eartrumpet.”
The three of them collapsed into laughter, and when
the paroxysm was over, Marney said:
"What about to-morrow, Geoff? Did you see Harry?”
"Yes. He’s coming.” Geoff turned to Jancy. "Mar-
ney and Harry Kovac and me are going for a picnic round
the rocks to-morrow. Would you like to come?”


"Oh, I’d love to.” Jancy’s eyes sparkled. "Do you go
all day?”
"Yes. We start early, about nine, because we go out
to the southern headland of the bay, and it takes a fair
while to get there.”
"I’ll be ready. I suppose I bring my own sandwiches
and drink?”
"Yes, we each take our own.” Geoff looked at
Marney. "I’ll pick up Jancy and then pick up Harry and
we’ll meet you in front of Darcy’s store, Marney.”
"All right. Shall I bring some of my stew?”
"I suppose so,” said Geoff indulgently.
"Wait till you taste that,” Marney told Jancy. "You
haven’t lived until you’ve tasted my stew.”
Geoff grinned. "And it’s a miracle if you live after
it,” he said.
"Phooey!” retorted Marney. "You always make a pig
of yourself with it, anyway.”
"Well, it’s either that or starve.”
They bickered happily for a while, and then Jancy
said:
"What’s Harry Kovac like? Miss Feemy thinks he’s
marvellous.”
"He is,” said Marney.
"Oh, Marney’s keen on him,” Geoff said., "Don’t take
any notice of her.”
Marney took this calmly. "Of course I am. Who
wouldn’t be? He’s good-looking, got plenty of brains.
He’s quite a person, is Harry.”
"That’s what Miss Feemy seemed to think,” said
J anc y-
Geoff dropped his bantering tone. "It’s true, too.
He’s one of the best. Anyway, you’ll meet him to-morrow
and you can judge for yourself.” Geoffrey stretched
and sat up. "Miss Feemy and Miss Lally have just arrived
over there, Jancy. Shall we go and see them?”
"Yes.” Jancy stood up and smoothed her blouse
and shorts. "Do you think we’ll get another game in this
afternoon?” she asked as the three of them wandered across
the lawn.


"I hope so,” replied Geoffrey. "There are a lot of
people here, though.”
"Yes, but lots of them don’t play,” Marney pointed
out. "They only come for tea and a gossip.”
"Well, if we get another chance I’m having Jancy as
my partner,” said Geoff.
"All right,” agreed Marney. "I’m quite satisfied to
beat you once in an afternoon.”
Miss Feemy and Miss Lally greeted them with smiles.
"Have you had a good game, dear?” asked Miss Lally
of Jancy.
"Marvellous,” Marney replied for her, and proceeded
to give a highly coloured account of Geoff’s ignominious
defeat. That young man listened with a smile, and when
she had finished said:
"She makes it sound bad, doesn’t she?” and then he
added: "Look, if you’ll excuse me I think I’ll go and look
for Huck. It’s just occurred to me I haven’t seen him for
ages. See you later.”
He went off, and Miss Lally said, "He’s a dear boy.
He looks after that brother of his so well. I don’t know
how his mother would manage without him.”
"I don’t know how anybody else would either,” said
Marney. "Godfrey does the most awful things. Do you
remember that day at Jerry Bentham’s, Miss Lally?”
"My goodness, I do.” Miss Lally looked shocked at the
memory.
"Dear Godfrey got into Jerry’s studio,” Marney told
Jancy, "and what he did there was nobody’s business. He
scrawled paint on three pictures. Luckily it didn’t ruin
them, because they were dry, and Jerry was able to take
the wet paint off. Oh. he’s a menace all right.”
"His poor mother must have been upset,” said Jancy.
"Oh, she wasn’t there. Jerry and Mrs. Chapman
didn’t know each other then. Nobody told her, of course,
and I don’t think she knows to this day. We only knew
that Godfrey had done it by the fact that I was telling
Geoff about it the next day, and he remembered seeing
coloured paint on the sleeve of Godfrey’s jacket the night


before. Later he asked Godfrey had he done it, and the
little tick confessed as bold as you please. He couldn’t have
cared less if he’d spoiled all Jerry’s canvases.”
"How awful!” said Jancy. "Isn’t it odd, though, how
he’s against people? He just seems to want to hurt them
all the time. I wonder why?”
"Because the child’s a sadist,” said Miss Feemy.
"Psychopathic case. Should be in a home.”
"That’s a bit sweeping, Feemy,” objected Miss Tally
mildly. "I don’t think he’s as bad as all that, otherwise he
couldn’t be so normal when he’s with Geoffrey. No, I
can’t help feeling sometimes that if that child could be
found something constructive to do he’d stop his destruc-
tive nonsense. An interest is what he needs —a real and
absorbing interest.”


CHAPTER X
"I couldn’t agree with you more, Miss Lally,”
boomed a gentle voice behind them, and Jerry Bentham
pulled up a chair. "That is, if you re talking about me,
of course,” he added, with a twinkle in his eye.
Miss Lally looked at him reproachfully. "You know
perfectly well I wasn’t talking about you,” she said.
"Well, I heard the word destructive, and naturally
thought you meant me.”
"Oh, you break chairs and things when you sit on
them, I know,” she said, and added kindly, "But that’s
just unfortunate. No, I was talking about Godfrey.”
Jerry Gentham nodded and became serious. "And
what you said about him was quite right, Miss Lally. The
boy does need an interest. I’ve been thinking about him a
good deal. He was in the ’bus yesterday.”
"Yes,” crowed Miss Feemy. "Jancy told us about it.
Do him good.”
Mr. Bentham shook his leonine head. "I don’t know
about that. I frightened him, and I shouldn’t have done
* »
It.
"Frighten him!” scoffed Miss Feemy. "Couldn’t be
done —if it could, it wouldn’t last for long.”
"Oh, yes, you can frighten him all right,” Mr. Ben-
tham insisted firmly. "In fact, in my opinion, that child
lives in constant fear.”
"Fear! Of what, Jerry?” asked Mjss Lally in surprise.
"He’s not neglected, he has a good home and everything
he wants. What’s he got to be afraid of?”
"The world, Ma’am. The world,” he answered. "It’s
a fear you can’t put your finger on, a subconscious fear,
and he hits out at the world for fear it will hit at him.
Now I did the wrong thing yesterday. I added to that fear,
I used my far greater strength to frighten him, and I


shouldn’t have done that.” He shook his head regretfully.
"No, I shouldn’t have done that.”
"But what else could you do? He was misbehaving
himself.”
"I should have applied my mind to it, Ma’am, like
an intelligent human being. I used brawn instead of brain,
and I’m ashamed of myself. But I’ve thought about it
since, and that’s why I agree with you when you say the
boy should be given an interest.” He beamed at Miss Lally.
"You’re a very perspicacious woman, Ma’am.”
Miss Lally blushed pleasurably at this praise. "Then
the thing to do is to find the boy something to do. But
what?”
"Ah! that’s the problem. And I intend to devote my
mind to it until I think of something. It’d be a help to his
mother if the boy was taken off her hands a bit, too.” He
looked over at Mrs. Chapman. "Charmin’ woman,” he
said. "She shouldn’t have to be worried by a great boy
like that.”
Jancy caught Miss Feemy’s eye, which closed in a
knowing wink, and realized that the old lady was secretly
rejoicing at this favourable start in the matrimonial stakes.
She laughed to herself.
Soon after this Geoff returned with Godfrey, and
Geoff, Jancy, Marney and Christine went on the court
again and had an enjoyable game, though it finished inde-
cisively, as the players were too evenly matched, and as
nobody seemed to be trying very hard it degenerated into
fooling.
The tennis party then broke up, and Jancy walked
home with Miss Lally and Miss Feemy, Mrs. Chapman and
the twins. Godfrey made no attempt at conversation,
but lounged along with his hands in his pockets beside
Geoffrey.
As the ladies talked, Jancy said to Geoff in a low voice,
"Will you bring Godfrey to-morrow?”
"Good Lord no! He can’t stand Marney. That
wouldn’t be any use at all.”
"What will he do with himself all day then?” asked
Jancy.


"I don’t know. He brought the parts of a model
aeroplane back from Sydney, and I’ll try to get him inter-
ested in that before I leave. He’s all right if he’s got some-
thing definite to do.”
"Funny,” said Jancy, "Mr. Bentham was saying the
same thing ”
"When?”
"Oh, just now, at tennis, when you were away
looking for Godfrey.”
"What did he say?”
Jancy told him the general gist of what had been said
between Mr. Bentham and Miss Lally, and added, "I think
he’s a wonderful man. I don’t know anybody else who’d
admit so freely that he’d been wrong —in front of Marney
and me, too.”
"Yes, he’s a decent cove, is Jerry—there’s nothing
small about him in any way. I hope he does interest him-
self in Godfrey. He’s about the only person I can imagine
doing anything with him.”
As Geoff finished speaking they reached the Hilton’s
gate, and with a final exhortation to Jancy not to be late
the next morning, he and his mother said their good-byes
and went off to catch up Godfrey, who hadn’t waited to
observe the social niceties.
"Ignorant little beast!” said Miss Feemy as the three
of them entered the house. "Jerry talked a lot of rot
about him this afternoon.”
"Now, Feemy,” said Miss Lally peaceably, "you don’t
think that at all, and you know it. You’re just being
stubborn.”
Feemy gave her short, sharp guffaw. "Can’t deceive
vou, my love, can I?” she said, with one of her lightning
changes of front. And then, "Anyway, it’s your turn
to make the pudding,” she said triumphantly, if a little
disconnectedly, and galloped away upstairs.
Miss Lallv smiled after her. "What are you going to
do now, dear?” she asked fancy.
"I thought I’d have a shower and go and see Miss
Emmeline for a little while if she’s well enough.”


"Oh, yes . I should think she’d love that, Jancy. She’s
in the sitting-room at the end of the upstairs corridor.
Now I must be off to the kitchen.”
Jancy had her shower and got dressed and then, going
along to Miss Emmeline’s door, tapped on it softly. She
entered at the invitation to come in, and found the old lady
seated at the window with her sightless eyes turned to the
garden.
"Is that you, Jancy?” she asked.
"Yes,” said Jancy, surprised. "But how did you
know?”
Just the different step, dear. One gets used to the
familiar ones, and recognizes a strange one.”
Jancy joined her at the window, where the perfume
from the garden drifted up on the light evening wind.
"Isn’t it beautiful?” said Miss Emmeline. "One can
almost smell the colours of the flowers.”
"Yes. It’s the best time of the day, I think, don’t
you?”
"I do. I remember when I was younger I used to sing
a song called 'ln the Gloaming.’ It was rather a sad song,
but after all it was about the death of the day, and that is
a sad thing.”
I know that song,” said Jancy, and in her small,
sweet voice, and without a trace of self-consciousness,
began to sing:
"In the gloaming, oh, my darling,
When the lights are dim and low.”
She sang the song through softly, and when she had
finished there was a silence and, looking at Miss Emmeline,
she was dismayed to see tears in her eyes.
"I’m so sorry, Miss Emmeline,” she began, but the old
lady stopped her with a slowly raised hand.
E)on t be, my dear, she said. "You have given me a
lot of pleasure. I hope you’ll sing it again for me some day.
It was beautiful.”
They fell silent again, and then Miss Emmeline, as
though throwing off the spell of nostalgic memories, gave
herself a little shake and said:


"Did you have a pleasant afternoon, dear?”
"Oh, yes, lovely. I played the best game I’ve ever
played, I think, and I met Geoffrey Chapman, Godfrey’s
brother. I must say he’s a big improvement on his twin.”
"Yes, he’s a fine boy. It’s a blessing they’re not both
like Godfrey.”
"Yes, and, oh! Miss Emmeline, I met a girl I liked a
lot called Marney Browne. By the way, she said she got
her name through you.”
Miss Emmeline laughed. "I femember. So she did.
Did she tell you how?”
"Yes.”
The old lady shook her head. "I was very arrogant in
those days. Arrogant and sure of myself. No hesitation
about running everybody’s lives at all. I’d think twice
about it now, though. I haven’t seen Marney for a long
time. How is she?”
"She’s fine,” said Jancy. "I like her so much, too. I
think we’ll be good friends.”
"I hope so, the poor child hasn’t had many since her
mother died and her father married again.”
"She told me she had a stepmother.”
"Yes.”
"Is her father alive?”
"No, he’s dead, too. You see, Marney was only about
four when her mother and father were in a dreadful car
accident. The mother was killed outright, but the father
was left a hopeless cripple. He was in hospital a long time,
and while there he met the woman he afterwards married.
She used to come to give him electrical treatment of some
sort, and as she was pretty and young and efficient, he
thought that she would be just the person to look after
him and Marney. He knew he hadn’t long to live, poor
man, and I expect he thought he was doing the best for
his daughter. Soon after he married this girl he died, and
she was left in charge. He was an extremely wealthy man,
and although he left his wife comfortably provided for,
the bulk of his fortune was left to Marney, who inherits
at twenty-one. As far as I can gather, the wretched woman


has tried to get what she can out of the child ever since.
None of us know much about what goes on. Marney
doesn’t talk and her stepmother doesn’t entertain, so no-
body has been inside the place since the father died. After
he’d gone I did my best to adopt Marney, I’m very fond
of her, you know, and it would have been wonderful to
have a*young thing in this house full of old women; but
her stepmother prevented that. We have often felt like
interfering since, because Marney looked so unhappy; but
we’d have probably only made things worse if we had, so
we’ve left well alone. Whether we were wise or not
remains to be seen.”
"Geoff seemed to think that her stepmother was
jealous of Marney’s good looks.”
Yes, that’s possible. Mrs. Browne was always a vain
woman, and wouldn’t relish competition. She tried to set
her cap at Jerry Bentham, but he put an end to that.
I believe that she’s now very thick with that old Mr.
Sheridan.”
"He was there this afternoon. I don’t like him, Miss
Emmeline.”
"You’re not alone in that, my dear. Few people do.
I’ve known him for a good many years. He first came
here as a remittance man.”
"Remittance man? What’s that?”
"In the old days it was the custom for wealthy families
in England to send their black sheep out here, so that they
were far enough away not to be a nuisance. They would
then send or remit a certain sum at intervals to keep them.
Hence remittance man.”
"Oh, I see.”
"Yes, he was quite down and out when he first
appeared. I remember my father was one of the first people
to give him a job. He was no use, however; he went from
job to job, never holding one long, until he exhausted the
employment resources of the town. He lived in a shack
on the beach until some years ago, and then suddenly he
spruced himself up and opened this antique shop, and
became interested in Old Australiana. Nobody ever knew


what caused this transformation, and although I don’t like
him, I cannot but admire the courage that made him pull
himself together and start afresh at such a late date.”
"I suppose so,” said Jancy. "It’s funny, though, Miss
Emmeline, that he stayed in the one place. I thought that
sort of person generally moved about.”
"They do,” agreed Miss Emmeline, "but for a long
while, I think, Mr. Sheridan had designs on my sister
Eulalie, and that’s why he stayed.
"Didn’t Miss Lally like him either?”
"I don’t think she was interested one way or another.
Just indifferent. She used to go to dances and things with
him occasionally. After all, there were so few presentable
men in Burangi, and he dressed well at first, and knew how
to escort a lady. I remember we were quite impressed
by the fact that whenever he took her out he always sent
her a corsage of flowers to wear. That was a rare thing
for a man to do in those days.”
"Apparently it didn’t impress Miss Lally enough to
make her change her mind about him,” said Jancy. "I
can imagine that if she once made a decision about a person
she wouldn’t change it easily.”
"No, she wouldn’t. Eulalie has plenty of strength of
character despite her gentleness. She made up her mind
about Mr. Sheridan after the first few meetings with him.
He was very attentive to her, and many a woman would
have had her head turned by it; but she told me then that
she thought there was more behind the attentions than
affection for her, and subsequent events proved her right.”
"Why?” Jancy, scenting a story, sat down on the
small stool at the old lady’s feet. "What happened, Miss
Emmeline?”


CHAPTER XI
"Well, when Mr. Sheridan began to take my sister
out my father was alive, and to all intents and purposes
we were a fairly wealthy family. This property was one
of the best on the coast, and through good management
promised to become more valuable as time went on. So
you see, anyone could have been excused for thinking we
were a family of substance. We thought so ourselves.
We had lots of friends, of course, and the house was always
full of people and we gave lots of parties. In fact, I sup-
pose we were quite good people to know in those days.
The old lady gave a gentle smile. "Even though I say it
myself. It was a very good life while it lasted, and it was
during this period that Eulalie told me that Mr. Sheridan’s
interest was not entirely in her. Apparently she found out
somehow that he had been making enquiries about how the
money and property were to be distributed between us
girls after my father’s death, and had even tried to pump
Euphemia on the subject. This shocked her very much,
and she never went out with him again. He continued
to come to the house, though, and having failed with
Eulalie tried his wiles on both Euphemia and me.
Euphemia laughed at him, and I discouraged him at the
first attempt; but that didn’t deter him from practically
living here, and trying every way to reinstate himself in
our regard. Really, when I come to think of it, the man
was unbelievably impudent.” Miss Emmeline shook her
head at the memory, and then went on: "Well, it was
about this time that our troubles began. The first shock
was Nela.”
"Nela? Nela?” queried Jancy. "I’ve heard that name
before. Oh, yes!” Her face brightened. "Miss Lally told
me about him. He was the Aborigine who went for help
when your father was born.”
"Oh, she told you about that, did she?” smiled Miss
Emmeline.


"Yes. It was most exciting. But go on, Miss Emme-
line. What happened to him?”
"Well, we never really knew. You see, he just disap-
peared.”
"Disappeared?”
"Yes, completely.”
"Perhaps he went walkabout,” suggested Jancy.
Miss Emmeline shook her head. "I don’t think so.
He’d never done it in his life before.”
"But he must have been very old,” said Jancy, "and
I think I’ve read somewhere that old Abos., when they
feel the time approaching for their death, often go bush
to die in the place they came from.”
"You may be right, but I don’t imagine he would get
far. He was an old, old man. Besides, we were his friends,
and I know if my father had thought he wanted to go
back to the bush to die he would have had him taken
there. No, I don’t suppose we’ll ever really know what
happened, but I can’t think it was that. Eulalia did sug-
gest he might have been swept off the rocks and drowned,
because he was very fond of fishing, and that may have
happened; and nothing has ever been heard of him since.
Well, troubles never come singly, they say, and certainly
ours didn’t, for a day after Nela’s disappearance my father,
whose clarity of mind had been failing for some time,
had a terrible stroke. It utterly incapacitated him, paralys-
ing his limbs and taking away his sense and power of
speech, and the doctor said that there was no doubt he had
sustained a great shock. It was thought that disap-
pearance might have caused the stroke, and, indeed, my
father was very fond of the old Abo., but it still seemed
to me that it wasn’t important enough to cause such a
complete collapse. Well, my father lingered in this condi-
tion for three years, and I took over everything. I was
young and ignorant at that time, and imagined the pro-
perty would run itself. It didn’t, of course. Our luck
seemed to have deserted us, for those were three bad
drought years for most people on the land; and for us
they were disastrous. Even so, I thought my father’s solid
financial position would carry us over, so you can imagine


my dismay when I wrote to our Sydney solicitor for a
substantial cash advance and was told there was no money
to meet it. Thinking there was some mistake, I went up
to see him right away; but there was no mistake—my
sisters and I had just forty-eight pounds between us and
utter poverty. I was frantic with worry, and desperately
tried to raise mortgages on the property to carry us
through, but things were too far gone, and before long I had
to resort to selling the land a bit at a time to keep us going.
Soon after this my father died, which was a merciful
release for him, and when his affairs were gone into it was
found that a year before his stroke he had been withdraw-
ing large sums of money from the bank. These were
never traced, and nobody knows what he did with the
money.
"The solicitor said he might have been blackmailed,
but I couldn’t believe there was anything in my father’s
life to warrant it, and said so, whereupon he suggested
that Nela had gone off with the money. This was equally
unbelievable, and there was nothing for it but to make a
search. The solicitor agreed to make inquiries of brokers
in the city to find out if my father had been speculating
and lost his fortune that way, and I went home to tell my
sisters and search the house. Well, we combed this place
from top to bottom, looking in all the likely as well as
the unlikely places, but we found nothing—nothing at
all. And we’ve found nothing since.”
"Oh, Miss Emmeline.” Jancy pressed the wrinkled
hand that lay in the old lady’s lap. How awful for you.
What did you do?”
"There was nothing to do, dear. We’ve kept ourselves
going since by selling our land and the bits of jewellery my
mother left to us. That was another queer thing. My
father also had some of my mother’s jewellery which he
thought was too valuable for girls to wear in a country
town, so he kept it himself. He showed it to me once.
There was a beautiful dog collar of matched pearls with
a diamond clasp, and an enormous old-fashioned cabochon
ruby, I remember, among the things, but they disappeared
as well, and I think, wherever the money went, they went,
))
too.


"Did the solicitor find out whether your father had
been speculating?” asked Jancy.
"Well, he couldn’t find any traces, but apparently if
a man wants to speculate under another name he can,
and my father might have done this; it was impossible
to find out for sure.”
"I do think it was rotten luck for you all,” said
Jancy, "and you had such a lot of it.”
"Yes, it did happen all at once. But there are com-
pensations, you know. When we lost our money we found
our friends.”
"Yes, Mummy says that usually happens.”
"It does. Certainly ours rallied to us. I don’t know
what we’d have done without them. Mr. Sheridan was
the sole exception, and was, of course, conspicuous by his
absence. He never came here afterwards, although he was
always gallant, and bowed when he met us in the street.
I was rather surprised that he let his designs on our
mythical fortune be so crudely understood; but I suppose
he thought it was useless to waste time on people who
could no longer be of any use to him.”
"I must say he behaved like a stinker,” said Jancy,
indignantly. "I don’t know how you can bear to be
civil to him.”
Miss Emmeline laughed softly.
"It would have flattered him too much to let him
see we were distressed by his desertion, Jancy. I think
we were a little hurt, but we didn’t really care that much
for him, and in any case, one can’t hold a grudge against
people for forty years. It would inevitably begin to wear
a little thin.”
Jancy smiled. "Yes, I suppose it would. You’d have
to be a good hater to make it last all that time.”
As she finished speaking a knock came at the door
and Jean’s head appeared around it.
"Are you ready for dinner, Miss Emmeline?” she
asked, and seeing Jancy, "Oh, there you are, Jancy; will
you bring Miss Emmeline down?”
"Certainly,” nodded Jancy, and as Jean disappeared
she stood up and took the old lady’s arm, and together
they left the room and went downstairs.


Miss Feemy and Miss Lally were already at the table
when they entered the dining-room, and Miss Lally got
up and pulled out her elder sister’s chair.
"Did you have a nice rest, Emmeline?” she asked.
"Yes, I did, Eulalie, thank you, and also a very nice
chat with Jancy. Although,” she turned her head depre-
catingly in Jancy’s direction, "I’m afraid it was more of a
monologue than a conversation really.”
"Oh, I enjoyed it. It was awfully interesting,” Jancy
assured her.
"I was telling her about Nela and father’s illness and
those things,” Miss Emmeline explained to her sisters. She
gave a sigh. "It all seems so far away now —so remote and
unreal.”
Miss Feemy clicked her beads and bangles. "Good
Heavens! does it, Emmeline? It doesn’t to me. Why, I can
remember the dress I wore at the last big party we had
here.” She laid down her fork dreamily. "Smoke-grey
chiffon with a yellow chiffon scarf. Tod McCarthy told
me I looked like a sunlit cloud.” She rolled her eyes
heavenwards ecstatically at the recollection, and then
laughed. "Afterwards I spilt a glass of punch down his
trousers, and he was very cross about it, so I said what
did he expect from a cloud but rain.” She laughed heartily
and then said scathingly; "Sentimental nonsense! Never
could stand it.”
"Oh, Tod was very good at that kind of talk and you
liked it as much as the rest of us, Feemy,” smiled Miss
Lally. "Anyway, I remember you being very Jealous when
you heard him tell me I smelled like an English garden.
"Jealous! Of course I wasn’t jealous. I was furious,
because he’d just said the same thing to me, sitting on the
back stairs.”
"Well, that’s not to be wondered at,” returned Miss
Lally, looking suddenly very girlish and indignant, "since
you reeked of my perfume that night, having pinched
it off my dressing table.”
"Oh, well.” Miss Feemy tossed this accusation away
lightly. "Hate a man who repeats himself. Anyway, what


did he know about English gardens? He’d never been out
of Australia. Silly ass!”
"Well, that doesn’t matter; it’s a very romantic thing
to say.”
"Romantic!” erupted Miss Feemy. "You always were
a fool for romance, Lally.”
"And you’re not deceiving anybody, Feemy, so were
you —still are, in fact.”
"Fiddlesticks!” Miss Feemy clicked her beads im-
patiently and bent her rather flushed face to her plate,
while Miss Lally looked at her with an indulgent fondness.
Jancy watched them with delight. This is how they
must have behaved when they were girls, she thought,
squabbling playfully over their perfumes, their clothes and
their beaux. She tried to imagine them young again, and
managed quite well with Miss Lally. But she was quite
unable to reconstruct Miss Feemy for, however she dressed
her, there was still the angular body, the clicking beads and
the birds’ nest hair. And yet the old lady must have had
something about her once, for her eyes were quite lovely
at times, still bright and dark, with an inextinguishable
glow of youth.
Jancy suddenly thought of a way out of her difii-
culty and turned to Miss Lally. "Have you got any pictures
of yourselves when you were girls?” she asked.
"Of course, my dear, lots.”
"I’d love to look at them, if I may.”
"Would you really, Jancy?”
Miss Feemy looked at her darkly, "Not going to laugh
at us, are you? I know you young folks.”
"Oh, Miss Feemy!” Jancy was quite shocked. "I
wouldn’t dream of doing such a thing. I love looking at
old pictures. Rusty and I always look at Mrs. Mansfield’s
album when we go up there.”
"Rusty—who’s that?”
Jancy explained, and Miss Lally said: "What a pity
to call her that! If I remember, she had such pretty
names.”


"Yes,” said Jancy, "but Rusty suits her somehow.
You’ll see when she comes down.”
"Well, never mind that now,” said Miss Feemy.
"What about our pictures? Where did you put them,
Lally?”
"Me?” exclaimed Miss Lally ungrammatically. "I
haven’t had them. You had them last.”
Miss Feemy turned squarely in her chair. "Now, you
know that’s not true, Lally Fdilton. You had them to show
Mrs. Chapman.”
"Yes, but you had them after that to show Christine.”
"Oh, did I?” said Miss Feemy ingenuously, it being
obvious to everyone that she knew perfectly well that
she had. "Oh, well, never mind, I’ll look for them after
dinner. They’re sure to be somewhere about.” She changed
the subject with her usual abruptness. "What pudding
did you make, Lally?”
"A rice custard.”
Miss Feemy smote her brow with her hand. "Oh, my
prophetic soul! A rice custard —I knew it. You know I
loathe it, Lally.”
"I know nothing of the kind, Feemy.”
Miss Feemy turned a tragic face to Jancy. "When
I was a child my grandmother’s cook used to say to us at
night, 'Now what will you have for afters, Miss Feemy,
some nice hot semolina or a piece of cold rice pudding?’,
and I’ve never been able to eat rice since.”


CHAPTER XII
Miss Lally laughed. "Well, that’s a new piece of
fiction, Feemy,” she said. "I’ve never heard that before.”
Miss Feemy looked at her reproachfully. "Why, you
know it’s true, Tally!” She appealed to her elder sister,
who had been listening amusedly all through dinner.
"Isn’t it, Emmeline?”
"Well, I don’t remember cook saying that to me.
You forget I was out of the nursery long before you two;
but I do know it was told as a joke for many years.”
"And,” put in Miss Eallly, "I never remember you
refusing rice on those grounds before. I really think,
Feemy, you just this minute thought of it.”
Miss Feemy grinned at her sister. "Oh, all right,” she
said placatingly, but added gaily, "but it made a good
story, didn’t it?”
Miss Emmeline shook her head despairingly. "Feemy,
you’re the most irresponsible person I know. What will
Jancy think of you? Trying to fill her head with all these
tales.”
Miss Feemy winked at Jancy. "She’d probably think
it’s highly entertaining. I know I would. Real life is
dull, isn’t it, Jancy?”
"Well, it can stand a little embroidery at times,”
admitted Jancy. "But I shouldn’t have thought you’d
ever find life dull, Miss Feemy.”
"Oh, I don’t. But that’s only because I help it along.”
She looked at the door as Jean came in, "Oh, here’s the
revolting stuff,” she said with a grimace. "I expect I’ll
have to force some down if I’m not to starve.”
"Don’t strain yourself, dear,” said Miss Tally with
false solicitude. "You can always refuse.”
"H’m. You wouldn’t care if I never got anything
to eat, Tally. It’s very selfish of you.” She helped herself


liberally to the despised dish, and finished long before
the others, pushed her chair back.
"Aren’t you waiting for coffee, Feemy?” asked Miss
Lally.
"I’ll have it afterwards. I’ll just go and see if I can
find the album for Jancy.”
She hurried away, and Miss Emmeline said: "It’s a
wonder that girl doesn’t suffer from violent indigestion
the way she bolts her food.”
"She never has,” replied Miss Lally, "and she’s done
it all her life.”
Miss Emmeline laid down her spoon. "If you don’t
mind, Eulalie, I shan’t wait for coffee. It spoils my sleep.
And as I’m rather tired, I think I’ll go up to my room.”
Til take you, dear.”
"When you’ve finished will do; don’t hurry.”
"I’ve finished.” Miss Lally got up. "Come along.”
When Miss Emmeline had said good-night and the two
old ladies had gone, Jean came in with the coffee.
"Why, where is everybody, Jancy?” she asked.
Jancy told her, and while they were talking Miss
Feemy came back.
"Can’t find that album anywhere,” she said im-
patiently. "Jean, you haven’t moved it in your everlasting
tidying, have you?”
Jean looked affronted. "No, Miss Feemy, I haven’t,
and if I didn’t everlastingly tidy up this house would be
in a mess, I can tell you,” and with a little flounce she
left the room.
"There now, I’ve annoyed her.” Miss Feemy looked
bewildered. "What could I have said?” She looked ques-
tioningly at Jancy. "I only asked her. Oh, well.” She
raised her hands and let them fall in a resigned gesture.
"People are a mystery to me. Always taking offence at
the slightest thing. Really, you’d think they’d grow up,
wouldn’t you?” She still stared at Jancy and put a finger
thoughtfully to her lips. "Now I wonder where I could
possibly have put that album?” Fler eyes brightened.


"My knitting bag!” she said in sudden enlightenment, and
loped out of the room as Miss Lally came in.
"Good Heavens!” the latter said to Jancy, "where’s
she off to now?”
"She’s still after the album, and she just said 'My
knitting bag’ and rushed out,” replied Jancy amusedly.
"Poor Feemy, her life is spent in a perpetual hurri-
cane of movement.” Miss Lally began to pour the coffee,
and Jancy said:
"Isn’t it rather lonely for Miss Emmeline upstairs on
her own, Miss Lally?”
"No, dear, she prefers it. She says that when you’re
blind it’s rather exhausting to be with people a lot, and
so she enjoys being quiet in her room, reading.”
"Reading?”
"Yes, Braille, you know.”
"Oh, can she read Braille?”
"Yes, it was the first thing she learned after she went
blind, and it’s been a great comfort to her.”
"I wonder would she like me to read to her some-
times,” said Jancy. "Mother says I do it very soothingly.
I often read to her when she’s not feeling well.”
Miss Lally passed her some coffee. "I should think
she’d love it, Jancy. It’s sweet of you to think of it. Next
time you’re not doing anything in particular you might
suggest it to her.”
"Good, I will.”
Miss Lally went to the door and called Miss Feemy,
who came in shortly afterwards, saying:
"Can’t find that album, drat it! Lally, you must have
had it.”
"I didn’t, dear; you had it last with Christine.”
Miss Feemy sat up. "No, I didn’t. I remember now.
Terry Bentham. I showed him. Went to get a bottle of
wine. . . .” She stood up triumphantly. "I know where
it is—in the cellar!”
Miss Lally laughed. "Really, Feemy, you do leave
things in the oddest places. The cellar, indeed!”


Jancy perked up interest. "Have you got a cellar?”
"Yes,” replied Miss Lally, "and still some of my
father’s wine.”
"Oh, I would like to see it.” said Jancy. "The cellar,
I mean —not the wine. May I?”
"Come down with me, child,” invited Miss Feemy,
"and see it now.”
Jancy finished her coffee and went with Miss Feemy.
The entrance to the cellar was through a door under the
stairs and down some steps. It was cold after the warmth
of the house, and Jancy hugged herself as they descended.
"Doesn’t it strike chill, Miss Feemy?” she asked.
"Does it? I don’t notice. Wait there till I put on
the light down here. You might fall.” Jancy heard her
strike a match and saw her light a lamp which hung on the
wall at the foot of the steps. "There now! Come along.
Antediluvian light. Father never had electricity put in
down there. Can’t think why.” She took the lamp off the
wall and led Jancy into a large underground room which
held rows of wine bins. She held the lamp up. "Not much
to see, is there? Now, where did I leave that wretched
book?” She began to search in the bins, and Jancy fol-
lowed her.
"Did your grandfather do all this?” she asked.
"No, my father did it. This room was made at first
as a refuge from Aborigines. They often used to attack
the homes of settlers, you know, and grandfather had it
stocked with food in case of an emergency. There’s a
pipe running in from the underground well outside, too.
So they’d have food and water, you see, if they were
trapped.”
"It never happened, though, did it?”
"No. They were lucky.”
"Yes.” Jancy gave a little shudder and glanced round
at the cold stone walls. "I don’t think I’d like to live
down here for any length of time. It’s be too chilly. It’s
a bit eerie, too, don’t you think?”
But Miss Feemy didn’t answer. She gave a triumphant
cry.
"Got it!” She waved the album at Jancy. "Knew I’d
find it here. Come on, let’s go up and have a look at it.”


She made off at a great pace, taking the light with
her, and not unwillingly Jancy followed her out of the
dim darkness of the cellar, feeling every moment that she
would be grabbed from behind the bins by a ghostly hand.
Not for anything would she have confessed to this child-
ish terror, but as Miss Feemy hung the lantern back on the
wall she took the opportunity to run up the steps before
the lamp went out, and emerged into the lighted hall with
a feeling of vast relief. Miss Feemy was not deceived.
"Frightened, eh? I was, too. Used to run up and
down there in the dark as a kid, just to scare myself.
Silly!”
They entered the dining-room, where Miss Lally was
stacking the cups.
"So you found it,” she said. "Well, take it into the
sitting-room, Feemy. We might as well be comfortable as
we look. I’ll join you as soon as I’ve taken these out to the
kitchen.”
A little later the three of them disposed themselves
on the lounge, with Miss Feemy in the centre, and opened
the book across their knees. It was a heavy book, fatly
padded with morocco, and it had brass corners and a tiny
padlock. The worn state of the leather testified to its
familiar use as a subject of entertainment. Miss Feemy
opened it with care at the first page, which held the por-
trait of a handsome woman. Fler looks were marred,
Jancy thought, by an unbecomingly frizzed fringe. But
the two old ladies looked at "it in obvious admiration.
"That’s our Mamma,” said Miss Lally. "Wasn’t she
beautiful?”
"Very,” agreed Jancy. "But her hair ”
"Fashionable,” interrupted Miss Feemy abruptly.
"Dear Mamma.” She turned the page hurriedly. "And
this is Father.”
Jancy saw a face mainly composed of whiskers. Very
imposing whiskers they were, too, and above them a luxuri-
ous moustache and a pair of fine dark eyes.
, "Oh, Miss Feemy, you’ve got his eyes exactly!” cried
Jancy impulsively, and discovered she could have said


nothing that would more endear her to the old lady. The
dark eyes shone at her.
"How clever of you to see that,” said Miss
"He had beautiful eyes.” She looked challengingly at Miss
Lally. "And Fm the only one who’s inherited them.”
Miss Lally smiled. "Yes, your eyes are just like
Father’s, Feemy.” And immediately Jancy felt that every
time the album was opened at this page these same words
were exchanged.
The next picture was that of a tall, elegent gentleman
who was leaning nonchalantly on a very insecure-looking
pillar; on one side of him stood a palm in a pot and on
the other side a backdrop behind him showed a painted
cataract foaming over some artificial-looking rocks. He
had a thin, dreamy face, with a lock of waving black hair
falling carelessly on his forehead, and his whole aspect was
that of the tired, slightly world-weary poet.
Miss Lally sighed. "That’s Mr. Guiseppe,” she said
in reverent tones.
Miss Feemy guffawed. "You never saw anybody as
silly as Lally was about him.”
Miss Lally blushed, and to cover her embarrassment
Jancy said:
"Who was he?”
"He was our music master,” Miss Lally told her. "At
one time down here a Mrs. Mather opened a finishing
school for girls. We all went, and a lot of our friends,
too. He took music. He played the piano like an angel.”
Miss Feemy laughed heartily. "You see?” she said to
Jancy when she recovered. "She’s still potty about him.
Fool of a man. Girls ran after him. Heard he had a wife
and five children afterwards. I did laugh!”
"He was a delightful man,” insisted Miss Lally. "Very
sensitive and understanding. Fm sure he had consumption
or something, though. He was so very delicate.”
"Stuff!” exclaimed Miss Feemy sturdily. "He just put
that on. It caught unwary females like you!”
"Feemy!” Two small red spots of anger appeared on
Miss Lally’s cheeks. Her dream had been assailed. "I will


not have you speak to me like that. Mr. Guiseppe was a
fine man, and you know it. In fact, you were rather keen
on him yourself at one time.”
This roused Miss Feemy, and she shut the book with a
bang . "I seem to have heard that said before,” she said,
"and let me tell you it’s not true. Mr. Guiseppe indeed!
As if I’d bother ”
Miss Lally put a hand on her sister’s arm. Her face
had regained its accustomed colour. "Feemy, what are we
doing? Squabbling in front of Jancy! What will
think?”
Feemy looked sulky. "Never can look at this album,”
she muttered. "Always fight.”
"I’m sorry, Feemy,” said Miss Lally earnestly. "Let’s
go on with it, shall we?”
But Miss Feemy still sat stolidly, and Jancy said tact-
fully:
"We can look another day, Miss Lally, if you don't
mind. I really would like to see it, but I must write to
Mummy to-night and tell her I’ve arrived safely and all
that.”
Miss Lally showed relief. "Well, if you think so,
dear. Perhaps you had.”
"And will it be all right for Rusty to come later on?”
"Quite all right, my dear.”
Jancy said her good-nights and, leaving the sisters still
sitting unreconciled on the lounge, she went up to tell her
mother how wonderfully full of interest her holiday had
turned out to be, and to urge Rusty to come down at the
earliest possible moment to join in the fun.


CHAPTER XIII
The next day dawned bright and hot, with the
promise of further heat later on, and Jancy was all agog
at breakfast about the expedition she was to make that day
with Geoffrey and Marney.
The old ladies were very pleased that she had so
quickly found congenial friends; and Miss Lally, anxious
to make the day as pleasant as possible, packed a lunch
herself.
"There you are,” she said to Jancy. "Eve thought
of everything you might need, I think. Also, I’ve put it
in a haversack and you can pack your swimsuit and towel
on top. How’s that?”
"Wonderful!” Jancy hugged her with sudden affec-
tion. "You are nice to me.”
Miss Lally hugged her back. "I can’t imagine any-
body being otherwise to you, child.” A bell on a curly
wire above the kitchen door jangled. "There’s Geoff now,
I think. Are you sure you’ve got everything, dear?”
Jancy said she was, and they both went off to open
the door for Geoffrey.
"Good-morning,” Miss Lally,” he said cheerfully.
"I’ve come to collect your boarder.”
"Boarder, indeed! Well, she’s all ready. Now, don’t
be too venturesome to-day, will you, Geoff? Remember
I trust you to look after Jancy and bring her home without
any broken bones.”
Geoff took Jancy’s hand. "Don’t worry, Miss Lally,
I’ll look after her —if not for your sake, for mine. I’m
saving her up.”
"Whatever for?” asked Miss Lally in some surprise.
"Lor me,” he said casually, "later on.”
"Good gracious!” Miss Lally’s mouth dropped open
and, leaving her thus, Geoffrey, grinning, said good-bye


and led Jancy off down the garden. Her cheeks were as
red as a peony and she said:
"You’re an odd boy, Geoff.”
"Am I?” His eyes wrinkled with laughter. “Why?”
"Well!” Jancy was suddenly shy. "What you said
back there.”
"Oh, that! I just like to make my intentions clear,
that’s all.”
Jancy could find nothing to say to this.
"You like me, don’t you?” he asked.
"Of course.”
He tucked her hand in his arm. "Good. That’s all
I wanted to know. Everything’s settled, then.”
He took the haversack from her shoulder.
"I’ll carry this. It’s a bit heavy.”
Jancy looked at his empty hands. "But where’s your
lunch?”
"I’ve got some bread and butter in my pocket, and
I’ll have that with Marney’s stew.”
"I thought you didn’t like it.”
"I do. But I don’t tell her. I wouldn’t have anything
to tease her about.”
By this time they had reached the Kovac’s place, and
Geoff, opening the gate, gave a shrill whistle. As they
walked up the verandah steps a tall, dark-haired boy
came out.
"Hi there, Geoff!” he said. "I’m nearly ready.”
Geoff said, "Good-day, Harry. This is Jancy Mitford;
she’s coming with us to-day.”
Harry smiled. "Hello, Jancy. I’ll just get my things.”
He went back into the house and Mr. Kovac put his
head out of the window.
"Hello, Geoff!” he said. "What you do to-day?”
"Just going round the rocks in caves and things.”
"You’re caving in?” Mr. Kovac looked puzzled, and
then he nodded. "You no feel good, eh?”
"Yes, I feel perfectly all right.”
"But you say you cave in.”
"No, I didn’t. I said we’re going round the caves.”
Mr. Kovac was still bewildered. "I thought you no
feel good, like Mamma.”


"How is Mrs. Kovac to-day?” enquired Jancy. "I
was with Miss Feemy yesterday morning when you said
she was sick.”
"She better. Miss Feemy make poultry for her.”
"Poultry? Oh, a poultice! I see.” Jancy smiled. "Fm
glad she’s better.”
Mr. Kovac shook his head. "Not better all over,” he
said, waving his hands eloquently all about his body. "J ust
better some. Here!” He made a circular motion on his
stomach with a stubby finger. "Is givink great hurt yes-
terday. Is terriple—is pain. Poor Mamma. Now Miss
Feemy’s poultry for him —all gone.”
He leaned on the windowsill exhausted with this effort
of communication, and when Harry came out and said
good-bye he could only wave feebly after the three of
them as they went down the path.
"Poor old Dad!” said Harry. "I don’t think he’ll
ever master the English language. I try to teach him,
but all that happens is that I get into an argument, and
by the time he’s finished with me I don t know whether
I’m Arthur or Martha.”
They all laughed, and Geoff said:
"I don’t suppose it matters whether he learns or not.
He makes himself understood all right.”
"Yes, but he never really gets to know people,” Harry
replied, "and it makes him shy of meeting them. I believe
that when you live in a new country it’s no fun unless
you go out and see what it’s like and how its people
function. We’re Australians now and we should act like
them.”
"Perhaps you’re right,” said Geoff, "but after all it’s
fairly easy for you, you’re young and interested. He’s
not. He’s left all his friends behind him in Europe, and
life is very different here, I expect, to what it was there.
It must be difficult to change from one way of life to
another at his age.”
"I think Geoff’s right,” put in Jancy, "and I also
think that the responsibility of whether people such as you
are happy here, Harry, lies a lot with us as well as you.
If we’re helpful and sympathetic we can make things
much easier for you.”


"You certainly can.” Harry took her up eagerly. "If
you realized what I went through when I first came to
Australia! It was terrible. I was pushed about and my
accent was made fun of until it was almost more than I
could do to go to school. Later on an Aussie boy started
to stick up for me. He was bigger than I, and a good
fighter, and after that I was left alone; since then it’s
been all right, but I think it’s hard for any foreigner when
they first come here. Poor beggars, they certainly go
through it.”
Geoff nodded. "Still, it happens in every country.
It’s just the same in England. They push foreign kids
around there, too.”
"That doesn’t excuse it, Geoff,” said Jancy. "There’s
one thing though, you’ll always find there’s somebody
who’ll stop it. Like the boy who stuck up for you, Harry.
Decent people won’t stand for that sort of victimization.”
Geoff grinned. "We ought to get Jan a soap box,”
he said to Harry, "she’d make a good orator.”
Jancy laughed and lost her seriousness. "It’s just that
I feel strongly about it, that’s all,” she explained. "I hate
seeing helpless people made unhappy.”
"Good for you,” said Harry. "If there were more
who felt that way we wouldn’t have so many wars. You
people have a saying, 'Do unto others as you would they
should do unto you,’ and I don’t think there’s a better
rule to go by for anyone, do you?”
The other two were agreeing that there wasn’t when
a voice hailed them, and they looked up to see Marney
approaching.
"Gosh!” she said, "you three were very deep in con-
ference coming down the hill. That’s the third time I’ve
sung out to you. Talking your heads off, you were. What
was it all about?”
"Oh, just this and that,” Geoff said airily, not wish-
ing to prolong the discussion. But Marney was not to be
sidetracked.
"Don’t you think my feeble mind can cope with such
weighty matters as occupy yours?” she said with mock
disdain. "Jancy didn’t seem to be excluded.”


"No,” said Harry warmly, "she talked darn good
sense, too. Don’t worry, Marney, she kept the feminine
flag flying all right.”
Marney grinned at Jancy. "Then I’ll leave it to you,”
she said. "Come and help me buy some chocolate, Harry,
and then we’ll be on our way.”
The two disappeared into the shop and Jancy turned
to Geoff.
"You know, those two do like one another, don’t
they?”
"Good Lord, yes. I told you yesterday.”
"I just thought you were teasing Marney.”
"Oh no. It’s true, and they don’T mind if you say
so either.” He looked sideways at her. "And neither do
we —do we?”
Jancy looked down at her feet and said confusedly,
"I don’t know.”
"You are a shy thing, Jan. How do you get that
way?”
Jancy still held her head down. "Nobody’s ever said
the things to me you do. They make me shy.”
"You like it, don’t you?”
"In a way, yes. But it embarrasses me.”
"You’ll soon get over that. Have you any brothers?”
"No. I’m an only child.”
"Well, that explains it.”
"Oh, I don’t know that it does. Marney’s an only
child, too.”
Geoff laughed. "So she is. I hadn’t thought of that.
Well, perhaps girls are just different.”
"Like boys,” suggested Jancy mischievously.
"You win,” Geoff surrendered good-naturedly. "Here
come the others. Shake a leg there or we’re going to be
all day.”
They set off down to the beach, where they walked
along the firm sand at the water’s edge until they came
to the rocks. They were shaley rocks, and they had to be
careful that they did not break away beneath their feet
and deposit them in the rock pools. The rock pools were


a delight and they delayed their journey frequently to
search for shells in them or drop stones on the small squids
lying at the bottom of the crystal-clear water.
After half an hour of this pastime the heat became so
intense that Geoff suggested that they would be more com-
fortable in swimsuits, so, parting, they went into different
caves and changed their clothes. When they met again,
Jancy pointed out the problem of carrying their clothes.
"We’re sure to drop them,” she said, "and I don’t
relish going home in a wet swimsuit.”
"I know what we’ll do then,” said Geoff. "We’ll eat
what’s in your haversack and the clothes can go in there.”
"You won’t either,” said Marney firmly. "We can all
tie our clothes up in our towels and carry them that way.
I’m not going to be done out of a good lunch; and hurry,
because we’ll never get to South Point at this rate.”
They did as she suggested and set off afresh, although
they still loitered and were only halfway to the Point
when Geoff suddenly said:
"Isn’t that old Sheridan coming towards us up there?”
He pointed. "Queer place to meet him.”
They all looked up and saw the aged Mr. Sheridan
picking his way over the rocks. There was no mistaking
that tail-coat.
"I wonder what he’s doing here,” said Marney. "Not
the place I’d have expected him to come for a walk.”
"No. Odd, isn’t it?” Geoff said. "Oh, I don’t know,”
put in Harry. "I’ve seen him here before.”
"Have you? When?”
"Quite often. He seems to wander round here a lot.”
Oh, I know,” said Marney, "he’s looking for old
Australian stuff for his museum, lj suppose.”
"I suppose so,” said Geoff.
By this time the figure was much nearer, and it could
be seen that it was empty-handed.
"Hasn’t got much for his pains then,” said Harry.
Anyway, you d think he’d have cleaned this place out
ages ago.”


"Yes.” Marney watched the old man. "He does look
odd in those clothes, doesn’t he? And see how daintily he
picks his way.”
They watched him advance towards them; but with
his eyes on the perilous rocks in front of him he did not
see them until he was nearly on them. When he did raise
his head and discover he had company he almost lost his
balance.
"Bless my soul!” he said. "Where did you come
from?”
Nobody answered this straight away, considering it a
rather foolish question.
"We’re going for a picnic,” said Marney at last.
"Where did you come from?”
"I—er —you mean me? Why—l ” He suddenly
looked confused and irritated. "I’ve been for a walk,” he
said testily.
Marney looked fixedly at his shoes. "You want heavier
shoes for that, Mr. Sheridan.”
He swallowed his irritation and gave her an uncon-
vincing smile. "Yes, you’re right.” He looked round at the
water. "Very beautiful, the bay in the morning.”
They all continued to look at him, and, clearing his
throat, he went on: "Where are you going for your
• * -v >5
picnic?
"Oh, along the rocks and to the Point,” replied Geoff.
Mr. Sheridan blinked. "Do you think it wise to go
that way? The road at the top of the cliff is much better.
These rocks are dangerous—very dangerous. And the tide
comes up so suddenly. I don’t think I’d go along here if
I were you. Lots of people have been drowned off here.
Why don’t you come back with me and go the other
way?”
Marney smiled sweetly. "Because we don’t want to,”
she said. "It’s much more fun this way. The tide and
the dangerous rocks didn’t put you off, apparently.”
He went very red and said angrily: "You’re an impu-
dent child, and I shall tell your stepmother. All right, go
along the rocks and drown yourselves if you must. I
don’t care.” And with a glare for all four of them he
stamped off, almost capsizing in his haste.


CHAPTER XIV
Marney looked after him contemptuously, and Harry
said: "You were a bit rude, Marney.”
Marney’s lips tightened. "I am always rude to that
old man on principle, and I shall continue to be so —any
objection?”
Harry saw the glint in her eye and laughed. "All right,
but don’t take it out on me. I haven’t done anything.”
"You took it upon yourself to criticize me,” she said
tartly, "and I don’t like it.”
"Now, now,” put in Geoff pacifically, "don’t let the
old codger spoil our day. Bit of a misfortune meeting
him anyway, but we can’t let it spoil everything.”
"No.” Jancy spoke up. "Come on, Marney. Forget
it. He’s gone now. But I’ll tell you one thing: he certainly
was anxious that we didn’t go along here.”
The boys looked at one another. "By Jiminy,” said
Geoff, "you’re right.”
"She is, you know,” agreed Harry.
"I wonder why he was keen to stop us,” said Marney,
forgetting her grievances.
"There must be a reason,” replied Jancy. "Do you
think he’s got some of his museum treasures stored along
here somewhere, and was frightened we’d pinch them?”
"Could be,” Geoff nodded. "Let’s go and see.” He
scanned the rocks. "Look, you can follow his tracks where
the rock shale has broken away. Let’s trail him.”
With Geoff leading, they set off to follow the trail of
broken shale. It led them beyond the point where they
had first seen the old man, and then the rocks gave way
to sand, and the imprint of his feet could be plainly seen
going into a cave.
They followed under the overhang of rock until it
grew too dark to see where they led.


"Darn it,” said Geoff, "We’ve lost the track now.”
"No we haven't,” Harry said. "I’ve got a torch. I’ll
have to go back to the light to find it, though; it’s in the
pocket of my shorts in the towel.”
He turned to go, but Geoff stopped him. "Wait a
minute. Why don’t you three go back and leave your
clothes and things at the entrance? You can take mine,
too, and I’ll stay here, because we’ll lose the trail if I
don’t.”
"All right. Give me your towel then,” said Jancy.
"But look, if this cave goes in a long way and branches off
or anything, how are we going to get out again? We ought
to leave a trail behind us. Paper or something.”
"That’s right. But I haven’t anything.”
"Neither have we,” said Marney and Harry.
There was a silence, and Geoff said in a disappointed
voice, "Well, that fixes that.”
"Not quite,” cried Jancy. "We’ve all got sandwiches
or something—there’s paper round mine—is there round
yours?”
"Good old Jan,” crowed Geoff. "She’s saved the day.
Back you all go and get the paper, then.”
The three of them returned and found that they all
had paper around their food; and, as Marney had hers in
a little picnic basket, they unwrapped the bread and,
regardless of the freshness of the food, packed it paperless
in the basket. Armed with the paper and the torch, they
re-joined Geoff, who identified his whereabouts by calling
out, and when they reached him he asked eagerly:
"Did you get any paper?”
"Yes, there’s plenty here,” said Jancy.
"All right. Now, Harry, you go first with the torch
•the two girls can follow, and I’ll bring up the rear
and drop the paper as I go.”
The little cavalcade started off, Harry shining the
torch all around as he went. It was not a very large cave
inside, and a single tunnel led out of it at the inner end.
They made certain that Mr. Sheridan’s hoard was not
stored in the main cave, and then entered the tunnel. It


was slow going, since Harry had to light his own wa*y and
then shine the torch back to help the others; but they
covered quite a distance before Harry said, "There’s an-
other tunnel going off to the side here.”
They all stopped. "Which will we take?” said
Marney.
"Can you still see the footprints?” asked Jancy
"No, the sand’s too soft.” Harry shone the torch
down the side tunnel. "It looks as though people have
been walking in both tunnels, though.”
"Well, let’s keep on the one we’re in,” suggested Geoff.
"We can explore the other one another day.”
"Okay.” Harry moved on again, and they followed
him for about half an hour until Marney said:
"I don’t know about anyone else, but I’m tired of this
and we don’t seem to be getting anywhere.”
"Oh, don’t give up, Marney,” begged Jancy. "Just
try a bit longer.”
"But it’s so dull,” said Marney. "Just walking in the
dark.”
Harry stopped. "Look!” he said. "That’s the fourth
time I’ve seen that.” He shone the torch on the side
wall. "Someone’s been digging along here.”
"That’s old Sheridan, I bet,” stated Geoff. "Wonder
what he’d want here? There’s no Abo.’s kitchen or any-
thing.”
"There must be something,” said Jancy, "and I bet
it’s important. Otherwise why did he try so hard to stop
us coming way?”
"That’s right.” Geoff backed her up. "Besides, I
think now we’ve got this far we might as well see where
the tunnel ends.”
"I don’t know about that,” said Harry. "This torch
won’t last too long, and we’ve got to get out again. I’ve
been thinking, why don’t we go back now and come again
this afternoon. We can all bring torches from home, and
with four to draw on we’ll be safe, no matter how far the
tunnel goes.”


"Well, that’s sensible,” said Geoff. "I’m not keen on
getting back without a torch; it’d take us all day groping
along. Let’s give it up now, then, and come back later.
Everybody agree?”
Everybody did agree, and without more ado they
retraced their steps to the main cave. The girls heaved a
sigh of relief as they emerged into the scorching sunlight
once again.
"Gosh!” said Jancy, "I was terrified that torch battery
would go flat on the way out, weren’t you, Marney?”
She nodded. "I couldn’t think of anything else.”
"Oh, we’d have got out all right if it had,” said Harry
reassuringly. "It would have taken longer, that’s all.”
"Just the same I wouldn’t have liked it,” said Jancy,
and shuddered. "There’s something about dark caves that
gets me.”
"Me, too. Still, it was cool in there, and it’s hotter
than ever out here.” Marney picked up her basket. "I’ll
tell you something. I’m absolutely ravenous. If I don’t
eat soon I’ll die.” She suddenly gave a cry of dismay. "Oh,
there’s no wood here. What about my stew?”
The boys’ faces fell. "Oh, heck!” exploded Harry.
"I was looking forward to that.”
"Well,” put in Jancy, "from what Miss Tally packed
for my lunch I should think we could all have enough.
Let’s open it up and see.”
They opened the basket, and when the food was
pooled it was obvious there would be ample for everybody.
Marney helped herself straight away to some of Miss
Tally’s sandwiches.
"Um,” she said, "scrumptious! Nearly as good as my
stew. Nearly, but not quite.”
Geoff took a sandwich and chewed it thoughtfully.
"You know,” he said after a while, "I’ve been thinking.
"What with?” scoffed Marney.
"That’s enough from you, young ’un,” grinned Geoff.
"As I said before, I’ve been thinking that if we go back
for the torches to-day it’ll look a bit funny. Old Sheridan
will probably be at your house, Marney, and it might set


him wondering. I think it would be better if we went to
the Point this afternoon and came back here to-morrow.
After all, by the time we go home and get back it’ll be
getting late.” He looked at his wrist watch. “It’s after
one now; but if we leave it we’ll have all day to-morrow.”
I m easy,” said Marney amiably. "That suits my lazy
nature to a T. It’s too hot to think of walking about
much.”
"Yes, I think it’s best, too,” nodded Jancy, and Harry
agreed with her.
"Good! Then say we go up to the Point and finish
the day there.” He turned to Jancy. "There’s a wonderful
rock pool to swim in and ”
"And we can have my stew,” interrupted Marney,
"for afternoon tea.”
"Don’t you think of anything but your stomach?”
asked Geoff wearily.
Marney looked at him, considering the question seri-
ously, and then said: "Yes, I believe I do occasionally—
but not often.”
"Not ever, I’d say.”
Marney ignored this, and said to Jancy, "Tell Miss
Lally from me her sandwiches are delicious.” She looked at
the rifled basket and took the last one. "I mean, were
delicious.”
"Greedy!” reproved Geoff. "Weren’t you always told
it was polite to leave something on the plate?”
Marney laughed. "I would be a fool with you hungry
heathens about. No, get in for your cut is my motto.
It’s a good Australian custom, and I follow it.”
"So I see,” said Geoff, looking ruefully at the basket.
"You’ve certainly devastated that little lot. I got hardly
any.”
"Well, you shouldn’t talk so much. Harry doesn’t
talk, so he doesn’t go hungry. Do you, Harry?”
"No. Where I come from you eat first —when you
can get it, of course.”
Jancy looked horrified. "Do you mean you went
hungry in your own country?”


He nodded. "Millions did in Europe. I’ve seen the
children at my own school with their stomachs distended
with hunger. Mine was the same.” He shrugged. "But
why should we talk about such things here?”
"Yes, why should we?” said Marney. "Who wants this
fruit? We can eat it as we go to the Point. Here, catch!”
She threw them each a piece of fruit, and then, cramming
Jancy’s and her towels and clothes into the picnic basket,
closed it down. "There! Let’s go. This heat is killing me,
and I’m dying for a swim.”
They made quicker progress than they had done in
the morning, and got to the Point about half past two.
Marney insisted that everybody collect wood and help her
put on the stew before they had their swim, and when this
was done they went down together. The pool was empty
of people, and owing to the morning’s tide was full of
fresh green water.
Jancy dived in with pleasure. One of her favourite
dreams was that she was diving into such clean green
water as this, and the actuality was almost more delightful
than the dream.
After their swim they lay on the rocks, basking in the
sun, until, drunk with warmth, they dragged themselves
back to where the stew was simmering on the embers of
the fire.
Jancy had watched Marney making this concoction
and had not been impressed. Various odds and ends of
vegetables had gone into a billy along with a few pieces
of meat, and the lot had been moistened by a generous
helping of sea water. They seemed to Jancy hardly the
ingredients for a successful stew.
Marney dished out liberally on to some tin plates,
and Jancy, picking hers up, applied her nose to it first.
"Well, it smells all right,” she said dubiously.
Marney pretended indignation. "Listen to her! About
my chef d’oeuvre! I’ve a good mind not to let you have
any.
Jancy tasted it and was surprised. It tasted very well.
"Why, it’s nice!” she said in the greatest astonishment.


Marney surveyed her hopelessly. "I give you up, my
girl. Is that the way you behave at the Hiltons? Are you
astonished when their dinner turns out to be nice, and do
you say so? No! Of course you don’t; it’s only poor old
Marney as is put upon.” She raised her eyes dramatically.
"Heaven will revenge this insult!”
Harry laughed. "You talk too much, Marney. You’ll
miss your second helping.”
Oh, no, don’t be pigs!” Marney applied herself to
the stew, and they all ate in appreciative silence for a
while, after which Jancy put down her plate, empty.
"Well, Marney, come back all I said. It was really
good,” she said with a smile.
"There!” Marney was triumphant. "Virtue vindi-
cated. I knew it had to come. The world might scorn
and revile at first, but true worth is recognized.”
Geoff pushed her head. "Can it, Marney! She’s awful
when she gets in this mood,” he said to Jancy; "the only
thing to do is damp her ardour.” And he and Harry,
catching hold of either end of the hapless Marney, carried
her down to the pool, amid screams of protest.


CHAPTER XV
When Marney’s ardour was sufficiently damped and
she had taken her revenge on her persecutors by pushing
them in the pool, the four lay in the shade of the rocks
to dry off. The sun, a round red ball, was now sliding
down the sky towards the west, but the air was still oppres-
sively hot, and Jancy sat up and shook herself.
"Well, I don’t know about you three, but I’m going
to dress. Have you got the time, Geoff?”
He nodded and groped in the pocket of his shorts,
which were lying nearby, for his watch. "It’s just after
five. I suppose we ought to be getting back.”
Marney stretched luxuriously. "I could lie here
forever. It’s too hot to move.”
her with a toe. "Lazy thing. Come
on, let’s go and dress.” She looked at Geoff. "Where do
we go, Geoff?”
"Oh, behind that rock. Harry and I’ll change after-
wards.”
Presently they were all dressed and ready to set off
on the return journey.
"I think it would be better,” said Harry, "if we go
back by the road, along the top of the cliffs. I should have
been home earlier than this and it’s quicker that way.
What do you say?”
Everybody said they thought it a good idea, and so
they climbed the rocks and the long, grassy hill to the
top. The view was enchanting from there, for the coast
stretched away on either side as far as the eye could see,
and below them the Pacific lay just like wrinkled green
silk.
"Isn’t it wonderful?” said Jancy. "Just like seeing
it from the air. It’s fascinating.”
Marney nodded carelessly. "Yes, it is pretty good.
But I suppose I’m used to it. I don’t really see it any


more. Look!” She pointed along the cliff. "I bet that’s
Jerry Bentham down there.”
"Yes, it is,” said Geoff, following the direction of her
finger. "He’s painting. I can see his easel.”
"There’s someone with him, too,” said Marney.
"Wonder who it could be? Don’t know who else paints
around here.”
"Well, let’s go and see what he’s doing. Come on, I’ll
race you.”
They chased one another along the cliff edge, and
after a long run reached within hailing distance of the
artist.
"Coo-ee!” cried Marney and stopped. "Why, that’s
Godfrey with him.” She spoke in the utmost astonish-
ment.
Geoff slowed down to a walk. "Gosh! so it is. Can
you beat that?”
As they approached, Godfrey put down the small
board he was working on and stared at them belligerently.
"What do you want?” he demanded.
Geoff grinned. "Just come to say 'Hello,’ Huck, and
you needn’t hide what you’ve done. We won’t look.”
"No, they won’t look, Godfrey,” Jerry Bentham con-
firmed. "I’ve trained them well. They never look unless
I say they can.”
He looked at Geoff. "We’re just having a go at the
bay to see what we can get. If you don’t mind we’d like
to get on with it while the light lasts. You can see it
when it’s finished.”
"Okay.” Geoff took the dismissal good-naturedly. He
was used to Jerry and knew that he would allow nothing
and nobody to interfere with his work. "We’ll be on our
way then.” He jerked his head at his companions. "Let’s
go.” He waved to the painters. "See you later.”
The four went off happily enough.
"I say,” said Marney, "it’s pretty good if Jerry’s
taken Godfrey up, isn’t it, Geoff?”
"It’s more than that,” said Geoff. "It’s miraculous.
I wonder how Jerry did it?”


"Well, I thought he might manage it,” said Jancy,
"after the way he talked at tennis the other afternoon,
didn’t you, Marney?”
"Yes, but I didn’t dream he’d do it so quickly. In
fact, I doubted whether he could do it at all. You know
what Godfrey is.” She glanced at Geoff. "Saving your
presence, Geoff.”
"Oh, don’t mind me. I’ve got no illusions about
Huck. I only hope Jerry’s treatment works.”
"So do I,” said Marney, "for all our sakes. Although
I can’t imagine anyone making an artist out of Godfrey.”
"I don’t know about that,” said Geoff. "He’s always
been interested in drawing and playing round with paint,
though he does it in fits and starts; but then, he never
sticks at anything for long anyway. Just let’s keep our
fingers crossed and hope this lasts.”
They were now approaching the outskirts of the town,
and Harry said: "What time are we meeting in the morn-
ing? Same as to-day?”
"Yes,” replied Geoff. "We’ll meet the same way,
too. I’ll pick Jancy up first. Is that all right with you,
Jan?”
"Perfectly all right,” said Jancy, as they turned into
the tiny main street. "I’ll be ready.”
"And I’ll be at the shop,” put in Marney, "and
ix j j
She stopped suddenly. "Oh, heck! Look who’s coming
down the street.”
They all looked up to see Mr. Sheridan with a woman
on his arm walking towards them. She was a fairly tall
woman, dark and very good-looking, and she looked gay
and young in an outfit of dashing beach clothes.
"Your stepmother!” said Harry.
"Yes,” muttered Marney. "Now I’m for it.” She
assumed an impudent don’t-care expression. "Let her do
her worst. She can’t hurt me.”
The couple bore down on them and came to a stop.
"Ah! there you are, Marney.” Mrs. Browne looked
at her stepdaughter with hard eyes that took in the whole
of her crumpled appearance. "You do look a sight, I


must say. You might have slept in those clothes.” Marney
stared back at her with eyes that were equally hard.
"Is that all you have to say?” she asked impudently.
Mrs. Browne’s lips tightened. "No! It isn’t all I
have to say. There’s something else. Mr. Sheridan tells
me you were extremely rude to him this morning. Were
you?”
Four pairs of eyes transferred themselves from the
woman to the foppish old gentleman, and there was no
doubt of the opinion reflected in them. They were unani-
mously in favour of his extermination. He met their
combined gaze for a moment, and then his eyes fell and
he took Mrs. Browne’s arm.
"Never mind, my dear, about the rudeness. It’s the
prerogative of young people nowadays. Good manners are
a thing of the past. Just forget it.”
"Forget it, Mr. Sheridan?” Mrs. Browne’s eyebrows
rose. "I certainly shall not! While Marney is in my care
she can’t go about insulting my friends. The idea! Mar-
ney, I wish you to apologize to Mr. Sheridan at once.”
Marney grinned defiantly. "Do you?” she asked
tantalizingly.
"Yes, immediately.” Mrs. Browne’s mouth was a thin
red line.
Marney lost her grin. "I’ll apologize to Mr. Sheridan
if you’ll apologize to my friends for making them uncom-
fortable by creating a scene in the street. Now, what
about it?”
Mrs. Brown swallowed with difficulty. "I can see
you’re determined to be unpleasant, Marney. Very well
then, go home. I’ll see you when I get back.” She took
the old man’s arm. "Come along, Mr. Sheridan. I’m sorry
you have been affronted in this way,” she said, and without
glancing at any of the young people she walked on down
the pavement with her companion.
Marney gazed after her with hot, sullen eyes. "That
woman always brings the worst out in me,” she said slowly,
and then to the others, "Bad luck you were exposed to
that, but I couldn’t let her put it over me.”


"Don’t worry about us, Marney,” said Harry. "We
don’t care. But I’m afraid you’ve laid up trouble for
yourself at home.”
"Oh, that!” Marney was contemptuous. "There’s
nothing she can do that will hurt me. I’m getting big
enough to give as good as I get.” She gestured impatiently.
"Anyway, let’s forget her, there are nicer things to think
about in life.”
They started to talk of other things, and when they
reached Marney’s turn-off Harry said: "I’ll go up with
Marney, Geoff, and we’ll see you in the morning.”
They said their good-byes and separated, and as Geoff
and Jancy walked up the main street, which still shim-
mered in the excessive heat, she said: "You know, Geoff,
I just couldn’t bear to live a life like Marney’s.”
"No, it’s pretty rotten for her,” agreed Geoff.
"She told me her stepmother wasn’t bad, but I think
she s horrible. Fancy her trying to humiliate Marney in
front of us like that. Wasn’t it awful?”
"Oh, she’s always doing that. I’ve got used to it now.”
"I’d never get used to it,” said Jancy vehemently.
"I could have fallen through the pavement when she asked
Marney to apologize.”
"Yes, she’s a fool of a woman,” said Geoff, "but also
I can’t help thinking Marney brings it on herself a bit.”
"How do you mean?”
"Well, she goes round with a chip on her shoulder,
you know. Look how she snapped at Harry for criticizing
her.”
Yes, Jancy nodded, "but you must admit life’s not
easy for her, Geoff.”
"I do. But I think she makes it harder. She deliber-
ately goads her stepmother at times, and the woman’s bad
enough without being spurred on. I think she makes
a mistake there.”
"Yes, but what is one to do?” Jancy was concerned.
"You either sit down under it or you do what Marney’s
doing.”


"You could ignore it.”
Jancy looked at him. "Could you? Do you really
think you can live with that sort of thing and ignore it,
Geoff?”
"I’d try to.”
"You might. But let me tell you it’s not so easy. I
had the same problem once, when I lived with my Aunt,
and I lay down under it, and I’d have been much better
off if I hadn’t.”
"You had the problem?” said Geoff in some surprise.
"You look as if you’d never known what the word meant.”
"Well, I did and I do,” said Jancy, and went on to
tell him of her life with her aunt and her subsequent
rescue by Captain Richmond. This, of course, led to a
description of that whole delightful family in general and
of Rusty in particular, and Geoffrey was made to realize
the pleasure he would experience when he met that re-
doubtable young lady.
"Yes,” he said, "I’ve no doubt I’ll be knocked all of a
heap, as they say, but I’m not so good at anticipating
my pleasures, so let’s get back to the subject in hand ”
"And that is?” asked Jancy, who had lost track of
the previous conversation in her reminiscences.
"Why, Marney, silly!”
"Oh, yes; well, what about her?”
"When we got sidetracked,” said Geoff, "I was going
to ask you whether you’d have behaved as Marney did
this afternoon. Would you?”
Jancy frowned. "I don’t think that’s a fair question,
Geoff. I’m not Marney.”
"I never said you were. I just asked if you would
have spoken as Marney did.”
Jancy gave this some thought and said eventually,
"No, I don’t think I would, but,” she added hastily, "I’m
not criticizing her. It’s just that it isn’t my nature to
do that.”
"What would you have done?”
Jancy laughed in a bothered sort of way. "You’re
badgering me, Geoff. You see, I wouldn’t have spoken


to Mr. Sheridan that way this morning in the first place,
so the little business in the street would naturally not
have arisen.”
"That’s not answering my question,” persisted Geoff.
"Gosh! you hang on, don’t you?” said Jancy.
"Yes, I want to know.”
"Well, I think if my stepmother had approached me
like that I’d have said that I’d rather talk about it at home
if she didn’t mind, and I think I’d have walked on.”
Geoff nodded vigorously. "Yes, that’s what I’d have
done, too. I’m glad that’s how you feel.”
"Mind you,” said Jancy with a twinkle, "I don’t know
what I’d do if she stood in front of me and refused to
let me go, and said 'Stand and deliver’ or something.”
"Well, you could always duck and run.”
"Highly undignified at my advanced age,” laughed
Jancy. "No, I’d probably just burst into tears and make
a complete fool of myself. Oh, I don’t know. You can’t
tell what you’d do in any given circumstances really. You
only think you’d do a certain thing, but if you didn’t have
time to think you’d probably do something just as silly
as Marney did.”
"Quite true,” agreed Geoff, and shook his head at her
wonderingly. "You’re a wise little thing for your age,
aren’t you?”
Jancy laughed. "Am I? I wouldn’t know.”


CHAPTER XVI
When Jancy and Geoff reached the Hiltons they were
hot and tired after their long day and the climb up the hill
from the town, and Miss Lally insisted that they have a
cool drink before Geoff continued on his way home.
"I don’t know how you could stay out in this heat,”
she said, handing them each a glass. "It’s been a scorcher
to-day; it’s a wonder you’re not burned to a crisp.”
They grinned at her and drank the iced lemonade
thankfully, and when Geoff had gone Jancy went up to
have a shower and change her clothes. Much refreshed, she
came down half an hour or so later, and from the stairs
heard the gentle boom of a male voice issuing from the
sitting-room. As she had guessed, it was Jerry Bentham.
He had a painting propped against the back of a chair
and was showing it to Miss Lally and Miss Feemy.
"Yes, it’s for you, Ma’am,” he was saying to Miss
Lally, mopping his perspiring brow. "You’ve always
wanted a painting of the bay, haven’t you?”
"Phave indeed.” Miss Lally’s face expressed incredu-
lous delight. "But I never expected you to give it to me.
You can’t afford to do paintings for nothing, you know.”
He beamed at her. "Ah! this one I did for love,
Ma’am. And it’s yours, with my compliments.”
"Really? I don’t know what to say. It’s such a
wonderful present. I can’t tell you how I appreciate it.”
"Then don’t try,” he advised her. "I’ll bring along a
frame to-morrow. I’ve got one to fit it.”
Miss Lally caught sight of Jancy, who had been stand-
ing in the door.
"My dear, come and look at what Jerry’s given me,”
she said. "Isn’t it beautiful? I’m so excited about it.”
Jancy duly admired the picture and told how she had
seen the artist doing it. "And what about Godfrey?” she
asked. "How did he get on with his painting, Mr. Ben-
tham?”


The two old ladies looked surprised. "Why, was he
painting?” said Miss Lally.
"He was,” replied the big man, "and he made a good
fist of it, too.”
"Bless my soul! I’d never have thought it,” said
Miss Lally. "I wouldn’t expect him to have the patience.”
"Well, he has.” The artist sat down. "The lad’s got
talent, Miss Lally. I think I’ve found an interest for him
that will help to re-direct those destructive energies you
were talking about.”
Miss Lally clasped her hands. "Oh, I hope you have,
Jerry,” she said earnestly. "But however did you manage
it?”
"No trouble at all, really,” he answered. "I was going
out painting, and had all my gear, and met young Godfrey.
He seemed to be at a loose end, and I asked him if he’d
like to come with me and try his hand at a picture. He
was sullen, as usual, but I saw a spark of interest in his
eyes and said, 'l’ve got enough paint and paper for both
of us, and I could give you a few pointers. Still, don’t
come if you don’t want to. I just thought I’d mention it,’
and I walked off. At first I thought he’d turned the offer
down, but after I’d set my easel up I found he’d followed
me, and he came along and stood right behind me. I
clipped some paper on a board and said to him, 'I can’t
paint with an audience in the rear, Godfrey. Amuse your-
self with this and let me get on.’ He sat down beside me,
and after putting a watercolour box, some brushes and a
bottle of water beside him I went on with my work. I
took no notice of him for a long time, and at last he
said grudgingly, 'Look, I’ve got stuck here. What do I
do?’ I showed him and told him a little about how to drop
the paint on, and forgot about him for the rest of the
afternoon. When I did come to earth I found he had
turned out quite a creditable little sketch, and when I told
him so he looked as if I’d given him a thousand pounds.
Soon afterwards you and his brother came along, Jancy,
and after that he didn’t do any more. When you were out
of sight he just said he was fed up with sitting, and went
off.”


"Hm!” snorted Miss Feemy. "No thanks for your
kindness and generosity to him, of course.”
"I didn’t expect it, Ma’am, and it doesn’t worry me
either. All I want is to interest the boy, and I think I
have. I hope so.” He beamed, and heaved his huge form
out of the chair. "We can only wait and see.” He went
and took Miss Lally’s hand. "I must be off now, Ma’am.
It’s getting late.”
"Oh, don’t go!” begged Miss Lally. "Stay and have
same dinner with us. We’d love to have you, wouldn’t we,
Feemy?”
"Of course.” Miss Feemy, who had been unusually
silent and subdued up to now, gave a guffaw. "That is if
you don’t eat too much. We only cater for female appe-
tites here.”
Miss Lally was indignant. "Really, Feemy, you are
the limit. Don’t pay any attention to her, Jerry, there’s
plenty to eat. You will stay, won’t you?”
"Well, that’s very nice of you,” he beamed. "It
would be a pleasure. If I’m not too much of a nuisance.”
"Of course you’re not. I’ll just go and tell Jean.”
Miss Lally left the room, and Miss Feemy said: "Just
as well we don’t dress for dinner, Jerry, or you wouldn’t
be able to stay. Funny how fashions change. My mother
and father always dressed for dinner from the time they
first lived here. It was common then, but few people do
it now.”
"Hardly anyone, I should think.” The big man sat
down. "And a good thing, too, in my opinion. Clothes
have become much more sensible in our time, thank the
Lord.” He relaxed into the chair and, taking out his hand-
kerchief, dried the back of his neck. "It’s certainly hot
to-night. Now, where was I? Oh, yes; I wanted to tell
you that I’ve been doing a series of historical illustrations
lately, and when you look up references for the costume
you realize how thankful we should be that we’re so com-
fortably clothed to-day. I was reading in an old book
yesterday that gentlemen in the reign of Charles the First
had their whiskers starched and curled.”


Jancy laughed. "It’s always seemed to me that the
men of those times were much more vain than the women.”
"Well, I don’t know, Jancy. You know, the mouse-
trap was first invented in the early eighteenth century,
and you know why?”
"To catch mice, I suppose,” said Jancy mischievi-
ously.
Jerry laughed. "Naturally. But it was first made to
the order of a lady of the French court. She used to wear
her hair in one of those enormous head-dresses which
were formed by putting a tall cage on the head and comb-
ing the long hair over it. Of course, the natural hair was
supplemented by false hair, but it left the inside of the
cage empty. Now, these head-dresses were so elaborate
and took so long to arrange that they were only done once
every month or so, and tidied up in between times, and
the ladies had to be very careful when in bed that they
didn’t roll about too much and upset the edifice. Well,
this French lady was very careful, so careful that a mouse,
looking for a place to make a nest, invaded her head-dress
and set up house there. It was only discovered when the
lady next went to have her hair done. You can imagine
her consternation at the discovery, and to prevent it hap-
pening again she asked her husband to try and invent
something to discourage the little rodent. He did, and
later presented her with a gold-mounted mousetrap, which
she wore in her head-dress forever afterwards.”
The three of them laughed heartily at this story, and
Jancy begged for more. Nothing loth, Jerry continued.
"Yes, Fashion is a curious thing. A new fashion has often
been invented to hide a deformity, you know. For in-
stance, patches—you’ve seen those small black spots on
the face? Well, in the reign of Edward VI a lady wore
one to cover a wart on her chin, and in no time they
became the rage. Charles VII of France had spindly legs,
so he wore a long, full-bottomed coat, and was copied by
the court. Francis the First cut his hair short because of a
head-wound, and short hair was worn by everybody for
years afterwards. Oh, there are hundreds of examples.
But the silliest one, I think, was originated by Isabella of
Bavaria. She vowed during one of the Continental wars


that she would not change her linen until Ostend was
taken. This siege, unluckily for her comfort, lasted three
years, and the supposed colour of her linen, a sort of dingy
whitish yellow, became fashionably known as Isabella
Yellow.”
"How ridiculous!” said Jancy. "They must have
been crazy.”
"No, only foolish, I think. 'Other times, other man-
ners,’ the French say tolerantly. I find it very interesting
to know what my forebears did. At one time, as Jancy
points out, the men made peacocks of themselves more
than the women. They painted their faces with cosmetics
and wore the most ridiculous clothes. Look at the fashions
of Henry VIII’s reign; they’re fantastic. Although I think
Queen Elizabeth’s was the most grotesque. When you look
at portraits of her and see that wire ruff rising from the
back of her head, that tight-laced bodice so long as to
almost reach to her knees, that large hooped skirt that
makes her look as if she were standing in a capacious
tub; why, the poor women must have been in perpetual
agony. I read that when she died she left three thousand
of these monstrous costumes hanging in her cupboards.”
"Three thousand dresses!” exclaimed Jancy. "Why,
she couldn’t wear them all, surely?”
"She’d only wear them each once, I suppose,” said
Jerry. "After all, the Queen was the leader of fashion
and couldn’t be seen twice in the same clothes.”
"Well, I’m just very glad I didn’t live then,” said
Jancy thankfully. "It must have been a real trial.” She
stood up as the door opened and Miss Lally came in, leading
Miss Emmeline.
"Oh, Miss Emmeline, this is a pleasure!” said the big
artist, getting to his feet. "I thought I wasn’t going to
see you.”
Miss Emmeline smiled as he took her hand. "I always
come down for dinner, Jeremy, and I always like to see
you.”
"It’s kind of you to say so, Ma’am. Now, which is
your chair?”


"Near the fire place, Jeremy.” She settled herself in
her usual seat. "And what have you all been talking
about?”
"Fashions,” said Jancy promptly. "Mr. Bentham’s
been telling us about clothes in the olden days.”
"That must have been interesting,” said Miss Emme-
line. "And now, Jeremy, did you examine that old canvas
I gave you to look at?”
"Yes, Ma’am, I did.”
"Is it a Turner, as Lally thought?”
"No, Ma’am. I’m sorry. It’s a copy.”
Her face fell. "Then it’s not saleable.”
"No.”
Miss Emmeline sighed. "I hoped we might raise some
money by it.”
"So did I, Ma’am, but it’s not good enough even as a
copy. If it was, we might have got a buy.”
"Why, people don’t buy copies, do they?”
Jerry chuckled. "They often have. There have been
several famous cases. I guarantee that lots of people who
have paid the price of an original are only in possession of
a copy. It used to be a regular business once. Mind you,
the artist didn’t always know. There’s a famous story
about an artist called Mignard. He painted a Madonna
in the style of Raphael and a dealer sold it as an original
to an Italian nobleman. It was first to be shown at a
gathering of critics, and on that afternoon Mignard, who
was a protege of the nobleman, was there. The critics
hailed the picture as a masterpiece, and Mignard didn’t
know what to do. Should he confess to the assembly
that he was the painter, and make himself a swindler and
them fools, or should he keep quiet? He found a com-
promise, and going up to the picture said, 'This picture,
I think, is not in the best manner of Raphael.’ The critics
cried him down unanimously and warmly upheld their
opinion that it was a Raphael, and in his very best manner.
"Mignard then made his decision. T will wager three
hundred louis, gentlemen,’ he said loudly, 'that this picture
is not a Raphael.’


"The dispute now became violent, and the critics,
after a hasty conference between themselves, decided to
accept the wager. But Mignard could not deceive his
friend.
" 'No, my friends,’ he told them, T will not take a bet
when I am certain to win.’ He turned to the nobleman.
'Sir, the money which you paid for this picture shall be
returned. It is not a Raphael. It is mine.
"The critics refused to believe him, and accused
Mignard of being up to some trick to acquire the picture
for himself. He appealed to the nobleman to take his
word, but that unfortunate gentleman, torn between the
opinion of an artist and that of a group of world-famous
critics, could not make up his mind. Then Mignard said,
'Let a dish of oil and turpentine be brought, and a small
cloth.’ He turned to the critics. .'As a proof that I painted
this canvas, gentlemen, I’ll tell you that it was an old one
already used. Beneath the Madonna you will find a Car-
dinal in a red hat.’
"The bowl was brought, and dipping the cloth in the
dish the artist rubbed at the canvas until the red hat showed
underneath. When it was easily recognizable, he stood
away. 'There, gentlemen, I didn’t want to contradict
you,’ he said, 'but I couldn’t see the pocket of my patron
plundered to enrich a dealer.’ ” Jerry laughed. ' Of course,
that’s a story about an honest artist. I’m bound to flatter
my profession.”
"Very interesting,” said Miss Emmeline, "and I don’t
believe a real artist would be dishonest; he wouldn’t care
enough about money, I should think. They’re really so
one-track-minded, aren’t they?”
"That’s true,” said Miss Lally, "and I hate to inter-
rupt, but dinner’s ready.”
Jancy moved alongside Jerry. "I hope you’ll tell us
some more tales after dinner,” she said eagerly, and the
story-teller smiled.
"Who wouldn’t, with such an audience?” he said, and,
taking Miss Emmeline’s arm, led the way to the dining-
room.


CHAPTER XVII
Jerry put Miss Emmeline in her chair at the head
of the table and, as she sat down, she said:
"Eulalie, please hand me my fan, will you? I left it
on the sideboard, I think.” She turned to the others.
"Has anyone noticed how oppressive the heat has sud-
denly become, or am I imagining it?”
'No, Ma’am.” Jerry took out his large handkerchief
and wiped his brow. "I felt it in the other room. Most
uncomfortable. A very hot day to-morrow, I think,”
"Yes,” said Miss Lally, starting to dish up the dinners
and hand them round, "it’s been working up to something
all the week.”
"Oh, I do hope we shan’t have any hot westerly
winds,” sighed Miss Emmeline. "I find them so trying.”
Miss Feemy. who had been remarkably silent up to
now, shifted uneasily in her chair, and then said slowly,
in a dull, unnatural voice, "It will be a hot wind to-
morrow, and, mark my words, it’ll bring tragedy with it.”
Miss Lally looked startled. "Oh, Feemy, don’t say
that.”
"Can’t help it,” said Miss Feemy miserably. "Don’t
want to say it. But something terrible is going to happen,
I know.”
"Please, Euphemia!” said Miss Emmeline with unusual
sharpness. "That will do.”
A blight fell on the company, and after a while Miss
Feemy pushed her plate away. "Can’t eat that. Sorry.
Excuse me,” and, getting up from the table, she went
out of the room.
"I’m sorry, Jeremy,” Miss Emmeline apologised to the
artist. "Euphemia gets these fits occasionally, and we try
to discourage them as much as possible.”


He nodded. "I’ve heard in the town about her
prophecies, Miss Emmeline. People seem to think they
often come true.”
"Maybe they do,” said Miss Emmeline tartly, but we
don’t pander to her fancies here, Jeremy, and I d be obliged
if you’d talk of something else.”
"Sorry, Ma’am. As you wish, of course.”
Jancy looked at the blind old lady and saw for a
moment the autocratic woman her mother had known,
then the old face softened and she said:
"I’m sorry I was abrupt, Jeremy. But these fancies
of Euphemia’s upset me very much.”
"That’s all right, Miss Emmeline. It’s natural they
should. They’re interesting, though. Does she know what
is actually going ”He stopped suddenly. But you
said you didn’t want to talk of it.”
"Go on, Jeremy, say what you want to say. I’m a
foolish old woman who tries to hide her head in the sand.
The thing is there and I’ve been afraid to look at Per-
haps it would be better to talk it out of my system.
"Well, I was going to ask if she gets a premonition of
what is actually going to happen?”
"I don’t know. As I say, I’ve never discussed it with
her. Eulalie may be able to tell you.”
"She doesn’t talk about it herself much, even to me,”
said Miss Tally, "but from what I can make out she doesn’t
know what’s actually going to happen; she just gets a
premonition of impending tragedy about people or events.
It usually depresses her very much, and she is not herself
for some time before. I had an idea there was something
in the air this evening; she lost her gaiety and was not as
talkative as usual.”
"Well,” said Jerry cheerfully, "we can only hope she’s
wrong this time. I don’t feel in the mood for tragedy, do
you, Jancy?”
Jancy smiled. "No, I don’t. Although I can’t help
wondering what will happen. You see, my mother told
me that Miss Feemy was fey (as she called it) and that
one day she told a fisherman not to go to sea, and he did
and was drowned. My father said it was a coincidence.”


"Ah! an unbeliever, I see,” said Jerry. "Well, I’m
not.”
"Why,” asked Jancy in surprise, "do you believe in
such things? Men don’t, usually.”
"Perhaps not. And I wouldn’t say I was a believer.
I’m just an agnostic.”
"What’s that?” Jancy never disguised her ignorance
when she could learn something. "What’s an agnostic?”
"An agnostic is a person who is inclined to think that
nothing can be known of anything except material
phenomena. But he doesn’t disbelieve; he just says 'I
don’t know.’ In fact, he might think with Shakespeare
that there are more things in heaven and earth than are
dreamt of in our philosophy and still be an agnostic. He
admits ignorance, you see, and with anyone who admits
ignorance there’s a chance for development.”
"I see.” Jancy wrinkled her forehead in the effort to
understand this explanation.
"Things do happen sometimes,” Jerry went on, "that
are simply inexplicable. Our feeble knowledge can never
explain them. For instance, my father, who was a very
hard-headed business man, had one of these strange things
happen to him. We were living in England at the time,
in London, and the next day he was expecting his partner
to return from a holiday in the country. He was at that
time contemplating a merger with another company, and
had arranged to go with his partner the next afternoon
and sign the papers that would complete the deal. That
night, however, he had a dream which disturbed him very
much, and he told us about it at breakfast. Apparently
he’d dreamt that he was standing in his office and his
partner came in and sat down very wearily. T just came
to tell you,’ he said, 'that we mustn’t make that merger.
It will ruin us.’ That was all the dream, but when he woke
up he couldn’t get it out of his mind. My mother advised
him to ring up and put the business of the merger off for
that day, until he could see his partner and consult with
him. My father was reluctant to do this, but after much
persuasion finally did as she advised. Well, to cut a long
story short, we received a telegram shortly after breakfast


to say that the partner had died of a heart attack at four
o’clock that morning, at the place where he was staying in
Devon. My father was shocked and distressed, of course,
but he felt less able to ignore the dream than he had before,
so he called off the merger absolutely and refused to con-
tinue with it. Six months later the company he was to
join with went bankrupt and he found that it was run
by a lot of swindlers who would have saddled him with a
worthless business.”
"Very strange indeed,” said Miss Emmeline, "but in
my long life I’ve heard of things equally strange. I’m sure
it is always wise to take note of warnings of that nature,
and yet I find myself very reluctant to accept Euphemia’s
prophecies.”
"That’s because she’s too close to you, dear, I expect,”
said Miss Tally. She rose and pushed back her chair. "I
think everyone’s finished. Shall we go into the other oor Jj
for coffee? I’ll just run upstairs and see if Feemy’s all
right.”
Jerry Bentham took Miss Emmeline’s arm and they
all left the dining-room. Jancy went out to tell Jean that
they were ready for coffee. That young lady was sitting
at the kichen table, looking very tired.
"Oh, hello, Jancy!” she said. "Coffee’s on the wag-
gon.”
"Thanks, Jean. I’ll take it in. You look absolutely
done.”
"I feel it. I just can’t stand this heat. It gets me.
Besides, Miss Feemy was in here this afternoon, muttering
about things happening, and that always puts me off.
"Oh, she’s been talking to you, too? We’ve had it as
well.” Jancy smiled. "I wouldn’t take too much notice,
Jean, if I were you.”
Jean gave her a pitying look. "You’d take notice
all right if you’d known her as long as I have.” She got
up and hit the table irritably. "I just wish she wouldn t say
anything, that’s all. I’d rather not know. Oh, well, I d
better get on with the washing-up.”


"I’ll take this in, then.” Jancy wheeled the waggon
to the swing door and pushed it down the hall slowly. She
was suddenly depressed after talking to Jean, and began
to feel a certain apprehension. What if Miss Feemy was
right after all and there was tragedy in store for someone?
Who was the unlucky person, and where would it strike?
Jancy found her thoughts becoming very gloomy and gave
herself a mental shake to rid herself of them. After all,
why cross one’s bridges before one came to them? To-
morrow wasn’t here yet, and when it did arrive was the
time to cope with its problems. She straightened her
shoulders and dismissed the matter from her mind as she
entered the sitting-room.
She was arranging the cups when Miss Lally returned
and took over the task.
"I’ve told Feemy to go to bed,” she said. "Poor girl,
she. is miserable, and that’s the best place for her. She
gets into an awful state.”
"Did you give her a sedative, Eulalie?” asked Miss
Emmeline.
"Yes, she’s quiet now.” Miss Lally changed the sub-
ject. "Did you tell Emmeline about Godfrey going
painting with you, Jerry? She’d be interested in that.”
"No, but I will.” The artist took his cue, and told
about Godfrey’s unexpected blossoming as a painter.
Miss Emmeline was much interested. "It might be the
making of him,” she said, "an absorbing interest like that.
It’s a happy accident, Jeremy, that you happened to be
available when most needed.”
"Yes, isn’t it? Particularly when you realize that so
many artists, poets and writers were made by just such
accidents. It seems men need certain circumstances to
direct them in the way they should go. Gibbon, for in-
stance; if he had never gone to Rome and sat musing
among the ruins of the Capitol, might not have written
The Decline and Fall of that city. Shakespeare, if he hadn’t
stolen a deer, might never have left Stratford and gone to
London, where he became enamoured of the theatre.
Newton, if he hadn’t retired to the country during the


Great Plague, might never have been hit on the head with
an apple and deduced the principle of gravity. Joshua
Reynolds, if he had never met Richardson, may never have
painted. Oh, there are hundreds of cases one can cite. I
myself would have become a businessman like my father
if he hadn’t made the mistake of introducing me to a man
who collected pictures. I only hope that I can be similarly
helpful to young Chapman, although I must admit an
artist’s life these days is not a bed of roses, and the number
of people interested enough to buy declines sadly every
year.”
"Yes, there doesn’t seem to be the same pride in
owning pictures nowadays as there was in my father’s
time,” agreed Miss Emmeline. "Still, photography was not
as widely used then, and everyone wanted likenesses of
their family, so they had them painted.”
They continued to talk about art for a little longer
and then Jerry stood up. "I must really go now, ladies,”
he said. "I’m keeping you up, and there are a few things
I want to do when I get home. I’ve got a long way to
walk, you know.”
"Well, if you must,” said Miss Emmeline, "I suppose
you must. I have enjoyed the evening immensely. You’ll
have to come again soon.”
"I’d like to, Miss Emmeline. Good-night, then, and
thank you for your hospitality.”
"I’ll see you to the door,” said Miss Tally, and the two
of them departed.
Jancy watched him go with regret. "Gosh! he’s an
interesting man, Miss Emmeline, isn’t he? He knows an
awful lot.”
"Yes, Jeremy’s not gone through life with his eyes
and mind closed; he absorbs everything. His mother was
just the same —she lived every minute of her life, and
found it wonderful.”
"Oh, did you know her?”
"Yes, she came out here with his father on business
years ago. Jeremy was just a boy; but he loved it so much
that he came back when he grew up. He told me he could
never live in England again after seeing Australia. It was


too orderly, too conventional and too grey after the sun
and the freedom and the space here. His father was very
disappointed. Jeremy was the only son, and there was
no one left to take over after he retired.”
"I can’t imagine Mr. Bentham in business,” said Jancy.
"He’s too big and sort of shaggy; he’d be like a great St.
Bernard dog let loose in an office.”
Miss Emmeline laughed. "That certainly describes
him.” She put her hands on the arms of her chair. "Well,
I’m for bed, my dear; would you take my arm?”
Jancy did as she was asked, and the two of them
reached the foot of the stairs as Miss Tally returned.
"Off to bed, are you? I think I’ll go, too. Not that
we’ll get much sleep to-night. It’s like an oven outside.
I’ve never felt such heat.”
"Thank Heavens for this old house!” said Miss
Emmeline. "At least it stays reasonably cool. We’re bet-
ter off than most people.” She pressed Jancy s hand. 111
take Eulalie’s arm now, if you’ll come to the other side,
and we’ll all go up together.”
At the top of the stairs Jancy said good-night and went
to her room. It was a relief to take her clothes off and,
putting on a cool nightie, she stood at the window for a
time. Outside the garden was still and heavy with heat
and perfume, and there was a smell of dried grass. She
went to the bed and, throwing back the blankets, climbed
in and drew the sheet over her; its linen was cool on her
warm limbs, and, relaxing under it, she thought again of
Miss Feemy’s prophecy. Fear pricked at her mind a little,
but she pushed it away, and with a sigh turned her face
against the pillow and fell asleep.


CHAPTER XVIII
Jancy woke later than usual the following morning,
but she felt unrefreshed by her long sleep. Miss Lally
brought her a cup of tea and she, too, looked tired. Jancy
remarked on it, and the old lady said: "Nobody got much
sleep last night, I m afraid. It was too hot. I must be off.
It’s after eight already and breakfast not even started.”
She hurried out, and, after drinking her tea, Jancy
went to the window. It was breathlessly hot outside. The
willow trees in the garden hung limp and exhausted, and
the flowers were bowed under the scorching sun. Jancy
bathed and dressed and went downstairs, out into the
garden. The heat hit her like a blow as she left the
house, and the grass of the lawn crackled under her feet as
brittle and dry as hay. Nothing moved in the garden;
no birds sang and there was an ominous stillness in the
air. She was glad to return to the comparative coolness
of the hall, and there she met Miss Lally taking a tray into
the dining-room.
"I’m supposed to go out with Marney and Geoff and
Harry to-day, Miss Lally. Could I have lunch? I’ll cut it.”
"Oh, my dear,” said Miss Lally anxiously. "I don’t
think I’d go out to-day. It’ll be much too hot.”
"But I’ve promised, and we’re going to meet at the
store.”
"I’d much rather you didn’t go, dear.”
"How will I let them know?”
"You can ring up.”
"Oh, yes, I forgot. I’ll go and do it now.”
Jancy went off to the ’phone and rang both Marney
and Geoff, only to discover that they had already left.
There was no answer to the ’phone at Marney's, but Mrs.
Chapman answered for Geoff.
"He went a few minutes ago,” she said. "I didn’t
want him to; it’s such a peculiar day. Are you going,
Jancy?”


"I don’t think so. Miss Lally says she’d rather I
didn’t.”
"Oh, I’m so glad. That will stop Geoff. If he’s at
the Hiltons I’ll know he’s all right. Have you heard the
wireless this morning, Jancy?”
"No.”
"Well, I’m tuned-in to the local station and they’re
issuing bushfire warnings. You’d better tell Miss Lally.”
"I will, thanks.” Jancy ran back to the kitchen.
The only wireless in the house was there, since Jean was
the only person who listened to it.”
"May I put the radio on?” Jancy asked Jean.
"Yes. I haven’t had time to do it myself. I’m all
behind like a cow’s tail this morning.”
Jancy switched the set on and asked Jean to adjust it
to the local station. It took a little time to warm up, and
then the prosaic voice of the announcer said:
"Every able-bodied man is wanted at once in front of
Darcy’s Store. Large bushfires have broken out in the
mountains at the back of the town and men are needed
to control them.” The voice stopped, and then went on:
"We are calling for all able-bodied men ” the voice
went on, repeating the appeal, while Jancy and Jean stood
looking at one another with wide eyes.
"I’d better tell Miss Lally,” said Jancy, and went in
search of the old lady. She found her coming down the
stairs after taking up Miss Emmeline’s tray, and told her
of the broadcast.
"Oh dear, oh dear!” Miss Lally wrung her hands. "I
knew it.” She put an urgent hand on Jancy’s arm. "We
mustn’t let Feemy know. Will you take her up a breakfast
tray?”
Jancy nodded, and they returned to the kitchen,
where they prepared the tray. Miss Lally put it into
Jancys’ hands.
"Now take it up and be as cheerful as you can. Don’t
mention anything about the bushfires, and behave norm-
ally.”
"All right.” Jancy carried her burden upstairs and
knocked on Miss Feemy’s door and opened it. Miss Feemy


was lying back against the pillows, looking pale and very
unlike herself, "I’ve brought your breakfast up,” said
Jancy. "Miss Lally said you’re not feeling well. I’m
awfully sorry.”
"I’ve got a terrible headache,” confessed Miss Feemy
in an exhausted voice. "Just terrible. It’s the heat, I
expect.”
"Yes. There’s probably thunder in the air. I know
that always gives Mummy a headache. You might feel
better after you’ve had something to eat. You had nothing
last night, you know.”
Miss Feemy sat up, and with a slight return of her
usual manner, said: "That’s it. I’m oply hungry. Not
sick. Never sick.” She looked at Jancy defiantly.
I can well believe it. You don’t look a confirmed
invalid to me.” Jancy placed the tray across the old lady’s
knees. Now just eat that and you’ll be as fit as anything.
Do you want any aspirin?”
"No, Lally gave me some. You go down and have
your own breakfast.” She began to toy with some toast,
and even as she buttered it the light went out of her eyes.
"I don’t think I want it,” she said.
"Just eat a little,” begged Jancy. "It’ll send your
headache away.”
"I’ll try then.”
"Good.” Jancy smiled at her and went quietly from
the room. Downstairs Miss Lally had already started her
breakfast, and Jancy’s was keeping warm under a cover.
She sat down, and Miss Lally looked at her enquiringly.
"Did Feemy eat anything?”
She started to. I thought I’d better not stand over
her.”
"That’s right, dear. Well, eat your breakfast. We’re
going to need some sustenance to-day.”
Jancy raised her eyebrows. "Are we? Why?”
"You’ve never been in a bushfire before, Jancy?”
asked Miss Lally gently.
"No.”
"Well, there’s always a lot of work to do and you’ll
need strength for it.”


"Do you often have them down here, Miss Lally?”
"No, not often. There hasn’t been one for fifteen
years. But I’ve got very vivid memories of it. I should
have known this was going to happen and done something
about it. I saw a bushfire burning weeks ago in the moun-
tains behind Great Rock. I did report it, but nothing
was done, and I blame myself that I didn’t insist that it
be put out.”
"But that’s miles away, Miss Lallly, isn’t it?’
"Yes, it’s ten miles off, I suppose.”
Jancy relaxed. "Then that’s all right.”
Miss Lally shook her head sadly. "No, it’s not, child,
and you might as well know it. If a westerly wind gets
up it could drive that fire down on the town in no time.
I suppose we could go down to the sea, but I’m mainly
concerned about the people who live on the small farms
between here and Great Rock. They are in very terrible
danger.”
Jancy could not help but show her perturbation at
this statement. "Oh, Miss Lally, what can we do?”
"Nothing, my dear. At least, we can get clothes
and food ready and be prepared for anything that may
happen. I don’t want to frighten you, but I think it’s
better you should know the position.”
"Of course.” Jancy went on with her breakfast and
they ate in silence until there came a knock on the front
door.
Jancy put down her table napkin. "That’ll be Geoff,”
she said. "I’ll go and let him in.”
"When she opened the door Geoff stepped straight
inside. There was a suppressed excitement in his face.
"Have you heard the news?” he asked.
"Yes. Isn’t it awful? We’re just finishing breakfast.
Come into the dining-room.”
They went back to Miss Lally, who greeted Geoff and
offered him some tea, which he refused.
"Have you been down the town, Geoffrey?” she
asked.


"Yes, the place is in an uproar. All the shops and
businesses are closed and they’re trying to organise men
and lorries to go to the fire.”
"Has it broken out anywhere else?”
"Yes, it’s all around this side of Great Rock, but
they can’t fight it because it’s still in the bush. The trouble
is the weather reports predict a westerly, and if that wind
gets up the fire will come out with a rush.”
"Oh dear! why didn’t they put it out when I reported
it?”
"Everybody’s saying that, Miss Lally. Lots of people
reported it. I did for one. But nobody did anything
about it.”
Its criminal!” cried Miss Lally. "Positively crim-
inal!”
I know,” agreed Geoff. He looked around the room.
"Have you got a wireless here?”
"Yes, it’s in the kitchen.”
"I’d like to listen. May I?”
"Of course. Jancy and I will bring the dishes out and
see if there’s anything new.”
Geoff went out carrying the teapot and hot water
jug, and Jancy and Miss Lally loaded the tray and followed
him.
In the kitchen the wireless was still repeating
monotononsly that every able-bodied man was wanted,
and, putting the tray on the table, Miss Lally said to Jean:
"Has there been anything fresh since I left?”
"Nothing except that the Norrises have ’phoned the
station to say they’ll need help to keep the fire off their
place.”
Oh, poor Mrs. Norris. She has five children out
there. I wonder could I ring her and tell her to send them
here.”
"The police have asked over the air that people will
not use the ’phone privately,” said Jean, "but you might
ring the station.”
"I’ll do that.” Miss Lally hurried away, and Geoff
turned the wireless up as the announcer began to talk
again.


“There are not nearly enough men assembled yet,”
he said. “We are going to need anyone with any strength
before the day is out, so we appeal to every man, young or
old, to report for duty outside Darcy’s store. This is your
town, and you all make your living here; help us to make
preparations to prevent it being destroyed.”
Geoff got up. “I’m off,” he said.
Jancy leapt up, with fear her eyes.
“Oh no, Geoff! Not you. They don’t mean people
like you.”
Geoff squeezed her hand. “That’s just who they do
mean, Jancy. Anyway, I’m going. I can swing a wet
cornsack with the best of them. I don’t want to worry
Miss Lally, and besides, she’ll make a fuss, so I’ll go before
she comes back.” He turned towards the kitchen door,
which at that moment burst open to disclose Bluey.
“G’day,” he said cheerfully. “Got any sacks here?
I’ve been sent to get as many as I could.”
“Yes,” said Jean eagerly, all differences forgotten in
the urgency of the moment. “I’ll show you where they
are.”
She went outside and Bluey followed.
Geoff stopped in the door. “See you later, Jan.,” he
said. “I’ll help Bluey carry the sacks down, and if Marney’s
at the store I’ll tell her to come up here.” He grinned at
her. “Don’t worry, everything will be all right.”
She smiled back as gaily as she could and he was gone.
Miss Lally returned. “The Norris children have already
been brought into town and are being taken care of. The
police asked me to stand by in readiness for anyone they
might bring here.” She suddenly noticed that Jean and
Geoff were gone. “Why, where are the others?”
“Bluey came for cornsacks for the firefighters and
Geoff’s going to help him carry them down. Jean’s show-
ing them where they are.”
“Oh, then let’s get these dishes out of the way and
wash up.” She gave Jancy a fleeting smile. “Clear the
decks for action, eh?”


They were halfway through washing-up when Jean
returned, and Miss Tally said:
"The Norris children are all right, Jean, but we’ve
got to be prepared to receive people. Also, the fighters
will require tea and sandwiches all day, so that’ll keep us
occupied cutting those. The police will send the men up
here in lorries as they come in, and the Country Women’s
Association will supply us with bread and butter when we
run out. There’s plenty of tinned stuff in the cupboard,
so off we go. I’ll cut bread, Jancy can butter it, and you
can spread filling. Get to it now!”
They all set to, and silence reigned in the kitchen as
the sandwiches piled up. At last Miss Tally said, "I think
we’ve earned a cup of tea, Jean.”
"I’ll get it.” Jean filled the teapot with water and
went out to empty it. She opened the door and stopped
dead. "Oh, my goodness!” she cried. "Took, Miss Tally!”
Jancy and Miss Tally rushed to the door and stared
out with shocked eyes. The back of the mountains was
hidden by a terrifying orange glow that paled the blue of
the sky, and even as they looked a wind stirred the still
trees at the bottom of the garden. An immense cloud of
smoke rolled sluggishly over the sky, obscuring the sun and
wrapping the world in a lurid, dusty pall. Jancy caught
her breath, frightened for the moment, and Miss Tally took
her arm.
"It’s started then,” she said quietly. "Come inside
and close the door.”


CHAPTER XIX
With this new danger Miss Lally seemed to become
calmer, and Jancy, ashamed of her fluttering breath and
fast-beating heart, envied her. "What shall we do, Miss
Lally?” she asked, trying to keep her voice steady.
"You can go round the house and shut all the doors
and windows. This is a westerly wind and we’ll have to
keep it out. Just look into Feemy’s and Emmeline’s room
and say as quitely as you can that you want to close the
windows.”
Jancy ran off on her errand and closed all the doors
and windows downstairs. She then did the upstairs, leaving
the two old ladies’ rooms until the last. Miss Feemy was
asleep when she went in, and she managed to seal the room
without disturbing her; but Miss Emmeline was awake
and reading her Braille.
"Is that you Jancy?” she asked.
"Yes, I want to close the windows.”
"It’s a westerly, isn’t it? I can smell it. Also there’s
fire behind it, I can smell that, too.”
It was no use trying to lie to those blind eyes. "Yes,”
Jancy admitted, "there’s a fire in the mountains, but
they’re out fighting it and it won’t reach here.”
Miss Emmeline smiled. "You needn’t try to reassure
me, child,” she said gently, "I know what bushfires can
do, and I’m too old to have any fear.” She paused and gave
a little laugh. "Unless it gets too close for comfort, of
course. Don’t you worry about me, just go back to Lally
and help her as much as you can. She’ll need it.”
"Yes, Miss Emmeline. Are you sure you’ve got all
you want?”
"Quite sure, thanks.” The old lady returned to her
Braille and Jancy left the room.
There was no one in the kitchen when she returned,
and the room was almost dark from the pall of smoke


outside. The wireless was still going. "Keep all your
windows and doors shut,” it was saying. Keep the wind
out of the house. Draughts can be dangerous. Patrol your
garden and look out for burning twigs and leaves that
might be blown over. Fill buckets from the tanks for an
emergency, but don’t use the hose unless the case is des-
perate, as the town water will be needed to protect the
hospital and homes on the outskirts. It stopped and began
again. "Keep all your windows and doors closed ”
Jancy turned away, and going to the window looked into
the garden. It was a mad world outside. Against the livid
fog of smoke the trees waved wildly. The old willow
streamed in the wind like the hair of a crazy woman, and
the poplar beside it danced and postured as though tor-
mented. It was an awful and magnificent sight, and she
stood fascinated until Miss Tally’s voice behind her said:
"You haven’t drunk your tea, Jancy. And I think
we’ll have a light on the subject. It’s darker than ever
here.”
The old bell above the kitchen door jangled, and
Jancy jumped and looked at Miss Tally apprehensively.
Then her face cleared. "It’s probably Marney. I’ll let her
She ran to the front door and opened it. It was
Marney, who said, cheerfully, "A fine, warm day,” as
she stepped inside.
"Oh, Marney! Isn’t it awful? I’m terribly fright-
ened.”
"Well, you’ve got the courage to admit it,” said
Marney. "I’m frightened, too, but I’ve got to be funny
about it at all costs, or I’d sit under the table and dither.”
Jancy laughed. "That’s what I feel like doing,” she
confessed.
"But you won’t,” returned Marney positively. "I’ve
met your sort before. You’ll be scared all right, but you’ll
perform prodigies of valour when and if it comes to the
point, I know.”
"I hope you’re right,” sighed Jancy. "Come into the
kitchen. There’s some tea on, and Miss Tally’s there.”
The telephone rang as the girls went down the hall
and Jancy answered it. It was Mrs. Hewett, and she was


slightly incoherent with fright. ‘'Oh, who’s that?” she
said. Jancy told her, and she babbled, “I want Miss Lally.
I want to come down there. Tell Miss Lally.”
Miss Lally, who had heard the ’phone ring, was at
Jancy’s side, and she took the receiver while the two girls
went on into the kitchen.
"She was in a proper flap, wasn’t she?” asked Marney.
"She sounded like it.”
"Yes, scared to death. I wonder what’s wrong?”
"Just general wind up, I should think,” grinned Mar-
ney.
Jancy poured Marney some tea, and she was drinking
it when Miss Lally returned. The old lady shook her head.
"Really, I’d have thought Mrs. Hewett would have more
sense than that.”
"Why, what’s the matter with her?” asked Jancy.
"She seems to have completely lost her head. Says the
fire will get her place first if the wind keeps up, and she
wants to bring Christine down here. They’re leaving the
old gardener to watch the place.”
"Did you say they could come?”
"Oh, yes, there was nothing else to do. I’ll find a job
for them when they arrive; that will keep their minds off
things. Now, you girls, when you’ve finished your tea
put every cup, mug and pannikin you can find on the long
table.
"All right,” Jancy said willingly. "By the way,
where’s Jean?”
"I sent her to the Kovacs to see if they’d like to
come in here. This house is so much cooler than theirs,
and she’s been so ill that she’ll find the heat trying.” Miss
Lally looked through the kitchen window as two figures
went by. "Here they are now. We’ll put Mrs. Kovac
in the dining-room; it’s the coolest room in the house.”
Jean entered with Mrs. Kovac, who was trembling,
and Miss Lally took her hands.
"Don’t be frightened, Mrs. Kovac. You’ll be all right
here.”


"You very kind,” said the sick woman. "I bother
you?
"No bother at all. Now, Jean, take Mrs. Kovac to
the dining-room and give her some magazines or some-
thing to look at. There’s some tea if she wants it.”
Jean went off with her charge, and soon afterwards
Mrs. Hewett and Christine arrived. Jancy let them in,
and Mrs. Hewett entered like a tragedy queen.
"Dreadful! Dreadful!” she cried. "We’ll all be burnt
to death. Oh, it’s awful!”
Miss Lally, hearing the cries, came into the hall.
"Please, Mrs. Hewett,” she said sharply, "control
yourself! I’m surprised at you!”
Mrs. Hewett gulped and stared at hearing this from
the meek Miss Lally; but she was effectually shocked into
silence, and Miss Lally went on: "Will you please go into
the dining-room, it’s cooler there. Christine, you can come
and help in the kitchen. We need everyone we can get.”
She led the girls off, leaving Mrs. Hewett to find her
own way into the dining-room, and Christine said; "I’m
sorry Mother behaved so badly, Miss Lally, but I’m glad
we’ve come here. I couldn’t cope at home. I do hope we
won’t be a nuisance, though.”
"You have a pair of hands, Christine.” Miss Lally
smiled at the worried face. "And you’d never be a
nuisance.” She looked round at them all. "Now, I think
while we’re working we’ll take it in turns to patrol the
grounds to watch for fire. Marney, you go first.”
Marney departed, and they all set to work in the
kitchen, putting out milk and sugar and helping Jean to
mix her scones and cakes. These were just put in the oven
when the first batch of hungry firefighters arrived.
They came in the back way, headed by Bluey.
"Got anything for us?” he asked.
Jean looked at his still clean face and hands. "Doesn’t
look as though you’ve earned it yet,” she said, not too
harshly.
"We’re on our way,” he said. "We’re going to Great
Rock.” He waved a hand at his companions, whose


appearance testified that they had already been at work.
"These blokes have just come from Bimboola; they need
something.”
"My goodness, is there a fire up there, too?” asked
Miss Lally.
A big man with red-rimmed eyes and a streaked face
where the perspiration had made runnels in the dirt,
answered her.
"Yes. It’s burning something fierce. We managed to
save my place though.” He sat down wearily. "It’s
terrible! Terrible! We saved the house, and the fire’s gone
on, but I’ve lost me bails and me barn and most of me
grazin’ land. I tell you, Miss, it was a sight I never want
to see again. That fire ran like water down the hill to the
creek, jumped it, and was burning me fences before you
could move to stop it.”
"How awful! You poor soul! And your family,
what about them?”
"Oh, I got them out early on. I wasn’t runnin’ no
risks. They’re in town.”
"That’s good. What you need is a drink. Wait a
minute.” Miss Lally hurried off and came back with a
whisky decanter, from which she poured a generous
amount into a glass. The man drank it gratefully and
smacked his lips as he put it down.
"That’s put new life into me, Miss. Thanks very
much.”
"Now have something to eat.” Miss Lally and the
girls attended to him and the other men, who left soon
afterwards. But the stream did not stop. Lorries pulled
up constantly outside the house, bringing firefighters and,
in some cases, their wives and children. The latter were
made comfortable in the dining-room and the men were
fed and sent on to other outbreaks.
The girls worked so hard ministering to the men,
cutting sandwiches and patrolling the grounds, that they
scarcely noticed the time passing or the increasing heat,
and it was not until Jancy sat down to snatch a drink and a
sandwich at lunchtime that she found her clothes wet


with perspiration. Everybody was in the same condition;
but there was no time to think about it, and Jancy had
hardly finished eating than Miss Lally asked her to take
up tea and sandwiches to Miss Emmeline and Miss Feemy.
Jancy went to Miss Emmeline first, and found her
still reading. She had to give an account of what was
going on v downstairs, and the old lady said: "I think I’ll
go down after lunch, Jancy. There must be something I
can do.”
"All right. I’ll come and get you. I’ll just take this
along to Miss Feemy now.”
She went along the corridor and opened the door
cautiously. But there was no need for it, for Miss Feemy
was up and dressed and putting on her shoes.
"Coming down,” she said with some of her accus-
tomed decision. "No good lying here.”
"But do you feel well enough?” asked Jancy
anxiously.
"Course!” snorted Miss Feemy. "Fit as a flea. Who’s
downstairs?”
"Mrs. Kovac and Mrs. Hewett, and a lot of women
and children. They’re all in the dining-room.”
"Good. I’ll eat this and go down.”
"Then will you take Miss Emmeline? She wants to
go, too. I said I’d get her after lunch, but we’re so busy.”
"Yes, I’ll take her. Don’t worry. Go and get on.”
Jancy went downstairs and, as she passed the dining-
room door, looked in. The room seemed to be full of
people. Most of the women were a pitiful sight, be-
draggled and harassed-looking, and in great contrast to the
immaculate Mrs. Hewett, who was sitting aloofly in the
windowseat at the other side of the room. She said to
Jancy:
"We’re all starving in here. Is there anything to eat?”
Jancy felt a real anger rise within her. "Yes, there’s
plenty, but you’ll have to get it yourself,” she said, and
looking round at the women and children, added:
"You might get some for them, too, while you’re
about it.”


Still seething, she went back to the kitchen, where
Mrs. Hewett appeared some minutes afterwards.
"Miss Lally, Jancy was very rude to me just now.”
Miss Lally looked up and her eyes flashed. "Was she?
Then I hope it did some good.”
I thought she might help take sandwiches and tea
to the people inside,” said Jancy.
"And why not?” said Miss Lally. "Everyone works
to-day. You’ll find trays over there, Mrs. Hewett, teacups
and sandwiches over here. I’ll leave the people in the
dining-room to you.”
Mrs. Hewett’s lips tightened, but without a word she
took a tray, prepared it, and left the kitchen.
Nice type, said Marney. "What does she expect
us to do wait on her?” She suddenly remembered Chris-
tine s presence. Sorry, Christine, I didn’t mean to be
nasty to you.”
Christine gave a rather wan smile. "Don’t mind me.
I think Mother should help, too. She’d forget herself if
she did ” A bang on the door interrupted her, and
another lot of men came in, headed by the Police Sergeant
and Keith Ames. They were all black and exhausted, and
Christine took one look at the young tutor.
"Keith!” she cried, and flew to him. "You’re all
right? You’re not hurt? Oh, Keith!”
He put his arm round her and they retired into a
corner of the kitchen.
"Oh,” said Marney, "if Mother could only see her
daughter now!” '


CHAPTER XX
The men, hungry and tired, sat down on the floor
with their backs to the wall, and the girls served them
with refreshments. The Sergeant, dabbing around the in-
side of his uniform collar with a once-white handkerchief,
was talking to Miss Lally.
"Well, I hope I never see another day like this, Miss
Lally. It’s hell let loose out there. These chaps have been
out to Great Rock, fighting like madmen, but they can’t
hold the fire. It’ll sweep round to North Point, I think,
whatever we do. Goodness knows what’s happened to the
families between the mountain and where the fire is now.
There are three farms there, you know —the Wrens, the
Parkes and the Lennons. I don’t like to think what may
have happened to them.”
"They have creeks running through their properties,”
said Miss Lally. "If they could get to them they’d be all
right in the water, wouldn’t they?”
The Sergeant shook his head. "Impossible. No one can
imagine what it’s like out there. It’s an inferno, and the
fire is jumping terrific distances. A creek wouldn’t stop
it for a minute. Why, we cut one firebreak a quarter of a
mile wide, but it spanned it as though it was a bush track.”
He stared at the floor in a bewildered way, and then looked
up at Miss Lally. "I’ve seen things out there to-day I never
thought possible. I saw a bird fly out of the burning bush,
its feathers on fire. It flew some distance before it fell,
and when it did fall, the bush it dropped into immediately
burst into flame. That’s the way the fire’s being carried,
Miss Lally. Another danger is dry manure. A lot of graz-
ing land has been lost because of it. It burns, you see, and
then the wind catches it and blows it, still smouldering,
into another paddock, where the grass is so dry it catches
immediately.” He shook his head again slowly. "I don’t
know what we’re going to do. I just don’t know. There’s


not enough firefighting equipment, not enough men —
what can one do?”
"You can only do your best, Sergeant, like the rest of
us. Now, have something to eat; that will make you feel
better.” She poured and handed him a cup of tea and a
plate of sandwiches. "I’d advise you and these men to have
a rest afterwards. You all look as if you need it.”
"They do. I’ve got to go on. I’ve been examining
fires and getting men to the places where they’re most
needed. I haven’t time to rest. By the way, can I use
your ’phone? I might as well see what my wife’s got to
report from the Station.”
"Of course, it’s in the hall,” said Miss Lally.
He returned, looking graver than ever. Miss Lally
raised her eyebrows. "Not good?”
"No, very bad indeed. The fire’s spreading.” He
lowered his voice. "I noticed that young Marney Browne
is here, and it’s a good thing. Her home is in the danger
zone, and one of our men went up to tell her stepmother
to leave and come into town, but he couldn’t find her.
There' ’s no one there, and Mr. Sheridan has disappeared,
too. Nobody’s seen them at all.”
Miss Lally was unmoved. "Well, they’re old enough
to take care of themselves, I suppose, and if you ask my
opinion that’s probably what they’re doing. I don’t think
you’ll catch them giving other folks a hand.”
"I know, but where could they have got to? They
can’t leave the town, the fire’s cut the coast road on both
sides of us. I hope they haven’t gone wandering about
and got caught.”
"Not them,” said Miss Lally stoutly. "They wouldn’t
go into any danger. You’ll find they’ve got themselves
a nice bolt-hole somewhere.”
"I hope you’re right.” He finished his tea. "I must
go now. Keep these fellows here as long as you can.”
Miss Lally nodded, and as the Sergeant left the kit-
chen Miss Feemy burst in. She seemed to have regained
her customary energy.


"Lally, I want towels. Those mothers in there are
running out of napkins for their babies.” She laughed.
"I’ve dried out some of ’em by hanging’ ’em out of the
window, so the fire’s good for something. Also they want
more to eat. I’ve told Mrs. Hewett to get it. Just had a
showdown with that old dear. Told her what I think about
her and about her attitude to Christine and Keith Ames.
Seems to have done her good. Emmeline backed me up.
Hewett got the shock of her life.”
Mrs. Hewett came in as she finished speaking, and,
picking up a tray, began to pile food on it. Miss Feemy
surveyed her approvingly. "That’s a good girl,” she said,
with an exaggerated wink at Miss Lally, before departing
to raid the linen press. To the latter’s amazement, Mrs.
Hewett took the remark without umbrage, and only said
meekly:
"I can’t manage all this by myself. Could someone
carry the cups?”
Miss Lally called Jancy. "Will you give Mrs. Hewett
a hand, dear? She can’t manage.”
Jancy filled a tray with cups and followed Mrs.
Hewett into the dining-room, where she collected the
empty trays and returned to the kitchen.
Miss Lally said, "Is everything all right in there?”
Jancy chuckled. "You ought to see the room,” she
said. "Napkins drying everywhere. Children crawling
all over the furniture, everybody talking and Miss Emme-
line reading from her Braille to anyone who wants to
listen.”
Miss Lally smiled. "But they’re all happy enough, are
they?”
"Oh, yes. They don’t seem to be worrying about the
fire.”
"Good! Now then, Jancy, I want you to do some-
thing for me. The Sergeant tells me they haven’t really
enough helpers, so instead of me ringing up the Station
for further supplies, I wonder would you go down and get
some more butter and things. We’re running short.”


"Of course. Do you want me to go now?”
"Yes, dear. Don’t say anything, just go out the front
way. If the food isn’t at the Station it’ll be at the Country
Women’s Association.”
"Good. I’ll go now then.”
"There’s two string bags in the kitchen drawer; you
can take those.”
Jancy nodded and, taking the bags, left the kitchen.
There was no one in the hall and, unseen, she slipped out
the front door.
The heat was intense after the coolness of the house,
and the smoke-laden air bit at her lungs, so that she was
coughing and choking by the time she got to the gate.
The smoke was like a thick yellow mist in the lane; trapped
between the high trees on either side it rolled and eddied
sluggishly. Jancy’s eyes stung and watered from it as she
groped her way slowly along, and she wondered how long
it would take her to reach the Police Station at the rate
she was going.
She reached the main street at last, and heaved a sigh
of relief when she discovered that the air, disturbed by the
furious wind, was much clearer there. She dried her
streaming eyes and sniffed, and was just about to turn the
corner when she heard the sound of furious galloping on
her left, and a horse and rider loomed up through the
smoke. They saw one another simultaneously, and the
horseman reined in. Jancy peered up at him and then said
in the utmost astonishment:
"Godfrey!”
"Yes.” The boy was half-crying. "Come and help
me. You’ll do. Come and get up.”
"But ” began Jancy.
"Oh, don’t argue!” Godfrey yelled desperately. "Get
up!” He freed his foot from the stirrup, and his voice was
so urgent that almost before she knew what she was doing
Jancy put her foot in the stirrup, took Godfrey’s hand,
and was hauled up behind him. He turned the horse
without speaking, and headed back at a furious pace the
way he had come. Jancy was too busy holding on to think
about anything else for a few moments; but at last she
found breath enough to yell:


"Where are you going?”
"Jerry’s place.”
"Fire?” cried Jancy.
"Yes. Send —get —help.” The words blew back at
her raggedly.
"You’ll want more people. Go to the Police Station.”
"Nobody there. You’ll —have—do.”
Jancy resigned herself to fate. There was nothing she
could do, and with one last thought for poor Miss Lally’s
supplies, she bent all her faculties to holding on to her
extremely precarious perch.
It was a mad ride through a crazy, deserted world.
They met no one on the road, and the few scattered houses,
abandoned by their occupants, stared blankly at them as
they passed by.
Presently the heat got worse,* and behind the hill
towards which they were heading Jancy could see a dread-
ful orange glow.
"Hang on!” yelled Godfrey. "Hilly here.”
He turned the horse into a rough bush track that lead
off the road, and they began to climb. Slipping and sliding,
the animal struggled up, snorting and shivering as the
smell of the burning scrub increased in pungency. At the
top of the rise it stopped altogether and stood trembling.
"He won’t go any further,” said Godfrey, who seemed
to have pulled himself together during the ride. "You’d
better get off.” . •
Jancy slid to the ground and patted the animal’s
heaving flanks.
"Poor thing, he’s scared to death. Are you going to
leave him here?”
"Yes, might need him,” said Godfrey, tying the reins
securely to a tree. "He’ll be all right. The fire will have
to get us first before it gets him. There!” He tightened
the knot. "Come on!” he said, and dived into the bush.
Jancy followed him hastily. "This isn’t the regular
track, is it?” she asked, as they struggled through the
scrub, which caught at their clothing and scratched their
legs and arms.


"No, but it’s quicker. Take too long the other way,
and we’ve got to get back to Jerry.”
"Is the fire near his place?”
"Yes. And you’d better save your breath. If I know
anything, you’re going to need it.”
At these ominous words Jancy fell silent, and all her
fears returned. Her heart quickened and she panted from
something else rather than exertion. I was mad to come,
she thought desperately. What can we do? We can’t fight
a fire. Oh! why did I come? The bush crackled suddenly
on her right and she stopped dead. "What’s that?” she
cried.
Godfrey turned and gave her a pitying look. "It’s a
wallaby, most likely. All the bush animals have been run-
ning from the fire.”
Jancy felt ashamed of herself. "I thought it might
have been a fire,” she said humbly.
"Well, it’s not!” he snapped impatiently, and added
in a weary voice, "Just my luck to find a scared female at
a time like this.”
Nothing could have been more calculated to stiffen
Jancy’s backbone than this remark, and Godfrey’s assump-
tion of male superiority. She squared her shoulders and
her eyes flashed fire.
"That’ll be enough of that, Godfrey! Yes, I’m fright-
ened, but so were you when I met you —you were nearly
crying. Of course we’re frightened, but it won’t prevent
us doing what we have to do, I hope. Now, get on your
way and stop your nonsense.”
Godfrey grunted and, to Jancy’s surprise, gave a wry
grin. He looked at her oddly for a moment, after which
he turned and proceeded on his way. Jancy followed, still
fuming. The idea! Who did he think he was? These
wretched, condescending males, how much better were
they when it came to the point? No better at all. Look
at Nurse Cavell, Florence Nightingale and that French
woman in the war. Jancy’s thoughts became almost
militantly femininst, and she glared at Godfrey’s back as
though she’d like to put a knife in it. So occupied with


these thoughts was she that her fear and timidity receded
at every step, and in is place grew courage and the will
to dare. I’ll show him, she vowed silently and with de-
fiance; bring on your fire! And fate took her at her word,
for the next moment Godfrey led her out of the bush on
to a crazy ledge of rock that overhung a valley below,
and for the first time she realized the full horror of a
bushfire. It was an overwhelming sight, and she needed
all her newfound courage not to show the very real terror
that shook her. The valley was a mile or so wide, and the
opposite hill was fringed with flame. Huge trees, their
fiery shapes silhouetted against the sky, threw showers of
sparks into the air like monstrous Roman candles, and
ignited everything about them. Flames leapt from one
tree to another like live things, and roared as they em-
braced each new victim, until the whole top of the hill
right down to the sea was a long raging inferno.
Jancy stood transfixed with horror, until Godfrey’s
voice roused her.
"Come on,” he said, "no time to stare. Down this
way.”


CHAPTER XXI
Jancy looked at him dazedly. She had been so
preoccupied with the sight on the hill that she had for-
gotten both him and Jerry. She pulled herself together.
"Where’s Jerry’s place?”
"Gosh! You are in a dream!” scoffed Godfrey.
"There’s the roof, under this rock.”
Jancy looked down and saw the iron roof below. "Oh,
well. Lead on, Macduff,” she said with an attempt at
lightness, and with a baleful glance at her Godfrey began
to climb down a rude flight of steps that had been cut
into the rock. As they neared the end of them he called
in a stentorian voice, "I’m back! and a minute after-
wards Jeremy Bentham appeared before them.
"Thank Heavens!” he said. He t looked around, no
doubt for the expected male assistants, and only seeing
Jancy exclaimed:
"But where’s ”
Godfrey let him go no further.
"She’s all I could get,” he said. "There was no one
at the Police Station except the Sergeant, and he promised
to send help if and when any turned up. He says the men
are getting worn out, but he’ll do what he can. I thought
she was better than nothing if we’re going to save the
paintings.”
Jerry took no notice of Godfrey’s disparaging remark,
but put an arm on Jancy’s shoulder. "Thanks for coming,
Jancy. You can be of help. Only I’m a bit worried
whether I should let you stay. This is no place for young
ladies, you know.”
"Oh, do let me stay, Mr. Bentham. I’d love to help.
And anyway I can’t get back now, so I might as well do
what I can until the other help comes.”
"All right.” Jerry patted her shoulder. "I won’t
argue with you. Now, let’s see what you can do. Come
round to the front of the house.”


They skirted a small pool under the rock. "Well,
we’ve got water anyway,” said Jancy.
"Yes, I’ve got a natural spring there. It keeps the air
cool here, but wait until you get round the other side.
It’s like an oven.”
The three went to the front of the house, and the heat
there was, as Jeremy had said, like an oven. The verandah
gave little or no protection from it, since it came from
the fire at the other side of the valley. Jeremy stopped and
nodded at it.
"You see, the bush stops halfway down the hill over
there, and the grass begins. Of course the fire’s easier
to fight when it comes out on to the grass, but also it
travels quicker, so I don’t think we have a lot of time.
I’ve shifted some of my stuff, but there’s a lot left and
we’ll have to get cracking if I’m going to save it.” He
pointed along the cliff that ran at the back of his house.
"There’s a cave over there, and I’m taking everything to
it. It’s not large—large enough though. So let’s get going.
Godfrey, you can help me carry the big easel over, and
Jancy, you can take the canvasses. They’re in metal cylin-
ders, so they’ll be easy enough to carry.”
He went into the house and the others followed. The
room they entered first was the studio; it was large, and
ran the whole length of the house, and held such a con-
glomeration of artists’ materials that Jancy was at a loss
where to start.
"Over there in that corner,” Jeremy directed her.
"You’ll find the cylinders against the wall. Godfrey and I
will get the easel and go first to show you where the cave
is. Ready, Godfrey?”
They lifted the unwieldly easel and carried it out of
the door, with Jancy following and, panting with their
burdens, they traversed the narrow path which so danger-
ously skirted the cliff edge and at last reached the cave.
It was roomier than Jancy had imagined from Jerry’s
description, and she mentioned this, whereupon he pointed
out that the overhang of rock in front gave it a deceptive
depth, but was useless as far as protecting anything went.
"It’ll all have to go right back in the cave,” he said," or


it’ll be scorched if the fire gets this far, and even if it does
not, the heat will damage it unless I can get it far enough
away from the entrance.”
Jancy’s face brightened with a sudden idea. "I know,”
she said, "when we get everything in we can hang blankets
in front and wet them in the spring. Wouldn’t that help?”
"Good for you.” Jerry beamed at her. "We’ll do that.
Now, let’s get back and get some more.”
Little by little they emptied the studio, staggering
along the precarious path again and again until their bodies
ached and their minds lost all thought but the immediate
necessity of protecting Jerry’* work.
They hardly looked at the fire, except to note its
progress occasionally and bestir themselves to greater
efforts. It had left the top of the hill now and was crawl-
ing like molten lava down the grassy slope to the valley.
Jeremy said once, "The wind might turn it when it
gets to the bottom. Sometimes wind makes a tunnel along
the valley, and it might blow it out to sea.”
"If it does we’re saved, then?” said Jancy,
Jeremy grinned. "We can’t rely on it,” he said. "It’s
a very slender chance.” He gave her a keen look that took
in the dust-streaked frock, the scratched and dirty legs
and arms. "I hope you’re not getting too tired with this
Jancy. I’s no work for a girl.”
"Oh, r m perfectly all right, Mr. Bentham ”
He held up his hand and interrupted her.
"The name’s Jerry,” he said. "All my friends call me
that.”
Jancy smiled shyly. "All right—Jerry,” she said.
"That’s the way. You did it very well.”
They were standing on the verandah while this con-
versation was taking place, and just then Godfrey passed
them on his way into the house.
"Have you two finished work?” he said roughly. "I
didn’t hear the knock-off whistle.”
"No, indeed,” said Jeremy. "Neither did we.” He
grinned at Jancy. "Once more into the breach, comrades,
eh?”


They continued their labours, and at last the entire
contents of the studio had been conveyed to the cave.
"Now,” said Jancy, as they stood surveying the results
of their labours, "if we bring out the camp stretchers and
prop them up in front we can hang the wet blankets over
them.”
Jeremy slapped her on the shoulder heartily. There s
no doubt you’re the brains of this organization, Jancy. I
don’t know what we’d have done without you. He
turned to Godfrey. Do you, son?”
Godfrey scowled. "You’ll be giving her ideas about
herself,” he said ungraciously.
"And is that a bad thing?” asked Jeremy, and then
laughed. "You needn’t answer that,” he said. "Come
along, let’s go and get the beds.”
They propped the beds up as Jancy had suggested,
and then, after first wetting the blankets in the spring,
draped them over the frames.
"That’s the stuff,” said Jeremy. "It covers them
completely and leaves a little niche behind for us to huddle
in. They’ll dry fairly quickly in this heat though, so I
think we’d better fill every available container with water
and bring it here.”
They filled everything they could find —buckets,
kerosene tins, saucepans and basins, and Jancy even brought
an ancient copper, which she put in the cave empty and
filled by making repeated trips to the spring with an alu-
minium jug.
As she made her last trip, Godfrey, who was standing
at the edge of the cliff looking down into the valley, said:
"Do you know, Jerry, I think the wind is turning
that fire! Look! It doesn’t seem to be burning so fiercely
at the end near the mountains.”
"No.” Jeremy stopped to look, and wiped his scarlet
face. "You know, I think you’re right, Godfrey. It doesn’t
seem to be travelling so fast in the centre, either.”
Jancy joined them, and then grabbed Jeremy’s arm
excitedly. "Oh, Jerry, perhaps it’s damp at the bottom
and won’t burn!”


Jeremy shook his head. "No, the creek dried up
months ago; it can’t be that. It must be that the wind’s
in a different direction down there, as I said before. Any-
way, it’s certainly not burning as hard as it was. It just
might go out. These fires do odd things. I’ve seen them
burn right up to a homestead and then stop. Most curious
thing—you can’t explain it.”
They looked at one another and smiled involuntarily,
and the hope that they might escape the fire was renewed
within them.
"Well, that’s given us a breathing space, anyway,”
said Godfrey. "Why not save as many of the household
effects as we can?”
Jeremy grinned. "I haven’t got enough of those to
bother about, Godfrey. Anything of any value is already
in the cave. I’m not a man who accumulates possessions,
since in the course of a long life I’ve discovered that you
never possess them, but in the end they possess you.”
"What about books and such?”
"Oh, they went in first. I couldn’t risk my library. I
stowed them while you were away, so there’s nothing else
—except, by Jove, the cat! It just occurs to me I haven’t
seen her for some time.”
"P’raps shes run away,” said Jancy. "Cats do, you
know. She might have been frightened of the fire.”
"Not Haggis. She wouldn’t leave me.”
Jancy laughed. "Haggis! That’s a queer name for a
cat. Haggis is a Scottish pudding, isn’t it?”
"Yes,” grinned Jeremy, "and everything goes into
it. Puss is a bit of a mixture, too, so I called her that.
Come on, we’ll go and look for her.”
They went back to the house and searched the rooms,
calling for the cat, but there was no response.
"I’m sure she wouldn’t leave,” said Jeremy, puzzled.
"Perhaps she’s by the spring. She lies there sometimes when
it’s hot.”
But she wasn’t at the spring, and it was plain that
Jeremy, who was obviously very fond of the cat, was
worried.


Godfrey suggested she might be under the house, but
if she was there she failed to answer their calls, and at last
they gave up the search and, climbing the step, stood on
the verandah and looked down at the fire.
"It’s certainly easing off,” said Jeremy. "You know,
I’m beginning to think we might escape it. In any case,
I’d be all right here now if you two would like to go on
home.”
"I’d rather stay here,” said Godfrey. "I’m as safe
here as anywhere, and my mother knows I m with you, so
that’s all right.”
Jancy’s eyes suddenly widened and, with a look of
dismay, she put her hand to her mouth. "Oh, Heavens!
I’d completely forgotten that Miss Lally doesn’t know
where I am. She’ll be frantic. Oh, and they won’t have
any butter or anything. I was going for that when I met
Godfrey.” She stared at Jeremy in complete consterna-
tion. "How awful! I’d better get home straight away.”
Jeremy looked serious. "Yes, Jancy, I think you
better be going.”
"My horse is up there,” said Godfrey, not averse to
being left alone with Jeremy. "You can take him.”
"I don’t like to think of you going alone,” said
Jeremy worriedly. "I don’t know what it’s like along the
road to town.”
"Oh!” Godfrey put in impatiently, "she’ll be all right.
There was no fire near the road when we came along it.”
"But that was two and a half hours ago, Godfrey,”
Jeremy pointed out. "A lot of things can happen in that
time.”
"Well, I think I’d better just take the risk,” said
Jancy. "I can always come back if it’s bad; but I really
think I’d better try and get home.”
"All right, Jancy,” agreed Jeremy, "but I want you
to promise me that you’ll come back if things look the
least dangerous. The firefighters should be along any time
now, and you can return with them.”
"All right, I’ll come back if there’s any danger,
Jerry, but I must go. I can’t bear to think of how worried
the Hiltons will be.”


They walked off the verandah and round the house.
"Phew!” breathed Jeremy, it’s no cooler, is it?”
"No,” said Jancy, "and the wind seems to have got
up.” She looked up at the cliff above her. "Listen to the
noise it’s making up there.”
Jeremy listened for a moment and his face changed
into a mask of horror. "My goodness!” he shouted, "that’s
not wind, that’s fire! Run for the cave. Run! Run!”
They ran as though their feet had wings. Jeremy,
owing to his long legs, made the cave first, but Godfrey
and Jancy, running behind him, suddenly saw the cat. She
was mewing pitifully from the side of the rock overhang-
ing the cave. Godfrey stopped and then began to climb
the hill to her as, with a roar, the fire topped the cliff
above them and an immense tree burst terribly into flame.
It burnt like matchwood Godfrey, who had got the
cat, started to descend, a dead limb, burning fiercely, be-
gan to break away. Jancy screamed, and as the branch
snapped she grabbed Godfrey’s leg and, with superhuman
strength, dragged him down and pushed him bodily into
the cave; but she was too late to save herself, for although
she made one step towards safety, the falling limb felled
her and pinned her to the earth by the other leg.


CHAPTER XXII
Meanwhile, back at Burangi House, anxiety for
Jancy’s safety was growing. After she left, the work had
gone on as usual, and her absence was not noted until some
time later. It was Geoff who called attention to it. He
came in, dirty and dishevelled from his labours at the fires,
and sat on the floor while Marney waited on him.
"It’s a pleasure to see you working,” he told her.
"How do you like it for a change?”
She pulled a face at him. "If you’d done as much
as I have to-day, my lad, you’d be a cot case. We’ve worked
like slaves since this morning. I don’t think any of us
have even sat down.”
"Do you good,” said Geoff unfeelingly. He looked
around the kitchen. "I don’t see Jancy about. I suppose
she’s collapsed from overwork.”
"It’s a wonder she hasn't.” Marney was indignant.
"She’s been going like a steam engine.”
Geoff grinned. "I’ll bet she has. I was only teasing,
Marney.
Marney looked thoughtful for a moment, and he
said: "What’s wrong?”
"Well, I’ve just realized that I haven’t seen Jancy
about for some time. Gosh! Geoff, I hope she hasnt’ really
collapsed. I’d better go and look.”
She left the kitchen and went through the dining-
room. Miss Emmeline was in charge there; but Jancy
hadn’t been seen.
"Perhaps she’s in the sitting-room,” suggested Miss
Emmeline. "So many more people have arrived that
Euphemia took them in there.”
"I’ll see,” said Marney, and went to enquire of Miss
Feemy; but she had no success there either.


"Haven’t laid eyes on her since lunch,” said Miss
Feemy, who was nursing a large baby and endeavouring
to disentangle it from her many beads and chains. "Per-
haps she’s upstairs resting. Have a look. Third door on
the right.”
T don’t think she’d be there,” said Marney doubtfully.
"But I’ll go and see.”
Jancy, of course, wasn’t there and Marney returned
to the kitchen very worried and, as a last resort,
approached Miss Tally.
"Have you seen Jancy?” she asked. "I can’t find her
anywhere.”
"Yes, she’s gone a message for me and I wish she’d
hurry. We’re running short of butter,” said Miss Tally
reassuringly, and then suddenly realizing the passage of
time, looked at her watch. Her eyes grew apprehensive.
"But she’s been gone ages. I wonder where she’s got to?
Oh! Marney, I never noticed how the time was going. I
wonder where she is?”
Geoffrey watched them talking together and, seeing
the concern in Miss Tally’s face, went over.
"What’s wrong?” he asked.
"Well, Miss Tally’s just told me that she sent Jancy
down to the Country Women’s for more butter and
things, and that she’s been gone a long time.”
Miss Tally wrung her hands. "Oh, I do hope nothing’s
happened to her. I can’t think why I didn’t notice she
hadn’t returned —but I’ve been so busy.”
Geoff patted her arm comfortingly. "Don’t worrv,
Miss Tally, I’ll scoot down the town and see where she
is. Perhaps the Country Women have kept her there to
help for a while.”
Miss Tally looked relieved. "Of course, that’s what’s
happened, I suppose.” She smiled at him. "Silly of me
to get in such a way.”
"I’ll go now,” said Geoff. "I won’t be long.”
"Thank you, dear,” said Miss Tallv gratefully. "And
don’t come back without her, even if they want her to
stay. I’d feel much better if she were here with me. Oh!


and you might ask the Country Women to send up some
more bread and butter.”
Okay. Geoff crossed the kitchen and Marney ran
after him.
"I’ll come with you as far as the gate,” she said. "It’s
my turn to patrol the garden.”
They let themselves out into the reeking, smoke-filled
air, and leaving Marney at the gate Geoff made his way
as fast as he could in the circumstances, down to the
Country Women s Association rooms. He had every con-
fidence that Jancy would be there, and was therefore
extremely surprised to be told that she had not been seen
at all.
"She might have gone to the Police Station for the
butter,” said the busy woman whom Geoffrey questioned.
"They 5 ve been giving out supplies, too.”
Geoff shook his head. "I don’t think she’d do that.
She was told to come here. Still, I’ll go and see.” And
giving Miss Lally’s message about the bread and butter, he
left.
But, of course, she had not been seen at the Police
Station either, and the Sergeant was most concerned. "I
don t know where people get to,” he said harassedly.
That Mrs. Browne and Mr. Sheridan have disappeared,
too. I can’t look after everybody. How did this girl come
to be in the town anyway?”
Geoff told him that Miss Lally had sent Jancy, and
was very worried at her not returning.
"Oh, she’s staying at the Hiltons’, is she?”
Yes, and you see, she doesn’t know the place; but
she’s got plenty of commonsense and wouldn’t go looking
for trouble, I know that.”
"Then we’ll have to see what we can do. I’m so short
of men, though. I m getting S.O.S.’s from everywhere all
the time, and there s no one to send. Half the men are
coming back so exhausted they can’t possibly go out
again without a rest. Anyway, I’ll try and do something.
111 get e\ eryone to look out for her. There are some men
resting in the back room who haven’t been in long. Per-
haps they ve seen her—you can ask, anyway.”


But none of the men had seen Jancy, and Geoff re-
turned dolefully to the Sergeant to tell him so.”
"I don’t know quite what to do,” he admitted. "If I
go back and tell Miss Lally Jancy’s not in the town she’ll
be worried stiff. At present she thinks the women might
have kept her to help. I suppose it wouldn’t do any harm
to let her go on thinking that while I look for Jancy
myself.”
"That would be best,” agreed the Sergeant. "But
where you’re going to start looking I don’t know.”
He stopped speaking, and cocked his head in a listening
attitude. "Here’s another lorry coming up the street; per-
haps they’ve seen her. Let’s go and ask.”
He and Geoff went out and were waiting on the side-
walk when the lorry pulled in. There were three men in
it and two women. When the lorry stopped they made no
move to get out, and the driver jumped down and came
round to the Sergeant. "It’s the Lennons. They’ve been
burnt out,” he said in a low voice. "The Wrens and the
Parkes managed to get to town, but these people were
caught. They’ve had a terrible time. We’d better get them
into the Station and give them something. They’re all
suffering from shock.”
"Right!” said the Sergeant. "Geoff, give me a hand.”
He let down the back of the lorry and held his hand
out to the woman nearest him. "Come on, Mrs. Lennon,”
he said with deep pity. "Come into the Station and I’ll
get my wife to look after you.”
The woman shifted her head and stared at him un-
seeingly. Her eyes were red-rimmed in her dead-white
face, and her singed hair stood out in a ragged mass around
her head. She made no attempt to move. .
"Just get up and help her, Geoff,” said the Sergeant.
"She’s too dazed to help herself.”
Geoff climbed into the lorry and took the woman’s
arm gently. "Just try and stand,” he said, and, like one
walking in her sleep, she did so. He took her to the edge
of the lorry and the driver and the Sergeant helped her
down and led her, moving like an automaton, into the


Station. Geoff went to the next woman, who was younger
than the first. She was nursing a baby.
"Shall I take the baby?” he asked. "I think you ought
to go into the Station. It’s so hot out here.”
She looked at him with the same dead eyes as the other
woman had; she, too, was pale with shock, and her hair
singed with fire. But she didn’t speak. Geoff turned to the
two men, who were the husbands of the women, and said:
"Would you help me to get her inside? She’s not fit to be
out here.”
The men nodded dazedly, and one took the woman’s
arm. "Come on, Nell,” he said, "we’ve got to go inside.”
Geoff took the baby, and she suffered her husband to help
her off the lorry and into the Station. The Sergeant’s wife
was already looking after Mrs. Lennon, and she sent
Geoffrey for a clothes basket to put the baby in. She then
administered restoratives to the shocked mother and the
three men, and made them as comfortable as possible on
the Station benches. When she had done what she could
she came over to where the Sergeant, the driver arid Geoff
were standing.
"These people ought to be put to bed,” she said.
"They’re terribly shocked. What happened?”
The driver spoke quietly. "I got to them after the
fire had gone through. The women were underneath the
tank. They’d pierced the iron and let the water run round
them. It saved their lives. The men were in the paddock.
It was ploughed, so it didn’t burn, but the place was
ringed with fire and they couldn’t get back to the house.
There’s nothing left of their property; everything was
burnt except the tank stand. Poor devils.” The Sergeant’s
wife looked at her charges, who were lying back with
closed eyes.
"Poor, poor souls,” she said heartfeltly, and then,
looking puzzled, she asked: "But haven’t the Lennons a
daughter, too? I thought they had.”
The driver closed his eyes and drew a hand wearily
over his face. "That’s the worst part of all,” he said.
"Jack Lennon told me that when the fire looked bad she
saddled her horse and went for help.” He raised his head


and looked at them with miserable eyes. "I couldn’t tell
him she never got here.”
The Sergeant’s wife put her hands to her face. "Oh,
oh!” she whispered, and her eyes filled with tears. She put
a hand on her husband’s arm. "Oh, George,” she said
chokingly, and, unable to control herself, she turned and
hurriedly left the room.
The Sergeant sighed. "We’d better not tell them yet.
And anyway she might have managed to get out.”
The driver shook his head slowly. No one could have
got through from there alive. It was sheer hell on earth.
I went in and came back after the fire had gone through,
remember. Even the soil on the road was smouldering. I
just prayed that my tyres would last until I made it, and
thank goodness, they did!”
The Sergeant’s wife returned with her control almost
restored. "I’m sorry,” she said, and her voice still shook
a little. "But I couldn’t help it. I have children of my
own. Still, it’s no use thinking of the poor girl; we’ve got
to look after the living. These people have got to go to
bed, as I said before. I’m full up here. I wonder who
would take them?”
"I think the Hiltons would,” said Geoff. "They’ve
got plenty of room.”
"But r Ve sent an awful lot of people up there; they
must be overcrowded.”
"Yes, but they’re mainly women who’ll go home
to-night. They’ve come there for their children’s safety
more thany anything else, and I know none of their houses
have been touched.”
"But what if the fires go on burning? They won’t
want to go home.”
"Oh, we certainly hope that doesn’t happen,” said
the Sergeant. "This westerly usually drops at sundown,
and we’ll probably get a cool southerly that’ll drive the
fire back over the land it’s already burnt and help put it
out. It might even bring rain.”
"Oh, I do hope so,” said his wife fervently, and her
eyes brightened at the thought of a reprieve from the


awful heat. "Then I’ll ring up Miss Lally and ask her if
it’ll be all right.”
She turned away to use the telephone at the Sergeant’s
desk, and they all heard Miss Lally answer and say that
the Lennons should be sent up immediately. The Ser-
geant’s wife thanked her and replaced the receiver.
"Now, how are we going to get them there?” she said.
"In our car,” replied the Sergeant. He smiled at
Geoff. "Your mother’s been driving it all day. She’s been
worth her weight in gold, the way she’s fetched and carried
for us. She’s gone up to the doctor at the moment with
one of the firefighters who got burned, and she should
be back any minute now.”
"Then I think I’ll be off,” said the driver, "if you’ve
got a car to transport them. I’ve got to pick up a truckload
of men out near Great Rock, and they’ll be expecting
me.”
He gave them a nod and went on his way, and the
telephone began to ring shrilly. The Sergeant went to it,
saying, "Someone else in trouble, I suppose, and there’s
nothing I can do. It breaks a man’s heart.”
His wife shook her head sadly. "It’s been very difficult
to-day,” she told Geoff. "We weren’t prepared for any-
think like this. There’s been no time to organize—no time
to do anything, in fact. We’ve just had to do the best
we can. It’s been terrible to know that people are in such
dreadful danger and there’s not a single thing we can do
to help, and even then we only hear from the ones who
have got a telephone. Heaven knows how many people
there are, like the Lennons, who haven’t got a ’phone and
have no means of calling for help.”
The sound of a motor car engine came from outside
and she said, "Perhaps that’s your mother now.”
"I don’t think so,” said Geoff, following her to the
door. "It sounds more like a lorry.”


CHAPTER XXIII
It was a lorry, and men were sitting wearily on the
back of it.
"You poor things,” said the Sergeant’s wife. "You
look all in!”
One gave a her a wry grin. "Oh, there’s life in the
old dogs yet,” he said. "Got any more fires you want
fought?”
"Adore than enough,” she answered. "Where have you
come from?”
"South Point.”
"Goodness! Don’t tell me it’s burning there.”
"It’s been terrific!” the man said, "and there’s been a
heavy landslide near the cliff.”
"What’s that?” asked the Sergeant, coming to the
door.
"I was sayin’ there’s been a heavy landslide at South
Point, Sergeant.”
"Didn’t look like a landslide to me,” put in another
man. "Looked more like a tunnel had fallen in. Have
they ever mined under there, Sergeant?”
"Not that I know of. There’s some caves that go in
a long way, of course.”
"Then that must be it. They’ve fallen in, I guess.”
The driver of the lorry came round and made his
report on the fires.
"Now, I’ll take these men up the street for a meal,”
he said. "They’ve earned it, I can tell you. I’d head any
of the fighters away from South Point, Sergeant,” he
added. "That fall of earth has left a terrible hole, and
burning trees have fallen into it. It’s pretty dangerous.
The fire’s under control there, so all you’d need to send
is a man to watch it.” He gave a sketchy salute and a


"See you later” to the Sergeant and his wife, who went
back into the Station, and then went round to his cab.
Geoff followed him.
"You haven’t seen a fifteen-year-old girl in your
travels to-day, have you?”
"No. Why?”
"She’s missing. We can’t find her.”
"No. Sorry, son, I can’t help you. But I’ll ask anyone
see.
"Thanks.” Geoff stood back, and the lorry moved off
as Mrs. Chapman drove down the other side of the street
and made a wide turn to stop in front of the Police Station.
Geoff went over to her.
"I didn’t know you were so good behind a wheel,
Ma,” he said facetiously, and then added seriously: "I don’t
suppose you’ve seen Jancy anywhere?”
"Jancy! Why, isn’t she at the Hiltons?”
"No.” Geoffrey told her what had happened.
"But, darling,” she said when he had finished, "surely
she couldn’t disappear like that. No, I haven’t seen her
about anywhere.”
"And neither has anybody else,” said Geoff. "I can’t
make up my mind whether to go back and tell Miss Lally
or not. She’ll worry herself to death. I feel I ought to gc
and look for Jan., but honestly, Mother, I don’t know
where to start.”
"Well, you know, it is probable that she’s gone back
home while you’ve been here. Perhaps someone called her
into a house to help with something. They’ve been doing
that all day to me. One dear old thing got me to bury
all her crochet work in the garden. Yes,” Mrs. Chapman
became more sure that this had happened as she talked,
"that’s what happened all right. I’d go back to Burangi
House and see, if I were you. She’ll most likely be there.
Now, I’d better go into the Station and find out what the
Sergeant’s got for me to do.”
"Oh, I can tell you that. He wants you to run the
Lennons up to Burangi House. Gosh! Mother, they’ve
had a terrible time.” Geoff proceeded to tell his mother


of the tragic events the driver had related, and of the
pitiful condition of the burnt-out family.
Mrs. Chapman was shocked. "I’d better get them up
to the Hiltons straight away,” she said, and, leaving the
car, she and Geoff went into the Station.
The Sergeant’s wife was very glad to see her. "I’m
so anxious that they’re put to bed and kept warm; it’s the
only treatment for shock. If you’ll take them up now I’ll
’phone the doctor and he’ll follow up and give them some
sedatives. You and I had better help the women. We’!!
take Mrs. Lennon first.”
At last they got the Lennons down the steps and into
the car, and as it was full Geoff said he would walk up
after them, and he set off after they left with all the
speed he was capable of in that heat.
When he reached Burangi House the patients had all
been put to bed and, as he let himself in the front door,
which was on the latch, he saw Miss Lally coming down
the stairs.
"Oh, there you are, Geoff!” she cried. "Did you find
her?”
Geoff’s eyes widened, for he had somehow become
convinced on the way that his mother was right and he
would find Jancy at home. "No,” he said flatly, "Isn’t
she here?”
"No, she’s not. Oh, dear!” Miss Lally gripped the
bannister with both hands in an excess of anxiety. "What
shall we do, Geoff?”
Miss Lally’s dependence on him called all Geoff’s
sturdy strength to the fore.
"Don’t you worry,” Miss Lally,” he said with a con-
fidence he did not feel. “I’ll find her. I’ll have a drink of
water first and then go back and look. Mother says fancy
might easily have been called into someone’s house to help.
In any case, I’m sure she’ll be all right. She’s got too much
sense to go looking for trouble.”
"I hope you’re right.” Miss Lally accompanied him
into the kitchen, where Marney gave him a glass of water
out of the refrigerator.


"No luck?” she asked, and Geoff shook his head.
"Of course I haven’t had a really good look yet. I
got sidetracked down at the Police Station.” He finished
the water and handed her the glass. "I’ll go now. I think
I’ll ask at every house on the road to the Country’s
Women’s. She’d be bound to go only one way, so it’ll be
simple.”
Marney looked out of the window at the smoke-filled
air. "I can’t say I envy you going out in that,” she said,
"though it seems to have lifted a little in the last hour.”
"Yes, it has,” agreed Geoff, "and the Sergeant thinks
we might get a southerly change soon, which would ease
things considerably.”
"Thank Heavens for that! I’ll watch for it every
minute.”
"Well, I’m off,” said Geoff. "Keep your chin up.”
He left the house and went towards the town,
patiently enquiring at every door on the way for Jancy,
but she was nowhere to be found, and at last he found
himself back at the Police Station where, worried and
anxious, he went in to ask the Sergeant if there had been
any news of her.
That poor, harassed man shook his head.
"Not a thing, Geoff. Men have been coming in all
the time and I’ve asked, but no one’s seen her.” He lifted
his head. "Here are some more now. Half a minute and
we’ll ask them.”
As he finished speaking a man ran in through the
door and looked round wildly for the Sergeant.
"Hey, look!” he cried. "We’ve got to get out to
South Point quick. I was left to watch the fire where the
tunnel fell in and I think there’s someone down there. I
can hear them moaning. There are some men on the lorry
outside and they’re willing to come back with me; but
we’ll need ropes and picks and spades and things.”
The Sergeant sprang into action. "You’ll probably
need other things, too. Geoff, run up to the Ambulance
Station, and if the cars are out, get them to lend you a


stretcher and some blankets. Leave word that when the
car comes in it’s wanted at South Point.”
Geoff flew off, and the Sergeant went to get spades
and ropes. He and his wife returned laden and, with the
help of the men, put the implements in the truck.
"This is the blackest day Burangi’s ever had,” said
the Sergeant’s wife. "How many more tragedies we’re
going to see before this day’s ended I don’t know.” She
turned to the man who had come from South Point. "Are
there more than one person caught in the landslide?” she
asked.
"I couldn’t tell. I just heard these awful moans, and
I didn’t stop to think how many people were down there.
I knew I couldn’t do anything myself, so* I ran to the
road for help, and by a piece of luck found this lorry
returning to town.”
The Sergeant’s wife nodded. ""Well, I’d better go and
ring the hospital and prepare them. I know they’re full
up, but this is a real emergency, and they’ll have to find
beds somehow.” She went in, audibly deploring the lack
of adequate space in the small cottage that served Burangi
as a hospital, and her husband, seeing Geoffrey hurrying
down the road with an armful of blankets, went to his
help.
"You take these,” said Geoff, "and I’ll go back for
the stretchers. The car’s out, but they’ll tell the driver to
go to South Point as soon as he comes in.”
"Good.” The Sergeant took the blankets and Geoff
returned to the Ambulance Station, where he picked up
the stretchers and carried them down to the lorry. When
they had been supplied with water and some bandages the
men drove off.
The Sergeant looked after them and mopped his
perspiring face. "Whew! I wish that southerly change
would come. It should be due any time now.” He looked
back towards the mountains, where the sun hung like a
menacing scarlet ball. "I think the westerly’s dropping,
don’t you?”
Geoff, who had been too preoccupied to notice any-
thing, gave his attention to the weather, and was surprised


to find that the wind was dropping. He looked at the trees,
which were no longer dancing like mad things, and said
incredulously, "I believe you re right. It is.
And even as they stood there the wind lost more and
more of its power until the dust no longer eddied along
the road and the leaves hung exhausted and motionless.
A look of relief and thankfulness swept over the Ser-
geant’s face and he grabbed Geoff’s army excitedly. It s
stopped! It’s stopped!” he cried, and ran into the Station
calling, "Mother, Mother, the wind’s dropped!”
They came out together, smiling, and Geoff smiled
back at them; they were all suddenly filled with joy at their
deliverance from the torturing wind.
"Now!” said the Sergeant. "This gives the southerly
a chance.”
"Oh, I hope and pray it comes,” breathed his wife.
"Me, too,” said Geoff fervently.
Another lorry drew up as they were standing there
and the men jumped out. They, too, were smiling as
they came across the road, their teeth showing white in
their soot-streaked faces. "Well, it won’t be long now,”
said one. "I’ve been waiting for that southerly all day.
They crowded into the Station, all talking at once,
and the Sergeant said: "Where have you come from?
"Don’t you remember, you sent us to Bentham’s?”
"Oh, I’d forgotten,” said the Sergeant. "I’ve sent so
many lorries to so many places.”
Geoff pricked up his ears at the mention of Jerry’s
place and said, "Is Jerry all right?”
"I couldn’t tell you, son, we didn’t get to him. The
fire stopped us. Came straight between us and his place.
Another mob of blokes are fighting out there now to give
us a rest. But Jerry will be all right; he’s a shrewd bloke;
he’ll find a foxhole in that cliff of his.”
The Sergeant was worried. "But he’s not alone, you
know.” He looked at Geoffrey. "Your brother’s with him.
He reported the fire soon after lunch. Came for help. I
told him I’d send someone and I sent these men; but that
was only an hour ago.”


Geoff gave him a startled glance. "Huck’s there!
Why didn’t you tell me? I’ve got to get to him.” He ran
outside and, seeing the lorry empty, came back in.
where s the driver?”
A man said, "I’m here, son.”
Geoff made for him. "Take me out to Bentham’s,”
he said. "I’ve got to get to my brother.”
"But you can’t do anything, old feller. You couldn’t
reach him. Nobody could. And he’s all right if he’s with
Jerry.”
Geoffrey s pleas became frantic. "I don’t care whether
I can do anything or not. I’ve got to get out there, I’ve
got to. Take me, will you?”
The man shrugged. Okay, if it means that much to
you. Come on.”
went outside, and on the top step the man put
a hand up and looked at the sky; then he slapped Geoff
jubilantly on the shoulder and yelled back into the Station:
f 11!” t^C SOUtherly ’ s ere ’ come and get your lungs
He ran laughing across the road, and he and Geoffrey
climbed into the lorry. He started the motor and pushed
it into gear, and with a wave to the group who were
capering joyfully at the Station door, he sent the lorry
noisily up the hill leading out of the town.


CHAPTER XXIV
Back at the cave everything was confusion for the
few moments after Jancy fell. Jerry, thinking his com-
panions were directly behind him as they ran for safety,
had gone straight to his paintings to see that they were all
right, and only turned when the stones dislodged by God-
frey on his descent rattled into the cave. The boy came
hurtling after them as Jancy pushed him, and Jerry was
just in time to see the burning limb fall on a cascading
shower of sparks and pin her to the ground.
He gave a great shout and crossed the cave in one
mightly leap. Catching Godfrey, who was clambering to
his feet, by the shoulder, he flung him out of the way as
though he were a straw and, reckless of the burning debris
that was still falling, he leaned over the unconscious Jancy,
grasped the burning limb, burning his hand badly in the
process, threw it off her leg, picked her up in his arms
and carried her into the cave.
He laid her gently down on the ground and beat out
the smouldering spots on her clothes as he snapped at
Godfrey, "Give me one of those wet blankets!”
Godfrey passed one, and Jerry rolled Jancy’s limp
form in it, pressing it against her body to kill any sparks
that may have still been alive, then he said: "Pull down
one of those beds for her to lie on; this ground’s too hot.
And I put a couple of dry blankets in the cubby-hole I
made for us. Get those.”
Godfrey set to these tasks with a will, and Jerry,
smoothing the tangled hair from Jancy’s forehead with a
large hand, watched the burning embers drop past the
mouth of the cave.
"Put the bed as far back as you can get it, Godfrey,”
he said. "We don’t want to risk any more fire falling on
her.”
When the bed was ready, Jerry unrolled Jancy from
the wet blanket and, carrying her over, put her down on


the mattress; he then wrapped her in the dry blankets
and told Godfrey to bring one of the buckets of water.
While this was being brought he knelt down, rolled up
the blanket and examined her injured leg. It was badly
burned and blistered, and would, he knew, give her con-
siderable pain when she came to.
He remarked as much to Godfrey when he brought
the water, and added: "I think we might let her be; at
least she’s suffering no pain while she’s unconscious. I
don’t think she’s hit her head at all; I think the agony of
that burn knocked her out.” His big, gentle hands ex-
plored the skull under the thick, soft brown hair. "Seems
all right,” he said. "I wish I could do something about
that leg, but I can’t. It’s better to leave it alone, I think;
do you?” He looked up a Godfrey for the first time and
saw that his face was full of misery. "Why, Godfrey, old
chap, what’s wrong?” he asked with concern.
This sympathetic question was the end of the boy’s
control. His face worked and heavy tears spilled out of
his eyes. He made no noise, but just stood there weeping
silently. Jerry watched this phenomenon for a moment
in astonishment, for he well knew that Godfrey had never
been known to cry, all the softer emotions having been
covered for years by a hard crust of aggression. Then he
said softly, "Don’t be upset, old chap, she’s going to be
all right.”
Godfrey gave a sob. "She did it for me!” he said
brokenly, as though he couldn’t believe it. "She did it for
me.
Jerry nodded and, turning away, Godfrey went to the
other side of the cave and cried unashamedly. Jerry did
not attempt to comfort him, for he thought it would be
very good for the boy to grieve for someone else; so he
got up from his knees and sat quietly on the end of the
bed, tying his handkerchief around his injured hand, until
the paroxysm was over and Godfrey, having pulled him-
self together somewhat, returned.
"I’m sorry,” he muttered, sitting down on the ground
near Jancy’s head. "I didn’t mean to do that.”
"Best thing you’ve ever done,” said Jerry. "It’ll do
you a world of good.”


Godfrey looked at Jancy and then at Jerry. "She
will be all right?” he said imploringly. "You weren’t just
saying that?”
"No, son, she’ll be okay. But the sooner we get her
to a doctor the better. How did it happen, anyway?
"It was the cat.” Godfrey looked round. "By the
way, where is she? Oh, there she is.” He pointed to where
puss was comfortably ensconsed in a corner of the cave.
He returned to his story. "You see, I saw the cat as Jancy
and I ran along the path, and I scrambled up to get her.
Jancy must have seen the fire break out overhead and, as
I came down, she grabbed me and thrust me into the cave.
He stared at Jerry wide-eyed. "She must have known it
was going to hit me. Can you imagine anybody doing
that?”
"Yes, lots of people,” Jerry said seriously.
"Course you could,” said Godfrey. After all, you
went out and got her and burnt your hand doing it, and
that was just as bad. I couldn t have done it.
"Oh, yes, you could. What if you’d been on your own
here, you wouldn’t have let her he out there, would you?
Godfrey wrinkled his brow in an attempt to answer
this question honestly. "I don’t know, he said at last.
"I don’t know what I’d do.”
"Well, I do. You didn’t wonder what to do when you
saw the cat, did you? You just climbed up and got her,
despite the danger.”
"That’s right.” Godfrey look surprised. "I did,
didn’t I?”
"Yes,” said Jerry. "There doesn’t seem to be any con-
scious thought at such times, Godfrey; people on
impulse, good or bad —your’s happened to be good.”
Godfrey smiled, and for an instant showed
which lay hidden beneath his usually surly exterior. "What
do you know about that?” he said delightedly.
Jerry laughed at this naivete, and the charm disap-
peared abruptly.
"You’re kidding me,” Godfrey accused him sulkily.
"Not me, son,” said Jerry. "I was pleased at the
delight you showed when you discovered you could be a


good fellow. I wouldn’t dream of kidding you. I’d like
you to stop kidding yourself though.”
All Godfrey’s aggression returned. "What do you
mean?” he asked belligerently.
"What I said,” answered Jerry carelessly. "You’ve
been trying to be Peck’s Bad Boy for a long while now,
and it’s high time you stopped it. You’ve tried it for long
enough, and you must have found by this time that it gets
you nowhere. It’s just not good sense to keep it up, now is
it?”
Godfrey glowered at the ground; but Jerry, taking
no notice, leaned over Jancy and lifted up one of her
eyelids.
"Hm,” he said, "she’s still a long way down.” He felt
her hands and feet. "She’s cold, too. I don’t like that. I
wonder if it’s possible to get to the house.” He went to
the side of the cave where they had entered. Burning twigs
and leaves littered the pathway and the dry grass was
burning fiercely where it grew in the cracks of the cliff
face. As far as Jerry could see, however, the house was still
intact, having been protected by the bare overhanging
rock and the wide area of cleared earth around the veran-
dah.
He cast a calculating eye at the path. "I think I could
make it,” he said. "I’ll get some more blankets and a
pillow. He came back to the bed and leant over to look
at Jancy, and while his back was turned Godfrey jumped
up, ran to the cave entrance and, saying, "I’ll get the
things,” was off down the path to the house.
Jerry crossed the cave with a roar. "Come back, you
young idiot!” he cried angrily to the back that was rapidly
disappearing down the path. "I’ll wring your neck!” But
this was said less angrily, and a grin twitched at the corner
of his mouth.
He shrugged and, still smiling, went back to his vigil
at the bed.
Godfrey returned unscathed with the blankets and a
pillow. He also brought a clean sheet. "I thought we could
tear this up and put it round her leg to keep the rough
blanket off it.” He raised his eyes to Jerry’s and then


dropped them, saying awkwardly, "You could put some
on your hand, too.”
"Thanks, I could at that,” said Jerry, deliberately
refraining from mentioning the boy’s foolhardiness in
running to the house. "You might give me a hand to lift
her out of the blankets so that I can fix her leg, Godfrey.”
Between them they got the blankets off her, wrapped
her injured leg in clean linen and rolled her up again.
Then Jerry took a piece of the sheet and, with the water
from the bucket, gently bathed her grimy face and hands.
As he finished she moved uneasily and muttered.
He bent above her. "How do you feel, Jancy?” he
asked softly.
Her eyes suddenly opened and stared at him dazedly.
"The horse,” she said indistinctly. "What about the
horse?”
Godfrey’s hand flew to his mouth in horror. "My
horse, Jerry. She means my horse Tommy. I tied him up
over the other side of the cliff.” He sat down and put both
hands over his face. "I forgot him,” he cried remorse-
fully, "I forgot all about him.”
Jerry heard him, but had no time to comfort him at
that moment, for Jancy’s eyes were slowly closing again
and he didn’t want her to sink back into unconsciousness,
not knowing whether it was bad for her. He bathed her
face with the cold water and called her name; but nothing
roused her, and at last he was forced to give up trying.
He turned his attention to Godfrey, who was still
sitting with his hands over his face.
Jerry put a hand on his shoulder. "It’s rotten bad
luck, Godfrey. But perhaps your horse managed to get
away.”
"No, I tied him so tightly, he’s never get undone
himself. No, he’s probably bur ” He choked on the
word —"burned to death.” He suddenly grabbed Jerry’s
hand. "Oh, Jerry, what shall I do? What shall I do?”
"There’s nothing you can do, son,” Jerry said, his
voice full of pity for the boy’s obvious distress. "We
can only wait and see.”


"But it’s my fault, both Jancy and Tommy ”
Jerry interrupted him. v "It’s nobody’s fault, Godfrey.
These things happen. You couldn’t stop them, or make
them come about. Don’t blame yourself.”
"If I hadn’t tied him there., If only I hadn’t tied
him—but I didn’t think of the fire coming that way.”
"Of course you didn’t, neither did I. It’s just one
of those things that couldn’t be foreseen.”
Jancy began to mutter again, and Jerry strode over
to the bed. Godfrey followed him and looked down at
the flushed face that was moving uneasily on the pillow.
"She looks hot now,” he said, "not cold. Her face
was quite pale before.”
"Yes.” Jerry was frowning worriedly. "I hope she
doesn’t get too restive or it’ll disturb that leg of hers; it’s
bad enough without being mauled about.”
"Why is she so hot?” asked Godfrey.
"She’s running a temperature,” explained Jerry. "I
wonder if she did hurt her head after all. It really seems
like a slight concussion.”
"Would that give her a temperature?”
"I don’t know.” Jerry stroked his chin and stared
at Jancy. "I wish I were more experienced in these things.
I don’t know what to give her. Aspirin might bring that
temperature down. Look, Godfrey, you watch her and I’ll
go to the house and see what I can find in the medicine
chest. Don’t let her throw the covers off or roll about if
you can help it.”
He went to the entrance of the cave and looked out.
The grass fire was still burning; but there was less debris
falling from the top of the cliff, and Jerry started to pick
his way down the path. At the house he went around
the back and, wetting an old sack, began to climb the rock
steps to the top of the cliff, beating out the burning grass
and small scrub as he went.
It took him a considerable time to get to the top; but
he thought it worthwhile, for he knew that it was becom-
ing imperative for Jancy to have hospital treatment, and
if it were possible he hoped to get her there himself instead
of waiting for the men the Sergeant had promised.


Eventually he reached the top and cautiously raised
his head above the rock to see what is was like above. A
blast of hot air scorched his face and he withdrew to put
the wet sack over his head and the handkerchief across his
face.
Slowly he raised his head again, and before the heat
penetrated he managed to get a good look at the terrain
above the cliff. It was still burning fiercely some two
hundred yards or so away, and the area between was a
blackened waste of still-smoking grass and trees. It was
obvious that there would be no chance of getting through
to the road for some time, and with a last look around
Jerry descended the steps and removed the sack from his
head.
Entering the house, he went to the medicine chest
and got a bottle of aspirin, took a spoon, a glass and a jug
which he filled at the spring, and rather dispiritedly made
his way back to the cave. Below him the fire at the bottom
of the valley had almost burnt out, but the falling limbs
from burning trees above the house had ignited the grass
and scrub below the cliff and it was burning upwards. He
stopped at the sight of this new danger, and then went on
praying silently that the fire would not reach the cave
before he could get Jancy out.


CHAPTER XXV
As he entered the cave, Godfrey called him. "Jerry!
I can’t keep her still.” '
Putting down the jug and glass in his hand, Jerry
hurried over to the bed, where Jancy was tossing restlessly.
"Now then, lassie,” he said in his deep, soothing voice, "be
still.” He stroked her head with his fingers and she quiet-
ened somewhat. "Bring me a glass of water, Godfrey, and
the spoon, will you, please? I’ll try to give her this
aspirin.”
He took two tablets from the bottle in his pocket,
and when Godfrey handed him the spoon crushed them
against the silver with his powerful thumb. "Now pour
a drop of water on that,” he directed the boy. "We’ll
make a paste.” Godfrey did so, and when the aspirin had
partially dissolved, Jerry lifted Jancy up with his arm
around her shoulders. !'Jancy! Jancy!” he said loudly
against her lolling head, until at last she lifted it and her
eyes opened slowly.
"Yes,” she said thickly, obviously trying hard to focus
him.
"Just swallow this; it’ll do you good. Open your
mouth.” She seemed to have no control over her lips and
Jerry, seeing this, put the spoon against her lips and gently
drew her chin down. He held her head back and the mix-
ture on the spoon emptied itself on to her tongue.
"Quick, Godfrey, the glass of water!” He put the
glass to her lips and she managed to sip a little. "Try again,
Jancy.” She made a manful effort and swallowed some
more, and Jerry said, "That’s my girl.” He gave Godfrey
the glass and carefully lowered Jancy on to the pillow.
He sighed as he stood up. "Well, that’s that. Whether
it’ll do any good or not I don’t know, but it will probably
quieten her.”
Godfrey was standing biting his nails at Jerry’s side.
"She looks awfully sick, doesn’t she?” he said.


"Yes. I’m afraid it must be concussion, and severe
at that.” He kicked a stone on the ground impatiently.
"I wish we could get out of this. Just watch her, Godfrey.
I’ve got to go out again.”
"What for?”
"Oh, just to have a general look round.” Jerry did
not want to tell the boy of the danger from below. "I
want to get her to hospital as soon as possible. We’ll go
as soon as the fire gives us a chance to get through.”
He went outside and along the path, and looked down
anxiously at the fire below. It was not travelling very
fast, but it was climbing slowly and surely upwards. Jerry
left it and went along to the cliff steps and peered over as
before. The fire there was a little further away, he
thought, and his hopes of getting out before they were
caught from the other side rose a little. The heat had
abated somewhat and, climbing up, he walked a little
way on the smouldering earth. Yes, the fire was certainly
receding and he thought that in a while he might make
an attempt to reach the road.
A burning sensation in his foot reminded him he was
standing on hot ground and he smiled wryly. "But not
in these shoes,” he said to himself, and, leaping back to
the steps, he descended them hurriedly and took his shoes
off at the bottom. They were quite charred, and he dipped
the soles in the spring before going into the house and
routing out an old pair of stout mountaineering boots,
which he put on before going back to the cave.
Godfrey was still sitting on the bed, and looked round
as he heard the ring of the studs on Jerry’s boots.
"What! Going mountain climbing?” he asked with
tired facetiousness.
Jerry grinned. "I went up to the top of the cliff
and burnt my shoes in the process.”
"Gosh!” Godfrey’s face brightened. "Can you get
up there now?”
"Yes, it’s not too bad. The fire’s burning away from
it. But we’ll have to wait a while before we can get to
the road. The ground’s got to cool off. What are your


shoes like?” He looked at Godfrey’s feet. "A bit light,
aren’t they? I’ve got an old pair of gardening boots that
might do you. They’ll be too big, but you’ll manage, I
expect. I’ll go and get them.”
He returned with the boots, and Godfrey put them
on. "They’re pretty large,” he said, "but I think I can
manoeuvre in them.”
"Good lad.” Jerry looked at Jancy. "She’s quietened
down all right, hasn’t she? She looks better, too.” He
walked restlessly up and down the cave for a time, and
then said, "I’ll go and see how things are now.”
Looking down on the fire from the path, he saw that
it was climbing faster than before, and going to the cliff
he climbed the steps again. The earth was still hot, but the
fire did not look to be burning so fiercely over near the
road. "I’ll give it as long as I can,” he thought, "and then
make a dash for it.” He patrolled the path between the
house and the cave after that, keeping his eyes on the fire
that was moving towards tjiem from below, and going in
to see how Jancy was at short intervals.
She had stopped her restless tossing about and seemed
to be sleeping, but, nevertheless, Jerry was worried about
her and anxious to get her to where she could receive
professional aid.
It was while he was patrolling the path that the wind
dropped, and he went in and told Godfrey the good news.
"All we need is a southerly now and we’re right. Pray
we get it, Godfrey.”
He went out and continued his restless watch between
the path and the cliff and was at the top of the steps
when the first cool breath of the southerly came over the
scorched and parched earth.
He gave a wild hurrah! and clattering down the steps
went into the cave. "It’s here, boy!” he cried. "Time to
move. You go first and I’ll follow with Jancy.”
Godfrey went out obediently and there caught the
first sight of the fire which was only twenty-five yards
or so from the cave. He ran back in. "Jerry, there’s fire
out there ”


Jerry interrupted him. "I know, son.”
"But what about your paintings?”
"They’ll have to take their chance; Jancy’s more
important than them.”
"Oh, Jerry!” wailed the boy. "Can’t we do some-
thing?”
"No, it’s no use worrying, Godfrey. You go on and
wait for me at the top of the cliff.”
Godfrey went reluctantly, clattering along in the
over-large boots, and Jerry, tightening the blankets
around Jancy, lifted her into his great arms and, carrying
her with surprising ease, followed on.
When they reached the top of the cliff the wind was
strengthening. Godfrey put his face up to it. "Gosh! isn’t
that wonderful? Feel how cool it is.” He looked away
towards where he had tied his horse and his face saddened.
"I wonder where Tommy is?”
"Sorry, son,” returned Jerry, "but he’s no more
important than my paintings at the moment. We’ve got to
get this girl out of here, that’s the most urgent thing. I
think we’ll strike across there.” Jerry nodded his head in
the direction he wanted to go. "We’ll reach the road
quicker.”
They set off briskly enough, Jerry moving easily
despite his burden, and were about halfway to the road
when Godfrey said: "I don’t think we’re going to make it.
The fire s still pretty bad over there, and the change of
wind is blowing it back.”
"It should go out soon in that case,” said Jerry.
"There’s nothing here for it to burn. We’ll work over
to the left and get behind it.”
They tramped on through the burnt area, and their
clothes, their hair and their nostrils became impregnated
with black dust from the fire and the reek of it. The wind
gradually strengthened until it was blowing hard, and the
smoke which had lam over the land all day began to billow
away towards the north. As it dispersed, the dark clouds
could be seen massing in the south, and presently they cov-
ered the sky.


"Look, Jerry!” Godfrey pointed to them. "Perhaps
it’ll rain. Gee! I hope it does.”
"So do I,” replied Jerry. "That’d fix everything. Put
all the fires out and bring relief to many a poor, hard-
pressed homestead. I bet some of them have gone through
it to-day.” He lifted in his arms. "I’d better
save my breath if I’m going to make it to town. It s a long
way.”
They tramped on in silence then, through a black and
ruined world. All the customary sounds of the bush were
gone, and here and there they came across the small corpses
of birds and opossums which had failed to escape the fire.
These usually lay in an odd green spot or two that for some
strange reason the fire had not touched, and they looked
peculiarly pathetic lying there untouched in their small
oasis and surrounded by black destruction.
Godfrey pointed them out and commented on the
strangeness of it.
"They probably managed to make that spot and then
died either of heat or of fright, and the fire has burned
around them,” said Jerry, "but that s only speculation.
Now, hold your tongue, young fellow, until we hit the
road. I need my breath.”
They walked on doggedly, and the way seemed inter-
minable. Half a dozen times Godfrey thought they had
reached the road, for the burnt-out countryside had lost
all its character and the familiar bush had become un-
known territory.
Jerry’s arms were beginning to ache from the effort
of trying to carry Jancy steadily and protect her from
being jarred when his foot rolled on a stone or went into
an unseen rabbit hole, and at last when they came to an
outcrop of rock he said: "I’ll have to rest for a minute,
Godfrey. The pace is too hot.”
He sat down, cradling Jancy in his lap, and Godfrey
stood patiently beside him.
"We’ll make it all right now,” he said. "The fire’s
gone out over this side.” He opened his arms to the wind.
"Gosh! It’s wonderful to be cool again.” He lifted his
face to the sky and closed his eyes. Then suddenly he


leapt as though stung. "Rain!” he yelled. I felt a spot
of rain!” He put his hand to his face and looked at the
moist spot on his finger. "It’s rain. Oh, Jerry, it is!”
He began to caper up and down, chanting comically,
"It’s raining, it’s raining, dog my cats, it’s raining!
Jerry, as delighted as he, gave a deep laugh. "Blowed
if I couldn’t join you in that dance if I could,” he said,
"but if it’s going to rain I’d better keep my strength for
the job in hand, so here goes.” He got to his feet, and
Godfrey leapt in front of him.
"There’s another spot!” he cried jubilantly: "And
another —and here it comes.”
They heard it hissing on the hot ground long before
it reached them, and when it came it was as overwhelming
as the Australian elements usually are, and deluged them
with water.
They sheltered behind a large charred tree at the first
onslaught, but they were soon saturated. Jerry put the
end of the blanket over Jancy’s face in an endeavour to
protect her, and Godfrey held his arms above it to break
the worst of the downpour.
"Well, we wanted it, and it’ll save my paintings,” said
Jerry, "but I wish I could have got to the road with her
before it started.”
"I’ll go and see if it’s much further,” volunteered
Godfrey, "will I?”
"Yes, that’s a good idea. I might manage it if it’s
not very far. And we’re more likely to be picked up
there.”
"Yes,” said Godfrey, "and that reminds me. Where
do you suppose the help the Sergeant promised us got to?”
"Heaven knows. Go and look for the road, old chap.
Wherever the help is, we don’t need it to fight fire now.
Godfrey was away a very little time and came run-
ning back breathlessly. "It’s just here, Jerry. Do you
know what? I think we’ve been walking alongside it for
some time.”
"Darn it!” said Jerry with feeling. "Never mind,
we’ve found it now. Come on.”


They tramped wearily through the downpour to the
road, and when they reached it Jerry sat down on a rise
at the edge. The rain teemed down on them and danced
wildly on the road. The blanket around Jancy was soaked,
and Jerry, frantic that she might catch cold, got to his feet
again.
Can’t let her get pneumonia on top of everything
else, Godfrey. I’ll have to try and make the town.”
They set off up the road, and to increase their worries
night, hastened by the overcast sky, began to fall.
Jerry’s arms were almost breaking with the dead
weight of the unconscious girl, and he was compelled to
take many rests, until at last Godfrey said:
"Look, Jerry, she’s got two blankets round her, hasn’t
she? Why not roll her in one and we’ll carry her between
us on the other?”
You couldn’t do it, old chap,” said Jerry doubtfully.
"Just try me,” begged Godfrey. "I can take her feet
if you 11 take her head. And she can’t get any wetter than
she is, anyway.”
"Well, if you think you can ”
"Of course I can.”
"Then unroll that blanket from her feet and take the
ends of it ”He stopped suddenly. "Wait! I think
I hear something coming.” They both listened.
"It’s a lorry!” shouted Godfrey excitedly. "Look!
There s its headlights. Gosh! Jerry, we’re saved!”
The vehicle topped a slight rise and bore down on
them, and its headlights picked them up as they stood in
the road streaming with water. It came to a grinding stop
beside them and two figures jumped out.
Huck!” cried one, and made for Godfrey. "Are you
all right?”


CHAPTER XXVI
And so Geoffrey found both those he sought.
"Gosh! Huck,” he said, pushing his twin’s head in
embarrassed affection, "am I glad to see you?” They
grinned at one another awkwardly, and to end the tension
Geoff turned to Jerry, who was talking to the driver. He
looked curiously at the bundle in Jerry’s arms. "Who’ve
you got there?” and with a sudden flash of intuition he
knew. "Jancy!” He pulled the blanket back from her face.
"Oh, Jerry, is she hurt? Let’s get her into the cab of the
lorry. Quick! Out of this rain. She’s drenched.”
"Take it easy, son, that’s just what we’re going to do.
I’ll get in front with her and you two boys will have
to just get wet in the back.”
"That’s okay! But come on, hurry!”
"Do you want a hand, Jerry?” asked the driver.
"No,” replied Jerry, "I’m okay,” and moving to the
lorry he climbed into the roomy cab. Gosh! it’s good to sit
down.” 1 j
The boys scrambled up on the back of the lorry, and
the driver, getting in beside Jerry, turned and went back
to town as fast as he could.
"We’d better take her straight to the hospital, hadn’t
we?” he said.
"Yes, that’s where the doctor is most likely to be.”
"Is she hurt bad?” enquired the driver.
"I’m not'sure, Jack. She’s got an awful burn on her
leg, and I think concussion.”
"Poor little beggar. How’d she do that?”
"Getting young Godfrey out of trouble, actually.
She pushed him clear of a burning branch that was falling
and collected it herself.”
"Game little tyke,” said Jack admiringly. "But what
she wanted to get herself hurt because of that so-and-so
for I don’t know. He isn’t worth it.”


"Oh, yes he is, Jack,” said Jerry. "It’s not like you to
give a dog a bad name and hang him.”
"Well, look now, Jerry. You know what he’s like,
don’t tell me different.”
"I know what he was like, but I’m hoping that he’s
going to improve. He’s gone a long way on the road to-
day, but he doesn’t know it.”
"Well, I hope you’re right.”
"Look, Jack, that kid to-day came out to see me, and
but for him and Jancy here I wouldn’t have saved my
paintings. They both worked like Trojans, and I’m deeply
in debt to them for it. Young Godfrey didn’t care about
the fire so long as he could save my stuff. He went into
town to get help for me —couldn’t find any and dragged
Jancy out to help.”
"You don’t say!” Jack was impressed. "Well, you
surprise me. Perhaps there is something there after all.”
"You bet there is,’’ said Jerry heartily, "and I aim to
bring it out.”
"Good luck to you then, son,” grinned Jack. "I hope
you succeed.”
They breasted a hill and the lights of Burangi glim-
mered in the dusk. "Now we shan’t be long,” said Jerry
with relief. "I won’t be happy till I find out what’s wrong
with Jancy.”
They entered the town, and as they passed the Police
Station the Sergeant was standing in the doorway enjoying
the look of the rain.
Geoff hailed him. "I’ve found them both!” he yelled.
"See you later.”
The lorry roared up the hill to the hospital, and it had
hardly stopped before Jerry was out and taking long strides
towards the open door. The modest reception hall was
empty, but Geoff, who was just behind Jerry, picked up the
bell on the small table and rang it with a will.
A nurse came hurrying round the corner, and seeing
them dripping all over the door, frowned at them. "Stop


that noise at once!” She took one look at the bundle in
Jerry’s arms. "Oh! Not another one —we ve no room for
him.”
"You’ll have to make room,” said Jerry, "and it’s not
a him, it’s a her.”
He took the blanket from Jancy’s white face, around
which her hair, damp with the rain, curled appealingly.
"Oh, poor child,” said the nurse, softening. "What hap-
pened to her?”
"She’s badly burned on the leg and has concussion,
too, I think.”
"Well, just sit down with her for a minute, will you?
I’ll see what I can do.”
They all sat down, Jack included.
"These places scare the daylights out o’ me,” he said,
looking around apprehensively as though any minute he
would be seized and put forcibly to bed. "They ain’t
human somehow. They’re that clean. And them nurses!
I’d rather die at home than have ’em bossin’ me around
in here. Did you hear her just now?” He mimicked the
nurse’s voice abominably and wagged his head. " 'Stop
that noise at once.’ Brrh!” He shuddered. "They make
me blood congeal.”
"You might be glad of them one day,” said Jerry,
"mightn’t he, Godfrey? I wouldn’t have minded having
a nurse around this afternoon, would you?”
Godfrey seemed to have fallen back into his former
taciturnity, and only grunted in answer to this. Jack gave
Jerry a prodigious wink, as if to say, "I thought you were
a bit too hopeful,” and then the Matron of the hospital,
accompanied by the nurse, came into the hall. Her severe
eye softened when she saw Jerry.
"Oh, it’s you, Mr. Bentham.” She looked at Jancy.
"Who is she?”
"Shes’ a friend of the Misses Hilton, and they don’t
even know she’s hurt,” Jerry boomed softly. "You’ll do
your best for her, won’t you, Ma’am?”


"Well, I don’t know whether we can ”
"Please, Ma’am, look at the poor little thing.”
The Matron put a hand on the blanket. "Why! She’s
as wet as you are.” Her head went up. "Nurse, bring a
trolley immediately.” The nurse departed and the Matron
went on: "The child can sleep in my bed to-night. I don’t
suppose I’ll get much sleep anyway —and then we’ll see
what we can arrange to-morrow.”
"Bless you, Ma’am!” boomed Jerry, taking her hand
and pressing it until she winced. "You’re a fine nurse and
a real woman. Knowing how you’re pushed for space
and help up here, I more than appreciate what you’re doing
and I thank you with all my heart.”
"Get along with you,” she said, smiling in spite of
herself. "Here’s the trolley. Just put her on that and
we’ll look after her from now on.”
Jerry placed Jancy gently on the trolley and she was
wheeled away. He watched her disappear reluctantly.
"You know, Matron, I’d like to stay and hear what the
doctor says about her.”
"He won’t be seeing her for a while. We’ll put her to
bed and I’ll dress her leg. Perhaps you’d like to go and
get her nightclothes, and by the time you come back
there may be some news.”
'That’s an idea. I’ll do that,” said Jerry.
"And you might call in and report this casualty to
the Sergeant on your way.”
"Willingly, Ma’am, willingly.”
"Good. Then I’ll go and get on with my work.”
The Matron went off and they all went out to the
lorry.
"Could you drive us to the Station, Jack, and then
to the Hiltons’?” asked Jerry.
"Sure,” said Jack largely. "Yours to command, mate.
It’s only the boss’s petrol, I’m not paying for it.”
"If I know your boss he’d think it was all right,”
said Jerry.
"Okay. Climb aboard.”
When they all filed into the Police Station the Sergeant
greeted them warmly, and when Jerry asked could he use
the ’phone he almost carried him to it.


The Hiltons’ number answered straight away, and it
was Miss Lally.
"We’ve got Jancy, Miss Lally,” he told her, and the
old lady, half weeping, cried: "Oh, Jerry. Where?
When?”
"She was out with me. I’ll be coming up in a few
minutes. I haven’t got her with me because she hurt her
leg and I had to take her to the hospital, but she’ll be all
right and you’re not to worry.”
The ’phone degenerated into incoherence at the other
end and a new voice came on. "This is Marney, Jerry.
I heard what you said. It’s upset Miss Lally. She s so
tired. Are you coming up now?”
"Yes, in a few minutes.”
"Don’t be long.”
Jerry rang off and returned to the others, who were
standing in a group near the Sergeant’s desk. Godfrey was
giving him an account of the afternoon and what had
happened to Jancy. His description of her courage lost
nothing in the telling, and Jerry, catching Jack s eye, gave
a triumphant wink as though to say, "I told you so.
"Well, you’ve had a terrible day,” said the Sergeant
when he had finished, and so have we. So have most
people, come to that ”
Geoff broke in. "Oh, Sergeant, did they get whoever
it was fell in the landslide?”
"Yes, they did.” The Sergeant fiddled with a pencil
on his desk.
"And who was it?”
"There were two of them,” said the Sergeant. Mrs.
Browne and Mr. Sheridan.”
There was a simultaneous chorus. "What!”
"Yes, that’s who it was. Old Sheridan was killed out-
right and Mrs. Browne’s not expected to live the night.”
"That’s pretty bad,” said Jerry. "How on earth did
they come to be there in the first place?”
"They were in the tunnel that runs in from one of
those caves.”


"What on earth were they doing there?”
"Lord knows. Sheltering from the fire, I suppose.
We’re going to evacuate the place to-morrow and see what
caused the fall. We might find something then.” He
paused. "Are you going up to the Hiltons’, Mr. Ben-
tham?” /
"Yes.”
"Then I’d be obliged if you’d tell Miss Lally about
Mrs. Browne. I believe her girl’s up there, and it would
be easier for a woman to tell her.”
"All right, Sergeant; and now I wonder whether you
could lend me some dry clothes? These are sopping, and
I can’t go around in them much longer.”
"By all means. Come into the house. You’d better
stay here to-night. We’ve got rid of our crowd and
the wife can put you up, I know.” The Sergeant led
him through, and presently Jerry returned, dryly clad.
The clothes were not such a bad fit, since the two men were
burly; but Jerry was the taller, so the length left some-
thing to be desired. However, they caused a little pleasant
hilarity which Jerry took in good part, and after they
had finished laughing he said:
"Well, I’ll get on up to the Hiltons’. And I think you
and Godfrey had better go home and change, Geoff.”
"Oh, yes, I forgot,” put in the Sergeant. "Your
mother asked me to send you home when you came in,
you boys, and I promised I would. You’d better go now
or she’ll be worrying.”
"All right. Will you take us?” Geoff asked Jack.
"O’ course,” said that worthy. "When you’re ready.”
He dropped the two boys at their house first, and then
went up to the Hiltons’, where he was taken to the kitchen
by Marney to exchange pleasantries with Jean and provide
a little competition for the persistent Bluey, who had taken
advantage of the relaxed atmosphere and stayed on.
Miss Lally took Jerry into the sitting-room. The
house was quiet now, all the mothers having gone home
with their children, and Miss Lally sat down thankfully.
"Feemy’s upstairs with Emmeline,” she said, "so you’d
better tell me all about it before she comes down. I’ll


tell her later. You know how excitable she is, and she’ll
take it better from me. Now, first, is it very bad? I felt
when you ’phoned that it was.”
"It’s bad enough,” admitted Jerry. "She sustained a
bad burn on her leg and possibly concussion, but I won’t
really know until I go back to the hospital. Mind you, it’s
not deadly serious, although painful enough, poor kid.”
"Well, now I know.” Miss Lally gave him a fleeting
smile. "And I feel better. What I can’t understand is how
she came to be with you and how it happened.”
"That 5 's easily fixed,” said Jerry, and launched into an
account of the afternoon’s happenings. Miss Lally’s face
glowed when he had finished.
"Well, I knew she was a sweet girl, but I didn’t
suspect her of bravery. One wouldn’t somehow. But there
it is.
Jerry smiled at her. "And there’s another thing.” He
told her of Mrs. Browne and Mr. Sheridan and repeated
the Sergeant’s request that she tell Marney. She was
shocked at the tragedy, but promised that she would tell
Marney in the morning.
"It’s an awful way to die,” she added, "but I can’t
be hypocritical about it. I can’t help seeing it as a release
for Marney.”
"Neither can I,” said Jerry. "It seems bad that
people have to die to make other folk happy, doesn’t it?”
He paused. "Oh! by the way, Miss Lally, the hospital
wants some nightwear for Jancy, and I promised to take
it up.
"I’ll get it.” Miss Lally jumped up and, going up-
stairs, returned soon after with Jancy’s bag. "Everything
she’ll need is there,” she said. "And you might ring me
and tell me what they say at the hospital.”
"I will, Ma’am.” Jerry walked into the hall with
Miss Lally as Miss Feemy came down. She ogled him
shamelessly, apparently revitalized by the terrible day that
had exhausted everyone else.
"Going so soon?” she asked archly. "Frightened of
my charm, eh?”


Miss Lally frowned at her, and directed her to tell
Jack in the kitchen that Jerry was ready. Jack soon
appeared and they said good-night and returned to the
hospital.
Jerry gave 'in the bag, but could get no news of
Jancy beyond the fact that she was comfortable, which
unsatisfactory piece of information he communicated to
Miss Lally on the Police Station telephone. After which,
tired and sleepy from his arduous day, he borrowed
pyjamas from the Sergeant and, crawling into a creaking
bed, slept the sleep of the just until morning.


CHAPTER XXVII
It was four days before Jancy was well enough to
see anybody. The Doctor’s diagnosis was the same as
Jerry’s, and he said it was essential that she be kept quiet.
On the fifth day she felt very much better; her leg was
less painful and her head began to feel as if it really be-
longed to her again.
She had stayed in the Matron’s room for two days
and nights, during which time that good lady, in the
rare moments she got a chance, slept on the lounge in
the nurses’ sitting-room. After the first two days the
congestion at the hospital eased and Jancy was put by
herself in a little room on the end of the verandah.
The first morning she was allowed to see visitors a
stream of them came to her room and each stayed a short
while. Miss Lally and Miss Feemy were very solicitous and
affectionate, and the latter spoke, under the impression
that she was being quiet, in a loud whisper that was more
nerve-wracking than a shout. After them came Jerry,
and Jancy took his hand gratefully. "Matron told me how
you carried me for miles to the road, Jerry. I don’t know
how you did it. I must have been a weight.”
"Think nothing of it, Jancy,” he boomed cheerfully.
"You were as light as a feather. I’ve brought you a little
present, because you worked so hard to save my paint-
• »
mgs.
"Oh, Jerry, I don’t need a present for doing that.”
"Well, here it is anyhow.” He picked up a brown
paper parcel from the chair and undid it. "There!” It
was a picture, and he propped it up at the end of the bed.
Jancy saw that it was a charming portrait of herself. She
was filled with delight.
"Jerry! How lovely! Do I really look like that?”
He laughed. "I hope so. I did it from memory, of
course.”


"It’s wonderful. Thank you so much. Would you
stand it over there on the table, please, where I can see it?”
They admired it together for a few moments, and then
Jerry left to allow Mrs. Chapman, Godfrey and Geoff to
come in.
Mrs. Chapman was sweet to Jancy and embarrassed
her by thanking her for what she had done for Godfrey.
Geoff eased the situation by chaffing her.
"I don’t know why you’re lying there, Jancy. I
think you’re a fraud. You look well enough to be jumping
five-barred gates.”
They all laughed, and Jancy said, "I feel well enough
to be jumping five-barred gates. Look over there at what
Jerry brought me. Wasn’t he marvellous to do it?”
Mrs. Chapman and Geoff went over to have a look
at the portrait and Godfrey moved closer to Jancy’s bed.
"Jerry gave me an artist’s paintbox,” he said, and
when Jancy said how glad she was he added gruffly, "I
think you were pretty good the other day.” And before
she could reply he turned his back and joined his mother
and brother.
Mrs. Chapman returned to Jancy. "We’d better be
going now, dear. We were told not to stop long because
it might tire you. We’ll come again soon. Oh, and you
might be glad to know that Godfrey got his horse back.
He must have broken the reins and got away.”
"Oh, I am glad!” said Jancy feelingly. I knew some-
how that Tommy would be all right, Godfrey.”
Godfrey nodded without looking at her, and they all
waved good-bye as the nurse came in with two huge vases
of flowers.
"My! You’re a popular girl, Jancy. There’s enough
flowers to fill a shop out there, and more fruit than you’ll
ever eat. Your friends came up with their arms full.”
"Aren’t they nice? But look, nurse, if there is such
a lot of flowers and fruit, what about giving some to the
other patients? It’s a shame to waste it.”
The nurse smiled. "I thought you’d say that, so I did.
Some poor things in the hospital never have anyone come
to see them or bring them anything. I gave most to them.”


"That’s fine. I’m glad.”
Footsteps sounded on the verandah and the nurse, who
put the flowers down and was leaving the room, said: "You
have another visitor, Jancy,” and Marney came in.
"Morning, Nurse,” she said brightly, and to Jancy,
"Salutations, invalid.” The nurse went out, and Marney
walked over to the bed grinning. "Did you know you’re
a blinking heroine, Jan? Everybody’s talking about you.”
"Oh, pooh!” Jancy flushed. "It *s exaggeration.”
} "Well, may be. But it doesn’t alter the fact that
you re famous. Why don’t these things happen to me?
They always happen to people like you. Don’t you re-
member me saying that you’re the sort that performs
prodigies of valour when it comes to the point?”
"Yes,” said Jancy, "but let’s skip it, shall we? I want
to know what’s been happening while J’ve been laid low.
Nobody will tell me anything, and I’m dying to know
about the fires and everything.”
And I m dying to tell you, because the most extra-
ordinary things have happened. But I’m not allowed to
talk just now, as they’ll only let me stay a minute, so I’m
going to wheedle Matron and see if I can come this after-
noon. She says she’s not letting anyone else in to-day, but
I’ll her curiosity is killing you. I’ll hop it now and
come back this afternoon.”
She grinned and departed, and about ten minutes later
her head appeared above the sill. "It’s okay, See you
at four.”
The head disappeared and Jancy was left to possess
her soul in patience until the afternoon. She lay there
wondering what the extraordinary things were that had
happened, and even made an attempt to pump the nurse,
who was unable or unwilling to satisfy her curiosity.
At length the long day passed, and when tea came
m at four o’clock Marney came with it.
"Timed it well, didn’t I?” she said, pulling up a
chair and making herself comfortable. "Let’s pour out
first and then I’ll tell you all.”


Stirring her tea, she suddenly laughed. "Gosh! I
don’t know where to start.”
"Anywhere will do. After I left the house, any-
where.”
"Well, Geoff went to look for you when we’d dis-
covered you’d gone.” She gave Jancy a sidelong glance.
"That young man is certainly a fan of yours. Anyway, to
continue.” She went on to tell Jancy about the Lennons
being burnt out and their arrival at Burangi House, and
the tragedy of their daughter. "She was found the next
day with her horse. Apparently a burning tree had
collapsed when she was riding by and pinned them both
down.”
Jancy shuddered. "Oh, how awful, Marney! I hope
there weren’t any other people killed.”
Marney made an attempt at being casual. "There
were, as a matter of fact.
"Who?”
"My stepmother for one and Mr. Sheridan for an-
other.”
"Marney!”
"Yes.” Marney stared down at her feet. "But don t
be upset about it, Jan. I suppose I should be, but I can t.
You see, a lot has come to light since they were found,
and it hasn’t increased any affection I might have had
for her.”
"Why, what’s come to light?” asked Jancy, greatly
interested.
"Well, apparently after my father died she tried to
get her hands on the money he left, but she couldn t do
that because of the way the will was drawn up, so she did
it another way. She and old Mr. Sheridan between them
cooked it up. You see, the furniture my father had was
antique and very valuable, and during the year after he
died and when I was too young to notice, old Sheridan
and my stepmother removed every piece that was worth
anything and put it in that cave we explored the other
day. Then he opened an antique shop as a front and sold
it to Sydney buyers piece by piece. Nobody here ever


saw it. She was afraid that people like the Hiltons might
recognise it, so it was never put in the shop, but brought
up after dark from the cave a piece at a time and put in a
back room for the Sydney dealer to see.”
"But that means she stole it from you,” said Jancy
indignantly.
"Yes.” Marney shrugged her shoulders. "But there’s
nothing I can do about that. The furniture’s gone and I
suppose the money’s spent.”
"Why, she and old Sheridan were a real pair of
crooks!” exclaimed Jancy.
"They were. Their crookedness did them no good,
though. In fact, it killed them. You didn’t hear where
they were found, I suppose.”
"No, I heard nothing.”
"Well, the fire burnt all along South Point, you
know. And several large dead trees standing together
burnt through at the bottom and fell. It’s thought that
the weight of them caused the tunnel beneath, that ran in
from the cave where we were the other day, to collapse.
My stepmother and old Sheridan were inside and it trapped
them. He was killed, and she only lived a few hours after
they got her out. The next day they excavated there and
found the remainder of the furniture. It was pretty well
smashed, of course, but Jerry says some of it can be mended
if I’d like to get it done. I don’t think I’ll bother, because
Miss Lally, who remembered what was in the house, came
and had a look and she says all the best pieces are gone.”
"Poor old Marney; it’s a shame,” said Jancy.
"Oh, I don’t know,” returned Marney philosophically.
"Good can come out of evil, and I’ve kept the best bit
until the last.”
"Oh, do tell,” said Jancy eagerly.
"Well, I’m going to live with the Hiltons for good.”
"Marney, how lovely!” Genuine happiness for her
friend shone in Jancy’s eyes.
"Yes, it is pretty good,” admitted Marney with a grin.
"Of course, Miss Emmeline wanted to adopt me years ago,
but my stepmother wouldn’t let her.”


"I know,” said Jancy. "She told me. Oh, Marney, I
am glad for you.”
"I’m glad for myself,” laughed Marney, "and now
there are a few things I’ve got to tell you about your own
people. Miss Lally has kept in touch with your mother by
’phone while you’ve been here, and she sends her love, your
father, too, and all the Richmonds. I’ve talked to Rusty
on the ’phone.” Marney smiled reminiscently. "She’s a
card, isn’t she?”
"She’s super,” said Jancy. "What did she say?”
"She said she had managed not to get the fever, and
was dying to see you.”
"Is she coming down?”
"As far as I can gather, they’re all coming down in
a few days. They’re just waiting until the coast road is
clear. There’s been a whole lot of landslides on it with
the rain and they are coming by car.”
"Who? The whole lot of Richmonds?”
"No, silly! Your mother and father and Rusty. She
says she’s not going to be done out of her holiday just
because you made the mistake of playing with fire.”
"Of all the cheek!”
They both laughed, and Marney went on. "The Len-
nons have left now. They were at the Hiltons for a while,
but somebody has lent them a house. People have been so
good to them. They’ve had clothes, furniture and food
given them, and the townspeople are already erecting a
new house out at their farm. It’s going to be very mod-
ern, with every convenience. In fact, they’ll be better off
than they were before.”
"Except for a daughter,” said Jancy softly.
"Yes, poor things, except for a daughter. There were
a lot of other people burnt out, too, you know. But there
were no other fatalities, and the Bushfire Relief is looking
after everybody marvellously. It’s been simply wonderful
the way people have got together and helped one another.
Nothing was too much trouble. Everybody pooled their
time, energy and money, and it’s extraordinary what
they’ve accomplished in a short time.”


"So apparently even a bushfire can do some good.
"Yes. Still, I don’t want another one in a hurry, Jan.
I was completely finished after the one the other day. She
put her cup on the tray. "Now, having talked your head
off, I’ll go. I wasn’t supposed to stay as long as this.
"Oh, do you have to go?” pleaded Jancy.
"I’d better. I don’t want to get into Matron’s bad
books. I’ve brought you some magazines.” She looked
around. "I put them somewhere. Wait on!” She stood
up. "I’ve been sitting on them.”
She gave them to Jancy and went to the mirror to see
if she was tidy.
"Harry Kovac’s taking me to the pictures to-night,
she said. "I’ve got to go home and pretty myself up.”
"That won’t be hard. You look fairly good as you
»
are. .
Marney made a sweeping bow. "Thank you for those
few kind words, lady. Might I return the compliment?”
"You might.”
"Then I do. And now, Madame, I take my leave.”
She went towards the door and, as she did so, they both
heard hurried footsteps along the verandah. Marney looked
out.
"Why, it’s Miss Lally,” she said.
The old lady appeared in the door; her hat was askew
on her head, her eyes were shining, and her hands shook
with excitement.
"Oh, you’re here, Marney,” , *e said breathlessly.
"What a good thing. I had to come straight away and
tell Jancy.” She put a hand up to steady her hat and only
succeeded in knocking it to a more rakish angle. "I’m so
excited I don’t know what I’m doing or saying.”
"What is it, Miss Lally?” said both girls together.
"Oh, my dears, the most wonderful thing has hap-
pened. Simply wonderful!” She looked around for a
chair. "I’ll tell you. But I’ve just got to sit down first.”


CHAPTER XXVIII
Marney hurriedly pushed a chair towards her and put
her in it. "There, now sit and get your breath for a
moment.”
Miss Lally giggled. "I feel just like when I have a
glass of sherry,” she said; "it goes to my legs.”
She waited until she felt a little calmer and then,
with all the solemnity due to such a statement, she said:
"They’ve found all Father’s money and Mother’s
jewels.”
"No!” The girls were first astonished and then
jubilant.
Marney jumped about the room. "Hoo blinkin’ ray!”
she carolled, and throwing her arms around Miss Lally’s
neck she kissed her heartily. Jancy watched enviously,
longing to do the same thing herself, but only able to
say over and over again:
"Oh, I am glad, Miss Lally, I am glad!”
"Thank you, dears,” said Miss Lally, and straightened
the hat that Marney’s assault had almost dislodged. "I
knew you’d be pleased.”
"Pleased isn’t the word,” said Marney. "But where,
when and how did they find them?”
"You both know all about the money and jewels, don’t
you?” asked the old lady, and when they both nodded
she went on: "You knew that it was thought by some that
Nela had taken them?” They nodded again. "Well, he
did.”
The girls’ faces fell. They had always liked the sound
of Nela, the old blackfellow, and this news was disappoint-
ing to them.
Miss Lally smiled at their faces. "Oh, he wasn’t a
thief. He must have done it on my father’s orders.” She
looked at Marney. "You know the tunnel where they
found Mr. Sheridan and your stepmother, Marney?”


"Yes.”
"Well, they excavated further along there this after-
noon and discovered that it goes right to a door in our
cellar.”
"How extraordinary!” said Jancy. "And didn t you
know, Miss Lally?”
She shook her head. "We knew nothing about it.
Anyway, apparently Father must have sent Nela down
there with the money and jewels to hide them. He went
very odd towards the end of his life, you know. Well,
this afternoon the men found a skeleton down there near
the door. It was lying under a fall of earth and big rocks,
and when they cleared the heap away they found, lying
beside the bones, the jewel box and another brass-bound
box full of money. We assume that poor Nela got in there
with the money and was killed by the rocks falling on him.
Poor old fellow. My sisters and I never believed that he’d
stolen any of it; we knew there’d be some explanation and,
you see, there has been.”
Her happy face beamed at them. "I still can’t get
over it,” she said. "It’ll take me ages to realize that we
don’t have to worry about money any more.” She clasped
her hands together. "And when I think what we can do
with it. There still might be something to be done that
would cure Emmeline’s eyes. She closed her own. If
only that were possible.” ,
"It quite might be,” said Jancy eagerly, "mightn’t
it?”
"Yes. But we’d better not say anything about it for
a while,” said Miss Lally. "We’ll have to prepare her for
it. So keep it to yourselves, won’t you?”
The girls promised they would, and at that moment
Matron put her head around the door. "Now! Now! she
said severely. "What’s all this? Too many visitors. Too
much excitement.” She looked at the three happy faces,
particularly Jancy’s, and added; But I must say it seems
to agree with you.”
"It does.” Jancy nodded vigorously. "It’s been the
best medicine in the world. Tell her, Miss Lally.


The old lady, nothing loth, told her story once more,
and the Matron was as delighted as they were.
"I think it’s wonderful for you, Miss Lally. I couldn’t
be more pleased if it had happened to me. But now I really
must chase you away. It’s essential that Jancy has her
rest. This will certainly bring her happy dreams.”
They said their good-byes and, although she felt she
was too excited to rest, Jancy slept soundly right through
till dinner-time.
She enjoyed it and ate heartily for the first time for
days, and was just finishing when Geoffrey came in grin-
ning.
"Just thought I’d come and see if they’d killed you
yet,” he said, sitting down. He looked at the empty plate.
"Hmm, you don’t look like dying.”
"Did you hear the Hiltons’ wonderful news, Geoff?”
Jancy asked. He nodded and continued to grin at her, and
Jancy said:
"You look just like the Cheshire Cat.”
"I’m not surprised. But you will be.”
"Why?”
"Well, my mother’s going to marry Jerry Bentham.”
"No! Geoff!” Jancy’s face was wreathed in smiles.
"That’s perfect.”
"Yes, I think it’s pretty good, too.”
"And what does Godfrey think?”
"Oh, he’s all for it. He’s had a mad crush on Jerry
since the fire. Something must have happened that day,
’cos he seems to have taken a tumble to himself. He’s still
pretty savage at times, of course, but he has more good
days than he ever had. I think a long course of Jerry might
cure him.”
"So do I. Jerry seems to understand him.”
"He does, and it’s a good thing for me; it makes it
easier to leave.”
"What do you mean —leave?”
"I’m going to England,” said Geoff casually.
"Really, Geoff,” said Jancy tartly, "you do drop your
bombshells with a soft thud.”


He laughed. "The same way I drop bricks in com-
pany.”
"But what are you going to England for?”
"Education, they tell me. Personally, I don’t want
any more —whether I need it, of course, is a different mat-
ter. But I don’t want to leave Aussie.”
"Well, why are you going?”
"Oh, it’s this family thing. I’m the next heir, and
they want to see me, and think I should be groomed to
fit the present owner’s shoes. Jerry seems to think I should
go and get it over.”
"I suppose if you get over there you’ll never come
back,” said Jancy regretfully.
"Oh, you don’t get rid of me as easily as that, my
girl. Just try and keep me away. No, I’ll go and look
them over and probably enjoy it —but I’ll be back, don’t
you worry.” He winked at her. "You’ll be just about the
right age then.”
"Geoff, don’t be silly,” said Jancy in confusion, but,
nevertheless, liking it a little.
"It’s not silly. I’ve told you before I’m saving you
up.”
"It’s so ridiculous. You’re only sixteen.”
"I’m old enough to know my own mind. And you
can battle against it as much as you like, but I’ll wear you
down in the end. I’ll bombard you with letters and give
you no peace until you decide to accept the inevitable.”
He stood up. "Now I’ve spoken my piece I’d better go.”
He strolled to the door. "Remember what I’ve said,” he
admonished her with an upraised finger was gone.
During the next two or three days Jancy progressed
quickly. Except for the leg, which would take some time
to mend completely, she felt very well indeed and quite
capable of getting out of bed.
On the third day Marney, Godfrey and Geoff came to
see her in the morning; but nobody came in the afternoon,
and she had had her dinner and was beginning to feel
rather lonely when a head came round the door. It was
Marney.


Jancy hailed her with pleasure, and Marney, looking
back down the verandah, called "Okay!” Then, dancing
into the room, she began singing, "Surprise, surprise, sur-
prise!” She was followed by Geoff, Godfrey and Harry
Kovac. Then came Miss Lally, Miss Feemy, Mrs. Chap-
man, Jerry, Keith Ames, Christine Hewett and Mrs.
Hewett. The latter must have benefited greatly from the
combined assault of Miss Feemy and Miss Emmeline on the
day of the fire, for she surveyed her daughter and Mr.
Ames with an almost indulgent gaze.
Jancy stared at them all in bewilderment.
"What ” she demanded, but speech deserted her,
for there, standing in the door, were her mother and
father and the irrepressible Rusty.
"Mummy!” she said faintly, and to her own and
everyone else’s surprise, she began to cry.
Her mother laughed and took her in her arms.
"There, darling, it’s all right.” She smiled at the others.
"Don’t take any notice, she’ll be better in a minute.”
Everybody started talking at once, and kept up a
hum of conversation until Jancy pulled herself together
again. She sniffed and blew her nose and looked around
at her visitors.
"But you’re all in party dresses!”
"Yes,” said Marney. "That’s what we’re having. A
party.”
"It’s an engagement party,” said Miss Lally, "a double
engagement party, in fact, for Mrs. Chapman and Jerry
and for Keith and Christine.”
"Oh, I’m so glad,” smiled Jancy. "Congratulations
to you all.”
"Thank you,” chorused the four blithely, and Jerry
added:
"We couldn’t celebrate without you, Jancy, so we got
permission from Matron to stay half an hour if we weren't
too noisy.”
"How nice of you. I couldn’t imagine anything I’d
have liked more.”


Jancy took her mother’s hand and that of Rusty.
"Everybody’s been marvellous to me here,” she said, * but,
oh my! it’s good to see you all again.” She included her
father with a glance, and he said:
"We didn’t know whether we’d find you charred to
a crisp, Jan. When we heard the reports on the wireless
the day of the big fire we didn’t know how anybody could
come out of it alive. It must have been terrible!”
"Yes,” admitted Jancy, "it was pretty frightening. I
was scared to death.”
"It didn’t stop her being a heroine,” said Geoff, who
was standing nearby, and Mrs. Mitford, seeing her daugh-
ter’s embarrassment, changed the subject.
"We’ve been talking to Geoff,” she said, "and he tells
us he’s going to England next month. He’s got to go up to
Sydney a week before he sails, so I thought he might like
to stay with us, if it’s not too far out.”
"Oh, good!” said Jancy joyfully, and Geoff said:
"I bullied them into asking me, Jan. I almost invited
myself.”
"Of course he didn’t,” said Mrs. Mitford, and then,
looking at Geoff, who was smiling at Jancy, she began to
wonder whether she hadn’t been inveigled unawares by
that good-looking young man into issuing the invitation.
Her husband divined her thoughts and pressed her
hand. She lifted her head.
"She’s growing up, dear,” he said.
Mrs. Mitford nodded rather sadly. "It’s a habit chil-
dren have.”
Rusty, who until now had been standing beside the
bed feeling, for once, a little shy, spoke up with her cus-
tomary frankness. "Are you keen on Jancy?” she asked
Geoff.
"Well, I suppose you could say I am,” he answered
amusedly.
Rusty put out her lip belligerently. "Then you want
to look out for Peter.”


"Who’s Peter?”
"He’s my brother, and he’s keen on her, too.”
"Rusty!” objected Jancy. "You know that’s not
true.”
Rusty waved her hand airily. "Well, he gave me to
understand that he was.”
Geoff grinned. "Is he a good fighter?”
"He’s the best in the world, that’s all.”
"Then let the best man win.” Geoff winked at Jancy
and went over to her mother.
Jancy surveyed Rusty, who was wearing an angelic
expression.
"Rusty, you are the end! What did you go and say
that about Peter for? You know it’s not true.”
Rusty grinned. "But Geoff doesn’t,” she said, "and I
think it’s just as well to give these men a little heavy com-
petition.”
Colonel and Mrs. Mitford burst out laughing.
"Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings,” he said
when he recovered. "You don’t improve, Rusty.”
Miss Feemy came over clicking her beads busily. "I
saw you winking at me, Colonel, when your wife’s wasn’t
looking.” She gave a guffaw and added seriously, "Lally
says we’d better go now, Brenda.”
"Yes, I think we had.” Mrs. Mitford rose. "We’re
staying the rest of the week until you’re out of hospital
and then we’ll take you home. So we’ll be up here bright
and early to-morrow morning.”
Everyone began to file out, and from each Jancy
received a warm good-night, even from Mrs. Hewett, who
unbent so far as to kiss her.
Mrs. Mitford came last. "Good-night, my darling,”
she said. "Sweet dreams!” She kissed her and tucked her
in and, going out of the room, shut the door softly, while
Jancy, secure in happiness and the warmth of good friend-
ship, closed her eyes and fell asleep.




R 83.3 • 2.


JANCY WINS
THROUGH
I HIS is the hook all Aus-
tralian schoolgirls have
been waiting for. Jancy
w INS I hrougm is a refresh
ing departure from tlie usual
stereotyped school story. It
is up-to-date and packed from
cover to cover with action,
humour and thrilling inci-
dents.
JANCY SCORES
AGAIN
■jITANCY is Lack again and
with her are those lovable
members of the Richmond
family*—sturdy Rusty, sleepy
Judy and the amusing Baby
Dumps.


ir
. . 4 I
A NNE bracken,
the brilliant authoress
of the popular book series
“Jancy” and “The Twins”
was bom in England, but
has lived most of her life on
the South Coast of New
South Wales.
The member of a large family
Miss Bracken first started
out on a Musical Career but
soon found out that owing to
her happy, glowing youthful
associations with her brothers
and sisters she had gained a
rich and warm knowledge of
home life.
Armed with this experience
she started out and wrote
her first book for Girls from 10 —l4 years “Jancy Wins Through.”
This book was followed by others and their large success has proved that
young Australians appreciate an authoress who caters for their literary needs
with such humour and understanding of their modem Australian idiom.
