

icy Wins Through
**• ■saPa ■'%*- 1 ' - r m ' A . w■■■/..■


V
i?


B4
V BY ANNE BRACKEN


.
'
'
■
*■
■
,
,
v ■ i ■
.
■


/
lIP . ■
/
I
.
■




JANCY WINS THROUGH
♦
I y
/
■


/
i


JANCY WINS THROUGH
ANNE BRACKEN
riOnS
Made and printed in Australia for Jons Productions
by Colourtone Pty. Ltd., Sydney, Australia


I
%


4 « --
For my niece,
PAMELA HARTLEY,
with love.
PAMELA HARTLEY,
with love.
/
'




Jancy Wins Through
By Anne Bracken
CHAPTER ONE
It was very hot under the tall gum trees in
the end paddock, and Jancy, picking up her book,
began to walk back to the house. She felt bored
and listless; nothing ever seemed to happen at
Urellen, and her Aunt was not the sort of woman
who wasted time finding amusements for twelve-
year-old girls. In fact, she made it no secret that
she considered Jancy a nuisance, not that she was
cruel in any way, but her cold voice and unsym-
pathetic manner consistenty made her niece feel
like an interloper.
Toiling up the hill in the hot sun, Jancy
thought longingly of the life she had led before
coming to Urellen. How happy they had been, she
and her parents, only two short years ago; but
now Daddy was missing in Malaya, and Mummy,
too frail and ill to have charge of a growing
daughter, had been forced to leave her under the
inhospitable roof of Aunt Marie.
The sound of a motor horn interrupted these
depressing thoughts, and Jancy was surprised to
see a car bump up the neglected drive that led to
the house. Visitors were rare at Urellen homestead,
and Jancy, eager for any excitement, hastened her
footsteps, arriving at the rather dilapidated car just
as the front door closed behind its owner. Hurry-
ing round to the back, she caught old Dinah, the
housekeeper, returning to the kitchen after letting
the visitor in.


“Who was it, Dinah? Anybody I know? Are
they staying long?”
“It’s Captain Richmond, child.” Dinah was
flurried. “And don’t waste time asking questions;
just run and get the tea service out of the cupboard
in the dining-room. Hurry now,” she pushed Jancy
gently to the door. “I don’t know how your Aunt
expects me to run a great barn like this with one
pair of hands. It’s shameful!”
Jancy left her to her aggrieved muttering and
went to fetch the service. Captain Richmond had
been a friend of her Father’s; she had seen him
often in the old days. Her spirits lifted. Perhaps
the visit had something to do with her. At this
exciting thought she hurried back to the kitchen
and, depositing the china on the table, went over
to Dinah, who was still grumbling fretfully at the
stove.
“Dinah, do you think Captain Richmond’s
coming here has anything to do with me?” she asked
eagerly.
“Bless you, child, how should I know? Your
Aunt doesn’t confide in me,” she replied testily,
and then her voice softened, and she put a rough
old hand on Jancy s head. “Not that 1 blame you
for wondering. It’s not much fun out in the bush
for a young creature like you, is it? No-one to play
with, and only us two women for company. Indeed,
I’d be out of it myself if it wasn’t for your Aunt.”
She sighed and began busying herself with the
tea tray.
Jancy’s excitement ebbed away, and, sitting
down at the table, she stared dejectedly at the floor
until Dinah, noticing her disconsolate appearance,
gave her some bread to butter for the sandwiches.
When the tea was ready, Dinah took it in and


returned with the message that Jancy was to tidy
herself and go to the drawing-room in half an hour.
Jancy’s spirits rose at this, and then sank again
as she reflected that the summons might only mean
that Captain Richmond wanted to see the daughter
of his old friend, and it was with very mixed feelings
that she washed her face, combed her hair, and
donned a freshly-ironed frock. At a few minutes
to the appointed time she came downstairs and
into the front hall, where she stopped at a wall
mirror to take a last critical glance at her reflection.
As she raised her hand to push a stray curl into
place, the clear high voice of her Aunt floated
out from the open drawing-room door.
“In that case, Captain Richmond,” it said, “I
have no alternative but to turn Jancy over to you.
I don’t approve of this step, though; people have
long memories, and the child will be exposed to
their uncharitableness. Not that she can be held
responsible for her father’s actions, but you know
how cruel the world can be.”
After the first part of her Aunt’s speech, Jancy,
overjoyed at the prospect of getting away from
Urellen, hardly heard the rest, the significance of
which was to occur to her afterwards, and with a
wildly beating heart she crossed the hall and,
knocking at the door, entered the drawing-room.
“Ah, there you are, Jancy,” said her Aunt.
“This is Captain Richmond.”
The Captain rose with a smile and took her
hand.
“We’ve met before, haven’t we, Jancy?’
“Yes,” said Jancy, smiling happily in return.
“The last time was when you took us to Sydney.”


“That’s right. You have a good memory.
Hasn’t she, Miss Ellis?”
Jancy’s Aunt nodded frostily.
“Captain Richmond has a suggestion to put to
you, Jancy,” she said. “I am not in favour of it,
but we have decided to leave the final decision to
you.”
Jancy turned a vivid expectant little face to
the Captain, who said gravely:
“It’s just this, Jancy. How would you like to
come and live with me and my family at Kuruna
Bay ? ’ ’
“Oh, Captain Richmond,” Jancy gasped in-
credulously. “Do you really mean it?”
“Of course I mean it, my dear,” the Captain
said heartily.
Jancy glanced doubtfully at her Aunt, and
then, clasping her hands together tightly to give
herself courage, breathed:
I’d love to, Captain Richmond, I’d love to
Miss Ellis sniffed.
“Well, I presume that settles it,” she smiled
coldly, “although you show an almost indecent
eagerness to leave me, my dear; but, still, children
are notoriously ungrateful.”
She turned to Captain Richmond.
“When do you want to take her?”
“Well,” he hesitated, and then a glance at
Jancy’s pleading eyes decided him. “If you could
manage it, she could return with me to-day.”
“Really!” Miss Ellis stared at him. “So soon?”


“It’s just that if she comes with me in the car
it will save her the long, tiring train journey, and
you the necessity of accompanying her.’’
“And her clothes?” Miss Ellis said distantly.
“She can take a small case, and the rest can
come by rail if they’re not ready,” replied Captain
Richmond, determined now to take Jancy with him.
Miss Ellis shrugged, and capitulated.
“Very well; if you’ll excuse me, I’ll go and
tell Dinah to pack.”
Left alone together, Jancy and the Captain
became a little shy with one another, until Jancy,
overcome with emotion and relief, suddenly
shocked him by bursting into tears.
“Good Lord!” he exclaimed. “What’s the
matter, Jancy?”
“I don’t know,” she sobbed. “I’m so happy.”
He laughed and pulled her to him.
“A real woman, I see,” he said and, taking a
large handkerchief from his pocket, he dried her
streaming eyes.
“I’m not really a cry-baby,” explained Jancy,
struggling to control herself. “But—”
“Yes, I know,” the Captain patted her hand
comfortingly. “Now, how would it be if you went
upstairs and got yourself ready? There must be a
few things you’d like to take with you, and I
haven’t got a great deal of time.”
Jancy managed a grateful watery smile and,
squeezing his hand tightly, ran off to do as he
suggested.


In her room she got down the small leather
dressing case that had been her mother s and, after
packing in the few things she wanted to take, placed
the photograph of her mother and father lovingly
on top. How pretty her mother was; she felt the
tears near again as she looked at the adored faces,
but the sight of her father s features suddenly dis-
persed the tears and reminded her of the words she
had overheard in the hall. What had her Aunt
meant by them? Why would people be cruel to
her; and what had her father done? She stood
there, pondering these unanswerable questions for
a while, and then, dismissing them in the belief
that her father could never be anything other than
fine, she locked the case and, putting on her hat and
coat, ran down to the drawing-room, where she
and the Captain chatted together until Dinah came
in carrying a case, followed by Miss Ellis.
“Well, that didn’t take long, I must say,” said
Captain Richmond, looking at his watch. “If you’ll
give me the suitcase, Dinah, I’ll take it to the car
while Jancy says good-bye to you and her Aunt.”
When he had gone, Jancy walked over to Miss
Ellis.
“Good-bye, Aunt Marie,” she said awkwardly.
“Thank you for having me here.” Her Aunt leaned
down and placed a bleak kiss on her cheek.
“Good-bye, Jancy. Be a good child while
you’re with Captain Richmond. And here is a part-
ing gift.” She placed a leather wallet in Jancy’s
hand. “Remember, this is only for an emergency;
you will be given adequate pocket money.”
Jancy stammered her thanks and, to hide her
embarrassment at this unexpected generosity, ran
over to Dinah, who hugged her warmly.


“I’m sorry to see you go, dearie, I’ll miss you.’’
Tears stood in her old eyes, and Miss Ellis, seeing
them, said briskly, “Now, now, Dinah, don’t drivel
over the child. Captain Richmond will be waiting;
we’d better go out to him. Come along.’’
The Captain was just closing the boot of the
car as they came down the steps.
“You’ll be sitting in the front with me, Jancy,”
he said. “In you get.’’ He closed the door and
turned to Miss Ellis. “Good-bye, Miss Ellis. It’s
been very kind of you to let me have Jancy at such
short notice. My wife will keep you posted about
her welfare.” He got in and started the car, and as
they moved off Jancy looked back and waved. Miss
Ellis ignored this parting salute, but loyal old Dinah
returned it vigorously until the curve of the drive
hid her from view, and Urellen was left behind.
Jancy afterwards remembered very little of the
long drive and her arrival at Kuruna Bay. Through
a stupefying fog of sleep she knew that someone
who smelt very nice undressed her and put her into
a cool soft bed, but she was asleep again almost
before these impressions had time to register.
Mrs. Richmond, looking down at the young
sleeping face, smoothed the thick brown curling
hair off Jancy’s forehead.
“Poor little thing, she’s so pale and thin, and
tired out,” she whispered to her husband.
“She’ll be alright after a night’s sleep,” said
Captain Richmond, and led his wife back to the
sitting-room, where she poured him some coffee and
asked if Miss Ellis had been very difficult.
“Difficult!” the Captain snorted disgustedly.
“No, she wasn’t any more difficult than usual.
Indeed, I think she was glad to get rid of the child;


but 1 hope that’s the last I have to do with the
unpleasant woman.”
Mrs. Richmond nodded.
‘‘How she ever came to be the sister of Jancy’s
mother, I can’t imagine. No two women could be
more unlike.” She placed a hand on her husband’s
shoulder. ‘ I’m glad now, dear, that you took things
into your owp hands.”
‘‘Well, I couldn’t ignore old Dinah’s letter;
she was so worried about the child, and, anyway,
I was not going to let Robert’s daughter stay in a
place where she was unhappy. Why, that infernal
woman has already got her so subdued that she’s
frightened of her own shadow.”
‘‘Never mind, dear,” said Mrs. Richmond,
soothingly. ‘‘l think a good course of your
daughter’s companionship will soon cure that. You
won’t know Jancy in a few weeks; wait and see.”


CHAPTER TWO
Jancy woke early next morning, and spent the
first few minutes puzzling out where she was. Then,
in a rush, all the happenings of the previous day
came back to her, and with a rising excitement she
lifted the mosquito net and looked out on to a long
sunny verandah that held two other beds beside her
own and a cot down at the far end. Above the cot
rails a pair of round blue eyes regarded her solemnly
from under a tousled mop of baby curls, and then a
voice from one of the other beds said:
“Hello, you’re Jancy Mitford, aren’t you?’’ and
Jancy turned to find two dancing brown eyes beam-
ing at her from a friendly freckled face.
“Yes, I am,’’ she,admitted shyly; “what’s your
name?”
“I’m Russel Elizabeth Alexandra Richmond,”
said the other grandly, tossing a glorious mop of
auburn hair out of her eyes. “Rusty for short; and
I’m ten.”
Jancy digested this information and then
offered some of her own in return.
“I’m twelve, and I’ve been living up at Urellen
with my Aunt.”
“Oh, I know all that,” Rusty said offhandedly.
“I heard Daddy tell Mummy that your Aunt was a
washout, and that you were coming to live with us.”
She threw off the clothes and got out of bed. “Wait
a minute till I get Dumps out of her cot, she gets wild
if I leave her there.” She laboriously lifted the baby
out of the cot and, clasping the plump little body
round the waist, staggered back to her own bed.


Dumps sat gurgling happily for a while and then
began belabouring her sister across the head with an
old rag doll. Rusty sustained this attack with imper-
turbable good nature and continued her conversation
with Jancy unruffled.
“Yes,” she went on, “I expect you’ll stay here
all the time now. I think you’ll like it; it’s lots more
fun than Urellen, I’ll bet, because there’s all of us
you see.”
“Who’s all of you?” asked Jancy with a smile.
“Why, there’s Dumps”—Rusty ticked them
off on her fingers—“and Judy, who’s asleep down
there, she’s four, and me, and Peter, who’s away
at school, he’s twelve, and Penelope, who’s fifteen
and thinks she’s grown up, and Mummy and Daddy
and Elsie. I should think that’s enough.”
“My goodness, I should say so. It’s a wonder
you don’t get mixed up. And what about Dumps
—that’s a funny name, is it her real one?”
“Oh, no, her real one’s Roberta, but that’s much
too grand for her at present, so we call her Dumps
because she can only walk a few steps and then
Dumps down on the floor. I invented it,” added
Rusty proudly.
Jancy, duly impressed, was just going to ask
some more questions when they heard footsteps in
the room that led on to the verandah and Captain
Richmond, clad in bathing trunks, walked out.
“Awake already, eh, Jancy? Did this young
terror disturb you?” He picked Dumps off the bed
and tickled her to her delight.
“No, I just woke myself.”
“That’s good.” He turned to his daughter.
“Who’s for a swim?”


“I am,” yelled Rusty.
“You’d better wake Judy then, and I’ll expect
you at the gate in ten minutes,” and Captain Rich-
mond departed with Dumps kicking happily under
his arm.
The girls scrambled out of bed and Rusty
dragged the clothes off Judy, who opened sleepy,
reproachful eyes.
“Come on, we re going for a swim, and if
you’re not ready we ll go without you.”
There was a wail of dismay from Judy, who
slid hurriedly from her bed and stumbled on her
plump little legs down the verandah and into the
dressing room after Jancy and her sister. Jancy,
having not yet unpacked, was lent a bather by Rusty,
and within ten minutes they were all running down
the steps and through the wild garden towards the
gate. Captain Richmond was already waiting for
them with Dumps and a huge surf-board, and they
all set off down the slight incline to the beach with
Judy lagging behind, crying: “Wait for me, wait
for me.”
Jancy waited for her, but was to discover that
no one else ever did, for Judy, when not sleeping in
odd corners, spent her time stumbling after the
bigger children all day with the same cry and, as
Rusty pointed out, if they stopped for her every
other minute they would never get anywhere.
The beach was in a lonely sheltered cove sur-
rounded by bush-clad hills, whose grey-green ex-
panse was broken only by the solitary red rooftop of
the Richmond home. Jancy was delighted with it, and
after a dip in the fresh cold water, sat on the sand
to enjoy the warm sun and watch Captain Richmond
come shooting in on his board through the boiling


surf to the beach. Such water gymnastics were com-
pletely new to her and she viewed the Captain s ex-
pert management of the big board with unconcealed
admiration, vowing silently to ride one herself one
day or drown in the attempt. The other children,
obviously accustomed to this display, were busily
enjoying themselves in their own way: Judy curled
up and dosing on the sand; Rusty making
amateurish efforts to do a crawl stroke; and Dumps
sitting at the edge of the surf welcoming each wave
as if it had been sent for her special benefit. Jancy,
marvelling that no one was set to mind such a tiny
baby, went to Rusty and suggested it might be safer
to take Dumps further up the beach.
“Oh, I’m keeping an eye on her,” said Rusty,
reassuringly. “She’s all right.”
“But won’t your Mother worry?’
“Gosh, no.” Rusty looked surprised. “With
me looking after Dumps, why should she?”
Jancy, unable to answer this, changed the
subject.
“Doesn’t she or Penelope ever come swim-
ming?”
“Not often. You see, Mummy likes her break-
fast in peace while we’re down here, and Penelope
—well, she’s frightened the water’ll muss her hair.”
This last was said with the utmost disgust, Rusty
evidently deploring her sister’s reason for not indulg-
ing in a morning swim.
When they returned from the beach Jancy
found her clothes for the day laid out on the divan
in the dressing room; and while showering and
changing, she began to feel unaccountably shy at
the prospect of meeting everyone at breakfast. She
need not have worried, for when she and Rusty


entered the breakfast room it contained only Judy
and Mrs. Richmond, who was sitting at the table
feeding Dumps.
“Hello, Jancy,” she said in her charming slow
voice. “Did you enjoy your swim?”
“Yes, thank you, Mrs. Richmond. It was
glorious.”
“That’ s nice, dear. Will you just take that chair
next to Rusty and she’ll look after you. And
Judy,” Mrs. Richmond turned to her small daughter,
“do wake up and eat your breakfast, you little dor-
mouse, instead of going to sleep in it.”
Having thus rebuked the drowsy Judy, she
raised a graceful hand, pushed a heavy lock of hair
off her forehead, and smiled absently at Jancy, whose
heart was completely captivated from that moment.
“Has anyone seen Penelope?” she went on,
and then as a tall slim girl entered the room, “Oh,
there you are, dear. I was just wondering where you
were.” Penelope sat down, She had the same auburn
hair as Rusty but darker, and a clear pale skin that
made her large dark eyes look even larger.
“You’re Jancy, I suppose,” she said gravely
across the table, and added a little severely, “Mother
always forgets to introduce people.”
“Well you didn’t give me much time, dear, did
you?” Mrs, Richmond said tranquilly; “and you
might just run into the kitchen and tell Elsie she can
do the eggs.”
Penelope got up stiffly from the table and went
to do as she was told without a word.
“I’m afraid I’m not being approved of this
morning,” said her Mother in a tone of humorous
complaint, and, Captain Richmond entering at that
moment, grinned.


“Oh, it’s you that’s in disgrace, is it?’’ He sat
down. “1 saw Penelope in the hall. You know,
you’ll really have to mend your ways, or your
daughter will be disowning you.’’
Everyone laughed, and Jancy watched them
in bewilderment, for Miss Ellis’ regimen had not pre-
pared her for such casual behaviour, and she had
expected a just retribution to fall on the head of
the insolent Penelope. Rusty caught sight of her
face.
“We don’t take any notice of Pen,’’ she ex-
plained, “she gets these spells. She’s being ladylike
to-day— to-morrow she’ll have forgotten all about
it.” She turned to her Mother, “by the way, does
Jancy come to school with us to-day?”
“Well, I don’t know. What do you think, lan?
Perhaps it would be better if she doesn’t go to-day.”
“No, let her settle in a bit,” agreed Captain
Richmond; “Rusty can stay at home with her if she
likes. I’ll ring Miss Grey and fix it up.”
“All right, dear, and, oh, I forgot about Pene-
lope.”
“Well, here she is; you can ask her.”
Penelope placed a large dish of eggs and bacon
in front of her Father, and seated herself.
“Do you want to go to school to-day, Pene-
lope?” asked her Mother. “Rusty’s staying at home
with Jancy.”
“Yes, I prefer to go, Mother.” Penelope was
still on her dignity. “I’ve got my French this morn-
• » 9
mg.
“Very well, dear, just please yourself, but you’ll
have to catch the bus down as your Father isn’t
going in to town to-day.”


With things thus satisfactorily settled, Rusty
pushed back her chair.
“I’m going to show Jancy around this morning,
Mummy, so I won t take Dumps or Judy.”
Mrs. Richmond nodded abstractedly.
“They’ve got to have their sleep anyway. So
off you go.”
Before setting out on the tour of inspection
Rusty said they had to make the beds on the veran-
dah and finish Jancy’s unpacking.
“You see,” she explained, “there’s only Elsie
here to help Mummy, and there’s an awful lot of
work, so-we’ve all got to do something to help a bit.”
Jancy signified her approval of this sensible
arrangement, and in no time they had her things
transferred from the suitcase to a loughboy of her
own in the dressing room. The last article to be dis-
posed of was the wallet her Aunt had given her, and
she took the opportunity of seeing what was in it.
Both pair of eyes opened wide as Jancy drew out five
new crackling pound notes.
“Gosh!” said Rusty, immensely impressed.
“What a lot of money.” She took the wallet from
Jancy and carefully counted the notes. “Oh, I do
feel rich; I’ve never held so much money in my life.”
“They look lovely and new, don’t they?” said
Jancy.
Rusty nodded.
“Not a very safe thing to carry about with you
though. I’d hide them if they were mine.”
“Yes.” Jancy replaced the money in the wallet
and, wrapping it in a woollen jumper, pushed it to
the back of the drawer.


“That’s that,” she said. “Aunt Marie said I
was only to use it for an emergency, so I suppose
it’ll stay there forever.”
“Oh, it might come in handy one day,” replied
Rusty, not knowing how true her words would prove
to be.


CHAPTER THREE
Having finished their tasks the girls were free
to start their tour. First, Jancy was shown around
the rambling Richmond bungalow which spread its
comfortable bulk over the hill that looked down on
the scene of the morning’s bathe. Then she was
taken to the kitchen and introduced formally to Elsie,
a big-boned girl with a good-natured face, who gave
them each a piece of home-made toffee. Jancy was
extremely puzzled by the extreme politeness of
Rusty’s introduction, and said, as they went out
into the garden:
“You know, no one introduced me to the
family, but you were very careful to do so with the
maid.”
“Elsie’s not a maid.” Rusty was shocked.
“She’s one of the family, so we’re very particular
about her.” And with this contradictory statement
she abandoned the subject to shout to her Mother,
who was standing under a tree, absentmindedly
watering, not only the flowers but also Dumps, who
had crawled into the middle of the bed and was
obviously enjoying her impromptu shower bath.
Having called her Mother’s attention to this mis-
hap, she said to Jancy:
“Come on, we’ll go up the back garden and I’ll
take you to the convicts’ cave at the top of the hill.
It’s got leg-irons and everything in it. There’s an
old man lives up there too. He’s got a little hut built
like a ship’s cabin that’s got bunks in it and every-
thing. Daddy says he’s an old Rugby man, what-
ever that is, and used to be a sailor. He’s pretty
grumpy though. Peter says he’s a hermit, cos only
hermits live by themselves.”


Rusty stopped talking, being by this time
breathless with the climb, and in silence they
reached the top of the hill. The convicts’ cave was
very interesting. It had been cut out of a flat-topped
rock and was rather small, and the floor was some
inches deep in water. Jancy looked timidly into
the smelly interior and withdrew shuddering.
“It’s horrible! However could they ever put
people in a place like that?” She pulled Rusty
away. “Let’s go. I don’t like it.”
“All right,” agreed Rusty, good humoUredly.
“We’ll go and see old Butler’s place; it’s just round
here.”
She led Jancy along a well-defined path and
over a large tree trunk that lay across a little creek.
“That’s where he gets his water,” she said,
and as they emerged into a clearing, “and that’s his
house.”
Jancy gave a little cry of delight, for the clear-
ing was a mass of colourful shrubs and flowers, be-
hind which stood a small house with geraniums
growing from its window boxes. Huge gum trees
brooded over the house at the back and beyond the
garden in front the ground sloped away to show the
blue Pacific ocean as far as the eye could reach.
“Oh, isn’t it simply lovely,” breathed Jancy.
“I’d give anything to live in a little house like that.”
At this moment the front door suddenly
opened.
“Oh, gosh! here he is,” squeaked Rusty, and
turned to run, but a voice arrested her.
“What are you doing th'ere?”
She stopped, petrified.


“I said what are you doing there?” the voice
demanded, and a big bearded man strode limping
towards them through the flowers. The girls stood
and waited for him helplessly. His eyes looked
angry. He stopped before them on the path and
glared.
“Well?”
Jancy found her tongue.
“We were only looking at your lovely house,”
she said shakily.
“Oh,” this tribute to his home seemed to
mollify him a little; “so long as you only look it’s
all right; but,” and his voice became harsh, “I won’t
have you children coming here ruining my garden,
understand that.”
“We wouldn’t dream of it,” Jancy assured him
hurriedly. “It’s too lovely. I’ve never seen anything
like it.”
The man looked back on his mass of flowers
and his face lost its angry look.
“Yes,” he said unexpectedly, “it is beautiful,
isn’t it?” and then, as if ashamed of this remark:
“Off you go quickly, both of you,” and without
another word he stumped back up the path again and
into the house. Rusty and Jancy stared at one
another and then silently returned the way they had
come. Going down the hill Rusty regained her self-
possession.
“Funny old man, isn’t he?” she said. “That’s
the first time he’s spoken to any of us, except to yell
and warn us away. You seemed to have a good
effect on him.”
“I don’t think he’s so old,” replied Jancy
thoughtfully; “it’s the beard that makes him look


that way, and perhaps he wouldn’t be so bad if you
got to know him.”
‘‘You can try if you like,” said Rusty cheer-
fully, ‘‘but r m not going to bother. Come on, let’s
go down on the beach; I’ll get a tin for some peri-
winkles as we pass the house.”
They spent the rest of the morning down on
the rocks collecting the little shellfish, and Elsie
boiled them for lunch. Jancy, after a tedious half
hour extracting the little fish from their shells,
thought the result very much more trouble than it
was worth, for when they were shared out equally
among the family each person received no more than
a dessertspoonful of periwinkles. They were quite
tasty, however, and Mrs. Richmond, eating hers
with every appearance of enjoyment, congratulated
the girls on their industry.
‘‘l do so love periwinkles,” she said, with a sigh
qf satisfaction, looking at her empty plate, ‘‘but I
can never get enough, and I’m too lazy to go and
gather them.”
‘‘They were very nice,” Captain Richmond
said appreciatively, ‘‘but I hope that’s not all there
is for lunch; I’m hungry.”
‘‘Oh no, dear. Elsie’s cooking something else,”
answered his wife vaguely. ‘‘We’ll find out what it
is in a minute.”
‘‘One thing about this house is its delicious
uncertainty,” Captain Richmond teased her; ‘‘one
never knows whether one’s going to get a baked
dinner or a radish for lunch.”
“Ian!” protested Mrs. Richmond mildly, “you
know that’s not true. Well,” she added, ‘‘not often,
anyway.”




The afternoon was spent down on the beach
with Mrs. Richmond, Judy and Dumps. Rusty had
brought a small toboggan and there was a grassy
slope nearby that made an ideal run for it. Dumps
yelled angrily on being refused a joy-ride, until Mrs.
Richmond, to pacify her, mounted the toboggan
and took the wilful baby on her knee. The two of
them slid bumpily down to the sand just as Captain
Richmond emerged from the path that led to the
house. He viewed his dishevelled wife amusedly and
shook his head.
“You’ll never have any dignity, Lesley,” he
said. “What would Miss Grey say if she could see
you now?”
“Probably be lost for words,” laughed Mrs.
Richmond lazily; “and a good thing too.”
Her husband flopped down beside her on the
sand.
“I’ve told Elsie to bring the tea to the beach; I
thought you’d like that.”
“Oh, yes, I would,” said Mrs. Richmond, “but
I think Rusty and Jancy might go up and help her.
Would you mind, dears?” She leaned appealingly
towards Jancy, who was already so enslaved by her
vague careless charm that she would have gone to
Timbuctoo if Mrs. Richmond had asked it of her.
“Not a bit, Mrs. Richmond. Come on, Rusty.”
When the tea was laid on a canvas cloth on the
grass and everybody was attacking it hungrily, Cap-
tain Richmond said:
“Mrs. Richmond and I have decided, Jancy,
that it might be better if you called us Uncle lan and
Aunt Lesley. What do you think?”
Jancy’s face glowed with pleasure.


“Oh, yes, please.**
“Good, that’s settled then. No more standing
on ceremony, eh, Jancy?”
Jancy shook her head, too overcome to reply,
and a feeling of supreme content swept over her.
For the first time since her Mother’s illness had left
her to the scant mercy of her Aunt Marie, she felt
as if she really belonged—was really wanted. It was
almost too much for her and, finishing her scone
with difficulty, she went over to Mrs. Richmond,
who was standing brushing crumbs off her dress.
“What is it, dear?’’ Mrs. Richmond put an arm
across the thin shoulders affectionately, but Jancy,
unable to speak, clasped her round the waist with a
silent intensity of gratitude, and after pressing her
hot face for a moment to the cool linen dress, flew
off up the path to the house.
Rusty followed to find her sobbing on the bed,
and stood irresolutely by the window until the
sobbing had subsided a little; then she went over.
“Would you like to come and see Peter’s guinea
pigs ?’ ’ she offered awkwardly. “They’re very nice.
Jancy sat up and dried her eyes and laughed
shakily.
“I’d love to, Rusty. I’m sorry for being such
an idiot, that’s the second time in a week. I don’t
know what’s come over me.’’
“Oh, Lord, everybody cries sometimes, even
me,” confessed Rusty airily. “It doesn’t mean any-
thing though. With me it’s usually temper. I’ve got
an awful one. I even throw things sometimes. Why,
I threw a book at Penelope once, but it didn’t do
much good. Daddy just gave it to me back and told
me to have another try, as that had been a very bad
shot, which made me feel silly somehow.” She
looked critically at Jancy. “I’d go and wash my face


if I were you, before Mummy comes back. She gets
very upset about anyone crying.”
Jancy lost no time in taking this sound advice,
and when Captain and Mrs. Richmond returned,
she and Rusty were playing an earnest game of Bobs
in the playroom. As she passed the door and saw
them Mrs. Richmond nodded to her husband.
‘‘She’s all right now; she’s got over it. Poor
little mite, she’s starved for affection. I could cheer-
fully smack that Ellis woman. Beastly creature.”
“Lesley!” Captain Richmond was much
amused at this outburst from his usually placid wife.
“Well, I could,” retorted Mrs. Richmo d de-
fiantly; “behaving like that to a child; it in-
human.”
She swept indignantly into the sitting room and
sat down, and her husband perched on the arm of
the chair.
“I don’t think I’ve ever seen you so disturbed,
dear.”
“It’s enough to disturb anyone, lan, to see a
child as grateful as that for a little ordinary affection.
Imagine if it were Rusty how you would feel.”
“Oh, I feel very strongly about it as itlat
surprised me was the effect on you. I thuu o *.t it
would take an earthquake to upset that serenity of
yours.”
Mrs. Richmond laughed.
“Never mind, I’ve got over it now. I don’t know
why I should have wasted anger on Miss Ellis, it
was rather silly.” She rose. “I’d better go and see
what Elsie’s doing about dinner. If I keep my mind
on my own affairs I won’t have time to worry over
anyone else’s,” and, restored to her usual
equanimity, she smiled at her husband and left the
room.


CHAPTER FOUR
The next morning all was bustle and excite-
ment with Mrs. Richmond sitting in the breakfast-
room directing (or mis-directing, as Captain Rich-
mond said) operations.
“I sit here,” she told Jancy, placidly fanning
herself with a cork mat, “because it’s nice and
central, and if anyone wants anything they know
where I am.” She looked at Jancys seersucker
froc and added, “I’ll have to get you a tunic for
sc. JI, 1 suppose; however, you’ll do to-day, and
I’ll have your things ready for next week.”
“I’ve never been to school before, Aunt
Lesley,” said Jancy shyly. “I feel a bit nervous.
You know, as if I’ve got butterflies in my stomach.”
Mrs. Richmond laughed delightedly.
“I remember I felt just the same way on my
first day, but this school is rather different. You see
the people in this district are so scattered that there
h "'ver been a Government school here. So all
ths go to Miss Grey’s school, and all the boys
go away to boarding school. You’ll like Miss Grey’s,
I think, there are not a great many pupils and they’re
all ages, so you’re bound to find plenty of friends
among them. Luckily, you’ve only missed two days
of the term, so everybody else will be settling in be-
sides you. Oh, Rusty!” she continued, as her
daughter came in carrying Dumps. “Don’t forget
to take those pawpaws down to Miss Mary, and give
me Dumps, you’ll hurt yourself carrying her about
like that.”
Rusty passed the baby over.


“We’re going now, Mummy, Daddy’s got the
car out and I’m allowed to ride on the running board
to the gate.’’ She planted a careless kiss above her
Mother’s eyebrow and then stood back, and said to
Jancy: “Go on, you, too.” Jancy needed no second
bidding, and was kissed warmly in return by Mrs.
Richmond before being dragged off by the impatient
Rusty.
A pleasant twenty minutes’ drive through the
bush brought them to the school, which was a large
house standing among Morton Bay fig trees.
“I’d better take you straight to Miss Grey and
I can deliver these pawpaws at the same time,’’ said
Rusty.
“I thought your Mother said to give them to
Miss Mary,” Jancy reminded her.
“Well, that’s Miss Grey’s sister, so it doesn’t
make any difference really.” She led Jancy to a side
door and knocked and the door was opened by a tall,
striking-looking young woman in a smart linen suit.
“Oh, it’s you, Rusty.”
“Yes.” Rusty thrust the pawpaws at her and,
in a voice quite foreign to her own, said: “Miss
Mary, this is Jancy Mitford, and, Jancy, this is Miss
Mary.” Miss Mary acknowledged the excessively
polite introduction gravely, and then with a smile
said:
“All right, Rusty, you can leave Jancy here
with me, I want to talk to her. You can come back
for her in twenty minutes or so. Oh, and get her a
locker key from Miss Grey, will you?”
Rusty nodded and ran off, and Miss Mary took
Jancy inside to an attractive room in which three
ladies sat drinking coffee. They put down their cups
as Miss Mary entered.


“This is Jancy Mitford,” she told them, “our
new pupil.” And to Jancy, “this is Miss Shaw,
Miss Lovett and my sister, Miss Grey.”
Miss Grey was a much older edition of Miss
Mary and looked, Jancy thought, rather forbidding;
but Miss Shaw and Miss Lovett were quite young
and nice to look at, like Miss Mary. After chatting
with Jancy for a few minutes the three mistresses
finished their coffee and left the room, and Miss Mary
then seated herself comfortably on a wide lounge
and, motioning Jancy to sit beside her, she started
to ask questions about her general knowledge.
Jancy, who had only been taught first by her
Mother and then by correspondence course at Urel-
len, came out of the ordeal very well. English, his-
tory and geography proved to be her good subjects,
but Miss Mary shook her head ruefully over her
replies to the mathematical questions.
“Never mind,” she said finally, “you’ll soon
pull up on that I suppose.” She rose and stood smil-
ing down at Jancy. “I hope you’ll be happy here,
my dear. Personally, I think you’ll fit in very well.
Now I expect Rusty’s waiting for you so you’d better
go.” She opened the front door to reveal Rusty
standing on the steps. “Yes, here she is. Take Jancy
round and give her a locker, please Rusty, and when
the gong rings take her to Miss Shaw’s class.”
“Yes, Miss Mary,” answered Rusty smartly,
and as the door closed, “blow it, I was hoping you’d
be coming to Miss Lovett’s period with me. Still,
you’re two years older, so I expect you couldn’t.”
She led Jancy round to the front of the house
and up a wide hall into a comfortable room furnished
with settees made of cane and upholstered with gay
cretonne; bright rugs were scattered over the natural
wood floor and the walls were lined with lockers.


Several girls stood about talking, and as Jancy
walked in they eyed her with a friendly curiosity.
“ I his is Jancy Mitford,” Rusty announced to
the room at large, “and these are —’’ she reeled off
a string of names that left Jancy very confused.
“Anybody going to Miss Shaw for the first period?”
A long-legged girl with a thick mop of brown
hair answered her, “Yes, I am.”
“Good, then will you take Jancy along, Pam?”
“Of course.” Pam grinned at Rusty.
“Although 1 bet Miss Mary told you to do it.”
“Well, yes, she did,” Rusty admitted, “but
it’ll make me late for Miss Lovett, and I was late
before.”
“All right, you’d better give Jancy her key and
cut along.” Here the deep tones of a gong inter-
rupted her and she turned to Jancy. “Come along,
that’s the gong for the first period.”
The morning sped by very happily for Jancy,
who distinguished herself in Miss Shaw’s English
class by knowing all about Charles Dickens, and later
earned the praise of Miss Lovett who took the fol-
lowing period for history. Fortified by these small
triumphs she began to feel less shy, and when the
gong sounded for lunch recess she found herself
walking down the corridor talking quite freely with
Pam and the rest of the girls who had made up the
class. Rusty, coming to find her, was much im-
pressed by Pam’s account of her prowess, and as
they made their way to the dining-room, said
solemnly:
“Gosh, you must be a real swotter, Jancy.”
Jancy laughed.


“No. r m not. It s just that old Dinah used to
read Dickens to me by the hour, and the history—
well, I had nothing else to do at Urellen but read,
and all the books there were historical,’ ’
The dining-room was noisy with the sound of
many voices when the two girls entered and took
their places at the long table. Penelope, who was sit-
ting with the seniors at the end of the room, smiled
and waved cheerily when she saw them come in, and
as they waved back and sat down Rusty said:
“Well, old Pen’s normal again to-day. She’s
not bad really; it’s that Yvonne Poulett who has a
bad effect on her.’’
“Who’s she?’’ asked Jancy.
“That dark girl sitting next to her. You know
once she came to school with lipstick on and her
finger-nails painted. Miss Grey went off pop. I bet
she finishes up getting expelled before long.’’
With this dark prophecy Rusty turned her
attention to her lunch, and not another word was to
be got out of her until she had finished. The meal
over, they returned to the locker-room to find
Yvonne Poulett and two or three other senior girls
deep in conversation.
“You others can do as you like,’’ Yvonne was
saying, “but I’m certainly going to drop my music
before I’ll take lessons from Madam Platz. She’s a
German, you can tell that by her name, and I’m half
French, and you know what the beasts did to France.
Besides, since Miss Grey switched my lesson round,
I don’t get enough time for tennis, and that’s a
nuisance.’’
A plump girl moved away from the circle
round Yvonne and flung herself lazily into a chair.


“Why don’t you admit that you don’t like
music, Yvonne?’’ she said carelessly, “instead of
trying to get out of it by condemning Madam Platz.
I think she’s a very good teacher, and, anyway, she’s
a refugee.’’
“That’s what she says,’’ sneered Yvonne, “but
I didn’t expect you to agree with me in any case,
Rhona. After all, you’re not built for sport,’’ she
flung a scathing glance at the plump figure, “and
you like stewing at a piano.’’
“Maybe,” Rhona laughed comfortably, “but
don’t attack me, you started on Madam Platz, finish
her off first.”
Yvonne flushed angrily and, turning her back
on Rhona, continued to harangue the rest of the
group. Rhona grinned at Rusty and Jancy who were
drying their hands.
“Hello, you’re new, aren’t you?”
“Yes, I’m Jancy Mitford.”
“She’s staying with us,” put in Rusty.
“Oh, she is, is she? Well, she’s a very lucky
kid then. How long is she staying?”
“Forever, I suppose,” said Rusty expansively.
“Goodness, not forever,” corrected Jancy,
“only until my Mother gets better; she’s very ill, you
I f
see.
“Sorry about that.” Rhona got clumsily out of
her chair. “I must be off. See you later.”
“She’s nice,” said Jancy as Rhona left the room.
“Yes,” agreed Rusty, “she’s the only girl here
who can stand up to Yvonne. Mummy likes her a
lot, and she often comes out to our place to play for
her and Daddy.”


Here Jancy, who had long cherished a dream
of becoming a pianist, burst out:
“Oh, Rusty, do you think I could take music
here? Mother taught me a little, and I’d love to be
able to play well by the time she’s better. Do you
think I could?”
“Why yes, I suppose so,” said Rusty, some-
what surprised at Jancy’s vehemence. “I didn’t
know you liked it. Ask Mummy when you get
home, she’ll fix it.”
Jancy spent the rest of the afternoon in a
delicious dream, which interfered somewhat with
her performance in class, but since the periods were
dancing and art her defection was not very notice-
able, and Miss Mary even complimented her after
school on the excellence of her first day’s work.
At four o’clock Captain Richmond called for
them in the car and ran them home, and Jancy,
unable to wait any longer, sought out Mrs. Rich-
mond immediately on her arrival and put the ques-
tion of music to her.
“Why yes, dear, of course you can,” Mrs. Rich-
mond said. “Your Mother is a very accomplished
pianist and I’ve no doubt you will be too. I’ll ring
up Miss Grey to-morrow and arrange it with her.”
Jancy was so excited that she said to Rusty as
they were undressing that night:
“I know I’ll never get a wink of sleep to-night.
It’s really not much use my going to bed.”
But nature soon took its toll, and presently
Rusty, who had been gabbling away cheerfully, dis-
covered that she was talking to herself and Jancy
was fast asleep.


CHAPTER FIVE
As the year advanced Jancy settled into her
new life as if she had never known any other, and
Urellen and all that it stood for sank gradually into
the background like a bad dream, taking with it the
timid, unsure Jancy that had been, and leaving be-
hind a happy, confident, carefree girl who, Mrs.
Richmond said, was a definite acquisition to her
family.
She was popular at school and soon made many
friends and inevitably some enemies. Yvonne
Poulett lost no time in proving herself to be the
latter, for her scheme to boycott Madam Platz fell
through mainly because of Jancy’s intervention.
Entering the locker-room a day or so after the
conversation she and Rusty had heard there between
Rhona Baldock and Yvonne, Jancy found the senior
girl again surrounded by the same group of girls,
with a few juniors hanging around the outskirts.
Rhona not being there to interrupt, Yvonne was
holding the floor unchecked.
“And so,” she was saying, “having had per-
mission from my Mother to drop music, I’m going
to tell Miss Mary, if she asks me, that I can’t learn
from a German. Mother thinks it’s very unpatriotic
even to employ her here.’’
“Well 1 can’t do that,” said a senior girl'named
Gillian Lome. “I know I won’t be allowed to drop
my music. I daren’t even write home and ask; I
know it’ll be no good.”
Yvonne stared at her pityingly.


“Don’t be silly, I’m not expecting you to ask
your people. All you’ve got to do is just refuse to
learn from old Platypus; if enough of us do it they’ll
be forced to sack her and get someone else.’’
“But,” said Gillian doubtfully, “Miss Mary told
me it was terribly hard to get good music teachers
up here, because it’s so out of the way. What if she
can’t find anyone to replace her?’’
“Well, what do you care?” Yvonne looked
round at the ring of faces. “I’m sure everybody here
would be darned glad to give up practising those
maddening scales. Wouldn’t you now?”
Most of the girls asserted heartily that they
would, and it was quite obvious that Yvonne, as
usual, had won her way.
Jancy was filled with anger at this horrible plot
against gentle, sad-looking Madam Platz, and no
less dismayed at the prospect of being deprived of
her beloved music, but being a new girl and still
timid, she had not the courage to raise a dissenting
voice among her seniors, and stood miserably silent
as they all filed out of the room.
The whole afternoon in class she worried about
what she had heard, and as soon as she was free
dashed off to find Rusty and lay the problem before
that practical young lady, who advised her to refer
the matter to Rhona Baldock. Jancy found Rhona
in the music room struggling with Bach.
“Have you had your lesson yet?” she asked,
bursting breathlessly through the door, “because
I’ve got to hurry and tell you something before
Madam Platz comes in.”
Rhona turned on the stool and, leaning back
with her elbows on the piano keys, made a loud
discord.


“Sit down, kid,” she said calmly; “Madam
Platz isn’t coming to-day. Something’s happened.
Now what’s worrying you?’’
Jancy, somewhat incoherently told her tale,
and when she had finished, Rhona nodded slowly:
“So that’s it.’’
“What do you mean?
“Well, when I came for my lesson Gillian
Lome almost knocked me down rushing out of the
door, and when I got inside Madam Platz was sitting
in that chair as white as a sheet. I asked her what
was the matter, was she feeling ill or something, but
she just looked at me and said that there would be
no more lessons and that she was leaving, and
walked straight out of the room.’’ Rhona got off the
stool slowly. “I think,’’ she added with a purposeful
air, “we’ll go and find Gillian Lome.”
After a short search, Gillian was found in the
Gymnasium alone and looking rather frightened.
Rhona wasted no time.
“What happened just now between you and
Madam Platz, Gillian?’’ she asked calmly.
“Nothing.’’ Gillian refused to meet her eyes,
and stared fixedly out of the window.
“I think you’d better tell me,’’ said Rhona, seat-
ing herself on a form. “Confession’s good for the
soul you know. As a matter of fact I know about
Yvonne’s little plan, so you might as well tell me the
rest, and perhaps we can patch this up before it gets
back to Miss Grey.’’
Gillian turned from the window furiously.
“Oh, why do you have to come interfering?
It’s none of your business.’’


“Oh, yes it is. I like Madam Platz, and, what’s
more, I’m not going to lose my chance at the music
exams, just because you and Yvonne choose to be-
have like silly asses.”
“For goodness sake stop bothering me.”
Gillian’s voice trembled a little. “I’ll be glad if old
Platypus does go. I hate her.”
“And what has Madame Platz ever done to you
that you should hate her,” asked Rhona, and added,
“anyway, she’s leaving, she just told me, so you’ve
accomplished your purpose, but I wouldn’t have on
my conscience what you’ve got on yours. Madam
Platz kept her invalid father and herself on the salary
she got here, so you’ve deprived two people of the
means of existence. I hope you’re proud of your-
self.”
Gillian, who was a foolish but not a heartless
girl, was obviously shaken by this statement, but
she stood irresolutely by the window, not knowing
quite what to do. Finally Rhona got up and signed
to Jancy. “Come on, let’s go,” but Gillian, suddenly
collapsing, cried, “No, don’t go, I’ll tell you.” She
grasped Rhona’s arm convulsively, and the words
came spilling out:
“Madam Platz caught me in the passage and
wanted to know why none of us had been for music
this afternoon. I told her that she wouldn’t get any
pupils at this school because she was a German, and
that we didn’t want her here. I got a shock when she
stopped me like that, and just blurted it all out.”
Gillian had the grace to look ashamed at last. “Oh, I
do wish I hadn’t done it, Rhona; I do wish I hadn’t.
Do you think we could catch her before anything
awful happens?”


“We ll try,” said Rhona, and without further
talk they sped over to the main house and down to
Madam Platz room. It was empty.
“Oh, heavens,” wailed Gillian. “We re too
late,” and at that moment the door opened opposite
to disclose Miss Mary, and her face showed plainly
that Gillian’s words were only too true.
“What are you girls doing there?” she asked
sternly, “you know you’re not allowed in the mis-
tresses’ quarters.”
“We were looking for Madam Platz,” said
Rhona.
“Oh, were you? Then you’d better come in
here. You may be able to enlighten me about some-
thing.”
They filed into the room and stood awkwardly
at the table.
“Now,” said Miss Mary coldly, “I think you
girls know something about what’s been going on
with regard to Madam Platz. Please tell me, and,
mind, I want the truth.”
Rhona and Jancy remained quiet, while Gillian,
now fully aware of the enormity of her behaviour,
redeemed herself a little by confessing everything
and taking the full blame on her own shoulders.
When Miss Mary had heard her out she sat down
wearily.
“Oh, Gillian, how could you have done such a
thing?” she said sorrowfully to the now weeping girl,
and then her voice hardened. “But you did do it, so
it’s only right that you should be subject to a small
part of the suffering you have caused Madam Platz.
Now, although you have taken full responsibility
for this sickening behaviour, I’m afraid that there


are others implicated. I have here a list of the girls
who were absent from music this afternoon, and
they re all equally culpable. Jancy, take this list and
bring these girls back here at once, please.” Jancy
fled. You will be deprived of a full term’s merit
marks, Gillian,” Miss Mary went on, “which is the
severest penalty I can impose on you outside expul-
sion, and you will, of course, apologise most humbly
to Madam Platz.”
Here Gillian began crying in earnest, but Miss
Mary ignored her tears and left the room, returning
later with Miss Grey, who, without a word to any-
one, took a seat near the table and remained silent
until Jancy returned with Yvonne and the three
other girls.
As soon as the door was closed Miss Grey stood
up and, surveying her pupils with a look of actual
dislike, said:
“Gillian has already forfeited a whole term’s
merit marks for her behaviour to-day. The rest of
you will do the same.”
Jancy and Rhona looked at one another aghast
at being included in this sweeping penalisation, but
Gillian, having recovered from her tears, came to
their rescue.
“Please, Miss Grey, Rhona and Jancy hadn’t
anything to do with it. Jancy heard it being dis-
cussed and told Rhona and they both came to per-
suade me to try and put things right.”
“Oh,” said Miss Grey. “Then they won’t want
to stand in such company any longer. Come over
here, girls.”
Miss Grey reseated herself and, after looking
at each of the disgraced girls for a time, to their in-
tense discomfort she spoke in an icy voice.


“You girls seem to have been labouring under
a misapprehension which, having done so much
damage, must be removed. Madam Platz is not a
German but a Polish lady. She was in Warsaw when
the Germans attacked that city and saw her husband,
her mother and three sisters die horribly in their own
courtyard. She is now trying to make a new life in
a new land and anyone who tries to stop her is as
inhuman as the Nazis who killed her people.” The
cold voice suddenly stopped, and then went on in
utter contempt: “You disgust me with your petty,
thoughtless tyranny. How dare you introduce it
into my school ? lam mistress here, and if ever again
my running of this establishment is upset by the un-
warranted interference of a pupil she will be ex-
pelled. You may go.”
The girls, looking completely crushed, filed
slowly out into the corridor and made for the locker-
room. Even Yvonne for once had nothing to say.
Jancy was awestricken by Miss Grey’s eloquence.
“Gosh, Rhona, wasn’t it awful?”
Rhona nodded.
“It does me good to hear Miss Grey let herself
go. And they deserved every word of it.”
There was no more talking, and soberly the girls
collected their things from their respective lockers
and one by one left the room. Jancy was almost the
last to leave and running down the corridor saw
Yvonne standing at the front door. As she passed
by the senior girl grasped her arm roughly and swung
her round.
“I’ll get you for that piece of tale-telling, you
little sneak,” she said viciously, thrusting at her a
face full of malignity, “and you’ll be sorry you were
ever born.” And with a final shake at Jancy’s arm


she ran down the steps and disappeared, leaving the
younger girl standing in the door completely be-
wildered by the swiftness of the incident.
In the car going home Jancy unburdened her-
self to Rusty, who was eager to know what had hap-
pened to keep her so late. That young lady was
appalled at the whole affair, especially the penalties
imposed of the loss of a term’s merit marks.
“But what does it mean?” asked Jancy,
puzzled.
“Well, we get so many marks a week for
lessons and general behaviour, and if they’re good
you can do pretty well as you like, but if you lose
’em, it’s awful. Your people are told and you’ve got
to do a term’s work over again, and for a whole term
you’re not allowed to play games or go to the pic-
tures or swimming or help in the canteen in town
or, oh, you know, any of the nice things; in fact
you’re not allowed to leave the school grounds. And
it’s worse for Yvonne and those girls to-day because
they’re boarders,’’
“Golly.” Jancy was much impressed at this
formidable list.
“As for Yvonne threatening you,” Rusty
laughed, “I wouldn’t take any notice. She can’t do
much.”
But Rusty was wrong, for Yvonne was to prove
that she could be a bitter and implacable enemy.


CHAPTER SIX
“By the way,” said Rusty, as she and Jancy
were building a fort on the beach one day, “it’s
Mother’s Day in a fortnight, did you know?’’
“How do you mean Mother’s Day?’’ asked
Jancy, who was unaware of this yearly tribute to the
world’s Mothers. “Is it something to do with Aunt
Lesley?’’
Rusty was shocked at the depth of Jancy’s
ignorance.
“Do you mean to say that you don’t know
about Mother’s Day?” she said incredulously.
Jancy shook her head.
“No, what is it?”
“It’s held on the second Sunday in May, and on
that day you have a little party and everybody gives
their mother a present. It’s specially good for us,
because Peter comes home for the holidays too.”
“That’ll be lovely,” said Jancy, and added
thoughtfully, “does it make any difference how far
away your mother is? You see,” she explained, “I’d
like to send mine something.”
“That’s a good idea,” agreed Rusty. “Now
what could you send?”
“I could buy something out of my pocket
money if there were some shops handy, but there
». **
aren t.
“Oh, that doesn’t matter. I know what you
can do. People who are sick always read a lot, so


you can make her a book mark of fringed ribbon
and put from Jancy to Mother on it. 1 did that last
year and Mummy loved it.”
This idea appealed to Jancy very much, and
without more ado the girls returned to the house to
search for the necessary materials.
“I don’t know what I’m going to do for Mummy
yet,” said Rusty as they rummaged through Mrs.
Richmond’s scrap basket in the sewing-room. “I’ve
got to think about that,” and then as a thought
occurred to her, “and of course you’ll have to give
her something too.” She sat down on the window
sill. “Now let me see what we will do?”
At the end of ten minutes’ concentrated think-
ing they decided that Jancy would make and
decorate a kitchen calendar, and Rusty a pin box
adorned with shells.
The next week all their spare time was spent in
the manufacture of these articles which had to be
made under the house to prevent Mrs. Richmond
seeing them, and by the time Peter arrived on Friday
night the gifts were finished and ready to be sub-
mitted for his admiration.
Peter was a very untidy, sturdy-looking boy,
extremely like his mother to look at, but possessing
none of her dreamy abstraction. Jancy took to him
at once and was further captivated the next morn-
ing when with a few well-chosen words he set the
seal of his approval on her and Rusty’s gifts. He
later with much mystery produced his own present,
which was a tray inlaid with various woods he had
made at school.
“Of course,” he said, laying it down for their
inspection, “it would have been better if I could have
had more time over it; still, it’s not so bad, is it?


The girls were silent with admiration, and then
chorused simultaneously, “Oh, Peter, it’s beautiful.’’
Peter, secretly pleased at the impression he had
created, said airily, “Not so bad. I think she’ll like
•, »»
it.
“She’ll love it, the girls agreed.
“I hope so. Now look, Rusty, haven’t we got
a piece of old corrugated iron somewhere? We did
have, and if I can find it I’ll make a boat. Old Sawtell
showed me how when I stayed with him the other
week-end; you hammer out the ridges in the iron till
it’s flat. He sails his on the river. He’s called it the
Swallow. I’m not keen on that name, it’s a bit sissy,
but I’ll think up another.’’
Rusty unearthed the piece of iron from behind
the fowlhouse and soon Kuruna Bay rang with the
sound of beaten metal. They started the process in
the back garden, but Mrs. Richmond, after putting
up with it for some time, advised them to take it
down on the beach.
“You see, dears, it’ll deaden the sound if you do
it on wet sand, and it’s just as hard, if not harder,
than earth. Besides, it’s a little trying on the ear-
drums, all that noise.”
“Sorry, Mummy,” said Peter. “I should have
thought of it. We’ll go now.” And gathering up
their materials they trailed off down to the beach
followed by Judy crying, “Wait for me.”
Rusty, of course, took Dumps in the pusher,
which was something of a mistake. As she loved
the noise so much she was in danger of getting in
the way of the hammer.
“Do keep her away, Rusty,” begged Peter.
“She’ll make an awful row if she gets hurt, and I
can’t watch her all the time.”


By the end of the afternoon the iron was flat
and Peter had cut two pieces of wood for the ends
and a piece for the middle, but the call to dinner pre-
vented any more work being done and very reluct-
antly the children went in to their meal.
“I believe you’re building a boat, Peter,’’ said
Captain Richmond as they sat down.
“Yes, and she’s going to be a good one too.
“What are you going to call her, son?’’
“Well, I haven’t decided yet, I thought the
‘lllustrious,’ but Rusty and Jancy like the ‘Seahorse.’
What do you think, Dad?’’
“Oh, I’ m not suggesting anything,’’ disclaimed
Captain Richmond. “After all, it’s your boat, you
must name it. I like ‘Seahorse’ though.’’
“Yes, I like ‘Seahorse’ too,’’ said Mrs. Rich-
mond. “I think ‘lllustrious’ is a little grand for such a
small boat, don’t you?’’
“Perhaps it is,’’ admitted Peter. “Well, ‘Sea-
horse’ it is then, and, Mother, could we have a
launching ceremony? You could launch it. It’ll be
finished to-morrow afternoon.”
His Mother was delighted.
“Oh, yes, let’s have a launching ceremony,” she
said gaily, “and I’ll get Elsie to give us tea on the
beach. Mind you have a bottle of something for me
to smash on the bows, Peter.”
Peter nodded.
“And, Mother, do wear your hat and every-
thing properly, won’t you?”
“Of course, dear, it’s got to be a real cere-
mony.”


The next morning they all worked very hard
on the boat and she was finished before lunch.
Everyone stood off to view their handiwork, and
then Jancy suddenly realised that the name had not
been painted on. This started an altercation about
whether a ship was named before the launching or
not, but it was finally decided that the ceremony
came first, because, as Rusty said, everybody was
christened first and called their name afterwards.
Peter and Jancy were inclined to think there was
something wrong with this statement if they
troubled to look into it, but they were too exhausted
to bother, and, without further discussion, they all
went in to lunch. As they walked through the
kitchen, Peter said to Elsie:
“We’re having a launching ceremony this after-
noon, Elsie, and we’d like you to come if you can.’’
“I’d be very pleased to, Peter. What time is it
•V **
on ?
Three o’clock, and Mother is launching it.’’
“All right, I’ll be there. Thank you very
much.’’
In the dining-room Penelope was presented
with a similar invitation. She hesitated.
“Don’t you want to come?’’ demanded Peter.
“It’s not that. Yvonne Poulett will be here this
afternoon.’’
“She can come too, I suppose, then,’’ said Peter
grudgingly.
“But she mightn’t care for it. This is her first
time out this term, and she might want to do other
things.’’
“Oh, all right, if you want to be stuffy,’’ Peter
began angrily.


“Now, dear,” remonstrated his Mother mildly.
“If the girls would rather do something else they’re
quite entitled to. You wouldn’t want to attend a
sewing circle, would you? Well, they might feel the
same about a launching, although if they don’t
they’re quite welcome to come.’’ She smiled at
Penelope. “Anyway, we’re having tea on the beach
afterwards, so we ll expect you then.”
At a quarter to three the children, dressed in
bathers, were waiting on the beach with the ‘Sea-
horse’ and an old champagne bottle full of cold tea,
and at five minutes to three exactly Mrs. Richmond,
followed by Elsie, emerged from the bush path on
to the sand.
“Oh, Mummy, you look wonderful,’,’ exclaimed
Rusty, as her Mother advanced towards them
dressed in the height of fashion, and carrying a long
cane adorned with red, white and blue ribbons, which
it must be admitted looked a little like old Christmas
decorations; still the effect was all that could be de-
sired, and when she took the champagne bottle and
stood by the boat she looked quite imposing.
“Oh, Mother, couldn’t I just take a photo? My
camera’s up at the house, it won’t take me a minute.’’
Peter scampered wildly off, returning in a few
minutes with the camera and his Father. “No one
told Dad the time,’’ he said disgustedly; “anyway, I
found him. Now, Mother, you make your speech
first, and as you break the bottle I’ll take you.”
“Wait a minute, son. Why don’t you get in the
group and I’ll take the picture?”
When this had been satisfactorily arranged,
Mrs. Richmond faced her audience.
“Ladies and gentlemen, I am here this after-
noon at the request of my son to name his first ship.


I only hope that in all her journeyings across the
oceans of the world that she ll live up to the finest
traditions of sea-faring.’’ She turned to the boat. “I
name thee ‘Seahorse,’ and may God speed you,’’
and leaning down she swung the bottle against the
small bows. As it broke everybody cheered, and
Dumps crowed with delight, and when the hubbub
died down Peter, grabbing his paddles, shoved the
‘Seahorse’ off into the water.
“Who’s for first ride?’’ he cried.
“Me,” yelled Rusty, Judy and Jancy all to-
gether.”
“You can’t all go, silly asses,” said Peter, “it’s
not big enough.” He dragged a penny out of his
pocket. “Here, we’ll toss for it.”
The toss went to Rusty, and after pulling the
boat round to a little natural cove in the rocks, where
there was no surf, they embarked.
“Not too far out, Peter, I’m depending on you,”
warned Mrs. Richmond, leaving the beach to change
her clothes and help Elsie down with the tea.
“Don’t worry, dear, I’ll keep an eye on them,”
said her husband, “if I can manage to keep awake.”
After everyone had had their ride, Peter, who
was tired, lay down on the beach.
“I notice Penelope didn’t come,” he remarked
disgustedly to Rusty and Jancy. “She would have
done but for that Poulett female. I don’t know why
Pen bothers with her.”
“Nor me,” said Rusty; “she’s an awful simp.”
“Look out,” warned Jancy, “here they are,”
and the three turned to see Penelope and Yvonne
coming out of the trees.


“Have you finished your launching?” asked
Penelope when she reached them.
“Yes, you’re too late,” said Peter. “You knew
it was three o’clock, anyway.”
“I forgot.”
“Hello, kids.” Yvonne, ignoring Jancy com-
pletely, greeted the others. The was only
an unintelligible mutter. Yvonne laughed.
“Not very lively conversationalists are they
Pen? But of course they’re so young.”
Peter regarded her with distaste.
“Do you mind going away? There’s plenty of
beach and we were here first.”
“Peter!” Penelope’s face flamed, and Jancy,
scenting a row, sighed with relief as Mrs. Rich-
mond and Elsie walked on to the beach.
“Here’s Aunt Lesley,” she said thankfully, and,
forgetting their differences, the children made for the
grassy bank on which afternoon tea was always laid.
It was not a very successful tea party for somehow
Yvonne’s presence imposed a certain constraint.
She was charming to the adults and courteous to
everyone else, but the children found it hard to dis-
guise their aversion to her and there was much secret
jubilation when Dumps, with an air of conferring a
great favour, put a handful of sand in her freshly
poured cup of tea.


CHAPTER SEVEN
On the Saturday before Mother’s Day, Captain
Richmond asked if anyone wanted to accompany
him and Mrs. Richmond into town. There was a
chorus of assent, and it was decided that everyone
should go except Judy and Dumps, who would be
left at home with Elsie.
When she was ready, Jancy took the book mark
she had made for her Mother to Mrs. Richmond.
Aunt Lesley, I’ve made this for my Mother for
Mother’s Day, but 1 don’t know where to send it.
Could you tell me?"
Mrs. Richmond looked at the length of ribbon
with its rather wavering inscription and smiled
gently.
“It’s lovely, Jancy.’’ She bent down impulsively
and kissed her. “That’s for your Mother. If you
leave this with me, dear, I’ll send it away to-day.”
She turned to the writing desk and Jancy, after
a moment’s hesitancy, said:
“Why doesn’t Mother ever write to me, Aunt
Lesley? I never get a letter. Does she know where
I am?”
Mrs. Richmond sat down and drew Jancy to
her.
“Darling, your Mother doesn’t write because
she’s been very ill. She’s had what’s called a nervous
breakdown and for some time afterwards she lost
her memory. Indeed, she doesn’t remember every-
thing even now, but she’s in good hands’and with
care she’s going to be all right eventually, so you’ve


not to worry but just be happy so that when she does
recover there 11 be a fine healthy daughter there to
greet her.”
Jancy nodded, although she did not quite un-
derstand, but feeling comforted she ran off as Cap-
tain Richmond entered the room.
“Look, lan,” Mrs. Richmond showed him the
bookmark. “The child’s made this for her Mother.”
“Poor kid. What are you going to do with it?”
“I’ll send it to Dr. Barnes with an explanatory
note, he’ll know whether to give it to Brenda or not.
I do hope he’ll be able to soon. Now I suppose every-
one else is ready. I’d better get my hat on.”
Outside the children had piled into the car,
Penelope in front and Rusty, Peter and Jancy
behind.
“What are you giving Mummy?” Rusty asked
her elder sister.
“You’ll see,” Penelope grinned tantalisingly.
“Don’t be so curious.”
“We showed you ours,” grumbled Peter; “the
least you can do is tell us.”
“You’ll see to-morrow,” said Penelope firmly.
“It’s more of a surprise if you don’t tell anyone.”
And as Mrs. Richmond got into the car just then
the others were forced to drop the subject.
Jancy thoroughly enjoyed the morning in town,
and she, Rusty and Peter explored the small main
street while the rest of the party made their pur-
chases. At half-past twelve they rejoined one
another for lunch, after which Captain Richmond
took them to a matinee at the local picture theatre,
where an animated cartoon was showing. It was


Jancy s first experience of moving pictures and she
was almost dumb with delight. Even after it was
over she did not speak, but lived the enchantment
over again all the way home in the car. She was still
in a dream as she rolled into bed that night and hardly
heard Rusty when she called: ' Don’t forget, early
to-morrow, because of the decorations.’’
At six o’clock she was woken by a stealthy
whisper, and after dressing quickly the two girls
crept out into the garden to pick arms full of white
flowers chrysanthemums, jonquils, and what
Rusty called snowbush, were gathered and placed
on the dining-room table within reach of Peter, who,
with the aid of a step ladder, was arranging them
round the walls.
By eight o’clock everything was finished, and
with Elsie’s help they laid the table and decorated it
with white flowers, after which, with a last look
round they departed to clean up for breakfast.
Captain and Mrs. Richmond were in their
places when the children returned to the dining-
room, and as Jancy sat down she saw that the pre-
sents had been arranged in a big pile in front of Mrs.
Richmond. She could see the wrapping of her own
parcel below the others and thought gloomily that
it looked rather meagre beside the bigger and more
opulent packages.
When everyone was seated Mrs. Richmond
smiled all round.
“The decorations are beautiful, darlings.
Thank you so much for them. I don’t know any-
body who was clever enough to have such wonder-
ful children as mine.’’ They all laughed, and she
went on, “For being so sweet I’ll do yours first and
reduce this pile a bit.” She picked up a small parcel
and called “Peter Richmond.” It was passed down


the table and Jancy noticed as she handed it on that
there was a little card attached with a verse written
on it. Rusty, catching her questioning glance, ex-
plained :
“Mummy always gives us a return present on
Mother s Day, and you’ve got to guess what’s in-
side it. She writes a verse on it to give you the clue.’’
Silence was called for while Peter read out his
verse
“If you eat all here that’s set out,
This is what you’ll have to let out
I know,’’ yelled Rusty; “I know.’’
Quiet, dear,’’ cautioned her Mother. “Let him
guess.
Peter looked up with a grin.
“I know what it is,’’ he said; “a belt.’
Everyone clapped, and then Rusty’s name was
called.
Her verse ran:
This will help to hold together,
What you keep for rainy weather
Rusty looked puzzled.
“It can’t be an umbrella or an oilskin, it’s too
small.’’ She felt the parcel all over.
*
“Come along, Rusty,’’ her father rallied her.
“I thought you were good at this.”
Rusty concentrated hard for a while.
“Give me a clue, Mummy,” she begged at last.
“Well, what do you do for a rainy day?” asked
Mrs. Richmond.


“Save,*’ answered Rusty, her face breaking
into smiles. “1 know, it’s a purse.”
And it was. A lovely little red suede one.
Gradually everyone around the table received
their presents, solved their clues and opened their
parcels. Jancy was the last to get hers. The legend
on the card ran:
“This with nimble fingers’ care,
Can help produce a lovely air.”
Jancy beamed at Mrs. Richmond.
“Music,” she said softly, and when she opened
it there was a copy of Beethoven’s “Fur Elise,”
which she had long, coveted.
“You’ll have to give a recital after dinner to-
night,” said Captain Richmond. “Can you play it?”
“Oh, yes, I used Rhona’s copy to practise
from.” She looked gratefully at Mrs. Richmond.
“Thank you so much, Aunt Lesley.”
“That’s all right, dear. And now I’m going to
open mine.”
To the accompaniment of wild cheers she pro-
duced Jancy’s calendar, Rusty’s shell box, Peter’s
tray, Penelope’s slippers, Judy’s pastry man that
she had made herself, and her husband’s gift of a
pair of gloves. When this was over everybody
rushed to kiss her, and she emerged from the tangle
flushed and laughing with one lock of hair hanging
in her eye.
“Goodness, you’ve ruined me,” she cried, and
then clasping as many small bodies as she could
encompass: “But I love, I love it.”
Here Captain Richmond called order.


“Listen, children. I’ve got Martin’s launch for
the day and we re going out. Now we can go to Per-
kin’s beach further up or over to Eel Island. I want
a show of hands on Perkin’s beach,’’ he paused, but
no hands were raised. “Eel Island it is then. We’ re
leaving at ten o’clock and I want everybody ready
on the beach at that time. Don’t get left behind, be-
cause this is the last trip for a long time, it’s getting
too cold.’’
At ten they were all waiting at the cove in the
rocks and were taken out two by two in the dinghy to
the launch which was anchored beyond the surf. It
was a large launch with two bunks forward and a
cabin aft that held all sorts of mysterious cupboards
and lifebelts stuck in shelves against the roof. The
bigger children were allowed to sit on top of the
cabin, and Jancy, viewing the wide expanse of sea
from this elevated perch,.swayed to the dip of the
boat and thought what a wonderful thing it must be
to go to sea.
It was an uneventful trip, except that Dumps
almost fell overboard twice.
“She reminds me,” said Rusty, “of that baby in
‘Alice in Wonderland.’ I don’t know why, but she
does. One of these days she’ll really fall overboard
and then where will we be?”
No one answered this question as they were
nearing Eel Island jetty, and everyone was too busy
collecting things to pay attention to idle conversa-
tion.
Peter, Rusty and Jancy explored the island all
morning until Rusty complained of feeling tired,
which was unusual for her, and they returned to the
beach.
“Ah, there you are,” said Mrs. Richmond, as
they approached; “just in time for lunch.”


“Good,” said Peter, taking up a strategic posi-
tion at the corner of the rug on which the meal was
laid. “Come on, Rusty.”
But Rusty did not want anything to eat and
lay down wearily on the sand.
“Do you feel sick, dear?” asked her mother.
“I don’t feel very well,” admitted Rusty
grudgingly. “I’ll just lie here for a bit until I feel
better; I must have eaten something.”
She looked so unwell when they had finished
lunch that Mrs. Richmond put an anxious hand on
her forehead.
“How do you feel, dear?’
“Not bad, Mummy.”
Mrs. Richmond looked at her husband
worriedly.
“Shfe’s got a bit of a temperature, lan; do you
think we’d better get her home?”
Rusty began to cry weakly.
“Oh, don’t go home, Mummy. I’m spoiling
everybody’s day,” she wailed.
Peter, though profoundly shocked at her tears,
made a clumsy attempt to soothe her.
“No you’re not. We didn’t want to stay on the
old island anyway. We’re sick of it.”
“Yes, I think we’ve all had enough,” agreed
Mrs. Richmond. “It’ll be after three in any case by
the time we get back, and that’s really late enough;
the evenings are so cold now.”
Somewhat subdued, everybody set to work to
get the gear aboard, and within half an hour they
were heading for home.




Rusty, despite a covering of various people’s
coats and cardigans, was shivering violently by the
time they reached Kuruna beach, and, leaving the
others to look after themselves, Mrs. Richmond
hurried her up to the house and into bed.
Speculation was rife at the dinner table that
night as to what was wrong with Rusty, and before
going to bed Mrs. Richmond made them all gargle
and rubbed their chests with eucalyptus oil.
“I’m sorry, dear,” she said to Jancy, “We were
going to hear you play to-night, but I think we’ll
postpone it in case you’ve caught a chill too. I’m
sure you won’t mind going to bed early, you can
read for a while.”
“I don’t mind a bit, Aunt Lesley. I do hope
though that it’s nothing serious with Rusty; it’s
most unlike her to cry, isn’t it?”
Yes, it is. She doesn’t take after me. I always
cried when I was a child.” Mrs. Richmond smiled.
‘‘But then I was such a spoilt little thing. Anyway,
I ve rung the doctor and he’s coming out first thing
in the morning, so we ll soon know what’s wrong.”
She kissed Jancy. ‘‘Good-night, dear, and thank you
for your gift this morning. Off to bed now.”
Before getting into bed Jancy looked curiously
at Rusty’s, which had been moved down the far end
of the verandah. There was no sign of life, but after
she had read for a while a plaintive voice said:
‘‘Would you mind putting the light out, Jancy,
please, it hurts my eyes.”
‘‘Of course I wouldn’t.” She switched it off,
and said into the darkness: ‘‘l do hope you’ll feel
better in the morning, Rusty, dear. Good-night.”


CHAPTER EIGHT
The doctor came early next morning and to
everybody’s dismay pronounced Rusty’s illness to
be measles.
“Oh, dear,’’ said Mrs. Richmond helplessly. “I
wonder where she got that?’’
“There’s four cases at the school,’’ replied Dr.
Jeeves cheerily. “That’s where she got it.’’ He picked
up his hat. “The rest of the children will have to
stay in quarantine, of course, until the infection
period’s over. I’ll call in a couple of days to see how
this young lady’s getting on.’’
Mrs. Richmond nodded distractedly, and saw
him out of the door with a succession of “Oh, dears.’’
“Don’t worry, Aunt Lesley,’’ Jancy comforted
her when she came back. “The doctor didn’t seem
to take it very seriously. Rusty may be much better
to-morrow.’’
But Rusty was no better the following day, and
two days later Judy, Dumps, Peter and Penelope all
succumbed. Jancy, for some mysterious reason, was
not attacked, and spent her time running after the
sick children and ministering to their wants until
Mrs. Richmond told her to take a rest or she would
be in bed too.
Jancy protested volubly at this, but Mrs. Rich-
mond pointed out that it wouldn’t be much help to
have another patient on her hands, and suggested
that Jancy play to her while she did her work, add-
ing:
“After all, you haven’t touched the piano for
days, and I haven’t heard ‘Fur Elise’ at all yet.”


“All right,” said Jancy, seeing the force of this
reasoning, and went to the battered old grand piano
where she spent a pleasant hour or two going
through her music to the delight of Mrs. Richmond,
who was a very appreciative audience. In the after-
noon she wandered out into the bush and up the hill
to the convicts’ cave, and, climbing on to the top of
the sun-warmed stone, sat with her knees under her
chin, thinking of the change in her life during the
previous few months. Urellen had already become
a distant memory, for Aunt Marie’s face was quite
difficult to recall, and even old Dinah’s had become
a little blurred. On the other hand, the features of
her parents remained as vividly alive as ever, and
Jancy was just beginning to feel a trifle sad about
them when she heard someone approaching along
the path and the bearded occupant of the little house,
whose name she had forgotten, came limping to-
wards her through the bush. He was walking with
bent head, and had almost reached the cave before
he saw the small figure sitting on the stone.
‘Good afternoon,” said Jancy politely.
‘Good afternoon,” he returned gruffly.
‘lt’s a lovely day, isn’t it?”
“Yes, I suppose so.” He glanced sideways at
her. “Weren’t you up here with the Richmond child
some time ago?”
Jancy nodded.
“Yes, that was Rusty. She’s got the measles,
and so have the rest of them except me. It’s a bit
lonely without her,”
“Yes, I expect it is
“I don’t suppose you’d let me come and look
at your garden again?” said Jancy tentatively.


The big man cleared his throat and looked
away.
“Come if you like,” he said unwillingly, and
limped off up the path leaving Jancy to follow by
herself.
When she reached the clearing he had disap-
peared indoors, so she spent a delightful hour explor-
ing the garden, which on closer acquaintance proved
even more fascinating than it looked. There was a
dovecote built like a Swiss chalet, on the porch of
which strutted cooing fantails; there were bird baths
decorated with stone snakes and lizards, and in one
corner was a beautiful lily pond with the stone figure
of an aborigine in the act of throwing a spear stand-
ing on its rim. Having seen everything there was to
see, Jancy returned to the house to say good-bye
before taking her departure.
"I’m going now,” she called softly through the
door, and, then suddenly remembering his name,
added, “Mr. Butler.”
He came out.
“I’ve just made a cup of tea, you can join me
if you like.”
“Oh, thank you,” said Jancy, pleased at the
opportunity of seeing the inside of the house.
“I suppose you’re allowed to drink tea?’ he
shot at her.
“Yes, I’m allowed it in the afternoon,” she re-
plied, following him inside.
“You can sit down there while I pour it out.”
Her host indicated a chair and disappeared through
a curtain into another room. While he was thus en-
gaged, Jancy took the opportunity to look around
her. On one side of the room was a bed built like a


ship s bunk, with an old-fashioned lantern hanging
at the head of it and bookshelves built in all round,
and on the other side was the fireplace over which
hung two pennants with .faded lettering on them and
a velvet cricket cap with a tarnished silver tassel.
Below these on the mantelpiece stood two photo-
graphs of boys in football clothes and a bottle inside
which a tiny sailing ship rode gallantly on a sea of
green paint. This was all she had time to take in
before Mr. Butler returned.
“There we are,” he said, setting down the tray
on a small table and drawing up a chair; “help your-
self.”
“Oh, that does look good,” said Jancy, picking
up a plate of her favourite crumpets and politely
handing them to her host.
“Thank you.” He took one and settled back
in his chair. He had thawed considerably and Jancy
thought she even detected a faint smile beneath the
greying beard.
“Do you like living here by yourself?” she
asked, after disposing rapidly of half a crumpet.
“Of course. Otherwise I shouldn’t do it,”
answered Mr. Butler.
“You must find it lonely though,” pursued
Jancy. “I used to at Urellen, and I had two other
people.”
“Urellen!” She looked up to see a look of com-
plete dismay and astonishment on her companion’s
face. “Did you say Urellen?”
He looked so ghastly that Jancy gulped down
a piece of crumpet almost whole.
“Yes, I did,” she faltered.
He stood up.


“I think you’d better be going now,” he said in
the familiar harsh voice. ‘‘l’m sorry, but you’ll have
to go.”
Jancy scrambled off her chair hurriedly, unable
to understand this change of front, and only anxious
to get away from the sight of that stricken face.
“Good-bye,” she said from the door.
“Good-bye,” he replied slowly with his back to
her; “and you’d better not come here again.”
Jancy did not stop to answer, but ran away
through the garden, past the convict’s cave and down
the hill, not slackening her pace until she reached
the Richmond’s kitchen door.
Elsie was at the stove when she heard the fly-
door slam, and seeing Jancy’s face dropped the kettle
holder and came over to her.
“What’s the matter, child, you look as if you’d
seen a ghost.”
Jancy managed to smile.
“It’s all right, Elsie, I’ve just run too fast down
the hill, that’s all, I think.”
“Well, you want to be careful,” cautioned
Elsie, “you’d better go in and have a rest.”
Jancy went inside, but instead of resting went
out to Rusty on the verandah and related the after-
noon’s experiences to her.
“Gosh!” exclaimed that young lady when the
story was finished. “Weren’t you frightened?”
“Scared to death,” admitted Jancy. “Elsie said
I looked as if I’d seen a ghost, but when I come to
think of it, that’s just how he looked.”
“Oh, I’ll never be game to go there again.”
Rusty shuddered. “Will you?”




“No. especially as he asked me not to.” She
thought a moment. “You know, he was perfectly
all right till I mentioned Urellen. I wonder why that
upset him?”
“Perhaps he’s been there sometime,” suggested
Rusty.
“Yes, that must be it, but although I think
Urellen’s awful, I didn’t think it was that bad.”
“Oh, well.” Rusty gave up the puzzle. “Never
mind, let’s have a game of Ludo or something.”
“I’m sick of Ludo, can’t we play something
else?”
“Mummy,” called Rusty, as Mrs. Richmond
came through the door. “What game can we play?”
“What about Consequences.”
“There’s not enough of us.”
“Well, I’ll play with you for half an hour and
we’ll get Peter; that’ll make four.”
“Goody,” said Rusty. “Jancy, get a pad out
of my drawer, will you, and there’re some little
pencils there too.”
Jancy got the pad and pencils and then went
to help Mrs. Richmond wheel Peter’s bed out of his
room on to the verandah. This accomplished, and
a couple of chairs drawn up, Rusty passed out a sheet
of paper and a pencil to each player while Mrs. Rich-
mond explained the game to Jancy.
“You begin as though you were writing a story,
you see, with ‘once upon a time there was a girl
named so-and-so,’ then you fold that down so it
can’t be seen and pass it on to the person next to you,
taking the paper passed to you by the person on the
opposite side; on this you continue the story: ‘and a


boy named so-and-so,’ and pass the papers on again.
The boy and girl do this and that until the end of the
story, when the consequences of their behaviour
finish the game, by which time everybody has con-
tributed something to each story. Anyway, you’ll
understand as we play.” She looked up. “All ready?
Off we go.”
In silence everybody wrote busily and passed
their papers until Mrs. Richmond said: “And now
the consequences.” Whereat they all finished their
story and passed them up to be read out by Mrs.
Richmond.
On opening the first, she laughed heartily.
“Oh, do hurry and read it, Mummy, it must be
funny. It’s probably mine.”
“Socks to you,” retorted Peter inelegantly.
“You must think you’re good.”
“Now, children.” Mrs. Richmond silenced
them. “Here’s the first: ‘There was once a girl
named Ermyntrude and a boy named Applejack
who met in the surf where they did a highland fling
and played the bagpipes. He said: “Pardon me, are
these your false teeth?” and she said, “All the better
to see you with, my dear”; and the consequences
were they both got bandy legs.’ ”
There was a yell of laughter from Rusty at this
but Peter said he didn’t think it was so very good,
and expected the bit about bandy legs was Rusty’s,
which that young lady admitted readily, being ex-
tremely proud of this flight of fancy. None of the
other stories when read came up to Peter’s elevated
standard either, and when Mrs. Richmond left them
they played on in an endeavour to compose the
superlative consequence. Jancy became more and
more fantastic in her efforts, finally extracting a re-


luctant laugh from Peter, who, having at last
obtained some satisfaction from the game, called it
off, and suggested they read from “Alice in Wonder-
land,” and all take different parts.
“What a wonderful idea,” said Jancy admir-
ingly.
The other two stared at her in amazement.
“Haven’t you ever played Alice?”
“No.”
“Gosh!” said Rusty fervently.
“I’ve never played any of the games you play,”
she confessed. “I can’t think where you get them
all.”
“Why, from Mummy, of course. She knows
millions,” claimed Rusty extravagantly. “That’s
why we don’t mind being sick. She always plays
with us.”
Jancy, suddenly swept with an overwhelming
longing for her own Mother, sat silent, until Peter,
guessing the trend of her thoughts, said abruptly:
“Come on, Jancy, don’t dream all day. Get
the books.”
“All right.” She went and brought three copies
of “Alice” from the playroom and gave Peter and
Rusty one each.
“Now let’s do the tea party,” said Peter, and
with Rusty taking the Mad Hatter, Peter doubling
the March Hare and the Dormouse, and Jancy doing
Alice, they gave themselves up to the hilarious fun
of the mad tea party and Jancy’s momentary unhap-
piness was dispelled.


CHAPTER NINE
By the time the children were well again the
holidays were over, and with Peter’s return to school
the Richmond house lost some of its attraction for
Rusty and Jancy, and they soon signified their will-
ingness to return to Miss Grey’s.
Penelope, who had been the last to contract the
disease, was still convalescing, and when Rusty an 4
Jancy came to say good-bye on leaving for their first
day at school, she begged them to ask Yvonne and
some of the other girls to come out and see her on
the following Saturday.
“I’m so bored lying here,’’ she complained.
I’ve read everything in the house and there’s
nothing to do.”
“We’ll play games with you if you like when
we come home,” offered Rusty. “Ludo, or some-
thing.”
“Oh, lord, not that kid stuff,” Penelope said
ungraciously. “I couldn’t be bothered.”
“0.K.” Rusty was unperturbed by this ill-
natured refusal of her well-meant offering. “Come
on, Jancy, Daddy’ll be waiting for us.”
“You can bring me a book from the library,”
Penelope called after them. “Yvonne will get you
one, if you ask her.”
“See me asking Yvonne,” muttered Rusty as
they got into the car; “not likely.”
“You’ll have to ask Yvonne to get her a book
out, won’t you?” said Jancy. “Only seniors can go
to their library.”


“I’m not asking Yvonne for anything,’’ replied
Rusty stubbornly. “I’ll ask Miss Mary or someone
to get the book.”
“Rhona would do it.’’
“All right, will you ask her then?” Rusty was
anxious to relinquish all responsibility.
“Yes, I’ll ask her,” agreed Jancy, “but I can’t
ask Yvonne for Saturday, she doesn’t speak to me,
you know.’’
Here Captain Richmond drew their attention
to a wallaby sitting on the side of the road and the
conversation was dropped for the rest of the journey.
On their arrival at school the girls were greeted
by their school fellows with a flattering warmth.
“Oh, I’m so glad you’re back,’’ said Pam Simp-
son. “We haven’t had a good game of basketball
for weeks. How about a practice game at lunch
time? We’ve got to play Maryville in three weeks
you know.’’
“All right with me,” said Rusty.
“And me,’’ echoed Jancy. “But look, I’ve got
to go and find Rhona now. I’ll see you later,’’ and
she hurried off through the main door and into the
locker-room, where she ran head first into Yvonne
who was coming out.
“Why don’t you look where you’re going, you
little sneak,’’ the senior girl said venomously; “you
almost knocked me over.’’ She brushed her dress
fastidiously as if to wipe away the contact.
“Sorry,’’ said Jancy briefly, as with a snort
Yvonne turned and left the room.
“My word!’’ said Rhona, who had viewed the
encounter from her favourite chair, “you’ve cer-
tainly made an enemy of her, kid; you want to watch
out.”


“Pooh! Who cares?” Jancy made a face.
“She can be very nasty.”
“So can I,” said Jancy stoutly.
“I doubt it.” Rhona gave a humorously
sceptical glance at the frank brown face and changed
the subject. “How are you feeling, kid?”
“I wasn’t sick; it was Rusty and the rest.”
“How’s Penelope then?”
“She’s getting better. That’s what I wanted to
see you for. She’d like a book out of the library.
Will you choose one ? And she says will some of the
seniors come and see her on Saturday?”
“Does that mean me?”
“Oh, yes, Rhona, and bring your music too,
will you?”
“Is that what you asked me for?”
“No, of course not.” Jancy went red with em-
barrassment.
“I was only teasing.” Rhona grinned amiably.
“I’ll give you the book before you go this afternoon,
will that do?”
“Yes, thank you, Rhona; I’ve got to go now.”
At the lunch recess both Jancy and Rusty
found themselves to be terribly out of practice at
basketball, and Pam was filled with dismay at their
amateurish efforts.
“You’ll never be in trim for the match,” she
moaned hopelessly, “and we haven’t got enough
time; it’s only three weeks.”
“We’ll train hard, Pam. You see, it won’t take
long, it’s only because I’ve been sick. I tell you what
we ll do. Some of the seniors are coming out on
Saturday to see Penelope, why don’t you come too,
and we can practise throwing. I’ll be feeling better
by then too.”


Pam was considerably cheered by this sugges-
tion and agreed enthusiastically to get Miss Mary’s
permission to accompany the seniors.
“I’m glad I’m not a boarder,’’ said Rusty, as
she and Jancy went back into school; “they don’t
seem to have any fun. Look at the way Pam jumped
at that invitation just now. They must get bored to
death.’’
“Yes,” agreed Jancy, “and, Rusty, I’ve asked
Rhona for Saturday too, is that all right?’’
Rusty nodded.
“Rhona’s a good sort, and Mummy likes her.
We should have a nice party for Saturday.’’
When they returned home that night Jancy
delivered the book to Penelope, who took it eagerly.
“Did you see Yvonne?’’ she asked, skimming
through the pages. Jancy nodded, consoling herself
with the thought that she was not really telling a lie,
as she had seen that young lady. “And are the girls
coming out?’’
Jancy nodded again, and then, afraid that the
questions may become too pointed, she excused her-
self in order to wash her hands.
“Perhaps we ought to ask Yvonne,’’ she said
to Rusty, who had followed her into the bathroom.
“After all, that’s who Penelope wants.”
“Well, the rest of us don’t,” replied Rusty
firmly. “Anyway, Yvonne might come without ask-
ing. I wouldn’t put it past her, and then everything
will be all right.” And with this airy dismissal of
the problem Rusty went to have her dinner.
Saturday dawned bright and clear and cold,
and after a morning spent in the kitchen helping
Elsie with the cooking, Jancy and Rusty, followed


by the persistent Judy, and with Dumps in the
pusher, went down to the main road to meet the bus
coming from school.
Pam and Rhona were the first to alight, fol-
lowed by Gillian Lome and four other senior girls.
Yvonne was not amongst them, and Rusty gave
Jancy a triumphant grin before turning to welcome
her own guests.
When they reached the house Mrs. Richmond
greeted the girls and asked Jancy to take them out
to Penelope. Not without misgiving, Jancy did as
she was asked, and her fears were realised when
Penelope, after greeting her friends, exclaimed:
“But where’s Yvonne?”
“She didn’t come,” said a girl named Irene
Edwards; “she said she hadn’t been invited.”
“But I did invite her. I told Rusty and Jancy
both to do it.”
“I don’t know about that,” replied Irene, “but
she wouldn’t come, said she couldn’t without an
invitation.”
Jancy here made an unobtrusive exit, and went
to find Rusty, whom she found tossing a ball in the
back garden with Pam.
“We’ve done it this time, Rusty,” she said, sit-
ting down dejectedly on the wheelbarrow.
“Why?” Rusty continued to toss the ball
calmly.
“Irene Edwards told Penelope that Yvonne
hadn’t been invited.”
“Well, that’s nothing to worry about. Pen can’t
kill us. Forget it, and come and have a toss.”
Jancy’s conscience troubled her the whole after-
noon, and turned to an active worry at teatime, when
Penelope showed by her glances at the two culprits


that she was not going to let the business of Yvonne
pass unremarked. From that moment Jancy began
to wish the girls would go so that the inevitable
showdown with Penelope could be faced; she lost her
appetite and was quite unable to join in the general
fun. Even Rhona’s music failed to revive her flag-
ging spirits, and when Mrs. Richmond suggested a
duet together, she gave one of the worst perform-
ances of her life. Rhona watched the stumbling
fingers with surprise and managed to whisper, as she
turned a page: “Buck up, kid, you’re making an
awful mess.” But Jancy, impervious now to every-
thing except her all-consuming worry, went blindly
on her own discordant way.
“Whatever’s the matter, Jancy?’’ asked Mrs.
Richmond when she returned to her chair.
“I don’t know, Aunt Lesley,’’ said Jancy miser-
ably. “I just couldn’t seem to manage it at all.”
“Temperament, I suppose.’’ Mrs. Richmond
smiled consolingly. “All the best pianists have it, I
believe.”
Jancy wished she could throw her arms round
Mrs. Richmond and confess her crime; she felt that
if she did not unburden herself of her worries soon
she would burst, and Rusty, reading the signs of dis-
turbance, drew her aside when everyone went to
prepare for going home.
“You’re not still worrying about Yvonne, are
you?” she asked disgustedly. Jancy made no
answer. “I believe you are! Of all the silly asses! It
doesn’t matter a hoot even if Penelope is wild, she
can’t do anything.”
But Jancy was too far gone to argue, her
imagination having built up a nebulous black cloud
of disgrace which was bound to fall on her.


“Come on then,” said Rusty at last, seeing that
her reassurances were of no avail. “We’ll go and
see the girls off.’’
As they walked down the road, Rhona said to
Jancy:
“What’ s wrong, kid, are you sick?’’
“No.”
“Well, cheer up. What’s worrying you?
“Nothing.”
“Don’t tell me if you’d rather not.”
Jancy remained silent.
“My hat! You have got it badly, old girl,” said
Rhona with gruff kindliness. “Can I help?”
“No one can, only me,” replied Jancy, close to
tears. “Thanks all the same, Rhona.”
She managed to swallow her tears as the bus
came along and waved good-bye with a show of un-
concern before starting back up the hill with Rusty.
“Well, have you got over it yet?” demanded
that damsel.
“No, but I’m going to now,” returned Jancy,
with sudden determination, and leaving Rusty to
finish the climb alone she sped back up the hill and
through the hall to Penelope’s bedroom. Before
knocking on the door she paused a moment to col-
lect herself and then, after a warning tap, walked in.
Penelope, who was reading, looked up from her
book, and seeing who it was, carefully laid the novel
down on the table and sat up.
“You’re just the person I want to see,” she said
ominously. “You probably know what for.”
For some reason Jancy now felt quite confident,
and closing the door carefully behind her she
answered calmly:
“Yes, I know what for. I want to see you about
the same thing.”


CHAPTER TEN
“Would you kindly tell me why you didn’t ask
Yvonne to come to-day?” said Penelope with great
deliberation.
“Yes, I’ll tell you,” said Jancy; “I couldn’t.
Yvonne has made it very plain that she doesn’t want
anything to do with me.”
\
“And I don’t blame her,” began Penelope
angrily. “You—” She stopped as the door opened
and her Mother walked in. There was an awkward
silence, broken at last by Mrs. Richmond,
“What’s the matter, children; anything
wrong?”
“Yes,” burst out Penelope furiously. “Every-
thing’s wrong. I told Jancy to ask Yvonne to come
to-day, and she didn’t.”
“Well, perhaps she forgot, darling.”
“Oh. no she didn’t. She did it deliberately and
told lies into the bargain. When I asked her if she’d
told Yvonne she said she had.”
“I didn’t,” broke in Jancy. “I said I’d seen her,
which I had.”
“Well, that’s half a lie; you gave me to under-
stand that you’d told her.”
“Now wait a minute,” said Mrs. Richmond
calmly. “Let’s get to the bottom of this. When did
you ask Jancy to tell Yvonne?”
“Last Wednesday,” said a voice from the door,
and Rusty walked it. “She asked me too.”


“Oh.” Mrs. Richmond sat back in her chair
helplessly at this further complication.
“It’s all right, Mummy,” Rusty went on sooth-
ingly. “We’ll soon clear this up.” She turned to her
sister. “It’s my fault, Pen; I didn’t want Yvonne
here so I told Jancy I wouldn’t ask her. Jancy
couldn’t ask her because Yvonne refuses to speak
to her.”
“But why?” asked Mrs. Richmond in bewil
derment.
“It’s a long story, Mummy, but Penelope
knows why. Anyway, Pen, I’m not sorry I didn’t
deliver your message, but I am sorry I didn’t tell you
I wasn’t going to. As for Jancy, I don’t know how
you could expect her to approach Yvonne, you know
what a pig she’s been to her.”
“I give up,” said Mrs. Richmond. “I never
heard anything so involved in my life.”
“Penelope knows what I mean,” asserted
Rusty.
“All I know,” retorted her sister, “is that you
and Jancy have insulted a friend of mine, and I think
you should apologise. Don’t you, Mother?”
“My dear child, I don’t understand any of it,
and as it’s involved with something that happened
at school it’s none of my business, and I’m afraid
that you’ll have to settle it between yourselves; I’ve
got to go and bath the babies.”
When she had gone, Jancy said;
“I’m sorry, Penelope. I should have told you
why I couldn’t tell Yvonne.”
“Should you? I’m not so sure that you could
after what you did to her.”
“What do you mean?” asked Rusty fiercely.


“What I say. Yvonne told me how Jancy ran
with a long tale to Miss Mary.”
“Oh, did she, and what else did she tell you ?”
“Enough to make me realise what a little hypo-
crite Jancy is.”
“Penelope!” Jancy stared at her incredulously,
and then turning, ran blindly from the room.
Rusty moved over to her sister, her hard little
fists clenched angrily.
“Now look what you’ve done, and you talk
about insulting people. I bet Yvonne’s told you a
lovely string of lies about Jancy that you were fool
enough to believe. Well, I’ll tell you the true story
and you’ll lie there and listen, and if there’s any
apologising to be done I think you’ll be the first to.
do it.” And Rusty related the whole series of events
which had led up to Yvonne and the other girls losing
their merit marks.
Penelope listened to it all and afterwards lay
without speaking, while Rusty waited impatiently
by the side of the bed.
“Well?” she demanded finally, unable to keep
silent any longer.
“I don’t believe it,” said Penelope, but her tone
showed a certain lack of conviction.
Rusty snorted disgustedly.
“All right, if you don’t believe it ask Gillian
Lome or Doreen Cayley, or Janet Lord; they were
the other three girls in it. Everybody else at school
knows what happened. I can’t see why you don’t.
It’s probably because you live in Yvonne’s pocket.
Anyway, that’s the truth, you can take it or leave
it.” And Rusty, with an indignant glare at Penelope,


left the room and went to find Jancy, who was sitting
on her bed on the verandah staring unhappily out
of the window.
“Don’t worry, Jancy,” she said kindly, sitting
down beside her. “I’ve told her the truth and she’ll
be sorry that she was so horrible to you.”
“Will she?” Jancy said doubtfully. “I don’t
think so. She’ll believe what Yvonne tells her.
You’ll see.”
“Well, let her, if she wants to. Everybody else
knows the truth.”
“But, Rusty, it’s so difficult living in a house
where somebody dislikes you. It’s like a pall on you
all the time.”
“I know, but it’ll be all right next week when
Pen asks the other girls and they tell her what really
happened. And, Jancy,” she added curiously,
“what’s a pall?”
“I don’t quite know,” confessed Jancy, “ex-
cept that it’s something that’s put over coffins.”
Rusty laughed.
“Gosh, what a gloom you’re in! You’d better
come and have some dinner.”
That night when they were in bed Mrs. Rich-
mond came out on to the verandah and sat down on
Rusty’s bed.
“Look, children,” she said, “ I don’t quite know
what this upset is all about and I don’t want to know,
but you really mustn’t try to prevent Penelope
having her friends to the house, even if you don’t
like them. She doesn’t interfere with yours, does
she? Now I want you to promise me never to do
such a thing again, will you?”


“Of course, Mummy.” Rusty threw herself
impulsively at her Mother, almost strangling her in
a mighty hug. “We told Pen we’re sorry, and we
won’t do it again. It was my fault, really.”
“Good,” Mrs. Richmond kissed her and Jancy
and said to the latter, “and don’t be too upset about
it, dear, these things are only a nine days’ wonder,
and in a few months’ time it’ll be all over and for-
gotten.” And with a smile and a last “Good-night,”
Mrs. Richmond put out the light and left them to go
to sleep.
The next day Penelope’s attitude towards
Jancy had not altered, for although she was not
actively unpleasant, she made it quite clear that she
had no intention of speaking to the younger girl.
Rusty advised her to take no notice.
“I don’t know why she’s picking on you and
not me,” she said, “but I’m sure it’ll be all right when
she goes to school to-morrow and finds out she’s
wrong.”
Despite Rusty’s confidence, Jancy was not con-
vinced, and for the rest of the day did her best to
keep out of Penelope’s way; but this attempt to
solve the problem only complicated it by developing
a constraint that was foreign to the Richmond house-
hold, and that night Mrs. Richmond said to her hus-
band:
“I don’t know what to do about this business.
After all, I can’t force the children to be friends.”
“Don’t interfere, dear,” advised the Captain.
“They’ll find a way out themselves, given time.”
“I know, but I feel that Jancy has only just
settled down happily here and then Penelope’s got
to come along and make things difficult. What I
can’t understand is, that although Rusty insists the
whole thing is her fault, Penelope seems to be mak-
ing Jancy suffer for it.”


“Well, r m afraid these things always happen
in families,” said Captain Richmond comfortably.
“Perhaps, but I can’t bear to see Jancy so un-
happy, poor little thing. She’s had enough to put
up with. Of course, 1 know that whatever’s behind
this business happened at school, that’s what makes
it difficult.”
“Then it’s not your responsibility, dear,” said
her husband. “I’d leave Miss Grey to deal with what
happens at school. Although if things don’t settle
down here soon I shall have something to say; we
can’t have our home unsettled.”
“All right then, dear, I’ll leave the problem to
you,” said Mrs. Richmond with a sigh of relief, and
took up her knitting.
Next morning, on the way to school, Penelope
maintained her strict silence, and when they arrived
she disappeared swiftly towards the locker-room.
“Gone to look for Yvonne, I’ll bet,” said Rusty.
“Let’s go and see.”
In the corridor that led to the locker-room they
saw Yvonne and Penelope walking away from them
with bent heads, deep in conversation. Janet Lord
was standing in the door.
“Janet, can I see you for a minute?” asked
Rusty.
“What for, kid?”
“Well,” said Rusty, “will you tell the truth to
Penelope about Yvonne and Madam Platz, cos Pen
thinks that Jancy told Miss Mary and she’s not speak-
ing to her.”
Janet looked doubtful.
“I can’t very well, Rusty, that would be telling
tales too, and Yvonne would have it in for me like
anything.”


“Oh, gosh, I didn’t think of that.’’ Rusty was
stumped for a moment, and then her face brightened.
“Anyway, I told Pen to ask you what happened, cos
I knew you’d tell her the truth. So that’ll fix every-
thing.’’
“Yes, I’ll have to tell her if she asks me,” agreed
Janet, “but you quite understand that I can’t unless
she does.’’
Rusty nodded.
“That’s all right, she’ll ask you. Thanks a lot,
Janet,” and with lighter hearts the two girls ran off.
The morning passed uneventfully, but at lunch
Miss Grey caused a terrific sensation by announcing
that a fete in aid of the Soldiers’ Comforts Fund
would be held in the school grounds on the last Satur-
day in the month, which was three weeks ahead.
Everyone went wild with enthusiasm until Miss
Mary called order to say that the school would meet
in the gymnasium that afternoon when the various
stalls would be allotted to certain groups of girls.
Lessons proved very tedious that afternoon,
but at last they were over, and at a quarter to four
the gymnasium was packed to overflowing with a
seething mass of chattering girls. Rusty and Jancy,
together with their bosom friends Pam Simpson, Jill
Johns, Shirley Layton and Frances Keene, decided
to try for the Sweet Stall.
“Elsie knows some wonderful recipes,” boasted
Rusty. “I’m sure we could make pots of money.”
The rest agreed heartily, confident that the
prowess of the invincible Elsie, together with that
of their own Mothers, would produce the best stall
in the school.


“Here’s Miss Grey,’’ said Jancy, as the noise
died down, and the headmistress took her stand on
a dais at the end of the room.
“Quiet, girls.” Miss Grey adjusted her spec-
tacles and took a sheet of paper from Miss Mary. “I
will now read out the list of stalls and those wishing
to take charge of them will raise their hands when
the name of the stall they have chosen is mentioned.”
She read out slowly, pausing between each item to
enable Miss Mary to take a count of hands: “Jumble
Stall, Fancy Stall, Book and Magazine Stall, Re-
freshment Stall, Sweet Stall.” At this last Jancy’s
group shot their hands into the air, and as no one
else seemed anxious to have it, the Sweet Stall was
allotted to them without argument.
Having attained their ambition they were no
longer interested in Miss Grey’s list, and began chat-
tering like monkeys among themselves until Miss
Grey took them to task severely and ordered them
out of the room.
On the steps they met Janet Lord, and Jancy,
who had momentarily forgotten the troubles of the
morning, was sharply reminded of them. Allowing
Rusty to walk on with the others, she said to the
senior girl:
“Did Penelope ask you, Janet?”
“I’m afraid not, Jancy, she hasn’t been near
me. She and Yvonne seem to be as thick as thieves.”
Jancy’s face fell.
“Never mind,” said Janet, kindly, “she might
to-morrow.” But Jancy shook her head dismally.
“I don’t think so, but thanks all the same,” and
gloomily she rejoined her friends.


Rusty, seeing her downcast face, inquired the
reason, and when Jancy told her, she said savagely:
“I suppose Yvonne s filled Pen up with another
lot of lies. Why she can’t see through her is beyond
me.” She shook Jancy s arm energetically. “For-
get it, Jancy. If Pen doesn’t want to use her common-
sense, she’s not worth bothering about. I’d let her
go to pot. Come on now, we’d better go and get our
things or we’ll be late for Daddy.”


CHAPTER ELEVEN
During the following week Jancy tried to take
Rusty’s sensible advice, but in the face of Penelope’s
stubborn silence it became more and more difficult,
until at last Captain Richmond, annoyed at the con-
tinued unpleasantness, called Penelope into the
study.
“Sit down, please, Penelope,” he said
brusquely, “I want to talk to you.” Penelope sat
down, and he went on; “Your Mother tells me that
owing to some upset at the school your arrangements
for asking Yvonne out last week-end fell through. I
believe that it had something to do with Jancy and
Rusty.” Penelope opened her mouth to speak, but
her Father silenced her with a look. “I don’t want
any explanations, thank you. Your Mother also told
me that Jancy apologised for whatever she did, but
apparently that wasn’t enough, as you’ve treated
her in an abominable manner over the last few days.
I don’t like to think that a child of mine would be-
have like that to a guest in this house, and Jancy is
more than a guest, she’s one of the family. I’ve been
waiting for you to come round and behave like a
rational human being, but as you show no sign of
doing so, I shall have to make you. You will treat
Jancy in a reasonable manner from now on or you
will be deprived of your pocket money. I refuse to
have my house made uncomfortable by the unim-
portant squabbles of my children.” He stood up.
“Do you understand?”
‘Yes, Father.”
“All right, you can go.” And, very much sub-
dued, Penelope sought the privacy of her room.


After this she was, when at home, careful in
her manner towards Jancy, but at school she was by
no means friendly, and as far as Jancy knew, she
never approached Janet or anybody else for their
version of the Madam Platz affair, thus showing that
she preferred to accept Yvonne’s explanation as the
truth. With the easing of the situation at home,
however, Jancy stopped worrying about it and
threw herself energetically into making the paper
decorations for the Sweet Stall.
Mrs. Richmond, who seemed to be a veritable
mine of attractive ideas, lent her valuable assistance
to these labours and everybody’s spare time was
filled manufacturing coloured cardboard boxes and
pasting mottoes such as “Sweets to the Sweet’’ on
them.
Judy and Dumps of course brought their de-
lightful presence to these daily tasks, but proved to
be of questionable help, Dumps on the very first
day being discovered stuck all over with pieces of
red paper which had somehow transferred its colour
to her face and mouth.
“Goodness!’’ exclaimed Mrs. Richmond, on
becoming aware of her youngest daughter’s vivid
complexion. “Whatever have you been doing?
Look at the mess you’re in.’’ And Dumps was car-
ried off to the bathroom screaming protestingly at
her summary removal.
“I don’t put it on my face like Dumps, do I
Wusty?’’ said Judy smugly from her position on the
floor, as the yells receded.
Rusty grinned at the earnest face.
“You put it almost everywhere else though,”
she said. “Look at your Coogans.”


Judy looked down at her play pants unmoved,
and with infinite care smoothed and patted a lump
of paste further into the flannel.
“But I don’t put it on my head,” she insisted.
Rusty gave up.
“Isn’t she sweet?” she said delightedly to Jancy,
and Judy, smiling her absent complacent smile, be-
gan to cover with paste the parts of her play pants
that seemed to have been neglected, during which
arduous task she fell asleep against the leg of the
table.
At the end of the second week all Jancy’s and
Rusty’s share of the decorations were finished.
“And r m not sorry,” said Mrs. Richmond.
“Judy and Dumps have had more baths in the last
fortnight than is reasonable, and I’m afraid you’ve
been forced to neglect your practice too, Jancy.”
“I know,” returned Jancy ruefully, “and the
examinations come off at the end of the year.”
“Well, you’ll just have to practise all the
harder, won’t you?” said Mrs. Richmond cheer-
fully. “Now what about the sweets? You’d better
give me a list of what you want, Rusty, and Elsie
and I will get our heads together.”
“Oh, can’t we help make them, Mummy?”
asked Rusty.
“I suppose so when the time comes, but Elsie
and I will know better how much sugar and stuff to
buy if we have a list of the sweets wanted.” Rusty
gave her Mother the list she required, and then Mrs.
Richmond said she had to go and look out some old
books for Penelope’s stall.
“We’ll come and help you, Mummy,” offered
Rusty readily, “cos we know best what we want to
keep.”


“All right, come along then.”
The search progressed very slowly, for in every
book that was picked out Rusty discovered an old
and valued friend with which she could not bear to
part.
“But you’ve got four copies of Alice,” pro-
tested her Mother at last. “Surely you can let one
go?”
“But we can’t play readings unless we’ve each
got a copy, Mummy,” explained Rusty, “and we’ll
be one short if you give that away.”
“All right, but I don’t know what I’m going to
do for Penelope,” said Mrs. Richmond desperately.
Rusty looked at the forlorn pile of four books
with which she had reluctantly agreed to part.
“It doesn’t look much, does it?” she said dole-
fully.
“Wait a minute.” Jancy sprang to her feet. “I
think there may be some books in the trunk Aunt
Marie sent. Let’s go and look, Rusty.”
The trunk, which had not been completely un-
packed since its arrival, was in the dressing-room,
and when the top tray was removed there appeared
below rows of closely packed books. Jancy was
astonished.
“Why, they’re not mine,” she said feebly.
“Let’s look.” Rusty lifted one out and opened
it at the title page. “ ‘Days at St. Hilary’s,’ by Ethel
Lewis,” she read out. “And look here. Brenda
Ellis, Urellen, 1923.”
“That was my Mother’s name.” Jancy took it
from her eagerly. “They must be hers. Let’s get
the rest out.”
There were quite two dozen books and some
bound copies of “The Children’s Encyclopaedia,”


which they lifted carefully on to the floor, where
they were poring over them when Mrs. Richmond
came in.
“Did you find anything?” she asked.
“Oh. yes, Aunt Lesley. They’re my Mother’s
books. Look, here’s her name.”
Mrs. Richmond took the book and flicked it
through with a reminiscent smile.
“Your Mother won this for sewing that year,”
she said amusedly. “She beat me by four marks. I
was second, and however I came to do it I don’t
know, for I was a shocking sewer then and I haven’t
improved.”
She turned some of the other books over.
“I don’t suppose you’ll want to part with these
now, Jancy, will you?”
‘Well,” Jancy hesitated.
“You don’t have to if you’d rather not,” Mrs.
Richmond told her.
“It’s only that as they were hers I’d like to keep
them,” said Jancy. “But I’ll tell you what I can do.
I’ve got another set of Encyclopaedias up at Urellen
that a friend of Mummy’s gave me; couldn’t we ask
Aunt Marie to send them down and I’ll give those
to Penelope’s stall and keep these?” And so it was
decided.
At dinner that night Mrs. Richmond told Pene-
lope of the arrangement, and she thanked Jancy
almost warmly.
“I think she’s getting over it,” said Rusty in
the playroom afterwards, “or perhaps she was so
glad to have them she couldn’t help looking
pleased.”
“Oh, Rusty, that’s not like you,” objected
Jancy. “I’m sure she meant what she said.”


“Of course she did,” said Rusty repentantly.
“I’m getting as bad as Yvonne, aren’t I?”
That night before she went to bed Jancy put
the books back in the trunk and, seeing a pocket at
the back,'thrust her hand curiously inside. There
seemed to be nothing there, and then suddenly her
fingers felt something cold, and to her astonishment
she drew out a necklace of beautiful pearls with a
diamond clasp.
She gasped, and stared at the warm creamy
jewels lying in her hand, and the realisation came to
her that they must be her Mother’s. Perhaps Aunt
Marie wasn’t so bad after all she thought; surely
she must have put them there, knowing how glad her
niece would be to possess them, and with a grateful
heart and reverent fingers Jancy carried them over
to the loughboy and deposited them in a little box
she kept for a few precious belongings. Then, happy
at the thought of her wonderful discovery, she crept
into bed and, hugging close her delicious secret, fell
asleep.
On the Friday before the fete the school was
given a half-day off to prepare, and Jancy and Rusty
spent it in the kitchen helping Mrs. Richmond and
Elsie make the sweets. Dumps and Judy were in
attendance as usual, and Mrs. Richmond was un-
decided at first whether to leave them there or put
them in the playroom.
“Oh, leave them here, Mummy,’’ said Rusty,
“they’ll come in handy to lick the spoons and bowls
and things.’’ But Elsie was not so sure.
“They’ll get into mischief as sure as fate,” she
warned, “and don’t blame me if they do. Besides, I
don’t like the idea of this spoon-licking.”
“Oh, you are crabby to-day,” teased Rusty.
“They’ll only lick the thick off, the hot water’ll do
the rest.”


“Have it your own way,” said Elsie, and went
to bring in a bag of sugar.
“Now,” said Mrs. Richmond, unruffled by this
passage of arms, “we’ve got toffee, fondants,
apples on sticks, cocoanut ice, marshmallows and
oh, lots of others, so if we re going to finish things
this afternoon we ll have to work as a team. Elsie
knows all about it so she’ll be the boss and the rest
of us will do as we’re told. Is that understood?’’
Everyone signified that it was, and Rusty,
taking advantage of the general preoccupation, sur-
reptitiously rescued a half-pound of butter from
Dumps, who was earnestly devouring it underneath
the table. Unfortunately, she shrieked on being de-
prived of the delicacy and drew down the wrath
from which Rusty had been endeavouring to save
her.
“You naughty girl,’’ said Mrs. Richmond
severely, “we haven’t got enough butter as it is, with
this rationing. You can just go straight into your
play-pen.’’ And she departed with her wriggling,
protesting offspring.
Judy watched this exit placidly from her chair
near the stove.
“I don’t eat the butter, do I, Wusty?” she asked
demurely, “cos I’m a good girl, aren’t I?” And with
a nod to emphasise this self-satisfied statement, she
stuck two fingers in her mouth and surveyed the
kitchen with round, solemn eyes, which before long
closed as usual in sleep.
When Mrs. Richmond returned the workers all
set to with a will, and by the end of the afternoon,
tired, but happy, they stood back and admired the
finished rows of sweets in their attractive boxes.
“Don’t they look nice,” said Jancy, delighted
at the result of their labours.


“They certainly do,” Rusty grinned. “Nice
enough to eat.”
“I thought that would come up sooner or later,”
said Elsie, producing a paper bag, “so I kept some
out for you.”
“Good old Elsie.” Rusty descended on her
roughly.
“Here, that’ll do,” said Elsie, submitting to the
embrace not unwillingly. “Take them and get out
of my kitchen, you young Turk.”
“And don’t eat them all before dinner,” Mrs.
Richmond called after them as they scrambled
through the door, “or you’ll spoil your appetites.”


CHAPTER TWELVE
Saturday morning dawned inauspiciously with
a shower of rain, but by eight o’clock the sky cleared
and the sun came out with an added brilliance.
Hurrah,” yelled Rusty at the dining-room
window, “it’s going to be a beaut day.”
“Rusty!” remonstrated her Mother. “What
did you say?”
“I meant a beautiful day, Mummy,” said Rusty
with mock penitence.
“I should think you did. Beaut day, indeed.”
Mrs. Richmond concealed a smile. “Now, Daddy is
taking you into school at nine, which will give you
plenty of time to dress the stalls before the Fete
opens at eleven. So you’d better start packing your
things in the car now —we don’t want a scramble at
the last minute. And Jancy, your Encyclopaedias
arrived at the station yesterday and I got the carrier
to take them straight to the school to save time.”
Half an hour later the car was packed with
sweets, books, decorations and boxes of cakes; Judy
was the only casualty during these operations, for in
response to her pleading Rusty gave her a box of
marshmallows to carry out to the car, and in
negotiating the three front steps she toppled head
first from top to bottom.
No one was aware of this accident until Pene-
lope, in one of her rushes outside, found her sitting
happily on the ground, carefully wiping twigs and
dirt off the somewhat squashed sweets and consum-
ing them with obvious enjoyment. A huge bruised
lump on her forehead was the only evidence of her


mishap, and as she did not seem to mind it, no one
worried except Mrs. Richmond, who said she
wouldn’t be able to get a hat over it for weeks.
When they arrived at school Rusty and Jancy
were met by Pam, Jill, Shirley and Frances, who
danced round the car excitedly.
“The stalls are up and we waited to see what
you had before we started decorating.”
‘‘Well, here they are. Have a look.” Rusty
passed the things out to the girls, who ran inside
with them.
‘‘Don’t they look luscious?” said Jill, devour-
ing the marshmallows with hungry eyes.
‘‘Hands off,” warned Rusty. ‘‘l’ll know if a
single one of them is gone.”
‘‘l wouldn’t dream of taking them,” laughed
Jill, ‘ ‘but I’m going to buy some. I ’spose we can
do that?”
‘‘l don’t know,” said Jancy. ‘‘We’d better ask
first.”
By ten-thirty the stall was gay with coloured
paper and fresh gumtips.
‘‘lt looks positively scrumptious,” pronounced
Pam. ‘‘Come and let’s see if the others have done
as well.”
“I’ll stay here and look after things,” offered
Jill.
Rusty looked at her distrustfully.
‘‘And Jancy and Frances had better stay and
look after you, I think, and when we three come
back you three can go.”
‘‘You are a pig, Rusty,” giggled Jill. ‘‘You
know perfectly well I won’t touch anything.”
Rusty grinned.


“A stitch in time saves nine,” she said. “See
you later.”
The three returned after quarter of an hour to
report that nothing in the grounds could equal their
stall.
“Go and have a look for yourselves,” said Pam.
“You’ll say the same.”
So Frances, Jill and Jancy did the rounds. At
the bookstall Jancy stopped on seeing her Encyclo-
paedias prominently displayed, and had picked one
up to thumb through it when an insolent voice said:
“Those books are not to be touched unless you
intend buying them, and I doubt if you do.” And
Jancy raised her eyes to find Yvonne looking at her
vindictively. “Put it down!” she ordered.
Jancy replaced the book and Penelope, who
was standing at the back of the stall, said wearily:
“Oh, leave her alone, Yvonne. They’re her
books, she donated them to the stall.”
“That doesn’t give her leave to handle them,”
retorted Yvonne, and presented her back to Jancy,
who walked away with Jill and Frances.
“My goodness, she’s got it in for you,” said Jill,
in an awed voice. “I wouldn’t be in your shoes for
anything.”
Jancy kicked savagely at the ground.
“Don’t let’s talk about it, I’m going to forget
about Yvonne to-day. Come on, I’ll race you back
to the stall.”
Rusty hailed them as they came in sight.
“Hurry up, you’re just in time. The Mayor’s
wife is going to declare us open.”


They scampered to the gates where a crowd of
people had gathered round a small platform on which
stood those who were going to speak at the opening
ceremony.
Jancy looked at the big crowd delightedly.
“Think of the money we’ll make,” she gloated.
“Pounds and pounds,” agreed Rusty from a
precarious perch on the gate. “Now hush, ’cos the
Mayor’s going to speak.”
The end of the first two speeches found the six
girls sitting on the ground in various stages of bore-
dom.
“Oh, gosh!” moaned Rusty. “Why can’t they
stop talking and get on with it. Those lollies will be
spoiled with the sun soon, and there’ll be nothing
left to sell.”
Jancy got to her feet.
“Well, you can sit here if you like, but I’m going
to put something over the sweets.”
“I’ll come too,” said Rusty.
“And me,” chorused the others
They returned to the stall to find that the sun
had done little or no damage to their wares.
“We’d better get behind the counter, anyway,”
said Jancy. “I expect they won’t be long now.” As
she spoke a prolonged cheer came from the crowd
outside the gates. “There you are. Quick, into the
stall; we must be ready.”
She passed a thin cane to Rusty, who took it,
and placed herself in a strategic position at the side
of the counter from where she could reach comfort-
ably the nimble fingers of any thieving small fry who
were likely to be seduced by the attractive display
of sweets.


They were all in their respective places behind
the counter when the gates opened with a clang and
the crowd came surging into the grounds.
Business was very brisk for the first half-hour
and then settled down to a steady stream of cus-
tomers that kept the girls fully employed. Rusty
was kept busy with her cane, and when Pam took
over to allow her to go to lunch she had a good score
of slapped fingers to her credit.
The refreshment tent was very crowded, but
she, Jancy and Shirley managed to get a glass of
milk each and some sausage rolls, sandwiches and
cakes, which they took to the gymnasium to eat.
“I wonder how much we’ve made?” said
Shirley. ‘‘l bet it’s a lot by now.”
Rusty, with her mouth full of sausage roll,
nodded.
“Did anyone ask Miss Mary if we could buy
some sweets?” asked Jancy.
“Yes, Jill did, and I bought mine.” Shirley pro-
duced a battered box of sweets from her pocket.
“Is that all that’s left?” asked Rusty dis-
gustedly.
“You can have them,” offered Shirley. “Jill
and 1 ate the rest. They were good, too.”
“Greedy pigs,” said Rusty. “You never told
us you’d bought any.” She took the box from
Shirley and brushed the crumbs off her skirt.
“Well, I suppose we’d better get back or the
others will be starving.”
They returned to relieve Pam, Jill and Frances
for lunch, and after buying a box of sweets, Rusty
took up her former position at the side of the stall.
She had only been there a few minutes when a small


grimy hand crawled searchingly over the front of the
counter, and, grinning to herself, she administered
a brisk slap to the pilfering fingers. There was a pierc-
ing yell, and Rusty stood up to see a small familiar
figure, with practically the whole of her hand in her
mouth, gazing at her reproachfully through stream-
ing eyes.
“Judy!” cried Rusty aghast, and scrambling
hurriedly under the counter she folded the plump
diminutive figure in repentant arms. It was some
time before Judy could be comforted, however, and
the stall’s dwindling stock of marshmallows was
further depleted in the efforts to placate her. Mrs.
Richmond coming on the scene at that moment
asked the reason for all the solicitude, and when
Rusty told her, she laughed delightedly.
“Well, darling, Judy was as much a thief as
the owners of the other small fingers you rapped
before, you know. 1 think she deserved what she
got.”
“But, Mummy!” Rusty was scandalised.
“She’s ours.”
“Nevertheless, dear, she deserved it. Now,
where’s Miss Grey? I want to have a chat with her.”
Rusty, leaving Judy with the others for a few
minutes, abandoned her post to convey her Mother
to the headmistress, and when she returned, Judy,
sated with sweets, and looking like a rather sticky
cherub, was fast asleep at the back of the tent.
Soon after this the stall was sold out, and the
six girls gathered round like misers to count their
hard-earned wealth.
“Twelve pounds fourteen and sixpence,” an-
nounced Rusty triumphantly. “Isn’t that marvel-
lous? Come on, let’s take it to Miss Grey.”


They all sped across the grounds to Miss Grey’s
door, where Miss Mary let them in.
“Well, girls, how did you get on?” asked the
headmistress as they entered.
“Marvellously,” said Pam. “We made . . .”
and they all chorused the glorious sum—“twelve
pounds fourteen and sixpence.”
“Excellent,” said Miss Grey. “You have done
extremely well. You can leave the money with me
and go and enjoy yourselves now. Let me see, it
was the Sweet Stall, wasn’t it?”
“Yes, Miss Grey,” said Rusty, “and we’ve
brought this box for you and Miss Mary.”
“How nice of you.” Miss Grey smiled, and
Jancy was astonished to see how nice it made her
look. “Thank you very much, all of you.”
“That’s all right,” mumbled Rusty, embar-
rassed. “We’d better go now,” and the six of them
made a hurried exit from the room.
The remainder of the afternoon was spent
haunting the various stalls and trying to pry out of
the stallholders how much money they had made,
but they met with little sucess.
“All right, we won’t tell you how much we
made,” asserted Rusty. “But I bet it’s twice as much
as you have.”
This provocative statement got them into
several pointless arguments which everybody en-
joyed and passed the time very nicely, and they were
all sorry when Mrs. Richmond came to tell them it
was time to leave.
Walking to the gate Rusty suddenly stopped
as if stricken.


“Oh, gosh!” she exclaimed. “I forgot Judy;
she’s still in the stall.’’ And she and Jancy were off
like a shot, deaf to Mrs. Richmond’s cries to return.
They came back after some minutes very dis-
tressed.
“Oh, Mummy, she’s not there. What’ll we
do?’’
“Don’t be silly, dear,’’ said Mrs. Richmond
calmly, “she’s in the car.”
“Oh,” Rusty subsided like a pricked balloon.
“What a relief.”
“Your Daddy found her wandering on the
road.”
Rusty, who was proud of her Mother’s confid-
ence in her as a nurse, looked ashamed at this, but
Mrs. Richmond gave her a brief hug.
“I’m not blaming you, dear. I didn’t expect
you to look after her to-day. Cheer up, there’s
nothing for you to worry about; it’s my fault,
really.”
And thus comforted, Rusty cheered up and
sang heartily in a tuneless voice all the way home in
the car.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
On the Monday following the Fete Miss Grey
ordered the school to assemble in the gymnasium at
lunch time to hear the financial results of their
efforts. Rusty and her familiars were there long
before the appointed time and enlivened the waiting
moments by jibing scornfully at the other stall-
holders who arrived later. This conduct soon pro-
voked the retaliation it was designed to do, and they
were in the middle of a friendly scuffle when Miss
Grey called for silence from the dais.
After remarking on the extraordinary success
of the Fete, and praising the girls for their contribu-
tion to it, she read out a list of the money made by
each group of stallholders.
There was no subduing Rusty when it became
clear that the Sweet Stall had raised the largest sum,
and she jumped up and down excitedly, crying:
“What did I tell you? What did I tell you?” until
Miss Grey asked her not to disgrace her recent efforts
by her present behaviour.
The total sum raised was fifty-eight pounds,
and refreshments had brought in eighteen pounds
of it, but as that was run by the Mothers, it did not
count in the school list, and so Rusty, Jancy, Pam,
Shirley, Jill and Frances were invited up to the dais
to receive the congratulations of their teachers and
school-fellows.
After this small ceremony the girls dispersed,
and as Rusty and her companions went to the door
they passed Penelope and Yvonne who were stand-
ing nearby.


“Good effort, kids,” said Penelope. “Con-
gratulations.”
“Thanks,” replied Pam. “It wasn’t bad, was
it?”
“I hope you’ll all be able to get your hats on
over those swelled heads,” put in Yvonne un-
pleasantly.
The younger girls did not reply to this and,
going down the steps, Rusty said:
“Silly ass, she makes me sick.”
“Well, there’s one good thing,” answered
Jancy. “We don’t see much of her.”
“We’re going to see more,” answered Rusty
dryly. “She’s coming out this week-end.”
Jancy looked dismayed.
“Oh, gosh, is she?”
“Yes, I heard Penelope asking Mummy.
There’s a dance on here next Saturday, and they’re
going to it. It’s only a kids’ dance of course,” she
added patronisingly. “The boys from Aldington
College are asked too.”
“Oh well, perhaps they’ll sleep most of Sun-
day morning and we won’t be bothered much.”
“I hope so,” said Rusty fervently.
That night, as they all sat round the fire, Mrs.
Richmond said:
“Daddy’s got to go to Mount Raymond to-
morrow on Manpower business, so I thought I’d go
with him and see Granny. Anyone else like to
%•»
come?
“Gosh, yes,” replied Rusty, nudging Jancy to
say the same. “Are we taking Judy and Dumps?”
“Yes, they’re coming too. What about you,
Penelope?”


“I’d like to go, but won t Miss Grey object to
the three of us being away at once?”
“I intend to ring and ask her,” said Mrs. Rich-
mond. “You very rarely see Granny these days;
it’s such a long way. I’m sure Miss Grey won’t
mind when I explain. I’ll go and telephone now.”
She was absent only a few minutes.
“It’s all right, children, Miss Grey was quite
willing to spare you. Now I think you’d all better
get to bed because we ll be making an early start
to-morrow.”
At half-past nine the next morning the whole
family, coated and rugged, set off in the car, Cap-
tain and Mrs. Richmond sitting with Penelope in the
front and Rusty, Jancy, Judy and Dumps huddled
warmly in the back. Rusty had brought the draughts
board to pass the time, but any attempt to set it up
was spoiled by Dumps, who, with a shriek of delight,
persistently swept board and counters from their in-
secure perch on Rusty’s lap. They gave it up at last
and contented themselves with counting the rabbits
that ran across the road till Dumps, tired out, joined
Judy in a nap and left them free to get on with the
game. The car only stopped once during the jour-
ney, and that was to let a big flock of sheep cross the
road. The dust rose from them like a cloud, and the
noise of their baaing was deafening.
“Gosh!” said Jancy; “this reminds me of
Urellen.”
“Yes.” Captain Richmond turned in his seat
and smiled at her. “It’s a familiar sight to you, isn’t
it, Jancy? There’s only one live stock route crosses
this road thbugh, so we won’t see any more to-day.”
It took some time for the sheep to pass, and
after continuing their journey they were another


hour on the road before the car turned off down a
short street and, swinging through an open gate
flanked by laurel trees, pulled up before a tall old
colonial house of grey stone.
As they stopped, a tiny white-haired figure
appeared at the front door and ran down the steps
to meet them on surprisingly nimble feet.
“How lovely to see you, darlings,” she cried in
a high sweet voice, and thrusting her head into the
car she looked round with a pair of bright vivacious
brown eyes just like Rusty’s. Jancy was surprised
to see how young she looked, despite her white hair,
for having no Granny of her own her idea of them
was based on books, and she had expected wrinkles
and a quavering voice.
“And who’s this, Lesley,” demanded Granny,
catching sight of Jancy. “You must introduce me.”
“This is Jancy Mitford, Mother, Brenda Ellis’
little girl; I told you she was staying with me when
I wrote.”
Yes, dear, I know you did, but I forgot.”
“And this is my Mother, Jancy, Mrs. Mans-
field.”
How do you do?” said Jancy shyly.
“Very well, thank you, my dear. Now come
along, don’t waste time. Out you get, and I’ll go
and tell Ferdy to put the kettle on.”
She disappeared through the door and the rest,
shedding rugs and coats, followed her into the house,
where they were soon drinking tea and all talking
at once.
“How pretty you’ve grown, Penelope. Lesley,
your hair’s coming down again. Russel, just run and
ask Ferdy for some more milk,” said Mrs. Mansfield
all in the same breath. “You can take Jancy with


you.” And as they reached the door: ‘‘What’s your
real name, child? Not Jancy, I’m sure.”
‘‘No, it’s Jancine.”
‘‘Very pretty,” approved Mrs. Mansfield. “I
shall call you that. I loathe nicknames.”
In the old-fashioned kitchen, with its scrubbed
wood tables and chairs, Jancy was introduced to
Mrs. Ferdinand.
‘‘But we always call you Ferdy, don’t we?”
said Rusty, ‘‘and Jancy can too, can’t she?”
Mrs. Ferdinand, who was a dark, fat, jolly-
looking woman, poured out the milk.
‘‘Of course she can. Now take this back to your
Granny, and don’t let her get too excited.”
‘‘No, I’ll watch her,” promised Rusty, adding to
Jancy as they returned to the others: ‘‘Granny over-
does things, you know. Ferdy says she doesn’t
realise her age. She’s quite ill sometimes when she’s
got herself too excited.”
After tea, Captain Richmond, promising to be
back at four, left to go on to Mount Raymond, and
when they had waved him off Rusty asked permis-
sion of her Granny to go up to the attic.
‘‘Yes, you can go,” said Mrs. Mansfield, ‘‘but
don’t leave it in the mess you did last time.”
It was rather dark and cobwebby in the tiny
room, but this did not deter Rusty, who waved an
old tennis racquet around to bring down the ones
that were likely to get in their way.
‘‘What’s that?” Jancy pointed to an easel with
a cloth draped over it that stood in one corner.
‘‘There’s a picture under it,” said Rusty, draw-
ing the cloth away and disclosing an unfinished
painting of a beautiful auburn-haired girl.
‘‘Why, it’s just like you, Rusty,” exclaimed
Jancy, ‘‘only older, and you’re not quite so pretty.”


“I will be,” returned Rusty unperturbed. “It’s
Granny when she was eighteen. Isn’t she lovely?”
‘‘She’s beautiful,” breathed Jancy. ‘‘Who
painted it?”
‘‘A young fellow who was in love with her. He
got killed.”
“Poor thing.” Jancy was overcome by this
tragedy. “It must have been awful for your
Granny.”
“Oh, no,” said the practical Rusty. “She didn’t
love him, anyway, and then one day Grandpa came
riding by on a huge black horse and she could never
look at another man. Her wedding dress is in this
trunk. Mummy wore it for her wedding too, and
we’re all going to wear it for ours, but Granny says
we won’t have to eat too much beforehand, cos it’s
only got an eighteen-inch waist and it won’t fit us if
we do.”
She opened the lid of the trunk and a mingled
odour of mothballs and lavender floated out.
“Pooh! What a smell,” said Rusty, lifting out
sheets and sheets of tissue paper. “Here it is.” She
held up an old-fashioned white satin gown that had
gone cream with age. “And here’s the veil.” She
placed the coronet on her russet head and minced up
and down a few paces. “Isn’t it glorious?”
“Lovely,” agreed Jancy. “Is there anything
else?”
Rusty replaced the veil.
“Yes, here’s her shoes.” She held out a pair
of small cream slippers, whose faded satin had
cracked and frayed across the toes.
“I bet they’d just about fit me now. They were
miles too big last time I was here.” Her small feet
slid down into the toes, leaving the heels clopping
behind her.


Jancy laughed.
“You look just like Mickey Mouse.”
Rusty replaced the shoes and closed the trunk.
“Come on, let’s go down; it’s cold up here.”
There was no one downstairs but Judy, who
was sleeping peacefully in an easy chair, so they
wandered through the house exploring, as Rusty
called it, until they came to a room with an organ
in it.
“Oh, do you think 1 could have a try on it,
Rusty?” Jancy asked with shining eyes.
“Of course.” Rusty opened the lid and pulled
out all the stops. “There, you’ve got to pedal like
mad, you know.”
Jancy pedalled like mad as directed and ex-
tracted a couple of wheezy grunts.
“Harder!” urged Rusty.
The organ began to rock with the vigour of
Jancy’s efforts, and as she suddenly struck a loud
and sonorous chord, something fell down from the
top of the organ and bounced from her shoulder on
to her knee.
She stopped playing and picked it up.
“What is it?” asked Rusty curiously.
“It’s a big envelope.” Jancy turned the pack-
age over in her hand. “It’s got James Bruce written
• .»»
.on it.
“We’d better take it to Granny,” said Rusty.
«( f *
Come on.
They raced through to the kitchen, and after
inquiring from Ferdy, who was getting the lunch,
where Mrs. Mansfield was, ran in to the garden.
“Granny,” yelled Rusty, as she saw her walk-
ing towards the house with the others. “Look what
we’ve found.”


She ran up and pushed the package into her
Granny’s hands.
“Gently, Rusty,” cautioned her Mother, but
Rusty was far too excited to heed, and in a torrent
of words told how the packet had been found. “You
can see,” she concluded, “that it’s something impor-
tant. It’s got James Bruce written on it. It might be
a missing will or something. Do open it and see.
Quickly, Granny!”
Mrs. Mansfield’s hand trembled a little as she
broke the seal.
“James Bruce; that’s my Father’s name,” she
hesitated. “It’s no good, I’ll have to get my
spectacles, and,” she added uncertainly, “a chair.”
“Now don’t upset yourself, Mother,” said Mrs.
Richmond.
“I’m not upset, child, only excited, just ex-
cited,” replied Mrs. Mansfield testily.
Inside they all gathered round while Mrs. Mans-
field sat down and put on her spectacles.
“Now,” she said, and drew out some folded
sheets of paper which she opened. Four pairs of eyes
watched her anxiously as she read and, when her
face brightened, four mouths smiled in sympathy.
“Well!” she said, finally putting the paper
down on her knee. “Well!
“What is it, Mother?” asked Mrs. Richmond.
But Granny, with what was almost a pleasure-
able little sigh, slid off her chair in a faint. They all
flew to her.
“Get her on the settee and call Ferdy,” said
Mrs. Richmond.
Rusty ran to obey, while the rest lifted Mrs.
Mansfield’s frail figure on to the couch and in a few
moments she returned with Ferdy, who took
charge.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
It was not long before Mrs. Mansfield re-
sponded to Ferdy’s expert ministrations, but she lay
quiet for a few minutes after opening her eyes, try-
ing to realise what had happened. Then she smiled;
“Isn’t it wonderful, Ferdy?’’ she said.
“I don’t know about wonderful,’’ replied Ferdy
with humorous severity. “You’ll never learn to
take care of yourself. It’s just as well I’m here.’’
“Now don’t scold,’’ said Mrs. Mansfield, sit-
ting up. “I’ve got wonderful news and, you know,
I always faint at wonderful news/’
She patted her hair into place.
“Pass me those papers, Penelope, please, dear.’’
Penelope picked up the papers which in the flurry
of the preceding moments had floated unnoticed to
the ground, and gave them to her Granny. “This,”
continued Mrs. Mansfield, “is a very important
document. You remember what a worry I was in,
Lesley, when I wrote to you last?’’ Mrs. Rich-
mond nodded. “Well, this does away with all my
worries. It’s the title deeds for our land.’’ She
beamed all round.
“Oh, Mother, what a relief,’’ said Mrs, Rich-
mond.
“What is it, Mummy? Do tell us,’’ Rusty
begged.
Mrs. Richmond looked at her Mother
“What do you think?’’
“Of course they can be told. They found it.
You see,’’ she went on, turning to the children, “this


land, acres and acres of it, has been ours for genera-
tions, so long, indeed, that we’ve never worried
about title deeds or things like that.”
What’s title deeds?” interrupted Rusty
‘‘They’re papers you must have to show you
own the land,” explained her Granny. ‘‘You keep
one set and the Government keep another, but some
of these grants of land were bestowed in very
peculiar circumstances in the old days, and if the
Government can’t find proof of your ownership,
and you can’t find your title deeds, you might be
involved in a lot of costly legal trouble, and even
sometimes lose your land. Now two months ago I
was called upon to produce my deeds, which put me
in a positive panic, as it’s very hard to search for
something when you don’t even know what it looks
like. First I went and saw Mr. Ware, my old solici-
tor, who searched his office and found that the deeds
had been given over in his Father’s time to my Father,
James Bruce, and signed for by him. They had never
been returned. My Father, unfortunately, a few
years before his death, became a little eccentric, and
although Ferdy and I looked desperately through his
old papers, nothing came to light. We then turned
the house upside down to find them, but without
success, and I had given up hope and was quite pre-
pared to stand the cost of a battle in the courts when
you arrive and,” her voice faltered, “and saved my
bacon,” she finished lamely and two tears of happi-
ness and relief rolled slowly down her cheeks. They
all gathered round her comfortingly, but she waved
them away.
“No, I’m all right. It’s just that I’m so happy.”
She rose to her feet. “Come and show me where you
found them, children.”


They all, except Ferdy, who went back to the
kitchen, followed Mrs. Mansfield into the room
where the organ was.
“It fell from the top somewhere,” said Jancy.
“I didn’t quite see where, exactly.”
“Stand on the stool and look, dear,” said Mrs.
Mansfield. “I’m sure it couldn’t have just been on
top, Ferdy would have found it.”
Jancy climbed up and almost immediately cried
out: “Here it is.” She pointed to a long narrow door
which at first sight seemed to be just another of the
many curlicues that adorned the organ. She wagged
it open and shut to show them. “There’s only
enough room in it for a rather fat envelope, so I
expect that’s where it came from.”
“Is there anything else in there, Jancine?’
Jancy inserted a probing finger.
“No. that’s all.”
“Very well, dear, you’d better get down now,”
said Mrs. Richmond, “and, Mother, what about ring-
ing the solicitor to tell him you’ve found it?”
“Yes, I will.” Mrs. Mansfield was escorted by
the whole group to the telephone in the hall, where
Mr. Ware was informed of the good tidings. As
Mrs. Mansfield replaced the receiver, Ferdy
appeared.
“It’s a quarter past two,” she said, “and it’s a
wonder you’re not starving. Everything’s ready.”
They all trouped into the dining-room, except
Rusty, who went to fetch Judy from the drawing-
room where she had slept through the whole disturb-
ance. When seated at the table, she still nodded, and
Mrs. Mansfield said;
“There must be something wrong with that
child, Lesley, the way she sleeps.”


“Just laziness.” Mrs. Richmond buttered some
bread serenely.
“She’ll go to sleep in her lunch soon if you’re
not careful.”
“Oh, she often does,” said Rusty, “and that
wakes her up.”
Mrs. Mansfield laughed.
“Your Mother used to do the same thing,” she
said, “but not quite so consistently.”
The conversation then turned to the exciting
events of the morning, the details of which were
gone over many times, and when they had finished
their meal Mrs. Mansfield said, with a smile:
“I think Russel and Jancine have earned a gift
for their invaluable discovery this morning, don’t
you, Lesley?” And leaving the room for a few
minutes she brought back two china niggers’ heads
about the size of an orange and placed them on the
table. “They’re money boxes,” she explained, “and
this is how they work.” From a small purse she took
a two-shilling piece and placed it on the thick lower
lip of one of the heads. It sagged with the weight at
first, and then the mouth closed with a snap and they
heard the money tinkle down inside,
“Oh, lovely,” cried Rusty. “Can I do it?”
“You can, dear, and here’s four more pieces for
you to put in and five for Jancine.”
“You shouldn’t give them so much, Mother,”
protested Mrs. Richmond.
“They’ve saved me a lot more than that, my
dear.” replied her mother, “and it’ll encourage them
to be thrifty. And Penelope,” she went on, “we
can’t leave you out. Your Mother tells me you’re
going to a dance on Saturday night. Well, here’s a
little trinket for you to wear.” She passed over a


shining bracelet. “They’re rhinestones, dear; my
Father gave them to me for my first ball.”
Penelope flushed with pleasure, and went
round and kissed her Granny warmly.
“Thank you so much, darling,” she said. “I’ve
never had anything so lovely. They make me feel
quite grown up.”
“That’s funny, they had exactly the same effect
on me. I suppose we re all the same under our skin,
vain and feminine,” pronounced Mrs. Mansfield,
and looked around the table. “Well, shall we all
adjourn, as my dear Mother used to say?”
In the afternoon Rusty prevailed upon her
Granny to tell them some stories of the early days
in Mount Raymond, which Mrs. Mansfield always
enjoyed doing.
“That portrait on the wall,” she said to Jancy,
“is of my Grandmother.” She indicated a painting
of a rather delicate-looking lady holding a large hat.
“She was the first to live in this hous. My Grand-
father built it for her. There were no settlers for
miles and miles when she first came here, and she
must have found it very lonely, but she had the real
pioneer spirit and ran this house and brought up six
children with only the aid of two aboriginal women.
My Mother told me she was never heard to com-
plain and was the most serene and happy woman she
had ever known. She was also courageous, as the
story I am about to tell you will show. You must
know first that the huge brass gong that still hangs
in the hall was put there in the beginning by my
Grandfather, so that should any danger menace her
while he was out during the day, he, or some of the
men working in the fields, could be summoned by
the sound of the gong. My Grandmother never had


occasion to use it until one evening, just before sun-
down, when, having put the children to bed, she
thought to have a few quiet moments with her em-
broidery before Grandfather came home. As she
came downstairs into the hall a curious sound made
her suddenly look up, and there, to her amazement,
she saw a strange man standing in the open front
door. He was a ragged and desperate looking indi-
vidual, and held in one hand a pistol, and from the
wrist of the other dangled a nulla nulla, which, as
you know, is a dangerous aboriginal club. Grand-
mother was so surprised that she was unable to move
for a moment, and the man, thinking she was
frightened, said in a brutal voice:
“ ‘I want some food and clothes, and I want it
quick, and if you so much as let out a squeak I’ll do
for you good and proper.’
“Grandmother continued to stand perfectly still,
but her brain was active, and she noticed that, fortu-
nately, she had stopped beside the huge brass gong.
The man was still glaring at her, and suddenly she
lifted her head, as if sfte’d seen someone behind him,
and screamed in a frightened voice, ‘Look out,
Harry!’ (which was Grandfather’s name) and as the
man swung round to meet what he thought was a
new danger, she grasped the stick, and giving the
gong two resounding bangs darted into the dining-
room and locked the door. From there she fled into
the kitchen and out into the yard, just as Grandfather
and the men rode up and hurriedly dismounted.
Swiftly she told him what had happened, and send-
ing some of his men round to the front of the house
he beckoned to the others to follow him through the
dining-room into the hall. It was empty, the man
having evidently been frightened away, but Grand-
father searched all night until the early hours of the
morning, when the brute was found and disarmed


by two of the men. Apparently there was no
ammunition in his gun, but it was later discovered
that he had battered to death two white women on
a lonely selection and robbed the house of provi-
sions, and if my Grandmother hadn’t been a courage-
ous, devel-headed woman, she would probably have
suffered the same fate.”
“Gosh!” said Rusty, filled with admiration for
her ancestress. “She was pretty brave. I bet I
couldn’t have done that, could you, Jancy?”
“I certainly could not.” Jancy shuddered. ‘Till
glad I didn’t live in those days.”
“We can all rise to unexpected heights when
the occasion demands it, I think,” smiled Mrs. Mans-
field. “Not very many people ever fail.”
Soon after four o’clock Captain Richmond
arrived back from Mount Raymond.
“Well, everybody ready for the road?” he
asked, warming his hands at the fire.
“Not yet,” said Mrs. “You must
have your tea before you go. It’ll be too late for the
children to eat when they get home. I’ll go and tell
Ferdy. Besides,” she added at the door, “you haven’t
heard my news yet.”
At this reminder everybody started telling Cap-
tain Richmond at once, and, laughingly, he said:
“I can’t possibly hear what it’s all about, with
you all talking at once. Lesley, what’s it all about?”
“Wait till Mother comes back, dear. It’s really
her story.”
Consumed with impatience, they waited for
Mrs. Mansfield and, when she appeared, Rusty
cried:


“We haven’t told him, Granny. We waited
for you. So do tell him quickly, or I’ll bust.’’
Mrs. Mansfield speedily complied with this re-
quest in order, she said, to prevent such a dire
catastrophe and the mess it would make on the
carpet, and when the story was told, not without
frequent interruptions from Rusty, Captain Rich-
mond was no less delighted with the find than his
family was, and congratulated the two discoverers
heartily, promising them something towards the con-
tents of their money boxes when they got home.
With tea over everyone collected their things
and packed into the car.
“Do come again soon,’’ begged Mrs. Mansfield,
and solemnly promising to do so they waved good-
bye to the little white-haired lady and started off on
their long journey home.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
By the first bus on Saturday morning Yvonne
arrived for the week-end, but Rusty and Jancy were
spared the unpleasapt necessity of being nice to her
as she and Penelope spent the whole morning titivat-
ing themselves and pressing their frocks for the even-
ing’s dance.
“You’d better put your things in the children’s
dressing-room,’’ Mrs. Richmond told her, when she
arrived. “There’s not much space in Penelope’s
room, and besides, there’s a long mirror in the other
one which you’ll probably like.”
Yvonne yielded gracefully to this proposal and
moved her suitcase over in the afternoon. It was
while hanging her clothes up that she opened Jancy’s
loughboy and, not averse to prying into other
people’s belongings, took out the trinket box that
stood on the second shelf. On seeing the pearl neck-
lace she lifted it out and, going over to the mirror,
tried them against the olive skin of her throat.
Charmed with the effect she gave a little grunt of
satisfaction; they were exactly what she needed to
go with her party frock and, unaware of their worth
and indifferent as to whom they belonged, she de-
cided to wear them that night.
The girls had to leave soon after dinner, and as
they were all ready except for their frocks, Mrs.
Richmond allowed them to come to the table in their
dressing gowns. Judy could not take her eyes off
Yvonne.
“Look, she’s got bleed on her fingers, Wusty,”
she cried, drawing everyone’s attention to that


young lady’s painted nails. “Has you hurt your-
self?” she asked solicitously.
“It’s only paint, darling,” said Yvonne smiling
to cover her chagrin at this unwanted publicity.
“What for?” demanded Judy with solemn in-
terest.
“Just to make them look nice, dear.”
“Well, I don’t think they do,” pronounced the
youthful Miss Richmond decidedly. “Pen’s got it
on too.”
Penelope, in a desperate attempt to change the
subject, addressed her Mother.
“Are the flowers picked to take to Miss Grey,
Mother?”
“Yes, dear, they’re in a jar in the kitchen.”
But Judy, refusing to be silenced thus, broke
in again.
“Mummy, does you like—” Mrs. Richmond,
fully aware of what her small daughter intended to
say, interrupted.
“Get on with your dinner, Judy, and not so
much talking.”
Judy subsided at the firm tone of her Mother’s
voice and the meal progressed rather silently to its
end. Afterwards, Mrs. Richmond called Penelope
aside.
“I don’t want to be a spoil-sport, dear, but I
really would prefer you not to wear that paint on
your nails.”
“Oh, Mother, there’s nothing wrong with it.”
“Perhaps not, but I prefer you not to wear it.”
Penelope was unpleasantly surprised at her
Mother’s unexpected opposition.


“All right,” she said sullenly. “But I don’t see
why. Yvonne s Mother doesn’t seem to mind, and
almost every woman wears it now.”
“Maybe, but things ordinarily worn by women
often look vulgar on schoolgirls, and I’m sure Miss
Grey would agree with me. As for Yvonne, she is
not my daughter and I have no right to interfere
with what she chooses to do. Now go and take it off,
like a dear girl; I’m sure the loss of it won’t prevent
you enjoying yourself.”
She smiled, but Penelope did not return it, and
walked sulkily from the room.
“I’ve got to take it off,” she reported to Yvonne
in the bedroom.
“Good heavens!” Yvonne laughed derisively.
“I must say I think your Mother’s a bit stuffy.”
But Penelope, who allowed herself plenty of
criticism of her Mother, was not going to take any
from an outsider.
“Oh, I don’t know. Mother says that women’s
fashions often look vulgar on schoolgirls, and I think
she’s probably right.”
“Well, I’m glad my Mother’s a bit more broad-
minded, ’’ returned Yvonne. “She’ll let me wear any-
thing.” And Penelope, thinking of the plump over-
dressed Madame Poulett, whom she often saw at
the yearly prize-giving, felt obscurely glad that her
Mother had asserted her authority for once.
She was further relieved on their arrival at
school, for while they and some other girls were
removing their cloaks in the locker-room, Miss Grey
came in.
“You will be in charge of Miss Mary to-night,”
she said, “as I have a lot of work to do. But I just
thought I’d like to come and see you all dressed up
before I start.”


The girls in their colourful frocks pirouetted
for her benefit.
“You look very pretty, very pretty indeed, and
I hope you enjoy yourselves thoroughly/'
“Thank you, Miss Grey,” they beamed
happily.
Miss Grey bade them good-night and turned to
the door and Penelope saw her stiffen.
“What have you got on your finger-nails,
Yvonne?” she demanded.
Yvonne clasped her hands behind her, without
answering.
“I spoke to you,” said Miss Grey; “please
answer me.”
“Paint,” blurted out Yvonne abruptly.
“Please go and take it off immediately. I will
not have my pupils disfiguring themselves in such
a manner.”
As Yvonne disappeared she surveyed the rest
with a cold eye. \
“Has anyone else had the audacity to come here
wearing that abomination?”
“No, Miss Grey,” They presented their hands
for her inspection.
“Good. I must go now. Girls, enjoy your-
selves.” f
As she left the room Yvonne returned in a fury.
“Stupid old fool,” she said viciously. “Honestly, I
think people here live in the dark ages.”
“Never mind,” Penelope soothed her. “You
won’t miss it. Those pearls you’ve got on look won-
derful,” she went on in a clumsy attempt to distract
the angry girl’s attention. “Are they real?”


Yvonne forgot Miss Grey and fingered the
pearls lovingly.
No, I don’t think so, but they’re nice, aren’t
they? She gazed at herself approvingly in the
mirror, undisturbed by any prickings of conscience,
for she had successfully deceived herself with the
thought that they were only borrowed and could be
returned in the morning. “I love pearls. In fact any
kind of jewels fascinate me. Do they you?”
‘‘l’ve never thought about it,” admitted Pen.
“I like this bracelet Granny gave me though.”
Yes, it s not bad,” said Yvonne disparagingly,
but they’re only rhinestones, aren’t they?”
‘‘l like them, anyway,” returned Penelope
stoutly. Come on, we’d better be getting over to
the gym, I think the band has started.”
The evening was hilarious and thoroughly en-
joyed by the youthful merry-makers, who at the end
formed a crocodile and wound in and out of the few
remaining dancers. Yvonne was at the end of the
crocodile’s tail, which whipped about in the most
erratic manner, and as the fun got wilder, she was
thrown off and flung against Gillian Lome, whose
lace dress caught in the clasp of the necklace and
wrenched it off. She grasped quickly at the falling
pearls, which luckily were knotted and did not
scatter.
‘‘Oh, I do hope they’re not badly damaged,”
said Gillian anxiously. ‘‘Let me have a look.”
The end of the clasp was broken and the fine
silver wire on which the pearls were strung had
stretched a little.
‘‘lt’s all right,” said Yvonne, relieved. ‘‘lt can
easily be fixed. I’ll take it into town on Monday.
I’d better take it up and put it away though, I think.”


“Yes, you might lose some if you don’t,” agreed
Gillian.
By the time Yvonne had deposited the pearls
and come back the dance was over, and Captain
Richmond had arrived to take them home. As they
put on their cloaks Penelope noticed Yvonne’s bare
throat.
“Why, you’ve lost your pearls, Yvonne.”
“No. It’s all right, they broke, and I had to put
them away.”
“Gosh, I got a fright,” laughed Penelope. “I
thought they’d gone.”
“No, there’s nothing to worry about. I can get
them fixed,” replied Yvonne, not without a pang of
discomfort.
On Sunday morning Yvonne, who had not
bothered her head hitherto about who owned the
pearls, made it her business to find out, and on Rusty
entering the dressing-room where she was doing her
hair, she said:
“Can I put my hat in your loughboy, Rusty?”
“You can if you like,” replied Rust un-
graciously.
“It’s that one over there, isn’t it?”
“No, that’s Jancy’s; this is mine. And mind
you don’t knock the bottles over with my bean plants
• »»
m.
She disappeared. So the necklace was Jancy’s.
Yvonne felt relieved. She should have known that,
of course, when Penelope did not recognise it, but
somehow the fact that it did not belong to the Rich-
mond family eased her mind, and thinking that she
would probably be able to get it mended and replaced


before Jancy discovered its absence, she forgot the
whole business, and finished doing her hair. Before
leaving the room, however, the thought occurred to
her that it might be wise to be a little more human
to Jancy that day, for should it be found that the
necklace was missing before she had a chance to re-
place it, it would be easier to placate a friendly Jancy
than an estranged one, and in pursuit of this policy
she sought her out in th 6 back garden, where she was
helping Rusty plant out bulbs in the small plot Mrs.
Richmond had given them to cultivate.
Judy and Dumps were with them also, and
Judy greeted her interestedly as she walked up.
“Where’s your bleed nails?”
Yvonne laughed.
“I put them back in the bottle, darling.” She
turned to Rusty and Jancy. “I say, can I help? What
are you doing?”
“Just planting bulbs, and no, you can’t help
said Rusty bluntly.
“Oh, well, I’ll sit and talk.” Yvonne was
secretly pleased at not having to soil her hands.
“What kind of bulbs are you planting, Jancy?”
Jancy, amazed at being directly addressed,
answered awkwardly, “Daffodils and things.”
“Don’t forget to put the tallest at the back,”
advised Yvonne, “or you’ll hide all the little ones.”
“We know all about that.” Rusty’s gardening
soul was deeply wounded. “Why don’t you go and
find Penelope. She’s about somewhere.”
“Oh, it’s pleasant here in the sun,” replied
Yvonne, comfortably settling down on the grass.
“I’ll look after the little ones while you get on.”


Rusty did not deign to reply, but Judy made
up for her sister’s boorishness by planting herself
down on Yvonne’s knee to the detriment of a per-
fectly pleated skirt.
Yvonne lost no time in removing her, saying:
“Look at the lovely little dandelions over there,
darling. Why don’t you go and pick them?’’
But Judy, ignoring the dandelions, only looked
at her solemnly, bewildered by this rebuff to her
friendly advances, while Dumps, with the greatest
of concentration, lifted a small spade full of dirt over
from the garden and dropped it in Yvonne’s lap.
This was too much for Yvonne and, hiding her
temper as well as she could, she got to her feet, shook
the dirt off her skirt, and sauntered off.
“Now what’s she sucking up to you for, I
wonder,’’ said Rusty suspiciously, when she had
gone.
“I don’t know,’’ Jancy was equally puzzled.
“But I think I’d rather have her as she was before.’’
“Me too. I didn’t think she’d hang around after
what I said, but some people can’t take a hint. Any-
way, Dumps got rid of her, didn’t you, pet?” And
Rusty descended on that small person and hugged
her gratefully.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
On Monday, Yvonne, on the fictitious plea of
buying a birthday present for her mother, got leave
to go into town after school. There were two
jeweller shops, but she passed by the first and went
down to the other end of the street, where there was
a small dingy shop marked jeweller and watch-
maker.
A little wizened old man, who was sitting at the
counter poring over a collection of tiny springs and
wheels, looked up as she entered and removed a
watchmaker’s lens from one eye.
“Yes?” he said.
Yvonne took the pearls, which were wrapped
in a handkerchief, from the pocket of her school
jacket and placed them on the counter in front of
him.
“The clasp of this is broken,” she said. “Can
you mend it?”
He took up the necklace carelessly, then look-
ing at it more closely, he glanced up at Yvonne from
under bushy eyebrows and, without saying any-
thing, placed the lens in his eye again and examined
the necklace minutely.
Yvonne began to feel slightly uncomfortable,
and said impatiently:
“Can you mend it? That’s all I want to know.”
He removed the glass from his eye and, ignor-
ing her question, said:
“This is an extremely valuable trinket for a
young lady like you to be carrying about.”


“Is it?” said Yvonne boldly, in an endeavour
to stifle a sudden spasm of fear.
Yes. It’ s your Mother’s, I suppose?’’
Yvonne seized on this.
“Yes, it’s my Mother’s; she lent it to me.
“Well, I’ll mend it.” He fingered the pearls
appreciatively. “You don’t often see pearls so
beautifully matched nowadays. These are just about
perfect.”
Yvonne took her handkerchief off the counter.
“When can I have them?”
“Ah, now that’s the pinch. I’ve got a lot of
work in hand and no assistance, you know. Let me
see, I could let you have it in three or four weeks.”
“Oh, heavens, all that time?” Yvonne paled.
“Couldn’t you manage it before then?”
He shook his head.
“I’m afraid not. There are other people before
you; they have first claim.”
“Oh, all right.” Yvonne yielded reluctantly to
the inevitable. “I’ll call in three weeks then.”.
“I won’t promise,” said the old man, giving her
a receipt slip, “but you can try in three weeks and
see.” And Yvonne had to be content with that.
In consequence of this delay with the necklace
she worked harder the following weeks at her policy
of being nice to Jancy, who was more and more be-
wildered by her sudden change of front.
“I’d be suspicious of her,” said Rusty at lunch
one day, “if I were you. I don’t trust her.”
“Perhaps she is sorry for being such a pig be-
fore,” hazarded Jancy and promptly forgot about
the whole thing when Miss Mary stood up and, ring-
ing the bell for silence, announced that the whole


school would take their water colours that afternoon
and go down to the river to paint.
“Oh, scrumptious,” chortled Rusty. “What
fun! Not that I can paint, but it will be glorious at
the river to-day.”
Jubilantly they packed their things and joined
the others in the school grounds.
“Are you coming in our lot?” asked Pam Simp-
son, as they walked up. “We can have a lot of fun
together.”
“Of course we re coming with you; who do you
think we’d be going with, Yvonne Poulett?”
This remark had the reception it deserved, and
they were still clowning foolishly and teasing each
other about the basketball game that had been
shamefully lost the previous week, when Miss Mary
came out and took charge.
It was, as Rusty said, glorious on the river that
day whether one painted or not, and Miss Mary, after
stationing them in groups at different points, lazily
enjoyed it between visiting them periodically to see
how they were getting on. At her first visit Rusty
was struggling with a particularly difficult tree.
“Oh, look at the mess I’ve made,” she wailed
hopelessly. “I’ll never paint if I live to be a hun-
dred.”
Miss Mary looked at the mess.
“Mm. It does look a bit like wet spinach,” she
said.
At this the whole group subsided into helpless
giggles, and as Miss Mary went on to demonstrate
how to paint a tree, the disturbance became worse,
until she put down the brush and said with lazy good
humour:


“It’s just no good trying to push culture into
your silly little heads. You can go on with what
you’re doing for the rest of the afternoon. I wash
my hands of you.’’
When she had gone, Rusty said:
“I’m not going to paint any more. Come on,
let’ s see if we can catch some tadpoles or something.”
Nothing loth, the group removed their shoes
and socks and followed her down to the river’s edge,
where they found a half-submerged punt tied against
the bank.
“What a bit of luck,” cried Pam. “I wonder
if it will float?”
“I think so. We’ll bail it out and see,” said
Rusty. But on looking round they found there was
nothing to bail it out with, and although they
searched along the bank the only find was a battered
tin lid.
“I know.” Rusty came to the rescue. “If we
drag it up on the bank and tip it on its side the
water’ll run out. That’s what we do with Martin’s
dinghy.”
No sooner was this said than they all tried to
accomplish it, but the punt filled with water was
extremely heavy, and it was only with terrific exer-
tion, coupled with much grunting, that they at last
got it on the bank.
“Now,” said Rusty, “all come this side, and
when I say ‘Go,’ lift her up.”
With a tremendous heave the punt was slowly
tipped on one side and the water cascaded down into
the river.
“Now,” said Pam, “down with her!” and gently
they let her slide back into the water.


“Who’s for first ride?’’ asked Jill Johns. “We
can’t all get in, can we?”
“No, there’s six of us, so we can go three at a
time, I think,’’ answered Frances Keene.
“Good,’’ said Rusty. “Well, Jill, Pam and I
will go first and Frances, Shirley and Jancy next.
How’s that?’’
This was agreed on, but as the three mariners
stepped aboard, Jancy had a belated twinge of con-
science.
“I suppose we really shouldn’t touch it. It must
belong to somebody, surely.’’
“We won’t hurt it,’’ said Shirley. “Look, we
won’t even undo the rope. It’s fairly long, and as
we’ve got no paddles, it’ll stop us from floating
away.’’
“Yes,” agreed Rusty, “you can give us a push
out and then pull us back when we are ready.’’
For about half an hour they enjoyed themselves
having alternate rides, by which time the punt had
shipped a great deal of water.
“We’d better make this the last,’’ said Rusty,
“and put our shoes and socks on before Miss Mary
comes back. In you get.”
Jancy held the punt while Rusty, Jill and Pam
got in and gave them a push. They floated down
gently with the stream.
“What about bringing our shoes and socks
down here,’’ said Jancy to her two companions,
“and then if Miss Mary comes we won’t look as if
we’d been doing anything we shouldn’t.’’
“Righto.” The two girls scrambled off up the
bank, and Jancy, picking up the mooring rope of the
punt, looked out to discover Rusty standing up with
Jill and Pam making signs to her to pull them in.


Jancy, thinking that to curtail their jaunt so soon
they must have caught sight of Miss Mary or some-
one coming along the bank, became a little panic
stricken, and, lifting the rope, which was heavy with
water, gave it a mighty heave. In response the punt
suddenly lurched forward and, to Jancy’s inex-
pressible horror, the three girls who were standing
at the back went over into the water. Jill, who could
not swim, screamed, and Rusty, turning to go to her
assistance, was hit'sharply on the head by the corner
of the swinging punt.
Petrified with shock, Jancy stood rooted to the
spot as with a wild cry Frances hurtled down the
bank, followed closely by Miss Mary, who kicked
off her shoes as she ran and dived into the river.
Frances, who was a good swimmer, followed suit,
while Jancy, dumb with fright and still unable to
move, watched them as if in a dream. Fortunately
the punt was not far out and Miss Mary reached
Rusty in time to prevent her going down a second
time. Pam already had Jill holding on to the punt,
and Frances, seeing they were all right, came back
to the bank, and jerking Jancy out of her spell, said:
“Don’t stand there staring, for heaven’s sake.
They’re all hanging on to the punt; help me pull
them in.’’
Jancy, ashamed to the depths of her soul by
her unheroic behaviour, did as she was told, and
with the assistance of the other girls, who by now
were all collected on the bank, pulled the punt in to
shore. Miss Mary, without wasting time, immedi-
ately began to work on Rusty, who was unconscious
and bleeding badly from the wound on her head;
meanwhile Rhona Baldock took charge and, turn-
ing to white-faced Penelope, said:
“Run back to school and get lots of blankets,
and tell Miss Grey what’s happened. Hurry!’’


Penelope, with five or six other seniors, obeyed
her, leaving the rest to cover the shivering forms of
Jill, Pam and Frances with odd coats and cardigans.
After a time Rusty opened her eyes and
moaned.
“She’ll be all right, thank God!’’ said Miss Mary
fervently, “and here they are back with the
blankets.’’
Penelope and the rest of the girls came stream-
ing down the hill, led by the uniformed figure of
Captain Richmond, whose face was pale with
anxiety.
“It’s all right,’’ Miss Mary assured him. “Just
a nasty knock and a wetting. Give me the blankets,
girls.’’ She wrapped Rusty tightly in two blankets
and, after doing the same for herself, directed Rhona
to cover Jill, Pam and Frances similarly, then with
Captain Richmond carrying his daughter, and the
other blanketed figures hobbling behind with their
friends, they reached the car, which was soon on its
way with its wet and shivering burden.
Back at school they were all put straight into
hot baths and sent to bed, except Rusty, who, after
being bathed and having her head bandaged, was
rolled in several blankets and allowed to go home
with her Father. Intent on getting his daughter
home as quickly as possible, Captain Richmond was
silent on the journey, and Jancy, sitting beside Pene-
lope and a now drowsy Rusty on the back seat, gave
herself up to scathing self-condemnation. She was
a coward! There was no other explanation for it.
To think she had almost let Rusty drown before
going to her assistance, Rusty, who was the best and
truest friend she had ever had. Horrible! Jancy
buried her face in her hands hopelessly as her
thoughts went round and round in the same bitter
circle.


It was dark when they reached home, and Mrs.
Richmond, having been told of the mishap on the
telephone by Miss Grey, was waiting anxiously on
the front step. She peered at her daughter s sleepy
face.
“How are you, darling?”
“Tired, Mummy,” said Rusty drowsily, “but
all right.”
“That’s the girl,” said Mrs. Richmond cheerily.
“I’ve put a hot bottle in your bed, so in you go.”
Her Father carried her out on to the verandah
and her Mother put her pyjamas on and tucked her
into bed.
“There now, you can go to sleep. If you want
anything you can call me.”
Rusty snuggled down cosily, and, after putting
out the light, the four of them went into the dining-
room to eat a belated dinner.
“How did you come to be there, dear?” Mrs.
Richmond asked her husband.
“I’d just called to pick the children up when
Miss Grey came out. She told me they’d gone down
to the river painting and were a little overdue, but
were expected back any minute. We chatted for
some time and then she asked me if I would care
to go in and have a cup of tea. I thought 1 might as
well, and we were just walking through the gates
when we heard a call and Penelope and some of the
girls came running towards us. One said there’d
been -an accident at the river and they wanted
blankets, which Miss Grey and Penelope ran in to
get. I asked if anyone had been hurt, and one girl
burst into tears and said she thought Rusty was
drowned. You can imagine how I felt! Miss Grey
came out then with the blankets and I just threw


them into the car and, with the girls hanging on,
raced down to the river. Miss Mary had things well
in hand when we got there, thank heaven! and we
rushed them back to school.”
“What a blessing you were there, lan, I can’t
think how they’d have got back otherwise. I wonder
how it happened?” *


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Both Captain and Mrs. Richmond looked at
Jancy, who, unable to eat, was toying with her
dinner.
“How did it happen, dear?” asked Mrs. Rich-
mond.
Jancy put down her knife and fork and looked
at her with dry, unhappy eyes.
“It was my fault,” she said in a toneless voice;
“entirely my fault.”
“Of course it wasn’t, dear,” expostulated Mrs.
Richmond; “what nonsense.”
“Yes it was, I’m afraid,” And Jancy went on
to tell about the punt and her unlucky tug at the
rope. “And then,” she concluded, “I just stood
there; just stood and almost let her drown. I
couldn’t move, my feet seemed to be glued to the
ground, and she might have drowned; they all might
have drowned!” She stopped and looked down at
her plate.
“I’m a coward,” she said at last. Mrs. Rich-
mond flew to her.
“Darling Jancy, you’re taking this too much to
heart. Rusty’s safe; everything’s all right.”
“It’s not, Aunt Lesley; it’s not,” insisted Jancy
intensely.
“Look, dear.” Mrs. Richmond drew up a chair.
“Everybody has had that experience. Why, I saw
Judy standing on top of the verandah rail one day
and was so terror-stricken that she could have fallen
and broken her neck before I could have moved.
That’s just the same as what happened to you. You


couldn’t have moved even if someone had given you
a king’s ransom. It’s got nothing to do with bravery
or cowardice; it’s something that paralyses the nerve
centres. Isn’t it, Ian?” she appealed to her husband.
“Of course,” he said heartily. “Forget it,
Jancy, You’ll see, next time the opportunity occurs,
yoy’ll be there with knobs on.” But Jancy refused
to be comforted.
“May I go to bed now, Aunt Lesley?” she said
apathetically, “I’m very tired.”
“Of course you are, darling. Off you go, then.”
She watched the small pathetic figure leave the
room and turned to her husband.
“Poor little thing; we’ve got to stop her feel-
ing like that; she’s terribly unhappy.”
“Yes.” Captain Richmond agreed. “If she’d
wept about it I wouldn’t have worried, but she
looked ...” He searched for a word.
“Stunned, I think you mean.” Mrs. Richmond
supplied it. “It’s so unnatural in a child. If we could
only convince her that it happens to everybody.”
“I’m afraid we can’t; she’ll have to prove to
herself that she can come up to scratch before she’ll
believe it. Don’t worry, dear, children get over
these things their own way.”
Later in the evening, Mrs. Richmond, going to
see that Rusty was asleep, found Jancy still awake.
She sat down on the bed and in the dark put her
arms comfortingly around the small body.
“Poor little thing,” she said compassionately.
“Are you still worrying?”
Jancy made no answer, and Mrs. Richmond
smoothed her hair gently and rocked her a little.
“Never mind, dear; never mind.”


Under this quiet sympathy Jancy’s self-control
broke and suddenly she broke into violent tears
mixed with unintelligible self-reproaches.
Mrs. Richmond let her cry it out for a long
time, and when the sobs eased off tucked her up
cosily.
“Now go to sleep, dear; that cry will do you
good.”
Jancy grasped her hand speechlessly and
pressed it to her flushed tear-wet face.
“You’re so kind to me, Aunt Lesley, so kind;
I do love you.”
“And I love you,” said Mrs. Richmond
earnestly. “Always remember that, Jancy.”
Returning to her husband Mrs. Richmond sat
down wearily.
“Well, I made her cry.”
Captain Richmond looked up from his paper.
‘Who? Jancy?”
“Yes, I did it deliberately, and I think she’ll be
much better; but oh, I’m so tired I could weep my-
self.”
“To bed with you then,” said her husband,
taking her arm and leading her firmly from the
room.
In the morning Rusty seemed to be no worse
for her accident except for a slight headache, and
Jancy, though rather pale, felt less ashamed of her-
self.
“You’d better stay in bed to-day though,
Rusty,” said her Mother. “I’ll ’phone Miss Grey
and ask if Jancy can keep you company.”
Miss Grey proved to be quite amenable to the
suggestion, and Jancy, at Rusty’s request, carried


Judy and Dumps out to keep them company on the
verandah. Judy was much taken by Rusty’s band-
age. “Is you a wounded sholder?” she asked
seriously. ,
'“What of, ” laughed Rusty. “Mutton? It’s not
sholder, it’s soldier, and I am not a wounded one.’’
Judy digested this for some time and then en-
quired further.
“Did you get gunned?’
Rusty beamed at Jancy
“Isn’t she sweet?’’
“Did you get gunned?” persisted Judy.
“No, I didn’t.” Rusty laughed. “I got punted.”
“Punted! What’s that?” demanded Judy
Rusty gave it up.
“I was only teasing, pet.
Here" Dumps started to make wild grabs at the
fascinating bandages and had to be forcibly re-
moved.
“She wants to be a wounded sholder too,” said
Judy placidly, as Jancy placed the baby on the floor.
“Don’t you, Dumps?”
Dumps of course could not reply, but banged
heartily on the leg of the bed with a wooden spoon.
“There you are,” said Judy triumphantly; “she
says yes.”
In the breakfast-room Mrs. Richmond was
opening up the mail that Captain Richmond had
brought from town the previous evening, but which,
owing to the general upset, she had had no time to
read. One letter caused her to frown and then ex-
claim despairingly.
“What’s wrong?” asked her husband.


“Marie Ellis is coming down the week-end after
next,” said Mrs. Richmond in dismay.
“Good lord, what for?”
“I don’t know. She doesn’t say, but I expect
it’s to see Jancy.”
Not her; she wouldn’t be interested enough
to come all that way. Let’s see her letter.”
Mrs. Richmond passed it over and he read it.
“It beats me; all she says is she’d like to come
if convenient. Well,” he looked at his wife and his
eyes twinkled, “it could be inconvenient.”
“Oh, I might as well get it over with,” said Mrs.
Richmond withstanding this temptation, “but I
shan’t tell Jancy until the day she’s coming; it’ll
only make the child miserable. She says she’ll arrive
in time for dinner on the Friday.”
“Oh, well, I suppose we ll have to put up with
it,” said Captain Richmond resignedly. “I think I
can manage to keep out of the house most of the
time.”
Mrs. Richmond raised a threatening finger at
him.
“You are not to desert me, lan. I’ll never speak
to you again if you leave me alone with that
woman.”
“All right.” Her husband laughed, and, kiss-
ing the top of her head, picked up the usual lock of
drooping hair and tucked it neatly into place. “I’ll
send her a wire while I’m in town to-day; that’ll save
you writing.”
“Thank you, dear, that will be a help. I never
know what to say to her.”
Oblivious of the imminent descent of her Aunt,
Jancy played with the babies on the verandah, and


when they were taken away for their sleep she un-
burdened herself to Rusty of her shame of the previ-
ous afternoon.
“Gosh!” Rusty stared at her wide eyed. “You
couldn’t help it. It was enough to give anyone a
shock, even me. There were plenty more who didn’t
jump in beside you.’’
“I know, but I caused it, and then just stood
and watched. There was nobody else there then,
and if Miss Mary hadn’t come you might have
drowned.”
“Well, I didn’t,” said Rusty sensibly, “and
don’t mention it again or I’ll screw your neck.”
She gave a friendly grin to take the sting out of her
words.
“All right.” Jancy’s spirits rose with a bound.
“Now, what will we play?”
Rusty accompanied Jancy to school two days
later and was received with earnest solicitousness
by the girls and mistresses.
Jancy was thankful to find that no one seemed
to have noticed her grave lapse at the river and she
was welcomed almost as warmly as Rusty. Miss
Mary, Jill and Pam had not apparently suffered from
their brief immersion, but they found that Frances
was in the sick room with a cold in her head, and at
lunch time Jancy and Rusty went to see her. She
was smelling heavily of eucalyptus and looked
miserable.
“This would happen to me,” she said dis-
gustedly. “Wouldn’t it make you sick?”
“It has apparently,” said Rusty, laughing
“You can joke,” Frances scowled at her, “but
you’re up and about.”


“Perhaps, but I’m a wounded sholder, as Judy
»»
says.
Frances giggled. “Did she really?”
“Yes,” put in Jancy, “she asked Rusty if she’d
been gunned.”
Frances smiled, but Jancy thought she looked
at her rather peculiarly, and immediately began to
worry; for after all Frances had seen her condition
that afternoon even if the others had not, but the
sick girl soon dispelled these fears by her completely
natural behaviour during the rest of the visit, and
Jancy, relieved, dismissed the look as a figment of
her own imagination.
The accident remained the chief topic of school
conversation for days, and Miss Mary, taking pre-
cedent over every known hero or heroine for the
rescue of Rusty, became the idol of the school. This
idolatry rose to terrific heights when it became
known that the tall soldier who had been seen fre-
quently by the girls some months ago had returned
and was going to be married to Miss Mary.
“Gosh! We’ll have to make her something for
a present,” said Rusty enthusiastically.
“The whole school’s going to subscribe to one,”
said Pam.
“Oh, that! Jancy and I prefer one of our own,
don’t we, Jancy? Something we’ve made ourselves.
We’ll give to the general present, of course.”
“Well, you’ll have to hurry up making it,” re-
plied Pam dryly, “cos the wedding’s coming off on
Saturday, as Sergeant Sadler has only got a few days’
leave.”
“Is he only a Sergeant?” said Jill disap-
pointedly.


“What a shame! If he’d been a Major or some-
thing she could have come out of church under an
arch of swords.’’
“Pooh, that doesn’t matter, silly,’’ Rusty said
briskly. “We ll make her an arch ourselves.’’
“What a perfectly wizard idea,’’ exclaimed Jill,
who had picked up some airforce slang from her
brother who had returned from England recently.
“When do we start?’’
“I’ll go now and ask Miss Grey if it’s all right,’’
said Rusty, and took herself off.
Miss Grey was obviously pleased at the idea,
and gladly gave Rusty her permission.
“We ll have to get some more people,’’ Rusty
decided, after telling them Miss Grey approved.
“There’s only six of us and that means only three
arches. I don’t think it’s enough.’’
“Well, let’s go and ask the others,*’ suggested
Pam.
They found that the response to their drive for
help to make and hold the arches was so overwhelm-
ing that they decided to form a selection committee
to choose a girl from each age group. This com-
mittee finally chose eighteen girls, which meant nine
arches, and they all agreed to meet at school on
Saturday morning and the Day girls would bring
fresh flowers to work with.
Rusty, although interested in this, was still con-
cerned about her and Jancy’s present, and was still
in doubt on Friday morning as to what they would
give Miss Mary.
At lunch time she got an idea.
“I know,’’ she said excitedly to Jancy, “we’ll
make a cake for the Sergeant to take back when he
goes.’’
“Oh, yes!” Jancy’s eyes danced. “I’ll bet no-
body else’ll think of that.”


Arriving home from school that afternoon
Rusty told her Mother of the brilliant idea. Mrs.
Richmond was doubtful of the Sergeant and Miss
Mary’s re-action to such a present, but knowing they
would probably take it in the spirit it was given she
did not discourage her young daughter, but placed
the kitchen at her disposal after dinner.
Elsie hovered around helpfully during the mix-
ing of the cake to which she contributed precious
rations, but Rusty and Jancy did everything else.
When the cake was mixed and placed in the oven
Rusty was consumed with impatience, and to pass
the time cleaned the mixing bowl out with her
fingers.
“That’s nice and clean,’’ said Elsie, viewing
this operation. “Now what about giving the rest of
the things a bath?’’
“All right,’’ said Jancy. “We’ll wash up.’’
“That’s what I meant,’’ Elsie grinned. “I don’t
like to find dirty dishes in my kitchen in the morn-
• »»
mg.
After they’d washed up, Elsie tried the cake
with a straw.
“It wants another few minutes, I think.’’
“Oh, heavens, it must be done,’’ said the im-
patient Rusty, knowing that Elsie’s few minutes
might mean another half hour. “I’m dying to see
what it looks like, aren’t you, Jancy?’’
“Yes, but I’ll tell you what, I’ll play you
draughts until it’s finished.’’
“All right.’’
Jancy ran away and returned with the board
and alternately they played with Elsie, who proved
to be as invincible on the draught board as she was
in the kitchen.


At last the big moment came, and with bated
breath the girls stood by the door as Elsie pulled the
cake out of the oven. On seeing it Rusty’s
expectant face fell.
“Look at the hole in it, for goodness sake!”
“I’m afraid the fruit has sunk in the middle,’’
said Elsie.
“We can’t give anyone that,’’ wailed Jancy.
“Oh yes you can.’’ Elsie was unruffled. “I’ll
put some icing over it and fill in the hole when it’s
cool, which incidentally will be in the morning. I’m
not waiting up to-night.’’
“You’re a lamb, Elsie,’’ said Rusty, restored
from her depression; “there’s nobody like you.’’
“Off with you,’’ said Elsie impervious to this
blarney. “It’s time you were in bed.”
The girls ran off obediently, and Elsie was care-
fully placing the cake on a wire cooler when Mrs.
Richmond came in and said: “How did the cake
turn out?”
Elsie let go the laughter she’d been stifling some
time, and pointed a shaking hand at the cake, which,
as it cooled, sank deeper and deeper in the middle.
“Oh, dear!” Mrs. Richmond viewed the wreck
sorrowfully.
“It’s all right,” said Elsie, wiping away the tears
of laughter with her apron; “don’t worry. Rusty’s
been talking about that blessed cake all the evening
and I knew what would happen when she did bake
it, so I made her one myself and I’ll substitute it for
this. She’ll never know the difference.”
Mrs. Richmond beamed at her gratefully.
“Elsie, you’re a treasure. You know some-
times I wake up at night and wonder what I’d do
without you.”


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Elsie was down early next morning and it was
just as well, for when she entered the kitchen a small
pyjamaed Judy was standing on a chair in front of
the ruined cake, and her crumby face bore eloquent
testimony that she had been there some time. Dis-
turbed by Elsie’s entrance, and fully aware that she
had been naughty, she made an effort to deflect by
flattery the punishment she thought was coming
and, pointing at the cake, smiled crumbily, and said:
“Nice.”
“I’ll give you ‘nice,’ ” said Elsie, lifting her out
of the chair with a little shake. “If that had been my
good cake I’d have told your Mummy.”
She looked at the remains of Rusty and Jancy’s
efforts, which now had no middle at all, and shook
with laughter.
Judy, sensing a reprieve, laughed too.
“Aren’t I funny?” she said.
“You certainly are.” Elsie picked her up and
wiped her sticky face, and Judy, pointing her finger
at the forlorn cake, said proudly:
“I ate it all by mine own self.”
“Yes, and you won’t eat any breakfast now,
will you, you naughty girl. Off you go; I don’t
want to have anything more to do with you.” And
she put the child down at the door and, administer-
ing a pat to the small departing rear, went back to
her work.
By the time Rusty came hurtling into the
kitchen a beautiful cake stood imposingly on the


dresser. It had white icing on top adorned with the
legend “Good Luck” in pink. Rusty was trans-
ported.
“Oh! It’s wonderful, Elsie. However did you
do it?”
“It’s a trade secret,” grinned Elsie.
Rusty flung herself at her and gave her a fierce
hug.
“You’re wonderful; I must get Jancy to come
and see it.”
Jancy was equally impressed. “Why, you’d
never know there was a hole in it,” she said admir-
ingly. “You are clever, Elsie.”
“I’m glad you like it,” said Elsie. “Now off you
go and get dressed. I’ll have it all packed and ready
for you after breakfast. And you’d better pick your
flowers now while the dew is still on them; the
secateurs are on the windowsill outside.”
Mrs. Richmond announced at breakfast that
she was going into town with Captain Richmond,
and Penelope, who was not required to prepare the
arches for the wedding, offered to stay at home and
look after Judy and Dumps.
“I’ve got to get Miss Mary a present,” she went
on, “so we ll drop you two at school and call for you
on the way back.”
“Don’t be late, Mummy, will you?” Rusty
looked worried. “Because we’ve got to have lunch
and dress and get back to school by 2 o’clock. The
wedding’s at three, you know.”
“Don’t worry, you’ll be there in time,” smiled
her Mother.
When the girls arrived at school their friends
had everything ready for them to get straight down


to work, which they did with much laughter and
excited chatter, and by 1 1 o’clock the arches were
completed.
“The carrier will take them into town to the
church,” said Miss Grey, after she had admired
them, “and I’ll tell him to be very careful.”
Rusty and Jancy, with Pam and the rest, then
went to the gate to await the arrival of Captain and
Mrs. Richmond, who drove up shortly afterwards
with Yvonne Poulett in the car.
“We found her in town,” said Captain Rich-
mond, “so we brought her home.”
Yvonne, who looked rather pale, thanked Mrs.
Richmond for the lift and, ignoring the girls, walked
off.
“That girl looks worried to me,” said Captain
Richmond.
“She’s always like that,” remarked Rusty un-
sympathetically, “we don’t take any notice of her.”
“Well, come on, get in,” said her Father, “and
hurry; we’ve got no time to waste.”
The wedding went off perfectly in the after-
noon and Miss Mary, looking very beautiful, walked
out of the church on her husband’s arm and under
the flowered arches held by her pupils.
“Doesn’t she look marvellous?” whispered
Rusty to Jancy, who was holding the arch next to
her.
“Glorious,” agreed Jancy ecstatically. “I’ve
never seen anyone look so happy.”
Captain Richmond, standing in front of a
shrub further down the churchyard, obtained two
very good pictures of the pretty tableau in the church
door, and as he folded his camera was accosted by
a man with a notebook and pencil, who said;


“I’m from the local paper, Captain Richmond;
my name’s Todd. I wonder would you mind giving
me a few details about the wedding?’’
“Not at all,” replied Captain Richmond, and
proceeded to tell what he could. After taking down
the Captain’s information Mr. Todd said: “And I’d
like to feature the names of the girls holding the
arches too. Do you know them?’’
“Not all of them, you’ll have to ask the girls
for the others, but one is my daughter, Russel Rich-
mond, and there’s Pamela Simpson and Shirley Lay-
ton. Oh, and Jancine Mitford, who’s staying with
» 9
US.
“Mitford?” Mr. Todd looked thoughtful.
“Any relation to the Colonel Mitford who was men-
tioned so much in the papers about two years ago?”
Captain Richmond hesitated.
“Yes, but there’s no need to mention that, is
there?”
“Oh, no. It was just the name seemed familiar
to me.”
“I prefer it not to be publicised, if you don’t
mind,” said Captain Richmond, “it might make her
unhappy. Although personally I have complete
faith in him, despite what the papers say, and I am
sure he’ll be vindicated sooner or later.”
“In any case, I wouldn’t mention it,” said Mr.
Todd. “It would accomplish nothing for me and
only hurt the child; 1 know how cruel gossip can
be.”
“Thank you, Mr. Todd.” Captain Richmond
shook his hand heartily. “I wish there were more
newspaper men like you.” He swung the camera on
its strap over his shoulder and Mr. Todd said:


“If you like I’ll get that film developed at the
office for you.” He smiled. “This isn’t charity. I’d
very much like one of those pictures to go with my
article.’’
“Of course, only too glad to have the develop-
ing taken off my hands.’’ And, laughing, the two
men followed the wedding party, which was by this
time getting into the cars.
As Captain Richmond and Mr. Todd moved off
a girl came out from behind the shrub in front of
which they had been standing and looked after them
with an expression of malignant satisfaction. “What
a wonderful piece of luck,’’ she thought, “and just
when I wanted it most. I’ll find out what young
Mitford’s father did if it’s the last thing I do”; and
with lifted head and a triumphant air, Yvonne
Poulett made her way through the churchyard and
out on to the pavement, where she found Penelope
looking for her.
The reception was held at the school, the adults
foregathering in Miss Grey’s room and the pupils
enjoying a spread in the gymnasium. Before leav-
ing, Miss Mary came over with some wedding cake
and made a pretty little speech, thanking her pupils
for their efforts to make her wedding a success. Her
husband was with her, and added that without their
assistance he was sure that he and Miss Mary would
never have managed to have got married, and
offered if any of them wanted to do the same that
he’d be best man.
The pair were loudly cheered at this, and after
saying good-bye were escorted to their car by the
entire school, who saw them off with much yelling,
waving madly until they were out of sight.
Returning to the littered tables in the gym,
Rusty rescued two pieces of wedding cake for


Dumps and Judy, and wrapped them up carefully
in a paper mat.
There, they’ll like that,’’ she said to Jancy;
“have you kept your piece?’’
“No, why should I? I ate it.”
“Well, you’d better have half of mine to sleep
on to-night. If you put it under your pillow you
dream of the man you’re going to marry.”
Jancy was a bit sceptical of this information
but agreed to try it, and they went to look for Cap-
tain and Mrs. Richmond as it was time to go home.
Judy and Dumps were very appreciative of the cake
and Judy, after demolishing hers in two mouthfuls,
said, to the amusement of the surrounding family:
“Did you gone and got married to-day, Mummy?”
“No, not me, darling. It was Miss Mary who
got married.”
“What for did she?” demanded Judy.
Mrs. Richmond looked nonplussed for a
moment, but her husband came to her rescue.
“Because she loves Sergeant Sadler.”
Judy pondered this awhile, and then said:
“Well, could I get married to Wusty, cos I love
her?”
“No, it’s not the same, pet,” Rusty intervened,
“and you’d better stop eating now or you’ll be so
fat no one’ll want to marry you.”
Judy looked a bit crushed at this, but revived
enough to waddle after Jancy and her sister, with
her incessant cry of “Wait for me,” when they de-
parted for the verandah to read until dinner time.
Penelope turned to her Mother when they had
gone.


I asked Yvonne to come for the day to-mor-
row; is it all right?”
Mrs. Richmond nodded. “Quite all right,
dear, so long as it’s not too early. I’m going to have
a sleep-in in the morning.”
“Then I’d better ring her now and tell her 1 1
o’clock will be early enough to come. That won’t
disturb you, will it?”
Heavens no! I shall be up before then; you
must think I m a slug-a-bed,” said Mrs. Richmond
with mock indignation.
Penelope laughed and went to use the tele-
phone.
Out on the verandah Rusty had abandoned her
book for the more exciting game of weddings, and
dressed in an old evening frock of her Mother’s was
pinning a discarded net curtain and a piece of sad-
looking orange blossom to her ruddy hair.
“There.” She surveyed herself in the mirror
with satisfaction. “Now, Judy, you hold my train
and we’ll walk to the end of the verandah like in
church. You can be the congregation, Jancy, you
and Dumps.”
Dumps crowed loudly, and whacked Jancy en-
thusiastically with a celluloid rattle.
“She likes it, you can tell,” said Rusty, pleased
with this demonstration.
“Yes, I can tell all right,” said Jancy, rubbing
her head ruefully; “she makes it very plain.”
“That’s only because she’s excited. She always
hits people when she’s excited.” Rusty turned to
Judy. “Now hold each side of the curtain wide
apart, pet, and follow me down the verandah when
I say ‘Ready.’


Rusty stood up and, elevating her small nose,
said “Ready,” and began her stately march, followed
by a solemn Judy who obviously took her train-bear-
ing seriously. They perambulated the length of the
verandah and started back, by which time Judy had
become a little bored and, seeing the fascinating dip
in the curtain (or train) between her and Rusty,
began filling it with the toys that were scattered
about. Rusty, feeling the extra weight, turned to see
what was going on, and at the same time placed her
foot inadvertently on a toy train standing on the
floor, whereupon her feet flew from under her and
with a terrific crash she landed on her back with Judy
on top of her. Jancy went limp with laughter at this
unrehearsed incident, and Dumps, thinking it had
all been arranged for her sole benefit, screamed de-
lightedly, and whacked the helpless Jancy with joy-
ful vigour, but Jancy hardly noticed the assault as,
weak with laughter, she watched the hapless Rusty
pick herself up and rub the rear portion of her
anatomy dejectedly.
“I’m sorry,” gasped Jancy, wiping her eyes,
but you do look funny, your veil’s all crooked.”
She went off again into another peal of mirth.
“Well, r m glad I amuse someone,” said Rusty
good humouredly, and catching sight of herself in
the mirror gave an appreciative giggle. One bright
brown eye was obscured by the veil which sat at a
rakish angle on her head, and the sad orange blossom
dangled fetchingly over an ear.
“It does look a bit comical,” she laughed.
Judy, standing watching her, smiled widely.
‘Wusty fall down.”
“I certainly did,” agreed Rusty.


“Miss Mary fall down too?” pursued Judy,
evidently thinking that the upset was all part of the
wedding ceremony.
At this picturesque idea of Miss Mary lying on
her back in the aisle, Rusty and Jancy both collapsed,
and were prostrate when Mrs. Richmond came to
carry Judy and Dumps off to supper and bed.
Mrs. Richmond was appalled at the state of
the verandah.
“Goodness me, what have you been doing?”
she said mildly, and, catching sight of Rusty who
was still arrayed in Jier dishevelled finery, she smiled,
and when Jancy told her of Judy’s conception of a
wedding ceremony, dissolved into laughter.
“Ridiculous little thing,” she said, picking up
that young lady and kissing her, “it must be lovely
to be four.” She put her down and picked up
Dumps. “Come along, Judy, supper, dear,” and
turning to Rusty and Jancy; “You two had better
tidy the verandah before dinner. If Elsie sees it like
this I don’t know what she’ll say.” And Mrs. Rich-
mond went away.
After tidying everything up the girls went to
wash their hands.
“I say,” said Rusty, squeezing soapsuds be-
tween her fingers, “what if we ask Mummy to go for
a picnic to-morrow? Just on the beach, you know.
But we haven’t had lunch outside for a long time
and it’d be nice.”
“Oh, yes ” Jancy loved picnics. “Let’s go and
ask her now, shall we?”
Rusty dried her soapy hands feverishly. “Yes,
let’s.”


They found Mrs. Richmond in the sitting-room
with Captain Richmond and Penelope.
“Mummy,” said Rusty, bursting in without
ceremony, “can we have a picnic to-morrow?”
“Why, yes; I don’t see why not.’
Penelope looked up from her book. “Yvonne’s
coming, Mother.”
“Well, she can join us,” said Mrs. Richmond.
“Now, where shall we go?” But Rusty had un-
accountably lost her enthusiasm at the mention of
Yvonne.
“Oh, let’s leave it till next week-end; it’ll be
better then.”
“No, I think we ll go,” said Mrs. Richmond.
“It’s warm on the beach in the sun, besides, it’ll
give Elsie a rest; you can all help cut sandwiches.”
Rusty walked out of the room followed by
Jancy.
“What rotten luck,” she said. “I wouldn’t have
suggested going if I knew that wet blanket was
coming.”
“Never mind,” comforted Jancy. “We’ll play
at the other end of the beach; she won’t come there.”
And as Elsie’s voice floated out from the dining-
room : “There’s dinner ready, come on, I’m hungry.”


CHAPTER NINETEEN
Next morning Jancy woke early.
“Did you put the cake under your pillow, and
who did you dream about?” she asked.
Rusty burst out laughing. “I can hardly tell
' t
you.
“Oh, go on. Who was it?’
“Mr. Butler, the hermit!”
Rusty giggled at this absurdity. “Oh, gosh!”
“Who did you?”
Jancy blushed.
“Go oh,” urged Rusty.
“Peter,” Jancy blurted out. And Rusty
bounced delightedly on her bed.
“How perfectly scrumptious. You couldn’t
have done better.” And she ran off to tell Elsie,
who was often the recipient of such confidences
when Mrs. Richmond wasn’t available.
After breakfast, during which Jancy received
a lot of good-natured chaff about her dream, every-
one was recruited to cut sandwiches. This was done
in what Elsie called mass production. One person
cut bread, one buttered, another added various fill-
ings, and when Mrs. Richmond got up later she
packed the basket.
When everything was ready Penelope’s Mother
said to her:
“It’s already half-past ten, dear, so to get the
best of the sun for the babies I think I’ll take them
down now and you can wait for Yvonne and follow
us afterwards.”


Penelope agreed to this plan and with Captain
Richmond, Dumps and the rest following behind the
party descended to the beach.
Rusty had wanted to bring Peter’s boat, the
“Seahorse,” but Captain Richmond said he had no
intention of saving anyone from a watery grave that
day and catching his death of cold in the process.
So the girls had to be content with the toboggan
and were having an hilarious time when Penelope
and Yvonne arrived.
Penelope was full of good spirits, and after rid-
ing on the toboggan, tried to coax Yvonne into
doing the same, but Yvonne refused to move from
her position, preferring to sit on the sand near Mrs.
Richmond and ponder the events of the day before
when she’d been into town.
To her dismay the necklace had not been ready
when she had called for it and she remembered now
with regret that in her panic she had made the mis-
take of trying to bully the little watchmaker.
“Don’t talk to me like that, young lady,” he
had said, “or I’ll be thinking you’re up to no good
with these pearls. Are you sure your Mother knows
you have ’em?” he added shrewdly.
Yvonne, in order to lull any suspicions he might
have, pretended to ignore this remark.
“Don’t talk nonsense,” she said, “if I can’t have
it to-day, when can I have it?”
“Not under a fortnight, Miss,” said the little
man firmly.
Yvonne’s eyes sparkled with anger. “You told
me three weeks or a month, and three weeks have
gone now.”
“Can’t help it, Miss; no assistants. You’ll just
have to be patient.”


Yvonne, without a word, flung angrily out of
the shop and up the street, but as she walked her
anger cooled and she began to worry. It was not the
consciousness of having done something wrong that
worried her, but the fear of being found out, and as
she loitered aimlessly past the shops her fear and
resentment gradually turned against the owner of
the neckjace, and she finally persuaded herself that
Jancy was the cause of all her troubles. It was
criminal for her to leave such a valuable necklace
lying about; she deserved to have it taken, and, any-
way, thought Yvonne, I wouldn’t have borrowed it
but for the dirty trick she played me over Madam
Platz. Thus ignoring the fact that when she had
taken the necklace the identity of the owner was a
complete mystery to her, Yvonne proceeded to feed
the smouldering fire of her hatred for Jancy, and
by the time she reached the station it had burst into
a fine healthy flame. Forgotten now was her pre-
vious and more practical policy of kindness to Jancy,
for passionate hatred had driven reason from her
emotionally unstable mind and even Mrs. Rich-
mond, who at that moment beckoned to her from
the car, was temporarily included in her rage.
“Why can’t they leave me alone?’’ she thought
furiously, crossing the road in response to the sum-
mons; but when she reached the car her manner
showed nothing of the anger burning beneath, and
she was as courteous as always to Captain and Mrs.
Richmond.
All through lunch and the journey to the
church her rage had grown inside her until the won-
derful moment when she had eavesdropped on the
conversation of Captain Richmond and Mr. Todd.
Yvonne was hardly able to believe her ears. If, as
she had gathered from the conversation, Colonel
Mitford had done something dishonest, then her


enemy was delivered into her hands, for she would
take steps immediately to find out what it was and
broadcast it to the school. She would blacken
Jancy’s name so badly that even if by some mis-
chance the necklace could be traced to her, Jancy’s
disgrace would overshadow her own. Yvonne could
hardly wait to get back to school after the wedding
and, immediately on arriving, she wrote hurriedly
to her Mother, asking for details of a Colonel Mitford,
who had been disgraced about two years before and
had suffered a lot of newspaper publicity, adding a
postscript requesting a speedy reply. Sealing this
missive she ran down to the corner postbox and
caught the five o’clock mail, hearing the letter drop
inside with an almost unholy satisfaction.
She smiled now, thinking of that letter and
ran her hand through the sand, reflecting that there
should be a reply by Wednesday at the latest.
“You seem happy, Yvonne,’’ said Mrs. Rich-
mond, noticing the smile. “A penny for your
thoughts.’’
Yvonne laughed and jumped up. “They’re
much more precious than that,’’ she said gaily, “and
I think I will have a ride on the toboggan after all.’’
“Yes, do dear, I always enjoy it.’’
Yvonne found it almost easy to be pleasant to
Jancy that day, and as they were going up from the
beach in the afternoon Rusty observed to Jancy that
Yvonne had been almost human for once.
“Yes, perhaps she’s not so bad, really,’’ said
Jancy comfortably. “After all, we haven’t been very
nice to her.”
But Rusty was sceptical about judging Yvonne
on one good performance, and only replied that they
had reason to treat her coolly, and it remained to be


seen whether Yvonne would keep up her high stan-
dard of behaviour.
Back at the house Mrs. Richmond asked
Yvonne if she was staying to tea. Yvonne said she
would like to as Matron was in charge of the school
that week-end and the meals were never so good.
“Why, where’s Miss Grey?’’ Mrs. Rich-
mond.
A
“Oh, she’s there, but as Miss Shaw and Miss
Lovett are away, and Miss Mary’s on her honey-
moon, she’s alone, and I don’t think she and Matron
get on very well.’’
“Oh, dear, we can’t let her stay by herself,’’
said Mrs. Richmond, unable to think of anyone
being lonely. “Can’t we do something. lan?’’
“All right, I’ll go and fetch her.” Captain
Richmond rose with humorous resignation. “You
wouldn’t be happy if I didn’t.”
Miss Grey returned in time for tea, and Rusty
and Jancy, who were expecting to sit silent under
her frigid eye for the rest of the evening, were
pleasantly surprised to find her quite a different per-
son away from school.
After tea everybody gathered round the fire,
and when they had played Animal, Vegetable and
Mineral in a desultory way for a while, Rusty de-
manded a story.
“Not to-night,’ said Mrs. Richmond. “1
really can’t think of any.”
“Oh, Mummy.” Rusty registered bitter disap-
pointment.
“I think I might know a story,” said Captain
Richmond, with a mischievous smile.
“Oh, not one of those ridiculous drover stories,
lan, please; they are really not suitable for children.”


This whetted Rusty’s appetite. “Oh, do tell
us, Daddy. What’s it about?’’
“Well.” Captain Richmond looked at his wife
enquiringly.
“I wash my hands of it,” she said, and looked
at Miss Grey. “They’re really the most ridiculous
stories.”
“Go on, Daddy,” urged Rusty.
“All right.” Captain Richmond settled into his
chair. “Now this is really an Australian folk story,
and lots of people don’t believe it, but of course it’s
no good telling it if you don’t.”
“We ll believe it, Daddy,” promised Rusty
recklessly. “Do hurry up.”
“Well, there was once a stockman who got lost
in the Never Never, and for three days he was with-
out food and water. At the end of that time he was
so weak that he couldn’t get off his horse, which he
allowed to roam at will through the sandy scrub of
the desert. The animal he rode was also weak, from
lack of food and water and wandered aimlessly in
every direction. Now anyone will tell you that
animals have an extraordinary nose for water, and
the stockman’s horse was no exception, for in the
middle of the afternoon it gave a feeble whinny and
set off at the best pace it could manage toward the
east. The stockman, almost thrown out of the saddle
by the violent movement, was just able to cling on
as the horse careered over the countryside and
presently imagined he could see the posts of a fence
in the distance, but so weak was he that he thought
it must be delirium. Imagine his delight when, as
they drew closer, he found the fence was real, a real
shining wire fence. Without pausing the horse took
it in his stride and, galloping on, brought his rider
to a little spring shaded by leafy gums. The animal
shoved his nose into the water and the man, who was


almost too weak to slide off his back, suddenly heard
a splashing sound behind him and, turning in the
saddle, discovered that the fence had cut the weak,
thin horse exactly in halves, and the water, as fast
as the horse drank, was running out the other end.
Quickly dismounting the stockman had a little drink
himself and then, as fast as he could, plastered the
horse s wound with eucalyptus leaves, after which
he had a night’s sleep under the trees. In the morn-
ing there was the horse walking round on its two
front legs as large as life and looking quite well, so
the stockman, knowing there must be a homestead
nearby, left him there and went to find the owners
of the place. Everybody was amazed at his story and
went out straight away with him to look at the re-
markable horse. The stockman said as he couldn’t
ride him any more he’d like to leave him in the nice
green paddock for the rest of his life, if the people
didn’t mind. They said of course they didn’t mind,
and they lent the stockman a horse and some rations
to enable him to return to his own station. He be-
came a bit of a rolling stone after that, and for some
years didn’t return to that part of the country, but
one day, thinking he would like to see the horse he
went back, and on reaching the station went straight
to the paddock, but the horse was nowhere to be
seen. He leaned sadly on the fence, regretting that
he hadn’t come back to see him before, when sud-
denly his eyes caught the movement of some trees
near the spring.
‘That’s funny,’ he said to himself. ‘There
ain’t no wind.’ And he gave the whistle with which
he used to call the horse so many years ago. Im-
mediately a miniature forest sprang into life and
galloped towards him, and the stockman was amazed
to see that the eucalyptus leaves he had plastered
the wound with had grown and the horse was walk-
ing about carrying a load of sturdy saplings.”


A complete and utter silence greeted the end
of this preposterous story, and Rusty, tickled by a
mental picture of the verdant horse, laughed hilari-
ously.
Even Mrs. Richmond giggled a little. “What
a thing to tell the children.”
“That’s an authentic Australian folk story,
dear. Personally, I think it’s very amusing.” And
he chuckled to himself wickedly.
Miss Grey laughed at the infectious sound.
“It was very original, anyway. I don’t know
of any other country that could produce such a fan-
tastic tale. It reminds me of a niece who wrote to
me from England to ask did we really have walking-
stick farms here, as an Australian soldier had told
her his Father had the largest one in Australia and
grew the biggest walking sticks.” Captain Rich-
mond roared with laughter and, smilingly, Miss Grey
rose.
“I’m afraid I’ll have to go now, or Yvonne will
be late getting to bed. Thank you very much for
your kind invitation, Mrs. Richmond. I was feeling
rather lonely without Miss Mary.”
Captain Richmond got the car out and good-
byes were said.
Later, as they were getting undressed, Rusty
said to Jancy:
“Not a bad old trout, is she, really?”
“I’d love to see her face if she heard you,” said
Jancy.
Rusty laughed.
“I’d love to see Peter’s face when I tell him
what you dreamed last night.”


“Rusty!” Jancy’s face went scarlet. “I’ll never
speak to you again if you do.”
“Don’t be silly, he’ll like it.”
“I mean it,” said Jancy doggedly. "I’ll never
speak to you again.” She went stiffly to the dress-
ing-table and Rusty, much amused, descended on
her with a bear hug.
“I was only teasing, Jancy. Gosh, you don’t
half fall for it, do you? I wouldn’t dream of telling
Peter such a thing; he’d half kill me. Besides, I
wouldn’t be too popular with you either, would I?”
“That’s putting it mild,” said Jancy, climbing
into bed, “and mind you don’t dream about Mr.
Butler, or I’ll tell him.”


CHAPTER TWENTY
By Wednesday morning s post Yvonne re-
ceived her Mother s letter which, on examination,
outdid even her expectations.
“Of course I’ve heard of Colonel Mitford,’’ her
Mother wrote volubly. “He was in charge of a large
contingent of men in Malaya, and when the Japs
came he left them behind to die and escaped. He’s
a traitor and a coward. I have enclosed newspaper
cuttings that I kept at the time because of a reference
to your Great Aunt Emilie, but I found that the
account of Colonel Mitford’s shocking conduct as
given by soldiers who were with him is on the back
of it. Anyway, if his daughter is attending your
school I’m not sure I wish you to stay on. I shall
probably write to Miss Grey later, saying that I can-
not let you remain at a school that also shelters the
daughter of a man who has earned the nation’s vili-
fication.’’
After finishing this dramatic screed, Yvonne,
who was unimpressed by another of her Mother’s
frequent threats to take her away from school,
turned to the cutting. It was intact except for a
small piece at the bottom, and was the account of
the enquiry into Colonel Mitford’s conduct. The
evidence of a few of his men who had been rescued
was there in black and white, and it was damning.
He had apparently left in a small boat at night with
two other men, and his batman testified that he had
provisioned the boat that morning in preparation for
what Colonel Mitford had said was a fishing trip.
Yvonne hugged herself with joy. “This should
fix the mealy-mouthed little hypocrite.’’ And put-


ting the letter with the cutting into her blouse pocket
she went happily to the first period.
At lunch time Yvonne was first in the locker-
room and, taking the cutting from her pocket,
dropped it near the table leg in full view of the door,
and then went to wash her hands.
Rhona Baldock and Gillian Lome were the first
girls to enter the room after her and, seeing the
paper, Gillian picked it up carelessly and was just
going to put it down on the table when her eye
caught the headline and the name Mitford.
“Just a minute, this must be young Jancy’s.”
She read the heading: “Colonel’s Cowardice in Face
of Danger.” “Oh, heavens! Look, Rhona.” They
read the cutting together and half-way through,
Rhona said:
“I think we ought to tear it up; the school won’t
suffer for not seeing this.” She took it from Gillian,
who said:
“It’s not ours to tear. Hadn’t you better find
out about it?”
“Yes, I’ll take it to Miss Grey.”
Yvonne, having listened to this conversation in
the washroom, thought it was high time to come out
and prevent Rhona from spoiling her plan.
“What have you got there?” She took the
paper from Rhona before she could be stopped and
pretended to read it while the other two stood silently
by. “Nice little scandal, isn’t it?” she said, looking
up. “I always knew there was something fishy about
that little sneak.”
Rhona reddened angrily. “That’ll do, Yvonne.
Please give me the paper. I want to take it to Miss
Grey.” But Yvonne just looked at her with an un-
pleasant smile as the rest of the school burst noisily
into the room.


Several of the seniors, seeing what they thought
was a row going on, asked what was wrong. Yvonne
dropped the cutting on the table.
“That!” she said, and before Rhona could
snatch it away the girls had read it.
“Phew! It can’t be true,” said Rosalie James
to Gillian.
“I’m sure it’s not, or at least there’s some mis-
take,” Gillian assured her earnestly. “1 think you’d
better give it to Rhona. She wants to take it to Miss
Grey.”
Rhona departed with the paper, knowing it was
too late now to take it to Miss Grey, and going up
the stairs with a heart full of sympathy for-Jancy,
she folded it and put it carefully in her writing pad.
In the locker-room the news spread like fire,
with plenty of inflammable assistance from Yvonne,
and Penelope, entering a bit later than the others,
was taken aside by her friend and apprised of the
newly-discovered piece of scandal.
“I can’t believe it,” she said. And with an odd
look at Yvonne she fled from the room.
“I’m glad it’s not my Father,” said a crony of
Yvonne’s, “I’d hide my head in shame.”
“I’m afraid it’s true even though Penelope
doesn’t believe it,” said Yvonne, “and I can only
say that I’m not surprised.”
The juniors standing around stared at this.
“Why aren’t you surprised?” asked one.
“Because that’s the sort of parent I’d expect
Miss Jancy Mitford to have. You all know how she
sneaked on me over old Platypus.”
A number of heads belonging to girls who had
been duped by Yvonne’s story nodded. “Yes, she
did.”


‘Well, what can you expect from a daughter
of a man like that?” And having contributed this
much to Jancys downfall Yvonne turned to walk
out of the door as the subject of the discussion
walked in with Rusty. There was an awkward
silence, and under the battery of dozens of curious
eyes the two girls walked into the washroom.
‘‘Gosh! I wonder what’s wrong,” said Rusty,
scrubbing her hands vigorously under the tap.
‘‘Everybody looked a bit peculiarly at us, I must
9 9
say.
They both dried their hands and opened the
door into the locker-room, and the buzz of talk
ceased at their entrance. Determined to get to the
bottom of this behaviour, Rusty faced the whole
roomful of girls sturdily.
‘‘What’s wrong?” she demanded. ‘‘We might
be lepers the way you’re going on.” At this the girls
scattered hastily to look for imaginary handker-
chiefs in their lockers, and Rusty, seeing that she’d
get no satisfaction, said: ‘‘Come on, Jancy, let’s go
to lunch.”
When they had gone Yvonne turned to the
girls.
‘‘lf you take my advice you’ll have nothing to
do with her. She’s here under false pretences.”
The juniors did not know what this meant, but
it sounded impressive, and although unable to under-
stand exactly what Jancy had done, they decided
that it must be pretty bad if Yvonne said it was, and
they willingly agreed to follow the senior girl’s lead
and avoid her.
At lunch Rusty and Jancy didn’t feel the chill
air of disapproval so much for they were surrounded
by Pam, Jill, Frances and Shirley, who had heard
the news but would have died rather than betray it


to their friends. Rusty however noticed the attitude
of most of the other girls at the table and when Jancy
went to get her pudding said to Pam point blank:
“What’s going on here, for goodness sake?
Why is everyone looking at us as if we had a
disease?”
“Oh, it’s awful.” Pam was very distressed.
“It’s Jancy they’re talking about, not you. I’ll tell
you afterwards, cos here’s Jancy coming back. I
can’t in front of her.”
Rusty finished her lunch in silence, and then,
telling Jancy and the others to get out the basket-
ball so that they could have a game when they came
back, she and Pam ran round to the tool shed behind
the school.
“Now,” Rusty faced her friend, “what’s all
this about?” Pam told the story of the cutting,
faltering a bit towards the end as Rusty’s frown be-
came more and more forbidding. When she had
finished, Rusty said fiercely, “I don’t believe a word
of it, but I bet Yvonne’s behind it somehow. Poor
old Jancy.” She clenched her small fists. “I could
kill Yvonne for this. How can anyone believe what
she says? Why can’t they have more sense?”
“We don’t believe it,” said Pam soothingly.
“We think there’s been an awful mistake of some
kind.”
“I know you don’t believe it, Pam. I didn’t
think you would; but somehow we’ve got to stop
the rest of the school believing it. Come on, we’d
better be getting back now or Jancy will smell a rat.
But don’t forget we’re going to do our best to stop
it.”
Pam nodded energetically. “We will.”


But it was easier said than done, for by the end
of the afternoon the school was divided into two
factions, those for and those against Jancy, and the
“Fors” were in a very small minority. These few
surrounded Rusty and Jancy loyally as they waited
for Captain Richmond to pick them up after school,
and even Penelope, appalled at Yvonne s vindictive
behaviour, was careful to be kind to Jancy. But all
these kind-hearted attempts only threw into relief
the attitude of the rest of the school, for those such
as the juniors, who were not really active in their
persecution of Jancy, just stood around and looked
at her as if she was some queer animal. Rusty was
careful to make Jancy believe that the feeling was
against both of them, and to Jancy’s questionings
on the way home, replied that she had no idea what
it was all about, but they’d probably find out later,
and with this Jancy had to be content.
Back in the locker-room Yvonne was holding
court with her supporters, most of whom were
boarders, and therefore more susceptible to her in-
fluence because of the constant association. Some
of them were furious in their indignation against
Jancy, some were apathetic and indifferent, depend-
ing upon whether they were naturally malicious,
lazy, or soft hearted. These last, although not con-
vinced of Jancy’s wickedness, weakly paid lip
service to Yvonne, partly because it was the easiest
thing to do and partly because of the fear of un-
popularity if they stood against her.
“And so,’’ Yvonne was saying, “I think she
should be taken away from the school.’’
“I know if I tell my parents,’’ a senior girl said,
“they won’t allow me to stay if she does.’’
Rhona Baldock, hearing this in the washroom,
put her head out and grinned.


“You don’t think grown-ups would take any
notice of your silly little squabbles, do you?’’
“Oh. no?” asked Yvonne carelessly.
“You bet they don’t,” piped up another voice,
and Frances Keene, who had been in the washroom
with Rhona, came out. “You’re going to be sorry
for doing this to Jancy, one day,” she told the group
of girls. “She can’t help what her Father did, even
if it’s true, and you’ve no right to make her un-
happy. How would you like it if your Father was
sent to jail or something and nobody would speak
to you because of it? It wouldn’t be your fault,
would it?”
Yvonne smiled at the small champion con
descendingly.
“But you see, unfortunately, Jancy follows in
her Father’s footsteps; we don’t want a coward in
the school, do we?”
“What do you mean?”
“What I say, and nobody knows that Jancy’s
a coward better than you do.”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
Frances dug her hands in her pockets and glared at
Yvonne.
“Oh, yes you do. Remember the day at the
. .»»
river ?
Frances paled.
“I see you do,” Yvonne went on in a madden-
ing voice, “and so do a lot of other people. Rusty
and the rest could have drowned for all the good
Jancy was. Lorna Thirle told me she just stood
there and you even had to shout at her to make her
pull them in. Lorna saw it from the top of the
bank.”


“It’s a lie,” said Frances stoutly. ‘‘She was
just numb with shock.”
‘‘You can call it that if you like.” Yvonne
turned away. “But I call it cowardice. Does anyone
agree with me?”
Most of them did, and then began talking all
about the river accident and Jancy’s behaviour,
which until now had been forgotten even by the few
who had seen it. On being reminded of it they lost
no time in turning it as evidence against her, and
Rhona and Frances, knowing it was useless to argue
any longer, left the washroom.
When Jancy and Rusty arrived next morning,
feeling was running higher than ever. Jancy was
ostracised by practically all the boarders, and just
before lunch time was so upset by this strange treat-
ment that she had to ask her form mistress to excuse
her.
She was sitting weeping in the locker-room
when suddenly Yvonne came in. She ignored
Jancy, who, realising that the senior girl was some-
how at the back of her troubles, swallowed her tears
and, planting herself bravely in front of her, said:
‘‘You’re at the back of all this, aren’t you,
Yvonne? So you can probably tell me what it is all
about. I must be the only girl in the school who
doesn’t know.”
Yvonne smiled maliciously. ‘‘You know what
it is all right,” she said.
‘‘You know I don’t.” Jancy waited, and
Yvonne, savouring the pleasure of delivering the
wound she was about to inflict, crossed slowly to a
chair and sat down.
‘‘Well, we think this is a pretty good school,
and the girls have decided that we don’t want any
undesirable people in it.”


“I don’t understand,’’ said Jancy, completely
at sea.
“Don’t you? Well, I’ll explain. Your Father
deserted his men in the face of danger in Malaya and
left them to die; you apparently take after him, as
you showed by your behaviour at the river the other
week. You’d have let Rusty and the rest drown be-
fore risking your own skin.”
After the first part of Yvonne’s denunciation,
Jancy had collapsed limply into a chair and fixed
tragic eyes on Yvonne’s face. The information
about her Father was more than she could digest at
that moment.
‘‘l don’t believe it,” she said mechanically.
“It’s quite true, and Rhona Baldock has the
newspaper cutting if you want to verify it. Your
Father is quite famous, you’ll find.” And with this
parting shot Yvonne went out as the rest of the girls
rushed in. They stopped suddenly on seeing Jancy,
who sat at the table white and stunned, but no one
approached her until Rusty and her faithful friends
came running in. Rusty took one look at Jancy’s
face and knew the worst had happened, and glaring
savagely at the rest of the girls, she, Pam, Frances,
Shirley and Jill led Jancy out.
In the grounds Jancy related what Yvonne
had told her with dry eyes and an expressionless
voice.
‘‘l suppose it’s true about my Father, isn’t it?”
She looked at Rusty with desperate pleading eyes
that begged her to deny it, and Rusty, who would
have given anything she possessed to say it was a lie,
had to confess it was the truth. ‘“But,” she added,
“there may be a mistake somewhere; we’ll ask
Daddy when we get home; he’ll tell us the truth.”


But Jancy refused to be comforted. “Whether
it s the truth or not, most of the girls believe it, and,
besides, Yvonne said I take after him because of
what happened at the river.” Jill squeezed her
shoulder.
“Buck up, old girl, things are as black as
they look, and, anyway, you’ve got us.”
“Yes, I’ve got you.” Jancy looked at them
gratefully. “But I don’t want to make things awk-
ward for you with the other girls.”
“We’re not interested in them after the way
they’ve behaved,” said Pam firmly, “and we’re quite
happy on our own.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
After dinner that night Jancy and Rusty, de-
termined to solve their problem, followed Captain
and Mrs. Richmond into the sitting-room.
“Daddy, we would like to talk to you and
Mummy seriously, please.”
Captain Richmond smiled over his newspaper
at his daughter’s unusually grave face.
“What is it, dear?” Rusty did not waste time.
“Well. some of the girls at school have found
out about Jancys Father and told her.” Captain
Richmond dropped his paper and looked at his wife
in utter consternation. “What we want to know is,”
Rusty went on, “is it true?”
Captain Richmond folded his paper carefully
and placed it on the table.
“Come here, Jancy.” He put a protective arm
around her and drew her against his knee. “No, it’s
not true. Not to his friends, anyhow. I went to
school with your Father, Jancy, and I’ve known him
all his life, and a straighter boy or man I never knew.
Maybe he did what he was accused of, but I’m con-
vinced that some day there will be a reasonable
explanation for it. Even if he does not return him-
self —and I’m afraid we’ve got to face that, dear—
I’m sure that his name will be cleared when we’ve
thrown the Japs out of Malaya and the full story of
the war there is told. Until then he will want all the
friends he can get, and the only way we can help is
to keep on believing in him despite what newspapers
or anyone else says. That’s what friends are for, and
I hope, Jancy, you’ll be a true one to your Father.”


Jancy looked at him with shining eyes.
“Oh, I will; I will. I don’t care what anyone
says about him.”
“No, me either,” said Rusty sturdily but un-
grammatically. “Of course they’ve dragged up that
business about Jancy not saving my life at the river,
too, and really it seemed so awful to-day there didn’t
seem any way out. But I knew you’d fix it, Daddy.
I knew.” And she gave her Father a hug round the
neck which was painful in its intensity. When he
could manage to speak he said:
“Try not to take any notice of the girls and
their foolishness. I’m sure you’ve both got your
own friends at school and the others are not worth
bothering about. It’ll be difficult, no doubt, but
you’ll both be able to show the stuff you’re made of
by believing in something that the thoughtless
majority have condemned, and that, my dears, is
what is called moral courage, which is a far harder
thing to attain than mere physical bravery.”
Thus comforted, the two girls ran off with
lighter hearts.
“You’re quite right, of course, lan,” said Mrs.
Richmond when they had gone, “but I’m afraid it’s
going to be hard on the poor little things at school.
Luckily they are not boarders and can come home
to a little peace at night.”
Her husband nodded.
“Still, it’ll bring the best out of them, and as
I’ve given them the satisfaction of knowing they’re
standing up to something worth while, that should
help them overcome the unkindness of the other
girls.”
Mrs. Richmond put down her knitting.


“I had a letter from Mother this morning and
she wants to come down for a while.”
“Good.” Captain Richmond was fond of his
mother-in-law.
‘‘But the trouble is she’s arriving to-morrow
afternoon by car. The Whatmores are bringing her
on their way to Sydney, and it’s Friday, you know,
and Marie Ellis will be here in the evening. And
how I’m going to tell Jancy on top of all this other
business 1 don’t know.”
‘‘Oh, lord, I’d forgotten Miss Ellis was coming.
Blow it!” He picked up his pipe and stuffed it with
tobacco crossly. ‘‘l suppose we’d better tell Jancy
and get it over with; she might as well have it all at
once as separately.”
Mrs. Richmond nodded as the door opened and
Penelope came in.
‘‘Hello, dear. Rusty’s just been telling us about
the upset at school.”
Penelope stared at her. ‘‘She told you!”
‘ Yes, dear. Why not. We were the right
people to come to. Both she and Jancy wanted to
know if it was true.”
‘‘And is it, Mother?”
‘‘Your Father will tell you.” Penelope turned
to him and briefly he repeated what he had said to
Rusty and Jancy, adding that he hoped that she
would be as loyal as they to the ideals of friendship.
“I will, Father,” she said seriously. ‘‘l never
realised that girls could be so cruel until this hap-
pened. They almost seemed to enjoy it.”
“Yes, it’s an unfortunate trait in human
nature, Penelope,” said her Father, “and I’m glad


you’ve intelligence enough to recognise it and re-
ject it. Now I’m afraid we’ve got some more bad
news for Jancy, so if you would go and fetch her,
dear, we’ll get it over with.”
‘‘Oh, Father, what is it now?”
‘‘Just that Miss Ellis is coming to stay and will
arrive to-morrow night.”
‘‘What on earth is she coming here for?” Pene-
lope’s eyes opened wide.
‘‘l really don’t know,” said her Father. ‘‘We’re
as much in the dark as you are.”
‘‘What a blow!” said Penelope, going to the
door. ‘‘l’ve pnly seen her once, but that was more
than enough.” And she went in search of Jancy,
who, on being told that Mrs. Richmond wanted her,
ran straight to the sitting-room. When she came in,
Mrs. Richmond said;
‘‘l’m afraid I’ve got some news for you, Jancy.
Your Aunt Marie is coming down and arrives here
to-morrow night for dinner.”
Jancy’s face was a study. ‘‘Aunt Marie!”
‘‘Yes, I don’t know how long she is staying,
probably only for the week-end. Don’t look so up-
set, child. She can’t hurt you.” Mrs. Richmond
smiled. ‘‘You’re a member of our family now, you
know. Now off you go to bed and tell Rusty
Granny’s coming to stay to-morrow too.”
Jancy pulled herself together and managed a
smile. “All right, I’ll tell her; Rusty’ll be glad.”
And she went away.
‘‘You know,” said Mrs. Richmond to her hus-
band, ‘‘it’s going to be funny with Mother and Marie.
Mother was the only one who could cope with Marie
when she was a girl, she was so wild and impulsive,
you know. I think she was fond of Mother though,


or at least respected her. I know when she and
Brenda used to stay with us Marie always behaved
herself.”
Captain Richmond laughed and shook his
head. "I can’t imagine that frigid woman as a wild
and impulsive girl.”
“But it’s true,” insisted Mrs. Richmond. “She
was very lovely to look at too.”
‘‘What happened to change her like that,
then?”
‘‘l don’t know. Mother does, I think, but she’s
never said, and I was too young to be told at the
time. It should make quite an interesting story
though.” She gathered her knitting together and
rolled it up. ‘‘Well, I think I’ll go to bed. Don’t sit
up too late will you, dear?”
Jancy got through the next day at school with
comparative ease, for she still found her friends an
adequate protection from the coldness of the other
girls, except in class where she was likely to be
seated among a group of enemies, but as they did
not speak to her their silence was not hard to bear,
and apart from the rather forbidding prospect of her
Aunt’s arrival she found herself with nothing much
to worry about.
By the time the girls reached home that after-
noon Mrs. Mansfield had arrived, and they were
allowed to go and say hello to her in the sitting-room
where she was resting. She greeted Rusty, for whom
she had a distinct partiality, with much affection,
and kissed Jancy fondly.
‘ Sit down there, dears. I’m so glad to see you.
Lying here as if I were an invalid makes me im-
patient. I think your Mother is under the impression
I’m on my last legs. But I’m not, as you can see.”


And to prove it she waved a pair of tiny feet adorned
with frivolous slippers under their nose 3.
“Now, if you’d only go and fetch Judy and
Dumps I’d be very happy.’’
When the babies had been brought she sighed
with satisfaction, gazing down fondly at Dumps,
who, seated on the floor, was carefully pulling
feathers out of her fluffy slippers. Judy had climbed
up beside her on the chesterfield and was obviously
making preparations for a nice nap.
“No you don’t, young lady. I won’t have
people sleeping on me." She sat Judy on her knee.
“Now tell me all the news.”
There was so much news that the girls instinc-
tively knew it was impossible to tell her, that they
stood tongue-tied for a moment and then Judy filled
the gap.
“Mummy gone and got married to a sholder,”
she said with her sweet complacent smile, “and Miss
Mary fell over.”
Mrs. Mansfield looked at her with complete be-
wilderment, and the two girls burst out laughing.
“What does all that mean?”
Rusty, glad of something to talk about, ex-
plained how Miss Mary had got married and why
Judy had got things all confused. Mrs. Mansfield
was much amused by the story of Rusty’s fall on
the verandah and Judy’s belief that it was all part
of the wedding ceremony.
“She’s not far wrong though,” she said. “Why,
when I was married the best man, who was in love
with a girl in the congregation, couldn’t take his
eyes off her, and, tripping over a hassock near the
altar, fell flat on his face. It was as much as I could


do to get through the service respectably.’’ She
giggled reminiscently. “I remember your Grand-
father and I enjoyed it very much afterwards.”
Here there was a rattle of cups in the hall out-
side and Elsie brought in the tea.
“How are you, Elsie,” said Mrs. Mansfield;
“bursting with good health I see.” Elsie smiled and,
taking the things off the tray, placed them on a small
table.
“Yes, though it’s a wonder I’m not run off my
legs with such a houseful of children.”
“Oh, they’re lovely,” said Mrs. Mansfield re-
proachfully. “They couldn’t help it, being my
grandchildren.”
“They’re njot bad, really,” Elsie admitted,
“only you mustn’t tell them so too often.” She
picked up the tray. “Mrs. Richmond will be here in
a few minutes, but she said if you want your tea to
start.”
When she had gone Mrs. Mansfield looked at
the massive silver teapot. “Well, I’m not going to
sprain my wrist lifting that thing,” she said. The
door opened and Mrs. Richmond and Penelope came
in, and after kissing her granddaughter, Mrs. Mans-
field returned to her grievance.
“I can’t think why you use this awful tea ser-
vice, Lesley. I’ve always hated it, that’s why I gave
it to you. Now why don’t you get some nice delicate
china like mine?”
“Yes, and have it in pieces over the house in
no time,” laughed Mrs. Richmond. “No, Mother,
I’ll stick to the silver. It bends, but it doesn’t break.”
“I suppose you’re right, and, after all, it was
my Mother’s, although I’m old enough now to ques-
tion her taste.” Mrs. Mansfield sipped her tea and


bestowed bread and butter and cake lavishly on the
children. Dumps dropped hers butter side down on
the carpet, and, after several attempts to pry it loose,
gave up the struggle and banged it in instead.
‘You naughty little girl,’’ said Mrs. Richmond,
scooping her up. “I’ve a good mind to slap you.’’
Judy relieved herself of the usual formula.
“I aren’t naughty, are I, Rusty? I don’t get
slapped, do I?’’
Mrs. Mansfield gave her a comical look. “Self-
righteous little horror,’’ she said.
“Oh, don’t take any notice, Granny,” said
Rusty. “She sometimes is naughty and gets slapped
hard.”
Judy’s face fell at this and her bottom lip began
to tremble ominously, but Rusty stemmed the
imminent tears by enveloping her in a pair of loving
arms.
“I didn’t mean it, pet,” she said penitently. “I
was only teasing.”
Peace thus restored, everyone proceeded with
their tea until Mrs. Richmond mentioned that Miss
Ellis was coming for the week-end. Mrs. Mansfield
raised enquiring eyebrows. “Miss Ellis, Lesley?”
“Oh, you know, Mother, Jancy’s Aunt.
“Oh, Marie Ellis. Good heavens, I haven’t seen
her for years. What is she coming down here for?
To see Jancy?”
“She didn’t say, Mother.”
“I do hate people who don’t give details,” said
Mrs; Mansfield impatiently. “But then she was
always a feather-headed girl.”
Jancy stared. The epithet “feather-headed”
seemed fantastic when applied to the woman she


knew, and although she would like to have heard
more about this strange youthful Aunt Marie, a
paralysing shyness prevented her from asking.
Luckily Penelope’s curiosity had been stimulated
too.
“What was she like when she was young,
Grannie,” she asked Mrs. Mansfield. “She’s almost
inhuman now, like an iceberg or something.”
“What was she like?” Mrs. Mansfield con-
sidered a moment. “Well, she was a bit like Jancine
to look at but stronger, and she was incurably
moody. One day up in the clouds and the next day
down in the depths. She was charming really, in a
stormy sort of way, and very different to her sister
Brenda, who was as gentle and even tempered as
Marie was lively and unpredictable. She was much
older than Brenda and adored her, protecting her
more like a brother than a sister.”
“Do you remember, Mother,” said Mrs. Rich-
mond, “when she blacked that Ryan boy’s eye for
teasing Brenda?”
“And serve him right,” said Mrs. Mansfield.
“He was a very nasty little boy, and now he’s a
politician 1 believe, and I expect just as nasty.”
Here Elsie opened the door. “Miss Ellis has
arrived, Mrs. Richmond; she’s just getting out of
the car.”
“Thank you, Elsie.” Mrs. Richmond stood up.
“Anyone want to come with me?”
No one answered, and then Jancy, thinking of
the spirited girl she had just heard about, felt a
sudden sympathy towards her Aunt, and said: “Yes,
I’ll come, Aunt Lesley.”
“That’s a nice girl.” Mrs. Richmond took her
hand warmly. “Come along, we’ll leave these lazy
bones here.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Captain Richmond was getting out of the car
when his wife and Jancy walked out on the
verandah.
“Here we are,” he cried. “Just give a hand
with these rugs, will you, Jancy?”
Jancy went down to the car. “Hello, Aunt
Marie,” she said, and raised her face to receive a cold
peck.
“Hello, Jancy; just take this small case and a
rug, will you?” Jancy took them and disappeared
into the house.
“How are you, Marie?” said Mrs. Richmond
as Miss Ellis came up the steps. “ You must be cold.”
“No, not really, I was quite warmly wrapped.”
“Well, come in and have some tea. Put the bags
in the side spare room, lan, will you, dear?” she
called over her shoulder. “We ll go into the sitting-
room.”
It was warm and cosy inside after the cold air
outside, and Miss Ellis was obviously very surprised
to see Mrs. Mansfield sitting in the centre of the
group of children. Something almost approaching
animation touched her face as she took the old lady’s
hand.
“It is nice to see you again after all these years,
Mrs. Mansfield,” she said warmly. Mrs. Mansfield
looked at her keenly.
“You’ve changed a lot,” she said accusingly.
“You look ten years older than you should. What
have you been doing with yourself?”


Miss Ellis became her calm cold self again.
“It’s not what I’ve done; it’s what life’s done
to me.”
“Fiddlesticks!” exclaimed Mrs. Mansfield.
“It’s what you’ve allowed life to do to you. Russel,
go and tell Elsie we want some hot water, please.”
Rusty departed.
“And have you been behaving yourself,
Jancy?” said Miss Ellis, her voice implying that her
niece probably had not.
Mrs. Mansfield answered for Jancy.
“Of course she’s been behaving herself. What
a question to put to the child. Hasn’t she, Lesley?”
Mrs. Richmond smiled placidly.
“She’s been very good, and we all love having
her here I assure you, Marie; there’s no need to
worry.”
“Why should there be?” enquired Mrs. Mans-
field irately. “She’s a nice child, and even if she
weren’t she soon would be in Lesley’s house.”
Here, Mrs. Richmond, thinking that the con-
versation was becoming unsuitable for children’s
ears, told them all to go and play on the verandah,
They ran off happily, particularly Jancy, who now
realised that as long as Mrs. Mansfield was in the
house Miss Ellis’ weapon of cold disapproval would
be powerless against her.
When the children had gone there was an awk-
ward silence until Captain Richmond came in for
his tea and, taking the cup his wife had poured out
for him, sat down.
‘Mind if I smoke, Mother?”
“Course not, dear; it’s your house and, any-
way, I love the smell.”


Captain Richmond lit up and puffed a few
clouds of smoke towards the ceiling. “Have a good
trip, Miss Ellis?”
“Oh, yes, quite good, except for a lot of soldier
hooligans on the train who enjoyed themselves at
everyone else’s expense. I think they should have
special trains for troops instead of forcing them on
civilian passengers.”
“God bless my soul,” Mrs, Mansfield ex-
claimed. “Do you mean to say you grudge those
boys a little fun when they are off duty?” She got
up irritably. “You’ve changed all right, Marie Ellis.
I remember the day when you misbehaved yourself
on a train, and it was no worse than what those boys
did to-day, I’ll warrant.”
Mrs. Mansfield left the room and Miss Ellis
face turned a painful red.
“Really, I don’t know what I’ve done to upset
your Mother,” she said, and added rather pathetic-
ally, “she used to quite like me, you know.”
“Yes, she was always fond of you, Marie,”
Mrs. Richmond agreed. “Don’t take any notice
though, I think she’s a bit tired after her long trip;
she’ll be all right to-morrow. And now would you
like me to show you to your room? You probably
would like a bath after that filthy journey.”
When his wife returned Captain Richmond was
grinning widely.
“Well, the old lady put her in her place, didn’t
she?”
“Oh, lan, I think she went a bit too far, don’t
you? After all, she’s a woman, and Mother
treated her just as though she were a child, and in
front of the children too.”


“And a good thing,” said Captain Richmond
unsympathetically; “it will make Jancy realise that
her Aunt is just as vulnerable as other people and
can be hurt equally as much. By the way, has she
mentioned yet why she came?”
“No, only that she’d like to speak to Jancy
alone after dinner, so I told her she could come in
here.”
Captain Richmond frowned. “I wonder what
she is going to say to the child. If she makes her un-
happy again, by heaven, I’ll . . .”
“Oh, I’m sure it’ll be all right,” Mrs. Richmond
interrupted. “I’m sure she wouldn’t dare do any-
thing while Mother is here.”
Captain Richmond relaxed.
“That old lady’s worth her weight in gold.”
He chuckled to himself and drank a second cup of
tea.
Meanwhile, on the verandah, Rusty and Jancy
had set up Peter’s Hornby train and were having
an exciting time lying flat on the floor watching the
small engine leave the station and career round the
track and under tunnels made of books propped on
top of one another. Judy soon became rather bored
with this, for despite her lazy nature she liked the
life about her to be full of action, and presently she
said to Rusty urgently:
“Make a cwash, Rusty; make a cwash.”
“She always wants me to make the train have
an accident,” Rusty explained to Jancy; “she likes
the noise. Not just yet, pet,” she went on to Judy;
“I will soon.”
Dumps, who all this while had been sitting
watching the speeding engine with fascinated eyes


that blinked every time it passed by her, got un-
steadily to her feet unseen by Rusty and, stagger-
ing the two steps to the railway, wavered to and fro
for a moment and then sat down neatly on the
station.
There was a mixed chorus of screams; one of
joy from Judy, who had at last got her “cwash”; of
agony from Rusty at the damage; of surprise from
Jancy; and of triumph from Dumps, who thought
she must have been very clever to merit such a loud
appreciation from her audience.
“Oh, gosh!” said Rusty hopelessly. “Peter’ll
kill me for this. He said I wasn’t to play with his
train if he wasn’t here. What’ll I do?’’
“We can buy another,’’ said Jancy comfort-
ingly. t
“We can’t, with the war on; they don’t make
them any more. Oh, dear, I’ll have to tell Mummy.’’
Dumps, oblivious of the trouble she had caused
her adoring sister, still sat where she was shouting
and crowing happily, but presently, finding the
wreck beneath her a little uncomfortable, she re-
moved her chubby body, leaving Judy sitting on her
haunches crooning contentedly over the lovely
damage. At this moment Captain Richmond
walked on to the verandah, and seeing Rusty’s de-
jected face, inquired the reason. She pointed word-
lessly to the wrecked station.
“Dumps did it,’’ said Jancy; “she sat on it.
Captain Richmond concealed a smile.
“Not a modest maiden, our Dumps; let’s have
a look.” He picked up the flattened station and
examined it. “Oh, I think that can be fixed.”
Rusty’s face brightened.


“Do you think so, Daddy. How?”
“I ll just straighten out the pieces and solder
them together again, and then give it a coat of paint.
It’ll be almost as good as new.”
Rusty was very much relieved.
“Thank heaven. Peter wouldn’t half have gone
off pop.”
“You’ll have to tell him,” said her Father.
“He’ll know it’s been used, and I don’t think you’d
better touch it again.”
“All right, Daddy,” said Rusty obediently.
“Do you think you could do it before he comes home
for the holidays? It’s only a few weeks, you know.”
“I think so. And you’d better put it away
now. I’ve got to tak6 the babies for their bath.
Come on, little uns.” He took an infant under each
arm and sauntered off.
As they were putting the train away Jancy
said:
“I tell you what we could do to make up for
breaking it. We could advertise in the paper ask-
ing if anyone has Hornby trucks or carriages for
sale.”
Rusty was much cheered by this excellent idea,
and they spent the next half-hour concocting an
advertisement for Captain Richmond to put in the
paper on Monday morning.
“There,” said Rusty when it was finished.
“That should bring something.” She read out:
“ ‘Anyone wishing to sell Hornby trucks or car-
riages, telephone Kuruna 76.’ It seems a bit short,
doesn’t it?” And licking the pencil gravely, she put
in the word “please” between carriages and tele-
phone. “There, that’ll do. Our paper covers a very


big district, so I shouldn’t be surprised if we get
dozens of answers. Come on, and we ll show
Daddy.’’
Captain Richmond thought the advertisement
a very ingenious idea, and agreed to deliver it first
thing on Monday morning, and having thus done all
they could to repair the damage, Rusty and Jancy
sensibly forgot the whole thing and went in to dinner,
to find the diminutive figure of Mrs. Mansfield sit-
ting alone at the dining-room table.
“Badly run household this,” she said tartly.
“Here it is after seven o’clock and no dinner, and I’m
hungry. Your Grandfather would have never sur-
vived if I hadn’t had his dinner on the table at seven
sharp.” And having delivered herself of this com-
plaint she went on: “And what have you two been
doing since I saw you last?”
Rusty related the sad story of the railway
accident, and Mrs. Mansfield laughed.
“I’ve sat down on many a railway station in
my life, but not quite in the same way.”
The girls were much amused at this gentle joke
and retailed it to the others as they came in. Pene-
lope and Miss Ellis were the last to arrive, which
earned them a look of disapproval from Mrs. Mans-
field, but presently, somewhat mollified by Elsie’s
excellent soup, she started a lively conversation,
and the dinner drew pleasantly enough to its close.
When Elsie came in to clear the table, Mrs.
Mansfield said:
“You’re as good a cook as ever, Elsie. But
you’ll have to train this family to sit down prompt
at seven. They come in like Brown’s cows.”


“I’ve stopped trying, Ma’am,” said Elsie with a
smile. “Perhaps you might manage it while you’re
here.”
“I’m getting too old to train people, Elsie.”
Mrs. Mansfield rose to her feet. “And as long as I
had you, Lesley, I never managed to get you to
dinner on time.”
“Well, I always think, Mother, that it’s silly
to be a slave to the clock, so I’ve spent my life trying
to ignore it.”
“And you’ve succeeded. I really don’t blame
you.” Mrs. Mansfield patted her daughter’s hand.
“Horrible things, clocks. They remind me of my
age.”
When Mrs. Richmond had settled her Mother
comfortably in the study, she told Jancy that her
Aunt wanted to see her in the sitting-room. Jancy’s
heart sank as she walked down the hall, but when
she reached the door she pulled herself together and,
ashamed of her weakness, knocked boldly on the
door and walked in. Miss Ellis, who was sitting near
the fire, motioned her to a chair.
“Sit down, Jancy.” There was a brief silence,
and then Miss Ellis went on. “Jancy, I’ve come
down here for a reason. You may know what it is;
I think you do, but I’d better tell you. At Urellen
there was a very valuable trinket that was missing
after you left. I don’t know if you took it absent-
mindedly and without knowledge of its worth; I
hope for your sake you did, but I’d like you to give
it back straight away. I’ve told no one of this, not
even Dinah, so you’re quite safe. Now will you
please go and get it for me?”
Jancy looked at her Aunt in open-mouthed
astonishment, that should have convinced Miss


Ellis of her innocence had she seen it, but that lady
had averted her face from her niece distastefully,
and only heard her say:
“I’m afraid I don’t know what you’re talking
about, Aunt Marie.’’
“I think you do, Jancy,” answered Miss Ellis,
in a weary voice. “The necklace.’’
“Oh, the necklace!” Light broke on Jancy.
“Why, yes, I found it in my trunk.”
Miss Ellis raised her hand. \
“Don’t lie, Jancy. Just go and get it.”
“All right, but I’m not lying.” Jancy left the
room to come bursting in a few minutes later with
a face the colour of paper.
“It’s not there, Aunt Marie! It’s not there.”
“What!” Miss Ellis rose to her full height.
She looked terrifying. “You little thief,” she said
in an ugly voice. “You miserable little thief.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
“Aunt Marie!” Jancy’s voice caught on a
frightened sob. “What are you saying?” But at
the menacing look on her Aunt’s face she involun-
tarily stepped back a pace.
“Go away,” said Miss Ellis in a choked voice.
“Go away. I don’t want to have to look at you.”
Jancy hesitated for a moment, bewildered, and
then rushed blindly from the room and on to the
verandah. She felt sick with shock, and trembled
violently. Only one clear impression remained from
the horrible interview, and that was that her Aunt
thought she had stolen the necklace. Jancy knew
there was no sense in trying to deny it, for her Aunt
would not believe her, and feeling completely unable
to face the Richmonds in the circumstances, she un-
dressed with fingers that shook so much they could
hardly manipulate the buttons, and, getting into
bed, turned her unhappy face to the wall.
Later, when Rusty came to find her, she pre-
tended to be asleep, and later still, when everyone
had gone to bed, she sat up in the darkness and
threw off the covers, thankful for the cool air on her
feverish limbs.
What could she do? What could she do? The
question went round and round in her mind until she
felt she would go mad, and then suddenly she remem-
bered the five pounds in the wallet her Aunt had
given her and her heart leapt into her throat. Five
pounds! It was an enormous sum. It could work
miracles. It could, for instance, take her far away
from Kuruna Beach and Aunt Marie’s terrifying


presence. It might even get her to Melbourne,
)vhere she could go to her Mother and unburden ht.
troubles; and at this thrilling thought Jancy’s resolu-
tion hardened and she made up her mind to run
away.
The relief that came with this decision almost
soothed her into sleep, but she fought the drowsi-
ness through the dark hours by pinching herself
hard and, at the first feeble light of day, she slid noise-
lessly from her bed and, going to the dressing-room,
dressed and packed a tiny case with pyjamas and a
toothbrush. Then taking the wallet from the back
of the drawer she folded it and put it in her topcoat
pocket and looked round to see if she had forgotten
anything. There was some paper and a pencil on the
dressing table and on an impulse she seized it and
wrote:
“Dear Rusty.
“I’ve got to go away because something awful
has happened that I can’t tell you about here. Tell
Aunt Lesley I’m sorry to have to do this, but I’ve
got to. I don’t want to go because I love you all so
much, but I’ve got to.
“Your loving friend, Jancy.”
After placing this rather incoherent note on the
dressing table where Rusty would see it, she picked
up her case and, going quietly to the end of the
verandah, let herself out of the door.
It was still fairly dark, but the bush was be-
ginning to stir with life, and a dawn wind sighed in
the tops of the tall gums as she walked down the hill
towards the main road.
When she reached it she turned her face reso-
lutely south, and with a sad heart at leaving the
Richmonds but a glad one at the prospect of seeing


her Mother, she set out with a firm step along the
long red road.
She had walked for almost an hour without see-
ing a soul when the noise of a lorry coming behind
her made her turj&, and before she realised what she
had done she held up her hand. With a squeal of
brakes the lorry pulled up beside her and a head
poked out of the driver s cabin.
“Want a lift?”
“Yes, please.”
“Hop in then.” The door opened and closed
behind her and she found herself sitting beside a
man in a torn pullover and a cap with bits of cob-
web floating from it.
“Going far?” He started the motor and the
lorry roared off.
“No,” said Jancy, “only to Burraboo
“Just down the line a bit, eh?”
“Yes.” Jancy avoided his eyes and watched
the road fixedly.
“Good, I’ll drop you there.” He looked at her
curiously.
“Thank you very much.” Jancy s heart
fluttered in case he might guess her secret, and
desperation lent power to her imagination. “I have
to do some shopping and then I’m going to the pic-
tures with a friend of mine,” she explained.
“Oh.” He grinned at her. “Well, it’s none o’
my business. How old are you?”
“Twelve,” replied Jancy.
“I’ve got a little girl at home just your age.
She’s going to High School next year.”
“That’s nice,” said Jancy politely. “Does she
like the idea?”


“No, I can’t say as she does, but she’s got to be
educated. You ain’t got no chance in this world if
you ain t educated. Look at me." Jancy looked at
him. I never ad no education; wagged it from
school when I was sent, an’ all that sort o’ thing.
It s no good; no good at all.’’ He ruminated sadly
on this for some time and they sat in silence while
the miles flew by until he said:
We 11 be gettin’ to Burraboo in a few minutes.
I always have breakfast there Saturday mornin’s.”
“Oh,’’ said Jancy. “Do you come this way
every week?’’
“Yes, I’m up and down this line every other
day. I m a long-distance carrier, see? But I like to
make an early start Saturdays so’s I can have a long
week-end at home.’’ He paused. “Would you like
to join me for breakfast?”
“Oh, yes, thank you,” said Jancy, who was
feeling very hungry and rather nervous at the pro-
spect of eating alone in a strange place. “It would
be very kind of you.”
He pulled up at a little shop on the outskirts of
the town.
“Here we are. Down you get.”
Jancy followed him inside where he banged on
the counter and then sat down at a table, telling
Jancy to do the same. Presently a tall plump girl
came in.
Hello,, Bill, she said. “Bright and early this
morning.” She caught sight of Jancy. “I see you
got a friend.”
“Yes, and she’s hungry. What you got, Lily?”
“Well, there’s eggs and bacon or steak and
chops.”


“What’d you like, girly?” asked Jancys new-
found friend.
“Bacon and eggs, please.”
“And steak and eggs for me. Hurry it, will you
Lil?” he added. “I’m late.”
“I might if you’re good.” And Lily, with an
arch look disappeared through the door.
“You’d better tell me your name, girly. Mine’s
Bill Byrne.”
“Mine’s Jancy . . .” She hesitated, but Mr.
Byrne affected not to notice it.
“That’s a pretty name. Very pretty
“What’s your little girl’s name, Mr. Byrne?”
“Pearl. Do you like that?”
This reply unfortunately reminded Jancy of
her troubles, but she managed a show of enthusiasm.
“Yes, very much. Have you any other chil-
dren?”
“There’s six altogether, but Pearl’s the
youngest, an’ she’s been a bit spoilt, I’m afraid.”
They chatted on for some time until Lily
brought their breakfasts.
“There you are.” She slammed down the plates
heartily. “An’ here’s a glass of milk for the little
girl.”
“Thank you very much,” said Jancy grate-
fully, and drank it straight off. “I was so thirsty.”
“Like another?”
“Yes, please, if it’s not too much bother.”
“No bother,” Lily assured her. “We got it laid
on out the back,” and with a grin at Mr. Byrne she
went to get it.


Jancy felt better after breakfast and watched
Mr. Byrne make and light a cigarette interestedly.
“Well, Jancy, this is where we part,” he said
abruptly.
Jancy, momentarily forgetting her circum-
stances, was surprised.
“Why?”
“Well, you’re staying in Burraboo to shop and
go to the pictures with a friend, aren’t you?” he
said teasingly.
Jancy’s eyes fell.
“You didn’t really expect me to believe that,
did you, girly? You’re running away, aren’t you?”
Jancy nodded miserably. “I suppose you’ll
send me back?”
“No.” Mr. Byrne rose. “It ain’t none o’ my
business as I said before. But might I ask where
you’re headin’ for?”
“Melbourne,” said Jancy.
He whistled. “That’s a long way
“Yes, but I’ll get there. I’ve got my own
money.”
“What do you want to go there for, of all
places?”
“I want my Mother,” said Jancy, very near to
tears.
“Now don’t spill ’em,” said Mr. Byrne. “Cryin’
never does no good. Look here, how would you like
to come on with me for a bit and we’ll talk it over?”
“All right,” said Jancy, cheered at the thought
of hot losing her friend after all. “I’ll do that.”
Back in the lorry, with the red road spinning
beneath them, Mr. Byrne said kindly:


“Now what’s it all about? Come on, get it off
your chest.” And thankfully Jancy poured out all
her troubles.
She told him her name first and then of her
Mother and Father, Aunt Marie, the Richmonds,
especially Rusty, her disgrace at school, and, lastly,
the necklace.
“Phew!” he exclaimed when she had finished.
That s a lot o’ trouble for a little un like you. I
don’t wonder you tried to leave it behind.”
“ You see, I can’t go back. Aunt Marie wouldn’t
believe me, and the Richmonds will think I’m a
thief.” Her voice broke.
“Now then,” warned Mr. Byrne, “I won’t
have no water-works. Dry up. You can’t think
when you’re cryin’, and this needs thinkin’ about.”
And Mr. Byrne proceeded to think about it at some
length, while Jancy, worn out by lack of sleep and
emotion, fell asleep on the seat beside him.
When she woke up the afternoon was well ad-
vanced, and she found that Mr. Byrne had put his
coat over her for warmth.
“Goodness, what time is it?” she asked in
alarm.
“Oh, you come too, did you? You had a nice
sleep?”
“Yes, thank you; it’s awfully late, isn’t it?
Where are we?”
“We’re nearly home, my girl, an’ I think you’d
better come there with me.”
“But . . . but . . . what about me going to
Melbourne?”


“I think you’d be wiser to sleep on that. It’s a
long way y’know.” And Jancy, rather fearful of
continuing her journey alone with night approach-
ing, gladly yielded to Mr. Byrne’s superior wisdom,
and allowed him to take her home.
There was no one in the yard of the Jittle cot-
tage as he drove in, but when the lorry stopped a girl
of Jancy’s age ran out and, climbing on the running-
board, looked into the cab. Her eyes flew open on
seeing Jancy, and she looked questioningly at her
Father.
“This is Jancy Mitford, Pearl. She’s staying
the night. Say hello to her.’’
“Hello,’’ Pearl said shyly. “You’d better come
in.” She opened the door and Jancy stepped down
as a motherly-looking woman appeared. “Why,
who’s this, Pearl?” she asked.
“Dad says it’s Jancy Mitford, and she’s staying
the night.”
“I’m very pleased to meet you, Jancy,” smiled
Mrs. Byrne. “Well, don’t stand there, Pearl, take
her inside to the warmth. I’ll be back soon.’ ’ And
Mrs, Byrne went to find her husband, who was in
the garage.
“Who’s the little girl, Bill?” she asked, after he
had kissed her. “I never know what you’ll come
home with next.”
“You can pick up almost anything on a car-
rier’s run, Jenny,” grinned her husband; “but this is
a bit different.” He gave his wife a brief outline of
the trouble that had forced Jancy into flight.
“Poor little thing.” Mrs. Byrne’s motherly
heart overflowed with sympathy. “And she’s had
no lunch, you say? I’d better go and get the dinner


then. And, hurry Bill, the boys will be home soon.”
She bustled off and Mr. Byrne, after putting the
lorry in the garage, followed her.
Inside the kitchen was warm and cosy, and
Jancy was sitting comfortably at the side of the fuel
stove while Pearl laid the table and an older girl
mashed potatoes energetically.
“You’d better get washed, Dad,” she said. “I
think I hear the boys now.” As she spoke the door
opened and the biggest young men Jancy had ever
seen walked in.
“Hello, Mum. What’s for dinner?” they said,
and, as they discovered Jancy, “we got an addition
to the family, eh?”
“Father brought her home,” explained Mrs.
Byrne; “her name’s Jancy Mitford.”
“Where did he find her?”
“That’ll do. Go and get washed. You’re not
fit to meet a lady as it is.” And with a grin they
did as they were told.
“How many brothers have you got?” Jancy
asked Pearl.
“Four. Two of them are at the war, but those
two are twins and not old enough for the army yet,
so they work in munitions.”
“Aren’t they big?” said Jancy admiringly.
“Yes.” Pearl was very proud of her brothers.
“They’re just about the biggest men in this town, I
reckon.”
“They must be; I couldn’t imagine anyone
bigger,” replied Jancy, and endeared herself to Pearl
for life.


When the boys and Mr. Byrne returned they
all sat down to dinner, and Jancy was introduced
to Bruce and Barry. It was a very enjoyable meal
to which they all did full justice, and it was enlivened
by plenty of laughter and good-natured chaff in
which Jancy was included as a matter of course.
Ethel, the elder girl, came in for most of her brothers’
teasing, being unfortunate enough to have just
acquired a young man whom her brothers accused
of being attracted to the house solely by their
Mother’s cooking. She took it all very cheerfully,
countering with an attack on Barry’s incipient
moustache, which was of rather feeble growth; and
altogether it was one of the most happy times Jancy
had spent and, forgetting her troubles for the
moment, she enjoyed it to the full.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
When Rusty woke on the morning of Jancy’s
flight, the first thing she noticed was the empty bed.
Thinking Jancy was in the bathroom she waited for
her to come back, but as time went by and she did
not put in an appearance, Rusty went to look for her.
The house was silent, no one being awake except
Elsie, who was in the kitchen.
“Have you seen Jancy?’’ Rusty put her head
round the door. “I can’t find her.”
“Pr’aps she’s in the garden,’’ said Elsie. Rusty
nodded.
“I’ll go and See.”
But on returning to the dressing-room for her
clothes she went over to the dressing table to comb
her hair and found the note.
“Oh, lord!’’ She snatched the paper up and
flew to her Mother’s room. “Mummy, wake up!
Do wake up! Jancy’s gone!’’ Mrs. Richmond sat
up drowsily.
“What is it, dear?’’ Rusty pushed the note
into her hands impatiently. “Jancy’s gone and left
this note.’’
“Oh, dear!” said Mrs. Richmond blankly when
she had read it. “Now what’s made her do that?”
“Something that old Miss Ellis said to her, I’ll
bet,” said Rusty fiercely. “I knew there was some-
thing wrong with her last night, going to bed so
early without a word to anyone.”
“Go and call your Father. I’ll get dressed
straight away. You’d better call everyone else too,
except Granny. We’d better not worry her; and
tell them all to go to the sitting-room.”


Rusty went on her errand with alacrity; she
was furious with Miss Ellis and had a few words of
her own to say to her. So, knocking on her door
last, she opened it and delivered herself of her
Mother’s message, before adding: “And it’s all your
fault. You hate Jancy, don’t you? Well, I hope
you’re satisfied now you’ve driven her away. You
cruel thing.” And without waiting for any more
she slammed the door behind her and ran down the
hall into the sitting-room to wait for the others.
She was still fuming when Penelope walked in,
closely followed by Mrs. Mansfield.
“What’s all the running about been going on
for this morning?” asked the old lady testily.
“There’s been enough noise to wake the dead.”
“Jancy’s missing,” said Rusty, “and it’s all
that old Miss Ellis’ fault, and I told her so.”
“Has she really run away?” asked Penelope
anxiously.
“Bless my soul, didn’t you hear the child say
so?” Mrs. Mansfield sat down in the sun on the
window seat. “A nice state of affairs, I must say.”
Here Miss Ellis entered in an obvious state of con-
cern.
“What’s this about Jancy, Mrs. Mansfield?
Rusty just told me, and I must say she was un-
necessarily rude about it.”
Mrs. Mansfield looked at her contemptuously.
“Sit down and keep quiet; you seem to have
done enough damage with your tongue already.”
At this uncompromising reception Miss Ellis
collapsed limply into a chair, and trying to ignore
the fear that was growing within her, sat silent with-
out looking at anybody until Captain and Mrs. Rich-
mond came in.
“Ah, you’re here too, Mother,” said Captain
Richmond. “Did the disturbance wake you up?”


“Of course it did, and I’d have been very
annoyed if it hadn’t. I don’t like missing things.’’
“Well, let’s discuss this business. There’s no
time to lose. Jancy’s gone, and the first thing to do
is work out which way she’s taken. We have no idea
of the time she left, but I think it was probably early.
If so, she’s got a good start on us as it’s now fifteen
minutes to nine. She won’t have got far if she’s
walking, and she will be, as she’s got no money
Rusty interrupted. “Oh, yes, she has got
money; she’s got five pounds. I saw them.”
“In that case she’d probably go for the train.
It’d be easy enough to get a lift into town from the
main road. So the best thing to do is to get the police
on to the job, and we ll search the bush around here
in case she hasn’t got that far. Now I’ll ring the
police and we’ll have breakfast, and after that every-
one will take a section of bush and search as far as
they can during the morning. By the way, Miss
Ellis, was there anything in the conversation you
had with Jancy last night that might lead her to do
a thing like this?”
“Yes,” Miss Ellis said coldly, stifling a faint
discomfort at the look in Captain Richmond’s eyes.
“I think she was ashamed to face you all this morn-
ing.”
Indeed, and why?”
“I was trying to keep this unfortunate business
quiet, but I see now that I’ll have to tell you. I came
down here this week-end, Captain Richmond, to ask
Jancy to return the pearl necklace she took from
Urellen.”
“Miss Ellis! Please think what you’re saying.”
“It’s the truth, she practically admitted it when
I faced her with it, but on going to fetch it she came
back with some improbable story about it not being
there. I suppose she’s either lost it or . . .”


“Please don’t go any further, Miss Ellis. Was
the necklace valuable?”
“Very valuable; that’s why it was taken.”
“If you seriously mean me to believe that Jancy
stole it for its value,” said Captain Richmond with
deadly quietness, “I’m afraid I’ll be compelled to
question your sanity. It takes an expert to recognise
real pearls.” He paused a moment. “Isn’t your dis-
like of Jancy leading you into rather fantastic
imaginings, Miss Ellis?”
She got to her feet indignantly.
“I won’t stay here and be insulted, Captain
Richmond.”
The Captain stood up with ironical courtesy.
“Then we ll excuse you with pleasure, Miss Ellis,”
he said.
She swept out of the room under the incredu-
lous eyes of the stunned Richmond family.
“Sphaw! The woman’s crazy,” said Mrs. Mans-
field, who was the first to regain her powers of
speech. “I never heard such rubbish in my life. As
if the child would know they were valuable!”
“There’s probably some quite simple explana-
tion of it,” said Captain Richmond. “Let’s not think
about it. I’d better go and ring the police.” He left
the room.
Miss Ellis was not present at breakfast, and
after Captain Richmond had assigned them each a
section of bush to search, the talk reverted to the
extraordinary scene in the sitting-room.
“I can’t understand it,” said Mrs. Richmond,
“that Marie could have such an active hate of her
own niece; it’s unbelievable.”
“Oh, not it’s not,” said Mrs. Mansfield; “she’s
always hated her; she hates her Father too.”
“Why, Mother? How do you know?”


“I know because I watched the whole thing
happen. She adored Brenda, and after her own
engagement fell through she clung even more to
her until her life was completely absorbed in look-
ing after the much younger sister. Then Jancy’s
Father came along and Brenda fell in love. Marie
tried to stop it every way she knew, but Robert was
a very determined man, and in the face of Marie s
frenzied opposition he carried Brenda off and mar-
ried her. Marie never forgave him, and she hates
Jancy because she’s the child of that marriage.’’
“Poor warped creature,’’ said Mrs, Richmond;
“she must have been terribly unhappy.’’
“No more unhappy than Jancy is at this
moment, I’ll warrant, and hadn’t we better get on
and look for the child? We’re wasting time.’’
Everyone sprang into action at this reminder
and, leaving Mrs. Mansfield to answer the telephone,
tramped off into the bush. They searched all morn-
ing unavailingly, and returned to the house at lunch
time tired and dispirited. Mrs. Mansfield said that
the police had rung to say that no one of Jancy s
description had been seen at the station, but in-
quiries were still going on and they hoped to have
something to report soon. On being told that the
family was out searching also, they suggested that
it might be better to leave everything to them, as
they had zoned the district and were doing the thing
scientifically.
Tired as they were, the forced inaction of the
afternoon was hard to bear, and they all roamed aim-
lessly about the house unable to set their minds to
anything. All, that is, except Miss Ellis, who re-
mained alone in her room all day until at four o’clock
Mrs. Richmond took her a cup of tea.


“I don’t want to intrude, Marie,” she said, “but
you must be frozen sitting here. Why don’t you
come out to the fire?”
To her surprise, Miss Ellis said passionately:
“Sit down and talk to me, Lesley. I must talk
to someone or I’ll go mad,” Her hands worked con-
vulsively in her lap. “I’ve been thinking about what
your husband said this morning and I’ve come to the
conclusion that he’s right. I must be insane.”
“Marie, dear!” Mrs. Richmond was overcome
at the thought of Miss Ellis having spent the day in
such dreadful contemplation. “Don’t say things
like that.” She put a warm hand over the cold ones
in Miss Ellis’ lap.
“Oh, Lesley, I don’t know what to do.” And
suddenly the proud, cold Miss Ellis lowered her head
and cried bitter, difficult tears on Mrs. Richmond’s
shoulder. After some time she recovered herself
and managed a wan smile.
“I’m sorry, Lesley, but it’s done me good. It
was probably mostly self-pity. I felt to-day that I’ve
been my own worst enemy. I’ve driven everyone I
loved from me. I loved John and drove him away
because he came back maimed from a war and I
couldn’t face marrying him. I loved Brenda and
drove her away because she dared to love someone
else besides me, and now I’ve driven Jancy away,
and heaven knows where she is or what’s happened
to her. What can I do, Lesley, to bring her back?”
Miss Ellis gazed at Mrs. Richmond desperately.
“Nothing, I’m afraid, dear. We re doing every-
thing that’s humanly possible. Nothing more can
be done.”
“I know,” said Miss Ellis miserably, “but it’s
so hard sitting here waiting, knowing that if Jancy
isn’t found, or anything’s happened to her, I’ve got


to go and tell Brenda that she’s lost her daughter as
well as her husband, and that it’s my fault.”
‘‘Now, Marie,” said Mrs. Richmond sensibly,
“you’re just exaggerating. I’m convinced that
Jancy’s all right and that she’ll be found before long.
You’ve let yourself get depressed sitting here alone,
that’s the trouble. There’ll be plenty of time when
Jancy returns for you to make things up to her.”
She rose to her feet purposefully. ‘‘l think the best
thing you can do now is come and help me in the
kitchen; it’ll take your mind off it. Elsie s got a bad
headache and I’m in need of assistance. Will you do
that?”
‘‘Yes, I’d like to.” Miss Ellis looked up grate-
fully. ‘‘You’ re so kind, Lesley, you always were.
And thanks so much for listening to me.”
Mrs. Richmond kissed her.
“Don’t worry any more, Marie. Everything
will be all right. Now I’ll leave you to bathe your
eyes and tidy up. Come out when youTe ready.”
Rusty’s surprise on seeing Miss Ellis in the
kitchen looking almost human was unbounded, and
she could not reach Mrs. Mansfield quickly enough
to tell her.
“Gran,” she said excitedly, ‘‘Miss Ellis is in the
kitchen helping Mummy with the dinner, and I even
saw her smile.”
‘‘Really? Well, that’s a miracle. And don’t
call me Gran, Russel, it’s undignified.”
‘‘Aren’t you surprised?” Rusty, was disap-
pointed.
‘‘Not much,” Mrs. Mansfield said comfortably.
“She’s come round a little sooner than I expected,
that’s all.”
“But she didn’t care about Jancy this morning
a bit.”


“She did really, but she wasn’t going to show
it, *’ said Mrs. Mansfield. “She’s had time to think
since then.”
At dinner everyone found Miss Ellis much the
same, for the habit of years cannot be broken in a
few hours, but although she spoke very little her
manner was less unbending, and she cleared away
after the meal and washed up with a very good
grace.
No further communications were received from
the police until just before Rusty went to bed, and
Captain Richmond, after answering the telephone,
said that they had searched exhaustively between
Kuruna beach and the township without finding a
trace of Jancy, and they had come to the conclusion
that she must have been picked up very early in the
morning by a vehicle on the road.
“I expect she has,” said Mrs. Mansfield. “After
all, the child’s got brains and must have realised that
we’d inquire at the station first, so she’s probably
got a lift down the line to a station where she wasn’t
known.”
“Yes, I thought of that and asked the police,”
said Captain Richmond, “but they’d already in-
quired and no one like Jancy has bought a ticket
to-day anywhere down the line.”
“The trouble is,” put in Miss Ellis, “that we
have no real idea of the time she left here. It would
help a lot if we knew that.”
“Well,” said Rusty, “if I was running away
I’d go at the crack of dawn and I’d walk to the main
road and ‘thumb’ a ride.”
“And what? Rusty!” said her Mother, shocked
out of her pre-occupation about Jancy by hei
daughter’s colourful language.


‘Tm sorry, Mummy. Anyway, I’d do that,”
she continued, “and I d go as far as the man would
take me and then I’d”—she looked at her Mother
warily— er —cadge another ride, and so on. Cos
you see it wouldn’t cost anything, and I’d save my
money.”
‘‘Of course.” Captain Richmond beamed at his
daughter admiringly. “Then if she’s done that she’ll
be picked up. She’s got to go through a town sooner
or later and the police are watching the traffic.”
“And of course she might have stopped for
something to eat and fell asleep in the bush along the
road afterwards, cos she’d be pretty tired after get-
ting up so early, and I don’t suppose she slept much
last night, poor kid.”
Miss Ellis reddened at this tactless reference to
her talk with Jancy, but Captain Richmond covered
it as hastily as possible.
“Well, there you are,” he said, “every eventu-
ality has been thought of, and I shouldn’t be sur-
prised if we have some good news in the morning.”
And, heartened by her Father’s optimism, Rusty,
after saying good-night, retired to bed.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
Jancy spent a very comfortable night at the
Byrne s and was woken at six by Mrs. Byrne for
breakfast. Only she and Mr. Byrne were up when
Jancy went out to the kitchen, and when they had
finished their meal, he said:
“Now you and me’s goin’ to have a little talk,
Jancy, about this trip to Melbourne.”
“Yes, Mr. Byrne.” Jancy looked at him expect-
antly.
“Well, this is my opinion. You’ve run away,
haven’t you?” Jancy nodded. “But,” he paused,
“I don’t suppose you’ve thought for a minute about
the distress of those you’ve left behind: that kind
Mrs. Richmond and Rusty and the Captain, have
you?”
Jancy confessed rather shamefacedly that she
had not.
t
“Well, think about ’em now, because I’ve no
doubt they’re thinkin’ about you and breakin’ their
hearts wondering what’s happened to you.”
This had not occurred to Jancy before.
“Oh, do you think so, Mr. Byrne?” she asked
unhappily.
“I’m positive, an’, what’s more, with friends
like them behind you I wonder you worried about
what your Aunt said. They would have got to the
bottom of it sooner or later for you. And, remem-
ber, Jancy, an innocent person mustn’t run away
because it makes ’em look guilty. Now you know
what I’d do if I was in your shoes? I’d go back, and
I’d explain about the necklace to Captain Rich-


mond and then let him fix it, which I’m sure he would
in no time. Yes, I’d go back an’ face the music like
a man.”
‘‘l was selfish, wasn’t I, Mr. Byrne?” Jancy
hung her head. “And I’m going to take your ad-
vice.” She raised her eyes in sudden determination.
‘‘l’ll go this morning. Can I get a train?”
‘ You needn’t worry about a train, Jancy, I’ll
take you home.”
‘‘But it’s Sunday, your week-end off,” protested
Jancy.
‘‘One day either way won’t matter; I’ve got to
go to-morrow in any case.”
‘‘l’m sorry to be such a nuisance,” said Jancy
guiltily.
‘‘Don’t worry about that. Think how happy
them Richmonds will be to see you.”
‘‘Yes, won’t they.” Jancy suddenly felt very
happy. ‘‘Oh, Mr. Byrne, you are kind,” she said,
uncertain how to express her gratitude, and wishing
she had the courage to give him one of Rusty’s bear-
hugs.
‘‘That’s all right. Now off you go and get
ready. I’ve got to be away in ten minutes to pick
up a load.”
In the yard, waiting for Mr. Byrne to get the
lorry out of the garage, she said to Mrs. Byrne:
‘‘Thank you very much for having me and
being so kind.”
“It’s been a pleasure,” smiled that lady. “I
hope we ll see you again some day.” She helped
Jancy up into the cab. “Hurry and get her home,
Bill, won’t you?”
He nodded. “Trust me!”
“I do.” She waved good-bye and they moved
off.


Mr. Byrne, after stopping at a big depot in the
town, dropped the load he had brought down the
previous day and picked up one of kerosene, and
within half an hour they were out on the main road
and had begun the long journey home.
“We won’t stop for lunch,” said Mr. Byrne;
“my wife packed a few sandwiches, and we’ll eat
them on the way so’s you’ll get home sooner.”
Jancy nodded. “I hope 1 haven’t worried Aunt
Lesley and the others too much by doing this, Mr.
Byrne. I’d rather die than cause them any trouble.”
“I know you would. You just didn’t think of
their attitude, that’s all. We’re all the same when
our skins are in danger; we ain’t got no time to think
of anybody but ourselves. You ain’t no different
to anyone else, Jancy. We’re a poor lot. I knew a
bloke in the last war as I’d have staked my life on,
but when we was in a particular bad spot one day he
tried to save his life at my expense. Funny thing
was that I came out of it without a scratch an’ he got
killed, poor fella. So you see, it’s like I say—we’re
all tarred with the same brush an’ there’s nothin’ to
pick between us.”
“Were you wounded in the last war, Mr.
Byrne?”
“Oh, yes, I got a bit of a scratch. Like to hear
about it?”
Jancy said she would very much, and for an
hour or two listened interestedly to her 'friend’s war
experiences, by which time they had begun to feel
hungry.
“I think we ll have that snack now,” said Mr.
Byrne. “You can undo it. It’s on the seat.”
Jancy found that Mr. Byrne’s “snack” was a
huge parcel containing bread and butter, cold meat,
tomatoes, cheese and celery, besides two huge slices


of cake and a thermos full of tea. They both enjoyed
the meal very much, and Jancy, soothed by the
motion of the car, went to sleep for a while after-
wards. When she woke up they were passing the
shop where they had. eaten breakfast the previous
morning, and Lily was standing in the door talking
to a friend. Jancy waved to her, but she was too
immersed in conversation to notice it.
“Never knew such a girl for gossiping,” said
Mr. Byrne. “Stand and talk all day, she would.
Still, I spose there’s not much else for her to do.”
He looked at the clock on the dashboard. “Half-past
four; we’ve made good time. I’ll soon have you
home, Jancy.”
The early winter night was setting in as they
skirted the town where Jancy had gone to the pic-
tures with the Richmonds, and it was almost dark
when they passed the school and began to draw near
Kuruna Bay.
“We shan’t be long now,” said Mr. Byrne
cheerily, and speeded up just as another truck came
hurtling towards them on its wrong side round a
bend.
Jancy never really saw what happened, as with
a terrific crash the two lorries met head on and she
was thrown to the floor, where she lay stunned for
some time before dazedly opening the door and
staggering out on to the road.
The darkness, lit with lurid flames, danced
foggily before her eyes for a few minutes and then
as her brain cleared she realised with horror that the
lorry, laden with kerosene, was on fire. Panic-
stricken, she watched the flames lick up the side of
the cabin from which she had just emerged and travel
down to one of the kerosene containers that had
fallen from the lorry and lay burst open on the road.


With a roar it sprang into flame and, momentarily
stampeded with terror, she cried frantically: “Mr.
Byrne! Mr. Byrne!” But there was no answer and,
with the sudden realisation that everything now
depended on her, Jancy lost her terror and began to
try to cope with the situation. Seeing that it was
impossible to negotiate the door on her side, she ran
round to the other. It was also burning, but not
quite so fiercely, and with a super-human effort she
wrenched it open.
Mr. Byrne lay over the steering wheel limp and
unconscious, and the floor beneath him was ablaze.
“Mr. Byrne! Mr. Byrne!” Jancy shook him desper-
ately, but seeing it was no use, and uncertain
whether the kerosene would explode, she did not try
to rouse him further, but oblivious of the fire on her
hands, disentangled his feet from the gears and tried
to pull him out. He hardly moved at the first tug,
but by now the fire was raging up the side of the
door and, desperation lending her strength, Jancy
gave a tremendous heave and he slid slowly down
on to the running-board and from there on to the
ground. By the time she had pulled him to the side
of the road farthest from the lorry, and propped him
safely behind the biggest tree she could find, Jancy
was sobbing with exhaustion, but realising that the
man in the other lorry must be hurt too, she
staggered over to it and found he had been thrown
clear and was lying in the road. He, too, she
dragged into the bush and propped against a tree
before resting wearily for a moment, and then set-
ting off in the direction of the Richmond’s home for
help.
Badly burned, and in intense pain, she seemed
to have walked a hundred miles before she heard the
clop of a horse’s hooves on the road coming towards
her, and with a hoarse shout she ran unsteadily to


meet it. The horseman, barely able to discern the
small figure in the gloom, dismounted.
“What’ s wrong?” he asked, but Jancy, unable
Xo answer, just held out her poor burnt hands
pathetically, and, exhausted, slid to the ground.
The man picked up the limp figure gently and,
realising that the Richmond s was the nearest place
for miles, rode headlong back to it with his piteous
burden.
Everyone in the Richmond household heard
the heavy steps cross the verandah but were not pre-
pared for the unusually violent ring at the bell.
Mrs. Richmond went to answer it and on opening
the door gave a cry of distress that brought the whole
family running.
“Move away, Madam,” said the man
brusquely. “Where shall I put her?”
“In here. In here.” Followed by the family,
the man strode with a slight limp into the sitting-
room and laid his burden down on the chesterfield.
“You’d better ring a doctor; she’s badly
burned.”
“Straight away.” Captain Richmond ran to the
telephone.
Mrs. Richmond was kneeling at Jancy’s side
lifting the hair from the blackened face and ex-
claiming pityingly at the burnt hands.
Rusty burst into tears.
“Is she dead, Mummy?”
“No, dear. Badly hurt though, I think. I won-
der what happened. Still, it’s no good worrying
about that; I’d better get her into bed.”
“I wouldn’t touch her if I were you,” said the
man. “The doctor should see her first. Those burns
want expert attention.” He turned away and, Miss


Ellis, who had been standing miserably watching
Jancy, moved aside for him to pass.
“Marie!” he said in complete astonishment.
She stared at him blankly, and then suddenly
her eyes shone with unbelievable happiness.
“John!”
They drew apart while the rest, unaware of
their meeting, crowded round Jancy, who presently
rolled her head back and forth and opened her eyes
dully.
“Darling,” said Mrs. Richmond, “how do you
feel?”
Slowly the dullness gave way to recognition
and then to anxiety, and she tried to get up.
“Lie still, darling,” said Mrs. Richmond, gently
pressing her back against the cushions. “Every-
thing’s all right. You’re home now.”
“But Mr. Byrne. What about Mr. Byrne?”
Jancy began to cry weakly.
“Who, dear?”
“There’s been a terrible accident down the
road. I came for help. They’re both badly hurt.”
“What’s that?” Captain Richmond came for-
ward and his wife repeated what Jancy had said.
“I’ll ring the ambulance.” He went away.
“There, don’t worry, dear. Uncle lan’s rung
the ambulance; they’ll be looked after.”
“I put them behind trees at the side of the
road. Tell Uncle lan; tell him quick! They won’t
find them.”
Mrs. Richmond privately thought that Jancy
was delirious, but in order to pacify her, she sent
Penelope out with the message to her Father which
he delivered.
“I wonder how she came to be in an accident,”
said Captain Richmond when he returned.


“We d better not question her now, lan, we ll
have to wait for details. I do wish that doctor would
come.”
“He shouldn’t be long now,” said her husband.
“111 go and see if I can see his headlights.”
Fifteen minutes later he returned with the
doctor, who said the ambulance had reached the in-
jured men as soon as he, and had raced back to town
with them. “I told them,” he added, “to be ready in
case I ’phoned them to come back here for this young
lady. Burns are usually a hospital case. Now will
everybody except Mrs. Richmond leave the room,
please.”
The family filed out, accompanied by Miss
Ellis and the strange man. In the hall she touched
Captain Richmond’s sleeve.
“I’ve made a wonderful discovery, lan. I want
you to meet John Butler.”
“What!” Mrs. Mansfield turned an astonished
face. “Not the John Butler you were once engaged
to?” She looked at the bearded stranger. “Well,
I’d never have recognised you under all that hair.”
Rusty, who until now had been too occupied
to notice what was going on about her, said: “Why!
It’s the hermit!”
Mr. Butler smiled. “Is that what you call me?”
“Yes. You know, Daddy, the man that lives in
the little house up on the hill.”
“Of course I know. I think we could all have
a drink on this, Butler, don’t you?”
“I’d be glad to join you, Captain.”
“Come along then.” They all trailed into the
study, except Rusty and Penelope, who went to
acquaint Elsie of the evening’s events. When the
drinks were poured, Mrs. Mansfield said:


“Well, here’s to you two, and I hope you have
enough sense to remedy now the mistake you made
years ago.’’
They all drank heartily to this toast, and Mr.
Butler covered Miss Ellis’ blushes by remarking on
the odd coincidence of their meeting. This led to
much discussion and explanation, and they were still
sitting there talking when the doctor came out of the
sitting-room. Captain Richmond went to him to ask
news of Jancy.
“She’ll be all right,’’ said the doctor. “But
she’ll have to go to hospital, burns must have regular
dressings. There’s no bones broken however, and
with good nursing she should be on her feet in
a few weeks. Now would you mind ringing the
ambulance, Captain Richmond? I’ve got to get
back to another case. I’ve put temporary dressings
on and she should be fairly comfortable for the time
being.’’
The Captain saw the doctor off before ringing
the ambulance, who said they would be straight out,
and then went in to Jancy. She was practically
covered in bandages, but one eye peeped out in-
domitably at Captain Richmond.
“I’m what Judy would call a wounded sholder
now, aren’t I, Uncle lan?’’ she said, speaking with
difficulty owing to her injured face.
“You are,’’ he answered, smiling at her. “How
do you feel now, Jancy?’’
“Not too bad; a bit sore.”
“Well, don’t talk too much or Aunt Lesley will
be scolding me.
“Indeed I will,” threatened Mrs. Richmond.
“She’s got to be kept quiet. You’d better tell the
others not to come in just now. They can see her
before she leaves for the hospital.”


When the ambulance arrived everybody said
good-bye, and with Jancy comfortably settled inside
and the doors closed, one of the ambulance men
stood chatting for a while to the family.
“I would never have believed it if I hadn’t
seen it with my own eyes,” he said admiringly.
“That little bit of a girl must have dragged those
men clear across the road, burnt and all as she was.
Gamest thing I ever heard of. I suppose she wasn’t
sure whether kerosene was as explosive as petrol, so
she put them behind a tree in case the lorry blew
9 9
up.
“She said something about putting them be-
hind a tree, but I thought she was delirious,” said
Mrs. Richmond.
“Not her. She put ’em behind a tree all right,
although one poor fellow named Darby could have
been left where he was. He died before we got him
to the hospital. Still that doesn’t detract from what
she did. I can’t get over it. She’s a nine days’
wonder, that little girl. Well, we’d better be getting
her back to the hospital now. Good-night, Captain.
Good-night, Mrs. Richmond.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
When they got back inside everyone gathered
round the fire discussing the accident and how Jancy
came to be in it. “We won’t know till she’s able to
tell us, so we ll have to possess our souls in patience,”
said Captain Richmond, “but it seems as if we’ve
got a heroine on our hands.”
Rusty glowed with pride.
“Yes, and they said at school she was a coward.
Just wait till to-morrow.” Her eyes sparkled at the
thought of the just revenge she would have on
Jancy’s behalf. “I’ll make them eat their words.”
Everybody laughed, and her Mother told her
to go and see if Elsie wanted any help in the kitchen,
and, if so, to lend a hand.
Mr. Butler stayed to dinner, and the transfor-
mation in him and Miss Ellis was so astonishing that
Rusty could hardly keep her eyes off them during
the meal. Mr. Butler’s gruff unfriendliness had dis-
appeared to be replaced by a genial good humour,
and Miss Ellis laughed like a girl and looked almost
as pretty. Bursting to find out the reason for this
metamorphosis, Rusty cornered her Granny in the
study afterwards and demanded an explanation.
“It’s like this, dear,” smiled Mrs. Mansfield.
“Many years ago Miss Ellis and John Butler
were engaged, and he went to the war. Unfortu-
nately he was wounded in the leg, and when he came
back Miss Ellis and he quarrelled, whether it was
over that or not I don’t know. In any case, they
parted, and since then, from what I heard this after-
noon, have led very unhappy lives.”


“Oh, Granny, do you think they’ll get mar-
ried ? asked Rusty, excited at the thought of another
wedding.
Mrs. Mansfield smiled at her impetuosity.
s “That remains to be seen. But I think they’ve
both realised they made a mistake and I expect now
they’ve met that they won’t be able to continue the
lonely lives they were living before. They’re fools
if they do. Yes, I wouldn’t be surprised if they make
a match of it. But,’’ she added warningly, “remem-
ber, this is just between you and me, Russel, so don’t
mention it to anyone else.’’
“I won’t, Granny,’’ said Rusty, delighted at
having a secret. “But can’t I just tell Jancy to-mor-
row when I visit her? She’ll be so glad.’’
All right, but not another soul, and warn her
to keep quiet about it.”
“Yes,” promised Rusty, and went on: “I’ve
just remembered something, Granny. Jancy told
me she went up to his house when we had the
measles and he was very kind to her until she men-
tioned Urellen and then he looked awful and asked
her to go. We were very puzzled about it at the time,
but this explains it, doesn’t it?”
“Yes, I suppose it reminded him,” said Mrs.
Mansfield. “Poor man, he must have been very
lonely all these years.”
“Yes, Miss Ellis too. I bet if any man I was en-
gaged to got wounded at the war 1 wouldn’t be silly
like her. I’d just run him off to church with his one
leg and marry him,” said Rusty recklessly.
Mrs. Mansfield looked at her amusedly.
“You know, Russel, I really believe you
would.”
The next day the whole family, laden with fruit
and flowers, went in to the hospital to see Jancy.


“Not that there’s much of you to see,” said
Rusty to the bandaged figure on the bed.
Jancy gave an involuntary smile that made
tears come into her eyes. “Don’t make me laugh,
Rusty,” she said indistinctly through the bandages;
“it hurts.”
“Oh, Jancy, I’m sorry.” Rusty was all peni-
tence. “I do wish you could tell us all about what
happened though, I’m dying to know. I’ve got
plenty to tell you, too.”
“Aunt Lesley,” said Jancy slowly,” would you
go and find out how Mr. Byrne is, please ? I’d like to
know.”
“Yes, dear. We’d better all go I think now.
I’ll just leave Rusty with you till I come back.”
“Goody,” said Rusty, when they had gone.
“I’ve got something to tell you.” And she launched
into the wonderful story of Miss Ellis and Mr.
Butler.
Jancy’s eyes shone happily when she had
finished. “And what about the necklace? Did it
turn, up?” she asked.
“No, nobody’s had time to think about it yet.
I expect it’ll come to light soon though.”
“I hope so. I found it in the pocket of that
trunk and thought it was my Mother’s and Aunt
Marie had sent it.”
Jancy took a long time to say all this, and Rusty
replied soothingly: “I knew something like that had
happened. Now don’t talk any more and I’ll read
to you.” 1
Presently Mrs. Richmond came back from see-
ing Mr. Byrne and reported that he had a broken
arm, fractured ribs and a few burns, and, although
very ill and unable to talk at the moment, was ex-
pected to improve soon. She chatted for a while and


then, seeing that Jancy.was tired, suggested they
should go and leave her to rest.
“Come soon,” she said, and Rusty promised
that she and Penelope would take the bus in after
school every afternoon and let their Father pick
them up at the hospital.
When she got home Rusty told Miss Ellis and
her Mother what Jancy had said about the necklace.
“So you see, Miss Ellis,” she added, “she didn’t steal
it at all; it must have got in somehow when you
were packing.”
“Yes, Rusty, it must,” said Miss Ellis in a
muffled voice.
“We won’t worry about it any more, Rusty,”
put in her Mother, “at present, anyway. Jancy can
look through her things when she gets home. It’s
probably there somewhere.”
The next day at school Rusty and Penelope
were besieged by the girls who had heard about the
accident but were hungry for details. Without much
urging Rusty gave an impressive account of Jancy s
bravery and a vivid description of her condition
when she reached the house after rescuing the two
men. The story lost nothing in the telling, and was
generously sprinkled with sarcastic asides designed
for the misguided wretches who had followed
Yvonne’s lead the previous week. This generous pro-
paganda soon bore fruit, and before the morning was
out, Jancy had deposed Miss Mary as heroine of the
school, and the girls who had been the first to de-
nounce her became the most voluble in her praise.
Yvonne soon found herself without supporters, and
Penelope, who had cooled off after her attack on
Jancy, now showed a decided preference for her
room rather than her company. Such a state of


affairs was very irksome to Yvonne, but realising she
would only get herself even more disliked by re-
maining aloof, she fell in line with the rest of the
school and became equally, if not more, fulsome in
her admiration than they.
This about-face sickened Rusty more than any-
thing else Yvonne had done.
“Really, Pen,” she said on the way to the hos-
pital that afternoon, “I don’t know how you could
ever have bothered with that rotten hypocrite; she’s
worse even than I thought.”
“Yes, I was a fool,” said Penelope humbly. “I
suppose I was taken in by her sophistication, and
the rest were a bit stuffy, so I stuck to her.”
“But she’s such an awful liar. I can’t imagine
you swallowing it.”
“Well, I don’t any more,” said Penelope
brusquely, a bit sore at this criticism by a younger
sister.
“No, and a good thing too,” returned Rusty,
unaware of having said the wrong thing.
“I hope Jancy’s better to-day.” Penelope
changed the subject. “I asked the nurse, and she said
the face burns won’t take long to heal.”
“I’m dying for her to be able to talk. I want to
know what happened.”
“Well, don’t ask her to-day. Mother said we
weren’t to stay long the first few days.”
“Of course I won’t ask her,” said Rusty in-
dignant at this attack on her commonsense. “You
don’t need to tell me that.”
By the end of two weeks Jancy’s face was much
improved.
“Now vou can tell us,” gloated Rusty, “at last!”


“All right.” Jancy smiled. “Nurse says my
hands will take a long time though. I suppose my
music will go to pot.” She looked a bit downcast.
“Of course it won’t,” said Penelope cheerfully.
“I believe they use the piano now to train the burnt
hands of injured airmen back to normal.”
Jancy brightened. “And they’re much worse
than me, aren’t they?”
“I should say they are,” said Rusty, and then
switched to the subject uppermost in her mind.
“Now, Jancy, what about the story? Come on, tell
us, and begin right at the beginning where you left
the house.”
Rusty settled herself comfortably and fixed her
eyes on Jancy, who, with a little embarrassed laugh,
began her tale.
When she came to the accident she found that
she could remember very little of it; just a confused
impression of fire, pain and fear.
“And I don’t wonder, after what you did,” said
Penelope. “What a bit of luck Mr. Butler happened
to be on the road. You would never have got home
in the state you were.”
“Oh, you did look awful, Jan,” said Rusty; “all
black and dirty and bleeding. I thought you were
dead.”
“Well, I’m alive and kicking now,” said Jancy.
“But not too hard,” remarked a voice at the
door, and they turned to see a nurse wagging her
finger at them warningly. “Come along; time to
• 9
go-
“Can I just nip in and see Mr. Byrne for a
minute?” begged Rusty. “I’ve got some flowers for
him and a custard.”
Well, just a minute, no longer. Hurry, now


They said good-bye to Jancy and Rusty “nipped
in” to Mr. Byrne in a ward lower down.
“Hello, there,” he grinned at her.
“Hello, Mr. Byrne, how are you to-day?”
“Middlin’, Rusty, middlin’. But middlin’s half-
way you know, so that’s not so bad, is it?”
“No, I think it’s wonderful.”
“How’s my girl, to-day? Is she looking
better?”
“Yes, miles. Her face is almost right and her
hands are coming on beautifully.”
“That’s good,” said Mr. Byrne heartily. “My
wife’s coming up to see me to-morrow. She hasn’t
been able to see Jancy before when she was so ill,
but I expect she’ll go in to-morrow and thank her
for stoppin’ me from being fried the other night.”
“Oh, goody,” said Rusty, and then catching
sight of the nurse at the door, “I’ve got to go now.
There’s some flowers and a custard Mother sent.
I’ll put them on your locker.”
“Your Mother’s been a wonder to me, Rusty.
Tell her thanks very much.”
“Righto. Good-bye,” said Rusty hastily, and
with a wave was gone.
When Mrs. Byrne arrived at the hospital the
following day Mrs. Richmond was there to meet
her.
“Rusty told me that Mr. Byrne said you were
coming up to-day, Mrs. Byrne, so I came in to thank
you for being so kind to Jancy.”
“Kind, Mrs. Richmond? Why, I could never
be kind enough to repay that child for what she’s
done. I don’t know what would have happened to
my Bill if she hadn’t been there. And you, Mrs.
Richmond, how good you’ve been to him. You’ve


looked after him as well as I could myself. I don’t
know how to thank you.”
“Then don’t.” Mrs. Richmond put a gentle
hand on her arm. ‘ I’ve done no more than you
would have done for my husband in similar circum-
stances. You’re so far away you see.”
Mrs. Byrne pressed the hand on her arm word-
lessly.
“Now I’m going to see Jancy for awhile, but
I’d like to come and see Mr. Byrne after you’ve had
some time together. May I?”
“We ll be waiting for you,” said Mrs. Byrne,
and went into her husband’s ward.
When Mrs. Richmond got to Jancys room that
young lady, looking very pretty in a pink bed-jacket,
was sitting up in a wheel chair with her bandaged
hands folded in front of her.
‘‘Look, Aunt Lesley, I’m up! Isn't it marvel-
lous?”
It is, dear.” Mrs. Richmond kissed her.
‘‘And you know what ? I’m going to be allowed
to have afternoon tea with you and Mr. Byrne.
That’s why I’m in a wheel chair, so they can wheel
me round.”
‘‘That’s lovely,” beamed Mrs. Richmond.
‘‘Now I think I’ll read to you a bit, shall I? It’ll help
pass the time till tea.”
‘‘Oh, yes, please. Read ‘David,’ Aunt Lesley,
will you?”
So Mrs. Richmond read David Copperfield until
the nurse came to wheel Jancy along to Mr. Byrne’s
ward. Jancy looked anxiously round all the faces
as she entered until she came to Mr. Byrne, who was
propped up in bed looking excessively clean, and
quite unfamiliar, in blue-and-white striped pyjamas.


Mr. Byrne, look, I’m here!” she shouted, for-
getting where she was.
Mr. Byrne s face broke into one big smile.
“Well, here’ s my girl. How are you, Jancy?”
"I'm fine, are you?”
“Nearly as good as ever.” They both laughed
delightedly, and Mrs. Byrne and Mrs. Richmond
joined in.
“Isn’t it a lovely party?” Jancy said excitedly.
* I rn so glad you’re here, Mrs. Byrne; that just
makes it perfect.”
Here the nurse brought the tea and thought-
fully put screens around the bed for their benefit
and that of the other patients, and after telling them
not to make too much noise, went away and left
them to enjoy themselves.
It was a quietly hilarious little tea party, if
there can be such a thing, and at the end of it Mr.
Byrne brought out the local newspaper from under
his pillow and, unfolding it, passed it to Jancy.
“How do you like that, young lady?” he said.
And Jancy, to her complete confusion, read a
huge headline: “Twelve-year-old Girl’s Amazing
Feat of Bravery,” and went on to scan a very
flowery account of the accident and her part in it.
“There, that’ll do you for your scrap book. You
can show it to your grandchildren,” said Mr. Byrne.
Jancy blushed, not knowing what to say.
“He’s only teasing, dear,” said Mrs. Byrne.
“But you’d like to keep it, wouldn’t you?”
“Yes. please,” said Jancy, “if I may.’
“Of course you may, and now drink up your
tea, because I think I hear nurse coming to shoo us
all out.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
Rusty missed Jancy terribly while she was in
hospital, and when her Mother told her that her
friend would be home at the end of the week her joy
knew no bounds.
“This is Tuesday, so there’s only Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday and she’ll be here on Saturday.
Isn’t it lovely, Mummy? Wait till I tell the girls at
school.”
She passed the news round as soon as she
arrived at school on the following morning.
“Oh, I am glad,” said Pam. “Do you think
Frances, Jill, Shirley and I could come out to see her
for a little while on Sunday?”
“Oh, yes,” agreed Rusty. “That would make
a sort of welcome home party,” and, thrilled at this
prospective pleasure, they went into school.
As the last girl left the grounds the big entrance
gates opened slowly to admit a little wizened man
in a battered felt hat. He hesitated a moment, peer-
ing towards the front windows, and then went round
to the side and knocked on Miss Grey’s door. It was
opened by the Headmistress herself, who inquired
his business.
“My name’s Rosenbaum, and I would like to
see you privately for a few minutes, Miss Grey,” he
said. “I won’t keep you long, but it’s important.”
“Very well, will you come in?” She took him
into her sitting-room. “Sit down, please.”
He sat down, balancing his hat on one knee,
and, fumbling in his pocket, brought out a jewel case
and opened it to display the pearl necklace.


“It’s like this, Miss Grey. A few weeks ago a
girl wearing your school uniform brought this neck-
lace into me to be mended. She obviously didn’t
know its worth and seemed very nervous. She told
me her Mother had lent it to her. I told her I
wouldn’t be able to mend it for three or four weeks
at which she looked very disappointed, but said that
would do, and went away. When the third week
came round she was in after it and went into a regu-
lar tantrum when I said it wasn’t done, and then
looked frightened as if she’d given herself away.
That was three weeks ago, and she hasn’t been back
since. The whole thing looked very fishy to me at
the start, but when she didn’t come back for it again
I decided there must be something wrong, so I’ve
brought it to you. I thought you’d know best what
to do with it.”
“What was the name of the girl who brought
it to you, Mr. Rosenbaum?’’ asked Miss Grey. “I
suppose you gave her a receipt slip?’’
“Yes, I did. The name was Pullet,’’ said Mr.
Rosenbaum, making a pardonable mistake in the
pronunciation.
Miss Grey took the necklace.
“Thank you for coming to see me, Mr. Rosen-
baum. I shall see that the necklace gets back to its
owner. Now, if you’ll name your fee for repairing
it I’ll pay you, and you’ll have no further need to
worry about it.
“Thank you, Miss Grey,’’ said Mr. Rosenbaum,
when this piece of business was settled. “I hope the
young lady don’t get into too much trouble over
this; but, of course,if what she told me is true, every-
thing will be all right. Thank you again, and good-
day.’’


When he had gone Miss Grey look at the neck-
lace in her hand and then rang the bell. To the maid
who answered it, she said:
“Please go and tell Miss Lovett that 1 should
like Yvonne Poulett to come to my rooms for a
moment.”
“Yes, Miss Grey.” The maid disappeared, re-
turning some minutes later with Yvonne, whom she
showed into the room. As the door closed behind
her Miss Grey walked over to the window, leaving
her pupil standing nervously in the middle of the
floor. She stared into the garden for quite some
time, and then, turning suddenly, said:
“Does this belong to you?”
On seeing the necklace that was dangling from
Miss Grey’s hand, Yvonne gasped involuntarily.
“I ... I
“Well?”
Yvonne stood silent, her brain racing furiously.
How much did Miss Grey know?
“I asked you a question, Yvonne. Please
answer it.”
Yvonne had no answer ready.
“It doesn’t, does it?” Miss Grey shot an arrow
at venture.
It hit its mark.
“No,” said Yvonne sullenly at last, thinking
that if Miss Grey knew everything, it was useless
to lie.
“Then to whom does it belong?”
Realising she had been led into a trap, Yvonne
raged inwardly.
“I don’t know,” she muttered.
“Then I shall have to inquire among your
school-fellows.”


“Oh. no.” Yvonne blanched at this, and took
an impulsive step forward.
“I think you’d better sit down and tell me the
whole truth, Yvonne,’’ said Miss Grey. “It will be
wiser in the long run.’’
Yvonne slid limply into a chair.
“All right, I’ll tell you,” she said desperately.
“It belongs to Jancy Mitford. I dressed at the Rich-
mond’s the night of the dance and found it. It was
so lovely I just thought I’d borrow it and put it back
next day, but it got broken and I had to take it to
be repaired. I didn’t know until then that it was so
valuable, I swear I didn’t. I just borrowed it, that’s
all.” Her voice tailed off.
“I see,” said Miss Grey dryly. “Anything
else?”
“No. That’s all. But it’s true what I’ve told
you, I only borrowed it. Don’t you believe me, Miss
Grey?”
“Yes, I believe you, but I’ve been waiting for
you to add that you regret it. In your eagerness to
justify yourself you have apparently forgotten that
small point.”
Yvonne’s chin lifted aggressively.
“I don’t see that there’s anything very wrong
in what I did, Miss Grey. I didn’t steal the necklace.”
“No. You managed to stop short of that,” Miss
Grey said coldly, “which probably makes you feel
very virtuous.”
There was a brief silence, and Yvonne started
to rise from her chair, but Miss Grey turned on her
suddenly.
“Sit down!” Her voice was cuttingly con-
temptuous. “I have something more to say to you.”
Yvonne sat hurriedly, and Miss Grey went on; “Ever
since you came to this school, Yvonne, you have


been a major source of annoyance to me, for I have,
on inquiry, found you at the bottom of almost every
unpleasant incident that has happened here. The
affair of Madam Platz was the most recent, and also
the most nauseating, and since then there has been
the persecution of Jancy Mitford.” Yvonne looked
up surprised at this. “Oh, yes, I always know what
is going on in my school. Did you imagine I did
not?” continued Miss Grey. “You should learn
never to under-estimate your opponent, Yvonne;
because that’s what you and I have been, opponents.
Well, I refuse to put up with your opposition any
longer, and this business of the necklace has finally
decided me in the matter. You have, I believe, often
threatened to ask your Mother to take you away
from this school. Well, you may, with my full
sanction, write her to-day and make that request
seriously, for the sooner you are removed from here
the happier I shall feel about the moral character of
the rest of my girls.”
Yvonne stared incredulously at Miss Grey as
the full implication of these words became clear to
her; but the Headmistress, unmoved by her white
face, went on inexorably: “Don’t mistake my not
expelling you for leniency, Yvonne. It is not you
I wish to protect, but the school. I am very jealous
of its honour. You will now return to your room and
write asking your Mother to take you away. What
reason you give for the request is immaterial to me;
but I want you to be out of the school by next week-
end at the latest. You may go.”
Thoroughly cowed, Yvonne crept from the
room and up to the dormitory, where she wrote a
passionate, incoherent letter in which savage de-
nunciations of Miss Grey and the school were
mingled with hysterical demands for her Mother to
come and get her straight away.


At lunch time much whispered speculation
went on among the girls regarding Yvonne’s visit
to Miss Grey and her subsequent absence from class,
and the school buzzed with rumours that kept every-
one in a constant and very pleasant simmer of excite-
ment all day.
In the afternoon the Headmistress sent for
Penelope, and when she came in, waved her to a
chair.
“Sit down, my dear, I shan’t be a minute.’’ Pre-
sently she finished writing and, opening the drawer
of her desk, took out the pearls and gave them to
Penelope.
“Why, these are Yvonne’s,’’ she said, recog-
nising them. “They’re not mine.’’
“And they’re not Yvonne’s. At one time you
were a great friend of hers, weren’t you?’’ Penelope
nodded. “But lately I think your opinion has
changed.’’
“X/- **
Yes.
“I’m glad it has, Penelope. You could find
many better friends. Indeed, you’ll have to. Yvonne
is leaving at the end of the week. I asked her to,’’
“Oh, Miss Grey! Why?’’
“Partly because of the necklace in your hand.
It belongs to Jancy Mitford.’’
Penelope’s face lit with joyful surprise.
“Oh, she’ll be so glad and relieved. Poor little
Jancy. That’s why she ran away.’’
“Yes, I just telephoned your Mother and she
told me the whole story.’’
“It’s almost too good to be true’’; and then
after a moment’s thought, “but if it’s Jancy’s,
Yvonne must have taken it.’’
“She did,’’ said Miss Grey. “To use her words,
she ‘borrowed’ it the night of the dance.’’


Penelope was appalled at Yvonne’s perfidy.
“And she let me admire it and never said a
word. I didn’t dream of being Jancy’s even when
hers was missing.’’
“Of course you didn’t. One doesn’t ordinarily
expect one’s friends to behave like that. She said
she was going to put it back, which I believe, but I
expect when you became cool towards her she de-
spaired of getting an invitation to your home and
the chance of replacing it having gone she preferred
to leave it at the jeweller’s rather than run the risk
of it being found in the school.’’
“Did she break it then, Miss Grey?’’
“Yes. Oh, I forgot, you didn’t know. Well,
your Mother will tell you all about it. Now wrap
those pearls in your handkerchief and take them
home carefully. And I don’t want this conversation
to go any further than this room, Penelope. Your
family will have to know, of course, but your Mother
will warn them to keep quiet. With Yvonne leav-
ing at the end of the week I’m hoping that the whole
thing will die a natural death and be forgotten. I
can’t stop the girls talking about her departure, but
if you add no fuel to the fire of their gossip it will
soon go out.”
“I understand, Miss Grey. You can depend on
me.
“I know I can,” smiled Miss Grey, “or I
shouldn’t have told you. Now you’d better go, it’s
getting late, and your Father will be waiting for you.
Good-night, my dear.”
On Friday Madame Poulett descended on the
school in a whirl of scent and expensive furs and de-
manded that her daughter be given up to her.
Yvonne was produced and in her presence her
Mother delivered an abusive tirade at Miss Grey,


who sat calmly at her desk throughout. Yvonne
eventually put a stop to the storm of words.
“Oh, do shut up, Mother,” she said wearily.
“I’m only too glad to get out of the place. Let’s go
home.”
Shocked into silence by this disloyalty, Madame
Poulett stared angrily at her daughter for a few
minutes and then, with a snort, drew her furs round
her and went to the door, where she stood posed
dramatically.
“Good-day to you, Miss Grey,” she said with
an effort at dignity. “Good-day.” And she swept
majestically from the room followed by Yvonne,
who disdained to waste farewells on her former mis-
tress, and slammed the door behind her in a final
gesture of defiance.
From the window Miss Grey watched the two
figures cross the grounds and climb into the big car
outside the gates. A few girls waved good-bye in
a slightly embarrassed manner, but the majority
stood stolidly silent or went about their business un-
moved by Yvonne’s departure.
“Not a very impressive leave-taking,” said Miss
Mary, who had come in and was standing at Miss
Grey’s side.
“No, and a good thing too. The girls don’t even
seem very interested in why she’s leaving.”
“Oh, they are,” laughed Miss Mary. “I hear
them discussing all sorts of delightful mysteries.
I’m sure the real reason isn’t half so exciting as the
ones they’ve imagined.”
Miss Grey walked back into the room.
“Well, that’s over. Now perhaps we’ll have
a little peace in the school.”


When Penelope reached home she delivered
the pearls to her Mother, who in turn delivered them
to Miss Ellis.
"I'm not even interested in them any more,
Lesley.” Miss Ellis looked uncomfortable. ‘‘l wish
I d never owned the wretched things.”
“Well, you can t get rid of them now,” laughed
Mrs. Richmond.
Miss Ellis sat up purposefully.
“Yes. I can. I’ll give them to Jancy.” Her eyes
shone. “Yes, that’s what I’ll do. It’ll make up just
a little for what I did to her. Not that I can ever make
up for that.”
“Now, Marie, dear, don’t reproach yourself,”
said Mrs. Richmond. “Everything’s all right now
and regrets are useless, anyway. I think it would be
a lovely gesture to give her the pearls, and I’m sure
she will appreciate the thought behind it.”
“I hope she will,” replied Miss Ellis. “You
know, Lesley, you’ve done me an enormous amount
of good while I’ve been here. I don’t feel a bit like
the Miss Ellis who first came. I feel more like the
Marie I used to be years ago. You and Jancy and
the family have done that.”
“And John,” Mrs. Richmond added teasingly.
Miss Ellis blushed rosily and looked almost
beautiful.
“I’ve got something to tell you about that,
Lesley. John and I are going to be married.”
There was a delirious five minutes after this,
for Mrs. Richmond loved weddings almost as much
as Rusty did.


“We ll announce it to-morrow afternoon when
Jancy’s home, and have a little party, shall we?"
she suggested.
“Oh, yes.” Miss Ellis was delighted.
Here Mrs. Mansfield came in and demanded to
know the cause of the excitement. When told, she
kissed Miss Ellis warmly.
“I’m very glad, Marie, and I hope you have a
large family. Are you going to live at Urellen?”
“Yes, John’s going to run the property. It’s
gone to wrack and ruin you know in the last few
years. My fault, of course; still, I think we ll be able
to bring it back together into the fine estate it was in
my Father’s time.”
“I’m sure you will,” agreed Mrs. Mansfield,
“but I warn you I’ll be coming to stay. I always
loved Urellen when your Mother and Father were
alive. It’ll be just like old times. Why, I feel young
again at the very thought.”
“Mother, behave,” said Mrs. Richmond with
mock severity. “And do you know dinner’s ready
and you’re still here ? I’ll never manage to get you in
on time,”


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
Early on Saturday afternoon Jancy arrived
home and was greeted like a veteran returning from
the wars.
“We couldn’t get a red carpet and a brass
band,” said Rusty with a grin, “or you’d have had
those too.”
Jancy, looking rather pale, and with her hands
still bandaged, was established in the sitting-room
on the chesterfield surrounded by the family, and
became the fascinated object of Judy’s eyes.
“Did you have a cwash?” she asked in-
terestedly.
“Oh, that reminds me,” put in Rusty. “We
got an answer to our advertisement this morning,
Jan, about the Hornby train.”
“Oh, Rusty, really?” Jancy beamed. “After
all this time.”
“Well, Daddy said if we left it in long enough
something would turn up. It was a boy that rang,
and he said we can have a station and a coal truck.
I’ll buy the coal truck and Mummy’s going to buy
the station.”
I am glad. And, Rusty, Mr. Byrne sent his
love to you and his regards to you and the rest of
the family, Aunt Lesley. He’s going home to-
morrow.”
“Is he, dear?” said Mrs. Richmond. “Did you
ask him to come and see us as he goes by on his
v*
run?


“Yes, he says he’ll be starting work in a few
weeks with the new lorry the insurance people are
going to buy him and he’ll call in on his first trip.’’
Presently afternoon tea was brought in, and
before serving it Mrs. Richmond stood up and made
the announcement of Miss Ellis’ forthcoming wed-
ding. This was received with wild approbation, and
Mr. Butler, coming in at that moment, was over-
whelmed with congratulations. When the excite-
ment had died down a little Miss Ellis produced the
pearls and told of how they had re-appeared and the
reason for Yvonne’s dismissal from the school, after
which she made quite a little ceremony of present-
ing them to Jancy, who was speechless with surprise,
and then stammered:
“Oh, Aunt Marie, I ... I
Her Aunt kissed her.
“I know, dear, you needn’t say anything.
They’ll be kept for you until you’re old enough to
wear them.’’
“Lovely, lovely,’’ chanted Rusty. “I knew it’d
all come right before long.’’
At which Judy piped up. “So did I, Wusty,
didn’t I?’’ Not in the least knowing what her sister
was talking about. There was general laughter at
this, and then Mrs. Richmond, seeing that Jancy was
looking a little tired, suggested she might like to go
to bed. Jancy agreed to this thankfully, and was
soon comfortably settled in, with Rusty, Judy and
Dumps for company.
As Mrs. Richmond returned to the others in
the sitting-room, and sat down, the telephone rang
and Captain Richmond went to answer it. They
heard him take the receiver off and then after a short
interval he yelled: “Lesley, bring me a pencil,


quick!” She ran to him with the desired object and
waited patiently while he took down the message
and hung up.
‘What is it, Ian?”
“Wonderful news, my dear. It’s a telegram
from Melbourne.”
“Oh, quickly, lan. Let me read it.” He passed
the slip of paper over and she read: “Had news,
Robert safe. Brenda leaving to-day to join you and
Jancy.” It was dated Friday. “Oh, lan,” Mrs. Rich-
mond’s eyes were wet with tears of joy. “How won-
derful! How perfectly wonderful!”
They returned to the sitting-room to tell the
others.
“What is it? Do tell us,” begged Mrs. Mans-
field. T m dying of suspense.”
“I can’t believe it,” said Mrs. Richmond. “It’s
too good to be true.”
“What’s too good to be true?” Mrs. Mansfield
said impatiently. “Goodness me! You tell us, lan;
Lesley seems incapable,”
Captain Richmond told them the good news
and then stood smiling in front of the fire while they
discussed it excitedly.
“Then Brenda must be all right again or they
wouldn’t let her travel,” said Miss Ellis happily.
“The good news must have done the trick,”
agreed Captain Richmond. “Dr. Barnes told us last
time he wrote that he thought that the only thing to
shock her out of her melancholia would be news of
Robert, and apparently he was right. We’ll switch
the news on at seven o’clock. They’re bound to give
it over the air if Robert’s turned up.” He thought
for a minute. “I think we’d better not mention this
to Jancy or Rusty. Jancy’s had enough excitement


for one day, and also we don’t know the circum-
stances of Robert s re-appearance, and I’d prefer to
hear it before Jancy does. We can’t stop Rusty
listening in to-night very well, but I think we ll keep
the news of Brenda’s arrival a secret from her for
the present and then she won’t be tempted to let it
slip to Jancy.’’
“I think you’re wise, lan,’’ said Mrs. Rich-
mond. “After all, we don’t know whether Brenda’s
completely recovered, and if she took ill on the way
and was detained and Jancy was expecting her it
might set the child back in health again, and we don’t
want to do that, do we?’’ Everyone agreed with this
sensible conclusion, and then Mrs. Richmond added
in dismay: “Oh, dear!’’
They all looked at her apprehensively.
“What’s wrong, Mother?’’ asked Penelope
anxiously.
“I forgot, we re full up. Where on earth am I
going to put Brenda?’’ '
There was a general laugh of relief.
/
“Is that all you’re worried about?’’ smiled Miss
Ellis. “She can have my room. There’s another
bed on the verandah,’’
“And anyway,’’ put in Mr. Butler, who all
this time had sat silent, enjoying the family’s excite-
ment, “Marie and I can always hurry our wedding
to suit your convenience.’’ His eyes twinkled.
Everybody laughed at this, and Mrs. Mansfield
said teasingly:
“I don’t doubt you would be glad of any excuse,
young man, but you’ll have to control your im-
patience, I’m afraid.”
At seven o’clock that night everyone gathered
round the radio expectantly, and Rusty, who had


been told the news about Colonel Mitford, danced
up and' down with excitement.
“Oh, I wish they’d hurry,’’ she said, chafing
at the delay. “I’ll burst if they don’t.’’
Presently, after the “National Anthem’’ had
been played, the announcer read the headlines, and
then said:
“It is with much pleasure that we report the
safe arrival at a northern port of Colonel Robert Mit-
ford, who has been missing in Malaya for two years.
Colonel Mitford was the subject of much adverse
criticism at the time Malaya fell but we are now able
to reveal that he left his post under secret orders
and has since been engaged in guerrilla warfare
against the Japanese. He and his followers have
been almost solely responsible for the capture of
Melanga, which has given us our first strategic foot-
hold on the mainland and is thus of vital importance
to the campaign in the Pacific. When this message
was received Colonel Mitford was on the point of
leaving the north on his way home, and we would
like to take this opportunity of welcoming a brave
and gallant soldier back to his homeland.’’
Rusty gave a vociferous cheer as her Father
switched the radio off, and flung her arms round his
neck.
“You were right, Daddy. You’re always right.
And do let me tell Jancy, please do.’’
He smiled at her urgency, and said:
“I think it would be nice for Jancy to hear it,
as we did, over the radio. Don’t you? We can bring
her in at nine o’clock when they broadcast again.
What do you say?’’
Rusty looked disappointed.


“Just think how we’ve enjoyed hearing it,
dear,” her Mother pointed out. “And try and
imagine what it will be like for Jancy. You can stay
up and hear it again too.”
“All right, Mummy. But I’d better not go out
to her before then cos I just couldn’t keep quiet.”
She did a little dance. “Oh! What a day!”
“You’d better go and work off your high spirits
in the kitchen with Elsie,” advised her Mother.
“Tell her she can serve dinner as soon as she likes.”
“I’ll tell her the news too. I’ll tell her the news.”
And Rusty flung violently out of the room, leaving
the door open.
Captain Richmond closed it.
“It’s a nuisance sometimes, having a whirl-
wind for a daughter,” he said drolly. “It creates such
a draught.”
“Still,” returned Mrs. Mansfield, “there’s some
virtue in it. It stops the cobwebs gathering.”
At nine o’clock Jancy was duly carried in, a
little mystified at the unusual procedure; but her
face, when she heard the announcement about her
Father, more than repaid Rusty’s self-denial.
“Oh! Isn’t it wonderful!” she said, laughing
and crying at the same time. “Isn’t it wonderful! I
don’t know what to say.”
“None of us do, dear,” smiled Mrs. Richmond.
“But we’re all terribly happy for you. Now, I think
perhaps you’ve had enough excitement for one day.
We mustn’t spoil the good progress you’re making.
So Uncle lan will take you back to bed now. Good-
night, dear. You should sleep well to-night; pleasant
dreams.”
The next day, being Sunday, the girls came out
from school to see Jancy. They also had heard the


broadcast and Miss Grey had asked them to convey
her congratulations to Jancy on her Father s return.
They made a rowdy party on the verandah, to which
Judy and Dumps added more than their quota of
noise. Dumps entertained the inattentive audience
by banging saucepan lids together incessantly; but
this accompaniment did not deter the conversa-
tionalists, who talked volubly through it, until
Rusty said distractedly:
“I can’t hear myself speak. For goodness sake,
Dumps, give me those.’’ She removed the lids from
the baby, who immediately rent the welkin with
loud indignant screams. “Oh, dear, now I’ve done
it! Here, Judy, tickle her with this.’’
“This” was a bedraggled feather duster which
was famous for its quietening effect on the
obstreperous Dumps, who, under its soothing in-
fluence, stopped screaming and began to chuckle
delightedly.
“Oh, the little pet,” said Pam. “Doesn’t it
sound lovely! Do it to me, Judy; I want to see what
it’s like.”
Judy complied good-naturedly, and before long
everyone was being tickled to their hearts’ content.
Mrs. Richmond, coming in and catching sight of
this amazing spectacle, collapsed with laughter in
the door, at which Pam and the others turned a
violent beetroot red.
“It’s all right,” Rusty reassured them.
“Mummy likes it too. Don’t you, Mummy?”
“Very much,” answered Mrs. Richmond.
“Although nobody does it quite like Judy; she’s got
a special technique, haven’t you, darling?”
“Yes, I’se the best, aren’t I, Mummy? Aren’t
I, Wusty?”


“You are, pet,” said Rusty.
/
“I came out to tell you,” went on Mrs. Rich-
mond, “that I’ve set a little party on the breakfast-
room table for you. So you can go in there and make
as much noise as you like. Jancy, you’d better put
your dressing gown on and join them, it’ll be a
change for you from bed.’’
There was a chorus of approval at this, and
they all made hungrily for the feast, which proved
to be a very lavish one indeed. Judy, as usual, dozed
off with her face in a piece of sponge cake, but was
rescued from asphyxiation by Rusty, who, while
continuing her talk with Frances, casually removed
her sister’s head from the plate and laid it back on
the table, in which position Judy remained blissfully
asleep.
When the party was over Mrs. Richmond said
she thought Jancy should return to bed, and soon
afterwards the girls left to go back to school. Rusty
escorted them down to the bus, and after waving
them off toiled back up the hill. As she reached
the garden gate a car came up the road behind her
and stopped. She looked round curiously as a door
opened and a pretty voice said:
“Don’t you remember me, Rusty?”
Rusty’s mouth fell open with surprise, and
then with a red indian yell she descended on Jancy’s
Mother.
“Careful, Rusty,” said a deep masculine voice
from inside the car. “My wife’s a bit frail at the
moment.” And Colonel Mitford presented a brown
grinning face for Rusty’s hearty kiss.
Their reception at the house was nothing short
of tremendous, and after a short period of controlled
hysteria Mrs. Richmond said they had better go to


Jancy. Everyone followed to enjoy her surprise, but
agreed to wait in the dressing-room while Colonel
and Mrs. Mitford went in first.
Jancy looked up carelessly as the unfamiliar
figures came through the door.
“Can I. . she began, thinking it was one of
the Richmonds, and then her voice tailed away and
she stared unbelievingly.
“Mummy!”
In a moment her parents were sitting on either
side of her bed and she had an arm round each neck.
“Oh, Mummy! Oh, Daddy!” she kept saying
over and over again incredulously.
“Bit light on your vocabulary, aren’t you, old
girl?” Her Father laughed a little unsteadily. Mrs.
Mitford held her daughter off and looked at her with
wet eyes.
“It’s wonderful to see you again, darling.
Wonderful. I got the bookmark you made me for
Mother’s Day. It was sweet.” And then catching
sight of the bandaged hands: “But what have you
been doing to yourself?”
At this the others, who had been watching
round the door, invaded the verandah, and all began
talking at once, and Captain Richmond finally
brought a little order to the chaos by saying the story
could wait for half an hour at least until the travel-
lers had refreshed themselves with a bath.
Jancy could hardly bear to part with them, even
for such a short time, so her Father put her gown
on and took her into the sitting-room, where she
could catch occasional glimpses of them as they
passed to and fro. She was fidgety, however, dur-
ing their absence, and only settled down when they


returned to sit either side of her and hold a small
bandaged hand in each of theirs.
Rusty stood before the fire regarding the three
benevolently as if she had been the sole agency in
bringing them together, then suddenly her face fell.
“Oh, gosh!”
“What is it, Rusty?” asked Mrs. Mitford.
“I’ve just thought that now you’ll be taking
Jancy away again,” she said miserably. “Won’t
%♦»
you?
Colonel Mitford and his wife looked at one
another over their daughter’s head and smiled.
“No, I don’t think so,” said Jancy’s Father. “In
fact, before the war we intended buying the old
Matthews’ place near your school, and I don’t see
any reason for abandoning the idea.”
“Oh, Robert, that would be perfect,” said Mrs.
Richmond, “having Brenda so near.”
“Well, that’s settled then,” said Colonel Mit-
ford. “Satisfied, Rusty?”
But Rusty was busy executing an impromptu
dance on the hearthrug. “Calloo! Callay!” she
yelled." “Oh, what a day!”
THE END
LETTERPRESSED IN AUSTRALIA BY COLOURTONE PTY. LTD.
FOR JONS PRODUCTIONS.


. 1
' . -
N
1
.
' ■
'
■
<
.
, ■' i
i •
\ ,
i j > "
■
#
I ' ■ v ' .* I
/
■ I


r
.
■
v
'
,
i V
'
,
.
,
I
\
*


1 'i 1
.
- '
'
.
.
\
V ■
.
- . :
V ■
• i
' . .
-
1
.
I ,
>■
■
1
■
• /
.


*


'
.
-
,
\
-
v
\ »
1




