

*I, j : '
ダト”卜イ
f ! 丨 I _
!. 額 1 .
p..
一 ■.. ... パど 一 _ ニ —
Japanese Wedding Ceremonies
Old and New.
By
Mrs R. Curizuka




JAPANESE WEDDING CEREMONIES
OLD AND NEW.
BY
Mrs. R. CURIZUKA
TOKYO.
SOLD BY
K. OGAWA,
TOKYO
AND
KELLY & WALSH, Ltd.,
YOKOHAMA, SHANGHAI, HONGKONG AND SINGAPORE.




I 丨 人.
PRINCE KAZU-NO-MIYA




ヘ
FUKUI-KEN.


I 1
H 夢丨 | '丨 ''
i
YAMAGUCHI.


r
hlhnn ■ \^ c^ 《
8
AT OKAYAMA.


-
_
考
«-igf - - ; —. .■一 e 一-一 ■一. 1」.... „L-■-■-.<l-i -■ ««ftB-i-t ■»•!.'»«<■}. l? . ■「■■_■■■■-- ... -I—. n I
AT JOSHIU.


.y
— 卜/#‘
H. ~;li llli —MM •■il..fc ‘
.‘ A\ _
I _
「 I 着
il-_ - —— I 一 I
i——— —I
AT AWAJI.


///
I
遍
——i If^.i„.l.L .—bfil ? ,i - - f :4’. - ■ ... i 5 li- !i.,; f-v:
rir!-. ."-K , —L - - . i- I n-1 ijsxf 1 - -
A
e
AT OKINAWA IN THE SOUTH.


ニ
Lnsw |
幾 I
./ •へ 寿： 纖 .
_=■ = •1 B—T 1 /iv
★
NOTO.


■ ;
:r く邊 へ
「 ま、、
議^ Mi»__
FUKUOKA.


I ■ _ __IW_I _l I . *■ 鹹 _
_ 1
'.■ • • I# * • . I : : l I •■' ':
I ト I
AT ECHIGO.


J
重
HIYOGO.


： し^ ===^^^^ ==^==^^ == =
: … ，，:
AT IYO.


V
4
AT KUMAMOTO IN THE SOUTH.
V


_
CH I KUZEN.


は^^
__
: 食
y. 泰，
i
i*
Aw
HIZEN.


-
. •
:
AT HIUGA.


[
V
議
A
1
SAGA MI.


i . :
II I I
- * -+—._ - -n
TOSA.


.「島 1
一^ - V
IZUMO.


漏
Mm i'Hm
—B———— —W—— —I—l— — .W -- ■> «v ■•丨 .,11 _—_ I W— KH—H— M— I— —
B
A
AT UZEN.


「― Y [
雜 1
: / ぎ | ノ
OSHIU.


一
： >L
AIZU.


■ - パ
-#
, 一— r:: 7
AT FUKUSHIMA IN THE NORTH.


.，，— - -r-inunr- tn\ - 一-- _. in « juj«. n.. ._■ uv 一 i i.i i ' lit l, i.i. l.««i »-i --i-,■r.imr- ■ . 11 11111 I——■' 1 ——■' 1 ■■ i . _ i .in t 「里 J» «v_ »_ i「 ■' 1 ■ " ■ r 1 1 1 - , 111
M m
MATSUMOTO (NORTH).


l» ■ 1 1 I I， I. - - n. 111 --♦»■■«- ».rc.fcafly— » ■-I — 量-^
• J
.I ——I—— 11 s» l
■■一— ニ— ■ニ 一 ■一■一— =_■=■■ i s = I ■ - 1 i = 丨 — I ■■■ 1 -■ ■ 「liiTm **•■
™p
—id^s^L
! 丨 ：.i- ム『 .丨
iii
. I-
I M l=i I ニ ibdl I 1111
YAMANAKA (NORTH).


卜"."..^^^^
■.
I
MAEBASHI：


1
i 益 n^^,<a
___
B
A
KISHIU WAKAYAMA.


ご
~~II:
f
d,>,/>#
i タ .
• I*¢
________ 1.— //X I
KISHIU.


1 一
J
.^l— l
一
• ulihH^
I- j
\
\
\
/
nMMMMMNMMNMMMMMNMMHF
- \
AKITA IN THE NORTH.


« I
目、 --一
一—— —_____ T
SHIDZUOKA NEAR TOKIO.


SHIDZUOKA.


• ; I ( .
、 i 暴
'■ p 肩;、 _ '
.，•い ,讀ダ 、グ
GIFU.


暴 • 择
HIROSHIMA (SOUTH).


1
tf
'着1 靈； J r
1 A Avu
■ I、
' 1
. ず' . ■ f ,!
IN THE HOKKAIDO.


] ; • i
> . i j r - -*
HACHIJO - OSHIMA.


%cm
■
メ^ h
零
F\
變ゾ
THE VARIOUS STYLES OF JAPANESE HAIR DRESSING
Osagegami.
Oiranma 犯
Katahazushi.
Marumage. (for old women)
Kirisage.
Kuwai.


//
t f
.A
霧
/ ノ
(W
VC)
TP /
Tonosama.
Kerai,
Wakaishi,
Sogami,
Bozn.
Gero.


m
_
今
▲
0^
Tenjfjmage. (for old Women)
Matsubagaeshi. '
Katsumi.
Tenjinmage. (for girls)
Kemaki,
Darumagaeshi,


/も
%
!//
4
Shimada-kuzushi.
Mitsuwa.
Marumage.
Obako.
Osafune.
Fnkurasuzume.


通
fC?-
'K n, w
r
1^%
liwata.
Takashimada.
Okeshi.
Otabakobon,
Ochigo.
Katsurashitaji.


W|
私
辑
/=s
參
/iJ X 、
■ I
'、響
か
k \\
0^
Musubigami.
Oshyako.
Nagashimada.
iatehyogo
Tojinmage.
Shitsume ichio.


A Daimyo's Wedding.
PRINCE KAZU-NO-MIYA.
The bride on her way to be married accompanied by her parents' retainers. The shape of the
hats shows the degree of their rank, whether Knight, Esquire or Men-atarms. The men on the horses
are the heads of the companies behind whom they ride.
The bride is in the first bullock waggon, the second and third waggons are empty; being only
taken in case of any accident happening to the first.
In the others are the brides women servants whom she takes to her new home. A Princess after
death takes her maiden name again.


I—FUKUI-KEN : The bride, accompanied by her parents and her go-betweens, arrives at her
future home. Some of the bridegroom s relatives meet her at the door and present her
with a cup of water. The bride drinks the water and then breaks the cup, thus symbolizing
the end of her maidenhood.
lI—YAMAGUCHI: The bride is offering dried fish (a form of congratulation) to the bridegroom.
On his right sits his go-between, on the left hers; his parents are also in the room.
HI—AT OKAYAMA 1 The people have a pretty custom. The bride arrives at night in a
‘‘ Norimono •” As soon as she is seen in the distance a bonfire is lighted before the house.
Where all was dark it now is bright, and in the same way the coming brings joy and
brightness to the house.
IV.—AT JOSHIU : Here we see the daughter of a wealthy farmer being conducted to the bride-
oroom's house, where the marriage ceremony will take place. The young man himself has
come out to meet her and is leading the way, followed by the go-betweens. The bride is
seated on the horse, whose trappings are of coloured silk and crepe. She is surrounded by
the bridegroom’s friends. Two servants are seen carrying a small part oi her “ trousseau.”


V. —AT AWAJI: This is a somewhat cruel custom. The girl being reluctant to marry, her
friends endeavour to blacken her after which she is looked upon as a married woman
and can no longer refuse to marry the man selected for her.
VI. —AT OKINAWA IN THE SOUTH : The go-between marking the bride’s forehead with
pure water three times. It is here the custom of the bridegroom to go, early on the morning
of the wedding day, to the bride's home on stilts to which are attached pieces of rope which
are held by a number of his friends, who in this way follow him to the house.
VII. 一 NOTO : Before the wedding day the bride, accompanied by her mother-in-law, visits the
temple in which are the shrines of the family she is about to join. She is presented to the
family priest and regaled with tea.
VIIL—FUKUOKA : In former times it was the custom for the bridegroom's mends to steal for
him the for whom he had expressed a preference. It is done in this wise : Two or
three young men, their heads enveloped in blue and white towels, tied in the way betokening
the business they were on would watch the girFs house at dusk every night until she came
out unattended. She was carried to the young man ? s home and the question of marriage
was then suggested to her, at times she was even married on the spot. Very often the


whole matter had been planned by the young people's parents, though no doubt in remoter
times the abduction was a bona-fide thing and the girl an unwilling victim.
IX.—IAT ECHIGO : The village people gather round the house where a marriage is being cele-
brated. They hammer vigorously on the wooden shutters to Dring good luck 一 often in
their zeal smashing them in.
X. —■AT HIYOGO and other fishing villages, the daughters of the fishermen come and woo the
young men on moonlight nights.
These very advanced daughters of the East make their own choice and do the
proposing themselves !
XL 一 AT IYO : The courtship is carried on in rather more the Western style, the young people
beinp- allowed to come together before they are married and to sit on the verandah in the
moonlight.
XII. —AT KUMAMOTO IN THE SOUTH : The bride walks to her future home attended by
bridesmaids wearing her colours.
They still wear the old-fashioned head dress of silk wadding which takes the place
of our veil.


XIII. 一 CHIKUZEN : It is customary for the bride's friends to accompany her to her new home
singing* and playing on musical instruments.
XIV. —HIZnN : Wedding pranks played by the servants as the bride and her train are on the
way to the wedding.
XV.—AT HIUGA: The go-between must walk one block ahead of the bride. Her
modesty compels her to carry an umbrella to hide her face.
XVI び. 一 SAGAMI: The bride and go-betweens on their way to the wedding. The men in front
carrying wine (sake) and cakes that the Dnde may not arrive empty handed.
XVI ん 一 SAGAMI: A few days before the wedding, the bride, accompanied by servants, visits her
husband's mends and relations, distributing cakes among them.
XVII. 一 TOSA : Here we see the ordinary ceremony of “ Sansankudo.” The common people are
trying to get a glimpse through the paper doors.
XVIII. —IZUMO : The servants of various friends are setting up stone images of Buddhas outside
the doors as a compliment to the onde. She will be as strong and durable as the stone
and will be respected as much as the images are.


XIX (a). 一 AT UZEN : The children prevent the passage of the bridal party by stretching straw
ropes across the road. If tipped they allow the procession to pass.
XIX {b). —AT UZEN : A wedding mummery. People wearing masks come to the house dancing
and singing.
XX. —OSHIU : Games among the servants at a wedding. They are trying to paint each others 1
faces with Indian ink.
If the bride should happen to pass they have also the right to blacken her face.
XXL 一 AIZU : Arrival of the bride, for which the servants have been waiting in order that they
might begin to make “mochi,” a cake made of pounded rice and always eaten at weddings
and New Year.
XXII. —AT FUKUSHIMA in the North there is a strange wedding custom. The bride’s friends
dressed as beggars in old straw coats and handkerchiefs on their heads crouch in the road
where the bridal train will pass. We see them in the picture on their knees in the road
offering their congratulations,
XXIII. —•MATSUMOTO (North) : The bride, wearing the old fashioned bridal head dress of silk
wadding, is being led to her new home. The servants behind are carrying cakes for the


neighbours' children who are waiting to greet her with torches in their hands. The torches
signify the brightness imparted by the bride.
XXIV. —YAMANAKA (North) : The bride presents a bag of beans to the bridegroom during the
ceremony, saying : I give you these as a sign that I will stay with you till the foundations
of the house wear away.” The beans are then cooked with rice and eaten.
XXV. 一 MAEBASHI: Torches are lighted in honour of the bride's coming, signifying, as in other
towns, the brightness and happiness the bride brings into her husband's lite.
XXVI (a). —KISHIU WAKAYAMA : On the ist and 14th January the newly-married bride, her face
hidden in a a kimono/' visits her friends, bringing boxes of a ame M (a sweet) for the children.
XXVI (d). —KISHIU WAKAYAMA : Here is the picture of a wedding ceremony in which the bride is
wearing white. This is in Japan the colour worn for the dead, and thus it signifies that
after the marriage the girl is dead to her old life and begins a new life in a new home. In
the background we get a glimpse of the shrine with offerings to the household gods. The
little pine tree, the stork and tortoise on the white-wood table, stand for long life. The two
figures on it represent an old couple who lived happily together for a hundred years.
XXVII. —•KISHIU : Cakes being distributed at a wedding to the children of the neighbourhood.


XXVIII.—AKITA IN THE NORTH : The young bride goes to some old friend of the family to have
her teeth blackened immediately after the wedding. The one who performs this office
becomes as it were the bride J s sponsor and is consulted in any difficulty.
XXIX. —SHIZUOKA, NEAR TOKIO ; 一 Exhibition of the trousseau after the wedding.
XXX. —SHIZUOKA : Harvest time is the busiest time of the year and the farmers’ daughters
must help in the fields.
There they are in their work-a-day clothes, unpowdered and unpainted, and conse-
quently into the fields the younp* men come to look for a wife.
XXXI. •—GIFU : Villagers throwing stones at a house where a weddinp* is taking place. This is
supposed to bring good luck, but often does a great deal of damage, ending in a fight
between the occupants and their w well-wishers.”
XXXII. —HIROSHIMA (South) : The bride exhibiting her trousseau.
XXXIIL —IN THE HOKKAIDO : At an Ainu wedding all people who care to come to the house
receive presents of money and cakes.
Every one wears a mask, not caring to be seen receiving money, and also because


with a mask one is able to come two or three times without being recognized. It is the
duty of the policemen outside the gates to prevent this as far as they are able.
XXXIV.—HACHIJO-OSHIMA : A young man having taken a fancy to some girl may come to her
home every night when his work is done, bringing his bedding with him. Some little corner
in the house is assigned to him and he is carefully observed by the girl's parents to see what
manner of man he is. If he is approved of he is invited to join the family circle and after
some weeks a marriage is arranged. All this time he is not permitted by custom to take a
single meal in the house.


THE MARRIAGE CEREMONIES OF JAPAN.
THE PRESENT DAY.
The marriage ceremonies of L.nristian countries bear more or less resemblance to each other,
inasmuch as, at any rate, the most important part of the ceremony is of a religious nature; and although
at the present day this is sometimes superseded by the civil contract, still we may say on the whole that
it is a religious ceremony.
Japan, on the contrary, although a country with many temples and innumerable priests, with a
religion and a gorgeous ritual, seems from time immemorial to have considered the marriage ceremony
as a purely family affair.
No priests or temple is necessary, and even the law takes little cognizance of it, for the legal part
consists merely in sending a notice to the authorities that the two parties have contracted a marriage.
At the present day, a man may legally have but one wife; it is also no longer such an easy matter
to divorce her, for Western ideas are influencing many ; still, women as a rule have had as yet the same
independent position enjoyed by the majority of their Western sisters.


One of the most honoured and important offices in this country is that of the a Nakodo/' or, as we
should call k, “ Go-between.” Without him no marriage ceremony could be arranged. He plays the part
of friend, adviser, witness, lawyer and minister in Japanese marriage 一 and his office is no sinecure.
Through him every detail is arranged from beginning to end —■from the first interview of the young
people to the time when the ceremony is completed ; and even then his duties are not at an end, for often
he is called in to settle disputes, which, alas ! arise, not infrequently immediately after a marriage, between
the young bride and her mother-in-law.
The position of go between being one of very great trust and delicacy, the person selected for
the post is usually an old family friend or some one whose opinion is highly valued. He must be a
married man, or as the Japanese, like Western nations, have their superstitions, they will choose if
possible a happy married couple, for the wife of the go-between is expected to share the labours of her
husband. No unmarried man can ever hold the office, and though a widow is sometimes asked to take
it, this is among the superstitions regarded as a bad omen for the bride.
When a Japanese father wishes to secure a partner for his daughter or his son (the marriageable
age being at the present day considered 20 and 24 respectively) he mentions the fact to one of his
frienas who loses no time in spreading the news among his acquaintances.


Very often a match is brought about through the indirect means of the hairdresser, a woman who,
as she goes from house to house and has ample time to gossip while she is dressing her customers , hair,
mentions the fact that Mrs. So and So has a charming daughter of a fnarriageable age, or that Mr. So
and So has a son for whom he is seeking a wife.
The public bath-keepers also are able to give plenty of information concerning the young people
of the neighbourhood, for they hear all the talk and chatter going bn in the bath-house, which is the great
place oi public resort.
When a young man and a young girl have been found who would seem to be a suitable match, the
parents of both parties set on foot careful inquiries as to age, social position, antecedents and so on.
If all seem satisfactory in these respects the kind services of a go-between and his wife are secured by
either side respectively. Having accepted the office, the go-between suddenly becomes a very busy
person. He is kept flying backwards and forwards bearing messages and replies, and arranging a
thousand details preparatory to the marriage.
The young people and their families are thus relieved of all trouble, difficulties are smoothed for
them, disapproving relatives are won over, and all this is done from sheer kindness of heart. It
requires a great deal of time, thought, and anxiety to perform these duties properly —duties which in


Western countries fall mostly to the share of the bride and bridegroom and are therefore a labour of
love.
Very naturally the young people wish to see each other, and this first meeting is called the Mi«aiZ ，
which means “ し 00 k-at-each-other meeting.”
As a rule the young people have not much voice in the matter of choice, and the girls more
especially allow their parents to choose a husband tor them.
Should a young couple fall in love with each other, and the match appear to their parents a fairly
eligible one, no obstacle would be put in their way. It is not often at the present day that either side
would be forced into a marriage against their inclination. There are various ways of arranging the
“ Mi-ai.” One way is for the young man's go between to take him to the house of the bride to call upon
her father.
The young man and his go-oetween are conducted into the reception room by one of the servants
and served with tea, cakes and tobacco in the usual way while waiting for the master of the house
(it is not considered impolite in Japan to keep your guests waiting wliile you change your clothes or
have your hair redressed.) At length the master appears, tne guests rise and all three spend a few
minutes in bowing to each other with great formality and making the usual polite speeches. (A Japanese


does not bow once —the minimum is three or four bows and these must be very low —the whole body
is bent, sucking in the breath.
After the first cup of tea has been served, the maid retires, and the bride-elect appears at the door
carrying a cup of tea.
She advances slowly, and with downcast eyes, towards the young man, holding the cup in both
hands, and having placed it before him (he does not rise) she bows deeply and is then presented by her
father in the following terms:
This is my daughter, who is very stupid; I beg you to pardon her awkwardness.” More bows
follow on both sides—the young man will probably address a few remarks to the maiden’s father, and
after a few minutes she will retire without having uttered a single word, and very likely with only the
dimmest notion as to the outward appearance of her future husband.
Thus ends the first interview 一 a difficult and trying one for both.
Another way of conducting the “ Mi-ai ”is to arrange a meeting at the theatre. The bride and
her family repair thither early in the morning, and the go-between and prospective bridegroom are invited
to share their box.
As a Japanese theatre begins at 10 o'clock in the morning and lasts still 6 o'clock in the evening,


the young people have plenty of opportunity for looking at each other. But here again, owing to the
presence of the family, and the natural shyness, any girl must feel in such a case the position is
frought with awkwardness and embarrassment. When the meeting is over, and the go-betweens on
either side have ascertained that the young people and their parents are satisfied, there comes the most
difficult part of the whole affair, namely, gaining the consent of the relatives.
The Japanese have a very strong clannish feeling and think far more of the opinion of their
relatives than we do. In all important matters, the various branches of a family are consulted, and
therefore no further steps can be taken towards the marriage, till the consent, of at least the more im-
portant members of the family, has been gained.
As the Japanese are also very particular about ancestry and social status in matters in which their
family is concerned, a somewhat long space of time usually elapses before all are satisfied on these points.
If the relatives live in different parts of the country it entails a great deal of letter-writing most of which
falls to the share of the go-betweens.
To state a case : There is in Tokio a well-known Japanese lady who has after waiting two years
and a half for the consent of her relatives to her marriage, only obtained the same within the last month.
She is moreover a widow with a family and lived abroad for many years—but neither of these facts render
A


her more independent than other women. Family authority cannot be set at naught in this country either
by men, or still less by women —those who do so are sure to suffer for it. There are sometimes cases —
one having occurred quite lately of young people growing restive under this form of tyranny, defying their
relatives and getting married without waiting for anyone's consent.
Needless to say such a couple will be in dire disgrace and disowned by the whole family. It may
be years before they are forgiven such an unsanctioned act 一 perhaps never.
The best recommendation therefore for any young man or woman in this country wishing to enter
the bonds of matrimony, is that they have few or better still no relations at all;such persons are much
sought after.
To return to our subject, when at length the consent of all has been gained, the bride and bride-
groom exchange Uino M —a word signitying “ a bond.” The bride sends her future husband a “ Haori ”
(an outer garment taking the place of our overcoat) and a Hakama (a divided skirt). The bridegroom
his future wife with an Obi (sash). These gifts must always be exchanged ; the rest of the
Uino M (for they consist of the " seven lucky things yy ) are not usually sent at the present day, as they
are somewhat useless and take up a great deal of room. Instead, when the “ Obi ”is sent to the bride,
aad the hakama 99 and u haorito the groom, these are accompanied by a slip of paper containing a
prmted list of the seven lucky things.


There are still some old-fashioned people, especially in country places, who like the Uino n sent in
kind—but the custom is dying out.
LIST OF “UINO.”
i haori and hakama (for man) or i obi (for woman) i
i Surume (fish)
i Shiraga (hemp) =：old age
1 Kobu (seaweed)=many children .
1 Ogi (fan)=incense .
1 Katsuobushi (fish) 5
1 Yanagitaru (a cask of sake) 7
And now, the day for the wedding can be fixed. As in the West people consider certain days or
months unlucky—such as a Friday or the month of May—»so also in the Far East there are lucky and
unlucky times for weddings.
The 16th of January belongs to the latter class, so does the month of July. (In July the Feast of
the Dead is kept).


The most propitious time is November, especially the middle of the month.
November in this country is a very beautiful month, fresh, bright and sunshiny—and as the Japanese
say u peacefulcoming just before the most busy and anxious time of the year, it represents (for the
bride) the lull before the storm !
On the day of the wedding, or just before, the bride sends all her belongings to the house of the
bridegroom—that is to say, to his father's house, for the young couple do not as a rule take a house of
their own.
There must be in the trousseau dresses enough to last for many years, a good deal of household
furniture and a sum of money —■all of which, of course, vary in value according to the wealth and position
of the family.
To each of the men carrying the trousseau (sometimes there are 10,2 o or even 30) a present
must be given, for it is the custom in Japan to fee every servant who comes to the house bringing either
congratulations or condolences.
The bridegroom of the present day wears at the marriage ceremony the ordinary haori and hakama
一 both of silk.
On the wedding day the bride rises at daybreak and begins her very lengthy toilet. First her


face, neck and arms are covered with a fine white powder, her eyebrows are blackened and her lips are
tinged with red in the most approved style. Next, the hairdresser comes to dress her hair, and as a
well dressed head is considered perhaps the most important feature in a dress, the process
occupies on a gala day two hours or more.
The bride is dressed in white silk throughout; the overdress, however, is of a different colour, and
may be the u Kaiclori, which is a silk crepe dress (usually black) covered with embroidery, or else the
"Furisode, a very long-sleeved dress, dyed in delicate colours and having flowers, birds and scenes
considered suitable to the occasion painted upon it.
Before leaving her own home the bride's father admonishes her, to be obedient to her husband and
her mother-in-law, kind to her sisters-in-law, and to beware of jealousy, etc., etc.
The ceremony always takes place in the house (unless he is to be adopted into the
onde s family and to take her name— ■her father having no sons 一 in which case it would take place in her
house).
The room reserved for this purpose is decorated with pine, bamboo, and plum-blossom, these
three trees being emblematic of conjugal happiness.
On her arrival, the bride is conducted into a smaller room to rest, and to put on her “Veil.” This


is a large sort of hood made of white wadding; it is put over her head and partly conceals her face. In
the meantime the bridegroom, his parents, and those of the bride have assembled in the room where the
ceremony is to take place.
The two go-betweens and their wives must be present, and also a boy and girl, both under fifteen
years of age. Their duties are to hand the cups and pour out the wine in which consists the most
important part of the ceremony.
The full complement of witnesses, including the bride and bridegroom, should be twelve 一 never
more —for no outsider is ever admitted to this ceremony. The bride on entering takes her place in the
middle of the room opposite to the bridegroom 一 a small table standing between them.
The table is made of white wood and is a foot square and a foot and a half high. On it stand
three shallow bowls made of red lacquer, one inside the other and of graduated sizes. The bride's
go-between first signals to the boy to fill the first bowl and place it before the bride; she lifts it in both
hands, presents it to the bridegroom who, taking it from her, drinks.
At a sign from the go-between the little girl fills the second bowl, places it before the
bridegroom and he in the same way hands it to the bride. The third bowl is filled by the boy and handed
again by the bride to the bridegroom. Before the bridegroom there are now standing two bowls, before


the bride, one. The little girl again fills up one of the bowls that he may hand it to the
bride, and when she has drunk the boy attendant fills the one that stands before her that she may present
it to the bridegroom —and so on alternately till the wine bowls have been drunk and each of the three
bowls has been used three times.
When this is done, the ceremony known as the ‘‘ San-san-kudo ” (3 x 3=9) is ended and the bride
and bridegroom are man and wife.
The change of cups symbolizes the sharing of joy and sorrow.
The husband and wife now rise and offer wine to their parents-In law, after which the bride removes
her veil and puts on another dress (the one worn at the wedding is never put on again).
In the meantime a feast has been preparea in another part of the house, and a large number of
friends, mostly those of the bridegroom, have assembled to wish the young people joy and happinevSS. The
latter are conducted to the upper end of the room, and friends and relatives come up in turn to exchange
cups of wine with them and to congratulate. The bride and bridegroom are careful to take only one sip
from each cup, as the Japanese wine — a sake/' though a most harmless looking and tasting beverage, has
strong intoxicating properties.
During the feast, at which clam soup is indispensable, the bnae, if she is rich, will change her dress


seven times, according to the courses which appear at table. The feasting is often kept up till midnight,
each on departing being presented with cakes and a large fish.
The wife of one of the go-betweens takes the young couple to their apartment, where, before
departing, she hands them a bowl of wine known as “ bed-wine.”
On the third day after her marriage, the mother of the bride sends her some cakes and a letter to
inquire how she is getting on with her new relations, and on the seventh day her parents give a feast
called Satokaeri, n to which all their friends and relations are invited to make the acquaintance of the
bridegroom’s family.
The first month after marriage is no honeymoon to a Japanese girl, it is often a very bitter one.
She is among strangers, whose ways may be different in every respect to those of her own kindred; she
has to learn that hard lesson of submitting herself wholly to the will of her mother-in-law, on pleasing
whom the whole comfort and happiness of her future life may depend.


明治卅七年 六月 一日印刷
明治 舟七 年六月 四日發行
製複許不
發印
賣刷
所兼
著作兼發
行 印刷者、
小川寫眞 製版所
粟 塚 龍
東京 市本所區
元町十八番 地
東京 市京橋區
日吉町 十三 番地
Mrs Rio Crizuka.


繼 ' . ■ノ •
y
||_ | 農
_ r W3P 7 氣 ，' . …
I "Wof
I • • Uj —J
\
丨「 I ベ ... .
叫ン ...... y
…へ メ. ‘
, > . ザ.、、 （ •
%■ ‘
-
二 Z'.d.;. . . . : --.. :.V ぐ’.广い'--..:- V’、. バ^^、' ; V^t ; .' ,：. : . _- ス ノ* | ベ’. '々 ： " , j.. ■ ,• • ■'•'■■: '' '.. '' ■L : ■ ； ... - ' .；._- ■ ■ - ；■< '' ■ l --•■■ •；'. ，! it*t. ." ； ■:.' '/*"： :. ■シ'ベ パ 、..■、<'•• ..
/ . 1 隸 - n _ 一.. .' % ノ
