

i
v« . V v«' ■ ■ , ''■' vN‘ : ’ . •;S


NEIF & R EC ENT BOOKS
Javanese Panorama. H. W. Ponder,
F.R.G.S. Ills, & Map. 2 It,
Peasant Life in Jugoslavia.
O. Lodge, m.a. Ills. e> Map. 21/.
Fly-tying for Salmon. E. Taverner.
5 col plates & other ills. 7 s. 6d.
Shooting Week-end Book,
Eric Parker. Cr. B m. lot.
Family Week-end Book.
Beryl Irving. Cr. B vo. 10 1.
Highland Gamekeeper. 2nd Edition.
Dugalo Macinttrb. Ills. 121. 6d.
Ranks & Uniforms of the German
Army, Navy fijf Air Force. D. Eri.au
jj Col.plates elf 450 Hl f. 10 s. 6d.
THE LONSDALE LIBRARY
Edited by
Lord Lonsdale & Mr. Eric Parker.
New Volume
Flat Racing. Earl op Harewood &
Lt -Col. Ricketts. 42/. £f 2ir.
Earlier Volumes.
Horsemanship. Geoff. Brooke. 21/. *t
Trout Fishing. Eric Taverner.
Qr. Ltbr., 42 5. Buckram, 2ir.*f
Shooting. Eric Parker. Buckram, air.*t
Coarse Fishing. Parker. 35/., 12t.6d.-f
Lawn Tennis. Wallis Myers. i2r. 6d. f
Cricket. D. R. Jardinb, &c. 15/t
Foxhunting. Sir C. Frederick, m.f.h.
Qr. Ltbr., 4jr. Buckram, 25/.*f
Winter Sports. Lord Knebworth, ij/.f
Golf Roger Wethered, &c. i jt.f
Salmon Fishing Taverner. 25/.*
Boxing. Lord Knebworth. 33 1., 12s. 6d.f
Anthology of Sport, y. 6d. & 101. 6i.f
Hounds & Dogs. Croxton Smith. 15/.
Big Game (Africa). Maj. Maydon. 25/. f
Cruising Martin & Irving. 2ir.t
Rackets, Squash, & c. Lord Aber-
dare. Qr. Llh., 35/. Buckram, ryr.f
Sea Fishing A. E. Cooper, ryr.f
Mountaineering Sidney Spencer. zi/.f
Motor Cruising John Irving. 2i/.f
Game Birds, Beasts dsf Fishes,
Eric Parker. Ltbr., 35 5. : Buck., rj t.f
History of Hunting. P. Chalmers, ai/.f
River Management. Towner Coston
Pentelow.S? Butcher Buckram, ty.f
Polo. Lord Kimberley. 45 5. & ajr.f
Deer, Hare & Otter. Lord Coventry,
&c. Qr Ltbr, jjr. Buckram, 1 js.f
Sporting Records, 1957. Buck, ij/.f
Motor Racing. Earl Howe, S. C H.
Davies, Qr.L/br. 35L Buckram lyr.f
The Lonsdale Keeper’s Book. By
well known Game-keepers, jjj.&fijr.f
• Also L.P. edition de luxe, £5 js.
•f Full leather edition to match edition de luxe
except in size, £j y.
SEELEY SERVICE & CO., LTD.


JAVANESE PANORAMA


By the same Author
JAVA PAGEANT
A description of one of the world's richest , most beautiful
yet little known islands , & the strange customs & beliefs ,
industries , religions , & wars of its fascinating people
“ The author writes easily and authoritatively of the many phases
of life in Java, both as it is to-day and as it was in the past. The
enthusiasm with which he writes springs not from the facile
admiration of the tourist but from the deep appreciation of one
who has lived in the island for many years, and he is to be con-
gratulated on having written an admirable contribution to the
literature of this important island.” The Times.
“A delightful and comprehensive description of the island of
Java. The author writes with charm, intimate knowledge, and
a sense of humour.” Moslem World.
“A work which is comprehensive without being encyclopaedic,
informative without being dull, and easy reading without being
facetious.” Geographical Journal.
“Indeed a revelation of a happy place.” Contemporary Review.
“An exceptionally racy volume of a little known place and people.”
Dundee Advertiser.
“A book with the aroma of a fairy tale. It is to be recommended
equally to the would-be traveller whose journeys must perforce take
place in fancy from his armchair, as well as to the luckier individual
who can indulge his whims and voyage whithersoever he will.
The story makes entrancing reading and yet definite and in-
valuable information is given on all points, even down to minor
details.” Times of India.
With many Illustrations by the Author & Two Maps.
Price 18$. nett


JAVANESE
PANORAMA
A further account of the world's richest island
with some intimate pictures of life among the
people of its lesser known regions
BY
H. W. PONDER, F.R.G.S., F.R.S.A.
Author of “Java Pageant“ Cambodian Glory," &c. &c.
WITH MANY ILLUSTRATIONS FROM PHOTOGRAPHS
BY THE AUTHOR & TWO MAPS
J
London
Seeley, Service & Co. Ltd.
196 Shaftesbury Avenue


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


TO MY FRIENDS
MEVROUW AND MIJNHEER JJ.B.V.
IN REMEMBRANCE OF HAPPY DAYS
AT POEDJON
AND GRATEFUL ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
OF THEIR INVALUABLE HELP




PT{E F C E
I MAKE no apology for returning to the subject of Java.
It is inexhaustible; the last word about it is never said.
You may live here for years, with eyes and ears open to
all around you; you may leave and return over and over
again; only to find surprises and fresh discoveries awaiting
you round every corner.
Java is one of those rare places with which familiarity never
breeds contempt, and added knowledge brings no disillusion.
The charm that woos and wins you as a stranger is just as
potent when you are a stranger no longer, if not more so.
Ripening acquaintance with this magic island might be
compared to friendship with a beautiful woman, whose
qualities of heart and mind, and even her caprices, attract no
less surely than the graces of her person. You fall in love
with Java at the beginning for its beauty, and love it better
with the passing years as you grow ever more intrigued by
its infinite variety. From delight in its charm you pass
to friendship with its people, while your interest deepens in
their customs and social systems, their village administration,
agriculture, and the rest.
But there are pitfalls for the unwary. As little by little
you begin to understand the meaning (or think you do) of
some of the thousand and one fascinating novelties for ever
being presented to your notice, you are apt rashly to take for
granted that they are typical of the whole country. You may
be right; but you may be wrong; never was there a place
where to generalise is so risky. The diversity of ways in
Java is endless, and it would need a dozen lifetimes to learn
them all. For from time immemorial, countless districts
were isolated from each other by impassable natural barriers
of rivers and mountain ranges, so that they developed on lines
almost as distinct as though there had been the whole width
of a continent between them instead of only a few miles, and
customs were evolved which became so deeply ingrained that


they still remain undisturbed in these days of easy com-
munication. Thus, not only do East, Middle, and West Java
differ from each other in a hundred ways, but you may find
in some formerly isolated district, covering only a few square
miles, customs and ceremonies unknown elsewhere.
It follows therefore that some of the native ways described
in the following pages are peculiar to certain districts, and are
not common to the whole country, so that visitors to Java
must not be disappointed if they do not come across them.
On the other hand they are just as likely to come across others
as yet unknown to the author, who can only promise a
complete picture of the Java scene if the Gods allow it to be
revisited in several future incarnations!
May Java soon be returned to her former freedom,
happiness, and prosperity!


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
I. The Lazy Native . . . . . . .17
11. Native Ways, Food, & Fashions ..... 30
111. Wedding Days ........ 39
IV. More about Marriage, Birth, & Death ... 47
V. The “Dessa” 59
VI, Life in a “Dessa” ....... 7°
VII. Religious Medley ....... 86
VIII. “Magic” 100
IX. For Feminists . . . . • • • .122
X. “Batik,” Dyeing, £ff other Crafts . . . .138
XL A Word about Eurasians . . . • • 1 5 1
XII. Beasts of Burden Cff “Pets” . . . • .158
XIII. “The Glory of the Garden” ..... 17 1
XIV. On Trees 185
XV. The “Kweekerij” ....... 194
XVI. The Great Post Road . . • • • .214
XVII. Ancient Kingdoms ....... 234
XVIII. Yesterday, To-day, & To-morrow .... 243
Index ...*••••• 2 61


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
A Ryok dancer Frontispiece
Facing page
A SELLER OF DURIAN ........ 4^
Ryok dancers in a bridegroom procession ..... 49
A BRIDEGROOM GOES IN PROCESSION TO HIS WEDDING . . *49
A “gARDOe” HOUSE, WHERE A WATCHMAN SITS SOUNDS EVERY HOUR
FROM 7 P.M. TO 5 A.M. ..... . 6 4
Rice harvest 65
Doves in cages, run up on tall bamboo poles .... 80
A SHEET OF “Bilik” ........ 8o
Loads of baskets 80
A roadside restaurant . . . • • • • .81
Basket carriers . . . • • • • . .81
Javanese women doing the family washing . . . .81
The Rice Goddess enthroned at a native festival . . .128
A woman planting rice . . . • • • • .129
A NATIVE HOUSEWIFE & A firewood seller . . . .176
Drying storing maize cobs ...... 177
The bridegroom & his steed with their attendants . . 208
European children in sedan chairs or “tandoes” . . . 208
Water supplies being fetched from a stream in petrol tins . 209
A MOUNTAIN PATH ....••••• 20 9


Sunset on Lake Sarangan ....... 209
Remains of a brick temple at Madjapahit .... 240
One of the island shrines richly carved ..... 240
A COUNTRY SCENE IN EAST Java . . . . . 24 1
Specimen of the carved stone panels at Boroboedoer . . 241
A Java mountain hotel Csf part of its terraced garden . .241




A Few Javanese a?id Malay Words m
Everyday Use in Java
Atap: roofing material made of palm leaf.
Baboe: maidservant.
Badjoe: jacket.
Baharoe: new.
Batik: cotton material patterned and dyed by hand.
Besar: big, great.
Bilik: split bamboo woven into sheets for building purposes.
Dalang: showman at a puppet show.
Dessa: a district.
Djakat: bad, wicked, naughty.
Djahit: to sew.
Djongos: house-boy.
Doekoen: magic maker.
Gamelan: native orchestra.
Gila: mad.
Golek: doll.
Kain: material (woven).
Kampong: village, hamlet.
Kazoin: marriage.
Kepala: head.
Nyonya: lady, madam.
Pandjang: long.
Pasar: market.
Penang: betel or areca nut.
Pikoelan: bamboo shoulder yoke.
Pisang: banana.
Salamat: safe, lucky.
Salamatan: good-luck feast.
Sapoe: duster or cloth.
Sapoe lidi: a switch or brush made of a bunch of palm-leaf midribs.
Sarong: the skirtlike garment worn by most Javanese men and women.
Selendang: a long scarf, usually of batik.
Sirik: the leaf in which betel-nut “chew” is wrapped.
Toean: sir, a lord or gentleman. Usual form of respectful address.
Toekang: a craftsman or tradesman. (E.g. toekang mas = goldsmith, etc.)
Toko: shop (Chinese).
Wayang: native shadow or puppet show.
Any of the above words containing the letters “ oe” are spelt in British Malaya
with “a” instead. Those beginning with u di” are spelt with a “y” only.


C Hoi P r E 71
The Lazy Native
UNIQUE in this as in all else, Java alone among the
East Indian islands is rich in the possession of a large
native population. And it is the colourful crowds of
these gaily dressed, brown-skinned people, ever moving to
and fro across the scene on their lawful occasions, that first
arrest the attention of every traveller.
“How picturesque!” “How quaint!” is the typical
tourist’s comment; and so, perhaps, they are. But there is
a great deal more “to” the Javanese natives than that. Though
they look as gay and as carefree as butterflies they are also as
busy as bees; and the bright flowered batik of their national
dress camouflages people for the most part as industrious as
the Chinese. They are a perfect example of the fallacy of
judging by appearances, and many is the casual critic that has
fallen into the trap.
Like all Orientals, the Javanese has a secret that we have
not; the secret of true repose. Unlike the European, he
feels no need to fill up his free time with entertainments
(though he greatly enjoys them when they come his way),
for he knows as well how to idle as he does how to work.
He does neither the one nor the other at high speed as we do,
and consequently knows nothing of the “nerves” that drive
us feverishly to perpetual motion. He works so hard, so
steadily, and so long, that when he does stop, his one desire
is to rest, and he asks no more than to be allowed to do
nothing. It is this complete relaxation of his that leads
European visitors so ludicrously astray in their superficial
judgment of the “lazy native.”
The Javanese is blessed with a cheery philosophy that
enables him to accept, as all in the day’s work, labour that the
poorest white man would refuse with indignation. You
will see coolies plodding up mountain gradients of “one-in-
three,” carrying porcelain baths and basins, corrugated iron,
tiles, bricks, bags of cement, sideboards, teak wardrobes, and
even pianos and all the other items that help to make life


in the Java highlands so pleasant for the European. The
carriers are usually singing and chaffing one another as they
go; and their pay is about threepence per journey of several
hours’ steady climbing, with return down the mountain
thrown in. The womenfolk work with equal cheerfulness
for even less reward. Loads of tiles are often carried on
these same steep roads, on the backs of tiny frail-looking
creatures, bowed almost double, who seem to possess the
same carrying power, in proportion to their size, as ants.
Their wage is about two-thirds of that paid to the men.
It is scarcely surprising that the possessors of such a
temperament, tackling the heaviest of donkey work with
cheery equanimity, should regard light work as a mere game.
Such work as waiting at table the Javanese genuinely enjoys,
as you may see if you live in an hotel where the domestic
regime is a happy one (an important proviso, for the Javanese
is intensely sensitive to the kind of authority under which he
works). It is pleasant to sit and watch half a dozen laughing
djongos (table-boys) vying with each other for the pleasure of
serving you. One will bring a fork, another a knife, and
another a plate: each polished with gusto under your eyes,
as he runs up with it, on the snow-white napkin worn as a
sign of office across every table-boy’s shoulder, and any
request will send one of them off at a swift, short-stepped trot,
noiseless on bare feet, to carry out your wishes.
Odd little surprises will be prepared for you now and then.
You may come in to dinner, especially when you have guests,
to find the napkins elaborately shaped into long-necked birds,
with red combs and yellow beaks made of flower petals;
while the author of the artistic effort stands shyly by, beaming
and eager as a child for your praise and approval.
The Javanese servant (except when he has been over-
Europeanised) never considers himself “put upon,” but he
dearly likes to confide in a sympathetic listener. The hotel
djongos who brings you your coffee at 6 a.m. (the usual hour
in the Dutch East Indies) will tell you that he started work
a quarter of an hour or so earlier, after perhaps an hour’s
walk from his home. He will be on duty till about 2 p.m.
and is then free till nearly 4 p.m., at which time tea is taken
round. Then he carries on till after dinner, say nine-thirty


or so, unless some convivial cocktail party should only go in
to dine when everyone else has finished. But even then the
philosophic djongos shows no sign of resentment, though he
seldom gets thanks, and tips never, and often not even ordinary
politeness, for his pains.
This is a manifestation of native amiability especially
appreciated by visitors from Australia, where the weary
traveller who arrives at an hotel later than about seven o’clock
in the evening cannot even get a cup of tea, much less dinner,
and is forced to starve in impotent rage (in the cause of
democracy) till breakfast next morning!
I once had rooms in a Java hotel whence I could look out
on the road leading to the back entrance, and thus had some
illuminating glimpses of the “off duty” appearance and
mannerisms of the varied individualities hidden during
working hours beneath the trim uniform of the staff.
Punctually at a quarter to six, in the delicious freshness of
early morning in this part of the world, all the djongos would
appear on their way to work, some afoot and some on bicycles,
mostly wearing the black or dark-red velvet Malay cap now
the fashionable native wear in large towns. Some were in
smart Palm-beach jackets, and all wore sarongs or kain of every
imaginable hue from vivid emerald (and silk at that) to
glowing orange or deep rich claret, as well as of every variety
of hatik or tartan: these last, unfortunately for Java’s local
colour, being more and more introduced by the lately estab-
lished weaving industry. (It should be explained that the
term sarong has come to be applied indiscriminately by
Europeans to any of the skirt-like garments worn by Javanese
men and women. Correctly, sarong only applies when the
two-metre length of kain , i.e. material, is seamed up into a
skirt. This is the working dress. But on more formal
occasions men wear an unjoined kain elaborately pleated in
front and held in place by a clip. To refer to the wearer’s
“ sarong ” when he is so dressed would be an affront.)
Ten minutes later all these individually attired young
Javanese townsmen had been metamorphosed into an im-
personal staff of servants in neat starched white drill uniform
and hatik head-dress; in regard to which latter, however, no
hotel management would ever dream of insisting upon


uniformity. At one time every district had its own style,
worn only by the men of that particular region; but nowadays
they are worn by all and sundry according to taste. Some
choose prim, close-fitting dark-blue and brown cloches r,
V-shaped on the brow, giving the effect of a centre hair
parting; others affect brighter colours and jaunty designs
with the twisted corners of batik sticking out at odd angles.
The Javanese are as cheery people as any in the world, but
they take themselves, their affairs and their beliefs, with great
seriousness, and their laughter is a sort of froth floating
lightly on the surface of their hard working lives. Of the
“sense of humour,” as we know it, the Javanese has none;
or if he has, it is one of the things for ever hidden from the
Western mind.
But he has something better. He can make a joke of
sudden annoying emergencies and contretemps that would
infuriate the average European. He never grumbles or shows
the slightest ill-temper on such occasions. For instance, at a
particularly well administered hotel of my acquaintance, the
house staff were allowed to gather in the late afternoon, when
the tables were laid for dinner, for a spell of leisure at one end
of what the Dutch call the “voorgalerij,” a place almost as
spacious as a church and furnished like a club smoking-room
with heavy arm-chairs, tables and thick carpets, in reality
a giant verandah with its roof supported at front and sides
by pillars.
Here, all dressed up, and obviously taking much pride in
their smart appearance in freshly starched uniforms, ready to
“wait” at table, they would squat in groups on the steps or
the floor in their characteristic fashion, smoking and chatting
in low voices about their latest love or financial affairs, with no
more strenuous work to trouble them till dinner time, except
to respond to an occasional call for drinks from the guests.
But every now and then during the West monsoon a
terrific storm would break over the town, with drenching
downpours of rain driven by wind-gusts of hurricane force,
and within a few minutes the great “voorgalerij ” was flooded.
The happy, idling djongos needed no command to spur them
to action. With the first low rumble of thunder or heavy
spot of rain, off would come the smart white jackets while


they raced indoors to hang them safely out of harm’s way,
and then, laughing and chattering as though the whole affair
were an entertainment got up for their benefit, all hands set
to with a will, shifting the heavy teak furniture into shelter,
rolling up rugs and carpets, racing up and down the tiled
floor, fighting back the sudden flood of water with buckets
and cloths and the bunches of palm-leaf ribs they call sapoe
lidi. For a time, it may be anything from ten minutes to
half an hour or so, all is excitement; and then, as suddenly as
it came, the storm passes. Everything is set in place again
with as much cheerfulness as it was removed; and presently
you may sit peacefully drinking your after-dinner coffee
looking out upon the quiet moonlit river from your favourite
corner, where an hour ago all was disorder, waited upon as
you were at dinner by a servant as calm and smart and smiling
as ever, showing not the slightest trace of the disturbance
that so lately broke in upon his little hour of cherished
leisure.
A naif vanity is characteristic of most Javanese, and to
take his “portret” (as he calls it) is a sure road to his esteem.
But beware of photographing him in groups! I once took
some snaps of a friend’s native staff, promising a copy of his
own “portret” to each if they would come and collect the
prints on a certain day. But our cherished idea of fair play
for all does not appeal in the least to the Javanese mind, and
if you think to please by treating a number all alike you will
find yourself greatly mistaken. It was useless to point out
to my eager sitters that having duly graced one group of
chosen cronies they should not “butt in” to another. Like
mischievous children, delighted at their own cleverness, they
insinuated themselves into corners of every group they could,
the number of their appearances depending upon the strength
of their determination.
The fun really began when they came to call for their
prints. These simple yet shrewd young Javanese construed
my promise of “one man, one portret” on quite a different
principle to mine. It had seemed so simple beforehand to
make a list of names and cross them off as the prints were
delivered; but when I handed each a print of his own
legitimate group and waved them away, the delighted faces,


eagerly scanning their own counterfeit presentment, would
fall at once. “But, Toean , there are others,” they would say.
“The Toean took my ‘portret’ twice” (or three or four times,
as the case might be), and their childish dismay at the thought
of going away without a copy of every picture in which their
ingenuous brown faces appeared made it hard to disappoint
them. I weakened, of course; what was a few cents, I
thought, compared with the amount of innocent pleasure that
it would buy? They should have prints of all as soon as I
could get them done.
The complications that followed this rash undertaking
lasted for weeks. Almost every day someone would knock
at my door, wearing a conspiratorial air, to pour out a tale of
the scandalous behaviour of one or other of his colleagues in
getting more prints than his share. One had borrowed a
print to show to a friend and then denied ever having had it.
Another had got two lots from me by impersonating someone
else (which was more than likely; by this time I was long
past remembering which was which of my fifty odd young
friends!); everyone, in fact, except the narrator of the tale
appeared to have done something he should not. But every
one of my visitors had some perfectly good reason to offer
why he himself should be trusted with an extra copy or two,
which he assured me he would deliver safely to the rightful
owners.
Through all these gravely confided stories of the others’
knavish tricks there shone a naughty delight in “going one
better” and, at the same time, of convincing me (as they
thought) of their own superior virtue. They bore one
another not the least ill-will, but each wanted to be singled
out for special favour, not to be treated as just one of a crowd.
And, added to that, the Javanese have an ingrained love of
conspiracy. Like children, they adore a “secret,” though
they are constitutionally incapable of keeping one, and are for
ever coming to you with some confidence or other, often so
absurd that it is hard to keep a straight face.
Surprising though it seems in so individualist a type as
the Javanese, they are capable at times of real esprit de corps
as well as personal devotion to a Toean of whom they approve.
Like the schoolboy, the Javanese appreciates justice as well as


kindness, and despises .weakness, though he is just as quick
as the schoolboy to take advantage of it. In the hotel
mentioned earlier in this chapter, whose manager was one of
the all too rare kind who take the trouble really to understand
their servants, the “boys” identified themselves with the
place and took as great a pride in it as if it were their own.
Several had been in its service for seventeen or eighteen years,
and many more for eight or ten.
They never missed an opportunity of confiding their high
opinion of their Toean Besar (master), or of singing the praises
of the hotel itself. “ Enak di sini ” (it is pleasant here) one
would observe quite irrelevantly as he poured out the breakfast
coffee, to which of course you would politely agree. “The
Toean Besar is a very good person,” the servitor would con-
tinue, as he returned with the toast. “If we djongos do
anything really wrong it is true that there is that in his eyes
of which we are afraid though he speaks softly; but if one
should fall and break many plates he is not angry, for he knows
it was not done out of evil intent but because an evil spirit
tripped our feet, and so he does not cut our wages as other
Toeans do. And if one of us should be ill in his stomach as some-
times befalls, and asks permission to go home, he is allowed to
go and his pay is not cut, for the Toean well knows that we
serve him gladly and do not wish to be ill.” And so on ad
infinitum .
It should be added, however, that native servants are as
easily estranged by unfair and unkind treatment as they are
easily won by the reverse, and in such cases lack entirely the
spontaneity and pride in their job of those who work in a
happy atmosphere, though even so they will give far better
service than the average European.
The palm for long service among my acquaintance goes to
a native houseboy who has been with a Scottish family for
over twenty-five years. During this period he has been
supported in his domestic duties by three wives in succession.
The first of them went gila (out of her mind), and Min had no
difficulty in transferring the burden of the poor creature’s care
from himself to the State (the admirable divorce law in force
among the Javanese needing no reform by Mr A. P. Herbert).
The second spouse was djahat (naughty), and succumbed to


the charms of the chauffeur, so once again Min secured his
freedom. The third, so far, seems a paragon of all the
virtues, and the good old fellow’s pock-marked face wears an
expression of great content as he serves the excellent meal
that he himself has cooked.
The accepted ideas held by Europeans in regard to such a
matter as murder are apt to be severely shaken now and then
in Java. The young daughters of some planter friends of
mine, who were fond of camping in the mountains, were
allowed to do so only when accompanied by a valued old
native gardener, under whose protection their parents felt
them to be perfectly safe, and had not the slightest anxiety
about them even if they stayed away for days. The old
man had acted as the young girls’ devoted watch-dog in this
way many a time before it was accidentally discovered that
long before entering the family’s service he had “done time”
for murder, having settled some little argument with a
neighbour by stabbing him to death!
The effects of European “higher” education on the
Javanese are hard to analyse correctly. Some of the results
are unquestionably beneficial: notably the number of native
doctors who are doing such valuable work both in Government
service and in private practice to improve native public health.
Nevertheless the “educated” native is even less fathomable
than the simple countryman and apt, in Java as in India and
elsewhere, to prove a rod fashioned by a would-be beneficent
administration to scourge its own back.
I have met Javanese who have studied in Holland, speak
fluent Dutch, and are practising lucrative professions as the
result of a generous education system, who yet miss no oppor-
tunity to pour out to a foreigner disloyal comments on the
very Dutch administration that has made their education
available to them. But such cases, I hope and believe, are
rare. Many, if not most, European-educated natives are
delightful people of whose loyalty to the ruling white race
there is no question.
Many Europeans seem quite incapable of grasping the
idea of “natives” belonging to any but a low, illiterate coolie
class, an error particularly rife among Australians who are
apt to describe indiscriminately as “niggers” all persons


whose coloured skins debar them from citizenship of “White
Australia.” They little know how many grades there are in
Javanese society, and how rigid is native etiquette; nor how
all too easy it is to “drop a brick” by greeting with the usual
“ Tabek ” a person whose social rank entitles him to the more
formal “ Semhah” ; and that to address as “ Toean ” one whose
correct title is “ Radin" is a far worse insult than to apply
plain “Mister” to Sir Jonathan Jones.
How surprised they would be to know that an immense
percentage of Javanese are not only literate, but bi-lingual,
thanks to the almost universal teaching of Malay in the
schools throughout the country as well as the mother-tongue
of each region. The ordinary working-class native in the
towns sits down to read his daily newspaper in Malay, which
is not his own language, as a matter of course. It would be
interesting to know how many of the tourists who look down
upon him could do as much in, say, French or German! As
for djeroe toelis , or native clerks, they are usually tri-lingual,
speaking perfect Dutch as well, and often type with equal ease
in all three languages.
The two leading “native” newspapers, Mata Hari and Sin
Po , both issued in the Malay language, contain the same news
cables as those in English, French, Dutch, or other journals,
and their editorials would soon disillusion those who think of
“natives” as primitive uninformed folk who go about their
simple affairs oblivious of the doings of their “betters.” One
leading article, for instance, commented acidly and quite
without reverence upon the pronouncement of a member of
the Government regarding the support that might be counted
upon from natives in the event of war. “So far from agreeing
with the Minister’s remarks,” comments this native writer,
we find them merely laughable.” He goes on to criticise
the cool assumption that natives will be content to be used
wholesale as baggage-carriers, road-makers, Gfc.
Another article dealt with air-raid precautions, and re-
marked upon “the elaborate training being given the populace,
not in self-defence, but in running away.” Yet another spoke
of the number of accidents in the Air Force, “due apparently
to faults in construction, thereby wasting not only lives but
the costly training of years”; the writer (a mere “native,”


remember!) proceeded to counsel with all the sententiousness
of a Times leader, that “at least use should be made of these
mishaps to investigate and correct the mechanical defects that
caused them”! The suave and polished language in which
these articles are always written, too, would enlighten those
Europeans who fancy the Malay language is nothing more
than the string of half-learned words in which they convey
their orders to those who serve them.
In most towns and villages there is a “ Volksbibliotek,” or
People’s Library, and these are well patronised. So are the
Balai Poestika : circulating libraries that tour the country by
motor van, and introduce native readers to Shakespeare,
Dumas, Swift, Tagore, Kipling, Farnol, “Don Kiset” (Don
Quixote), and many other classical and popular works in
Malay translations.
On the shelves of many native homes you will find volumes
of classical wayang plays: far better known to the Javanese
of all classes than are Shakespeare’s to us. To the average
foreigner, the wayang is no more than a sort of native Punch
and Judy show, but to the Javanese the art of the wayang is a
matter of as serious importance as was that of the Drama to
the Greeks, and though it has suffered many changes under
the imported influences of successive conquerors, the Hindus
especially, it remains a native Javanese institution, designed
originally for the purpose of calling up the spirits of ancestors,
but thereafter developed into a unique and elaborate art. Its
strange religious origin is probably responsible for the
grotesque form of the figures, not quite human, yet one that
the imaginative Oriental mind might suppose departed human
spirits to assume, and is recalled too in the offerings always
made to the spirits before a wayang show begins.
Among the volumes of wayang plays you may find, too, an
interesting text-book called Uger Pedalangan: containing the
rules for wayang showmanship. The vocabulary of this
curious art is a rich one, but none the less the dalang , or show-
man, must be able to express by a distinct intonation every
mood and emotion, whether love, farce, tragedy, triumph,
contempt, and so on; and the slightest departure from the
accepted tone would be resented by any native audience.
Each of these tones has a name, prenesan , hanolan , &fc., and


the dalang's art of expressing them, which is held in high
esteem by the Javanese, is called lakon.
Natives say that the oldest and true native wayang is the
shadow-show they call gedog , in which krisses are worn by the
puppets, and which was in vogue long before the Hindus
imported the stories that came in time to dominate the wayang
repertoire. These, they say, were merely adapted to the
original native show. In the wayang Purwa the characters
had become Hinduised: Arjuno the Indian hero appearing
as the leading figure, and his love Subadra as heroine. In
this no krisses are worn. The Purwa took its name from the
parwas of the Mahabharata , which, with the other great
Indian epic Ramayana , supplied most of the stories that have
now merged with the old Javanese legends in the repertories
of all forms of wayang. The characters of these are inextric-
ably mixed; ancient Java heroes appear in Hindu stories,
and Hindu gods have been turned into clowns!
Another ancient form of wayang is the wayang kelitik. In
this, flat figures like those used in shadow-shows are displayed
in front of a screen instead of merely as a means of throwing
their shadows upon it. These figures are of thin wood with
leather arms, and not, as in the earlier wayang , cut entirely out
of buffalo-hide. The stories in this wayang are all of the
the heroes of Madjapahit, the East Java Hindu kingdom, and
it is still in vogue in East and Middle Java.
The next development was the wayang golek , now general
in West Java. In this the figures are wooden dolls cut out
of soft randoe or kanari wood, and elaborately painted and
dressed. This gives the puppet-maker much more scope,
and the sixty-odd characters are all differently treated, and
immediately recognisable by a Javanese. The less observant
European, however, seldom succeeds in recognising any but
the hero Baladewa, whose magnificent head-dress, called
kuluk , is unmistakable.
The word wayang , it should be explained, originally meant
shadow,” but with the introduction of puppet-shows, and
later still of plays with living actors, it has come to mean any
sort of play or players.
Another, now rare, form of wayang is the wayang heher.
In this there are no puppets, but painted figures and scenes


are unrolled and set up while the dalang sits behind unseen
and speaks the parts. This show is given on special royal
occasions in the Sultanates.
Spoken plays by unmasked living actors, called wayang
Wong, were introduced by the Sultans of Djokdja and Solo
during the last century, but they remained a royal entertain-
ment and never became popular; perhaps because the
Javanese think it unlucky to take the place of puppets. The
repertoires are much the same as those of the wayang purwa .
A few travelling shows give plays by masked actors, called
wayang topeng\ these are farces not unlike the well-known
Malay “opera.”
At an old-fashioned wayang , the dalang and the men of the
audience sit on one side of the kelir or screen, in front of
which hangs a brass lamp called a hlentong , while the women
sit on the other side to see the shadow. The unflattering
inference suggests itself that at the wayangs presented for
tourists, at which they see only shadows, they are probably
classed in native eyes with the womenfolk as inferior mortals!
Strangers meeting a wayang on its way to fulfil an engage-
ment have been known to mistake it (and even to describe it
in stories written on their arrival home) for a native funeral.
The box, called the kotak , in which the puppets are packed
much resembles a coffin, so the error in excusable. Another
smaller “coffin” contains horses, krises , and other stage
properties called ricitan , and a set of flat metal plates called
keprak which the dalang operates vigorously with his toes to
indicate the noise of battle when a fight between two warriors
is being staged.
Popular reaction to the first “blackouts” held by way of
air-raid precautions in the large towns of Java provided
interesting sidelights on native mentality. The leaflets which
were distributed, headed “Danger from the Skies!” and
dramatically worded in Malay, were received in perfect calm,
and the order to show no lights was obeyed almost without
exception. It seems probable that to the Javanese, living
as they do in a country where sudden and violent storms and
floods are everyday affairs, and volcanic eruptions and earth-
quakes always a possibility, the aeroplanes they are now so
well accustomed to hear roaring overhead are simply one more


noisy phenomenon added to the rest. And when they are
officially warned (just as they are of anticipated volcanic
activities) that these latest additions are likely to prove as
unpleasant as, say, Mount Merapi, which a few years ago
killed hundreds of peaceful country folk as they went about
their ordinary affairs in their fields and villages, they accept
the new danger as philosophically as they always have the old,
as something that it is quite useless to get excited about.
The women, few of whom can read, because they cannot be
spared from home in childhood to go to school, were warned
of the “blackouts” in another way. They were told by their
lords and masters that the kampong head-men had ordered
that they must stay indoors in darkness, so that the evil
spirits that would be abroad that evening (whom they would
hear in the sky) should not be able to find them or do them any
harm: which, after all, was not an inapt rendering of air-raid
intentions.


CHAPTER W
Native Ways , Food, & Fashions
t "T~AHERE is one generalisation that is quite safe to make
about the Javanese, and that is in regard to their
A personal cleanliness. Running water and these people
have a natural affinity for each other; and the running streams
that are so lovely a part of every Java landscape would seem
incomplete without the brown figures so often to be seen
standing ankle deep, pouring water over their shoulders from
any and every sort of dipper that comes to hand. The
Javanese would no more think of failing to bathe at least once
a day than he would of missing his sleep; and even in towns,
where the delicious sparkling streams he loves so dearly are
not available, he makes shift just as contentedly with the
brownish waters of the canals.
At any hour of the day you may see men removing their
clothing with becoming modesty before slipping into the warm
current, there to stand breast-deep, soaping their hair as assidu-
ously as ever hair was shampooed in a beauty parlour; and when
the long, pleasant process is over, ducking and swimming under
water, pausing for another soaping, sliding hither and thither
with the ease and grace of fishes, while the garments washed
before the bath lie spread out on the bank to dry in the sun.
Nor do native women allow town life to prevent them from
bathing. They do so fully dressed in a sarong drawn up and
secured round their bodies under the arms, slipping the wet
garment off after pulling a dry one over their head.
So long as you live in Java, you take this trait in the Javanese
character that sets them for ever washing themselves and their
garments, for granted; but you will not spend long in a
country where other standards obtain, in France, for instance,
before you appreciate it at its proper value. The ingrained
greyish grubbiness of many otherwise charming little “white”
boys’ and girls’ skins (to say nothing of that of some of their
elders!) is in sorry contrast indeed with the satin-smooth
bronze Javanese, bathed several times a day.
Not only the grubbiness, but also the slovenliness, all too


familiar in the countrysides of England and France, is foreign
to Javanese ideas. Lovers of “artistic” tumble-down cottages
and all that goes with them would find the Java kampongs far
too neat to be “picturesque,” matching as they do the orderly
perfection of the fields. Broken fences, gates hanging
drunkenly on one hinge, and makeshift fastenings with rusty
links of chain or bits of wire, so characteristic of our farms
and fields, are unknown in Java. No sooner do repairs
become necessary to a fence or bridge, or whatever it may be,
than the native makes it as good as new again. The inherent
craftsmanship universal among the people is fortunately
combined with an inexhaustible supply of bamboo at no more
cost than the trouble of planting it from time to time; and
thus it is that never a day passes but you will see a native
cutting, carrying, or splitting this invaluable material.
Europeans too benefit from the general native use of it. A
three-foot-high fence put up round a friend’s garden recently
cost ten cents per three-metre section, about a farthing per
foot. The bamboo was cut in the garden, split, and the*
fence made and erected for this princely sum, the only
additional expense being a few cents’ worth of nails.
The surfaces of the lanes that serve as main streets to
countless thousands of native kampongs are kept as smooth as
they are neatly fenced; and women and little girls are often
to be seen conscientiously sweeping the section outside their
family compound. These smooth pathways are in strange
contrast to so many lanes in rural England, very often the
only means of access, perhaps, to the homes of well-to-do
householders; lanes made up of puddles and pot-holes and
mud, only to be tackled afoot in over-shoes, or gingerly by
car at the risk of broken springs. It is amusing to reflect
that if the English gentlefolk who live thereabouts were mere
humble Javanese peasants, neither puddle nor pot-hole nor
s l°ppy mud would pollute the surface of that awkward lane!
It would be smooth and level, easy alike for shod and unshod
feet; and even, if necessary, paved with squared stone,
trimmed and laid by hand.
It is unnecessary to say that the Javanese are past-masters
in the handling of water. Their irrigation system is
admittedly one of the wonders of the world, and there is no


detail to which their patience and ingenuity does not extend.
A farmer who wants to water a field that cannot be irrigated
by a stream above it will rig up a bamboo lever with a tin at
one end, and patiently dip up water into furrow after furrow
from a stream on a lower level. When he wants to dam a
fast-flowing stream, he does not waste time building one with
loose stones, having learned by experience that these are no
match for the impetuous mountain torrents after rain; instead,
he makes baskets of split bamboo, and puts his stones into
them, so that his dam hangs together. On somewhat the
same principle he binds the earth with which he builds the
“bunds” between his water-filled ricefields, with rice-straw,
so that they never crumble, narrow as they are. And he well
knows how to make running water serve him in other ways
besides irrigation. I watched some men one day who were
weeding a stone-paved mountain road. It was during the
dry monsoon, and the earth between the stones was hard as
concrete. But that troubled them not at all. The mandoer
(foreman) looked round for a handy stream, never far to seek
in the Java mountains, dammed it with earth and straw and
stones, and deflected its flow over the road till it was soaked
and the weeds came up easily; then demolished his little dam,
and turned the stream back into its proper course, all as
casually as turning a tap on and off.
You will see examples of native ingenuity in everyday
matters at every turn. How neatly, for instance, he solves
the problem of felling a dead shade-tree in a tea or coffee
plantation, without damage to the bushes beneath it. If he
cut it at the base it would crash down and smash perhaps a
dozen or more in its fall; so he climbs another tree near by,
taking a rope with him which he passes over a branch at a
good height from the ground; then comes down again and
climbs the tree he is about to fell, taking one end of the rope
and tying it securely high up among the branches. Then he
perches himself a little below and chops into the trunk until
he has weakened it enough to break off with a sharp pull on
the rope. It looks a risky business, but he knows just when
to stop. “ Turun ” (come down) calls his partner below, who
has been holding the rope’s end on the farther side of the first
tree, and down he scrambles, out of harm’s way, as the rope


tautens. The top of the tree then bends slowly over and
breaks off with a splintering crash. Its fall controlled by the
rope, it swings harmlessly in mid-air and is carefully lowered
to the ground. The process is repeated, once, or perhaps
twice, and the thing is done.
The same ingenuity and infinite patience is applied to
everything the native does. He will plant a field with cassava
(tapioca) cuttings with such meticulous exactitude that from
whatever angle you view them they stretch away in long,
dead straight lines in the distance, forming a perfectly sym-
metrical network of tiny squares; or set out another field
with seedlings, each one of many thousands shaded by a little
half hoop of sugarcane waste or screen of banana stem, pains-
takingly made and stuck in by hand. A municipal road
sweeper fits a scraper neatly made of an empty tin at one end
of a long bamboo, and a stiff little brush of palm midribs at
the other, and is thus equipped with the perfect tool for his
purpose.
Everything that we do with machinery the Javanese does
by hand. He “mows” the lawn as smoothly as though by a
razor, with his small curved knife called an aret or the larger
gogok bangan\ and though visitors from more “advanced”
countries sometimes smile superiorly when they see rice
being harvested a head at a time with a little knife, the native
scores heavily if a storm should flatten his crop before it is
cut, as happens sometimes in Java as elsewhere. A European
farmer, dependent on machinery, would groan that his wheat
or oats are ruined, but the Javanese is quite unperturbed;
thanks to his “primitive” methods, his crop can be gathered
with little trouble and no loss.
The Javanese wooden plough, or loekoe , too, is as primitive
an implement as you please. But the farmer knows better
than to change it for any modern innovation. It is of exactly
the same design as that used by his forefathers for countless
generations, and is perfectly adapted for its purpose. It
can be easily carried on a man’s shoulder to and from the
fields, and turned with the minimum of trouble when in
use.
The native countryman’s knowledge of local conditions
is of course unrivalled, and the Dutch have the wisdom to


make full use of this when occasion arises. When, for
instance, a bridge is to be built in a region subject to bandjir
(floods), local natives are always consulted.
It is difficult for Europeans to realise how humble is the
native’s financial standard, and how pleased he is with the
tiniest coin. It is worth while always to carry a supply of
copper cents (of which a roll of fifty, done up in a screw of
newspaper, is to be had at any Chinese toko (shop) for the
equivalent larger coin); for one of these, worth only about
a farthing to us, is quite acceptable to a Javanese. It will
buy a packet of the tiny cigarettes so dear to his heart, or a
portion of most of the eatables sold at the wayside stalls. The
possession of this small change will save the European
traveller a considerable sum in the course of a few weeks, and
achieves just as much in good will as five cent or ten cent
pieces.
You have only to watch for awhile, when the tide is low,
from one of the bridges over the river at Soerabaya, to realise
how much a very little may be worth to the native. You will
see men and boys wading waist deep as they dredge in the
mud with flat baskets for bits of old iron, bottles, prawns, a
possible coin or so, or anything else the gods may send them.
The gleaners are so many that the harvest at best must be
pitifully small; but the Javanese is an incurable optimist;
and at worst he has an excuse for a bathe, which, next to
eating, is his favourite occupation.
In the matter of food the Javanese are artists in their way,
and no French chef could put more care than they do into the
preparation of the queer concoctions they find so delicious.
Like the French, too, they have the “restaurant habit,” or
rather that of “eating out”; the population is too large and
too well distributed to be catered for by restaurants, and the
demand is met by thousands of itinerant food-sellers who set
up little stalls by the roadside or trot along carrying a cooking-
stove and pots and pans hanging at one end of their pikoelan
(bamboo shoulder yoke) and a larderful of dainties at the other;
ready to pull up and serve a meal for a few cents to any passing
client. A small blue bowl is taken from a pile in the larder,
and on to a foundation of rice other portions are ladled to taste,
after the inevitable soup made of coconut milk in which float


lumps of katella (sweet potato) and other vegetables, and a
piece of dried fish. For more prosperous customers there
are soft pale-green cookies called lontong made of rice steamed
in banana leaf, looking, if the truth must be told, rather like
Cornish pasties that have gone mouldy! Another popular
favourite is the temper , a small rice roll containing minced
chicken; it is wrapped in banana leaf and pinned at the ends
into a tiny parcel with splinters of bamboo.
The Javanese have a very sweet tooth: so much so in fact
that they sometimes even pay for it with their lives. Wild
honey abounds in the forests, and to get it they smoke the
bees out of their nest in some high tree, and a man will climb
up to take the honeycombs. It occasionally happens that the
angry swarm returns too soon, and settling on the thief sting
him so furiously that he falls out of the branches and is killed.
Among favourite sweetmeats less adventurously acquired
are tjaka ayam , made of strips of cassava dipped in sugar and
fried golden-brown, stuck together in little bunches like
chickens’ claws, which is the meaning of their name; flat
round flour and sugar cakes with a hole in the middle, dyed
pink or yellow, which are strung together like Chinese ‘‘ cash ’’;
and pisang sale (sundried bananas). These last are sold not
only at native foodstalls, but in packets at railway stations, and
are often eaten by European travellers.
Despite the fact that the Javanese eat with their fingers, and
so perhaps offend European ideas of propriety, they are
extremely finicky about the appearance and colour of their
dishes, and dyes therefore play an important part in their
menus. Rice, cassava, and coconut cakes are dyed all sorts
of brilliant colours, and so are their sauces; native taste
inclining for these latter to a particularly garish pink. Some
dishes are richly black, an effect for which burnt coconut
leaves are used; others are snowy white with grated coconut;
for brown ones, caramel or palm sugar is the medium; and
for red, hibiscus flowers or the leaves of the red Colius ; a
familiar red-dyed item being a tiny fish like whitebait, called
ikan glagah , served at a European rice table as well as with
native repasts. The sap of almost any non-poisonous leaves
may be used to make green dishes, which Europeans often
make the mistake of supposing to be mouldy! Blue ones


are dyed with the petals of Clitorea\ yellow, with saffron,
Gardenia, or the pith of a huge fruit called nangka. Many of
the same dyes are used in batik making.
Native fritters and fried chicken are excellent, always
providing your prejudice against coconut-oil is not insur-
mountable. And a hungry English motorist who pulls up
at a native restaurant may get a meal more to his taste at the
cost of a few cents than at an expensive Dutch one. Any
passing native in a country town will direct you to one; and
there you can help yourself at a laden counter to a portion
of fried chicken or a variety of other delicacies for three cents
or so, and sit down to eat at a small table adorned with a gay,
clean, coloured cloth and a great dish of Ambon bananas as
centrepiece. A bowl of steaming rice will cost you one cent;
a couple of bananas and a big cup of strong black coffee, three
more; and to offer the odd cent change as a tip out of a ten
cent piece is neither usual nor polite! The behaviour of the
clientele in these humble eating houses could not be more
decorous at the Ritz. I have never known anyone even cock
an eye at the intruder, though a European female must be an
extremely rare bird in such places (it simply isn’t done by the
Best People!); and one can only marvel again at the uncon-
scious example in good manners that these simple folk often
set to those who regard them as “inferiors.”
The motorist who prefers an al fresco meal bought from a
roadside food vendor will fare almost equally well, except
that he will have to take his chicken or temper in his fingers.
But so did far greater folk in Merrie England not so many
years ago; and in Java there is always a sparkling stream near
by to serve as finger-bowl.
Food varies in different parts of Java, and so do fashions,
particularly in millinery. In the West Java countryside,
when a man wears anything other than the usual batik head-
dress, it is usually a wide straw hat that is the special product of
Tanggerang. In East and Middle Java hats are also worn,
but they are small, stiff, miniature editions of Chinese coolie
hats, rising to a point in the centre, or else a queer basin shape.
Either kind is often perched on the top of the batik headdress,
which the Javanese wears so constantly that he probably
forgets it does not grow on his head. Occasionally, however,
35
Native Ways , Food\ & Fashions


he will reverse the order, with even more comical effect; and
even in the highly sophisticated streets of Batavia, you may
see a velvet Malay cap fitted neatly over the crown of a wide
brimmed Tanggerang straw. A “dunce’s cap,” exactly like
those used to shade choice chrysanthemums, is sometimes
worn in East Java; and in one district a kind of woven helmet
is the mode.
It is not only in matters of headgear that Javanese men are
greater slaves to fashion than their womenkind. In some
places, so perverse is human nature, it is the custom to blacken
and polish the white and even teeth, of which most of them
are the lucky possessors, with a dentifrice they call hanyon ,
made of coconut milk in which iron rust has been steeped.
Djoko bark is used for polishing, and the processes are re-
peated until a shine like that on patent leather is attained.
Elsewhere the victims of custom tamely submit to the removal
of their two upper middle teeth on arrival at adolescence.
And in the Preanger, where the people are much lighter-
skinned than elsewhere in Java, and the men almost beardless,
they pluck out any hairs that may appear on their chins, an
occupation at which you may often see them engaged with
tweezers and a little looking glass, as they squat on the grass
by the roadside.
There are fashions too in umbrellas. In the royal capital
of Djokdjakarta, large yellow or black gamps vary the Java
wide use of those made of oiled paper, and add a charac-
teristic note to local colour, especially when they are displayed
in shop windows against backgrounds of burnt sienna and
indigo batik.
Tenacious though he is of all these and a thousand other
native customs, the Javanese shows himself amusingly
susceptible sometimes to European influences, even when
these are least appropriate. The native child, for instance,
born and bred to tropic heat, thrives in it like a little salamander.
Nevertheless house servants in the towns, who have come to
regard mountain holidays as the “done thing,” will gravely
inform you that they have sent their families away to the hills
for the hot weather.
The natives of different parts of Java vary as much as do
those of our English counties. In the Preanger, people met


along the road will greet you of their own accord, a man
raising the straw hat perched atop of his batik headdress as he
does so. In East Java, though they respond at once to your
greeting, they seldom take the initiative. But it is easy to
get on terms with native children everywhere.
We may smile at native simplicities; yet the Javanese
might retort that he has long outgrown some childish things
still firmly believed by many people in England. Old Moore ,
for instance! A Javanese equivalent of this immortal work
was published about a century and a half ago at the court of
the Sultan of Solo; and among many prophecies foretold that
“vehicles would move without horses or oxen”; that “lines
of metal would carry travellers across the country”; and that
“when the pas ars (markets) lose their echo the women of Java
would lose their virtue.” An old resident who owned a copy
of the book told me sadly that this last prophecy had been
fulfilled as well as the others. The pas ars had lost their once
characteristic echo when the old-fashioned high roofs had
been replaced by others of modern design; and (so he averred)
the modern Javanese “Miss” had travelled far from the
modest simplicity of her grandmother!
But however that may be, the fact remains that the Javanese
natives are a pleasant people. They differ from ourselves in
a thousand ways, great and small; but they possess qualities
that give us very seriously to think, before assuming with too
much certainty that it is we who are the Superior Race.


c H Pr E T
Wedding Days
THE Javanese attitude to marriage and divorce is the
exact antithesis of ours. In England marriage is
dangerously easy and divorce deplorably difficult. In
Java the married state is enviably simple to escape from when
occasion demands; there is, for instance, an old custom, still
extant in places, which permitted a man whose wife remained
childless to return her to her parents and ask for another
sister in exchange! But casual register office weddings
are not for the Javanese couple, and the long drawn out
ceremonial that is their unescapable prelude to matrimony
is an infallible! preventive of rashness, and would probably
scare any European into perpetual celibacy.
As in Europe, there are in Java months that are specially
popular for weddings. Many are celebrated just before
Ramadan, the Mohammedan month of fasting, and many
more when that disturbing period is over. And in Middle
and East Java, where the effect of the dry East monsoon is
most marked, and rice cannot be planted all the year round
as in the West, the favourite marriage months are June and
July, after the gathering of the rice harvest.
In Middle Java, above Madioen in the Sultanate of
Soerakarta, there is a mountain region between Magetan and
Ngerong that celebrates weddings in a way all its own. I
lived for some time in this district in a house whose garden
overlooked the road through Plaosan, a native and Chinese
township possessing no white population except ourselves
and the occupants of two or three villas on the outskirts,
which therefore was affected but little by modern influences.
The more so that it lay almost at the end of the road to the
higher ranges, which a mile further on became too steep for
ordinary traffic.
Our garden made an ideal “dress circle” from which to
look on at the show unconsciously provided for us, day in,
day out, by the inhabitants as they passed up and down on
their lawful occasions along this road which, with its hedges


of roses and hibiscus, and its overarching bamboos and shady
trees framing glimpses of the distant mountains, made a
perfect setting for the scene.
The revue that passed unceasingly across this natural
stage was colourful enough at all times. But in the marriage
months it became doubly entertaining. An atmosphere of
restless activity pervaded the village during these wedding
days, continuing hour after hour, day and night, instead of
only before and after the market as at ordinary times. Groups
of people in twos and threes would stand about laughing and
chattering; and every now and then a native girl, dressed in
her best and dainty as a flower, would pass up the road carry-
ing on her head a large tray covered with a white lace cloth.
These trays were laden with all kinds of eatables, and might
be either contributions from relations to the marriage feasts,
or else gifts accompanying invitations to the wedding.
In Java custom demands that the parents of a young couple
about to marry shall give presents to the entire circle of their
acquaintance. The Javanese have in fact an incorrigible
habit of present-giving to all and sundry on the occasion of
any sort of salamatan (good luck feast) whether personal or
public, a habit which it is the accepted thing among Europeans
to condemn as extravagance. And yet there is something
very likeable about this overwhelming desire of theirs to share
any great occasion with their friends. It is, moreover, largely
a matter of exchange; for the compliment is always returned
either in cash or in kind. Among the Javanese, as with us,
it would be unthinkable to go to a wedding without giving a
wedding present.
All day the endless cavalcade goes by. Sooner or later
the members of the gamelan orchestra will pass, laden with
their instruments, without whose queer monotonous music
no native celebration is complete. The big gong, measuring
four feet across, packed in a great bamboo basket like a huge
wash-basin; the principal instrument, a kind of giant
xylophone ten feet long, and its stand, a gaily painted red and
gold contraption like a highly ornate bedstead, are each
carried by two young men walking one behind the other,
with a stout bamboo resting on their shoulders from which
the instrument is slung. Smaller gongs and other instru-


merits are carried in long tubular containers of split bamboo;
the whole procession, of a dozen or more, all in appropriately
festive mood and laughing and singing as they go.
There is always one discordant note in these otherwise
delightful day-long shows. Inevitable as the gamelan is the
appearance of the limp, dismembered corpse of a sapi (steer
or bullock), slain like the fatted calf of old to provide meat for
the feast. It is usually carried back from the village slaughter-
house in a large shallow wooden cradle with barred sides
that afford a much too good view of the unsightly contents.
The pretty golden brown head, with horns and soft velvet
muzzle all dabbled with blood, will 101 l grotesquely in a
basket borne in the rear: destined most likely to form an
offering to ingratiate evil spirits, and turn them from any
unkind intentions they might be entertaining towards the
bride and bridegroom.
Excitement grows as the day passes, and does not end
with the coming of darkness. All through the night, if
you happen to wake, you will hear voices and laughter:
but always subdued, as is the way with these mannerly
people. And a little before dawn, the bang of a shot-gun
will announce that the wedding celebrations have officially
started. They will go on, first at the bridegroom’s home
and then at that of the bride, for days; until such time, in
fact, as all the provisions, if not the guests, are exhausted.
On this day, about noon, the bridegroom goes in procession
to the Mesigit (mosque), and it is now that the real show
begins. The whole population turns out to see it. Even
the tanis (farmers) take care to be back from the fields, and
see their plough-bufflaloes safely stalled in time to bathe and
don their newest sarong before either joining the crowds that
line the roads or becoming part of the procession itself, which
swells and lengthens as it goes. It is as fantastic a sight as
ever was devised in pantomime, and as it comes slowly into
view in the brilliant tropic sunshine, you are likely, especially
when you see it for the first time, to rub your eyes and wonder
if you are dreaming.
The wail and squeal of bamboo pipes and a vague thudding
of drums, mingled with the murmurous hum of many voices
and the soft scuffle of bare feet, comes nearer and nearer.


Then, round a bend in the dappled shade and sunshine of the
winding road trot a score or so small boys, all turning fascinated
half-frightened glances back over their shoulders at the antics
of a huge monster that capers just behind them.
Sometimes leaping high into the air, where it seems to
remain uncannily suspended; jumping clear from one side of
the road to the other; now facing this way and now that;
twirling giddily, or springing suddenly backwards into the
midst of its delighted followers, the amazing apparition
slowly approaches. It is crowned with an immense fanshaped
headdress made of peacocks’ feathers, bedizened with
streamers and spangles and flowers, towering high above
the crimson-scarred hibiscus hedge that borders the road.
It has an enormous lion’s face with staring eyes, prodigious
whiskers and hideously grinning teeth; and the twirling
figure itself is decked with every sort of bizarre drapery that
Oriental naivete could devise. Yards of muslin and scraps
of batik of every hue hang about it indiscriminately, touched
up here and there with bows and tassels. And finally, a pair
of magnificently muscular calves emerge from three-quarter-
length loose breeches trimmed with ludicrously feminine
frills. A ten-foot-long tail of extremely grubby calico whirls
with the agile giant’s leaps and bounds, its end held by another
masked dancer who plays up faultlessly to his leader’s com-
plicated performance, while missing no opportunity to cap-
ture the applause with a solo on his own account whenever
opportunity offers.
Behind these come two lads dressed as female characters,
their brown cheeks rouged, wearing bejewelled headdresses
and dangling earrings, and their thin braceleted bare arms
hanging from modish quasi-European decolletages . They are
followed by the “band,” whose instruments consist of three
or four small oblong drums hung from the players’ necks, and
tapped with the fingers at each end; some tambourines; and
a mixture of bamboo pipes and whistles, producing be-
tween them a rhythmical and not unpleasing accompani-
ment.
But all this is merely accessory to the procession proper.
The real hero of the occasion, the bridegroom, is now seen
approaching, riding on a pony and shaded by a large umbrella


carried by an attendant walking beside him. The benedict-
to-be is an even odder figure in his way than the capering
dancers that preceded him. He sits absolutely rigid, im-
passive and expressionless as a doll, his face whitened like
that of a circus clown, his hands in loose white cotton gloves,
the left arm stiffly a-kimbo, and the right hand with gold rings
(worn outside the glove) gleaming on the first and fourth
fingers, as he stiffly holds the reins.
He wears a heavily braided black cloth military cap and
long coat, with loose black breeches ending below the knees
to reveal the suspenders that hold up barred red-and-white
stockings; and black laced shoes of generous size to accom-
modate feet better accustomed to go bare. A kris is stuck
in his belt at the back, and from its hilt dangles a string of
glass beads, in contrast to a chain of real gold and silver coins,
hung round his neck and falling to his waist. The bewilder-
ing ensemble is completed by a pink muslin sash tied round
his waist in a big bow.
The bridegroom’s mount is draped with red netting trimmed
with tassels; and the saddle is a sort of winged boat with a
Garuda head, suggesting the probability that these ceremonies
must date back to Hindu times, five centuries or more ago;
for Garuda was the god Shiva’s favourite mount. Bracelets
of bells jingle on the pony’s fetlocks and on its tinsel crown,
and round its neck is a pink sash to match its rider’s. Trained
specially for these occasions (and hired out at a not incon-
siderable fee by its owner, a well-to-do local Javanese) the
animal dances along with mincing steps, in time, more or less,
to the band.
It is the duty of the attendant umbrella-bearer to keep the
umbrella twirling over the bridegroom’s head without pause
from beginning to end of his progress to the Mesigit , for it is
by this means that an abundant offspring is assured to the
coming marriage; and this is a consideration of the first
importance in Java, where children begin to earn their con-
tribution to the family exchequer almost as soon as they can
toddle. The umbrella man does his duty conscientiously;
with only a slight lapse now and then when some superlatively
funny antic by the dancers distracts him, and he pauses to
join in the delighted chorus of “Wahl” with which the


Javanese express applause; but he always resumes his fertilis-
ing exertions the next moment with redoubled vigour.
The bridegroom’s procession consists only of men: all
dressed in their smartest batik sarongs and headdress, and
starched white jackets. And as every available man in the
village turns out to support each bridegroom in turn, and the
latter’s costume, the pony, and its trappings are all hired for
each successive marriage, is it any wonder that it is hard to
distinguish between the wedding parties of Paiman, Sapari,
Osman, or Matradji, even though you may be on the friendliest
of terms with them in everyday life ?
The dancers are known as “ Ryoks” ; they are local men
whose skill has been acquired in a lifetime of practice, and
genuine skill it is, suggestive at times of the methods of the
Russian Ballet. Their art is often a family one, handed down
from father to son. Their services are considered indispens-
able at any comme-il-faut wedding in their district, so that
during the marriage months they make a substantial addition
to their income. In ordinary life they are farmers and
cultivators like the rest of the community. Their elaborate
masks are communal property, for which an association called
atoeran sinoman make themselves responsible. In our village
they are kept at the school, in full view both of scholars and
passers-by, but familiarity does not seem to detract in the least
from the thrill they produce when the Ryoks appear in them.
The procession winds slowly along, with many halts to
allow the dancers to entertain the populace, until at last it
comes to the Mesigit , where the Mo din (whose function it is,
among many others, to look after local religious affairs and
to marry and divorce any who desire his services) is sitting on
the steps, smoking the odd little tapering cigarettes beloved
of all Javanese natives, while he awaits the arrival of the
party.
The bridegroom is helped from his pony by two of his
friends (his unaccustomed clothes apparently making him
incapable of independent action) and then walks stiffly across
the compound with an attendant on each side of him, to the
foot of the steps, from which the Modin has now disappeared
behind a curtain. One attendant here takes off the groom’s
cap while the other stoops down to unlace and remove the


clumsy shoes, and then for a few minutes they leave him
standing there alone, a quaint unreal-looking figure, expres-
sionless as ever, while they go off to wash their feet in a little
room at the side, before entering the Mesigit.
Then, all together, the three young men ascend the steps,
lift the curtain, and disappear. Further we cannot follow
them; but I am assured that in the very few minutes they
remain out of sight, inside, the bridal knot is securely tied (in
exchange for two and a half guilders) despite the absence of
a bride. That is until such time, of course, if the marriage
should not be a success, as the husband may see fit to spend
the same modest sum in having it untied again!
Meanwhile, outside in the road, the Ryok dancers have
seized the opportunity to relax: to raise their masks and
exchange pleasantries with their friends in the crowd, until
the bridegroom returns and stiffly mounts his pony again, to
sit there motionless as a Horse Guard, the umbrella still
faithfully twirling above his head, while the Ryoks proceed to
give a whirlwind performance of mock fights and wild caper-
ings to which all their previous efforts have been a mere
curtain-raiser. This show outside the Mesigit is the most
important item of their performance, and its omission would
not only deeply offend the village public, but reflect most
adversely on the prestige and reputation for generosity of the
bridegroom’s parents. So he doubtless accepts it with the
rest of the tiresome preliminaries to connubial bliss, as he sits
on his pony, his immobility in odd contrast to the general
hilarity, visibly the only person present who is not enjoying
the entertainment: though it is probable that, even if he were,
custom would forbid him to show any sort of expression.
The crowd has grown by this time until it has completely
filled the street between the low-browed Chinese shops, but
remains a most mannerly audience in spite of its enthusiasm.
Sometimes, from one end of it or the other, there will come a
cry of “Mo-tor-r-r-r—” the final “r” trilling from mouth to
mouth, like the purr of a giant cat. And with the sound the
crowd splits in two as though a wedge had been driven into
it, and dancers, band, bridegroom, wedding-guests and
onlookers all press back helter-skelter to the sides of the
narrow road, overflowing into shops and front gardens and


tumbling into the deep ditches, as a car (usually driven at
high speed, for there is no “30-mile limit” here) with blaring
horn tears through the human avenue thus formed, yielding
glimpses of massive figures and pasty faces, and perhaps the
echo of a contemptuous laugh at these silly native pranks.
But it has no sooner passed than the crowd, quite without
resentment, flows out over the road again, even giving the
white man’s car a cheer to speed it on its way, while the Ryoks
start their gymnastics again as though they had never been
interrupted.
The bride’s progress to the mosque is a very different story.
So unobtrusive is it that you must keep a keen look out if you
are to see it at all. No drums or dancers give warning of its
coming as it makes its way humbly along the same road that
the bridegroom travelled so triumphantly a few hours earlier.
And if ever proof were wanted of woman’s insignificant place
in the Oriental scheme of things, this almost furtive little
party would supply it.
With whitened face, wearing a crown of paper and tinsel
flowers, and a new, but quite ordinary, sarong and little muslin
coat, the bride-to-be rides past in a primitive tandoe (sedan-
chair) surrounded by a score or so of her women friends, all,
of course, wearing their best. They are dressed, in fact,
exactly like the bride herself, except that no crown adorns
the sleekly brushed dark hair coiled so neatly on the nape of
each slim neck, and their brown cheeks are innocent of her
disguising white make-up. They steal sedately down the
road, scarcely receiving even the tribute of a glance from the
passers-by, and presently the bride in her turn disappears
behind the curtain of the Mesigit. Soon she creeps shyly out
again, climbs back into her chair, and the little party melts
away into the distance once more as inconspicuously as it
had come.
The whole programme is repeated day after day, without
any variation that an outsider can see, so long as the marriage
boom continues. But interest never flags, and both Ryok
performers and audiences seem as full of enthusiasm at the
end of a month or so of weddings as they were at the
beginning.


CHIAPrE % F 0 U %
More about Marriage , Birth , & Death
THE queer eatables that accompany invitations to a
Javanese wedding are a source of much embarrassment
to a European guest. It would be a bold stomach
indeed that would tackle them, and it is most difficult to dispose
of them otherwise, without being caught in the act by your
native servants, whose feelings would be outraged. To refuse
the gifts would be unthinkable; for not only would it be an
unpardonable affront to the donors, but it would bring bad
luck to your own home as well as theirs for a whole year if
you did so, or failed to put in an appearance at the marriage.
While I was living in the village described in the previous
chapter, the son of the Kamitoewoe , an important native local
official, was married; and though the bridegroom’s procession
appeared to be identical in every detail with the others that
were taking place almost daily, the other ceremonies were on
a rather more elaborate scale. The festivities began the night
before the wedding with a tanakan , a formal wedding dance
with prescribed movements, led on this occasion by the
highest local official, the assistant wedono , in honour of the
happy event in his colleague’s family.
The bamboo gateway at the end of the path leading to the
Kamitoewoe's house was gaily decorated with palm fronds
and hibiscus when we arrived in the early afternoon of the
great day, and we were received in a big room where rows of
chairs and two long tables awaited the guests, the tables
however being bare, while a lavish supply of food was dis-
played on the mat-covered floor.
Lace curtains veiled doorways leading into rooms on either
side, in one of which a gamelan orchestra was softly playing.
It was only when we were startled by the shrill neigh of a
pony from what we had supposed to be a bedroom, behind
one of the lacey draperies, and the unmistakable “moo” of
a sapi from another, that we realised we were not in the house
proper at all, but in an addition built on for the occasion in
the compound in front of the one large, windowless, living


and sleeping room of which many Javanese houses consist.
So that actually we were encroaching on the lawful domain
of the worthy Kamitoewoe's domestic animals.
The house into which this fine new addition led was a
bewildering hotch-potch of East and West. The whole
floor was covered with beautiful new woven grass mats,
across whose expanse we looked to an alcove in the centre of
the farther wall. This was curtained with heavy red plush,
looped back in a style ludicrously reminiscent of small old-
fashioned Parisian hotels, and gave a secretive sort of effect
to the bridal couch, a large, brand-new double kapok mattress
which almost covered the floor of the little inner room. On
it we could just catch a glimpse between the curtains of two
“Dutch wives” (a sort of bolster) in frilly covers, and of a
spotless mosquito net looped up with tinsel and flowers.
In front of this alcove, on a velvet pile mat of startling
design, two upright chairs with red velvet seats covered by
white lace antimacassars stood primly side by side awaiting
the bride and bridegroom. At intervals round the walls
were seven large cupboards and wardrobes, and in one corner
a double bed, enclosed in a mosquito net, was half hidden by a
screen.
The walls were hung with oleographs, among which was
a highly coloured portrait of Queen Wilhelmina of Holland,
with enlarged photographs of the Kamitoewoe s family, and
some highly glazed pottery ware, lobsters and fish. Light
(to say nothing of heat) was supplied by a paraffin lamp
hanging from the roof, and two “fat-lamps” on the floor.
The two stout posts supporting the roof were banded with
red and white paper, and at the top of both of them, and at
each corner of the room, there hung a big bunch of bananas,
always much in evidence at native weddings. For among
Javanese and Malays the banana {pisang ) and betel-nut
{penang ) are the chief marriage tokens. To offer either to
a young girl is equivalent to a proposal, and her acceptance
implies a favourable answer. The Malay word meaning “to
ask in marriage” is meni’mang , derived from penang.
Little groups of friends sat on the floor chatting softly
together, while they were served with cups of tea and coffee
by the ladies of the house and by wives and daughters of the


A SELLER OF DURIAN.
EACH DURIAN IS TIED UP IN PALM-LEAF TWISTED INTO A HANDLE TO ENABLE PURCHASERS TO CARRY
THE PRICKLY, VERY HEAVY FRUIT AWAY WITHOUT DIFFICULTY. NOTE THE BEARER’S PALM-LEAF
HAT. HE WILL PUT IT ON OVER HIS VELVET Songkok IF IT RAINS. HIS Sarong IS TWISTED UP AND
CARRIED OVER HIS SHOULDER.


RYOK DANCERS IN A BRIDEGROOM’S PROCESSION.
A BRIDEGROOM GOES IN PROCESSION TO HIS WEDDING.
THE UMBRELLA HELD OVER HIS HEAD MUST BE KEPT TWIRLING IN ORDER TO ENSURE PLENTIFUL
OFFSPRING OF THE MARRIAGE!


atoeran sinoman , this being among their official duties. They
moved noiselessly to and fro, inviting the guests to help
themselves from a long double row of dishes set out on the
floor, laden with all sorts of odd looking dainties.
All this we had plenty of time to observe at our first visit,
paid before the arrival of the young couple from the bride’s
home in a kampong a few miles away, whither the bridegroom
had gone in state, complete with his whole entourage, to take
delivery of his bride.
The oftener guests come and go at these days-long recep-
tions, the better the luck for both hosts and guests. So it
was quite in order that after awhile we should take our leave,
promising to return later. Meanwhile we took the oppor-
tunity to put in an appearance at another wedding which was
taking place on the same day. Returned home from that also,
we presently heard from our garden the distant sound of drums
and shouting, and set out once more for the Kamitoewoe s so
as to be in time for the reception ceremony.
We took our places at the invitation of our host, who was
looking very stately in his stiffly starched white jacket and new
golden-brown sarong and headdress, standing close behind
a new grass mat spread just inside the entrance. Upon this
mat, which custom demands must be virgin new and undefiled
by any foot before that of the bride is set upon it, we were very
earnestly warned not to tread.
We had not long to wait before the head of the procession
appeared in the narrow bamboo fenced lane leading to the
house, in much the same order as usual. The small boys
were in the lead, yelling with joy at the antics of the Ryoks
who, far from appearing tired, seemed to be reaching with
this final scene the very apex of their inspiration. This time
it was the second dancer, slender and powdered under his
tinsel crown, who came whirling with fluttering hands towards
us, before his leader, the parongan , with one last tremendous
bound, fell into a dramatic pose just outside the door. Then
came the musicians, who drew apart to make way for the bride
in her floral carrying-chair (called the “ Kronok”), to be set
down in front of the new mat, beside which her father-in-law
stood gravely waiting.
The little bride sat stiff as a doll in her chair, her face


utterly blank under its thick coat of white paste, crowned by
a top heavy headdress of imitation pearls and wired metal
flowers, while the Kamitoewoe stepped solemnly forward.
Stooping down, he gathered up his son’s wife in his arms and
carried her, according to custom, over the threshold into the
house, moving slowly so as to allow time for her to be plenti-
fully bestrewn with rice. Then he set her down on her feet
on the mat; for thus, and in no other way, must a Javanese
bride be received on her marriage day into her husband’s
home.
Looking more like a doll than ever, she stood there on the
mat for a minute or two while the bridegroom, who was close
behind, dismounted awkwardly from the grey wedding pony
in its Garuda trappings, and came to stand beside her. Then
the queer little figure sank to her knees and clasped her
husband’s left ankle, bowing her head and touching his knee
with her face. Rising to her feet again, they stood stiffly side
by side, and an egg was placed in the hand of each of them.
This they held while attendants transferred a flower from the
bride’s headdress to that of her husband and vice versa , and
then dropped over the shoulders of both a loop of strong
white cord. Thus united, hand in hand, the other hand of
each still grasping the egg, they walked through to the inner
room and sat down on the two chairs in front of the marriage
bed. A small table was placed before them and they were
served with two plates of rice, elaborately decorated; but
before they helped themselves a big brass bowl of water was
brought, in which they washed their hands together and then
clasped hands on the table for all to see. During this part
of the ceremony the eggs were handed to attendants to hold,
as an English bride hands her gloves to a bridesmaid. The
eggs having been returned to them, each then took a little
rice in the hand not occupied with the egg, and offered it to
the other, both eating a few mouthfuls.
While this was going on, plates of rice and dishes of every
imaginable sort of etcetera had been handed round by the
attendant womenfolk to the company who by now were
crowding the floor, but, strange to say, nobody seemed to
be eating anything. This was explained when after a while
squares of banana leaf were distributed. On to these the


plates were emptied, and the food, safely wrapped up in neat
packages, disappeared into the folds of the guests’ garments
to be carried home and enjoyed at leisure.
All this went leisurely on for about an hour, during which
the bride and groom sat silent and unmoving on their chairs.
Outside the gamelan played its odd monotonous music, broken
now and then by a muffled bang from a drum, lying at the
entrance, which is beaten to announce the arrival of each
guest.
At last the newly married pair stood up, and the bridegroom
walked through the assembled guests to the outer room,
while his bride, supported from behind by her mother with a
hand under each arm, followed humbly in his wake. A brass
sirih box containing the ingredients for betel-nut chewing,
and some tobacco, were placed in her left hand, and an
earthenware drinking vessel in her right. These she handed
to her new lord and master in token that in future it would be
her care to serve him with the daily necessities of life. This
done, she was free at last to slip away and sit at ease among
her own friends, while the bridegroom vanished into the
darkness outside the house.
The formal proceedings were now over; and having
pressed our small wedding contribution into the host’s ex-
pectant hand (there is no false modesty about the Javanese!)
we took leave once more, receiving a pressing invitation to
attend the celebrations which would go on all night at the
home of the bride, to which the whole party was to set out
shortly.
A heavy thunderstorm came on soon after we reached
home, and it was not until some hours later, when we were
beginning to think about bedtime, that we saw the flickering
light of a number of torches wavering along the road, and the
procession with the bride’s chair in its midst passed our gate
in the warm scented darkness on its way to the next stage of
the festivities, which, we had been told with pride by one of
the party, would alternate between the two houses for five or
six days.
These post-nuptial celebrations we did not this time attend.
They are all very much the same and, to a European, after the
first few experiences, extremely wearisome, for, once in the


party, it is difficult to escape before daylight. There is almost
always a wayang show; the queer monotonous gamelan music
goes on and on, rising and falling like the sound of wind or
water; native guests drift in and out and eat and drink, which
latter you too must try to do if you would not hurt your
host’s feelings; the bride sits on view in her finery looking
like a doll; and the master of the house accepts without the
least embarrassment the coins slipped into his hand by
departing guests as wedding gifts. 1
There are few kampongs in this part of Java in which you
will not see preparations for marriages going forward during
these “marriage months.” As at the Kamitoewoes, the usual
plan is to wall and roof in part of the compound in front of
the house, an area perhaps thirty or forty feet square. The
walls are of split and woven bamboo and the roof of palm-leaf
atap. To see the care and labour with which the sections are
planned and measured out on the ground, you would never
think that the building in course of construction was only a
temporary one, destined to be demolished after only a few
days’ ceremonies.
All standards of labour are different from ours among
these slow-moving, slow-thinking, eternally toiling people.
Nothing to them is too much trouble. They do not look at
things that way. If, for whatever reason, they decide to do
a thing, whether it be building a house, tilling a field, or
carrying some enormous load all day and all night for an
infinitesimal profit, they simply go ahead and do it, without
haste or delay, comment or complaint. The same spirit
that sets these humble country folk building what are in effect
whole houses for a daughter’s wedding feast, inspires the
natives of the big towns to erect the elaborate Pasar Gamhar
and Pasar Malem pavilions, involving months of labour, only
to be torn down again after the twelve days’ annual fair.
The life of a Javanese bride-to-be during the weeks preced-
ing her wedding must be anything but a happy one. Every
day for two months, unless she breaks away from prescribed
custom, which is probably rare among so conservative a
people, she submits to massage, or dilalar , from head to heels
by the village matrons, with a coarse powder called lalar ,
1 See Java Pageant, chapter iv.


made of temoe-giring , pandan , ketan, and kemoening leaves, 1
ground up together. Then, after having bathed, she is
rubbed down again with a finer powder called hedak wida ,
made of temoe-giring , sarinaga , dempo , and penang. 1 These
recipes are strictly adhered to and the ingredients regarded
as indispensable. Daily, for the last ten days before the
event, she is rubbed with a sort of cold cream, a mixture of
fat with the bedak wida , to make her skin soft and supple, and
the hairs are plucked out of her body. Two days before the
wedding the thick long rope of black hair that is every Javanese
woman’s crowning glory is washed and smoked over a fire of
sweet-scented wood to give it a pleasant odour, and she herself
is rubbed with a sweet-smelling mixture called tapel. On the
last night before the marriage an emblem called the sadjen
is often placed beside the bride-elect’s sleeping place. It
consists of some bananas, betel-nut, and two yellow coconuts
called klapagading , on one of which is a drawing of Ardjoeno
and on the other of Soembadja, his wife. In some villages
the bride sits up all night dressed in her wedding finery,
surrounded by brass pots full of flowers.
On the great day itself she is dressed, after bathing and
massage, by a local doekoen or magic-maker who, before
setting the heavy bridal headdress in place, cuts off a lock of
the bride’s hair, to be snipped up and divided among the
relations, each of whom should put a few hairs in the shell of
a young coconut and throw it into a river or the sea.
The bridegroom on his wedding morning, before being
dressed in his Gilbertian costume, sits in the front room of
his father’s house surrounded by his male friends, while the
Modin reads aloud instructive passages from the Koran. He
then hands round for inspection the Sri-kawin i a gold ornament
that he will present to his bride at their meeting.
The wedding day is called “day of meeting”—ketoemoe—
from the fact that the bride and groom meet officially for the
first time outside the bride’s door when the groom goes to
fetch her. This is the first formal part of the ceremony
shared by both, and each is given a rolled sirih leaf, which
they throw at each other before their joint procession sets out
to the home of the bridegroom’s father.
1 All cultivated in native gardens or easily obtainable.


Tiresome formalities do not end for the Javanese wife with
her marriage. In the seventh month of her first pregnancy
she must prepare a good-luck feast called Tingkeban for all
her friends. And native methods of midwifery can scarcely
add to the joys of childbirth, though they do not seem to have
the adverse effect upon the population that might be expected.
These methods and beliefs differ in all parts of Java. One
that is widespread is that difficult childbirth is rendered as
easy as Twilight Sleep if a dried gut from a panther or, better
still, a tigress, killed when in whelp, is bound round the
woman’s abdomen.
When the baby is born, another feast, the Sepasaran , is
held and kept up for six days, and another, the Selapanan ,
thirty-five days after the birth. When the child is seven
months old a ceremony not unlike Christian baptism takes
place, an example of which I saw recently at the home of
one of our native neighbours, a well-to-do gentleman
aptly described locally as orang tjoekoep , meaning, literally,
“a man who has enough” or, as we might say, “a warm
man.”
Early one morning we noticed several servants emerging
from this worthy’s door, carrying a large brass bowl of water
which they set on the ground in the middle of the compound
in front of the house. The Modin then arrived and, after
bowing gravely to the little group of people standing around,
squatted beside the bowl, muttering long strings of unintelli-
gible words as he scattered flower petals, looking suspiciously
like those of the pink roses in our hedge, on the surface of
the water. The proud father then threw in a handful of
small coins, to ensure wealth for the child in the future, and
the baby was carried out from the house, dressed in bright
silks and swathed in a handsome selendang or scarf of batik.
It was undressed and plunged into the water without raising
the slightest objection, and with its tiny face smeared with
white paste looked even more like a doll than had the bride
and bridegroom. When it had been wrapped in its batik
again and carried off indoors, the Modin and his assistants
frugally gathered up the infant’s symbolic future wealth from
the bottom of the bowl, no doubt to prevent it from falling
into evil hands and thus bringing bad luck, and the water


with its rose petals completed its beneficent work on the roots
of a bougainvillea growing by the house door.
Death too, of course, has its ceremonial in Java, though
the dignified simplicity of a native burial is in most marked
contrast to the noisy demonstrations of the Chinese. When a
Javanese dies, the body is carried out of the house and washed
from head to foot, after which wads of fibre or kapok are
placed over the eyes, and in the ears, mouth, and nostrils,
to prevent the entry of evil spirits into the body, and the
corpse is tightly wrapped in a length of new white cotton
material.
An old native called on me one day to ask if he might
borrow sixty cents to buy a piece of this white kain in which
to wrap his aunt after her death. When I condoled with him
on his bereavement and gave him the money, he explained
that the old lady was still well and hearty (she lived in fact for
another year or more), but that she herself had expressed a
wish to have everything all ready. He had some time
previously asked for, and been given, two nice pieces of teak
to mark the head and foot of the grave, and now, he said,
nothing more was needed except the bamboo for the bier!
He added ingenuously that as he was sole heir to his aunt’s
house and a field of djagong (maize) he felt it his duty to carry
out her wishes.
Javanese employees, like Europeans, are fond of using a
relative’s funeral as a pretext for a day or half day off. In
their case the funeral is always perfectly genuine, but their
relationship with the deceased is sometimes hard to establish.
The simplicity of divorce leads to a multiplicity of step-
relations, all of whom regard one another with complete amity,
and the conveniently elastic word saudara (family) includes
them all. When, for instance, my maid Moerti asked leave
to attend a family funeral recently, she was assisting, as far as
I was able to discover, at the obsequies of a sister by her
father’s last wife but two, for whom she had a warm affection
and shed many tears. /
A native funeral on its way to the burial place is a very
simple sight, and perhaps for that reason a very touching one.
The body is carried on a bamboo bier called a handoesa , under
a sort of cradle something like those used in hospitals to keep


the weight of bedclothes off a broken limb. Over this are
laid the batik kains of the departed, and across them chains of
Kemhodja 1 blossoms. Ahead walks the Modin , scattering
yellow rice (very frugally) out of a small china bowl. Some-
where in the procession that follows the bier you will see two
young men, each carrying one of the roughly carved teak
head and foot posts that will be set up when the burial is over,
a sight that never fails to suggest to me the sensation that
would be caused at an English funeral if the tombstone were
carried behind the hearse.
At the funerals of better-off persons, especially in towns,
the bier is often covered by a mosquito net set up on corner-
posts as on a bedstead, so that the dead appear to be carried
to the grave on a bed, hung with garlands of Kemhodja flowers.
The effect of one of these, with an umbrella carried ahead of
it, indicating that the dead person was of good position,
threading its way across tramlines and among modern motor
traffic, is extremely incongruous to European eyes, but the
mourners are quite unaware of it, and go on their way with
all due dignity.
There is no other burial place in the world that conveys
so completely the fitting atmosphere of Death as some of those
long established among the Java mountains. Nor are there
any that, in their own eerie way, can compete with them in
beauty. You will often see one on a low hillock, or tucked
away in a sheltered corner in a fold of the hills, a dark
patch touched with scarlet amid the green and silver of the
surrounding ricefields. Around the edge, poinsettias flare
like living flame against the sombre darkness inside, under
the gnarled, grotesquely twisted trunks and branches of
ancient Kemhodja trees, planted long, long ago, as cuttings,
at the heads and feet of the forgotten dead. They crowd
close together as though to prevent all intrusion upon those
they still guard so jealously; and their branches, interlacing
a bare four or five feet above the ground, make with
their thick glossy leaves an impenetrable roof that shuts
out entirely the light of the sky. So that, peering in
1 Kemhodja (Plumeria Acutifolia), known in Australia and elsewhere as
Frangipani, is called Boenga Koebor —the “grave flower” —by Javanese and
Malays.


from the bright sunshine outside, it seems like an en-
chanted forest, whose mysterious gloom must inevitably be
peopled with ghosts and all manner of strange, terrifying
spirits.
As your eyes grow accustomed to the darkness, you may
perhaps distinguish one or two graves enclosed with stone
or cement, but this is rare. For the most part nothing marks
the last resting place of the Javanese dead but stout teak posts
whose carved heads stand a foot or so out of the ground.
These bear no inscription and are seldom or never replaced.
For the Javanese, wiser perhaps than we are, does not attempt
to perpetuate the memory of his dead for a posterity for whom
they can have no concern. He plants a Kemhodja beside
them, which will add its shade to the place when he too, and
his children and his children’s children, have come to rest
there. The teak posts will last as long as the memory of the
dead in the hearts and minds of those left behind; and after
that, who will be left to know or care who it is that is lying
here? The posts will rot and fall; all trace of the grave is
lost, as that of hundreds before it. But the dust of those
who were buried here is safe, mingled with that of their
fathers and forefathers, in the shade and keeping of the
“grave trees.”
Sometimes, on the outskirts of a village, you will see one
of these trees, huge, gnarled, and immensely ancient, on a
little artificial mound surrounded with a neat bamboo fence
or perhaps a hedge of poinsettias. This marks the grave of
some specially revered person of long ago, perhaps a “wise
man” or religious teacher. Even he is now long forgotten;
probably not even his name survives, but the people of a
village always treat such a place with reverence and keep the
fence in repair, and it is seldom that you will not see little
offerings of rice, cakes, or flowers among the roots of the tree.
Some of these graves are said to be so old that the Kemhodja
tree, old as it is, may have been replaced by a new one several
times.
The Javanese observe many feasts after the death of some-
one belonging to them. One takes place immediately after
death, one three days later, and another after seven days.
The first anniversary is honoured with a celebration called


mendak sepisan and the second with mendak pindo. A thousand
days after death one called the njewoe is held. Thereafter the
dead are remembered all together at a feast held in one of the
“holy” months, in somewhat the same way as the French
celebrate the “Jour des Morts.”


£HAPTE\ FIFE
The Dessa
THE foundation of the native social system in Java is
the dessa. And dessa administration, though it appears
strange to the European, works with a smoothness
that any of our systems, from parliaments to parish or county
councils, well might envy.
The dessa is an agricultural area, usually a large one,
surrounding and including a village or town (“township,”
as Americans or Australians would call it) which serves as its
heart and commercial centre; and also a number of kampongs
or subsidiary hamlets scattered far and wide among the rice-
fields, where live the peasant farmers and their families.
The system of dessa government is entirely native, a survival
of earlier times left almost intact by the modern Dutch rulers
who wisely recognise its efficiency in the special conditions for
which it was devised. It varies somewhat in different parts
of the island, as do also the titles of the officials and their
duties: these divergencies having doubtless been evolved
under individual local conditions in the days when districts
were entirely cut off from one another for lack of means to
cross mountains and rivers. But fundamentally the system
is the same in every dessa. In the Javanese scheme of things
the town exists as an adjunct to the land, not vice versa , as has
come to be the accepted rule in our Western world. And
the whole structure of local government is based on that
idea, so to administer the affairs of the community as to assure
its well-being through the land by which it lives.
Dessa land law is extremely complicated and many weighty
tomes have been devoted by Dutch writers to the subject.
It is of interest to English readers that the system described
in these treatises on native land tenure is that inaugurated
during the five years of British rule in Java, by Sir Stamford
Raffles, and that Dutch administrators who followed him
paid him the compliment of adopting it. One authoritative
article on the subject begins: “When the English took over
control of Java they found a system based on monopoly,


forced labour, and forced delivery of produce . . . which
Raffles regarded as oppressive for the people and bad for the
Treasury.” 1
Briefly, it may be stated that the land composing each dessa
is divided among a number of families in which it is handed
on from generation to generation, but with one curious proviso.
If one of the landholders breaks the law, for instance by theft,
or by an affair with his neighbour’s wife, and especially if he
should lay himself open to a sentence of imprisonment, then
he forfeits the right to his land for himself and his heirs, and
the dessa council decides to which of the hitherto landless
families the culprit’s portion shall be given. By which it
can be seen that a fall from grace on the part of one of its
members is not a matter of unmixed regret in the community,
for in no dessa is there ever quite enough land to provide a
piece for everybody.
All the dessa officials are natives, and all except one are
local residents, elected by local native vote. The exception
is the head of them all, a sort of Mayor, called Wedono in East
and Middle Java and Wedana in the West. In small dessas
this official is called “assistant” Wedono or Wedana , as the
case may be. This head man is a well-educated native
from elsewhere, appointed by the government, and usually
transferred to fresh fields every few years. He enjoys a
special prestige due to his ability to speak Dutch, and his
quasi-European standing, and he acts as a sort of liaison
officer between Dutch and native, a delicate position calling
for considerable tact, which is seldom found wanting.
Next to him comes the chief of the really local officials,
the Loera or Bekel, who may also be called kepala dessa
(kepala = head) or Petinggi (meaning literally the tall or high
one). Through this important person and his next in
command, the Kamitoewoe or Kami-toea , the Wedono's orders
are transmitted to those lower in authority. Then comes the
hayan or kehayan , a sort of Public Works controller, who
apportions and directs the communal work of the dessa,
such as cutting or planting trees, trimming banks, repairing
flood damage, and the like. He also acts as go-between in
1 Encyclopedia van N. Indie , M. Nijhoff, ’s Gravenshage, E. J. Brill, Leiden
(J. F. Snelman; van der Lith).


the matter of orders from the authorities to the humble
ordinary countryman. The Djogobojo is an official whose
duties are many, and vary in different places. One I know
in Middle Java was known as the Keeper of Buffaloes, being
responsible for the safety and welfare of these important
animals and of all other cattle, without which the fields could
not be ploughed. It is his special duty in most dessas to
catch thieves, whether of live stock or smaller fry.
The Sambong is another indispensable official, who, in the
dessa mentioned above, was the arbiter of the water-supply.
This is the most delicate and difficult of all administrative
posts, for irrigation water is literally the life of the community
in a rice growing country. Quarrels are frequent; the
temptation to tap a neighbour’s channel at night proves
irresistible at times. All such disputes must be dealt with
by the water-chief, and it is whispered that in Java, as else-
where, bribery is by no means unknown, and that it is the
farmer who can offer the best arbitration fee who is always
found to be in the right in such an argument!
In country dessas where the mesigit is a combination of
mosque, hotel-de-ville , and town-clerk’s office, the Modin is
an important functionary, taking the place of the Penghoeloe
who presides over the mosque in large towns. He plays an
even greater diversity of parts than his mesigit. He acts as
priest, so far as priests can be said to exist in the Mohammedan
church, collects religious dues and taxes, makes and breaks
marriages, presides at salamatans , indicates lucky days for
weddings and other important events; takes measures against
evil spirits when required, this being considered a more
dignified method among persons of standing than recourse
to the doekoen or magic maker; he gives instruction in the
Koran, and hunts up children for vaccination! He is, in
short, a very useful member of the community, though he is
not always regarded with as much respect as he could wish.
In West Java the Soendanese have a saying: “The Lebe is a
goat! ” —meaning that he will eat anything; or in other words,
that he will take on any old job that is offered to him. ( Lebe ,
or Amil) are this industrious functionary’s titles in West Java.
In East and Middle Java he is Modin or Kaoem.)
All these officials, and any others there may be, are easily


located by a painted board, the equivalent of our professional
men’s brass plate, bearing their style and title, such as
Pondjosari ... Modin, usually set up on the ornate bamboo
archway giving access to their homes.
In addition to all those officials who live in the central town
of the dessa , every one of the surrounding kampongs has its
own head man, called Kepala Kampong or Petinggi. These
gather with the rest on appointed days, once or twice a week,
at the Koempoelan or council meeting at the JVedono's house.
Usually they ride up on ponies, which are noticeably well fed
and groomed. The well-to-do Javanese countryman is a
keen horseman and takes great pride in his mount, especially
if it be a kore , a pony trained to a smart “amble ” pace. These
are rare, and command very high prices. A prettier sight in
its way than these native councillors cantering or “ambling”
down the village street under the great overarching trees,
with the dappled sunshine striking now and then on a pony’s
glossy flank or on the polished hilt of a kris , it would be hard
to find. One by one they dismount and the ponies are tied
up in shady corners here and there, and the dessa parliament
gathers solemnly on the “voorgalerij ” of the Wedono's house.
The “voorgalerij” is a verandah on a very large scalein
reality an open-air room with the roof supported on three sides
by pillars. Here they sit all the morning cross-legged on
the tiled floor, discussing, and very effectively legislating, local
affairs, fortified from time to time by cups of black coffee.
The councillors wear a distinctive dress for the meeting.
Their sarongs more properly called a kain y is always a handsome
one, and a kris is stuck into an embroidered belt. A short
black jacket, often piped with red, is worn over a white shirt.
And a broad ribbon—red when the meeting concerns
exclusively local affairs, and orange when it is “Queen s
business,” such as roads or bridges, that has to be dealt with
—crosses the breast from shoulder to waist. The usual
jaunty batik headdress completes the costume, and sandals
are worn as a sign of social superiority.
Elections are held from time to time. Balloting is done
with small pieces of bamboo, dyed a different colour for each
candidate, adding much to the picturesqueness of the occasion.
Survivals of ancient troublous times, when Java was as


warlike in its small way as modern Europe, are th,e dessa 1 s
gardoe or watch-houses, in each of which hangs a hollow tree
trunk called a kentongan or tong-tong , on which the hours are
struck during the darkness, from 7 p.m. to 5 a.m. One of
these little buildings, which may be built of concrete, split
bamboo, or stone, according to local fancy, must always stand
at the entrance of every path leading to a kampong, and at
any other points deemed desirable by the dessa authorities.
The watchmen are appointed weekly, and every man in the
dessa takes his turn sooner or later at this honourable duty.
The hours thus sounded are a sort of “all’s well” signal like
a ship’s bells, for the kentongan are the recognised means of
giving an alarm. In the days when inter dessa skirmishes
were as much a national sport in Java as football to-day in
England, they served to call the men of the kampongs to defend
their homes or help their neighbours in case of an attack.
When the warning sounded, all the kampongs within earshot
of the one first sounding the alarm and, snowball-wise, all
those in turn surrounding each of the others so summoned,
rushed to the assistance of the one attacked: the perfect anti-
aggression pact in practice. More settled conditions under
Dutch rule—and above all the Field Police—have rendered
this system of mutual defence, which was known as kawan-
gangsal or montjapet , no longer necessary. But the ken-
tongans remain, and are still used as fire alarms or when a theft
has been discovered. Some ultra modern Wedonos , eager
to show their thorough conversion to European ways, have
abolished the striking of the hours during the night. But
native opinion is conservative, and this rather charming
custom is still fairly general outside the large towns, especially
in East Java.
It is oddly companionable, if you happen to be awake in the
night, to hear the muffled musical “klonk” of wood on
hollow wood in the distance, picked up and repeated, or over-
lapping like striking clocks, from half a dozen or more different
points. You lie drowsily seeing in imagination the tiny fire,
whose ashes are to be found in each gardoe house next morning,
glowing and flickering softly in the starry darkness, and the
watchman, having faithfully discharged his duty, settling
down to sleep again for another hour after rewarding himself


with a puff or two of one of his queer little cigarettes. Admir-
ably devoted to duty these native watchmen seem to be. But
I am bound to record that their ardour is rather apt to wane
with the night. You will be able to pick out a much greater
number of separate notes from different watch-houses at 10 or
II p.m. than at four o’clock next morning. And by 5 a.m.
the falling off in the volume of the kentongan orchestra suggests
that most of the performers have decided to “cut” the last
hour of all and have a good sleep before going off to their
everyday work.
The kentongan also serve as a sort of curfew. At 9 p.m.
the nine strokes are followed by a further series of taps which
indicate to all and sundry that now shops must be shut; the
roadside food-stalls, round each of which with its tiny gleaming
oil lamp a few gossips are always gathered, must be packed
up and carried off, and all good people go quietly home to
bed.
Old residents say that in some dessas there were formerly
also night watchmen who marched round in threes, beating
a tattoo on pieces of bamboo to rouse Chinese merchants who
were heavy sleepers and were afraid of thieves. The custom
was, not unnaturally, anything but popular with other sections
of the community, and appears to have quite died out. Many
dessas however still employ a night patrol.
In the daytime the little gardoe houses are used as shelters
by wayfarers, and very often a food-vendor will set up a stall
under their friendly roof.
Just as the Wedono's council is the brain of the dessa, so
the pasar (market) is its heart. It is the business centre, the
exchange and mart, the agricultural show, fun-fair, social club,
and a hundred and one other things combined. And that on
no mean scale, for th t pasar of many an unpretentious township
serves a wide and densely populated area, and on market days
will be packed with a mass of humanity numbering thousands,
through which it is scarcely possible to push your way.
Despite the great numbers of buyers and sellers, there is
none of the casualness of a French or English market about a
Java pasar. It is fenced in, and there is only one entrance,
where a native clerk from the Wedono's office sits issuing
tickets at one cent apiece to every vendor. A market is held


a Gardoe house, where a watchman sits and sounds every hour from 7 p.m. to 5 a.m. on the
HOLLOW TREE-TRUNK OR Kenlongatl HANGING FROM THE BAMBOO STAND OUTSIDE. THESE LITTLE
SHELTERS ARE FAVOURITE RESTING AND MEETING-PLACES BY DAY WITH PEDLARS AND OTHERS. A
TRAVELLING HABERDASHER IS HERE RE-ARRANGING HIS STOCK.


RICE HARVEST.
CARRYING HOME A LOAD OF GRAIN FROM HIS Sawafl,


in very large dess as every day; in others, twice in the seven day
week; and in Middle Java once or twice in the old five day
week, now called “pasar week,” as it survives only in this
custom. 1
On those days, long before it is light enough to see them,
you will hear the low clank of the big bells worn by the oxen
drawing the heavily laden, creaking grohaks or tjikars (heavy
wagons built of teak), and the laughter and chatter of the men
and women who think nothing of walking all through the
night carrying enormous loads to market from their fields and
gardens. As the light increases you will be able to watch
the endless procession passing down the road to market, the
perfect pageant of country life. You may see it a thousand
times, but it never loses its novelty or its fascination, or the
illusion it creates that it is a scene staged for your entertainment
rather than an ordinary episode in a workaday world.
It is full of variety and yet bewilderingly the same. As
you see the ever moving stream pouring down the lovely sun
flecked road under the sheltering trees, it seems almost as
though all these busy chattering people must be marching
round and round, reappearing over and over again, as in
Drury Lane dramas of the good old days, so alike they look
with their brown faces and colourful garments. But this is a
stage on which there is no lack of “supers.” The people
come from all the countless kampongs scattered among the
surrounding miles of cultivated fields; tiny hamlets which,
when you see them from the mountain slopes above them, are
only visible as darker patches made by the shade of trees and
bamboos amid the brighter green of the rice crops. And all
these passing eager folk have the same goal and the same
object: to sell their produce and to exchange gossip with their
friends at the pasar.
Women are much in the majority, and they provide their
own transport. Every one of them carries a big round
basket slung in her selendang (a length of stout cotton material
a yard wide and three yards long: usually of batik\ which she
wears across one shoulder with the ends tied together, and this
is filled with all sorts of produce according to the district and
the season of the year. It may be piled high with coconuts,
1 See Chapter Eight, p. 119.


with maize or cassava, bunches of carrots or tiny pink onions,
with enormous nangka , twice as big as a man’s head, with
papayas, peas, beans, sapodilla, oranges, potatoes, mangoes
or durian; or the heads of half a dozen or so luckless fowls,
unmindful of their destiny and apparently quite contented,
though their legs are tied together, poke out above the top
of the load, looking absurdly like a bunch of grotesque
flowers.
Most of the women wear a tight-fitting long-sleeved cotton
or coloured muslin jacket called a badjoe\ but many, especially
in mountain villages in the poorer parts of Middle Java, wear
instead a long piece of batik or blue-dyed calico wound tightly
round the upper part of the body under the armpits, leaving
uncovered smooth shapely arms and shoulders that any
society woman well might envy.
Beside many of the women trot miniature replicas of them-
selves : little girls, scarcely more than babies, with unnaturally
solemn faces and hair screwed into a bun, dressed in tiny
sarong and badjoe , and carrying tiny well filled baskets in tiny
selendang to match, with nothing childish about them except
an occasional frightened clutch at mother’s hand or dress.
Often a baby is sharing the big basket, the selendang slung
across its mother’s back, its little behind fitting snugly to the
tight-stretched cloth, and a small fat leg protruding on either
side. Usually the tiny face is smeared with white paste,
and sometimes it is ridiculously crowned with a man’s grey
felt hat or a cloth cap, lamentable evidence of European
influences and Japanese trade, but obviously, in the proud
mother’s eyes, the last word in smartness.
When the women stop, as many of them do, at the roadside
food-stalls to buy their breakfast, a baby hand is pretty sure
to be stretched out and dipped into the sticky mess for a share.
The people eat as they walk along, usually a handful of steamed
rice over which is poured a spoonful of henna coloured sauce;
pinches of various vegetables are added, all these being kept
cooking in their several iron pots at the roadside. The
mixture is served on a square of banana leaf, of which the
restaurateur has a pile on the little stall beside him.
For the men of the dessa , the pasar , when they attend it,
is a respite from their hard work in the fields, and for the most


part you will see them walking proudly along, alone, or in twos
and threes, very rarely indeed with their womenfolk, smoking
their small tapering cigarettes. All wear the hatik headdress
of universal Java custom, and some a conical or basin shaped
rice straw hat, painted a vivid red, blue, or green, perched
on the top of it. Many are unencumbered by any sort of
burden; others carry a stout bamboo and a coil of rope,
ready for the goods they plan to carry home, bought at the
pasar with the price of the produce their wives are bringing
to it. Others are carrying a patjoel (the native farmer’s
favourite tool) for repair or re-tempering at the blacksmith’s
forge, whence there sounds, almost unnoticed, an inter-
mittent musical accompaniment to the scene. A few are
well loaded with great bunches of bananas, or bundles of
firewood as tall as themselves, fixed at each end of their
pikoelan (bamboo yoke); or with twin baskets of manure or
piles of palm-leaf roofing.
Few of the endless stream of passers-by seem to have any
concern other than the all-engrossing pasar. But now and
then a man may emerge from the bamboo grove near by,
balancing a great smooth green freshly cut bamboo across
his shoulder with one hand, while in the other he carries the
sharp curved parang with which he has just chopped it down.
For him the pasar does not exist; he is only concerned with
some needful repair to his house or stable.
Dozens of little boys run free, laughing and chasing each
other round their elders, on their way to school; though some
of them will probably be pressed into service on their way
home again to help carry their parents’ purchases back to
their kampongs.
Sometimes on pasar days a better class native lady will
stroll down the road, in the crowd but very manifestly not of
it. Her costume is invariably that known as sarong and
kebaya : the latter a long cutaway jacket, usually white,
trimmed with embroidery. This style, believed to have been
introduced by the Chinese, was formerly worn in Java by
European women, but is now only the fashion for upper-class
Javanese and Chinese. She is pretty sure to be wearing
high-heeled mules or sandals, which alone would mark her
out as belonging to a different world from the rest who,


without exception, go barefoot, but she too may conform to
universal custom and carry a baby in her pretty selendang.
She will be greeted very respectfully by the lesser folk, and
by the JVedono's staff of clerks, who appear in due course,
immaculate in starched white jackets, golden-brown batik kain
and headdress, and sandals, carrying important-looking
document-cases under their arms.
As the sun rises higher, the stream moving down the road
towards the market gradually thins, and for an hour or two,
while activity at the pasar is at its highest, the road will be
almost empty. Then, by degrees, the stream of humanity
starts to flow again, but this time in the opposite direction.
The people are still laden, but differently. The women’s
baskets are filled now with their household purchases, and
crowned, nine times out of ten, with a koekoesan. This is
the conical split bamboo basket in which the family rice is
daily steamed, and which, from such constant use, wears out
quickly. It should be noted that in Java rice is never boiled,
as by European “barbarians”; and the difference in its
flavour when thus cooked as it ought to be is extraordinary.
Another very general purchase is a bunch of the indispensable
lidi, midribs of palm leaf, out of which every sort of broom,
brush and mosquito switch is made. And some women are
now laden with local products for sale in some distant dessa ,
which their labour in transporting it will enable them to turn
into a microscopic profit.
For the most part the men return as they went, less heavily
laden than the women, and are carrying nothing more than
new tools or patjoel handles, or perhaps the baby, so as to
enable mother to deal with the heavier load! But there are
some exceptions. Some carry weighty hardwood planks,
half as long again as they are themselves, ingeniously lashed
in pairs on to the shoulder-yoke in the form of a giant inverted
V, for convenience in transport. Others will be entirely
hidden behind sheets of split, woven bamboo called bilik ;
literally as big as the side of a house, that being exactly what
they are destined to become. These are lashed to a stout
bamboo and balanced so that they can be carried upright
with nothing visible of the bearer from one side except his
feet.


Many of the men will be resplendent in fine new hats,
perched of course on the top of their ordinary batik headdress.
The purchaser of a new hat is always unmistakable, because
he is unable to resist the temptation to take it off and admire
it as he strolls back along the road.


C H <AT T E 7^
Life in a Dessa
JAVANESE country folk are poor, but seldom too poor
to spend a cent or two on their children, or rather on
their little boys. There will be few of the little lads
who do not carry toys of some sort as they pass on the home-
ward journey with their parents. Some run along with bright
eyes fixed on paper windmills whirling on slender bamboo
sticks, or on jolly little wayang figures made of paper. Others
swing ingeniously made rattles of various kinds, or suck the
coloured ices on sticks which are brought up from the town
below in big vacuum flasks by the Java equivalent of our
“Stop Me,” and find a ready sale in all country places^
The housewife’s own purchases are not all strictly utilitarian,
either. Few go home without a supply of pink and white
cassava-flour cakes impaled on a stick or strung on a grass
cord; or a bunch of the popular sugar “chickens’ claws.”
And a bouquet of paper flowers to brighten the dark window-
less living-room of her home often nods from the top of a
woman’s basket in place of the fowls that peered from it on
her outward journey, which fowls by now, poor wretches, are
probably sizzling in the pan for someone’s dinner!
The pasar itself is a perfect index to the life of the dessa in
which it is held, and is a fascinating study to the foreign
visitor, providing that its pungent blend of smells, and the
inevitable close contact with humanity in a hot and humid mass,
are not too great a deterrent. If you join the procession you
will find on reaching the pasar that, for lack of lehensraum , it
has overflowed its boundaries and that vendors of all sorts of
goods as well as of food line both sides of the road outside.
The vendor of rice straw hats plies a busy trade on the grass
verge by the roadside, where the purchasers, all men, make
their choice with as much care as a lady of fashion in Bond
Street, but at somewhat lower cost. The ordinary conical
shape, with coloured straws cunningly woven in to make a
pattern, is sold for ten to fifteen cents. Painted over with
enamel in some gay shade the price is five cents or so higher.


There are sellers of toys, cakes, haberdashery, and unclassi-
fiable oddments which include soap cut into one inch cubes,
and salt in slightly larger ones, wrapped in banana leaf;
sewing cotton wound off in short lengths on paper balls, full
reels being too expensive for these humble purchasers; palm-
sugar done up in small round wheels of dried palm leaf; tiny
tapering packets of native cigarettes wrapped in maize leaf;
the woven grass cigarette cases which every Mid-Javanese
carries; matches, big coarse hairpins, sold singly, buttons,
also sold singly, peppermints, spoons, pencils, and so on ad
injinitum\ a sort of very humble Woolworth’s where nothing
costs more than one or two cents, say a halfpenny or farthing.
Having nothing to sell, you are admitted free with a genial
grin, by the Wedono's clerk in the ticket office, to find yourself
at once part of the ever moving, closely packed, good natured
crowd whose chatter blends into a murmur as vague as that of
the sea; a crowd that, congested as it is, never jostles roughly
or shows the least sign of irritation or impatience. So dense
is the mass of people that it is almost as impossible to see the
merchandise, much of which is laid out on the ground, as it
would be to see the sea bed when you are swimming. You
can only get glimpses here and there of cabbages and coconuts
and carrots, beans, lettuce, tarong, tomatoes, sawoes, papayas,
soursop, artichokes, chillies, potatoes, cucumbers, melons and
the rest, with here and there a picturesque little group of
women stripping maize from the cobs into great golden heaps.
The crowds surge round all this without doing it any damage,
for the Javanese as a rule are careful to do as they would be
done by in the matter of respect for their neighbours’ property.
Threading your way carefully through the throng, you come
to the raised floors of the roofed-in market proper, where the
produce is exposed in a more conventional way, on benches,
and here the variety is infinite indeed. Tobacco is heaped
in dark piles on green banana leaves, looking as attractive as
it smells. Near by are huge quantities of the popular tempe
cake made of partly fermented soya beans and cassava flour;
it is sold in great slabs a foot or more long, is about six inches
wide and looks rather like oil-cake. The yeast used by
natives, called raggie , is there in small white balls that look
like moth-balls; so are little brown cubes of gamhir , side by


side with its partners, betel, nuts and chalk, for use in the
universal sirih chew.
All sorts and sizes of ugly-looking roots and nuts and
scrapings are displayed, every one of which, if you ask, you
will be told are the ingredients of various medicines guaranteed
to cure every ill that flesh is heir to. The names of these
remedies differ in every district, and even if they did not,
would convey little to European ears. But it is evident that
they are all as well known to the native marketers as though
they were labelled in bottles or packets in a chemist’s shop,
and there is always a thriving trade in them, for the native
has a blind faith in the efficacy of a dose of medicine. Some-
times there is a stall where a primitive apothecary, usually a
woman, dispenses strange concoctions after whispered con-
versations with the patients: consultations that have an air of
mystery that suggests dealings with some medieval sorceress.
And you wonder whether it is a love potion that is afterwards
handed over, or perhaps the means to get rid of an unwanted
mother-in-law.
There are fragrant many coloured heaps of scented flower
petals, of which you can buy a handful to scatter on a grave, or
adorn your hair, or make chains for the children’s necks. And
you can buy too a tiny phial filled with any scent you choose for
no more than one goheng ( 2cents: about a halfpenny). A
popular stall this with young girls, especially at Leharan time,
the so called Native New Year.
At another stall you may find a woman making up small
packets containing a pinch of several of the medicinal roots,
an orange petal or two, a slice of carrot, and a few pepper
seeds, which she wraps in the übiquitous banana leaf, and
sells like the proverbial hot cakes. What this odd mixture
is designed to do for the purchaser I have never been able to
find out. Whenever I have asked I have always received a
shy smile and a shake of the head; and information, usually
so eagerly given, is not forthcoming. So whether it is a form
of magic of more than ordinarily confidential kind, or merely
a Javanese version of the French housewife’s bouquet garni ,
I am unable to say.
The sight of the banana section of a pasar is unforgettable.
The green and golden bunches, called sisir, many of them as


tall as a man, hanging close together as though growing in a
fairy tale forest, give the narrow dark passage between them
something of the character of a jungle path, filling it by their
colour with a weird and false illumination. Here too, in some
corner, there will be a pile of the strange torpedo shaped
purple banana flowers: a much prized delicacy among the
Javanese, who cook them with chillies and coconut milk, and
serve them on special occasions with their rice.
To pass on from the banana jungle to the fish section is a
transition from the sublime to the ridiculous; but there was
never a Java pasar yet that lacked this department, a very
important one in the life of the people. The hareng , a small
herring which is common round the coast, and also bred
extensively in artificial ponds under Government supervision,
is dried and salted to become a staple article of diet known as
trassi. It announces its importance in the national scheme of
things by permeating an unduly wide area of the pasar with
its unpleasant aroma.
A familiar sight are masses of the tiny sprouting beans the
Dutch aptly call “little commas,” a popular adjunct to both
Dutch and native rice tables. Less attractive are big, bloated,
jellylike cakes, quivering and flabby, made of banana and
palm sugar, sold by the slice. There is hardware of all sorts,
from the tiny ani-ani or etam for cutting the heads of rice
from the stalk, sharp as a razor and sold for one cent, to
patjoel- blades and ploughshares, parangs and arets (large and
small knives for outdoor work): to say nothing of all the
imported delights now so beloved of these once unsophisticated
people, such as safety razors, cigarette lighters, and electric
torches. There are “departments” for everything: firewood,
tiles, pottery, hats, baskets of every shape and size from three
inches to three or four feet deep; enormous piles of koekoesan ,
mats made of grass or coconut fibre; palm-leaf roofing
called atap , house walls of hilik, maize-fibre brooms, stacks of
lidiy and of wooden patjoel handles.
There is a drapery section with piles upon piles of cotton
goods, beside which squat the sewing men with their machines,
ready to make up garments to measure while the customer
waits. Business always appears to be thriving, and you will
seldom see one of the dozen or more sewing machines that is


not hard at work. More often than not, several are crowded
out, and tailor, sewing machine, shirt or jacket in the making,
and anxiously waiting customer, are all out in the open, among
the maize and melons and the rest. Batik sellers are legion,
for this is the national dress material of the people; and in
Middle Java there are also great quantities of cotton goods
dyed blue with locally grown indigo. Belts embroidered
with silk in many colours, very popular with Javanese men on
dress occasions, hang in dozens from a bamboo in a dark
corner, illuminating it with gay colours.
Inside, outside, in round, flat, covered baskets, or in bunches
of two or three or half a dozen, in every corner, lying on the
ground with their feet tied together, are the luckless fowls
that are the mainstay of every menu in the tropic East.
Unluckily the climate demands that they be marketed alive,
and the sight of them is distressing to the compassionate
onlooker; yet the victims are themselves so little concerned
at their situation that they peck greedily at the grain scattered
round them until they are picked up, pinched or poked
appraisingly by prospective purchasers, and either carried
away or else dumped down again to snatch another grain or
two before their inevitable doom overtakes them.
There is food and drink of all kinds to tempt the marketers.
There are fruit syrups in intimidating shades of verdigris
green and petunia pink, and cakes and biscuits no less highly
coloured; and though few Europeans would care to tackle
any of these, the appetising smell of grilled meat that some-
times tickles your nostrils is quite another matter. It comes
from a row of small charcoal fires over which small pieces of
meat, liver, or chicken, impaled on skewers, are being grilled.
These are called sate, and are as popular at European tables
as they are with the Javanese.
When a market day coincides with a killing day at the
dessa slaughter house, as for popular convenience it very often
does, there is sure to be in the pasar a gruesome meat exhibit
calculated to convert any European visitor to a strict vegetarian
diet. And among the horrid shapeless bloody relics, which
look as though the animal had been torn to pieces rather than
cut up, you will always see the hooves, still muddy from the
poor beast’s last journey, as likely as not from the compound


where it had been the children’s companion and pet from
babyhood.
You may go to any pasar of all the thousands throughout
Java, and yet be sure to come across something that is new to
you, or some small incident worth adding to your memories
of them. I once saw an old man, gnarled, smiling and deeply
wrinkled like a Balinese carving, selling smokes and sundry
small etceteras , among them the flint-and-steel cigarette
lighters that have become popular in Java of late years. He
was singing, softly and ceaselessly, a jolly little song, obviously
improvised, about the wares he had to sell, and I caught
something about “pretty flowers of fire that would light up
the hands of those who used his fire stones.” Catching my
eye, and what I hoped would be accepted as an appreciative
murmur, he immediately introduced a personal and embarrass-
ingly complimentary note into his improvisation: after which,
having no use for a “fire stone,” who could do less than stop
and buy two boxes of matches for three cents ?
At another pasar , a stout Chinese had arranged a table and
four heavy teak armchairs by the roadside near the entrance.
Here he graciously played the host, inviting passers-by to sit
down and drink tea to the strains of a gramophone, while he
displayed samples of shaving cream.
On pasar days, an official is always on duty at the Loemhong ,
or dessa bank, another most important item in dessa adminis-
tration. Much gold is deposited here in the form of smooth
shining bunches of ripe golden heads of rice. It is at the
Loemhong that a certain proportion of his crop must, by dessa
law, be deposited by each farmer to ensure enough seed for
the next sowing; a most necessary precaution, without which
the light-hearted Javanese would quite likely sell or consume
the whole lot, leaving the future to take care of itself. Out-
side this curious “bank,” at any time that it is open,
you will always see some of the golden grain being un-
loaded from the grobaks while the big creamy coloured
oxen lie peacefully chewing the cud on the grass at the
roadside.
The amount of rice thus deposited for seed is regulated by
the dessa authorities. This and all other matters of book-
keeping are in the hands of the Tjarik , the local writer or


accountant, who, like the other officials, enjoys the distinction
of a board bearing his title at his gate.
Extra entertainment for the crowds that gather on pasar
days is provided from time to time in many dessas by the
advertising methods of various European manufacturers.
The directors of these enterprises are well aware that however
small the purchases of the individual native, they represent
in the aggregate an immense trade that it would be folly to
neglect. Motor vans, equipped with loud speakers and
gramophones, tour the country, penetrating into the most
remote corners, taking care that their visits shall coincide
with market days, when the scattered populations of the
dessas are drawn as though by a magnet to their exchange
and mart, and villages that are quiet and sleepy at other times
are thronged with thousands of people.
The van pulls up near the pasar\ the salesman turns on
the gramophone, and proceeds to broadcast a lively dialogue
between two natives, man and woman, in which the charms
and cheapness of, say, Palmolive soap, which has a factory
in Java, are extolled, interspersed with some extremely highly
spiced jokes, which delight the crowd that immediately
collects. The entertainment is given in Malay, and also in
Javanese or Soendanese, according to the locality visited.
When the audience has been entertained and got into a
thoroughly good humour, the salesman turns off the gramo-
phone and gets down among the crowd, giving away hundreds
of small samples, cajoling delighted girls to use this soap that
will make them irresistible, and persuading married women
that it will beautify their babies: in short, writing “Palm-
olive” on the local consciousness in such a way that it will
never be forgotten. The local storekeepers, well knowing
the mentality of their customers, lay in a supply and arrange
for more; attractive posters in gay colours, announcing the
soap as “ Saboen oeangi hoeat moeka , hoeat hadan , hoeat sehat ”
(fragrant soap for your face, your body, and your health), are
posted up; and off goes the car to repeat the programme at
the next dessa on its list.
The designing of posters to attract the native eye is an art
as yet only in its infancy, but one or two firms have learned
it to a nicety. The palm in this respect should certainly go,


up to the present, to Mr Wood of “Wood’s Great Peppermint
Cure,” who is a familiar figure on the walls of every native
or Chinese kampong , even the smallest, and the “cure” a much
trusted ohat in countless native homes. For despite his own
enormous pharmacopoeia of herbal remedies, the Javanese
is always ready to pin his faith to any new one recommended
to him by the white man. Mr Wood is represented as
a benevolent Eastern potentate in flowing robes with a
long white beard, dispensing to a worshipful populace his
miraculous mixture, whose innumerable virtues are set forth
in flowery Malay as guaranteed to cure penjakit roepa-roepa
(illnesses of all sorts). Chinese storekeepers, from whose
shelves the “cure” is seldom absent, have told me that it is
in immense demand, and is firmly believed to be a panacea
for a variety of quite unmentionable ills.
Even the important Dutch tea-growing industry does not
find it beneath its dignity to establish direct contact with
Chinese and native buyers. The motor vans of the Neder-
landsch Indische The Propaganda tour the country as
thoroughly as do those of manufacturing firms. So far as
my experience of them goes, they do not employ quite such
entertaining methods; but they distribute attractive posters
showing natives dispensing the “cup that cheers” to groups
of friends, making eloquent speeches about it the while; and
in every village, storekeepers are appointed their official
agents. It would be rare indeed to find even the smallest
dess a town in which a board bearing the words Waroeng Teh
{lit. “tea-shop”), and the agent’s number, does not appear
on at least one small Chinese or native shop —or more likely
on several. Competition for the honour is keen, as indicated
by the numbers, which run into five figures.
Tea has become a popular drink among the Javanese,
though it has not, and probably never will, replaced coffee.
But even so, just as twopenny cups of tea are said to have laid
the foundations of Lyons’ great business, so the tiny purchases
of Java’s forty odd millions of people may well have an effect
by no means to be despised upon the fortunes of the Dutch
tea-growers.
Even on days when there is no pasar there is never any lack
of entertainment in a country dessa if you care to watch the


passing show. There are the farmers going off to their
fields in the early morning, their sarongs pulled up and worn
shawlwise to keep out the cold, carrying a heavy primitive
wooden plough across one shoulder, and driving in front of
them the great water buffalo or golden brown oxen that will
draw it. There are women of all ages, some young and
charming, and others ancient crones that must be great-
grandmothers at least, going down to the stream for water,
with earthenware jars, as big as themselves and far heavier,
carried either on their heads or held in place on their backs
with the ever useful selendang. There are men carrying loads
of every sort and kind at the ends of their pikoelans which they
shift adroitly from one shoulder to the other in one lithe
movement, without even stopping in their stride. There are
huge clumsy creaking grohaks (for some reason no one ever
seems to oil them!) of the same pattern as those used by
countless generations in these same regions, drawn by two
oxen with a tall slender tapering upright rod fixed between
their yokes, painted in bright colours and often tipped with
a bunch of flowers. There are strings of pack ponies, almost
hidden under their cruelly heavy loads; and sometimes in
mountain districts you may see a Chinese or well-to-do native
being carried along in a heavy teak and bamboo sedan chair.
On most days the travelling native barber will pass, carrying
his apparatus in a wooden box labelled Barbier, and a camp-
stool for his clients. He will take up his stand under a shady
tree, hanging a little mirror on a nail he drives into the trunk;
and there the men of the dessa , swathed in a sheet, will have as
neat a hair-cut as any man could desire. These barbers ply
their trade also, with equal lack of embarrassment, under the
great trees beside road or river in the heart of the big European
towns.
In places off the main highways, where there is not much
motor traffic, the native has not yet abandoned his age old
custom of squatting down for a rest and a gossip, whenever
he happens to meet a friend, right in the middle of the road.
The small boys too will gather there at all hours of the day
except when they are at school, using the open road as a
convenient board on which to play the popular “stone game,”
a sort of “noughts and crosses” played with twenty-one small


pebbles of which you will find traces scratched on the ground
in every kampong. Should they hear an approaching car or
grohak , they simply withdraw quietly to the side of the road
until the intruder has passed, and then resume gossip or game
without the slightest agitation.
After dark the road becomes even more of a social centre.
And when the food vendors have set down their portable
stalls and kitchens at their regular nightly pitches at the
corners of all the bamboo fenced paths leading from the
surrounding kampongs to the road, the faint smoky yellow light
from each of their tiny paraffin lamps illuminates dimly a ring
of gossipers who, having bought their right to a place by the
purchase of a cent’s worth or so of some queer eatable or
other, sit straggling half across the road. These stalls are
the ordinary dessa man’s club, and he would be regarded as a
djewa soenji indeed (a hermit: lonely soul) who did not join
the group around one of them. There is no sight in all dessa
life that is more characteristic and familiar; and there is no
memory that comes more vividly to mind in after years than
that of these faintly seen glimpses of village night life.
The batik headdress (called iket kepala or ceding) which
custom demands must be worn by every Javanese man, except
those who have succumbed to imported fashion and wear
instead the velvet Malay cap, is as necessary a part of his
equipment as his nose and ears. The conversion of the
squares of batik dyed specially for this purpose is a difficult
art, and the principal village of most dessas has its native
modiste , who squats on the floor of his tiny shop and showroom,
surrounded by dummy heads stuck all over with pins, on
foot-high wooden stands. On these dummies, on stiff muslin
foundations, he makes up the intricately folded little turbans
to his customers’ orders, in any style they may desire. As a
rule only half the square is used, cut across diagonally, as
modern fashion, and perhaps economy, dictates a smaller,
closer fitting headdress than formerly, when it was the custom
for the wearer to twist up his own headgear for himself.
In large towns and pasars the finished headdresses are sold
ready made; but in country places the milliner’s business is
all “bespoke.” No finished models are on view, but all
round the walls of the shop, which may be a bare six or eight


feet square, hang squares of hatik of various designs from which
the client may select. An iket kepala thus made to order costs
from one to two guilders.
Apart from such specialists, the storekeepers are almost all
Chinese who do a steady business quite unaffected by the
pasars. An important institution in most dessas , too, is the
tjandoe or chandu (opium) depot. This is opened at fixed
hours, and is of service to all classes of the community as well
as to opium smokers, as it is the recognised place at which
small change is certain to be found! Thus proving how small
are the quantities in which this so-called curse of the East is
consumed. The Javanese is far from being so affluent that
he can afford to buy enough to do him any harm, and the
Chinese too are very moderate in its use. I know many a
Chinese storekeeper whose one evening pipeful is passed round
all the adult members of his family, providing one short puff
for each; surely a very modest indulgence compared with
that of the ordinary European cigarette smoker whom it
never occurs to anyone to accuse of being an addict to vice.
This much prized luxury has been the subject of endless
Government commissions and of a ponderous mass of literature;
but there is one point about it that admits of no argument, and
that is the handsome profit it yields to those controlling its
supply in both Dutch and British colonies. The Dutch East
India Company made over two million guilders out of it in
1794, and a century later it brought the Government more
than eighteen million. The unlicensed planting of the opium
poppy is forbidden, and even this is being diminished; but
it is hard to believe that so valuable a source of income will
ever be seriously discouraged, except on paper.
The schools, of which there are now well over 15,000 in
Java, play an important part in dessa life. The teachers are
all natives, themselves the products of the same admirable
Dutch-instituted education system that they are engaged in
passing on to the next generation. Most of those I have met
are polished and delightful people who take their responsi-
bilities very seriously. They are extremely successful in
their handling of the pupils, by virtue of an instinctive under-
standing and love of children that is characteristic of the
Javanese people.


NO JAVANESE COUNTRYMAN FEELS HIS HOME IS COMPLETE WITHOUT A DOVE IN A CAGE, RUN UP A TALL
BAMBOO POLE LIKE A FLAG. THIS IS HOW THEY LOOK AGAINST A STORMY SKY.
A SHEET OF BILIK.
THIS HAS JUST BEEN BOUGHT AT THE PaSOf AND IS BEING CARRIED HOME BY THE PURCHASER TO'
FORM A WALL IN THE NEW HOUSE HE IS BUILDING.
LOADS OF BASKETS BEING CARRIED OVER A MOUNTAIN-PASS TO A MARKET TWENTY MILES AWAY.


A ROADSIDE RESTAURANT.
THE PROPRIETOR IS GRILLING Sate (SMALL PIECES OF MEAT ON SKEWERS) OVER A CHARCOAL FIRE.
A PILE OF BANANA-LEAF “ PLATES ” IS ON THE TOP OF THE LARDER BESIDE HIM.
BASKET-CARRIERS CROSSING THE MOUNTAINS TO MARKET.
JAVANESE WOMEN DOING THE FAMILY “ WASHING ” IN A MOUNTAIN
STREAM.


School buildings are more or less uniform throughout the
Java country dessas. They are long, low, and whitewashed,
built of bilik, stone, or cement, and roofed with brown tiles.
The spotlessly clean and airy classrooms are plentifully hung
with pictures designed to add entertainment to geography
and other lessons. Australia’s charms, for instance, are
illustrated for the youthful Javanese in giant kangaroos that
leap right across the map of the Commonwealth from Perth
to Brisbane. And in Africa the chief product would appear
to be the elephant. This pictorial method is turned also to
practical purposes by charts showing the tools used in agri-
cultural work, building devices, and so on.
The children are taught their lessons in the local mother-
tongue of their district: Javanese, Soendanese, or whatever
it may be, and are also taught Malay, which it is desired to
make a lingua franca throughout Java. The “readers”
published for the purpose by the Education Department
are exceptionally good, and are as useful to Europeans desirous
of acquiring a sound knowledge of the language as they are
to the children for whom they were compiled. They contain,
moreover, numbers of delightful pen and ink sketches illustrat-
ing native everyday life, and are well worth buying for those
alone. 1 The increase of Malay-speaking natives all over
Java, as well as in the outer islands, is very noticeable to
anyone who has known the Indies long enough to see a
generation of school children come out into the world.
The illustrated “readers” published for the use of natives
who wish to study Dutch are invaluable also to English
students.
All the schools have gardens, and in many of them, if the
headmaster is, as most country-bred Javanese are, a keen
agriculturist, the boys are taught to cultivate small plots of
various crops under his skilled direction, so that they return
to the paternal fields less inclined to join in the “drift to the
towns ” that is one of the drawbacks to school education, even
in such an agricultural paradise as Java.
The teachers say that as a rule the children are very quick
and keen at all their studies. For some reason, they almost
1 The two volumes of Mata Hari Terbit are specially recommended to
students of Malay, as used in Java.


invariably take a special pride in neat handwriting, and con-
sequently many Javanese write a faultless copperplate script
that no European could ever hope to emulate: a far cry
indeed from the days when the point of a lontar palm leaf was
the only pen of the few natives who could write at all. The
proportion of boys to girls is typical of the East; there are
rarely more than half a dozen or so girls to a hundred boys in
any country school, the parents considering it mere foolishness
that their little girls should waste time at school that can be so
usefully employed at home.
Native parents are expected to pay a small fee, if they can
afford it, for the education of their children. The amounts
vary with the district, from five cents per month in the lowest
class and ten to fifteen cents in the second and third classes,
upwards.
The kampongs have a life of their own; and in them, as in
the central town or village of the dessa , all duties for the
common weal are shared by the members of the community.
The Kepala of the kampong is a mere subordinate member of
the central dessa council, but in his own kampong he rules
supreme; usually without much difficulty, for local pride in
each kampong is strong, and they vie with each other in the
perfection of their close trimmed banks, their bridges and
fences, and their paths, swept as meticulously as your drawing-
room floor.
For the most part these kampongs are charming, especially
in cool mountain regions, where in each little garden there is
a proud display of flowers and vegetables, and orange or
pommelo trees fill the air with the lovely scent of their blossom,
or stand laden with golden fruit. There are always waving
palms and bananas and clumps of bamboo, none the less
ornamental because it is grown for strictly practical purposes;
and often palisades of burnished green sirih or other climbing
plants. The houses will be of split bamboo bilik ; and nowa-
days almost if not quite all are roofed with the pretty red-brown
tiles which are one of a thousand and one other minor native
industries. A wise Dutch regulation has ordained of late
years that the formerly much used palm leaf atap roofing,
which gave dangerously hospitable harbourage to rats, must
be abolished, as a precaution against plague.


Other simple and admirable hygienic regulations ordered
by the Dutch, and transmitted through the dessa council to
the heads of the kampongs , are rigorously enforced by each of
them among their little groups of subjects. In every small
compound you will see all rubbish neatly gathered and burned,
bedding being aired in the sunshine, and walls freshly white-
washed at regular intervals. The people of the kampongs
usually pay their head man’s salary, or part of it, in kind.
And in maize growing districts the long rows of tall bamboo
drying-racks laden with the cobs thus paid in are a sight well
worth seeing.
Every kampong has a more or less elaborate entrance gate
and porch built of bamboo. Often these are most decorative,
for this is a matter in which the community take special pride.
Usually the large double gates, often eight feet or more high,
made of bilik, are closed at night; and many of the entrances
are provided with a covered platform and a kentongan where
the hours of darkness are struck by a watchman. This same
platform is also used to accommodate a gamelan orchestra on
public festive occasions. In a particularly prosperous kampong
there may be a fine avenue leading to the gate, and the approach
may,be beautified with hedges of alamanda or acalypha, or by
walls covered with a veil of maidenhair fern. There is no
need to teach these simple people the “community spirit.’’
It is part of their natural make up; and despite their long
hours of labour in the fields, nothing is too much trouble that
will enhance the beauty of their “home town,” and incidentally
give them an opportunity to crow over the inferior attractions
of their neighbours’ kampong .
No kampong is complete without its communal laundry and
bathing place, made in the bed of some convenient stream,
and fenced round with the indispensable bamboo. These
are the women’s clubs. Here, all and every morning, happy
groups of women and children are busy, washing themselves,
their babies, and the many coloured garments of their families,
beating soapy sarongs on flat stones as they stand ankle or
knee deep in the warm, soft, gently flowing stream, in a
glorious mix up of splashing water, mud, ducks, soapsuds,
laughter, and gossip. While higher up the stream, other
women are washing rice for dinner, in bamboo baskets under


the bamboo pipe that brings them their unfailing supply of
running water.
Among the many communal customs of the kampongs , one
which concerns theft might be recommended to other com-
munities, for it is remarkably productive of honesty. If the
property of any stranger visiting the kampong should be stolen,
the whole community is held to share the responsibility, and
every member of the population must contribute to the cost
of replacing it. Hospitality to travellers is one of the accepted
rules of Javanese native life, and no one is ever refused shelter
for the night. That he should be robbed while the guest of
the kampong , therefore, brings shame to everyone living in it.
Consideration for weary travellers is also shown in the
custom, in many dessas , of keeping an earthenware jar filled
daily with fresh water in a bamboo basket fixed on a post by
the roadside. One of these is often to be seen at the point
where the path to a kampong joins the road. The jar in its
deftly woven split bamboo cover looks at first glance temptingly
like a giant bottle of Chianti!
The kampong dweller, simple fellow though he may be, is
not so unsophisticated that wireless is unknown to him, and
in the most remote hamlets you will probably see several
aerials made of slender, immensely tall bamboos, rearing their
heads high above the thick foliage that hides the small houses.
Their erection presents no difficulty, thanks to the genuine
community feeling that prevails.
No sooner does Si Soswosipotro or Ah Woeng or some other
village worthy announce his purchase of this latest kind of
white man’s magic, and his desire to appease the spirits that
serve it with a tall pole, as advised by the Chinese who sold it
to him, than all the male youth of the kampong not otherwise
occupied at the moment will turn out to give a hand, well
knowing that they will share as a matter of course in all the
fun it may provide in the future.
Native houses in country kampongs are of extremely simple
design. They rarely have any windows; and the one large
room is carpeted with grass mats and crowded with furniture.
Conservative though he is in the matter of house design, the
Javanese, when he can afford it, is a convert to European
furnishings at their very worst. Wardrobes and “what-


nots,” china cabinets, occasional tables, and Nottingham lace
curtains are his delight. He does not feel his home complete
without an immense iron double bed for the heads of the
family, the rest being quite content to sleep on the floor, for
the Javanese have the happy knack of being able to sleep
anyhow and anywhere. Even the hospitable instinct that is
one of his most ancient traditions is given a European flavour
when a card on which the words Salamat Datang (Welcome)
are printed, in large letters, is framed and glazed in the latest
Dutch style and hung just inside the door.
Javanese taste in music, however, remains unchanged; and
the vague indeterminate rhythms of the gamelan to be heard
as you pass by any kampong , through all the countless dessas
of Java, have probably changed little, if at all, through many
hundreds of years. They are almost as indispensable to
native life as light and air and food. These village gamelans
usually consist only of the giant xylophone already mentioned:
made of two long converging bamboos supporting the “notes”
of metal, wood, or split bamboo, called saron in the former case,
and gamhang in the latter, and of various drums and gongs.
The full gamelan , which is an orchestra of about twenty-four
players, is rare in Java outside the two royal palaces, though it
is common in Bali.
In the old days, when every village was an independent
fortress, Java shared with many other parts of tropical Asia
the admirably practical custom of planting a dense grove of
bamboo round each kampong , as the best of all defences against
surprise attack, and a supply of all-purposes building material.
The peaceful modern Javanese has happily no longer need
of it to protect him from treacherous neighbours, but he still
finds it as necessary as ever for a thousand peaceful purposes.
To the casual passer-by the appearance of any kampong in a
country dessa to-day, half hidden among its feathery bamboos,
probably differs but little from what he would have seen if
he had passed that way a thousand years ago.


CH<ATrE % S E V E
Religious Medley
THE religious and quasi religious customs of the
Javanese are inextricably mixed. His devotion to
the orthodox observances of Islam is as intense, or
almost, as that of a good Catholic to Mother Church. But
that does not make him any less faithful to the ancient beliefs
of his remote ancestors, as well as to some of those introduced
by the Hindus who ruled his forefathers for a thousand years.
He celebrates innumerable salamatans on religious occasions;
but as to which department of his voluminous theology any
of them really belong it would be hard to say. He himself
would be the last person who could tell you, for even those
held on the orthodox Mohammedan feast days have borrowed
so much from old-time Java customs that the Faithful from
other Mohammedan lands might well be hard put to it to
recognise them.
Salamatan is an elastic and untranslatable term, applied
equally to religious festivals and to feasts and ceremonies
designed to bring good luck and, still more, to avert bad luck
and appease evil spirits. Every sort of event in public or
private life is held to be a suitable occasion for one of these
celebrations. It celebrates, quite impartially, the Birth of
the Prophet, the pregnancy, birth, marriage, or death of
any humble native, the building of a house or a bridge, the
crushing season at a sugarmill, the end of the month of fasting,
or the departure of an employer on leave to Europe!
To European eyes, all these salamatans are very much alike,
and leave a general impression of picturesque native crowds,
dressed in their best and most colourful garments, and of
unlimited quantities of queer and, to us, most unappetising
eatables, most of them smelling pungently of coconut oil.
But to the Javanese, a salamatan is a very different matter.
Each and every one of these occasions have their own special
conventions, especially in the way of food; and a native
housewife would no sooner dream of departing from them


than we should from our Christmas turkey, roast beef, and
plum pudding.
It might be expected that the most important of all the
feasts of a devoutly Mohammedan population like the Javanese
should be the GarebegMoeloed , the equivalent of our Christmas,
which celebrates the Prophet Mahomet’s birthday on the
twelfth day of Moeloed, the third month of the Mohammedan
year. But important though this may be in a religious sense,
it cuts no ice in Javanese native life in comparison with the
Garebeg Poesa , Hari Raya , or, as it is more often called,
Lebaran , which marks the end of Ramadan, the month of
fasting, called in Java Boelan Poesa . This is the day of days
in the Javanese calendar. It falls at the beginning of Sawal,
the tenth month of the Mohammedan calendar, but in Java
and for the Javanese it is the New Year.
It must be mentioned in passing that every year, as Lebaran
comes round, it happens as regularly as clockwork that some
erudite individual or other will sit down and indite a letter
to the Press to correct those ignorant persons who will insist
on falling into the error of describing this feast as “Native
New Year”! It may be that the misinformed Europeans
who do so will mend their ways, though I doubt it. But
what is to be done about the forty odd million natives who
fall into the selfsame error, and greet one another wherever
they happen to meet on the great day with “ Salamat Tahoen
Bahroe! ” (Happy New Year!)?
However, New Year or not, the Lebaran feast is the most
delightful of all occasions to see in Java, for every native goes
avisiting, dressed in new clothes. And the scene on the
roads, especially in a prosperous country district, is like an
endless colour film, only a thousand times more charming
and entertaining.
The colours that the people wear are as gay as those of the
flower fields that in many mountain regions border the roads.
The women wear sarongs in varied patterns, of henna-brown,
red, and orange, with tight little badjoe jackets, some of plain
red, green, blue, yellow, or petunia silk or muslin, and others
of dainty floral patterns. Some young girls wear a kodoengan ,
a yard or so of bright hued chiffon, scalloped and embroidered,
thrown lightly over the head as our grandmothers used to


wear what they called a “cloud” when they went to an evening
party. These are in every conceivable combination of colour
with the wearers’ hadjoes : bright pink with mauve; blue
with green; yellow with claret colour; and all or any of them
with golden brown batik sarongs ; yet they all harmonise as
naturally as wild flowers with charming effect.
Others are bareheaded, to show their immaculately smooth
hair coiled in a great knob at the nape of the neck, adorned
with flowers and gold pins and ornaments; and a few, especi-
ally smart, have whitened their faces with “liquid” powder,
ending at a well defined highwater mark across the forehead.
Some walk in pairs, hand in hand; some lead tiny tots like
pocket editions of themselves, just as smart as their elders in
their brand-new miniature garments, with an absurd baby
bun of hair adorned with an hibiscus blossom; and some
carry a smaller edition still, pick-a-back, with wee hands
sticking out on each side of big sister’s neck.
The men are all in stiff new sarong or kain, mostly worn
hitched up at one side to show their equally new shorts. They
wear freshly starched white or khaki drill jackets and open
shirts, and almost all sport the Malay velvet cap, rather than
the ordinary Javanese batik headdress, the cap being considered
smarter for these festive occasions. Some wear sandals, but
more often they carry them in their hands, as do also the
women. A dainty little lady walking with obvious discomfort
in a smart pair of high-heeled mules will suddenly give up in
disgust, and slipping them off will stride away with them
swinging in her hand, to be resumed, no doubt, when she
reaches her destination, if she has one that is, for the important
thing on Lebaran day is simply to be on the road to see and
to be seen.
For this reason the crowds going in one direction are as
great as those going in the other. Taxis, “mosquito” buses,
and pony sadoes all do good business, packed to doors and roof,
racing to and fro, going apparently nowhere in particular,
charging their passengers only a cent or two per head. A
few rather arrogant looking young native “bloods” ride smart
ponies up and down, the admired of all beholders. Now and
then a flower farm employee, smartly dressed as the rest,
will pass carrying a glorious bouquet of multicoloured


flowers: most likely a “St Nikolas” gift, for it happens some-
times that the native and Dutch festivals fall on the same
day, the fifth of December. Sometimes, but happily, as a
rule, not often, there may be a discordant note in the bright
colour harmony of the scene, when some misguided native
mother has seen fit to score over her neighbours by dressing
her children in European fashion. I once saw two little
brothers in native dress leading a younger one in shirt and
navy-blue knickers, a solar topee much too big for him, and
brown lace shoes, in which the poor little lad clattered
awkwardly along, stumbling now and then, between his
luckier barefooted brothers. Just behind them were two
small girls in shoes and socks and pink silk frocks, and a
third, aged about four, in a white shirt-blouse on to which a
dark serge skirt was buttoned: she too, poor mite, stumbling
painfully in unaccustomed shoes. Then there was a toddler
scarcely able to stand alone, in a knitted red and white cap,
white shirt, horrid little red knickers, and long loose stockings
that kept tumbling down his legs and flapping round his
toes, as two little girls tried to lead him along. They stopped
on the grass by the side of the road, and while one held him,
the other pulled the stockings up above his skinny little bow-
legged knees, and fixed them with strings of grass. Then,
apparently deciding that these improvised suspenders would
not stand the strain of any more pedestrian exploits, the bigger
girl picked him up and sat him astride her hip; and the little
group tripped away obviously as proud as Punch to be the
bearers of such an up to date baby brother.
There are other sartorial effects somewhat startling to
European eyes: as for instance a muscular pony driver in a
transparent white sprigged muslin jacket worn over a violent
red and white striped football jersey, with the usual hatik head-
dress and sarong ; and a lad racing past on the carrier of a
friend’s bicycle, wearing a Malay cap, a shiny new white satin
jacket, a mauve “zip” shirt, tartan sarong, and batik kepala .
Javanese young men and little boys, as well as Chinese, are
much addicted to striped cotton suits exactly like European
pyjamas; but this is a fashion that has something to recommend
it, for it is cool, clean, gay, and comfortable.
Now and then two or three young Chinese will stroll past,


in the same holiday mood as the rest, with arms round each
other’s shoulders, very slim and trim in their well starched
white suits. But, sad to say, when Europeans appear on the
scene it is seldom that they contribute to its charm. Robust
ladies in revealingly tight shirts and trousers, for instance,
set one wondering why, in a period when feminine fashion is
kinder to women, when they please, than ever before, they
should be at such pains to appear at their worst by contrast
with the festive attire of the crowds on a native holiday!
Even on this general holiday not everyone is idle; and you
will see mingling with the throng here and there a coolie,
bare to the waist, swinging cheerily along with piled-up loads
of carrots, cauliflower, or cabbages, all adding their touch of
colour to the pageant.
It is noticeable that in all such crowds you will always see
groups of little boys walking together, and others of little
girls. They never mix, except when a family party of father,
mother, and children take the road together. The little girls
walk sedately, their muslin badjoes fastened with gold brooches,
wearing chains of fresh flower blossoms, and each grasping a
tiny payong (umbrella). The boys swagger along, and there
is scarcely one of them, even tiny lads of three or four years
old, who will not be smoking a little tapering cigarette, often
in a holder, which adds the finishing touch to their absurdly
grown up air. ' Each little boy is as perfect a replica of his
father or elder brother as his little sister is of her feminine
elders.
This great occasion is celebrated, like those of the Chinese,
with crackers, the use of which has been shrewdly introduced
to the Javanese by Chinese storekeepers. So another touch
of colour is added in every town and village by the piles of
these fireworks in crude pink and green wrappers, displayed
on tables in front of all the Chinese shops.
The Lebaran is no more forgotten by the Javanese when
they are absent from their country than is Christmas by
Britons abroad. Native nursemaids, taken home to Holland
by Dutch families on leave, always do their best to cele-
brate the feast even in the dismal chilliness of European
winter.
The great day of Lebaran is followed by the Salamatan


Maleman (the word malem means “night ”), which is kept up
for the next seven nights, those on uneven dates calling for
the chief celebrations. It ends with Salamatan Bada Sawat
—also called Salamatan Ketoepat , the latter being the name of
the rice cakes proper to the day. These, though unpalatable
to European taste (at least they are to mine), are most pleasing
to the eye. They consist of steamed rice pressed solid, done
up in little packets about four inches square, beautifully
covered with plaited green palm leaf, with a sort of handle at
one end. During the seven days preceding the feast, the
women in every kampong are hard at work making them, for
custom demands that they should be given as presents to every
acquaintance. All along the roads on the pasar day before
the proper day of presentation, you will see women carrying
baskets piled high with the pretty things; and you will be
lucky indeed if you are not presented with a dozen or more.
They are most difficult to dispose of under the watchful eyes
of your devoted native servants, whose feelings you would
not hurt for the world; but, in modern parlance, they are
“too, too, sick-making”!
The month of fasting is faithfully observed in country
districts, and the native population take no food between sun-
up and sundown; but they certainly do all that is humanly
possible to supply the deficiency at night. They have a meal
just after sunset, and then settle down to sleep, which the
fortunate native seems always able to do at any time at a
moment’s notice. But one remains awake and on watch, a
duty that, of course, is taken in turn, and at midnight he goes
round the kampong banging on a short piece of bamboo to
waken the people for the midnight meal, or saoer , calling out
a long-drawn cry of “ Sa-a-oe-rr" as he goes. At the same
time, the hedoek (a great hanging drum with ends of buffalo
hide) booms out from the mesigit (mosque), and its dull,
muffled sound is heard for an hour; rather intermittently as
a rule, for it is banged in turn by the young santri, or mosque
apprentices, who are apt to fight for the tahoeh with which
the drum is beaten. When this duty, of which the santris
are very proud, is done, they go home to a heavy meal, leaving
the Modin to watch over the mesigit till dawn.
Strict observance of the month of fasting is to a great


extent dying out among the younger generation in the large
towns. They often keep it strictly only on the first day of the
month, and for the rest of the period get a dispensation from
their Penghoeloe (head of their church) just as Catholics do in
Lent from the priest. They argue, not unreasonably, that
the long complete fast interferes too much with their jobs,
and that jobs are all too easily lost in the keen competition of
the modern Java town world.
Especially is this noticeable in the so called “factory
district” of Soerabaya, which is like no other in the world,
and must surely be the pleasantest. It is strung out along
the bank of the river just outside the town, where the big,
cool looking, spotlessly whitewashed buildings stand back
from the road, screened by huge shady Flamboyant trees
which spread their branches out across the roadway to join
those of others on the opposite side. There, on the wide
grass verge of the river bank, under their shade, come the
vendors of food and coffee and syrups, to cater for the factory
workers, no less during the month of fasting than at any other
time.
It is a charming sight to see the workers in their multi-
coloured garb come tumbling out, laughing and chattering,
at midday, or when work is over in the afternoon, to gather in
groups round the food-sellers’ little kitchens with their extra-
ordinary variety of the weird edibles dear to the native heart.
Many of the men and boys (the girls are far too modest for
anything like mixed bathing!) go into the river for a swim,
slipping easily out of their scanty garments, and soon the
shining water is alive with smooth brown bodies among the
bright green and blue of the water hyacinth that comes slowly
drifting down with the stream. A jolly crowd of youngsters,
some carefully soaping themselves, hair and all; others
laughing and splashing and fooling, in the way of all young
people. Watching them, it is hard to believe that they are a
part of the same ruthless industrial system that produces the
weary unsmiling workers of other lands.
In the big towns the end of the twelve hours’ fast is
announced daily by the firing of a cannon at 6 p.m., for the
benefit of those who are not within earshot of the bedoek at the
mosque, which is always sounded at this hour. But nowadays


it is not, I fancy, such an eagerly awaited sound as it was a
generation ago.
The easy absorption of the Mohammedan religion by the
Javanese by grafting it, as it were, upon their previous beliefs
is better understood when it is realised in what manner the
teaching of the Prophet came to them. It reached Java by
way of Malaya, where it had taken a firm hold centuries earlier,
probably soon after Mahomet’s death in a.d. 632. Malay
and Arab traders made the Java ports of Grissee and Toeban
ports of call on their way to the Moluccas for spices; and,
finding Java a land flowing, if not with milk and honey, with
many other equally delectable things, began to settle there.
The rich Mohammedan Malay merchants, people of a race
having much in common with the Javanese, were regarded as
desirable matrimonial catches for the daughters of Javanese
of good family; and as Malay settlement increased, no doubt
the humbler classes followed the example of the “best people”
and intermarriage became general. In this way there was a
peaceful penetration of the new religion with the minimum
of friction; a strange chapter in the fiery history of Islam’s
triumphal sweep across the world.
The first known Mohammedan missionary to Java was
Malik Ibraham, who died at Grissee in 1419. His tomb, on
a hill just outside the town, is still a place of pious pilgrimage.
The Mohammedans, in fact, seem to have “Islamised”
Java and other East Indian islands in much the same way as
we “Christianised” various parts of the world. Then, as so
often occurred in the case of Christianity, traders and mis-
sionaries paved the way for conquest. As the new faith spread,
the power of the old Hindu-Javanese kingdoms, even that of
the great Madjapahit, dwindled by degrees till they became
an easy prey for the Malays; and by 1579 all but one of
the Hindu states had disappeared and were replaced by
Mohammedan powers. The exception was Balambangan, in
the extreme south-eastern corner of the island, which, like the
adjoining island of Bali, the invaders seem to have ignored.
And now there comes a third great religion, Christianity,
to “try its luck.” Not for the first time, for Portuguese
Catholic missionaries visited Java early in the fourteenth
century, but they do not appear to have found the Javanese


responsive. They tried again late in the sixteenth century,
and established a mission which existed for a few years until
it was expelled by the conquering Mohammedans.
Then came the Dutch; not, like the French in Indo-
China, preceded by their missionaries. They conquered and
overthrew the Mohammedan kingdoms one by one, but what-
ever may have been the severity of their conquest in other
respects, they certainly did not attempt to impose Christianity
upon the vanquished by the sword. The Dutch East India
Company was far more concerned with exploiting the Javanese
than with converting them; and any attempts by the expelled
Catholics to renew their missionary work among the natives
were frustrated by the Company’s edict that no religion might
be practised except that of the Dutch Reformed Protestant
Church.
It was not until the great Company had died an unlamented
death as a bankrupt that religious freedom was permitted by
its successor, the Batavian Republic, and missionaries of
various denominations began by degrees to make their
appearance, though at first they do not seem to have been
very popular with the Government, and only gained a strong
footing when the nineteenth century was well advanced.
So far as actual religious “conversion” is concerned, none
of them has made an appreciable mark on the Javanese
population. A Catholic missionary early in the last century
is said to have remarked plaintively that the Javanese were
too firmly attached to Islam to give the new faith a chance;
though, he added, “they don’t really know anything about
Mohammedanism”—a remark which would have been equally
true of Christianity or any other creed they might have been
persuaded to adopt.
It is in more practical ways that the Christian missions,
Protestant, Catholic, and Salvation Army, have benefited the
people of Java. The missions of each of these bodies provide
hospitals, home nursing, dispensaries, and “poliklinieks” for
the natives, and the work they have achieved in this way in
the improvement of public health, supplementing the fine
Government Health Services, is inestimable. All are deserv-
ing of the highest praise; but specially notable are the two
leper colonies maintained by the Salvation Army, one at


Soerabaya and one at Samarang, and “superior” persons who
are inclined to jeer at “Salvation lasses” would do well to
visit one of them, to see for themselves the amazing, genuine
happiness that they have brought to these poor outcasts.
In a varied life I have seen many memorable sights; but
one stands out as unique: that of the leper orchestra in their
quasi military uniforms, some playing their instruments with
the remnants of hands from which the fingers had all but
disappeared; some minus ears or nose or feet, or in process
of losing by slow corruption those and other portions of their
anatomy; but all of them playing with as much gusto, and as
much noise, as any normal “army” band unhampered by such
tragic disabilities; and the choir they accompanied sang the
familiar cheery, not-too-musical hymns with an enthusiasm
equal to that of the orchestra.
The actual means by which leprosy is communicated from
an infected person to another is still uncertain, but it is
considered unlikely that it is simply by touch. Doctors and
nurses handle the poor maimed limbs and bodies of their
patients every day as a matter of course. So that when the
casual visitor is told that there is no surer way of giving
pleasure to these unfortunate people than by shaking hands
with them, if the pitiful contact with an often shapeless stump
can be so called, is it not surely up to him to make that very
small contribution? It is the custom to wash your hands in
strong disinfectant on leaving the buildings of the colony,
and as in this part of the world a constant change of clean
clothing once or twice a day is the rule in any case, no other
precaution against infection is necessary.
The “poliklinieks” provided for the natives both by the
Government and the various religious bodies are, if anything,
more invaluable to the population than the hospitals. In all
the large towns there are several at which a native doctor and
dispenser give free advice, treatment, and medicine daily.
The Salvation Army maintain three in Soerabaya alone; and
in most country places a “kliniek” is open two or three times
a week. They are used and appreciated by an ever increasing
number of the population as education becomes more and
more widespread.
In conjunction with an organisation called the “ Algemeene


Steun Inlands Behoeftingen ” (General Support for Native
Necessities), popularly known as the “A.5.1.8.,” the Salvation
Army provide some 1500 to 1600 very poor natives of
Soerabaya with a good meal every day.
The “A.5.1.8.” was started by Mevrouw de Jonge, wife
of a former Governor-General, well remembered and beloved
for her benevolence. It is generously supported and carried
on by Chinese and European residents, and the Salvation
Army has shouldered the practical side of the work.
The poorest and most densely populated districts of the
city are served by five depots, at one of which is the kitchen
where the food for all five is cooked. To each of these centres
every morning the poor people come, each with his or her
card, showing to how many portions they are entitled. The
system has been worked out with the co-operation of the
people’s kampong head men, who investigate the needs of the
poorest inhabitants of their districts, and report them to the
committee. Rice, of course, is the staple of the meals pro-
vided, and three whole sacks of it per day are steamed (not
even for Java’s poorest is it boiled in the wasteful western
way) in a huge drum over an open fire. Dried fish and many
kinds of vegetables and other native dishes are all cooked
according to native methods by native helpers in the same
building, a bilik shed erected for the purpose. The poor
people form a queue, each carrying some pathetically humble
receptacle in which to take away the food: old earthenware
pots, rusty enamel basins, pieces of ancient calico, batik, or
even newspaper, and file slowly past a table where each card
is taken and the number of portions called out. These are
ladled out one after the other by a row of voluntary native
assistants. First, out of an enormous bowl, constantly re-
plenished by the cook, comes the steaming unbleached rice,
which, by the way, is delicious; and then the other foods,
which, as far as possible, are varied every day. They are
bought at the pasar each morning by a Javanese woman
superintendent who lives in a little room adjoining the kitchen.
One point about these poor folks who are thus assured of
one meal per day is remarkable, and should be recorded.’
Desperately poor they undoubtedly are; their sarongs and
jackets are faded and patched, and the headdress of some of the


men, which, however destitute, not one of these conscientious
Mohammedans would ever dream of going without, is no
more than a twist of threadbare rag. But none of them, not
even the raggedest, is dirty. And here, in a shed, under
the blazing tropic sun, only a few degrees from the Equator,
there is no vestige of that horrible pervading smell of unwashed
bodies and garments that is characteristic of European or
Australian soup kitchens.
It is the same at all the depots, to which the food is taken in
turn by the “army” car, and gives the foreign visitor an
added respect for these humblest of Java’s people, whose
instinct for personal cleanliness survives even the direst
poverty.
The buildings at all the depots are of the simplest and
cheapest kind, mere shelters of bilik and tile, as is so fortunately
possible in Java, and the necessary space has been provided in
every case at very low cost. The fine influence of the “army,”
combined with natural Javanese kindliness, has resulted in
most of the labour connected with the scheme being voluntary
and unpaid; consequently the expenses are very small, and
almost every guilder contributed can be spent on actual food.
The average cost of the meals thus provided is only about
two cents per person. The average amount spent per
month is 800 guilders.
Modern Christian missionaries in Java, mindful perhaps of
their medieval predecessors’ failures, approach their desired
converts in a very tolerant spirit, and some have been known
even to press the national Hindu-Javanese wayang into
Christian service, by presenting Bible stories with wayang
puppets! In the missionary hospitals, native prejudices,
such as an objection to a day for which an operation has been
fixed as unlucky, are treated with sympathy, and no direct
attempt is made to convert the patients, whose friends may
come and go freely, and who may observe the Mohammedan
forms of prayer in a Christian hospital without let or hindrance.
As a result of these tolerant methods there are said to be
some 50,000 Protestant and 25,000 Catholic natives in Java,
and, in places, there are whole kampongs whose populations
have embraced the Christian faith.
Happily most of these Javanese converts, unlike the
G


Christian natives of other parts of the Dutch East Indies, have
retained their charming national costume, and with it their
natural grace of manner. They continue to celebrate the
traditional salamatans with their indefinite relation to this or
that religion, attend the same wayang performances of stories
from the Hindu Ramayana , and listen to the gamelan with
as much zest as ever. In fact, to the passing stranger, most
of them are quite indistinguishable from their Mohammedan
brethren, and except that they attend a Christian church
service, and sing hymns instead of gabbling the Koran, one
is rather tempted to wonder just what the change may be that
their conversion has wrought in them. For the average
Javanese, whether he professes and calls himself Mohammedan
or Christian, remains still the same mannerly, industrious,
kindly, hospitable individual, possessed indeed of more of
the Christian virtues than most of us, but he also remains at
heart the same convinced animist, with a few added trimmings
garnered from each superimposed religion in turn, without
dropping any of the previous ones. That is why, as a
Mohammedan, he is unique, as he doubtless was also as a
Hindu or a Buddhist: and as he is when he is persuaded to
turn Christian.
The very mild form of Christianity that is accepted by
Javanese converts, at all events those of the humbler class, is
the only one that would ever really suit them. They have a
genius for adapting a religion to themselves rather than them-
selves to the religion, in which they differ widely from most
other Orientals. It is a melancholy fact that although the
Christian religion had its birth in the East, it is a misfit in
its modern fulldress form to the average Oriental. Intro-
duced to Eastern peoples as it is by European missionaries,
after nearly 2000 years of modification to European standards,
Christianity is inevitably associated in Eastern minds with the
aping of the white man’s clothes and manners. Probably
they imagine that the first disciples of Jesus wore trousers
and collars and ties I And indeed, so completely have we
“westernised” His teachings, that we have all but succeeded
in convincing ourselves, to say nothing of the “heathen,”
that Christianity is our own exclusive property and a product
of western civilisation.


There are, of course, some well and truly “westernised”
natives in Java, mostly of the upper social class. But it is
more likely that the generous Dutch education system, with
the facilities it offers for study in Holland and to qualify in
one or other of the learned professions, is responsible for their
metamorphosis, rather than that they -owe it to missionary
effort. They appear usually to have “adopted” Christianity;
but the dispassionate observer is tempted to surmise that
they have done so more with a view to putting the finishing
touch to the near European figure to which they have attained,
rather than as the result of any religious conviction.
An example of the all embracing tolerance of the ordinary
Javanese native’s attitude to religion may serve to illustrate
the rich blend of which his faith is composed. The native
postmaster of a small country dessa , a simple fellow, whom I
had long known as a Mohammedan, appeared one day to my
surprise in his little office not only in a European suit, but bare-
headed, which, to the followers of Mahomet, is unthinkable.
I asked him if he had been converted to Christianity: there
could be, I thought, no other explanation. “No, Toeang he
said; “but it seems to me that it is well to belong a little to all
religions!” And he proceeded to embroider the theme,
while he drew a diagram on his post office counter to show that
all roads may lead to Toean Allah\
Whether or not Christianity will ever replace Islam in Java,
as Islam replaced Hinduism, no one can tell. But it may
already have had effects that will add to the problems of future
archaeologists. Centuries hence perhaps, when civilisation is
struggling painfully to life again, and students come to search
in Java, as elsewhere, for traces of an earlier, lost civilisation
blotted out by barbarians of the twentieth century, they may
find among the ruins, with the Buddhas and the Hindu giants,
some of the Madonnas and Christian angels in Oriental poses
that now adorn native Catholic churches; and they will
speculate upon the confusion of influences revealed in the art
of a vanished race, as we do to-day upon that of the Greeks
in India.


CHtATTE^
“Magic”
REFERENCE to the ingrained animism of the Javanese,
despite their conversion and apparent devotion to
Islam, has already been made. But the extent to which
that animism is expressed in almost every action of native daily
life is an endless revelation.
Your Javanese may have made the pilgrimage to Mecca:
thousands of them do so every year; he may be a doctor or a
lawyer as the result of Dutch higher education, or a skilled
mechanic or electrician; in any case he will certainly have
adapted himself more than willingly to all the innovations that
Western progress has brought him in the way of electricity,
transport, and so on. But he can never quite shake himself
free of the ancient belief of his ancestors in the spirits that
inhabit every nook and corner of the country. A faith that
permeates the whole atmosphere of the archipelago, and that
of Java, for all its civilisation, as much as the rest. So much
so, that even hard-headed Europeans can only shrug their
shoulders and murmur the overworked tag about “more things
in heaven and earth,’ ’ etc. Certainly not one of them who
has won the confidence of his native friends will ever doubt
their unshakable belief in the strange tales they tell, or will
be so foolish or so unkind as to laugh at their fears and fancies.
As a typical example: a native electrician, skilful as any
European at his trade, was sent for to repair a connection
running through our garden. He arrived just at sundown,
ready and eager to put all in order for us, having come on foot
the five miles up the steep mountain road from the town.
But when he learned that the trouble was outside, and that he
would have to brave the darkness of the garden, even though
illuminated by our torches, he sorrowfully shook his head and
departed down the road again, saying he would return next
morning, for, if he touched their haunts at night, the spirits
of the garden would be angry and punish him severely!
But after all, there is not so very much to choose between
the Javanese native’s methods of propitiating any spirits that


may happen to be about, and those of the conventional
Christian. At planting and harvesting seasons all the farmers
of a dessa will gather at a sort of service under some ancient
holy tree, bringing offerings with them which they deposit
among its enormous roots. And near the fields that they
wish to place under spiritual protection they place little
offerings of food on small altars; or light tapers and set them
up beside any tree or rock that they have been taught to
regard as holy. Whereas we bring apples and vegetable
marrows to the harvest festival, or burn candles and tapers to
the saints, according to taste.
It is impossible to live long in Java without noticing these
expressions of the natives’ respect for the spirits. The
offerings are to be seen here, there, and everywhere, and you
may pass a dozen of them on any country walk. The little
altars look rather like big toadstools, the top formed of a
round tray made of woven split bamboo, with a bamboo
section serving as stem. On these, tiny cakes, sweetmeats,
and handfuls of rice are arranged on pieces of banana leaf,
and adorned with a flower or two. You will find them on
the earth banks surrounding the ricefields; in quiet shady
corners under a waringen tree; or beside lonely paths where
protection from lurking dangers might be especially welcome.
I once asked an elderly Javanese, a village head man and
devout Mohammedan who had made the pilgrimage to Mecca,
and was very proud of the prestige as a Hadji that it gave him,
why, if his people really believed in the One True God, they
should think it necessary to “keep in” with the field spirits in
this way. He gravely explained that Toean Allah was a very
great God, and had great affairs on his hands to attend to:
such things as pilgrimages to Mecca, for instance. How
then could he be expected at the same time to keep his eye on
Ahmat’s and Soedji’s rice crops, and those of all the other
millions of cultivators in Java, to see that the rats did not get
at them, or other mishap befall ? It was not reasonable. He
could not do it. It was a matter for Sri Dewa, the Rice
Goddess, and, under her, the Field Spirits to look after; and
the old man, squatting on his heels, puffing away at his tiny
cigarette, gazed at me sadly, as though I ought to have known
better.


The Javanese farmer, having duly fulfilled his obligations
to the spirits, gets steadily on with his job, conscious that he
has done all that is possible to secure the co-operation of the
unseen powers, and that the rest depends on his own efforts.
It has always seemed to me that his is a much more reasonable
blending of spiritual matters with agriculture than that of the
British farmer who, having, as is his way, bemoaned the
weather and the rain that endangers the wheat or oats he has
cut, will let a fine sunny Sunday go by entirely wasted rather
than cart and stack the crop on the sacred Day of Rest, to
awaken, as he deserves, on Monday to another wild, wet
morning, and curse anew the vagaries of the English climate.
Offerings to the gods and spirits of volcanoes are constantly
made, for the Javanese have only too good cause to know
what these are capable of doing to them if they are angry.
So, in times of epidemic, failure of crops, or other adversities,
or indeed at any time, they will climb the mountains and place
their gifts there in the hope of appeasing the unseen powers.
Near the summit of Goenong Kloet (one of the most sinister
volcanoes in Java, with an even blacker record to its discredit
than Goenong Merapi, having erupted every eight or nine
years since 1811) there is a knife-edge above a precipice some
1500 feet high which, according to native legend, has been
from time immemorial a place of human sacrifice. It is
whispered that whenever the wise men predict another out-
burst there are always to be found those whose faith and
courage are sublime enough to offer themselves as a sacrifice
to the mountain gods, by leaping into the crater.
Not long before the last eruption a party of Europeans who
were climbing the mountain found the traces of a camp.
There was a blanket, the ashes of a fire, some cakes, brass pots,
and other small offerings; but no sign whatever of who it was
who had brought them there, nor any trace of returning foot-
prints in the soft ground that showed clearly those going
upwards. The coolies with the European party told them
that the vanished camper had certainly thrown himself over
the precipice in the hope of turning away the wrath of the
gods: a vain hope as it proved, for the eruption duly followed
not long after. But in the face of such things who shall dare
to say that the humble Javanese have no faith, or that they are


not truly “religious” ? Which of us would dare do the same,
even to avert a world war ?
Europeans who wish to climb any of the active volcanoes
in Java will find that it may not be done without the con-
currence of the spirits. Your coolies will carry offerings
with them, and will stop to place them at some holy spot, in
return for which it is understood that permission is granted
to climb further, or to camp for the night, as the case may be.
A party whose coolies had thus secured permission for them to
camp for one night were overtaken by heavy rain, which made
the climb to the summit impossible. They decided to stay
where they were for a second night and continue the expedi-
tion on the following day. This, however, their coolies very
gravely explained, was impossible, as only one night was
covered by the permit they had received; but they would soon
put it right. So down they scrambled, an hour’s journey or
more over the rough path they had just ascended, back to the
Holy Place to offer a second gift to the gods. Then, having
arranged the matter to their satisfaction, back they came to
the camp, saying that now all was well, and the party could
safely climb to the crater next morning!
In some curious limestone mountain formations visible
from the winding road that crosses the ranges near Bandoeng,
not even the materialistic presence of several chalk-works,
sources of some of the loads of lime so often to be met, carried
on the backs of trains of pack ponies, has been able to frighten
away evil spirits. One of them especially, Goenong Pawan,
is inhabited by particularly fearsome hantoes , and on leaving
my car by the roadside one day, and walking towards some
caves in the gleaming white precipice, I was gravely cautioned
by a native not to enter them. I took his advice; otherwise,
I gathered, I should not be alive to tell the tale.
Every volcano in Java has its own legends, firmly believed
by every native. Of the terrible Goenong Kloet, mentioned
above, for instance, they say that there sleeps beneath the
triple craters a giant prince with the head of a buffalo, and
that whenever he stirs or turns over in his sleep there is an
eruption, serious or slight, according to the degree of his
restlessness. But if ever it should happen that he wakes up
completely and rises from his hard couch, then the whole


of Java and its people will be overwhelmed in a disaster a
thousand times more terrible even than the eruption of
Krakatoe.
The legend about the Ardjoeno mountains is of another
kind. Arjuno or Ardjoeno, the great Indian warrior who is
also one of the heroes of the Javanese wayang , gave his name
to the whole range, the two principal peaks being called
Ardjoeno and Wedadarin (Arjuno and the Angels), to
commemorate the fact that the hero spent many days and
nights here in meditation without once succumbing to the
charms of the angels in exquisite female form who took it in
turns to tempt him. His pious retreat to the mountains had
been undertaken in order to consult the gods about a “brothers’
war” he had dreamed was to break out, and according to which
“men should fly over on wings from other lands and kill
them”—a curious prediction in a story some 2000 years old!
Javanese legends are of course not confined to the moun-
tains, and most of them, like all respectable fairy tales, have a
“moral,” taking care to avenge the sufferings of the hero and
bring down a terrible vengeance on the villain of the piece.
The story of Lake Sitoe Bagendit, near Garoet, is a typical
one. Where the lake now is, there was once a prosperous
village among whose residents was a very wealthy widow called
Nji Endit, who was hated for her miserly ways. She had a
fine house and many servants, but never gave anything away.
Once a year, however, she gave a great feast after the harvest
by way of showing off before her poorer neighbours. While
this feast was going on, there appeared a poor beggar, terribly
emaciated and almost naked, asking for a little rice for pity’s
sake, as he had not eaten for three days. But the widow
laughed at him and said: “Do you think I grow rice to waste
it on beggars? Get out, or I’ll set my servants on you!”
She hunted the old man away, and he crept out of sight,
sitting down to rest beside a bagbagan (a bathing place in a
running stream) behind the house, with the tears running down
his cheeks in his weakness and hunger. Suddenly he heard
a voice, and looked up to see a dignified old man who asked
him so kindly what ailed him that he told the story of Nji
Endit’s cruelty. The old man was the Spirit of the Stream
and said to him: “Fear not, I shall avenge you. Go away


from here as far and as fast as you can.” The beggar hobbled
off as fast as his feeble legs would carry him, and presently,
as he looked back from a hillside where he had sat down
again to rest, he saw the water rising. The stream, com-
manded by its Spirit, had overflowed until the whole village
was under water, and thus the present lake came into existence.
The greedy widow was changed into a big leech, which lives
on the shores of the lake to this day.
The ancient custom of currying favour with the gods by
an animal sacrifice will sometimes crop up among the natives
of Java. A sugar planter friend of mine, making his rounds
in the mill one day, came upon the scene just in time to rescue
from a grisly fate a wretched kitten which was about to be
thrown into the crusher tied to a bunch of sugarcane “to
bring good luck to the crushing,” as the millworkers earnestly
informed their master when, much to their puzzlement and
distress, they were told to stop the machine, untie the little
creature, and take it to the planter’s house. That particular
kitten lives to this day, a sleek and pampered household pet;
but the custom may be more general in the mills than any of
us guess. Cats are cheap enough, heaven knows, but it is
not a pleasing reflection as you drop a lump of sugar into your
afternoon tea!
The heads of cattle slaughtered for feasts of any ceremonial
kind are usually offered as sacrifices to the spirits. This is
especially the case at the inauguration of a new building; and
during the great Java sugar boom, now, alas, only a matter
of history, when many huge new mills were erected, these
sacrificial offerings of rows of wide horned buffalo heads were
a sight not easily forgotten.
How all the “holy” trees and stones and rocks and springs
acquired their holiness, no native can ever say. But holy
they are, and the Javanese will run no risks of offending the
spirits that inhabit them. All waringen trees are holy, more
or less, when they have attained any age, which is most
fortunate, for if it were not so, many of the magnificent old
trees that preside over the pasars and the big open grass
covered space, called aloon-aloon , in the centre of most native
towns, sheltering an immense area with their wide-flung
branches, might well have been swept away by the tide of


progress. But happily their holiness protects them. No
native would dare to strike an axe at the sacred trunk, and it
would be a brave white man indeed that would order him to
cut one down.
The waringen is one of the most characteristic of Java trees.
It is a member of the ficus (fig) family, to which Ficus elastica ,
from which rubber was tapped before the cultivation of Hevea ,
also belongs. They closely resemble one another, and the
elastica is often mistaken for its “holy” relation.
A fine old waringen that stands on a piece of land leased
from the native owner some years ago by a European, as a site
for a country house and garden, created a curious situation.
Native prejudice would not permit the holy tree to be included
in the very beautiful garden that the new tenant soon caused
to be made around it, and certainly no white man might ever
sit and drink tea or gossip in its shade! The difficulty was
overcome by putting up a fence all round the tree, with a
pathway, also fenced, leading to it through the garden from
the outside boundary, so that natives might bring their
offerings to it without let or hindrance as before.
You may sometimes see, under the deep shade of one of
these old waringen , such relics as a carved stone Hindu god,
or Nandi, the sacred bull, tucked in the natural shrines formed
by the huge sprawling roots. They were probably brought
there, perhaps generations ago, by natives who found them
in the neighbourhood, who would think the holy tree a suit-
able place. There is such a tree at Simpang, Soerabaya, and
another at Poedjon, in the eastern mountains. These, and all
others similarly distinguished, have an added holiness, and it
is rarely that there are not small votive offerings among the
great roots, and always the ashes and remnants of countless
tapers.
A stone or rock of any unusual shape is quite sure to be
regarded as the habitation of a spirit, and often a bilik house is
built over it, in which offerings are placed. If by the wayside
on a mountain path you see what looks like a neat bamboo
dog kennel, it is long odds that inside you will find a queer
shaped stone with faded flowers and some rice or cakes beside it.
So long as native superstition is confined to such things as
rocks and trees, it does not cause the European resident of


Java much inconvenience. But when it is a stream or a spring
whose water he needs that is found to possess the embarrassing
quality of holiness it is quite another matter. He may be very
seriously inconvenienced and be put to heavy expense; but
his material interests will carry no weight in competition with
the Javanese spirits, and in the end he is almost sure to have
to admit himself beaten.
As a case in point: an hotel was built recently on a high
pass across one of the lovely mountain ranges, the site being
chosen, as is the custom, in convenient proximity to a sparkling
stream which runs splashing and gurgling past it from the
heights above. From this it was proposed to connect a
running water supply according to the delightfully simple
method in vogue in these parts. A bamboo pipe, often with
its end covered with a small round tin, perforated to form a
filter, is fixed under a fall from over some high rock, or in the
bank of the stream at a point where the water flows swiftly;
the bamboo pipeline is carried on along the hillside to a
concrete tank outside the house. Thus a constant water
supply is yours at the cost of a few shillings and without
payment of a water rate!
This is done in country places, especially in the mountains,
all over Java; and the hotel in question, in common with all
others in the Dutch East Indies, was luxuriously fitted with
baths and wash-basins and all the latest sanitary appliances
which had to be carried by coolies up the steep mountain
track in readiness for the bountiful supply of clear spring
water provided by nature: which incidentally was an item
given prominence in the advertised attractions of the
establishment.
At last all was ready; the plumbing done, and every fitting
in its place; but when it came to the last and simplest item, the
tapping of the stream and laying the pipeline, there came a
hitch. The coolies, who till now had worked at the job as
cheerily as is their wont, shook their heads and looked
frightened. The hotel proprietor, thinking they were waiting
for his promise of the usual salamatan , hastened to promise
that one should be held the moment the water was connected;
but still they hung back, and at last their head man spoke for
them. “It may not be, Toean” he said very solemnly. “The


water of that stream is holy. The spirits will be angry and
some great evil befall, if we steal the water from their stream!”
No orders or promises or persuasions would induce those or
any other coolies to place in position the bamboo piping across
the short distance that would have led the sacred water to the
house. There stood the new hotel spick-and-span and ready
for its guests. All around it was the music of running water;
but to conjure that melodious sound within doors, to flow
from the shining chromium taps into the much advertised
modern baths and basins, was beyond the white man’s
power.
At last, after many consultations with the wise men of the
village near by, the coolies’ head man announced that, provided
the proper offerings of rice were regularly made to the spirits
of the stream, water might be dipped from it in sufficient
quantity to fill the hotel tank, but that on no account might
it be run off in a pipe. So the hotelier, grateful for small
mercies in a situation that had looked for a time like being
even worse that it was, had to be content with a tank filled by
buckets; and the inadequacy of the supply in proportion to
his costly fittings is a constant mocking reminder of how
impotent the blessings of civilisation may be, at times, to
compete with an ancient primitive faith.
Holy objects such as krises , shields, and other things,
which are said to fit none but men of royal blood, and which
make their wearers both invincible and invulnerable, are still
preserved in the palaces of the sultans at Soerakarta and
Djokdjakarta, jealously guarded in an inner room by women
especially chosen for the task. These poesakas , as they are
called, are much revered by the people, who bring offerings
to them in the hope of help in curing sickness, and of procuring
fruitfulness in women.
Every village has its doekoen : a wise man or magic maker
who is consulted upon every sort of medical, domestic, social,
or other problem. And the natives’ blind and utter faith in
all things supernatural makes the doekoen s job a profitable
and easy one. The average Javanese, however poor, would
far rather pay the wise man as much money as a coolie can earn
in a month, to make magic over his sick child, than allow a
white doctor to treat it free. There is in some villages also


a wise woman, called nini towok , whose speciality it is to
discover thieves and other evildoers.
Odd stories of these doekoens' powers are told even by
Europeans: as witness the following, vouched for by a well-
known Dutch business man. Some years ago, a friend of his
who had a native wife decided it was time to turn “respectable”
and marry a white girl. But he was genuinely attached to
his native partner, and shrank from breaking the news to her
and still more from the thought of sending her away. So
torn was the young man between his two loves that several
of his bachelor friends put their heads together and decided
to tackle the affair in the native way by consulting a doekoen ,
found for them by a native servant. The ancient man
listened gravely to the tale they told him and, after deep
thought, said that all would be well if they carried out his
instructions. Then, taking a sodawater bottle, still adorned
with its label, and putting a small piece of bamboo inside it
while muttering a charm, he corked it and handed it to the
young men, telling them to throw it into the water from the
first bridge they should cross on their way home. This they
did, throwing the ridiculous bottle into the river from a bridge
in the heart of the town; a place swarming with traffic and a
most unlikely milieu , one would have thought, for magic.
Nevertheless it worked. Their friend, who knew nothing
of their efforts on his behalf, announced next day that, to
his astonishment and relief, his native wife had packed her
baggage while he was out, and had disappeared, never to be
seen by any of them again.
Many people will remember a recent African travel film
in which a native was seen “calling the crocodiles.” The
same extraordinary power is claimed by many East Indian
doekoens , and undoubtedly possessed by some. I have not
come across any authenticated case in Java itself, but at
Banjowangi, Dutch Borneo, just over the water, a doekoen
performed the feat in the presence of hundreds of onlookers,
including many Europeans. A native had been taken by a
crocodile, and his friends wished to avenge him and punish
his murderer. But a promiscuous crocodile hunt would not
do. Crocodiles are regarded with great respect in all the
islands of the East Indian Archipelago, and in Borneo they


are inhabited by the spirits of the Dyaks’ ancestors, so that
they must never be killed wantonly or without good reason.
But it is understood that if one of the creatures so far forgets
its manners and the canons of good taste as to devour a
descendant of the spirit that uses its body as a habitation, then
it must pay the death penalty.
The local doekoen was accordingly consulted, and he assured
the bereaved relatives that he would certainly bring the guilty
reptile to justice. Down to the muddy river bank, right in
the middle of the town, he went, followed by the entire native
population, and there, squatting in the usual native fashion
on his heels, he started to croon a queer monotonous chant.
On and on it went, rising and falling weirdly, while the crowd,
deeply awed, watched in dead silence. “ Baiya!” (crocodile)
“ Baiya /” he called, over and over again. “Come, Baiya ,
come! One of you has broken the law. You have killed
a man, and eaten him. Come! Come! You too must
die! You must die. Come!” . . .And presently, while the
chant went on unbroken, dark shapes were seen approaching
swiftly and silently, leaving the surface of the sluggish stream
unruffled save for the wake that widened in two silver lines
behind each of them, as though they were small boats. They
were the heads of a score or more of crocodiles; and as they
came nearer one separated itself from the rest. The doekoen
now changed his chant a little, and addressed himself to the
nearest approaching head only, while the others one by one
turned round and disappeared.
The hideous brute reached the point just opposite the
doekoen , climbed the bank and, waddling clumsily forward,
stopped close in front of him. Fearlessly, still singing his
uncanny chant, he approached it, and bound first its great
jaws and then its fore and hind claws with rope that he had
brought with him, to which it made not the least resistance.
The doekoen then stopped chanting and, turning round, said
to the awestruck crowd: “Here is the one who devoured
your brother! Kill him! It is the law!” Nothing loth,
the executioners hastened to do their grisly part. The
helpless crocodile was cut open; and there in its stomach
were recognisable traces of the unfortunate man whose death
was thus lawfully avenged!


The Javanese greatly revere white hair; and, provided of
course that they have reason to like and respect its possessor
on other counts, they are very ready to accredit him with
supernatural powers. An old planter friend of mine who
was born in the country, and speaks Javanese, Malay,
Madoerese, and several dialects as fluently as the natives
among whom he has spent his long life, is regarded far and
wide as a wise and holy man from whom no secrets are hidden.
From all over the district they come to consult the Toean Toea
(the Old Lord) as they call him; and there is seldom a day
when you will not find him dispensing wisdom and counsel
from a seat in his garden to some figure squatted before him
on the ground.
It may be a man suspected of theft or some other mis-
demeanour. On such occasions my old friend is in his
element. Gazing benevolently upon the delinquent crouched
humbly at his feet, he slowly shakes his head with its thick
white thatch as he raises his right hand and points heaven-
ward. “Aw as!” (Beware!) says he, with awful solemnity.
“Up there in the sky sits the Lord Allah, Who looks into
your heart and sees all things! He knows whether you lie
or speak truth. And now, mark well what I say. If you are
lying ... in two full days from now —that is on Friday at
this hour—He will make your stomach swell till it is so big
you cannot walk! Awas! Awas!”
The man stares, fascinated, at the pointing finger and the
gently wagging white-crowned head. And so convinced is
he that the Toean Toea is on terms of the utmost intimacy
with the gods, that he will certainly confess if he is guilty.
But that is no guarantee that upon occasion even such a
confession of guilt may not be turned to the sinner’s advantage
in dealing with a white-haired seer whose kindness of heart
is as famed as his omniscience. One wily rascal, his bluff
of innocence wholly broken down by the awesome thought of
Divine intervention in his stomach, replied, grovelling:
“Why should I lie when the Toean knows all? It is true
that I was guilty of the theft, for Ardjo was a fool and it was
easy. Such men as he are a temptation to those wiser than
themselves. But no matter. I will go now to the poliss and
confess, and they will put me in prison. And because I


speak the truth the Toean who is great and good, knowing all
the secrets of the gods, will see that while I am in prison my
wife and my children, of whom I have many, do not starve!”
And it was so! The Toean not only provided for the thief’s
large family while he went to jail, but gave him a job when
he was discharged: he was pointed out to me, where he
worked among the flower beds, while I listened to the story.
Belief in my old friend’s supernatural powers, already
strong, received irrefutable and terrifying proof in native eyes
through the fulfilment, needless to say wholly unforeseen by
the prophet, of one of his prophecies. He had rented a
piece of land from an adjoining native landowner, paying him
three years’ rent in advance in cash, the man, as commonly
happens, needing money to meet the expenses of a daughter’s
wedding. At the end of the first year, however, on going
with his coolies to direct a fresh planting, Mr X. to his
astonishment found the native owner hard at work on the
land in question, and on asking for an explanation the man
calmly asserted that the arrangement, which had been made
merely by word of mouth, as is usual in such transactions,
had been for one year only.
The native farmer, who was elderly and of some importance
among his neighbours, stuck stubbornly to his version even
when the Toean , adopting his usual tactics, solemnly wagged
a finger at him and told him that unless he admitted he was
lying he would certainly be dead within three days. To my
old friend’s horror, on the third day the man’s wife appeared
weeping and wringing her hands, to say that her husband
had died in the night, from what cause no one was ever able
to discover. Grovelling on the ground in front of the Old
Lord, placing her forehead against his boot, she sobbed out:
“ Wahl Wah! Alas that Soemo should have lied to the
Toean who knows all things and has the power of life and
death! I stood unseen behind the door when the Toean paid
the three years’ rent, but I dared not tell Soemo for he would
have been very angry. But now he is dead, and I pray to
the Toean to take the land and plant it, for it is lawfully his!”
Is it any wonder that after such tragic proof the “Old
Lord’s” fame spread far and wide, and that he is regarded
as having powers far greater than any doekoen ? So much so,


indeed, that when plans to murder all the Europeans in the
district (during a native plot organised in 1927 with the
avowed object of wiping out the Europeans throughout
Java) were discovered, it was found that Mr and Mrs X. had
been specifically excepted—surely a unique honour!
This plot was “given away” in the district in which my
white haired old friend and his family are residents, by an
anonymous letter from a friendly native to the Wedono of the
dessa , who promptly handed it on to the European authority
in the nearest large town. The letter contained the startling
announcement that on a certain day all the local Europeans,
except Mr and Mrs X., were to be killed, and that weapons
and other proofs would be found in certain native houses.
Soldiers and police were sent up; a search revealed the
promised proofs; and a hundred or so of the conspirators
were rounded up. They were roped together and made to
trot behind a police motor bicycle to the Wedono's office at
a very slow pace, as an example to their neighbours. Later
on they and their fellow-conspirators from elsewhere in Java
were deported to a convict settlement deep in the wilds of
Dutch New Guinea, several days’ difficult journey from
Merauke, which is itself surely one of the loneliest places in
the world.
Of course there are “haunted houses” in Java. It could
not be otherwise in so spirit haunted a community. The
strangest example I have come across is a large hotel on the
outskirts of a populous village in one of the most famous
mountain beauty spots in Java. It is a solid stone building
standing back from a main road at the end of an avenue of
stately palms, on the slope of a magnificent natural amphi-
theatre looking out over a panorama of rare loveliness. There
is a spacious terrace from which to view the scenery, a fine
tennis court, a garden full of flowers and shrubs, and long
rows of bedrooms, each with its own bathroom and verandah.
The last word, in fact, in attraction and comfort. The whole
place is fully furnished; but it was abandoned years ago, just
as it stands, to the dust and ants and spiders—and to the spirits.
You can walk through a broken shutter, held in place by a
chair pushed against it, into the once pleasant lounge, full of
armchairs and small tables, on which there are still ashtrays,


and shelves and cabinets still adorned with books and orna-
ments. On the walls hang blue china plates, framed pictures,
and a calendar from some insurance company dated seven
years ago!
Through the dirt-grimed windows of the dining-room,
where yellowish, rotting lace curtains droop forlornly, you
can see the long table on which stands a dead palm in a
blackened brass pot. Drawn up to it are two long rows of
chairs; and along the walls are buffets and sideboard laden
with piles of plates and rows of jugs and cups and glasses;
even a stone filter is not lacking.
So it has stood, needing apparently little more than a
thorough spring cleaning to make it fit for human habitation,
for more than seven years; and so it will in all probability go
on standing until it falls down.
A wrinkled old native came hobbling across the garden
from an outhouse when he caught sight of me on the day
when, my curiosity aroused by the stories I had heard, I made
my way in to see for myself. I asked him if he knew why
the place had been deserted; and he shuddered and looked
nervously over his shoulder as he replied in a low voice: “The
place is accursed, Toean. It is built over an old burial-place,
and the spirits of the dead who were laid to rest there were
angry. And as though that were not enough, there is more.
It was a Toean Tjina (Chinese) who had it built: a very rich
man and vain, and he would not listen when the old men of
the dessa went to him and told him that he must not raise a
house here because the place was unholy. He laughed at
them and insulted them, saying they were only ignorant men,
and that many Toean Belanda (Dutchmen) would come to his
fine hotel, and that they were not afraid of spirits.
“So the house was built. And when it was finished we
went to him again, and said that at least a great salamatan
should be given, for, as all men know, unless a salamatan is
held when a house is built it cannot prosper, and how much
more when it stands on such a place as this. But he would
not listen, and sent us away, and though he was so rich there
was no feast. Then he himself came to stay in the hotel
though he was more than fifty years old (and if a man go to
live in a new house at that age he will die) and because we men


of the dessa did not wish evil to come to him, and because evil
would come to us if we did not warn him, we went to him once
more and told him that if he stayed he would surely die. And
this time he was frightened, for he did not want to die, and
he went away. And so he went on: at first many Toean
Belanda came to the hotel. But soon there came also evil
insects and swarmed like a plague. And then one Toean died
there and then another and another, and yet two more, as well
as two children. And so men knew at last that the place was
accursed and they must not live here; and they shut the doors
and went away and no one has been inside since.”
Such a silly childish story it seems. Just native nonsense
that no one could take seriously. And when I went and had
another look through the windows at the smug conventionality
of the rooms inside, it all seemed more ridiculous still. And
yet —it was all true. Four persons actually had died in the
hotel, though one at least was an invalid sent to the mountains
as a last hope. As for the “evil insects,” they might have
been no more and no less than bugs. Scarcely a spiritual
visitation! Another native reason sometimes given for the
hotel’s abandonment is that the Sultan of Solo once spent a
night there, and that no ordinary person dare sleep in the
place where so august a prince had condescended to rest, lest
their presumption be punished with death by the spirits in
the High One’s service.
But whatever the explanation, there the odd fact is. There
stands the haunted hotel Girimojo , as a proof of the power of
the spiritual over the material in modern Java. It is still so
attractive in appearance from the road at the end of its fine
avenue that, even to-day, passing motorists who do not know
its story will sometimes pull up in the hope of being able to stay
there. With its furnishings it is worth many thousands of
guilders, and many thousands more in profits, if only its
builders had listened to the native wise men and chosen its
site fifty yards or so away. But as it is, it is doomed to stand
for ever empty for no other reason than that “the spirits have
willed it so,”
There is a belief handed down from very ancient times
which proved quite recently to be still not extinct among
Java country folk. In the bad old days, according to Javanese


legend, it was the custom to placate evil spirits by mixing
children’s eyes with the mortar in the foundations of im-
portant new buildings, and particularly of new bridges, in the
hope of saving them from being swept away in the sudden
heavy floods that are so common in mountainous regions.
To get eyes for the purpose a magician called the doelitan or
tjoelikan was employed. He had only to point his enchanted
finger at them and the children would follow him as willingly
as those of Hamelin followed the Pied Piper. The rest was
easy. He lured them out of sight of the village, then caught
them and tore their eyes out and let them go. As soon as he
had enough for the amount of mortar required he took his
“bag” of eyes to the builders, the mixture was made, and the
bridge was as safe as magic could make it. It is scarcely
surprising that, when the foundations of any such building
were about to be laid, all the parents in the surrounding
districts lived in daily terror, and every child was warned to
run away as fast as he could whenever a stranger appeared,
and never on any account to let such a one come near them,
lest it be the dreaded doelitan.
The doelitan is used as a bogey man by Javanese mothers to
frighten disobedient children who will not come in when they
are called. “Hurry, hurry!” you will sometimes hear a
woman call from her gate to a group of happy little boys busy
with their “stone game” in the dust of the mountain pathway.
“Come back! Don’t play so far away. The doelitan is out
and he will catch you!”
But the great difference between this Javanese bogey and
ours is that many Javanese mothers believe that the doelitan
does actually exist. Occasionally it happens that a cry of
“doelitan!” will rouse a whole kampong , and all the people
will stream out to save their children, the women armed with
aloes (the heavy clubs with which they stamp rice) and the men
with their pikoelans , and then woe betide any passing stranger
who may unwittingly have aroused their suspicions.
A case of this kind occurred recently when two Dutch
sailors spending a day’s leave in the country tried to make
friends with some native children so that they could take
photographs of them. Suddenly they heard shouts, and the
whole population of the kampong came tearing down the path,


brandishing their clubs and throwing stones, evidently in a
very ugly mood indeed. The two gallant mariners had never
heard of the doelitan , but they could see that the natives meant
business, so they took to their heels and gained the main road
just in time to board an opportunely passing motor bus,
leaving the baffled kampong folk wildly gesticulating in
the roadway behind them. An official inquiry into the
affair was held, and it came out in evidence, quite seriously
given, that the two strangers had been mistaken for
doelitan.
Belief in wer e-tigtrs or, as the Javanese call them, matjan
gadoengan , still persists in out of the way parts of Java, and
much more, of course, in the outer islands. There were in
Java quite recently, and there probably still are, kampongs
where the people, both men and women, were firmly believed
to possess the power of transforming themselves at will into
tigers. In such places, natives have told me, no travelling
Javanese would ever think of asking shelter for the night for
fear of what might befall him. If, however, some stranger
were to do so in ignorance of the kampong's sinister reputation,
he would be refused, as it would not be consistent with Javanese
ideas of hospitality to expose a guest to such a danger as the
possibility of being killed and eaten. One village still bears
the name of “Gadoengan,” which serves, no doubt, as a
warning to all whom it may concern.
Natives will tell you that the gadoengan goes about his
affairs by day as an ordinary person though, if you look
carefully, you can recognise him (or her) because there will
be no cleft in the upper lip. At night he goes ahunting in
tiger form, but is more to be feared than any real tiger, for
he has none of their fear of man, and possesses all man’s craft
as well as his own. There is just one thing to be done if you
should meet the gadoengan ; if you know who he or she is in
human form, and address the tiger by name, it will be forced
to resume its real shape and will be powerless to do you harm.
It seems, however, that few have had the presence of mind
to attempt this experiment; it would be so easy, they say, to
make a mistake!
In the islands beyond Java the belief varies. In parts of
Lombok the gadoengan becomes not a tiger, but a crocodile;


and in Timor, a dog or cat. In Middle Celebes the natives
believe that such persons can change themselves at will at
night into all sorts of animal forms, even that of a rat, so that
they can go spying on their neighbours’ affairs.
Among many queer beliefs the Javanese hold in connection
with animals is that anyone who eats the flesh of a white water
buffalo will become an albino. So that while the black
buffalo is killed in Java but rarely, being too valuable as a
draught animal to be sacrificed lightly, his white brother is
in even less danger of the butcher’s knife. Anyone who has
ever seen an East Indian albino will easily understand the
natives’ horror of falling under'a similar curse. I only came
across one once, and a truly terrible sight he was: a heavy,
powerful man with a shock of almost tow coloured hair,
pinkish mottled skin, great hairy red hands, weak, watering
eyes, and flat nose: hideously conspicuous among a crowd of
cheery brown men, and quite evidently conscious of it; silent
and morose though all the rest were laughing, and as alien to
them as a pariah dog.
A queer game, with a strong flavour of Maskelyne and
Devant about it, is said by old residents of West Java to have
been played in some Soendanese villages. A dozen or so
children would form a ring and march round and round
another child who was wrapped up and entirely hidden in a
sarong. After they had been round twenty times, singing a
monotonous sort of chant all the while, they would stop, the
sarong was unwrapped, and the child had vanished. Then
the ring would be formed again and the children march round
twenty times in the other direction, singing a different song:
after which the vanished child would be found in the sarong
again, very dazed and saying he had been asleep. No
explanation of the trick, if trick it was, was ever discovered;
but as it was not considered a healthy form of juvenile enter-
tainment it was eventually banned officially by the authorities.
It is more than likely, however, that it is still played in places
remote enough to feel themselves safe from interference with
their little pleasures.
The old Javanese five-day week, though it was abolished,
as was obviously inevitable in a colony developed by Europeans,
long ago by the Dutch, still survives in the Sultanates of Solo


and Djokdja in what is known as the Minggoe Pasar or Market
Week. For here the markets are held, as of old, once or
more times in the five-day week, the “week” consisting of the
five days, Kliwon, Legi, Pahing, Pon, and Wage. In most
dessas a pasaran hesar (big market) is held once a “week”
—that is to say, at intervals of five days—and thus falls,
according to our week, on different days: Monday, Saturday,
Thursday, Tuesday, Sunday, Friday, and so on. The various
combinations of days of the five and seven day weeks
are regarded by natives as of great importance, for the
reason that some are approved by the spirits and some are
not.
Some indeed are so distasteful to the powers of the unseen
world that when the market day falls on such a combination
all sorts of precautions have to be taken. Tapers are lighted,
gifts of rice and cakes offered, and even, at times, fowls
sacrificed, in order to appease the evil spirits. The days
regarded as undesirable differ in various dessas ; but it is
curious to note that, even here, Friday is a bad day, and any
combination with it is regarded as a bad one, though some
are worse than others. The markets are held on different
days in different places; just as with us, one town’s market
day may be Wednesday and another Thursday. So in Middle
Java one dessa will choose Pon, another Wage, another Kliwon,
and so on. Those places whose pasar is held on Kliwon have
to be most careful of all: for the combination of Djoemat
(Friday) with Kliwon is that most particularly resented by the
spirits.
The following table will explain the combinations of days:
(1) Sunday (Minggoe) (i) Kliwon
(2) Monday (Selasa) (2) Legi
(3) Tuesday (Senen) (3) Pahing
(4) Wednesday (Rebo) (4) Pon
(5) Thursday (Kermis) (5) Wage
(6) Friday (Djoemat) (x) &c.
(7) Saturday (Saptoe) (2) £sc.
&c.
The Javanese of the Sultanates always call the days by their
double name, putting that of the seven-day week first. They


will say they went to the pasar at Plaosan on Rebo-Pon, or
Minggoe-Legi, or whatever it may be.
In small country places where the market is held only once
in the five-day week the difficulties of European housekeeping
are considerable when the unlucky Djoemat-Kliwon com-
bination comes round. For then, when the cook goes to the
pasar to lay in the next five days’ provisions, she will not dream
of doing so until she has taken whatever she may have been
brought up to believe are the proper precautions, perhaps the
sacrifice of a white cockerel, which may be hard to come by,
the demand for these luckless birds for sacrificial purposes
making the mortality among them very high.
Natives of Soerabaya firmly believe that at least one shower,
usually the first of the West Monsoon, is bound to fall during
the Pasar Malem , their annual fair. The Dutch, for once
equally superstitious, believe as firmly that this first shower,
being the gift of St Nikolas, will fall on or about this saint’s
day, the sth of December. Strange to say, both predictions
are almost invariably fulfilled!
The heat of the East Monsoon, much more severe in East
Java than in the West, reaches its climax in November, and the
relief that comes with the first rain is eagerly awaited. Day
after day hopes are raised by masses of grey clouds; by an
occasional peal of thunder, or by sudden, shortlived wind-
storms, scattering a few raindrops here and there. And then,
usually at night, it comes at last. It may be a short, sharp
rattle like machine gun fire on the roof, tropically heavy but
lasting a bare sixty seconds or so. Or it may gather volume
like a flood, falling more and more heavily and steadily, with
increasing, unbroken roar for an hour or more, drawing from
the parched and grateful earth an ever more delicious scent.
Next morning the sun rises in a clear sky on a new world,
transformed by that one first shower, with every colour
softened yet intensified. There is a cool freshness in the air
and, incredible though it sounds, the brown grass already
shows a faint tinge of green. But this magical transformation
at which we marvel, the native takes as quite a matter of
course.
The tale might be prolonged indefinitely of the super-
stitious beliefs that mingle so oddly with all the religious and


modern influences in this highly civilised Dutch colony. The
thread of “magic” is inextricably woven into the life of the
native people; and so it will doubtless remain, despite what-
ever changes Fate may have in store for them as helpless
pawns on the chess board of human affairs.


c H <A T T E \ 3^l
For Feminists
LIFE is very real and very earnest for the Javanese
woman; but the gods have endowed her with the
happy faculty of carrying her heavy burdens lightly.
Unlike her brothers, she has no childhood. Everywhere
you will see little boys playing and running and shouting as
children do all the world over; but little girls, never.- Both
boys and girls are pressed early into the family service and
made to do their bit; but the boys realise from the beginning
that they are made of superior clay, and are treated as such;
whereas girls are predestined slaves and little else from the
time they can toddle.
Boys, almost without exception, go to school, gaining
thereby not only the kudos attached to “learning,” but all the
attendant joys of rushing down the road to and from the
schoolhouse; of playing games in the compound and buying
‘‘ ijs ’’ from the shrewd Chinese who appears outside the fence
at the morning recess, carrying a fat vacuum flask from which
he produces pink, yellow, and green ice-candles impaled on
little bamboo sticks, at one cent each.
But to every hundred boys in any native school there will
be a bare half dozen or so little girls; and even they evidently
feel that they are intruders, squatting unhappily in a corner of
the verandah during the play hour, never by any chance
joining in the fun with the boys who are racing about outside.
For the most part the Javanese girls stay at home, gravely
taking their place as little women: sweeping the paths, shaking
grass mats, carrying water, washing clothes; doing anything
and everything in fact that a wise mother can think of to save
her from doing it herself! To that mother the whole pattern
of life is orderly and predestined. She married for the sole
purpose of producing children, acting meanwhile as house-
keeper, of course. When she has a boy, it ministers to her
pride, her husband is better pleased with her, and she receives
many more congratulations, but the acquisition of a son only
adds to her domestic burdens. When, however, it is a girl


that arrives, the achievement is much less acclaimed, and her
husband is apt to give her to understand that she has let him
down; but on the other hand, by way of compensation, she
scores in having produced a little drudge, of whom, however
kind a mother she may be, and the Javanese are almost
invariably kind to children, it never occurs to her not to make
the fullest use.
A Javanese baby emerges from infancy with almost the
same magical speed as a butterfly from its chrysalis. One
day you will see a young mother with a newly arrived baby
lying curled in her selendang . Then, in less than no time, it
will appear, still in that same useful appendage, but sitting in
it like a frog, with small fat arms and legs asprawl round
mother’s waist and back. And before it seems possible, the
little creature, if a girl, is toddling along holding on to its
mother’s sarongs its fat baby ankles, encircled with bangles,
peeping out beneath a miniature sarong of its own. It will
wear a tiny muslin jacket, and its wisp of dark hair will be
screwed up into the veriest burlesque of a “bun” on the top
of its head with one thick hairpin. Nine times out of ten, the
toddler will have another bit of batik over one shoulder in
exact imitation of mother’s selendang , with perhaps a bottle
or little basket in it; not, however, as sentimental tourists,
ravished at the charming sight, are apt to think, dressed up
“for fun.” Far from it. She is learning her job already;
and she will be made clearly to understand that once the
precious one cent’s worth of coconut oil for cooking has been
bought, and is in the bottle she is carrying, it must be kept
right way up, or there will be trouble! The little face will
wear an expression of portentous gravity: not unhappy, but
conscious of responsibility. And the lesson, thus so early
and so quickly learned, will dominate the girl-child until she
reaches years of indiscretion.
I stayed recently with friends who were in the habit of
buying eggs from a former servant. The latter always sent
them by her daughter, aged two years and three months!
This comical scrap of humanity, who was turned out in
faithful miniature of the market women passing up and down
the road outside, would open the gate and walk up to the
verandah, twist her shoulder with precisely the same gesture


that all Javanese women use when taking anything from their
selendang , and produce a small round basket containing ten
eggs. She would watch gravely while they were removed
and counted; then wrap the money given her in a screw of
newspaper and put it in the basket, adjust basket and selendang
to her liking, and patter away again without having said a
single word.
Needless to say, little Javanese girls are expected to
“mother” their younger brothers and sisters as they come
along. It is quite common to see a little mite scarcely bigger
than the “egg woman” described above, carrying a baby
astride her hip. It would be hard to say whether the sight
is more comic or pathetic; but certainly it is impossible not
to smile when you meet one of these quaint little figures with
its preposterous twist of hair skewered by an enormous
hairpin, and the baby face with its preoccupied grown up air
to match its grown up clothes.
I have seen too, in a mountain kampong near my home, a
small girl just five years old, with bare arms and shoulders
and a bit of batik bound round her funny little chest above her
diminutive sarong , standing in a running stream scrubbing
and soaping garments on a flat rock, while she kept a motherly
eye on a naked baby brother splashing happily in the water
near by.
But it is all so natural; so much all in the day’s work, that,
over serious though these unchildlike little girls may seem,
they are quite normal young human beings when they reach
the flirtatious age. They work none the less; idleness is
never part of their philosophy; but they are very feminine
for all that, and during the all too short time that they are
marriageable and not married, they make the most of it.
These slender, fine boned little creatures in their teens are
often charming; and when they are, like all women worth
their salt, they know it. I have seen a pretty, laughing young
woman, balancing on her head a great basket of green banana
and sirih leaves, a dead weight that I could scarcely lift off
the ground, let alone carry, keeping up a spirited flow of
flirtatious sallies with three smart young natives who accom-
panied her for the whole length of the street leading to the
market. The East being the East, no embarrassment was


caused on either side by the fact that the lady was carrying a
heavy load while the attendant swains were unencumbered.
This flirtatious mood, like the mating plumage of birds,
is worn as a rule only until it has attained its object; and once
married there is no more fun with young men for the respect-
able Javanese woman. There are “others,” of course, among
the Javanese, as elsewhere. But that does not mean that she
is either depressed or downtrodden. On the contrary,
marriage seems to release her imprisoned spirit and, her
destiny being achieved, she becomes as garrulous with her
women friends as she was silent and self-contained as a child.
By European standards, her life is always a hard one, for
not only is she, in the natural course of things, housekeeper,
child bearer, and nurse, but she does her full share of outdoor
work as well. She carries live fowls, eggs, vegetables, coco-
nuts and other produce to market, and for sale at the houses
of Europeans. Most of the ever needful weeding in the fields
falls to her share, the men having their hands full with heavier
work such as ploughing and watering. Most important of
all, it is the Javanese woman’s proud privilege to plant out
the bihit (seedlings) of rice, thus symbolically proclaiming
herself the true mother and giver of life to her race.
This rule in Java is fixed and absolute. Rice must be
planted by women or it will not be fruitful. To the Javanese
mind it is as unthinkable for a man to plant rice as to give
birth to a baby! He may gather the bibit from the seed bed,
he may “top” them, and set them in bunches in the shallow
water and mud of the prepared field ready for the planters;
but that is all. And there is no more characteristic sight
than that of the rows of women planters, stooping from the
waist with legs wide apart, sarongs kilted above their knees,
ankle deep in the shining water that mirrors their every
movement, setting out the slim bright green seedlings with
astonishing speed in lines as straight as though every one had
been marked with a cord; chattering and calling to each
other, while their naked brown babies play glorious games in
the warm mud and water of an as yet unplanted adjoining
field, rolling and splashing like miniature baby hippos, or like
our own children on a seaside holiday.
This rice planting is a communal affair, and all the available


women of a dessa turn out together to do it. And so truly
do many hands make light, or rather quick, work that you
may drive in the morning along some broad valley where the
sawahs (irrigated ricefields), as yet unplanted, shine like
mirrors, reflecting every detail of the mountains that bound
them as far as the eye can see; and return the same evening
to find the water surfaces of the whole great area pricked with
the tiny green shafts of newly planted rice.
In West Java, where the rainfall permits rice planting at
any time of the year, some sawahs are always in process of
being planted at the same time that others are being ploughed
and the crop from yet others being gathered. The calls on
the women’s time are constant, for they reap the rice crop also;
though in this they are joined by the men unless heavier work
calls them elsewhere. At harvest times, every woman you
meet along the country roads will have a pointed stick or
bamboo, six or eight inches long, stuck in the glossy coil of
her black hair. If you look closer you will see that a narrow
blade, about two inches long, set in wood, is fixed half way
up this handle at right angles. The little instrument is the
ani-ani , the universally used knife with which the heads of
rice are cut, one by one, by hand. The blades are sold by tens
of thousands for one cent each in every pasar , and every
countryman mounts his own in exact sizes to suit himself, his
wife, and his family.
Though they all work, the lives of Javanese women differ
greatly according to the various regions in which they happen
to live. In the highlands of West Java, among the rich tea
estates, the woman power of whole villages finds employment
in picking and in the processes in the tea factories; and
probably these, of all the women of Java, have the pleasantest
lives. Even among them, however, tea picking must give
way to rice planting when occasion demands, for this latter
is an inescapable duty with which nothing can be allowed
to interfere. But for the most part the lot of the tea estate
hands is a pleasant one. You have only to see them to be
assured of that, as they stream, laughing and chattering, to
or from work, along the steep road against a background of
distant mountains, looking like figures on a stage; brightly
arrayed as tropic flowers, as though they had decked themselves


out under the same unseen compulsion to add to the gaiety
and colourfulness of the scene. Every tint of the rainbow
seems to be there: the deep rich tones of native dyes in batik
sarongs , and the lighter hues of foreign printed muslins in their
jackets, and in the chiffon scarves, either tied or floating
lightly round their heads and shoulders.
Some even of these bright flower-like creatures are often
heavily laden. Many on their way to work will carry on their
heads huge round baskets or bundles tied up in cotton stuff.
These contain what is known as “kampong leaf,” that is, tea
grown and picked in natives’ own small gardens, which the
estate management buys from the growers up to a fixed quota.
I saw a young woman one morning with a big log balanced
across the bright orange scarf that covered her head, a bulky
package of green leaf slung over one shoulder, and a bundle
of smaller firewood tucked into the crook of her arm, gesticulat-
ing gaily with her free hand, on which there gleamed a gold
bracelet and some rings, while she carried on an animated
conversation with her friends in a kampong as she passed.
The tea pickers look more like flowers than ever as you
catch glimpses of them here and there at their work among
the dark bushes. But their work is skilled, for all that, and
its technique must be well learned, or the picker will soon find
herself among the unemployed. She must see that the shoot
has four leaves (including the tip) above the tiny sepal-like
leaflet that indicates a new growth, and she must pick the
shoot off above the leaf immediately above this sepal. Only
thus is the next new growth assured; a matter whose import-
ance will be understood when it is remembered that a tea
shoot grows at the rate of a centimetre per day, and that the
same trees are “picked” at intervals of only ten days. The
finest flavoured tea is not the tip, as seems to be generally
supposed, but the rather larger leaves just below it, which
contain more fragrance. These are those that will be found
rolled up into tiny tubes by the rolling and drying process,
and may be easily identified.
Picturesque though they are, the pickers do not conform
altogether to the average poster-artist’s conception of them,
to be seen on hoardings in England and Australia, where
lovely dusky figures move among the bushes with large


baskets on their backs. In reality, the leaf is gathered into
shapeless bulging bundles in big squares of inevitably damp
and dirty cotton stuff tied up by the four corners, which are
emptied into baskets dumped here and there beside the paths
bordering the section that is being picked, and taken later
to the factory. These dumps are the recognised meeting-
places for rest and gossip, and to them come the food vendors
with their portable kitchens and strange eatables, to cater for
the hungry pickers, who, however, need never work longer
than they choose. They are paid according to the weight of
the leaf they gather, and may stop when they are tired, weigh
in, and trot away home to attend to their own domestic affairs.
Much of the work inside the factories on all tea estates is
done by women. When the pickers bring the leaf in, in the
afternoon, it is taken up to the drying loft, a long narrow place
fitted with fans at either end and a hot air apparatus in the
middle, separating two sets of wire racks on which the leaf
is spread at the rate of about a pound weight to the square
quarter metre. Here it remains overnight, and by the next
morning has lost 60 per cent, of its moisture. It is gathered
up by hand and tipped down a chute to the floor below, where
it is gently crushed and turned between horizontal revolving
rollers like giant gramophone records; this breaks the cells
and liberates the juices, as well as rolling up the leaf. It passes
next into a huge tubular wire mesh container divided into
three compartments, each with a different mesh. The smallest
leaf that passes out through the finest of these is not put in
again; but that from the others may be put back once, twice,
or even three times again, each sifting an hour. Then it all
goes to the fermenting room, where temperature and humidity
are regulated, the latter by means of water trickling down the
walls. Here the leaf, already classified into three or four
grades, lies in trays about four inches deep for two and a half
to three hours, while fermentation takes place. And lastly
each grade of leaf is gathered up and fed into the gaping
mouth of the dryer, into whose dark, hot cavern it is slowly
drawn on a flat belt four or five feet wide, up to the top storey
of a long tunnel which doubles upon itself in several super-
imposed descending levels. Down through this the belt slowly
carries its precious freight, to emerge from a chute at the


THE RICE-GODDESS ENTHRONED AT A NATIVE FESTIVAL CELEBRATING THE HARVEST.


A WOMAN PLANTING RICE. A TYPICAL SCENE.


bottom as the dry fragrant leaf so familiar to us, ready for
the pot!
Though now a finished product, the tea has yet to be sorted
into many more grades for commercial purposes. It goes
into the sorter, a machine superhuman in its ingenuity,
separating the leaf by a violent oscillating motion into seven
sizes, first cutting it into diminishing lengths and then shaking
it through meshes of decreasing size, ranging from “Orange
Pekoe” (so called from the tiny flecks of yellow made by the
tips) down to tea “dust.”
This sorting process is meticulously watched by the “tea
maker,” and the grades thrown back again and again, until
they come exactly true to type out of the separate mouths
into the containers.
The big machines are served by men; but at this stage the
women take complete charge once more. Hundreds of
pounds of leaf are poured out in great fragrant heaps in long
rows eight or ten feet apart on the spotless, polished concrete
floor; and round each of these squat women and girls in
multicoloured sarongs and quaint, tight fitting, prim little
long sleeved jackets, no two of them dressed alike, picking
over the sweet smelling masses of tea almost leaf by leaf,
freeing it from stalks or too thick midribs, which they throw
away outside the charmed circle with quick deft movements
of their small hands.
Last stage of all: the leaf is gathered and swept up, each
grade of course separately, and carried to the packing room,
where it is poured through chutes into the cubic three-ply
tea cases familiar to all of us; these being kept shaking while
being filled by means of yet another ingenious device. And
the whole of the transformation scene, from green, growing
leaf on the bushes, to the finished product we know so well,
is completed within twenty-four hours!
Women tea workers enjoy a certain prestige, and are apt
to be envied by their acquaintances in less favoured occupa-
tions. Some walk long distances to the estates from surround-
ing kampongs\ but many live in the quarters, forming whole
large villages in themselves, built on the tea estates for their
accommodation.
When the tea bushes are pruned, which is done every two


years or, on some estates, every three, the women are allowed
to carry away the primings for firewood. At these times
processions of whole families are to be seen: mother bowed
under an immense load, and her children laden in descending
scale according to size, jogging gaily home with this valuable
perquisite. The system has the advantage from the estate
management’s point of view that the prunings are cleared
away as cleanly as though the place had been swept, at no
cost at all. A newly pruned tea plantation in Java is as bare
as a French vineyard in December; but with the difference
that only two and a half months after pruning, the women
will be hard at work again, picking from bushes as richly
green as ever.
All this, and more, goes to the making of that “nice cup
of tea,” as dear to the heart of the Javanese woman as it is
to ours.
Many women are employed on the Java rubber estates as
tappers and weeders, and many more go over to Borneo and
Sumatra, where labour is scarce, to work on similar plantations
there. They are drawn from the most densely populated
parts of Java, tempted by heaven only knows what dreams of
prosperity in these, to them, distant lands. Their El Dorado,
alas, soon fades in the light of reality, and many of them suffer
tragically from homesickness; so much so that suicides
among them are not uncommon. The incoming and outgoing
streams of these humble migrants at the ports of. Sumatra
and Borneo are sights not easily forgotten.
The lives of women in the poorer regions of Java whence
these emigrants come, notably in the Sultanates of Solo and
Djokdja, are very unlike those of the bright little butterflies
that flit in and out among the tea bushes of the Preanger.
Their appearance too is different. The colourful clothing
that elsewhere in Java is everyday wear is not for them, and
they dress, except on high days and holidays, in a uniform
shade of dark blue. This depressing fashion is due not so
much to poverty as to politics. Indigo 1 is grown here by
decree of the native rulers who, from time immemorial, have
derived much profit from the dyeing industry, and their
insistence upon the wearing of indigo-dyed stuffs by their
1 See also Chapter X.


subjects is one of the few prerogatives remaining to them under
Dutch rule, with lamentable results upon local colour.
Bales of cotton material of this doleful hue are exposed for
sale in every shop and pasar in the Sultanates; and so, when
poor Mrs Ah Wan or Kartjo has at last managed to save up
enough to buy a new sarongs she is denied the innocent feminine
delight of choosing among the myriad gay patterns available
to other Javanese women. She has to get what poor thrill
she can out of a dull deep blue that differs from her old one
only in being stiff and clean: a deprivation that every woman
will well understand.
Despite their rather drab appearance, however, the women
of the Sultanates are cheerful enough; and if their standard
of living is lower than that in other parts of Java it does not
seem to worry them. Even the poorest, who hire themselves
out to labour which is proportionately greater in relation to
their size than we should consider reasonable loading for
ponies or donkeys, never seem in the least degree depressed
by it, and are always ready with a cheery smile, or to chatter
with others similarly laden. But it is noticeable that youth
for them is even shorter lived than among the other women
of Java, and that with its passing there dies all instinct to
attract. A very short time after marriage their mouths are
discoloured and distorted with betel-chewing; and it is not
long before appearance matters to them so little that they, as
well as the older men, adopt the ugly habit of holding a whole
big betel nut in their mouths instead of the usual rolled up
sink, and you will see them walking unconcernedly to the
pasar with lips and cheeks distended as though by a hideously
bloated cigar.
The loads that these frail-looking small women carry are
unbelievable. I have seen a wizened little wisp of humanity,
who must have been sixty years old, climb day after day down
the side of a steep, slippery ravine, from a mountain village
to the bed of a rushing stream, and plod up again carrying on
her back, slung in a broad blue selendang , a basket, into which
her own shrunken little body might have been packed several
times over, filled with smooth round stones from the river bed,
each the size of a man’s head. She was bent double, but
apparently quite undistressed, as she returned time after time


with such burdens to a great pile in the compound of a village
official, kept there to be drawn upon for communal building
purposes. One of these stones is a dead weight that no
white woman, however well nourished, would care to carry far
on the level. How she would deal with a dozen of them on
a steep, slippery, rock strewn climb, heaven alone knows.
Other women in these same regions hire themselves out to
Chinese or Arab merchants, to carry the products of one
dessa to the markets of another. There is much of this intet-
dessa trade in Java, as many places have their own local in-
dustries, specialising in basket weaving, hats, whips,
pottery, and so on. The women carriers of baskets, who
cross the Lawoe mountain range from Magelang on one side
to Solo on the other, one of the longest and steepest passes in
Java, are so completely hidden under their loads that they
look like weird, shapeless moving monsters, ten or twelve
feet high. But enormously bulky though these loads are,
they are not so appallingly weighty as those of tiles or earthen-
ware, which also are transported fifteen or twenty miles by
scraggy little women over a road that for at least eight miles
climbs relentlessly at grades that are formidable even to the
mere unencumbered hiker. But they plod steadily up,
swinging their thin bare arms, chattering and often even
singing, as they breast the endless slopes in long single files.
These women, and others who do exceptionally heavy work,
wear a long piece of blue dyed cotton material called a kain
pandjang wound tightly round the abdomen, and another
round their breasts: a primitive form of stays that is probably
the best ever invented. All Javanese women wear this
support when they go back to work after childbirth.
Like other Oriental women, the Javanese are experts at
carrying heavy loads on their heads. The secret of success
in this connection is to coil a piece of an old sarong or a small
towel into a round pad on which to perch the burden. Some-
times, after disposing of a load, they appear to forget that the
pad is still in place, and will walk airily along wearing what
looks like a clumsy turban. Or they will unroll the towel*
and use it to protect a precious Tanggerang straw hat, worn
for shade occasionally in the fields, with very comical effect.
No kind of weight carrying comes amiss to Javanese women.


The enormous earthenware jars in which they fetch water
from the streams for domestic purposes are slung in the ever
useful selendang on their backs; or, failing these, they will
fill a four gallon paraffin tin, of which, like white colonials,
they have learned the usefulness, and carry it, brimming,
uphill for a mile or more.
Needless to say, human nature being what it is, this labour
that offers itself so willingly for even the heaviest of work, is
fully exploited by those in a position to employ it, be they
Arab, Chinese, or European. And when the labourer is so
eager to earn even the small amount offered, and the employer
is in genuine need of labour, it would take a wise head indeed
to determine the ethics of the case.
A very different aspect of women’s life in the Sultanates is
that of the dancers, or ronggeng. They are part of the royal
entourage and there are more than a thousand of these dainty
little ladies in each kraton. This, though commonly called
the Sultan’s “palace,” is in reality a town within a town, for
an Eastern prince’s entourage is a population in itself. The
kraton at Djokdja, rebuilt about 1760, houses between 15,000
and 20,000 people, and that at Solo rather fewer. Each of
the two Sultans have bodyguards of 1000 men. The Djokdja
kraton measures about 1200 yards by 800, with an outer wall
14 feet high and 15 feet thick, and an inner wall of earth.
The royal dancers were formerly to be found also at the
courts of all the now vanished Javanese princes. They are
believed to be the successors of the temple dancers in Hindu
times, who represented the celestial Apsaras so familiar in the
carvings at Angkor and elsewhere.
In the days of the Javanese sultans’ glory, before the
Dutch set the conquered princes’ houses in order, poor
orphan girls became automatically the property of the reigning
prince, who took the pick of them for his harem, and handed
the rest over to men in his employ, who sent them out as
prostitutes and collected their earnings on their royal master’s
behalf. From which it may be seen that the prerogatives of
Javanese royalty were not always of the nicest.
The art of dancing, held in very high esteem in the great
days of the native kings, came very near to extinction with
their fall. A Javanese, R. A. Soerjodinnigrat, writing in


BFasita, and Dr Krom in Hindoe-Javaansch Kunst , both say
that dancing was a national art of importance in the time of
King Airlangga, about a.d. iooo. And in the reign of Sri
Hayam Woeroek, who reigned over Madjapahit from 1334
to 1389, king and his family took part with their dancers
in the ballet, and also sang, and directed the gamelan. With
the fall of Madjapahit in 1478 the Hindus faithful to the
defeated regime fled to Bali, to the Tengger mountains, and
to Balambangan in the extreme south east corner of Java,
facing the Bali coast. In these places the old dances have
survived, becoming blended in Bali, however, with those
already in vogue there.
The ronggeng dances were of a popular order and designed
to appeal to simple folk. Such themes as “the hen laying
an egg,” for instance, is an old favourite. But nowadays
the royal families both in Djokdja and Solo are making great
efforts to revive the more classical forms, particularly the once
famous Serimpi and Bedaya , which are being studied under
the direction of the Crown Princess. The well-known native
educationist Ki Adjar Dewantoro is also taking much interest
in the work.
These dances are most “select,” and the performers are
drawn only from among the native nobility, whose duty it is
to appear on certain special occasions. Four or five girls
dance the Serimpi\ and in the Bedaya there are nine, represent-
ing the nine nymphs of Ratoe Kidoel, King of the South.
In this latter dance, if it should happen that not enough girls
of high rank are available, the parts may be taken by well-
born boys in women’s costumes. No words are spoken by the
performers, a dalang (showman) speaking for them as in the
wayang
The school education system introduced by the Dutch,
which has had so marked an effect upon the male population
of Java, has affected the women but little. Life is too serious
an affair to them to allow even its earliest stages to be wasted
upon such fripperies as book learning; that is reserved for
the Lords of Creation. There are no illusions in the Javanese
woman’s mind concerning her place in the scheme of human
affairs, and she knows and keeps that place without the least
ill feeling. Most Javanese women are lovable little people,


simple and unsophisticated, grateful for the smallest gifts,
and for wages that by our standards seem a pitifully small
recompense for so much devoted labour. There is something
very touching, too, in their easily inspired affection, and the
little spontaneous gestures with which they show it.
It is the custom here to have a “ w&sh-baboe ” who collects
your clothes of yesterday early every morning, launders and
irons them, and brings them back during the day in a fresh
and delectable pile, every separate item of which is an object
of pride to her. If you admire her work as, if you have a
heart in your body, you must, your little maid will probably
show you each article, and describe with childlike pride just
how she ironed this one or that, perhaps even a handkerchief
carefully pressed from the wrong side so as to show up the
embroidery. If for any reason you should go in search of
her when she is at work, you will find her hard at it in the
wash house, singing to herself or chatting to the others, up
to her elbows in soapsuds, with her tight, long sleeved jacket
soaked through, for Javanese women never roll up their sleeves
as we do, or crouched beside her big charcoal iron, fan-
ning it with a little bamboo kipas. But by the time she
brings back your linen she will have changed into fresh gar-
ments, and appear spick and span and dainty, complete with
gold pins and brooch, and perhaps a gold necklace and
pendant.
I am quite sure to be accused of exaggerating the Javanese
servant’s virtues. So I had better admit at once that they are
not perfect. In many respects the native maid has much the
same ideas as her white prototype: as, for instance, when she
“does” a room she likes to demonstrate her extreme industry
by making as thorough an upheaval as possible of everything
in it. She turns chairs and tables upside down, rolls up
mattresses, takes cushions off the chairs and puts them on the
window ledges, whence they often fall into the flower-beds,
shakes mats, and does everything else she can think of to
make your quiet sanctum uninhabitable. And should you
happen to have a job to finish and try to carry on with it at
your table, which stands like an island in the midst of a stormy
sea, she is likely to assure you still further of her zeal by
banging the chair seats nearest to you with her sapoe lidi , or


even flicking the books under your very nose with a feather
duster.
But the great essential wherein she differs from her opposite
number in Europe is this: if you should decide that you can
bear the hullabaloo no longer, and you mildly but firmly
ordain that the spring cleaning shall be deferred to some more
convenient time, she will acquiesce at once with a smiling
“ Balk, Nyonya ” (All right, madam), and vanish swiftly from
your sight without the slightest sign of rancour, leaving you
to think of the thunderclouds that would gather about your
defenceless head if ever you should dare to issue such a counter-
order to an English housemaid.
The ordinary routine of housekeeping in Java provides the
European mistress with such constant and colourful entertain-
ment that it is never boring. She never looks up, from
whatever she may happen to be doing, but some picturesque
person or other is trotting up the drive bearing something
eatable for her consideration. It may be a man with twin
loads of green oranges, doerian, mangoes, melons, mangosteen,
or sapodilla; or a woman in gaily flowered sarong and badjoe ,
balancing on her head a round basket from which peer the
inquisitive little faces of two or three fowls, apparently greatly
enjoying their last ride to eternity as they squat snugly with
their legs tied together; or she may carry one under her arm,
caressing it gently now and then as though it were a pet
kitten, and not doomed to an early and ignominious execution.
And how much pleasanter it is for the housewife to stroke the
soft warm feathers while she chaffers amiably over a price,
that may rise as high as sixpence for a nice roasting fowl, than
to purchase it in all its trussed and chilly nakedness on an
English poulterer’s bench at some twelve times the price!
Or perhaps to buy, for a change from more conventional
vegetables, the curly, unopened fronds of wild bracken which
the women of mountain kampongs gather and carry round in
baskets for sale.
There is one duty, conscientiously performed by all Java
kampong women, which is not likely to commend itself td
persons of fastidious taste, but is a most necessary item in the
routine of village life. This, not to put too fine a point upon
it, is the de-lousing of their own and their daughters’ long,


luxuriant hair. You will often see a native mother sitting cross-
legged before her house door, with her daughter’s head, or that
of a friend, on her knees, bending over it with intent gravity
as her slender, agile fingers search for the prey. It is not a
“naice” pursuit, it is true. But it does not reflect so adversely
upon native standards of cleanliness as is often supposed.
The Javanese are naturally clean; but not all their passion
for bathing can compete with the speed with which parasites
multiply in the conditions of kampong life. Sleeping, as these
humble people do, crowded side by side on the floors of small
windowless bamboo and wooden houses, in a tropical climate,
the prevention of parasites is impossible, and they accordingly
apply the only practical means of cure.
There is however another custom in which Javanese women
are concerned which has not, so far as I know, been adopted
elsewhere. The Javanese are intensely hospitable, and no
passing traveller on his way through a country dessa is ever
refused a meal and shelter for the night. Formerly, hospitality
went much farther; and the really genial host did not feel that
the demands of true courtesy had been fulfilled unless he also
lent his wife to the guest. This custom is officially extinct
in Java, except perhaps in very remote kampongs where old-
fashioned standards of hospitality still obtain; but it is doubt-
less still de rigueur in the farther islands of the archipelago.
It is a far cry from such domestic amenities to the native
wives of Europeans, about whom so much has been said and
written. Of late years the Dutch authorities have facilitated
more and more the marriage of even the lower ranks of their
Colonial army and navy with white women; but, nevertheless,
the native wives and “housekeepers” of the men have earned
much praise, and the Dutch officials give them credit on the
whole for an excellent influence.
Women are almost entirely responsible for the making of
batik, the distinctive dress material of the Javanese people.
This, however, is decidedly “work of national importance,”
and must be dealt with in another chapter.


C H <A T T E \ TEN
Batik, Dyeing , & Other Crafts
JAVANESE batik cannot by any means be lightly
dismissed as merely one of many native crafts and
industries. It is much more than that. It is bound
up in the history of the people; its classic designs embody all
sorts of obscure associations with ancient legends; and there
is nothing quite like it in any other part of the world. Its
survival as the material of the national costume of the people
in face of all foreign influences is strangely consoling. For
the time and care that go to its making, the frequent repetition
of drawing, dyeing, drying, re-dyeing and re-drying upon
every single piece of the millions upon millions of sarongs ,
selendangs , and iket kepala in daily wear are proof positive
that here at least patient and painstaking craftsmanship is
still alive in a senselessly hustling hurrying world.
There are many theories about the origin of this curiously
characteristic art. But the only thing that seems to be certain
is that it is a true indigenous product and not an importation.
The earliest known record of batik making dates from the year
1518 and was found at Galoeh, South Cheribon, at that time
a Sultanate; but it is generally believed to have been made
from much more ancient times.
The making of what must once have been the generally
used foundation of hatif an unbleached handwoven material,
is still carried on in a few very isolated places where cotton is
grown by the natives; and batik that is dyed on this is called
lawon or kain ketel. It may be easily recognised by its uneven
pattern, due to the coarse weave of the stuff.
But with this exception, all the batik made and worn nowa-
days in Java is dyed on machine woven material, until recently
all imported, first from Lancashire, then from Japan and
India; but now increasingly the product of a newly established
weaving industry in Java itself.
The Javanese use many beautiful classical designs in their
batik which they claim are exact reproductions of patterns
handed down for hundreds of years. Knowledge of these


designs is surprisingly widespread among the people; and
often a simple, apparently quite uncultured countryman will
recognise and put names to specimens shown to him, at first
glance.
The designs are classified in groups, each with its own
name, with a sort of central motif which appears in each of the
well known patterns belonging to it. There is, for example,
the “ Semen ” group (from semi = to grow), in which the same
tangle of leaves and flowers threads its way here and there
amid whatever else the pattern may contain. In the “ Semen
Nogohisikan ” they entwine themselves about a lyre-bird; in
“Semen Redjoenowidjojo ” about multiple horns and bunches
of fruit; in “ Semen Goenong ” they radiate from a mountain
shaded by an umbrella; in “ Semen Groedo ” about a winged
lyre and flights of birds; in “ Semen Remeng" amid wings
rising from a curious rectangular centre-piece and a maelstrom
of intricate curves and twiddles, and so on. Other groups
are “ Kemhang Kentang ,” “ Djonggrong ,” “ Djlamprang ,” and
“ Tjakar Wok” all of which names, and many more, fall
trippingly from native lips, and sound much more musical
than might be supposed from their forbidding appearance in
cold type.
Easier for our European eyes to recognise is the familiar
blue and white “ Kelengan” dyed with indigo only, and
much worn by Chinese ladies. It was also a favourite with
Europeans up to a generation ago, when the sarong-kebaya
(kebaya = a long jacket) was the prevailing feminine fashion
among them in Java. The rarer “ Latar Iring ,” with its
black ground, which the name literally means, and a green
and yellow pattern called 11 Pare Anom ,” young rice, are also
simple ones for foreigners to distinguish from the rest.
“Kain Pradan ,” with gold leaf added to the dyed pattern,
were, and still are, made only for nobles, and may cost a
hundred or two hundred guilders each.
Batik making, that is to say, the method of dyeing these
patterns on what the Javanese call bianco (plain white material:
the name doubtless a legacy from the Portuguese), is probably
almost exactly the same to-day as it was hundreds ot years
ago. The designs are drawn by hand in hot wax which is
poured out of a tiny vessel called a tjanting , rather like a doll’s
146
Batik, Dyeing , Other Crafts


teapot, in somewhat the same way as a cake is iced with sugar.
The wax is warmed in a special pan called a wadjan over the
small round charcoal cooking-stove or anglo used by every
native. The drawing on a sarong of one of the intricate
patterns described above is a matter of weeks; but time is
nothing to the happy and sensible Javanese. It would be
all the same to the batik maker, except for its effect on her
revenue, if it took a year. Nor is she in the least dismayed at
the infinite labour of “undrawing,” as it were, parts of the
complicated design over and over again with acid, after each
dyeing, fixing in a bath of water, palm sugar, lime, and alum,
and drying. The wax prevents the action of the dye upon
the material, and its removal allows each successive colour to
take effect. The patient, unhurrying deliberation of the
whole process, so foreign to the spirit of the Western world,
is almost incredible in these days. It is a home industry, and
many Javanese women dye batik in their spare time, by way
of making a little pocket money; but mostly batik is made in
Chinese owned factories, places that do not at all resemble
what the term conveys to European ears. Usually they are
nothing more than rough bilik sheds in which the dye baths
are housed, standing in a compound where the batik is hung
out to dry after dyeing on long parallel rows of bamboo
supports.
The batik habit is deeply ingrained in even the humblest
Javanese; and to meet the poor man’s demand for a cheaper
quality, which is still more or less the genuine article, the
pattern is printed on the material with copper stamps dipped
in hot wax, instead of being drawn by hand. These are called
batik tjap-tjapan (= printed stuff). The rest of the process is
the same as in the hand drawn kind, but as a rule only two
colours are used in order to keep the price down to the
minimum.
Formerly all the colours came from native dyes, and a great
proportion of them do so still. But aniline dyes, which the
Javanese call sepoehan , are being used more and more. In
one district, that of Pekalongan, on the north coast, they
have ousted native dyes and patterns altogether, and the
“Pekalongan kain ,” adorned with gay flowery patterns like
those of European chintzes, are recognisable at a glance even


by the veriest foreign tyro in such matters. They are known
to natives as hang-hangan , and are much in vogue among smart
young Javanese men on courting bent, especially in West
Java.
The predominating colours of true native design batik
vary in every part of Java. Blue and a warm brown are the
favourites in Djokja and Solo. Red is much used with brown
and orange in West Java, and seldom seen in the East. But,
generally speaking, the dyes are legion, and the Javanese are
as full of wisdom in getting colours from innumerable different
fruits, barks, leaves, and flowers as they are in the concocting
of their amazing pharmacopoeia of ohats. 1
The following are among a few of those most generally
known and used. Benkoedoe , a bush found wild all over Java.
The skin of the root produces a red dye; the fruit is edible,
and also makes a popular hair shampoo. Setjang is another
bush that grows wild and is also much planted for the red dye
got from boiling the wood which, by the way, is so hard that
it can be used in place of nails. Bakoe , or mangrove bark,
yields a black dye. Koenjit padi is a mountain plant whose
root, when cut up and infused like tea, produces a rich yellow.
Other yellows are derived from the dried fruit of the huge
nangka , from the gardenia, from Konkoma , a sort of crocus,
and from the padding round the seeds of kasoemha kling , a tree
easy to mistake for the well known ramhoetan. It has a very
similar red fruit which yields a red dye. This tree is much
planted by the Javanese on boundaries, in decorative avenues
at the entrance to kampongs , and formerly round coffee planta-
tions, the belief being widespread that it was a protection from
the dreaded coffee disease.
A deep red dye is also got from the familiar red Colius ,
which the Javanese call hay am merah , and from the red hibiscus.
Green is made from the sap of many kinds of leaves,
particularly daoen telang ( Clitorea ), daoen katoek ( Sauropus ), and
kore legi ([Phaseolus ). The flower of Clitorea also yields
ultramarine blue.
But most interesting of all the natural dyes used in Java is
indigo, which has played a part in history that is far from
1 Obat = medicine. Classified and illustrated in Indische Kreuden by Mev.
J. Kloppenburg.
148
Batik, Dyeing , & Other Crafts


being suggested by its nondescript appearance. It has been
known in Asia from time immemorial, and in Europe since
that of the Romans, who called it pigmentum Indicum (Indian
dye), from which, no doubt, the name “indigo” is derived.
Marco Polo referred to it as “endego.” Its Sanskrit name is
“nili” or “nilini,” meaning dark blue, which was corrupted
by the Portuguese to “anil.” In Java it is called nila, a
similarity that suggests the probability that the plant was
introduced here by the early Indian settlers. It was a very
widespread native culture when the Dutch arrived in Java,
and they were quick to see its profitable possibilities. They
shipped large quantities to Europe, and the records of the
Dutch East India Company mention three shiploads of it
sold in 1631 for 500,000 florins.
After Roman times, indigo seems to have disappeared from
European commerce until the Middle Ages, when its re-
appearance was greeted with violent opposition from the
powerful financial interests connected with the cultivation of
woad. An agitation to prevent its use was worked up; indigo
was described as “Devil’s Dye,” and in France the death
penalty was actually imposed upon anyone who dared to use it.
In England, Queen Elizabeth ordered its use to be restricted;
and in Germany the famous Nuremberg dyers were forced to
take a solemn oath every year that they would use no other
dye than woad for blue dyeing. It was not until 1737 that the
use of indigo was permitted by law in France. Opposition to
its use is said to have been due to ignorance of its origin for,
until the beginning of the eighteenth century, it was popularly
supposed to be either a dangerous mineral dye or else an
animal product derived from urine! One cannot help
suspecting that these notions may well have been the result
of shrewd propaganda by the financial concerns interested in
ousting the newcomer’s unwelcome competition.
Forced culture of indigo was much increased in Java under
the famous, or infamous, van den Bosch, in whose time it was
grown in over one hundred large plantations in the Preanger
(West Java), as well as in Middle Java. The crop was
“rotated” with rice in the same manner as sugar, indigo being
a plant that severely exhausts the soil. Indigo culture was
bitterly hated by the Javanese because they were often forced


to work at great distances from their home kampongs\ so much
so that a saying was common among them that “they were
born, married, and died in the indigo fields.” They were
paid nine cents (less than twopence) per day. Happily for
them, sugar began to prove more profitable than indigo, and
consequently indigo planting decreased as that of sugarcane
increased. Indigo was finally ousted as an article of European
commerce by aniline dyes; and it has now reverted to the
place it occupied in pre-Dutch days as a product for native use.
Even that might well have disappeared had it not been for the
profit the wretched plant yields to the native princes, by whose
orders it is cultivated in the Sultanates.
The seed is sown about the end of May, after the rice
harvest, and planted out about a month later. It grows into
a tall, weedy plant known as tarum or tom , with small oval
leaves and little red flowers in bunches which produce tiny
pods containing yellow seeds. The whole plant is cut,
steeped, fermented, and boiled in the indispensable paraffin
tin, and the dye is squeezed from the resultant pulp.
Cotton goods have been increasingly woven of late years in
Java in small Chinese and native owned mills; and recently
Dutch enterprise started the weaving industry on a large scale
at Garoet, West Java. Here, not only white material as the
basis for batik but also artificial and real silk, and coloured
cotton sarongs are woven at the rate of some half million yards
per year, as well as the greenish khaki drill worn by the army.
It remains to be seen whether in the fullness of time the
Javanese will be weaned from their traditional batik and,
following the example of the Indians, adopt as their national
dress the ugly quasi-tartan sarongs like cheap tablecloths that
are the product of the mills. But I doubt it. The Javanese
are conservative, and tradition dies hard. Moreover it is a
hopeful sign that the machine industry has already been forced
to give in, in one particular, to native prejudice.
A sarong , as distinct from a kain , is sewn up into a sort of
skirt, which native custom demands must be seamed up by
hand. So all attempts to foist upon the populace sarongs
with nice neat seams stitched up on a sewing-machine, or
woven in one piece without any seam at all, were a complete
frost. They were politely but firmly declined. The innovation


was ignominiously abandoned, and in order to capture the native
market some thousands of native women are now employed to
sew up the seams of the factory produced sarongs by hand instead.
The Javanese are as conservative in their housebuilding as
they are in their dress. Their national building material is
bamboo, split into strips and woven into sheets of tough, stiff
fabric known as bilik, which is mounted on a bamboo or timber
framework. To anyone living in Java the sight of it is so
familiar and ordinary- that it is taken as much for granted as
are bricks and mortar in England. But a recent London
broadcast to schools announcing that “houses in Java are
built of palm leaf,” a piece of information by now doubtless
entered in our educational archives, served as a reminder that
the making of bilik is not appreciated by stray European
visitors. It is a skilled and essentially Javanese craft; general
in native housebuilding throughout Java, but little used in
other parts of the archipelago.
The bamboo stems are split with a sharp parang (a curved
and deadly native knife) into narrow strips which are laid out
on an open space and interwoven, sometimes into patterns
almost as intricate as that of a knitted pullover, a task by no
means as easy as it looks in the hands of a skilled bilik maker,
for the strips are often twenty or thirty feet long.
Few Java countrymen cannot make bilik for themselves
when occasion arises, but there are, of course, experts in this
as in all trades, and in many pasars you may see stacks of the
big sheets for sale. They are carried away by the purchaser
to the scene of building operations, either doubled into a
huge curve inside which the bearer walks with only his feet
visible, or else carried upright, lashed flat against a bamboo
supported on the bearer’s shoulder. Arrived at the building
site it is laid on the ground, and the doorways or other openings
cut out.
An allied craft is grass weaving and basket making, which
seems to be instinctive in Javanese men and women. Almost
any one of them will twist up a neat carrier of grass or palm
leaf at any moment it may be required. But here again there
are, of course, “professionals” and baskets of every sort and
size for every conceivable purpose, as well as mats, hats, and
fine woven cigarette cases and other such small articles, are


made and sold by the million. Their makers do not grow
fat on the proceeds of their skill. Containers the size of an
ordinary barrel, in which vegetables are packed for transport
to market, are supplied by village basket makers at the rate
of five cents (about a penny) each!
Pottery is a native craft throughout all the archipelago,
born no doubt of practical necessity. It is mostly made,
naturally, wherever good clay for the purpose happens to be
found, and in Java its transport from such regions to others
not so favoured make it one of the most familiar sights on the
roads: loaded house high on grobaks , on the backs of women
or pack ponies, or hung in baskets from the two ends of
men’s shoulder yokes.
Much of the pottery is made by women who work the
potter’s wheel with a cord made of loeloep (the bark fibre of
the waroe tree) tied to a bamboo and operated with the foot.
Among the innumerable shapes and sizes made are one or
two that soon become familiar to everyone who travels the
roads of Java. Most common of all is the gendi (also called
lantingan ), a little drinking vessel with a spout, used by every
native. At the other end of the scale for size is the gentong or
genoek , an enormous earthenware jar used for water storage at
native houses that are some distance from a stream. They are
usually buried in the ground up to the neck. They are
transported in couples, one at each end of a pikoelan , encased
in stout split bamboo baskets woven to fit them. A smaller
size jar, holding about five gallons, called a djoen , is used by
women for fetching water from a stream. These are to be
seen in use a dozen times a day, either balanced on the bearer’s
head or slung on her back in the indispensable selendang.
The kendil and kenaron , small and large rice pots respectively,
are always much in evidence, as is the kuali, a cooking pot very
like a French marmite . And the anglo , the bucket shaped
charcoal cooking stove, is of course the most familiar and
übiquitous of all. The making of tiles is an old native
craft, and not learnt from Europeans, though the style and
shape has changed under modern influences. Ancient
buildings at Madjapahit and elsewhere in Hindu Java were
tiled with interlocking curved tiles admirably designed to
carry off heavy rain.


Like the Chinese, from whom, probably, they learned the
art, the Javanese are good brass workers, and their productions
contribute much to the decoration of all homes in Java. The
Dutch are fond of mingling brass with china in the adornment
of their charming voorgalerijs , and though they use much of
their own imported brasswork there is plenty of room for
Javanese and Chinese also. The Javanese designs do not
reach a very high level artistically, perhaps, but they are very
pleasing. The familiar wayang figures are often introduced.
The best of the old luxury crafts of Java have died out
with the passing of the former wealthy royal courts, whose
pride it was to maintain and encourage them. The glory of
the goldsmiths has departed with the rest, but their art,
though very humble nowadays compared with that of former
times, is preserved to some extent in the people’s love of
adornment which is at the same time a form of investment
and of insurance against a rainy day. Every Javanese woman
who can afford it, or whose husband or father can afford to
give them to her, owns gold ornaments of some sort. If you
happen to see your cook when she arrives in the morning,
before she changes into her working clothes, she may very
likely be wearing a gold chain and pendant round her neck,
and her gaily coloured muslin jacket may be fastened down
the front with three or four gold brooches. Another day
she may appear, neat and clean as ever, but minus the necklace,
and with the gold brooches replaced by ordinary safety pins.
In response to inquiry she will tell you cheerfully that they
are in the Roemah Gadean \ (the pawnshop). There is nothing
in the least embarrassing to her about the confession because
one of the chief objects of possessing them is their usefulness
as a source of cash when funds are short. No Javanese is
capable of putting money aside for an emergency; but it is
the understood thing that whenever there is a sudden strain
on the family exchequer, the first and obvious remedy is to
put the womenfolk’s gold ornaments “up the spout,” to be
redeemed again just as naturally when the financial crisis is past.
In the big towns the Chinese have almost entirely absorbed
the goldsmith’s trade that this custom supports. But often
in a country dessa you will find a tiny shop, built of bilik, and
perhaps a bare four or five feet from the ground to the over-


hanging tiled roof, bearing the sign: Toekang Mas (gold-
smith), with a rough painting of a ring or gold ornament. If
you peep inside, you will see an old native squatted on the
ground before a low bench, shaping out in the dim light the
soft pale gold rings and brooches for which, even among the
simple country people, there is such a constant demand.
An ancient art now adapted to modern markets is that of
decorating specially prepared buffalo hide. The immensely
thick leather is thinned down till it is so thin as to be almost
transparent, cut and punched into lacelike patterns, and
delicately coloured. Formerly used in the making of wayang
figures, this unique and beautiful fabric is now mounted in
fans, lampshades and other articles in well deserved demand
by Europeans.
At the other end of the scale in leather work is the rather
rough and ready saddlery worn by Java’s countless ponies.
It is no uncommon sight to see a country saddler at work by
the roadside in some out of the way kampong carrying out an
order for a local client. His leather is tanned as a rule with
the bark of an acacia called pilang , or of two sorts of cassia ,
the tangoeli and hoenghoengdelan. Mimosa (the “wattle” of
Australia) is used for better class work; and which is
more expensive than any of the others, only for the very best.
Javanese craftsmen have discovered in the buffalo’s horns,
as well as in its hide, a material full of possibilities for the
making of saleable articles. He seldom leaves what to him
is the beaten track in the matter of design: birds, wayang
figures, and the kris are his favourites; but for all their lack of
originality the results are always characteristic and sometimes
charming.
One of many local industries, confined to their own
particular region, is the making of the immensely long tapering
whips that are the pride of the sado- drivers of East Java.
These are made in the Kediri district, from finely split rotan
(rattan), plaited together and bound at intervals of a few
inches with narrow bands of metal. The longer the slender
whip that sways, gracefully as a young bamboo, above the
little two wheeled carriage with its quick-trotting pony, the
smarter feels the driver and his fare. The final touch is often
added with a posy of flowers or ribbon at the tip.


Recently the Javanese have adopted a craft hitherto entirely
a monopoly of the Chinese: that of making oiled paper
umbrellas. In this country of sudden showers they are
carried by every man, woman, and child during the wet mon-
soon, so that the industry is an important one. The old
familiar Chinese payong is still to be bought in most village
shops at the modest price of one tali (2 5 cents = $dl) ; but
the Javanese article, which is still cheaper, is becoming more
and more popular, especially in East Java, where they are
mostly made.
The making of gapjak (wooden sandals sold for two cents
per pair) is so simple that it should perhaps scarcely be classed
as a craft; but the sight of them, piled high on grobaks drawn
by two big oxen, is so familiar that it deserves mention. They
are to be seen, too, in twin man-high loads with their bearer
squatted between them, at street corners and at the entrance
of many pasars. The puzzle to the casual observer is to
guess when all these enormous quantities of gapjak can be
worn, for it is rare indeed to see a Javanese of the humbler
class anything other than barefooted. They buy them,
nevertheless, and the Chinese also. Among Europeans they
are popular as bath sandals.
The superlative skill that went to the making of the famous
bas-reliefs at Boroboedoer has not been bequeathed to the
people of Java, any more than the art of the Khmers has come
down to the Cambodians. A universal instinct for carving
seems to be the fortunate monopoly of the natives of Bali.
But the Javanese respond quickly to training in woodcarving,
and they turn out work that would attract more attention if
it had not to suffer comparison with that of their Balinese
neighbours. Like the French in Indo-China, though on
a lesser scale, the Dutch are now encouraging this and
other almost vanished native arts, which are taught in
schools at Djokja and elsewhere, and the work finds a ready
sale.
True native carving has survived in West Java in the making
of the wooden puppets or golek used in the wayang shows that
are the accompaniment to every native ceremony. There are
few villages of any size where you will not find a carver of
these grotesque, jolly little figures, of which some fifty or


sixty, all different, and so meticulously correct in every
particular that they are easily recognisable to any native, are
used in one performance. The finished figures are painted in
gay colours, and dressed in sarongs of hatik , into some of which
a diminutive kris is stuck.
An allied art is the painting of these same classical figures
on black woven material, to be hung as wall decorations.
They are offered for sale at prices that can barely cover the
cost of the paints and goldleaf used.
In recent years natives who possess artistic talent have been
taking more and more to painting in European style, and they
produce often really charming sketches of the lovely Java
landscape in both watercolour and oils. There is no false
pride about these humble artists, and their pictures are hawked
about the streets, either by the blushing artist himself or by
a coolie, as unaffectedly as though they were mangoes or
haberdashery. The pioneers of this kind of art, who had the
good fortune to make their appearance during the after the
Great War boom, used to be able to ask, and often get, ten or
twelve guilders for their pictures. But so many natives
turned their artistic facility to account in the hope of making
these quick and handsome profits that over production was
the inevitable result; and nowadays you will be offered your
choice of dozens of charming little watercolours at a fixed
price of fifty cents, or oils at one guilder. I have often tried
to imagine what would be the reactions of some of our best
“arty” circles if they could see one of these least of their
brethren carefully propping up his pictures on tables and chairs
or against verandah posts for your inspection, and then
standing back humbly, hoping for sales at a flat rate of ten-
pence per masterpiece. I have many of their little pictures
in my possession, and they do more to call up memories of
the lovely land of their origin than all the hundreds of
photographs I ever took.
The Javanese artist not only sells his pot boilers at prices
to suit the times but, like his more distinguished confreres
elsewhere, he has a keen business sense, and is not above
making a bit “on the side.” If you buy paintings to-day the
news travels so swiftly through the appropriate channels
that there will certainly appear to-morrow, apparently by the


merest coincidence, another neat little native equipped with
mitre, mounts, mouldings, glass, and all the rest of the picture
framing paraphernalia. He will frame your purchases for
you, skilfully and neatly as in any London shop, squatted on
the path in your front garden, all for a modest guilder
apiece.
The true assessment of a work of art in terms of cash is
always difficult. And quite apart from Old Masters and
suchlike, why should you be able to buy a delightful little
landscape from a Javanese for one guilder and be asked
twenty pounds for one that pleases you no better by a European
visiting artist? The explanation is beyond me; but my
native house-boy had no doubts as to how the proper price
of a painting should be arrived at. Inspecting critically one
that I had just bought from a Javanese hawker, old kartjo
asked how much I had paid for it. I told him, a guilder and
a half. He shook his head sadly. “It was too much,” he
said. “It is not worth it. The paint on it did not cost
nearly all that!”
The pathetically low price of all native made articles makes
the contrast with those asked in European shops in Java all
the more startling. Accustomed to the endless variety of
ingenious and charming toys sold in every native pasar , little
birds made of painted shells nodding their heads on an inch
of wire spring, quaint tiny wayang figures with jointed arms,
and the like, at prices never above a penny, I picked up one
day in a European “fancy shop” a little egg cosy, thinking
it would do to post home in a letter to a child. I put it down
again hurriedly when I learned that the privilege of being
knitted by white fingers raised the value of the trifle to eighty-
five cents, though any native could have copied and improved
upon it, and would have sold it gladly for five!


C H <A T r E \ ELEVEN,
A Word about Eurasians
THE sweeping assertions commonly made about
“natives” are surpassed, if anything, by the cliches
so glibly quoted by Europeans on the subject of
Eurasians. To most British people the very word is
anathema; but many of them are as ignorant of the subject
as their prejudice is strong, and they seem never to make the
slightest effort to repair it. Superior persons obviously
feel that the last word on the subject has been said when they
remark with an omniscient air that “Eurasians always combine
the worst qualities of both races,” and leave it at that. But
the matter of “crossing” two human racial types is far too
complex and important to be so lightly dismissed; and
nowhere less so than in this corner of Asia, where persons of
mixed blood are so numerous that they form an anything but
negligible part of the community. We seem prone to forget,
moreover, that mankind has been “crossing” since the
beginning of history; and that such a thing as a “pure”
human type, if indeed it exists outside the lowest and most
isolated of human strata, must be a rarity indeed.
Such careless thinking and ignorance of essential facts is
all the more remarkable in view of the study that is given to
the matter of types and quality when the breeding of cattle and
other domestic animals is in question. In their case it is
taken for granted that a good cross will be produced when
both parties are of good quality, and that failing this the result
will be a poor one. So, obviously, it is with the blending of
human types that go to the making of the Eurasian. Given
poor stock in both European and Asiatic, say, for instance, a
hobbledehoy Dutch trooper and some immature native
kampong girl, one of the sort that is drawn as by a magnet to
garrison towns, what hope can there be that the offspring will
be of any better quality than the parents?
But by no means all Eurasians belong to this category,
though admittedly there are some. Dutchmen have been in
Java for more than three centuries, and it was generations


before the women of their own country came out in any
numbers to join them. So they had no choice but to seek
their domestic partners on the spot, as the rank and file of the
Army do to this day. And though many, if not most, of the
old East India Company’s men were rough and brutal, there
was, at least, a leaven of the better sort, and these sought wives
among the upper class Javanese. The highest native circles
of all, the families and connections of the Javanese princes who
had ruled over the kingdoms into which the country was
divided, were forbidden to the white conquerors, for the proud
defeated aristocrats would have nothing to do with them.
But there were plenty of natives of good family —shipowners,
merchants, and others —who, accepting the inevitable, and
looking at the situation from a business point of view, just as
their forebears had done a thousand years earlier on the coming
of the Indian conquerors, saw in the newcomers desirable
■partis for their daughters.
It was these marriages, with good blood on both sides, that
founded some of the fine old-“Indo” families of Java, with
traditions of their own as proud and ancient as those of many
pure-bred Europeans, and much more so than most. Others,
bearing French names, trace their origins back to the early
nineteenth century, when French armies under French
officers fought side by side with the Hollanders against the
English, and left behind them not only the families they
founded, but also French words and expressions that are now
a part of the language.
These families are true “gentlefolk,” living proofs of a
racial blend that happily combines the instinctive courtesy
and hospitality of the Javanese with all that is best in the
European. If the cavilling critic at this point contends that
such people are rare compared with the numbers of the cruder
sort of half caste whom he insists upon regarding as typical,
is not the obvious retort the sad fact that in any community,
of whatever race, the best are inevitably and always in the
minority ?
The social status of the Eurasian in Java, and elsewhere in
the Dutch Indies, is quite different from their position in
British colonies. In British Malaya, for instance, they have
their own tennis, cricket, and other clubs, and live their lives


more completely insulated from the European community
than do the Chinese. For such is our peculiar snobbery that,
in the case of a Chinese, wealth proves a passport to “select”
British circles from which Eurasians are irrevocably barred.
The Dutch, however, unlike the British, are realists, and
approach the matter in a more practical way. They recognise
the absurdity of treating as a “minority” with unequal rights
a section of the population which has existed in Java almost
as long as the Dutch have been there themselves. The
“Indos,” therefore, possess full European status. And it
has been estimated by some statisticians that as many as
75 per cent, of the population officially classed as “European”
have native blood in their veins. Nor is there any rank,
not excepting even that of Governor, from which they are
debarred.
Those persons who ignorantly damn all Eurasians out of
hand as “a poor lot” would be embarrassed indeed if it were
their privilege to come in contact with some of the cultured,
charming, and often highly intellectual descendants of the old
“Indo” families. The women especially are notably gifted
with poise and dignity, and dispense hospitality with an old-
fashioned grace as rare in our time as it is charming. A few
of these ladies, nowadays, alas! very few, too individual and
too wise to be slaves of modern fashion, still wear in the
country that most effective dress the sarong and kebaya which,
a generation ago, was worn throughout Java by European,
Chinese, and Javanese women alike. White women have
now abandoned it entirely, and the “Indos” almost so. The
few who are still faithful to it are those with the good taste to
realise how extremely becoming this costume is to brown or
brownish skins. Among the Chinese it is still the accepted
feminine mode; and it is devoutly to be hoped that some day
the cycle of time may bring the fashion into general favour
again.
The difference in the appearance of “Indo” ladies when
dressed in the sarong and kebaya that sets them off so well, and
the same ladies wearing European styles, which presumably
most of them feel more consistent with their official status,
is unbelievable.
There are some, of course, in whom the European strain


predominates so strongly that Western dress suits them just
as well as it does the “volbloed.” But whenever the Javanese
strain is apparent, often to great advantage, conferring fineness
of bone, slender wrists and ankles, and long fingered shapely
hands, the olive skin that goes with these assets, though not
unpleasing in itself, is at once affected adversely when set off
by a smart European frock. This, however, is a matter of
degree. The well bred “ Indo” lady usually has such excellent
taste that when occasion demands that she shall wear European
dress she chooses quiet styles and tones that suit her colouring.
But others of humbler origin are apt to display a predilection
for crude colours and extreme fashions that have the effect
of vulgarising them completely.
Rather pathetic figures they are, though they wouldn’t
thank you to say so, these ultra smart young women with
their shingled hair, their too bright, too tight frocks, and
three inch heels! It would be interesting, if it were only
possible, to find out what human ingredients can have contri-
buted to the make up of some of them. Now, for instance,
place the forebears of two attractive young creatures spending
a holiday in a mountain resort, who appeared each day in
different and ever smarter frocks, daintily smoking cigarettes
in long holders, and were greatly concerned to preserve their
dark brown skins from sunburn! “Just look at my arms,
how burnt they are!” one would cry, holding out for inspec-
tion a shapely arm about the colour of a good willow calf shoe,
on which the sun would have his work cut out to make the
least impression. Carrying sunshades to shield equally brown
faces, these two would set out for walks in high-heeled sandals
and such skimpy skirts that to climb a bank on which to pose
for a photograph was an affair of real difficulty; and they
tired so soon that a rest seemed to be necessary at very short
intervals, while past them plodded the tireless native women
in an endless procession, steadily climbing the steep slopes,
bowed almost double under the preposterous loads on their
backs. Is it possible that such as these can really have been
the ancestors, on one side, of the backboneless “young ladies”
lolling limply on the bank?
The official recognition of all Eurasians as Europeans has
certainly proved a sound policy from the national point of


view in modern times. For whatever may have been the
case earlier in the colony’s history, there can be no doubt
nowadays of the Eurasians’ dyed-in-the-wool “Dutchness,”
particularly in the case of the type represented by those two
decorative young women. Needless to say, Dutch is their
accepted mother tongue, and when they are proficient in
native languages, it is considered as much a matter of'scholar-
ship for them as for us. There is no suggestion of any reason
why they should possess any special facility.
Yet, now and then, even in the most ultra European, the
other side of the mixed ancestry will show itself. I have seen
a seductive young creature, dressed in all respects, save one,
like a fashion plate, sitting at a well appointed hotel luncheon
table, suddenly drop the sandals off her bare feet, and tuck
up her legs under her chair in characteristic native fashion
exactly as though she were squatting on her heels! But for
that one odd lapse she could have held her own with the best
at Ascot.
But even to those who are not quite the cream of the
Eurasian population, the usual careless judgment does not
apply. The “worst” qualities of a people are by no means
confined to its humbler classes. And the children and
children’s children of poor parents on both European and
native sides present a combination rather of the little
peculiarities natural to people of humble station than of any
“bad” qualities. The tastes and manners of the Dutch
working class are no more “refained” than those of their
opposite numbers elsewhere, and they share the same some-
what crude sartorial standards, whether those of Brixton or
Broadway.
There is nothing “bad” about the “snoepen” habit, that
is, of eating all sorts of strange snacks at all hours of the day:
jelly, soup, cakes, corn-cobs, cold poached eggs, or any other
tasty morsel that happens to be handy, which is prevalent
among these innocent children of European colonisation and
policy. It is simply the logical outcome of two strong
characteristics transmitted side by side. The Dutch, not to
put too fine a point upon it, are frankly fond of food. So
are the Javanese; even the poorest of them go to endless
trouble to provide astounding varieties of highly flavoured


embellishments to the daily rice. The conditions that govern
the lives of most of them, working out of doors from dawn to
sunset, has made it habitual to them to eat snacks at all times
and seasons, buying them from the countless itinerant food
vendors who exist to supply this very demand. So what
more natural than that two such elements should combine to
produce the famous “snoepen” habit?
It is so fatally easy to criticise and to “smile superior.”
The habit of entering nothing but debits to the Eurasian
account is so engrained that the possibility of credits is over-
looked. Once rid your mind of borrowed, second hand
generalisations and you are apt to be shamed by the example
of these much maligned people. It could, for instance, only
have been philosophy derived from the native side of their
ancestry that enabled a Eurasian family of my acquaintance
who fell on evil times to weather the lean period by cutting
down a lavish European style commissariat to the simplest
of native fare costing some twopence per head per day without
reducing in the least their Dutch standard of perfection in
an immaculately swept and garnished house. As another
example, the windows of my home in Soerabaya looked out
upon a tennis-court where a Eurasian four used not only to
start play daily with the earliest light of dawn, but would
play also, and a very high standard tennis too, all through the
stifling afternoon hours of the kentering months (October and
November) at the end of the East Monsoon. The heat at
sea level in East Java during those months prostrates many
even of those Europeans long accustomed to the tropics;
hours when white women retire to their rooms and lie limp
and effortless till the djongos brings tea, and the evening, relief;
while white men, sweating and cursing, go about their busi-
ness only because they must. During those same sweltering
hours, those young Eurasians would be running, leaping, and
smashing their hardest, obviously for the sheer joy of the
thing, as oblivious to the temperature as though they were
at Wimbledon.
It is rare to see a white woman walking in the town except
in the cool of the evening. But the admixture of native
endurance in the Eurasian endows her with greater energy,
and it is by no means unusual to see Eurasian housewives on


their way home after doing their morning marketing at the
pasar , walking along in the shade of the great trees beside the
river, usually wearing sandals and carrying a sunshade,
followed by one or more native women with baskets on their
heads or hips containing the day’s provisions.
It has often seemed to me that there is much to be said for
a “cross” that blends the sporting energy and keenness of
the European with the physical endurance of the Javanese
that is their heritage from countless generations of ancestors
with a superhuman capacity for toil. It sets one wondering
whether, after all, by other standards than those we Europeans
have come to accept as absolute, people combining the best,
not the worst, qualities of European and Asiatic, may not
prove in the fullness of time to be best fitted to guide the
destinies of tropical countries and coloured populations.


CHAPTER TWELVE
Beasts of Burden £s? “Pets”
THE taxi of the town dwelling Javanese is the sado,
a small two-wheeled trap drawn by a pony; and the
clatter of fast-trotting hoofs, most familiar of all sounds
in the Java towns, makes a delightfully gay impression upon
the visitor, enhanced as it is by the cheery jingle of the bells
with which the ponies’ harness is adorned. But jolly though
the effect may be upon the hearer, the gaiety begins and ends
there as far as the ponies are concerned. Java has been well
named a tropic paradise, but it is no paradise for domestic
animals. Not because the Javanese is deliberately cruel, but
because animals to him are not sentient creatures at all; they
are merely machines which exist for his convenience. Hence
the lot of those commonest and cheapest of his slaves, the
ponies, is not a happy one.
There is another note in the merry sounding tunes played
unceasingly in the streets by those small twinkling hoofs with
their gay accompaniment of bells, and that is the sound of the
long supple whip, falling flail like on flanks and sides: a
combination of sound that becomes as familiar after a time
as that of the instruments in an orchestra playing some well
known air.
Sometimes the driver plies his whip mechanically in perfect
time to the pony’s trot, and the “thwack, thwack” mingles
rhythmically with the tapping hoofs and jingling bells. At
others, the tune is more varied, starting as the sado comes
within earshot with the quick “tip-tap” of the trot, into which
there break three or four swishing cuts of whip on flesh,
changing the rhythm of the trotting hoofs to the “ti-tappat,
ti-tappat” of a smart canter, soon to change down again to a
trot as the pony tires; then the whip again, and then the
canter, and so repeated ad libitum , ad nauseam , and for the
pony, ad damnaum , till the sounds pass beyond your hearing.
Our convention of driving a harness horse at the trot does not
exist for the Javanese. If the pony can be made to go faster,
make him! And with that end in view he plies his whip as


mechanically as he jerks eternally on the bit in the sagging}
ever dribbling mouth, totally unconscious of cruelty, and
only doing what is equivalent in the native mind to pressing
the accelerator of a motor car. As a result of this ceaseless
pulling at the bit, it is seldom you will see a pony that has not
tucked up the tip of a pink tongue against his cracked and
bleeding mouth to ease the pain.
It is rare to see a pony whose knees do not show unmistak-
able marks of having been “down.” The beautifully surfaced
roads of whose upkeep the Dutch are so justly proud are a joy
to the motorist, but they take a heavy toll of the gallant little
trotters with their slippery shod hoofs, in conjunction with
the universal bad driving.
The ponies are fed on the same principle that they are
driven: simply to keep them going. The grass-sellers,
whom you will see near every pasar and sado stand, and here
and there along the streets, squatted beside baskets full of
green grass in neat bundles which they keep fresh by sprinkling
with a cigarette-tin of water now and then, are the “filling
stations” for the little beasts that supply the motive power of
Java’s cheap transport. The average sado driver will feed his
pony as it stands with sweating, heaving sides in a short
respite between fares, shoving grass into the little creature’s
mouth without removing the bit, just as a motorist might put
a “drop of juice” in his tank to carry him on for a few miles.
The simile is strengthened by the custom of buying a supply
of grass bundles and stowing them under the seat like a spare
tin to give more fuel to the engine as required.
Whole families of natives or Chinese are often to be seen
packed into one of these little carriages, looking as though at
any moment the weight must swing the pony off the ground
with its legs dangling in the air; and the fares paid are so low,
anything from a cent (about a farthing) up to a penny or two,
that profits are small; and it is perhaps not surprising that in
the poorer parts of Java the ponies’ food ration is cut down to
the irreducible minimum that will keep them alive and moving.
In West Java, though the drivers are no better and have no
more sentiment for their animals than the rest, they are more
prosperous, and the appearance of their turn-outs is a matter
of great pride, with the result that the ponies are better fed


and cared for. They are well groomed, and many of them
even sleek and fat; the sadoes are smart and bright with
polished brass, the harness encrusted with glistening metal
plaques, and the whip often adorned with a large muslin bow.
The grass, which is the principal feed, is cut by hand, often
by children, on such little uncultivated land as there is, on
roadside banks and the boundaries between ricefields. Not a
blade is wasted, and the tightly packed double pikoelan loads
are carried immense distances into the towns for sale. As a
supplementary feed the ponies are given wet meal-mash
which, especially in East Java where appearance is not con-
sidered, they must eat as they do their grass, at odd times
between fares with bit in mouth, so that bits are nearly always
clogged with the dirty remnants of a hundred such hasty
meals, and the pony’s nose, like a slum child’s, badly in need
of wiping! It never occurs to an East Javanese driver to
remove the bit and give his pony a feed in peace, as we give
a horse a nosebag; and though the Batavian driver does so,
he is more influenced by a mixture of vanity and laziness
than by consideration for the pony. He wants his turn-out
to look smart because otherwise his fellow drivers will look
down on him, and also do better business; and he has dis-
covered that it is less trouble to take a bit out of a horse’s
mouth than to clean it.
Draught oxen, sapis as the native calls them, are fed at
odd times in the same way, but being of more phlegmatic
temperament they appear to accept the snacks offered to them
with perfect equanimity. Anywhere along the roadside you
may see a grobak driver squatting in front of his quietly munch-
ing pair of beasts as he feeds them with stalks of glagah (wild
sugarcane) or djagong (maize). But these drivers jerk as
unthinkingly on the ropes threaded through the sensitive
quivering nostrils as do the pony drivers on reins and bit;
and there is never a sapi whose flanks and sides are not scored
with a network of whip-weals.
Oxen, so small as to look absurdly out of proportion to the
huge clumsy grobaks , can pull an enormously heavy load once
it is on the move; but sometimes to start it is beyond their
power, especially if a wheel has sunk deep into asphalt softened
by the hot sun. It is then that the native shows to advantage.


The driver and a dozen passers-by will push and pull at the
great wooden wheels, in diameter more than the height of a
man, to help the gentle little cream coloured oxen as they
sink to their knees in the effort to get the load started. Then
they go swinging quietly off again with the big bells round
their necks softly clinking, while the driver’s mate stoops to
pick up one of the leather shoes, worn by the beasts tied over
their hooves with a thong, that has been lost in the struggle.
This is a far pleasanter scene than some I have seen in white
countries, merciless thrashings of willing horses in France,
struggling to drag the deadweight of a great load of coal out
of deep mud; Australian stockmen viciously kicking their
mounts in the belly in sheer rage at some mishap; a “sports-
man” at Singapore doing the same; exhibitions of brutality
that you will never see in a lifetime among the Javanese.
When the native is cruel it is due to lack of imagination, and
to the impossibility of bringing home to him the idea that
animals can suffer. At the bottom of the garden one day I
found our cook who had been told to kill a goose for dinner.
He was singing softly to himself as he sat in a shady corner
with the bird held between his knees, sawing patiently away at
its neck with a blunt old knife that would scarcely have cut
cheese. When, horrified, I remonstrated and told him to
dispatch the unfortunate bird quickly, he smiled gently and
said in a reassuring tone: “ Saya, Toean. It is all right.
There is no hurry. This knife will kill it presently. It is
not to be cooked until the evening!”
Very noticeable among the draught oxen are some, light
chestnut in colour, with large white patches on the buttocks.
These patches are the distinguishing marks of the hanteng
(the wild ox of the islands) now tamed and crossed with other
breeds. They are perfectly docile, but will sometimes escape
and run wild again if used in places within reach of the
forests.
The lowest caste of the Java ponies are the pack ponies,
much used in mountainous regions. In the densely populated
Sultanates the fate of these stunted, inbred, underfed little
slaves is a miserable one indeed. Often they are mere walking
skeletons on to whose sharp-ridged narrow backs immense
loads of stone, cement, chalk, pottery, manure, lime, and so


on are piled in twin baskets balanced across rough pads of
sacking, and secured with girths and cruppers of bark rope;
and if you should chance to see them when the packs are
removed, their hides are a patchwork of open and half healed
sores. Yet it must not be forgotten that in those regions
where these pitiful little beasts call for most sympathy the
people inflict upon themselves as merciless a slavery as they
do upon their pack animals, and carry loads just as outrageous,
if not more so.
At the other 'extreme end of the scale are the saddle ponies
ridden by well to do native countrymen, to whom, as to the
Australian bushman, riding is the everyday mode of transport.
It is an accepted convention among Europeans that the
Javanese is no horseman, and judged by their driving they
certainly are not. But some of the smartly turned out moun-
tain riders, astride the fast kore that are their pride, have as
pretty a seat as any horseman could desire.
It would be as difficult to imagine Java without its ponies
as without its mountains, but it is doubtful whether the ponies
were originally natives. Their ancestors are generally be-
lieved to have been imported by immigrants, anything from
a thousand to two thousand years ago, so that there has been
plenty of time for their increase. They breed now in countless
numbers in most of the East Indian islands; and in some,
where the human population is not large, as in Timor and
South Celebes, they have become completely wild animals.
The well known “Sandalwoods,” from Soemba (Sandalwood)
Island, are the best of the breeds, and for many years thousands
of these handsome and very powerful ponies have been brought
across annually to Java. The inter-island steamers are
equipped with special accommodation for them and for those
from the neighbouring island of Soembawa. The Sandal-
wood breed is the proud possessor of a stud-book and a very
ancient ancestry. Native legend records that the ponies
ridden by the ruling prince of this island were always killed
when he died, so that their spirits might go with his to the
holy forest of Parai Merapoe in the Massoe mountains, for
his use after death. To this day natives of Soemba will tell
you that in those mountains there are wild horses that no one
ever tries to catch, though they are finer than any others;


the spirit-horses of the long-dead Sultans. Ponies were
killed, and eaten too, at the death of all important persons in
many of the outer islands in olden times.
Ponies were bred in Java for some time under government
supervision for the army and post services from about 1820
onwards at Tjipanas and Tjiandjoer. The records say that
only one stallion was kept “in the Resident’s stable to prevent
misuse”; but the natives replied to this restriction by refusing
to part with their mares, and the scheme ended in failure.
Another attempt was made with more success in Timor in
the seventies, which no doubt accounts for “Timor ponies”
being so generally known.
If the Javanese has a soft spot for any animal, it is for the
kerbau , or water buffalo; though his solicitude is more likely
to be due to the fact that the beast is a valuable and very costly
asset than to any sentiment. Whatever the reason, he takes
immense care of the great lumbering brute, never fails to scrub
it from horns to heels in the river every day when its work in
the fields is done, and houses it, every bit as snugly as he does
himself and his family, in a bilik stable that is, as often as not,
a part of his own home.
Until recently no native householder felt his establishment
complete without a dog. Often they were quite good looking
ones, but possessed of an ineradicable dislike of Europeans,
inherited perhaps from the days when their ancestors barked
hopeless defiance at the invaders who came to destroy their
masters’ homes. These kampong dogs are certainly many
degrees higher in the canine scale than the wretched pariahs
of India, or the swarming mongrels of Bali. But it is doubtful
whether their lives were or are particularly enviable; and
therefore their recent virtual extermination as the result of a
dog tax is probably as humane a measure to the dogs as it is a
blessing to those of us who take our walks abroad round about
their former haunts. A year or two ago, as you walked
through a kampong , the wretched brutes would tear out,
barking furiously from each and every native house in turn,
only to rush inside again, tail between legs, the moment you
approached nearer, or clicked your fingers in an attempt to
establish friendly relations. Nowadays, except in places far
off the beaten track,' you rarely see more than an odd one or


so, owned by the local head man perhaps; for cents are worth
more than dogs to the native, and the tax, at first ten cents
per dog, was soon raised to twenty-five cents, and later in many
places to a guilder or more.
Now and then you may come across a queer exception
to the typical snapping, barking kampong dog in one that has
been owned and petted by a white man, probably some lonely
bachelor planter, and abandoned (in the humane European
way!) or given to a native house-servant on leaving the district
or the country. You will find yourself being shyly followed
at a respectful distance by a dog of breeding just as dubious
as the rest, but unlike them in his pitiful eagerness to make
friends, coming to you at once if you speak to him, wagging a
deprecating tail and imploring you with eloquent eyes to let
him follow you home. If you give him the chance he will
curl himself up on the mat at your door or, better still, at your
feet, with a sigh of utter content; reminding you that it is not
only the native who forgets that animals have feelings and
affections.
It is the fashion among the Dutch in Java to keep a dog;
but why they should do so, except as guardians, is a mystery,
for they rarely take them out themselves, leaving them to be
exercised by servants as impersonally as though they were
racehorses in training. Big dogs such as Alsatians (much
bred on the high plateaux, and very popular) are taken out
by the house-boy, and you will see them in the cool of morning
or evening solemnly pacing up and down with them on a chain.
Small ones are taken for their airings by the hahoe (maid), and
you may even see these pampered pets being amused by her in
the garden as though they were children. I saw a Pekingese
one morning that had been provided by its ingenious native
nursemaid with a plaything in the shape of a living rhinoceros-
beetle, a big black creature that inhabits and destroys the
coconut-palm, tied to the end of a string of fine grass. The
little dog was enjoying the game immensely, making furious
rushes at his toy, but never quite daring to seize it in his
mouth.
European dog-owners do, however, occasionally exercise
their own pets when on holiday in the mountains, and I once
saw one who made a picture I have never forgotten. It was


a tall, stout, perfectly bald Dutch gentleman, gazing out
through his spectacles upon our simple village ways with the
bland superior air of a townsman in the country, and leading
two probably priceless boarhounds on a double chain. He
was obviously quite unaware that twenty paces or so behind
him was a native leading a pair of shaggy goats and that, to
the casual glance, the two pairs of animals being much of a
size, there was very little to choose between them!
The Dutch in Java have a weakness for deer as well as for
dogs, the result perhaps of nostalgic memories of the charming
deerparks in their homeland. In such surroundings as the
park at Buitenzorg nothing could be more charming; but
these animals do seem rather out of place in small, dusty
wired-in enclosures like hen-runs, in the backyards of hotels,
where they are often to be seen.
It may be that they give the same sort of satisfaction to their
owners as do the caged doves, without which the native house-
holder feels his home lacks the final cachet of respectability.
It is his first duty in the morning, especially in East and
Middle Java, as the sun pours its earliest rays over the
mountain-tops, to hoist the dove in its gaily painted cage to
the top of a lofty bamboo, as if it were a Royal Ensign to show
that the Sovereign is in residence. At Banjoewangi the sight
of hundreds of these cages silhouetted against the sky, high
above the roofs of the native town that straggles along the
estuary, is an amazing one, easily to be mistaken for a planta-
tion of some weird growth such as agave in flower. In West
Java the natives also keep doves, but they are more often hung
on trees or house walls. At the home of a village head man
in the Preanger I saw a row of nine gaily painted cages hung
along the verandah, and one on a post at each end, by way of
adding tone to the establishment.
There are “S.P.C.A.s” in the Java towns, and they do
their best; but it is hard to see how any organisation could
ever cope with so vast a field of genuinely unconscious cruelty,
and where, moreover, so much of it, as for instance in the
handling of poultry, is condoned. Mevrouw sends her cook
to the pasar to buy “kippen” (fowls), the mainstay of all Java
menus, and welcomes her back quite unmoved by the sight of
two or three wretched birds hanging head downwards as they


are carried in a bunch by the legs, feebly cackling their last
protest to an unkind world before they receive the coup de grace.
Veterinary clinics are provided by the authorities in Soera-
baya and Batavia for the treatment of sick animals, to which
the natives are encouraged to bring their ponies and sapis.
These do excellent work, but it may be imagined that the
number it is possible to treat is a mere drop in the ocean of
the thousands that would benefit if the work could be organised
on a bigger scale, and if the conservative native would make
more use of them. Veterinary inspection of cattle is, however,
rigorously carried out, and often on pasar days in the country
you may see, on the grass by the roadside or in the space
where the sapis are tied to bamboo stakes awaiting attention,
a big teak armchair, looking oddly out of place in such
surroundings, but representing the natives’ idea of hospitality
to the visiting inspector.
The Javanese may not be sentimental as we are about
animals, but at least he is not a hypocrite. He is simply a
realist. Working animals are there to work; others are
there to provide food and must therefore be killed; that is
all there is to it. He sees no reason to camouflage, as we do
because we “can’t bear to think about it,” the unpleasant
stages that intervene between the charming picture of con-
tented grazing cattle and the meat we eat at table; and he
leads to the slaughter a petted calf that has been his children’s
playmate and almost a member of the family for a year or so,
with no more feeling than he markets a basket of cabbages
from his garden.
A young calf is a favourite investment of the Javanese
countryman, and a gentle little golden-buff sapi tied to a
bamboo stake in the corner of the compound is to be seen
outside many a native house. There the animal grows from
calfhood to maturity, fed by the children on grass cut far away
on the roadsides or hillsides, and carried down, perhaps by
“mother,” bent double by the damp green mass on her back:
a devotion that would be touching if it were performed out of
affection, as the stranger is apt to suppose. The calf soon
becomes to all appearance as much a beloved household pet
as any dog in a European family. He lies peacefully chewing
the cud while the children play around him, climb over him


and sit on his back, or feed him with stray morsels of sugar-
cane; and he has also the companionship of the older beasts
used for ploughing, which spend their leisure hours tied to
stakes in the compound, doubtless envying him as a spoilt
young idler who does not have to go out into the fields to bear
the burden and heat of the day, or have a rough cruel guide-
rope pushed through a cut in the cartilage of his nose.
Instead, he is led out with a rope round his neck by the
children in the cool of the evening, to graze by the roadside
or in the sawahs where the crop has been cut.
The days and months drift thus peacefully by, until pre-
sently the calf has grown by imperceptible stages to be a sleek
young steer of something like full size, though a modest one
at that, for these island cattle are only pocket editions by
European standards.
Then there comes a day when, to the animal’s mild surprise,
it is aroused from its sleepy cud-chewing at an unusual hour,
in the middle of the morning, to see the master of the house
who stands looking at him in conversation with a friend.
They give him a friendly prod or two in his now well-covered
glossy sides and flanks, which he accepts, as he has accepted
everything that has come his way during his pleasant un-
eventful existence, as a well-meant harmless gesture. Then,
still vaguely surprised at the unusual attention, he is led forth
on to the street by the master himself with his friend or friends
in attendance, administering encouragement from behind
with a thin bamboo. 'But that troubles him not at all.
Animals are perforce philosophers accustomed to take the
rough with the smooth, and he trots confidingly along,
snuffling and nuzzling in friendly fashion at the hand of any
chance met passer-by in the hope it might offer him a mouthful
of something nice to eat.
Poor trustful affectionate little martyr, so basely betrayed
by those he has always believed to be his friends! What has
he ever done to deserve a worse fate than the one we deal out
to our vilest criminals ? He meanders on down the road,
heartened now and then by a hand slapping his flank, remind-
ing him that friends are near, or so he thinks. Right through
the village they go, pausing here and there while the master
exchanges a word or two with acquaintances, and the velvet


nose and eager tongue make more contacts on their own
account; until at last the little cavalcade turns in beside the
■pasar, and makes its way along a narrow path between high
hedges towards a small, immaculately whitewashed building
bearing the word “Slagterij.”
It is at this point, I think, that the first stab of fear must
touch that gentle heart; for on the stream that runs beside
the path there is carried, faint but unmistakable, the sharp
acrid smell of blood from the constantly washed concrete
floor, bearing a message to this latest victim that he is to be
added to the long list of martyrs that have been butchered
here, innocent sacrifices to the appetites of Man.
Now, for the first time, poor Si Ali (or whatever his name
may be; he is sure to have one) pulls back on the headrope,
and digs his small pointed hoofs into the ground in a desperate
attempt to escape. Surely his own friends, the master who
has so often sat beside him, squatted on his heels in character-
istic native pose, humming a little song as he pushed mouthful
after mouthful of succulent grass or maize-top between the
greedy lips, will not desert him now? Surely, surely, he will
deliver him from this horrible danger that has so suddenly
challenged his affrighted, quivering nostrils ? But no. The
master’s is the very hand that now drags him ruthlessly
towards it, jerking cruelly on the rope so that it tightens
round his throat, almost choking him; while from behind,
someone is belabouring his flanks and legs. Terror seizes
him. He is suffocating. His eyes bulge from their sockets.
His tongue lolls out. But his groans of terror and despair
are strangled by the ever tightening rope. Someone twists
his tail, his feet are dragging, but somehow, against his will,
they still carry him up the low concrete steps and on to the
wet slippery floor of the secret little building with its awful
sinister smell of blood. It may be that by now the mists of
fear and pain have gathered too thickly for him to know
much more, or to feel the last searing agony of the knife that
ends them all. One can only hope it may be so; and hope,
too, that the murder of the gentle household pet is soon over;
for the Javanese, despite his many good qualities, is quite
incapable of realising that it should be so.
Sometimes the torture is prolonged for a second or third


victim while the first is being done to death in the Chamber
of Horrors; and the next predestined sacrifices are dragged
and driven into the nice clean hygienic concrete stalls adjoining,
there to hear and smell all that is going on only a few feet
away, with plenty of time to think suitable thoughts for the
dying. While the loving masters of those about to die
calculate their profit, or shrug their shoulders over the
necessity to forgo it, if the meat be intended for a wedding-
feast, and bewail the hard fate that in either case they are
obliged to hand out the four hard-earned roe-pea (guilders)
that are the fixed price of the killing.
Later, you will be lucky if you do not meet your late friend
on his return journey, either as a limp shapeless mass covered
with grass mats hung across a stout bamboo supported on the
shoulders of two men, leaving a trail of bloodstains along
the road; or else in a sort of wooden cradle in which are piled
the still bleeding “joints,” covered with banana leaves, while
another carrier brings up the rear carrying on his shoulder a
basket in which you recognise the pretty head that stretched
out to lick your hand an hour or so ago, now all dabbled
hideously with blood. As likely as not, too, the boys whose
duty it is to carry home the hide will stop outside your gate
to refold it in the middle of the road, and tie it up more securely
with grass; and in this limp, slippery horror you will know
the velvet coat you have so often stroked. There is not one whit
more cruelty in all this than in the butchering of our “prime
cuts” in England. The only difference is that the Javanese
is less squeamish, and perhaps more honest, than we are.
At least, however, it is to be hoped that no such horror as
one brought home to some Madoerese cattle vendors a year
or so ago could ever happen in England. Whether Javanese
would have been capable of it I cannot say, but there is no
reason to believe that the ordinary people of Madoera are any
more cruel than those of Java. It is the custom to bring live
cattle by ferry at night across the strait from Madoera to
Soerabaya, where they are sold the following morning by live
weight before they are killed. Some fiend among the
Madoerese owners originated the idea of increasing the
weight of the cattle by forcing a bamboo tube down their
throats and pouring through it quantities of water, so that the


poor brutes passed their last hours of life in agony, with
lacerated throats and distended stomachs. When the dis-
gusting torture was discovered, after it had been going on for
some time, and the market overseer reprimanded for having
failed to report it, his excuse was that he had not dared, for
fear of reprisals!


Q H TE E T
‘ * The Glory of the Garden
ABLE though he is in so many other avocations, it is
above all as a cultivator that the Javanese native
excels. It is this quality of his, linked with an incom-
parably fertile soil, that has made of Java one great garden
from end to end.
Many English people seem to imagine that although an
“eternal summer” may be pleasant enough in its way, it is
bound to be rather monotonous, and that a country which
enjoys such a climate will lack all the charm of seasonal
changes. It is true that Java has none of the violent contrasts
in temperature that must be endured in Europe; but of
monotony there is none. The monsoons bring variations
just as great in their way, but far pleasanter; and the diversity
of crops borne by the rich soil move through as orderly a
progression as do the wheat and oats and barley that
struggle from seedtime to harvest in, say, the stony fields of
Buckinghamshire.
Not even the contrast between July and December in those
English fields is greater than that between the silver mirrors
of the flooded ricefields before planting, and the same fields
green as the sea with waving rice; or, on the wide flats of
East Java after the rice harvest, when the rich dark soil is
cut into deep, lance-straight water trenches fifteen feet or so
apart in preparation for sugar planting; work for which huge
spades are used in place of the otherwise universal -patjoel.
Among many other seasonal transformation scenes is that
when the sugarcane comes into flower, and the sun lights up
the silky sheen of the great creamy plumes as they wave high
above the tall cane, looking from the heights above like
forests of pampas grass.
To a visitor who shares the average Englishman’s passion
for “growing things” the interest of this Java-wide garden is
enthralling. But at the same time the puzzlement aroused by
the bewildering diversity of novel growth that greets him at
every turn soon grows well nigh unbearable. He may have


arrived in Java possessed of a gratifying sense of superiority
over his town dwelling friends, founded on his ability to
distinguish, with luck, between wheat, oats, barley, beans, and
“root crops.” He may even perhaps have a nodding
acquaintance with lucerne in Australia and South Africa.
So that it is wounding in the extreme to his agricultural amour
propre to find himself unable to put a name to any of the
thousand and one plants, trees, and crops that are to be seen
on any road or rail journey in this intensively cultivated land.
At first, perhaps, all had been well. The Java landscape
is so dominated by ricefields and in some areas by the “big”
crops, sugar, rubber, tea, coffee, teak, and tobacco, that for a
time they distract the attention from all else. But that phase
soon passes. If the newcomer travels by train, he finds
himself being swept past field after field planted with different
crops: some close to the ground like thick green carpets;
others tall and slender; groves of shrubby trees with big white
flowers and others with small yellow ones; climbers trained on
trellises; and dozens more, which flash past the windows and
vanish into the distance before there is time to register a clear
impression of them, so that any hope of describing them later
in an attempt to discover their names and uses is slight indeed.
Nor is that the end of the troubles that beset the seeker after
this kind of knowledge; for there is scarcely a plant, a fruit,
or a tree that has not an entirely different name in East, West
or Middle Java, to say nothing of innumerable local variations.
But it is a fascinating game for all that.
The harvesting of many of these infinitely varied lesser
crops of Java brings each of them into prominence in turn.
One that will certainly attract the attention of a newcomer is
that of the groundnuts, or pea-nuts ( arachis\ which are
grown in enormous quantities in areas where the water supply
available during the dry East Monsoon is insufficient for
rice growing. Such areas are most numerous in East Java,
where the effect of this monsoon is most marked.
In mountain regions in this part of Java these so called
“nuts,” which, in actual fact, are not nuts at all, but beans,
are often interplanted with potatoes or maize, according
to a system of planting and interplanting which keeps the
soil almost continuously productive. This the Javanese


calls terus-menurus , an untranslatable word denoting ceaseless
progress, or the rotation of crops without pause or inter-
ruption.
The planting of the nuts is timed so that the crop is ready
to gather in November in order that the land they have
occupied can be broken up and prepared for rice planting
when the rains start in December. The “nuts” are the
easiest of all crops to gather, for the whole plant, top, roots
and all, with the so called nuts hanging among the root
fibres, comes up with one pull of the stem. For this reason,
one of the plant’s many native names is katjang broel , meaning
“all-together bean.” All along the roadsides at harvest time
you will see them in great heaps, just as they were pulled,
awaiting transport, and everywhere you will meet men jogging
along between twin loads of them, and grohaks piled twelve
feet high with the fading green mass. They may be taken to
their native owner’s house, where the children pull off the
damp, earth covered nuts and strew them to dry on the
ground of the compound, or along the roadside in front of
shops or houses where no one seems ever to interfere with
them. Sometimes a Chinese or Arab merchant will buy the
crop and it is taken to a bigger depot. But wherever it may
be, you will see the nubbly, shabby little nuts looking like
rather coarse gravel all over the ground, and even perhaps
find yourself treading on them unawares as you enter some
small village shop.
This arachis , one of the many varieties grown in most
tropical and sub-tropical countries, is a native of South
America, and the nuts are not, as they appear to be, attached
to the root fibres. Soon after blooming, the bunches of small
yellow flowers borne by the plant droop downwards and
gradually creep underground, where the pods mature. The
plant itself, after these have been removed, is used as a manure,
especially for sugarcane.
The popularity of the nuts, fried either in coconut oil or
in the oil produced from the nuts themselves (an important
industry), is country wide, and the consumption of them
enormous. They are eaten daily by natives with their rice,
and accompany every European rijsttafel. The cry “katjang
gorengV ’ (fried beans) is one of the most familiar of sounds


in every town and village, where they are sold in the streets
in small conical newspaper packets for one cent a packet, and
are almost as popular with Europeans, at all events among their
children, as they are with natives. They are often called
katjang tjina , being said to have been introduced by the
Chinese.
Another crop greatly in evidence during the East Monsoon
is katella , better known to English speaking people as sweet
potato, and to the French as patate. In Middle and East
Java it replaces rice during the dry season over immense areas,
and covers miles of country like a thick green carpet. The
Javanese have adopted it as their very own, and mostly call it
oehi Java , i.e. “Java potato,” for, after rice, it is one of the most
important items in their dietary. Several different varieties
are cultivated in Java, all growing low to the ground with
very dense foliage. Like the ground nuts, the crop is gathered
just before the rains come, and the roots are spread out on
every available space to dry. Europeans in Java very seldom
eat katella. Having myself had to make this singularly
uninspiring vegetable my staple diet during a lean period in
the Australian Bush, I must say I do not wonder!
The kapok harvest must surely be the oddest harvest in
the world. Towards the end of the dry season, in October
and November, the big torpedo shaped green pods begin to
shrivel and turn brown; and then, here, there, and every-
where, you will see bamboo ladders being reared against the
stiffly outstretched horizontal branches of the queer ungainly
trees, so unlike any other tree that grows that, once seen, no
one 'can ever fail to recognise them. The pods gathered,
they are carried in split bamboo baskets of enormous size,
on the backs of women or of ponies, or by men with their
pikoelans , to wherever it is to be shelled; perhaps to some big
depot where the pods are spread out in the sunshine on an
open space paved with concrete until they are hard and dry;
after which, if they do not split of themselves, as they often do,
they are split open by hand, the soft fluffy white cotton pulled
out and its seeds removed. Sometimes it may be only the
product of a couple of trees, or even of one; and even then it
is not to be despised, for the yield of each tree is almost in-
credible; in such a case it may go, perhaps, to its owner’s


home to be dried and opened, either for sale or for his own
family’s use.
Anyone who has ever handled kapok , even to the extent of
filling a cushion, and thus knows its uncanny capacity to spread
itself all over a room, will easily imagine that at big kapok
depots, or so called factories, the road, the trees, and indeed
the whole scene, for hundreds of yards around, is white and
fluffy with the clinging stuff, as though it had been through
a heavy stage snowstorm. And all the people who have
handled it, or have even been anywhere near it, look as though
they had been pushing their way through a barrage of cobwebs.
So, too, if you linger long, you will yourself, especially if
curiosity should prompt you to peep inside a shelling shed,
where, through a tangible fog that tickles your nose and clings
to your hair and eyelashes, you will see the bursting pods piled
roof high.
Because of its extreme lightness, the size of the loads in
which the kapok goes on the next stage of its journey is simply
enormous. Sometimes it is packed in immense sacks, lashed
together four upright and two across their tops, and one such
load roped at each end of the bearer’s pikoelan ; or in two vast
square packs similarly carried, dwarfing the man who jogs
cheerfully between them, bearing their weight on his shoulder,
to pygmy proportions by comparison. Sometimes one such
pack is carried on a little old woman’s back, or they may be
piled on pack ponies into loads so wide and so high that all
you can see is a jerkily moving mass supported on four
absurdly inadequate looking legs, with sometimes the tip of
a protruding nose. And from each and all of the loads,
however carried, the breeze blows back frail fluffy little puffs
of white cloud.
In this order the kapok comes to the factory, where the
remaining seeds are removed and the cotton is pressed, like
Australian wool, into square standard bales for export. There-
after you may see it piled high on motor lorries, or on barges
being slowly poled down the river on its way to the docks,
where, if you care to follow it so far, you can walk between
mountains of it as though along the feet of cliffs.
Immense though the quantity of kapok is that is supplied
by Java to the outside world, by no means all of it is exported.


The local demand is also great, for the reason that this
beneficent tree produces its luxurious mattress stuffing to all
intents and purposes ready made, so that it is remarkably
cheap, and therefore kapok mattresses are as universally
popular among Chinese and Javanese as among Europeans.
Made by Chinese workmen, these mattresses are superlatively
good; and many a former Java resident bemoans the fact
that nothing like them is to be obtained in Europe.
And, finally, if you should wish to fill a new cushion here
in Java and unless you are living at a great distance from a
town, you need never trouble to go shopping to buy your
kapok. It is seldom that a day passes without a kapok seller
wandering by, a bamboo across his shoulders with a bunch at
each end of fat, dangling, sausage shaped blue, red, green,
purple or yellow oiled paper bags, each holding about enough
for your purpose, and at the same time adding their quota to
the general colourfulness of the scene.
The Javanese never waste an inch of cultivable earth if
they can avoid it; and the narrow earth banks that intersect
and hold water in the ric e-sawahs, serving also as paths, are
often planted as well. Climbing plants of all sorts are
favourites for this purpose, mostly beans of various kinds, all
neatly trained on slender bamboos, as we grow exhibition
sweetpeas in England. The list of katjang (bean) varieties
grown in Java fills several pages in agricultural publications,
and includes all sorts and sizes from the giant pate with its
foot long pod containing seeds nearly as big as table-tennis
balls, and which are chopped up and eaten as a relish with
rice, down to the diminutive tauge which is allowed to sprout
in the dark after being gathered, so that a dish of the tiny
half-opened beans with an inch of curling white stem looks
not unlike our mustard, of the “mustard and cress” partner-
ship. The Dutch have aptly named them kommajes (little
commas).
The famous soya bean should be mentioned among the
many sorts that are grown and flourish here. It is rather a
nondescript looking plant and not very easy to recognise. It
has small oval leaves and purplish flowers like a vetch, and
grows best on the warm low levels, though it is also to be seen
in the mountain districts up to about 3000 feet.


Spinach, and a green vegetable rather like it, called kan-
koeng, cover hundreds of acres. Peas, including a miniature
variety eaten with the pods, are largely grown for European
consumption, as are potatoes, tomatoes, and many other
vegetable crops. Onions do particularly well, and a tiny pink
kind is a great favourite with native growers.
A characteristic sight in East and Middle Java is a small
leaved leguminous bush bearing yellow flowers, which is
much planted on the earth banks between ricefields. This is
crotelaria , known variously to the natives as entjing-entjing ,
orok-orok , or kakatjangan: it enriches the soil and provides a
useful fibre. Other varieties, called goedeh and widgen sesam ,
have small white blossoms and edible seeds which are added
to the sayoor asem , a sort of pickle used by natives; another
member of the same family is the much larger tori bearing
handsome white blossoms which are crushed and eaten with
rice. The branches and prunings of all these are a useful
source of firewood.
A beautiful crop to be seen here and there in Middle
and East Java, where it is being planted experimentally,
is rosella , a member of the large hibiscus family. It is a
very tall slender lance-straight reddish cane, with narrow
leaves and a large single white flower. • It produces a valu-
able fibre, and it is hoped to cultivate it profitably on land
formerly occupied by sugarcane, the planting of which
has been so drastically reduced since the slump in this
commodity.
Sugarcane has been cultivated in Java since early in the
sixteenth century under the control of Arabs. The Dutch on
their arrival were quick to follow so profitable an example,
and by 1620 some twenty mills were in operation round about
Batavia. It was destined to become the most important of
all the European cultural enterprises in Java.
At first it was a forced culture, but later, as a private enter-
prise, sugar became a source of prosperity to the whole native
population of East Java as well as to Europeans. Huge
fortunes were made through it in the Great War, as well as
in coffee, quinine, and other products, and Java cane crops
were sometimes sold three or four times over before they were
cut, with staggering rises of price on each transaction. But


in recent years the industry suffered the greatest debacle in the
colony’s history.
Up to 1931 Java was producing from her 179 mills about
3,000,000 tons of sugar a year: one fifth of the world’s sugar
supply, and was only second in her output to Cuba. But for
years powerful native financial interests in India had been
working for the establishment of sugar culture in their own
country; and in 1931 the Indian Government imposed a high
tariff on imported sugar under which mills sprang up like
mushrooms. In the first season there were thirty of them,
producing 158,000 tons between them; three years later
135 mills were working, with an output of 650,000 tons,
which rose still further the following year. With the result
that Java, which in 1931 sent nearly a million tons of sugar to
India, by 1936 sent scarcely a ton. And Japan, formerly also
a big customer, had in the meantime become self-supporting
through its development of sugar culture in Formosa.
The Java industry was desperately hard hit, and for some
years the dislocation and distress was extreme. Dozens of
the great mills stood idle and empty, their machinery having
in some cases been bought and reinstalled in the very mills
in India that had ruined those in Java. The offices were
closed, and desolation reigned in the sugar towns that the
mills had brought into being. Pretty bungalows formerly
so gay with flowers and ferns and polished brass, with bright
silk lampshades and blue Dutch china, were shuttered and
forsaken; their once trim gardens a wilderness, and boards
bearing the words “Te Huur” or “Te Koop” greeted the
traveller on every side, while many of the canefields that
formerly lined the roads for miles were replanted with rice
and other crops.
Formerly the Java sugar industry had competed in the
world’s market without subsidy; but now the Government
took a hand, and by guaranteeing a fixed minimum price for a
proportion of the output, together with the growers’ success
in reducing production costs, some sort of stability has been
attained, and the hope that Java will be able to produce and
dispose of about half her former output. The population is
adapting itself to changed conditions, and the signs of distress
that followed the sudden slump are now happily disappearing.


Sugar is grown in Java by natives as well as on the grand
scale by Europeans, and small plots planted by Javanese are
to be seen here and there surrounded by other crops. The
cane, of course, is the same in appearance whoever owns it;
but you will see no lordly sugar mill with tall tapering white
spire dominating the scene of these modest native holdings.
The cane grown on them is crushed in a primitive stone or
concrete contraption worked by a bullock marching monoton-
ously round and round, and the resultant juice is boiled in
paraffin tins, those faithful friends of both Orientals and white
Colonials in modern times. The sugar is made up into little
tapering packets of standard size, wrapped in palm leaf, and
is one of the countless items that soon became a familiar sight
in every pasar and village shop. These native sugar enter-
prises, humble though they are, have at least the advantage
that they are quite unaffected by the disastrous malaise that
has closed down so many of their more pretentious cousins.
Their numbers and activity are as great as ever they were, for
the Javanese has a sweet tooth, and loves sugar in any form
when he can afford it.
Several sorts of wild sugarcane are native to Java. The
most familiar is glagah , which is easily mistaken for the coarse
alang-alang grass formerly much used for roofing. Glagah is
often planted on native holdings, and either crushed to obtain
the sweet juice, or the young shoots eaten as a vegetable. The
native practice of applying the same name to all sorts of rough
grasses, as well as to a small red fish eaten with rice, is very
confusing to strangers.
No one who has ever seen a plantation of agave , a kind of
aloe, from which sisal hemp is produced, will be likely to
forget it. The stiff, spiky, symmetrical rows with their tall
“candelabra’ ’ of flowers stretch away in unbroken ranks to
the horizon, weirdly silhouetted against the sky, for this crop
is cultivated on flat areas. This crop is one that no visitor
will have difficulty in recognising, for it is utterly unlike any
other in Java, and looks as though it would be more at home
in the arid wastes of Mexico than amid the gracious fertility
of the East Indian islands.
Vanilla, which is really an orchid, is much grown in Java.
It grows wild in the South American forests; and when the


Spaniards conquered Mexico they found the Aztecs there
flavouring chocolate with it just as chocolate manufacturers
do to this day. There is no record of when it was first brought
to Java, but as a Spanish writer sang the praises of its “ remark-
able flavour” as early as 1608, one may suppose its fame
reached the East India Company and that they thought it
would be a profitable culture. It is an uncannily vigorous
climber, with thick fleshy stems and leaves that bring to mind
the story of Jack and the Beanstalk, for if it is allowed its own
way it will climb straight up the trunk of a tree on one perfectly
vertical stem, to dizzy heights far out of sight and reach
among the highest branches.
When grown commercially vanilla is trained on bamboo
trellises or on small trees kept lopped to prevent it from
growing out of reach. In the latter case horizontal bamboos
are fixed from tree to tree. A drawback to its cultivation
is the necessity to fertilise the flowers artificially. Opinions
differ as to whether in its wild state the plant is fertilised by
insects or by humming birds; but whatever the agent may be
in its native land, it is not present in Java, and the grower
must apply the pollen by hand.
Many other climbing plants besides vanilla excite the
stranger’s interest in almost any native garden in Java. Their
name is legion and, with the exception of pepper, their uses
are for the most part hidden from the mere European. Some
add their contribution to strange native dishes, and most, you
will be told if you ask, yield obat (medicine) for all sorts and
conditions of illnesses. But there is one, the sirih, looking
at first sight like a very handsome bean, with shiny elongated
heartshaped leaves, which is one of the most important items
in Javanese native life, as it is in that of many other Oriental
peoples. It is one of the thousand or so members of the
pepper family which grow wild all over the East Indies and
South East Asia, and were the first cause of the annexation
of all these lands by European powers, the spice trade having
been the genesis of the East India Companies.
The leaves of the sirih are the principal ingredient in the
“chew” without which no Javanese would find life endurable.
They are a familiar sight even to town dwellers, for there is
scarcely a street corner at which you will not see a native


squatted beside a basket of them, piled up in neat brilliant
green bundles, which he keeps fresh by sprinkling them every
now and then from a little tin of water. For although the
other ingredients of the “chew” can be kept almost indefinitely,
the sirih leaves must be used perfectly fresh.
To make his chew, the native takes one of the slightly
scented, bitter, red juiced leaves, smooths it on his knee, and
snicks off the stalk. Then he smears it with a little fine chalk,
and lays on it a tiny bit of gamhir , or sometimes, in remote
places where gamhir is not obtainable, a bit of the sirih catkin,
and a piece of betel nut, which he breaks off with a nutcracker.
(Betel nut, by the way, is only another name for areca nut, and
is called by Malays and Javanese pinang or penang .) The
sirih chewer then folds all this up into a small packet in the
sirih leaf and puts it in his mouth.
A chew lasts about a quarter of an hour. Hence the
Javanese word for “a quarter of an hour” is sapanginang ,
meaning literally the length of a pinang , much as we might
say “the length of a cigarette.” The sirih chew is supposed
to have healing properties, and is sometimes spat out on to
wounds in the course of their treatment by a doekoen (a native
doctor and magic maker).
The Javanese like a good ripe old betel nut in their chew,
and if that is not strong enough for a hardened palate they
will put a wad of tobacco in the other cheek at the same time.
Malays prefer a milder flavour and choose young, immature
nuts for their sirih. Old Javanese men and women, especially
the very poor in the Sultanates, often suck a whole nut, known
as pinang merah , instead of the mixed chew. The areca palm
is grown all over Java and the East Indies, and its abundance
on Penang gave that island its name.
The other ingredient, gamhir , is the product of a bush much
seen in native gardens: in its natural state a climber, but
“topped” under cultivation to increase the production of
leaves from which the extract is made by long boiling. The
syrupy substance so obtained sets quite firmly and, after
drying, is cut into the tiny yellow brown cubes in which it
is sold, and which are among the most familiar sights, in all
markets. It is the same extract as that used for tanning,
well known as catechu .


The sirih box in a Javanese household is as important an
item as the teapot in ours, if not more so. Called tempat sirih
or pakinangan (kinang is the Javanese word for the prepared
mixture), the box contains compartments with two tiny-
covered boxes for gambir and tobacco, one uncovered for
betel nut, and a little pot for lime. Sirih boxes are made of
many different materials: brass, wood, silver, or even gold,
and are often very beautiful. It is a strict rule of Javanese
hospitality to offer the sirih box to a guest, and it is an equally
strict rule of courtesy to help yourself from it when thus
offered to you. It may play a part in courtship; if it is
proffered by a simple maiden to a diffident swain, it is a hint
that his advances will not be unwelcome. Being of the
superior sex, he is under no obligation to accept unless he is
inclined; but if he should do so, the young lady may hope
for the best!
The cinnamon bush grows wild in Java, and its bark is
used by natives to flavour their tiny tapering cigarettes. The
cultivated variety was brought here from Ceylon when that
island was in the hands of the Dutch East India Company.
It was one of the forced cultures imposed on the natives in
both places.
Many colourful plants are used for hedging. Coleus , of
which countless sorts grow wild, is a prime favourite, as it
roots from any sprig stuck in the ground, and grows fast
and with great luxuriance. The common crimson variety,
which the Javanese call hay am merah (red spinach), is specially
prolific, and you may often see a glowing mass of the lovely
thing warming the shadows on the fringes of a mountain
forest.
Caladium of many kinds is to be found in such places also.
Lantana , though so abundant as to be a pest in places, is
none the less beautiful for that. Crotons , of which many
varieties are native to Java, are everywhere, and a garden in
which they do not appear is rare. Usually they, too, are
planted as hedges, and the brilliance of colour they lend to
the roadsides is a delight to see. Acalyphas are equally
popular as hedges and bushes, specially striking varieties
with big coloured catkins being in high favour. The most
curious of these is aptly called ekor koetjing (cat’s tail), and


bear thick reddish velvety catkins a good foot long. The
hosea , eixora , and tenoma , all bearing brilliantly coloured
flowers, are common in all gardens, and so is the gardenia , or
katjang piring.
The hibiscus flourishes everywhere; not only the common
red sort, beloved of South Sea novelists, but a great variety of
others, including a delicate rose pink, and one whose blooms
are finely fringed. The Javanese call the red one kemhang
sepatoe , the shoe flower; not, so old time Dutch planters say,
with any reference to its shape, but because, in the days before
improved transport made the small amenities of life so easily
obtainable, native servants discovered that the squashed
blooms made an excellent polish for their masters’ boots and
shoes.
In mountain regions there are miles upon miles of thick
green hedges ablaze with big yellow sunflowers, or as the
Javanese naturally call them: kemhang mata hari. The
Dutch, however, call them “Marygold” after a certain Mary
Gould, the daughter of a rich American, who, so the story goes,
saw it growing wild when travelling with her father in South
America some fifty or sixty years ago, and took seeds back to
the United States. There it was widely cultivated, and from
thence was introduced to Java by Dr Junghuhn, famous for
his introduction of cinchona, among other plants designed to
prevent erosion of mountain sides and for the enrichment of
the soil.
Another hedge much planted at high altitudes is the
poinsettia , which, like so many other plants in this genial
climate, will root and grow without fail from the roughest
of cuttings stuck in the ground.
The lovely pale gold alamanda , which we grow with care
in English hothouses, glorifies many Java hedgerows. It
clambers over trellises and arbours, and hangs down in heavy
masses over garden walls as prodigally as does the Mesem-
bryanthemum in Devon and Cornwall. The gorgeous flame
coloured hignonia , which the Dutch for some reason often
call “stephanotis,” is also a popular favourite.
Gardening is altogether too easy in Java! Not only can
you grow a fine new hedge almost overnight by sticking in a
row of twigs, but your very gateposts will burst into life if


you let them, throwing out a crown of branches like those of a
pollarded tree. These are a common sight in native kampongs .
Sometimes the prudent native householder, having evidently
an eye for future profit as well as for pleasing appearance, has
put in gateposts of kapok wood, so that he rejoices not only
in a living archway over the entrance to his little demesne,
but gathers therefrom a useful crop. How very pleasant it
would be if only our staid suburban British gateposts would
develop the same virile qualities!


A(_
On Trees
THE trees of Java have earned a whole literature to
themselves. Forestry experts estimate the numbers
of distinct sorts at anything between five and ten
thousand. But without presuming to attempt to approach
them on so devastatingly grand a scale, the few that the
ordinary layman succeeds in identifying are quite interesting
enough. Heading the list for sheer breathtaking magnificence
is the Poinciana , well named by the French, in its native land
of Madagascar, the “Flamboyant,” and by the English
“Flame of the Forest,” for this tree in full flower must surely
be nature’s supreme achievement in the realm of colour.
Bare in the dry East Monsoon, the branches break suddenly
at the change of season into a dazzling blaze of scarlet blossom
which spreads day by day until it is a mass of flaming glory
almost too blinding for human eyes to bear. Then, as
quickly, the foliage appears in feathery sprays, supplying a
perfect setting to the flaming masses of bloom. For a month
or six weeks the show displays itself daily in all its glory in an
ever increasing luxuriance of foliage, until at last there begin
the gentle showers of falling blossoms that cover the ground
under the trees with a brilliant carpet, swept up with meticulous
care daily; for these trees are mostly planted to form avenues
along important roads in the large towns. And then, slowly
and imperceptibly, for the.process takes some weeks, the
scarlet seems to melt away as the green foliage thickens, as
though it had been submerged and drowned by the rising
green tide. And at last, “flamboyant” no longer, the
Poinciana enters upon another phase as a gracious and lovely
shade tree.
Only second to it in brilliance is the cassia , which bears
masses of yellow blossoms like those of our laburnum, and is
called hoedjan mas (golden rain) by the natives. Another
beautiful tree is one they call daoen koepoe-koepoe (butterfly
leaf) bearing dainty clusters of frail pink and white blooms like
flights of butterflies; and the tamarind , a native of tropical


Africa, with red streaked yellow flowers is also a familiar
roadside tree. It has a practical as well as an assthetic value,
its pods making a delicious jam and a popular syrup known
as stroop asem.
Two other red blossomed trees which visitors sometimes
confuse with the Poinciana are the sepatoe dea , or Forest Tulip,
and the dadap. The former is a native tree planted along
the roadsides at high altitudes too cool for the heat loving
Flamboyant. It bears flowers which grow singly, high among
the topmost branches, and are only visible as splashes of
brilliant colour against the sky. It is only when they fall
that the beauty of these strange blossoms can be seen. They
are not unlike immense sealing-wax red sweetpeas, and are as
big as a native woman’s hand. The dadap has an equally
bright red flower of similar shape but quite small. It also is a
native tree, and is much planted for shade in coffee plantations,
as it grows quickly and does not exhaust the soil. Its seeds
contain a valuable alkaloid, and the bark of one variety, known
as dadap bong , yields the poison erythrinine. Several sorts of
Alhizzia are also planted as shade trees with coffee or tea;
and so is koveel toro , from whose light, flexible wood walking-
sticks are made.
Hundreds upon hundreds of miles of country roads, as well
as those in the towns, have been converted into avenues in
Java by the planting of shade trees. The favourite, and
most familiar, is the stately Kenari , which grows to a great
size, and whose nuts are much sought after by the Javanese,
who eat them with their rice and also extract oil from them.
The Sana is another the sight of which soon grows familiar,
for it is easily recognised in its so called “wintering” period
when, like the teak, it sheds its leaves and stands looking
strangely naked and forlorn against the background of rich
tropic foliage. The timber from this tree is a beautiful
reddish hardwood known as lenggoa , and trees sometimes
attain such a size that table tops five or six feet in diameter
have been cut from a single cross section of its trunk. Nor is
its timber its only product. The Javanese make fish nets
and rope from its bark fibre, and use its sap, which they
call getah angsana , for tanning leather and as a healing
ointment. Native women make an infusion of the leaves


and use it as a shampoo, and the men crush and dry them
for snuff.
Another remarkable and beautiful tree is the “Rain Tree,”
a native of South America, and another of the many importa-
tions Java owes to Dr Junghuhn. It bears delicate fluffy
pale pink flowers with very long, fine stamens, and it has the
peculiar habit of folding up its small oval leaves at sunset:
for which reason the Javanese call it daoen tidor (sleeping
leaves). By an association of ideas very characteristic of
native mentality, they have great faith in a sleeping draught
made from an infusion of these leaves.
The native teak of Java, called djati, is much planted for
shade and decoration in gardens, as well as in forests for its
invaluable timber. It is the easiest of all trees to recognise,
for its leaves are bigger than dinner plates and its great trusses
of creamy blossoms are strikingly beautiful.
The Java chestnut or sarangan , which has given its name to
one of Java’s best known mountain resorts, grows wild in
most mountain forests. Its nut is not unlike its European
namesake, and is in great demand in native markets from
September till the end of the year.
The casuarina , here called tjimara , is common in East Java,
but not in the West; and the pandanus is to be found at many
places on the coast.
An “India rubber plant,” in a pot, was almost as indis-
pensable as an aspidistra in respectable British households in
Victorian times, and English visitors who are old enough to
remember it may recognise this old friend in much glorified
form in Java gardens as the karet or ficus elastica. This is the
original “India rubber tree,” a native of Java, Malaya, and
elsewhere in the East Indies, and has a curious history. An
early navigator saw a native boy playing with a ball that
“bounced in a surprising manner,” and was told on inquiry
that it was made of the dried sap of this tree. He took
samples back to Europe and before long the product was
being imported as “guttapercha.” An Englishman, one
Prestly, discovered in 1770 that it would rub out pencil marks,
and for over half a century that was its chief use, until experi-
ments in America led to the discovery that it could be
vulcanised by the use of sulphur.


Plantations of ficus elastica were started and improvements
and developments with “guttapercha,” or “caoutchouc” as
it was also called, continued until the superiority of the rubber
yielded by the Brazilian hevea was discovered. The cultiva-
tion of hevea , started at Kew Gardens in 1876 from seed
smuggled from Brazil, put an end to the importance of ficus
elastica , and was the beginning of the rubber industry as we
know it to-day. The tree, however, remains to beautify
many gardens; it grows to great size, and it is difficult to
realise that the stately tree that spreads a welcome shade above
your head, and frames the distant lovely view with its great
branches, is in fact the same humble “India rubber plant” of
suburban sitting rooms, which its fat, pink, rolled up leafbuds
and smooth thick leaves recall to mind.
Years of familiarity have never quite robbed me of astonish-
ment at the sight of the nangka , or soekoen as it is called in some
parts of Java. Its cousin the Breadfruit is startling enough,
but it at least is shapely as you would expect a giant fruit to be,
and grows in a seemly way on a handsome tree whose large
and decorative leaves are a becoming setting for it. The
nangka tree is a scraggy, nondescript affair, standing awkwardly
as a nervous schoolgirl, as though embarrassed by the
monstrous, shapeless, scratchy, dirty green fruits that poke
or hang untidily at all angles from its trunk and branches,
inadequately protected by a rather sparse supply of leaves
far too small to be in proportion. It would be a small nangka
that was less than a foot long; many are double that, and their
weight, needless to say, is terrific.
The nangka is a native of Java and common in some districts;
it passes unnoticed all through the year until December,
when, laden as outrageously as a coolie, but with its own
offspring, it is one of the sights of the regions it inhabits, at
altitudes above 3000 feet. The fruit, which in shape is often
rather like a collapsed half-empty sack that has sagged in the
middle, is in evidence everywhere in its season by the roadsides,
in the pasars , on the tops of buses, loaded on grohaks and
pikoelans\ and wherever natives congregate it is cut into
hunks, exposing its pale yellow pulp and large seeds, and
eagerly bought. The Breadfruit, to which this monstrosity
of a fruit is related, is also much planted in Java, though less
195
On Trees


than the nangka. It is an importation from the South Sea
Islands, and the tree is as handsome as the nangka is the
reverse. It is easily recognised by its large, symmetrical,
deeply indented leaves. The Javanese names for it are
soekoen bidji and kaloewieh.
In their characteristically irrational way, the Javanese have
given the misleading name of nangka helanda (Dutch nangka)
to the American “Soursop” ( anona muricata ) or, as the Dutch
call it, “Zuurzak.” A more inappropriate name could
scarcely be imagined as the tree is little more than a shrub,
and the only resemblance borne by the fruit to the nangka
is its colour and irregular shape, an average specimen being
only about six to eight inches long.
It is easy enough to recognise the bamboo, but not to
distinguish between its many varieties. The giant of the
species, bamboo hitoeng or pitoeng , growing in great groves
on the sides of deep gorges among the mountains, is a glorious
sight. It grows to amazing heights, often attains ten inches
or more in diameter, and is incredibly strong for all building
purposes. Bridges built of it will safely carry the clumsy
teak grobaks or tjikars , whose registered weight is over 1000 lb.,
and even motor cars.
Bamboo taki and bamboo watoe are the kinds most used for
splitting into the house building material called bilik , described
in a previous chapter. The slender bamboo apoes provides
fibre from which is made a strong cord used to bind the frame-
work of buildings together. The bamboos andong , gombong ,
and soerat are also used in building, as well as cut in sections
to form natural containers for carrying water or collecting
palm juice.
Small Chinese and Japanese varieties are also sometimes
planted. These are mostly grown for export.
Methods of propagating the bamboo are simple and effective,
and often to be seen on a country walk. A stem, or part of
one, is buried just under the surface of the ground; holes are
cut in the upper side between each of the joints, and the
sections filled with water. New sprouts and roots then grow
from each joint. Another method is to stick a two section
piece of bamboo in the ground at an angle of about forty-five
degrees, and fill the protruding section with water like a


cup, when the joint, one side of which should be just under
the surface of the ground, will sprout as in the first
method.
Big untidy masses of what appear to be pine needles or
small dry sticks, jammed in among the highest stems, which
are sometimes to be seen in bamboo groves, are often taken
for some kind of giant birds’ nests; but they are in reality
the flower of this strange tree. It often further puzzles the
passer-by with the eerie rasping groans it emits as its immensely
tall and heavy stems rub against one another when they are
swayed by the breeze among their tops.
* Palms are as familiar a feature of the Java landscape as the
bamboo, and are almost, if not quite, as indispensable to the
Javanese people. There are many varieties. The coconut,
which grows to great heights and often lives to eighty or a
hundred years, is everywhere, and serves many purposes
beside its primary one of producing nuts. The midrib of its
leaves, tied in bunches, is the übiquitous lidi y with which all
nations do their sweeping; its sap yields sugar “toddy”;
its fibre makes mats; and when its day is done, its trunk is
used for the inside framework of houses, to make footbridges,
a row of the trunks being laid side by side, and another set on
the top of them at right angles to the first.
The sago palm provides an important addition to the native
dietary which, however, involves felling the tree at fourteen
or fifteen years old. The trunk is cut into logs six or eight
feet long, which may often be seen as they are trundled along
the roads by a rope attached to an improvised axle fixed in the
ends of the log. The sago is prepared by chopping the log
open on a mat-floored washing place with a trough beneath it,
built out over a stream. The soft heart of the trunk, a fine
meal-like substance called serampin , is scraped out, water is
poured over it, and it is kneaded with the feet in the trough
into a paste. This is packed in long cylindrical palm leaf
baskets, and often floated down river in its own scraped out
trunk, the native being nothing if not practical. As well as
that consumed by the natives, much is also converted into the
pearl sago of commerce, made by the simple process of hanging
it up in mats rolled cornerwise and repeatedly shaken till small
lumps are formed. These are then gently baked. The


process is much the same as that followed in making tapioca
from cassava.
The aren palm also produces sago when its life is over; but
in the meantime it has an important mission to perform, for
it is the sugar and toddy producer -par excellence. As much as
1800 litres of the so called “Java sugar” can be tapped from
a single tree. The sap, which is called toeak , is caught in a
bamboo section bound to the stem; then boiled in an iron pot
till it is syrupy, and transferred to another where it crystallises.
It is then cut into round cakes with a cutter formed of the
round end of a large bamboo section. The fermented toddy
is called toeak kras , and is also used as yeast. As well as the
aren and coconut palms, the lontar and nipa yield the same
sugary sap, but in less abundance. The aren palm also
provides the native with a particularly strong fibre much in
favour for rope-making, so tough that it can even be used for
anchor cables.
The midrib of the sago palm fronds, laid in parallel rows,
takes the place of hilik for house walls in other parts of the East
Indies but is seldom to be seen in Java. It is known as gaba-
gaha. Palm leaf, preferably of the nip a palm when available,
provides the atap roofing that was very generally used before
the Dutch ordained that tiles should replace it as a precaution
against plague-bearing rats, to which atap offered too attractive
a harbourage. Atap is, however, still used on all temporary
buildings: notably those of the annual Pasar Gamhar , and
before and after this great fair loads of the picturesque roof
material, done up in bundles of twenty-five, are a familiar
sight on all the roads and canals of Batavia.
Except for the “oerwoud” (that is, the primeval jungle that
clothes the highest peaks: seldom seen by Europeans save where
passes have been made across the ranges) the mountain forests
too are part of Java’s immense cultivated garden. There is
nothing at first sight in the appearance of these lovely wood-
lands to suggest that they are not as “wild” as the jungle
above them; but the discovery of Australian eucalyptus
rubbing shoulders with native djati and ipe, and mimosa
cheek by jowl with dammar and tree ferns under the shade of
big gloomy pines, sets up doubts in the visitor’s mind as to
whether they can really be as natural as they seem; especially


when he finds himself in a real pine wood bare of undergrowth
and carpeted with slippery pine needles whose sweet, sharp
scent transports him in a moment from the tropics to Bourne-
mouth or Japan.
The answer to the riddle is the Forestry Service, whose
tree nurseries are often to be seen in the cours_e of a mountain
ramble. Hidden as they are in the very heart of the woods,
hemmed in on all sides by towering trees, these forests in
miniature are a charming sight such as Gulliver might have
seen in the land of Lilliput. The fairy glades of baby pines
and “gums,” mimosa and many other foreign varieties, are
raised from seed brought from all over the world, and supply
the young trees now interplanted with the indigenous growth
in countless mountain forests all over Java.
The Forestry Service was originally concerned only with
the preservation and replanting of the rich natural djati
forests which had been depleted almost to the point of extinc-
tion by the East India Company’s blandong system. Under
this the native regents were forced to supply huge quantities
of the timber, and the forests were ruthlessly cut, making vast
profits for all concerned, except, of course, the poor coolies
who actually cut them. It was not long before the coastal
forests, especially fine round about Rembang, and always
renowned for the building of native prahaus , were cut out,
and the blandong cutters were forced to go farther and farther
inland for supplies to meet the Company’s insatiable demands.
All their wharves, godowns, and ships were built of this
magnificent hardwood, and immense quantities were exported.
It was for this reason that djati woods began to be planted
under Company control. The blandong system was con-
tinued with variations up to about 1865, by which time the
planted forests were becoming productive.
The first forestry experts had been brought to Java in 1849,
and the first forestry inspector was appointed in 1858, in a
great measure to repair the ravages of the long Java war, when
miles of forests were chopped down by the Dutch to deprive
the natives of cover, so that their resistance might be finally
subdued. Since the last decade of the nineteenth century,
the Forestry Service has steadily grown, and now controls not
only the many planted djati woods, but the original “wild”


forests also, which are regularly inspected, thinned, and
replanted in the best interests of timber and firewood supply,
the latter a vital matter in this densely populated country. In
many places whole hillsides have been reafforested, often
under an ingenious system whereby the Forestry Department
allows the use of the land free for three years to farmers from
Madoera for the cultivation of maize, in return for their care
of the young trees between which the maize is planted. In
this way, as well as assuring the welfare of the embryo forests,
the Madoerese are encouraged to settle in these non-irrigable
areas, less uncongenial to them than the Javanese, accustomed
from time immemorial to irrigated land.
For many years Java exported large quantities of djati and
soft woods for paper making, the latter to Japan. But in
late years Japan’s financial difficulties have reduced these
exports to a minimum. Increased exports of djati to Europe
have to some extent made up for other losses; but a new
paper mill is Java’s chosen solution to reduced sales of
“pulping” wood. This new mill is to make a stouter kind
of paper than that hitherto produced at the two existing mills,
at Probolingo and Padalarang, where rice straw is the material
used.
The planting and care of the trees that form avenues beside
hundreds of miles of Java roads are also the concern of the
Forestry Service.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The “ Kweekerij ”
THERE is no pleasanter way to live in the great
garden of Java than to have a garden of your own:
a “Kweekerij” as the Dutch call it. The word means
“nursery”; but there is little or no resemblance between a
Java kweekerij and its opposite number in England, beyond
the bare fact that flowers are cultivated in both of them.
For however much beauty a British nursery may achieve
through sheer mass production of colour, there is never any
possibility of mistaking its commercial object. The pain-
fully practical layout of an English nursery would make that
clear, even if the fact were not shouted at us from giant
signboards; and not all the glory of the flowers in even the
best of such places can ever make it in the true sense a
“garden.”
In Java it is quite otherwise. Though why it should be
so is hard to say. The Dutch are commercial minded enough,
heaven knows, and they are experts in the flower business
from Ato Z. Nevertheless, though a Java mountain kwee-
kerij may be just as much a business venture as if it were a
shop, there is nothing in its appearance to suggest that it has
been planted for any other purpose than the pleasure of its
owners, and to add yet more colour and beauty to the wealth
of both with which it is surrounded.
Of course the nature of those surroundings has much to do
with it. You must go high up among the mountains, at
3000 or 4000 feet, to plant a nursery, for here the climate is
that of a perennial perfect European summer, where spring,
summer, and autumn flowers flourish side by side all the year
round. No garden can look “commercial,” or other than
beautiful, when it is planted up hill and down dale on steep
terraced hillsides and winding valleys, and watered by
sparkling streams running under bridges of woven bamboo,
between banks thick with maidenhair fern: and it is in
country such as this that most of the Java nursery gardens are
to be found.


No blatant signboards spoil the picture here. Only a
flush of pink or crimson on the mountainside, as you turn a
corner of the steep winding track, or a blur of many colours
like the pattern of an old Persian carpet, set amid the vivid
green of the rice terraces, announce themselves as a source of
supply of some of the roses and asters always to be found in
the flower shops that form such delicious oases of scent and
sweetness in the hot city streets below.
It was to be expected that the Dutch, the world’s greatest
horticulturists, should establish flower culture and a flower
trade on the grand scale in a colony whose climate and
conditions were so ideal for the purpose. For many years the
business was a lucrative one; and then, as with so many other
crops (that of rubber is the most notable instance), its very
success was its undoing. More and more Europeans planted
flowers for profit; and when the Javanese began to follow
suit, the familiar bugbears of over production and low prices
were the result, and to-day the profits of a hloemkweekerij are
extremely modest. In places there are actually acres of
glorious roses, which look like Regent’s Park rose gardens
strayed on to a Java mountainside, blooming unnoticed and
ungathered, because it does not pay to pick them.
Although flower growing in Java is no longer as lucrative
as of old, it is still carried on. The expenses are relatively
low, compared, that is, with the costs involved in Europe. A
native gardener’s wages are about twenty-five cents per day,
and that of a woman employed in weeding, picking, or pack-
ing, twenty cents. The trade remains a large one, and the
demand for flowers is great, but it is far more profitable to
the retailer than to the grower, and the gap between the prices
charged in the shops and those earned by the grower is
ludicrously wide. The national love of flowers, or perhaps
it would be more correct to say the fashion of “saying it with
flowers,” is very much alive in the Colonial Dutch; and every
sort of occasion, whether it be arrival or departure, a wedding,
a birthday, or a funeral, is marked by gifts of baskets or
bouquets of flowers, for which the town florists charge luxury
prices much the same as those paid for similar tokens in
Europe, if not even higher.
The luckless grower, however, as a rule only gets a flat


rate all round of about thirty cents per large bunch of roses,
carnations, asters, lilies, or whatever it may be, a price which
has to cover all his costs of growing, gathering, packing, and
transport. Native cultivators undersell even this low rate.
They like to offer, and often sell, the flowers they grow to
European planters in their neighbourhood, to save themselves
the time and trouble of transport to market. Failing this
method of disposal, they carry great loads of lovely blossoms
down from their gardens to the towns far below, journeys
that take many hours, and sell them for next to nothing in
the streets. For the Javanese is content to accept a very small
return for a very great deal of labour.
However serious the competition of these native growers
may be, it would be hard not to forgive them when you see
the gorgeous splashes of colour they contribute to the scene:
as for instance on the aloon-aloon at Malang, East Java, most
beautiful of all the grassy town centres in the whole island.
Here, under the far flung shade of an immense old waringen
tree which dominates the centre of the great space of close
cropped turf, the native flower sellers congregate every
morning in the midst of a crowded mass of multicoloured
blossoms shimmering like rainbows in their setting of green,
against a background made up of glimpses between the
waringens that stand sentinel all round the aloon-aloon , of
white walled, brown tiled houses; and above and beyond them
the serene distant beauty of the Ardjoeno mountains, on whose
slopes these very flowers have grown.
Thanks to the indispensable bamboo, this wealth of flowers
is always fresh. They stand in water in deep “vases” easily
made by sawing off sections of its immense hollow stems.
On many European owned kweekerijs the culture of flowers
is combined with that of oranges, coffee, vegetables, vanilla,
and other crops. And some of the town flower shops have
their own gardens in the mountains where they cultivate their
supplies. The best flower growing climates being at altitudes
that are delightfully cool and healthy to live in, the owners
and managers of these nurseries naturally make them their
homes, adding still further to tneir informal and welcoming
appearance. They seem to apply the same principle to them
as the Frenchman does to the matter of food, when he argues


that since we must eat and drink to live, we may as well make
it as enjoyable a process as possible. So the nursery gardener
in Java sees no earthly reason why the garden that supports
him and his family, albeit modestly, should not be a place that
will give them pleasure as well as profit. He not only plants
rectangular blocks of flowers, so far as the probably irregular
contours of his land permit, in true Dutch style, and others of
oranges, coffee, strawberries, or anything else that happens to
suit his taste and his business, but makes among them grass
paths and rockeries, with orange and pommelo and mimosa
trees here and there for shade and decoration. He will have
beds of begonias and pansies and violets and nasturtiums;
and pergolas and arbours covered with deep red bougain-
villea, golden alamanda, clambering roses, or fluffy pink
Honolulu creeper. In shady corners there will be banks
covered with maidenhair fern of every kind, from the giant
that in England is seen only at Kew, to one so fine it seems
made for fairy bouquets; and rare gold and silver ferns and
many others, all to be found wild in abundance in these
mountains, and brought home and planted here, most likely,
by members of the family from country walks.
Not that the “business” part of such a garden is any less
lovely in its way than the rest. There are trim rectangles of
yellow, red, and white roses; of pink, cream, yellow, and red
gerberas which grow to even greater perfection in this climate
than in their native land of Africa; of hydrangeas, dahlias,
carnations, chrysanthemums, asters, marigolds, coreopsis,
gladiolas, cannas, blue and white agapanthus, tall crimson,
orange, or white lilies, blood-red orchids from Borneo, and
many more; most of them surrounded by broad belts of
zinnias of every brilliant hue imaginable, which grow here to
giant size, and serve in their sturdy perfection as a windbreak
for less robust flowers, while themselves adding to the glory
of the garden with their gorgeous masses of colour. In the
same way the clumps of gerberas of every shade, of coreopsis,
marigolds, and dwarf zinnias lining both sides of the grass
paths serve the double purpose of beautifying it and adding to
the supplies of those flowers for the market.
The delicately scented mimosa, known in its Australian
homeland as wattle, blooms here all the year round and is as


much in demand in Batavia and Soerabaya florists’ shops as it
is in England and France. And these graceful trees render
even more valuable service when they throw their feathery
shade over the bamboo seats beside the shaven turf path that
runs between carpets of colour melting in the distance into
the dark shadows of a coffee plantation and the misty blue of
the far off mountains.
Work on a kweekerij , as on all tropical plantations, starts at
daybreak, and both Mijnheer and Mevrouw are pretty sure
to be out soon after setting the gardeners to their various jobs.
Some will be preparing beds with the patjoel , or changkul , as
the Malays call it, almost the only tool used by the field
worker in these parts. It is shaped like a narrow spade, with
the difference that it is set at an angle of about thirty degrees
to the handle, 1 the edge of the blade pointing back towards
the user: the perfect instrument for working soft rich stoneless
soil, into which it cuts as though it were cheese, as the gardener
drops it with much the same action as a man using a pick.
The patjoel is the inseparable outdoor companion of its native
owner, who cares for it like the true craftsman he is, and keeps
it always bright and keen. It is said that he never sharpens
it, and that his custom of leaving it to soak all night in a stream
or tank is the correct way to keep it in good order.
Other gardeners will be taking rose, carnation, or
chrysanthemum cuttings, or planting them out by hundreds;
and others, again, transplanting seedlings, sowing seeds, or
weeding; or perhaps cutting, with the faithful patjoel, channels
to lead water from a stream running through the garden, to
irrigate one or other of the flower crops.
To a British visitor accustomed to measure the work that
can be accomplished in a garden in terms of one pair of hands,
all this seems like a miracle. The plans that have matured
in the minds of Mijnheer and Mevrouw during the night
watches are translated into fact with no more labour, to them,
than that of directing it. Cool and clear come the instructions,
gently uttered, in fluent Javanese; and Soemo and Kardjo
and Matradji and the rest, who know their work, and know
that those in command do so too, buckle-to with a will; and
1 The Provencal peasant, working in his stony soil, uses a two- or three-
pronged fork set at exactly the same curious angle.


in a few minutes, by magic as it seems, a big perfectly sym-
metrical bed has been prepared, banked up, holes punched
at measured intervals, and a couple of hundred cuttings set
out and already looking quite at home. “Ach ja! says
Mevrouw with a smile. “When you garden here in Java,
you use your own brains and other people’s hands and muscles.
It is much better so, nietwaarV'
It certainly is. And it is not only abundance of labour, but
of labour that is both willing and efficient, that makes garden-
ing in Java so doubly pleasant. There are no glum looks,
no grumbles, and no arguments. The Javanese is a born
cultivator, and as a rule he is as eager to carry out instructions
as his employer is to give them.
You need not wait here, as in England, to transplant roses
or other shrubs at the “proper time’’ in spring or autumn.
Any time is proper in Java. If you should decide that a rose
bush would look more effective in some other part of the
garden than in its present place, you have only to call one of
the gardeners, give instructions, and the thing is done. That
perfect tool the -patjoel releases the roots without damaging
them, and prepares their new bed. The good earth makes
them welcome; and though the young shoots may wilt
for a few days, in a week, at most, the tree is perfectly
settled down and goes on flowering as though nothing had
happened.
A section of the garden devoted to the cultivation of large
specimen chrysanthemums, such as we grow in glasshouses,
is typical of the patient devoted labour so willingly given by
the Javanese gardener. Every plant, with its one perfect
bloom, is shaded by a small conical hat made of split bamboo,
held over it like an umbrella on a stick stuck in the ground;
and the effect at a distance is exactly as though rows of men
were standing stiffly at attention between the plants.
Early every morning the important business of picking the
flowers for market is done by native women; and a pretty
sight it is to see them in their brightly coloured sarongs , for
once in a way kilted to the knee, for the ground is often wet,
from irrigation in the dry monsoon or heavy showers in the
wet one. They move, always stooping, between the rows of
plants, picking or cutting with mechanical speed and skill,


and a complete lack of sentiment; they always carry the
flowers head downwards!
Prettiest of all is to see one of them returning from some
distant part of the estate carrying on her head, like a huge
deflowered hat, the carnations and asters and sweetpeas she
has picked, piled up on a round bamboo tray a yard across.
The slim upright little figure in its gay red, green, and yellow
sarong , and maroon hadjoe , and serious young brown face
shaded by the wide flower laden tray, is one that artists might
search the world for in vain, as she tops a little rise, and pauses
for a moment silhouetted against the vague blue of the distant
mountains, and then sways easily down the grass path between
the squares of red and pink roses and flaring belts of zinnias,
with one hand, on which a couple of pale gold rings gleam
softly, raised in an unconsciously classic pose to steady the
lovely burden on her head. Unsmiling, and apparently deep
in thought, she passes from the bright sunshine into the
luminous shade of the mimosas and out again, to disappear
at last under the pommelo trees laden with their great golden
globes, in the direction of the packing-sheds.
Carefully separated into bunches of different sorts and
colours, the flowers are put in to be watered in bamboo section
pots, in the big, cool “godown,” where they stand in battalions,
making lovely dim, vague blots of colour in the sweet scented
half darkness until the time comes to pack them for transport
to town.
The baskets, if they can be so called, in which they are sent
to market are bucket shaped and about the size of an ordinary
wine cask. They are mere skeletons made of strips of split
bamboo about six inches apart, but wonderfully strong and per-
fectly rigid. A huge pile of them appears every day or so at the
entrance of the “godown,” moving apparently of its own voli-
tion, so entirely hidden beneath them is the old man who makes
and delivers them, for one penny each! They are lined with
banana leaf, and the flower bunches tied one by one all round
inside, so that the effect of the finished package before the lid
is put on is that of a giant bouquet with a space in the middle.
Finally they are sprayed; the round top, also lined with banana
leaf, is tied on, and the big baskets stand in a row in the
shade to await the special motor lorry that calls for them daily.


Man cannot live by flowers alone in Java nowadays, and
other crops have to be pressed into the service if a kweekerij is
to pay its way. Fortunately the mountain climate so favour-
able for flowers is equally well suited to all kinds of vegetables,
for which there is an immense demand; but here again the
story of the flower industry has to a great extent been repeated,
and prices have fallen too low to bring much profit. And
when you drive through one of the fertile mountain districts
and see the huge piles of magnificent cabbages from native
gardens awaiting the transport lorry at close intervals along
the roadside you can only marvel that there can possibly be
enough people in Java to buy and eat them, or that they bring
in even the low prices that they do.
And what would the London housewife say if she could buy
lovely asparagus, fresh picked from the garden, for threepence
or fourpence per lb ?
The vegetables are packed in another shed or “godown,”
in stouter baskets, varying in price from two to five cents
according to size. Like the flower baskets, they are made of
the white inner layer of the bamboo, with one strip of the
dark green koelit (the skin, or outside layer), not, as might be
supposed, for decoration, but for strength. Many people in
the towns place orders with the mountain growers for regular
supplies of vegetables two or three times per week; and very
attractive these baskets look, with their assortments of firm
fresh cabbage and lettuce, carrots, silver beet, asparagus, etc.,
with always, in season, a dozen or two of the rich dark green
oranges in insatiable demand for the making of cool drinks.
The skin of these oranges never turns yellow, but remains a
rich dark green when the fruit is sweet and ripe.
While the packing is going on, the two great pale buff oxen
who will presently draw the huge creaking grobak with its
load of vegetables down the long steep winding mountain
road to the railway, twenty miles away, lie dozing in the shade
of their bilik shed near by, lazily chewing maize husks and
leaves, until the baskets are loaded, the big gentle beasts
yoked, and they set off with softly clanking bells on their slow
all night journey; a cheap and admirable mode of transport
when speed is not the essence of the contract, as in the case of
flowers.


Oranges are grown successfully anywhere in the Java high-
lands, but they thrive best in the centre and east of the island
where the dry season is more marked. On the rich plateaux
of Batoe and Poedjon, above Malang, they have found their
ideal climate, and not only are there tflany European planta-
tions of them in this region, usually in conjunction with
flowers and other crops, but few native gardens are without a
few trees. The prime favourite is the delicious djeroek manis ,
a very sweet, juicy variety; and though great quantities of
these are grown on the kweekerij , the demand for them in the
towns is so great that the natives are encouraged to bring
the crops from their trees to supplement the supply, so that the
orders for them may be fulfilled. As with their flowers, the
local Javanese are delighted to sell on the spot and save them-
selves the long trip on foot down the mountain; so at all
hours of the day in the orange season there are pretty sure
to be one or two picturesque figures squatting contentedly
between their twin loads beside the verandah, smoking their
tiny cigarettes and chatting in low voices, until such time as
Mevrouw shall appear and offer them, as is most probable
if their fruit is sound, the ruling price of FI. 1.25 to FI. 1.75
per 100, according to size, for djeroek manis , and FI. 1 per
100 for so called “sour” oranges, which are also very juicy
and make very refreshing drinks. (The Dutch Florin or
Guilder—the names are used interchangeably—is worth, at
par, u. Bd. sterling.)
The enormous pommelo, known as djeroek Bali , is also a
favourite in native gardens, though the demand for the fruit
is not great and they make little profit from them. The fruit
is, however, a useful contribution to the native commissariat,
and it is for this reason that the pommelo tree is to be seen
here and there among the trees that line the roads, according
to the admirable custom throughout the island, on these high
plateaux. During the last century, when the Dutch were
still engaged in opening up the country and making roads
farther and farther into the hinterlands, the Government
adopted the excellent plan of planting at intervals along those
roads trees that would bear fruit to feed the ever plodding
natives who would travel along them to carry their produce
to market. The pommelo and the nangka were among the


trees chosen for this purpose at the elevations that suited them,
and although nowadays there are kampongs and waroengs
(small shops) and itinerant food vendors everywhere along the
highroads to cater for travelling natives, and the food bearing
trees are no longer needed for their original purpose, many
still remain among the ranks of shade trees as evidence of a
practical and kindly consideration that is rare indeed in
Government departments.
This djeroek Bali is truly magnificent, and makes the finest
of oranges look like a poor relation. The tree grows to a
height well above the roof of an ordinary house, and the sight
of one laden with bunches of the huge golden- balls, bigger
than a child’s head, often six or seven in a bunch, from the
topmost branch down almost to the ground, interspersed with
great clusters of outsize blossom, is a thing never to be
forgotten. Like all the citrous family of trees in this generous
climate, the pommelo is in bloom almost all the year round,
and the scent of its wonderful flower, like orange-blossom
many times magnified, fills the air even when the crop is
ripening; and the fat creamy buds and thick petalled blossoms
fall on the grass at your feet as you reach up to gather the giant
fruit.
The djeroek kaprok , a sort of mandarin, is widely grown as a
“side line” or for decoration in European and native gardens.
This fruit finds a ready sale in Java as elsewhere. Another
small variety no bigger than a mandarin but with the tight
skin of the true orange, variously named, but generally called
by the Javanese djeroek samhalan , being used chiefly, like
lemon, as a relish, is extraordinarily prolific, and on the
kweekerij was found to be an excellent substitute for the
Seville orange for marmalade making. The tree, planted
for shade and ornament, is a lovely sight indeed in the fruit
season, for it bears so heavily that it is almost covered with
small golden balls, and in the distance looks as though laden
with masses of yellow flowers. And there was surely never
marmalade made under such pleasant conditions as when we
picked the ripe fruit which fell, too, in thousands and carpeted
the ground for yards around, washed them in a handy stream,
and cut them up, sitting amid the scent and under the shade
of the tree that bore them; stirring them later over a little


earthenware anglo , while a Javanese girl, squatted on her heels,
gently fanned the charcoal to a glow. %
Other so called choice varieties of orange, such as the
Valencia and Washington navel, are grown in many planta-
tions and are in great demand. These, however, have not
so good a flavour as those grown in dryer climates and in
latitudes where a cold winter allows the tree to rest.
An interesting method of increasing the vitality of trees,
rather on the monkey gland principle, is much practised by
Java orange growers. The tops of three or four well rooted
seedlings of sturdy “rough orange” or lemon stock are
planted close round the tree it is desired to tonic, and the tops
of the seedlings grafted into its trunk. The effect is some-
what that of living “flying buttresses.” The tree thus
stimulated quickly draws new life from the strong young
seedlings, and its crop is usually much increased by the very
next season.
A quicker and easier method of getting new trees than by
raising them from seed is common among both European
and native orange growers. A convenient branch is ring-
barked, earth is bound round the gap in palm leaf and kept
damp until the roots are formed. The rooted branch, called
a tjangkokan , is then cut off and planted. Trees started in
this way are usually to be recognised by their rather lopsided
shape.
The coffee grown on the kweekerij is a survival from the
time when the whole of the surrounding country was planted
with this crop by order of the Government; and to-day there
is scarcely a native front garden in the district in which dark
leaved coffee bushes do not rub shoulders with orange trees.
The network of good paths or by-roads, too, which nowadays
are the delight of visitors on mountain holidays, are another
good legacy from those bad old days.
Happily native memories are short, and their records scanty;
and the bitter hatreds of the days of forced coffee culture on
these same peaceful hillsides and plateaux are now long
forgotten.
Arahica coffee, introduced by the Company from Arabia
early in the seventeenth century, was carried on as a forced
culture by them and by the Government that succeeded them


until early in the twentieth century. According to records
45 million trees were planted by Daendel’s orders. Raffles
made the culture free during his short interregnum; and when
the Dutch resumed control it remained nominally so, but the
plantations were hired out to the dessas , whose populations
had to pay for them at the rate of half, or sometimes one third,
of the crop. In practice this meant that the unfortunate
natives worked for nothing, as they had no means of selling
the balance of the crop, and so simply turned it over with the
rest to their taskmasters. In 1830 the notorious De Bosch
tightened the screw still further, and all coffee grown had to
be sold to the Government at the latter’s own price, after two
fifths had been taken off for rent and transport. Whole
dessa populations were called up willy-nilly to work the huge
plantations, no matter how far away they might be from their
homes. News of the oppression filtered through to Holland
and aroused a wave of indignation at what was described as
the virtual slavery of the natives. After this the scheme was
modified by degrees, until by 1872 most of the plantations
had been broken up into small gardens of 5 0 or 100 trees
round about the native kampongs.
Early in the twentieth century the dreaded “Coffee disease”
which had appeared previously in Ceylon attacked the crops.
It was a kind of mildew which formed in orange coloured
spots on the undersides of the leaves of coffee and other
members of the rubiace<e family of plants. It ravaged and
almost entirely wiped out the arahica coffee plantations of
Java; and incidentally was the cause of the very great increase
in the cultivation of tea, which was planted in its place.
When at last coffee growing was resumed many years later
by private planters, it was the sturdy, big leaved robusta from
the Congo that they selected. And it is this, with its white
starry blossom growing in thick double rows along the stem,
half hidden by the glossy dark leaves, that is nowadays mostly
to be seen. But here and there you will see a bush of arabica ,
easily recognisable by its much smaller leaves and general
slenderness; and now that the disease has disappeared,
arabica is being grafted on robusta stock and planted once
more. Very misleadingly, arabica is always called “Java
coffee” by the Dutch planters.


A grey wild cat, common in mountain districts, and called
the loewak , is a scourge to coffee growers; for not only is it,
like all its kind, a robber of hen roosts, but has an insatiable
predilection for the sweet, reddish ripe coffee berries, which
it strips off the branches and swallows in dozens. The
brute’s taste is unerring, and it may be relied upon to choose
the very best. But things are seldom so bad that they might
not be worse; the twin seeds of the coffee berry are too hard
to dissolve, and pass unscathed through the animal’s digestive
system. They are carefully collected by the native coolies,
roasted and ground in the ordinary way, and called “loewak
coffee”! According to many people, both native and
European, such coffee has a more delicious fragrance than
any other.
The loewak's lair, or the hide out whence it makes its
nightly raids, will often announce itself unmistakably from a
patch of thick cover on a mountain walk, with a whiff of
pungent, horrible wild-beast smell that transports you in a
moment, in imagination, to the lions’ house at the Zoo. But
the loewak itself is never to be seen in the daytime.
Worn-out coffee bushes serve a last useful purpose as
charcoal—the staple cooking fuel of the native population.
When the great Government plantations were ordered to be
grubbed up, charcoal burners were everywhere encouraged,
in order to use up the wood and clear the land. But nowadays,
the industry being a lucrative one, natives who carry it on may
not do so without a Government licence, and in some places
are obliged to sell only to Government depots.
The favourite wood for the purpose is tamarind. But on
the kweekerij , for a time at least, our charcoal was home
grown; a plantation of old coffee bushes having been con-
demned and dug up, a native charcoal burner was sent for
from his home in the forest, and we were able to watch the
process from start to finish on the premises.
The old man and his assistants first dug a shallow hole
some eight or ten feet square, in which a fire was laid ready
for lighting. Over this they built a strong platform of green
wood, covered with several layers of fresh green banana leaves,
and on them were piled the coffee roots and chopped up
bushes destined to be turned into charcoal. Then, over a


bamboo framework, they constructed a sort of hut made of
clods of grass and mud, leaving an opening as a chimney for
the smoke. The fire was then lighted, and kept smouldering
for three or four days. At the end of that time the queer
edifice was dismantled, and the charcoal laboriously picked out
bit by bit from the pit, where the men and their wives, who
by this time had joined the party, squatted chatting or
singing softly in the midst of a charred, sodden mass made up
of charcoal, damp brown leaves and branches, and muddy
clods. They were paid by results: at the rate of thirty cents
per pikoel , one pikoel filling two big baskets.
Charcoal is a very important item indeed in the domestic
economy of life in Java. Not only do all native-women cook
with it, but it is used in the kitchens of all, or nearly all,
European country households. At first sight it would seem
impossible that any but the simplest sort of cooking could be
done on the queer little bucket shaped anglo, with its ridicu-
lously tiny charcoal fire kept glowing by fanning at intervals
with a small split bamboo fan, sold for a farthing in an y pasar.
But the most elaborate meals, including the myriad dishes of a
complete nasi , or rijsttafel , are cooked as a matter of course
on two or three of the primitive little stoves standing in a row
on a concrete slab. Even baked dishes present no difficulty,
for charcoal piled on the top of an iron pot on the fire produces
exactly the same results as an oven, in the hands of a good
native cook.
None of the inconveniences usually associated with house-
keeping in remote country places trouble the mistress of a
Java kweekerij or plantation. For not only are supplies of
all kinds brought to the door without even the trouble of
ordering them, or if by chance they are not, a native servant
can always be sent to the pasar or the nearest kampong , but her
domestic staff can be increased at a moment’s notice to meet
any emergency.
Friends perhaps turn up unexpectedly, and she invites them
to stay for the week end, but no domestic upheaval follows the
invitation. She confers with her cook; and presently, as
though by magic, there will appear a smart djongos (house-boy)
in clean starched white jacket and neat batik sarong and head-
dress, accompanied, perhaps, by a demure little haboe (maid-


servant). Within a few minutes they will have joined forces
with the other servants, and everything is working as smoothly
as though they had been part of the regular domestic staff
for years. Yet in all probability they are just ordinary dessa
folk, relations, very likely, of the servants regularly employed,
whom you would see at any other time, if you happened to
pass their homes, busy with their own simple affairs. The
spick-and-span djongos who waited so deftly on your guests on
Saturday and Sunday will probably be found in his garden on
Monday, splitting bamboo or planting maize, or breaking up
land with a clad only in a pair of black shorts; and the
bahoe may be winnowing rice or weeding in the fields.
Why there should be this unfailing supply of quite reason-
ably efficient house servants among the inhabitants of so many
country dessas is a mystery. Asked where they learned
housework, they will often reply that at some time or other
they have “followed” a white master as a personal servant;
or they may have picked up what they know of European
domestic ways from parents who have been called in as extra
kitchen hands at holiday times in mountain hotels. But
whatever the reason, there they are: so many degrees higher
in cleanliness and efficiency than the average European
“daily” as not to come into the same category at all.
Insect pests are not nearly so bad in Java as many people
seem to imagine. There is none, for instance, to compare
with that horror the English earwig, with its uncanny faculty
of materialising out of thin air, and vanishing when you
attempt to kill it, to reappear crawling on your sleeve or your
neck or in your hair. It is only in England’s so called summer
that you find this vile insect in your sponge, on your bath
towel, emerging with an obscene leer from the binding of
every book you take from your shelves, under your pillow,
and in the tea cosy, dropping from your toothbrush, or even
committing suicide in the mustard!
But though this scourge has no counterpart in Java there
is one that is cursed high and low by housewife and cultivator
alike, and that is the ant. Not the destructive white ant, with
its occasional visitations in its winged stage as the laron at the
beginning of the wet monsoon; nor even the smaller flying
varieties, though they are bad enough; but those innocent


A CLOSE-UP OF THE BRIDEGROOM AND HIS STEED, WITH THEIR
ATTENDANTS.
EUROPEAN CHILDREN CARRIED UP A STEEP MOUNTAIN ROAD TO SCHOOL
IN NATIVE SEDAN-CHAIRS OR TAJVDOES.


SUNSET ON THE LAKE SARANGAN.
A MOUNTAIN PATHWAY
THE EVER-USEFUL PETROL-TIN.
WATER SUPPLIES BEING FETCHED FROM A
STREAM FOR A NATIVE GARDEN.


looking little hypocrites, the tiny black and brown ants that
appear from nowhere if sugar, fruit, or anything else to their
taste is left on the table.
Indoors they are a pest, but out of doors they are a menace.
To the planter they are dangerous and insidious enemies.
Swarming up the trunks of sturdy orange or other fruit trees
in countless hordes, they eat every young shoot, covering
whole branches with a black sticky mass composed of millions
of their bodies, and reduce the trees to impotence. Against
copper sulphate, however, they are powerless, and repeated
sprayings of a strong solution will eventually vanquish them.
But an attack on them is not an easy or a pleasant job, for they
fall like rain on to anyone standing below the branches, and
make fierce counter forays into his hair and ears and under
his clothing, biting venomously as they go.
There is a kweekerij of a special kind at Nagrok, in the
Preanger, where orchids are cultivated on the grand scale.
They are propagated by seed in culture tubes on a chemical
glucose mixture: a process taking several months, though it
is possible to see within two or three days whether the seed
is germinating. The fairylike seedlings are transferred to
pear shaped bulbs like electric lamps for a further two months
or so, and then to a tiny pot. Most orchids take three years
to attain maturity and to flower, so the business is one of
infinite patience. This Dutch specialist has some hundreds
of new hybrids to his credit, and does business with all parts
of the world. The orchid houses at this nursery are ingeni-
ously designed to reproduce natural conditions. Some are in
shade houses with soft constantly dug earth floors, copiously
watered to give off a damp heat like that of forest undergrowth.
Tree growers, on the other hand, are provided with branches
high above the ground in open, cool, wire-netted houses
roofed with tiles, where the breezes are as refreshing as in the
tree tops.
Prices for these pampered gems of tropical beauty are very
high, and the profits from a nursery of this kind far greater
than those of an ordinary kweekerij.
The running water supply of Java country homes, as
described in an earlier chapter, is usually assured without diffi-
culty from natural sources. But it must be confessed that the


British visitor or resident accustomed to the staid conservatism
of streams at home may be apt to get some odd surprises. In
England, it is a thousand to one that a brook remembered
from childhood will still be trickling along in the same place
if you should revisit it half a lifetime later. But here in Java
the handling of water is so much a commonplace that a stream
which is here to-day is just as likely to be gone to-morrow.
You may perhaps have leased a house and land that possessed
among its attractions a stream that bustled merrily through
the garden, not only adding immeasurably to its charm, but
also playing the beneficent part of rubbish remover, and even,
as is often the case, of sewerage system.
The horror of the householder may be imagined when one
morning in the dry monsoon he awakens to an unwonted
silence to find the pleasant music of laughing water that had
lulled him to sleep no longer agreeably assailing his ears.
When this happens there is nothing to be done except possess
the soul in patience. Water, in this intricately irrigated land,
serves nobler purposes than mere hygiene. Your stream
has been diverted to play its necessary part in watering the
crops elsewhere in the dessa , and will return to you when its
more urgent work for the general community is done.
It is not only flowers and fruit that give colour to country
life in Java. Contrary to what seems to be the general belief,
Java is rich in bird life; especially on the rich plateaux far
above sea level. In these regions the chorus of bird song is
gayer than that of an English spring, and many of the birds
wear plumage as brilliant as their voices. King of them all
is the gorgeous kepodang (oriolus indicus ), brighter in colour
than any canary, and big as a missel thrush, with glossy black
head and wing markings. And when he flashes like a sun-
beam across the carpet of colour in a mountain flower garden,
to perch in a pommelo tree loaded with great golden fruit, or
among the dark foliage of a “mountain tulip,” near one of its
flaming scarlet blossoms, he looks like a flower that has been
miraculously endowed with wings. His rich mellow un-
mistakable call of “wieliwaal,” by which name the Dutch call
him, usually brings his mate to perch on a neighbouring tree;
but never in the same one, a rule so invariable as to arouse
the suspicion that the kepodang s character is less beautiful


than his appearance, and that his spouse prefers him at a
discreet distance!
Parrots also contribute much to the colour of the mountain
country scene. They are vivid green with pinkish orange
breasts and, like their Australian cousins, they take the air in
large companies. Like them, too, their beauty, from the
gardener’s point of view, is only feather deep, for they are
most destructive and extremely greedy. But all the same,
much must be forgiven them in return for the lovely
gleaming pattern that they paint as a big flight of them rises
and wheels in a gleaming shaft of emerald across the field that
they have just ravished.
Less decorative, but far more companionable, is the djalak ,
another link with the bird life of Australia, where he is familiar
to all bush dwellers by the inappropriate name of “soldier-
bird.” Happily a bird by any other name whistles just as
sweetly, and his cheery, encouraging note is as pleasant to the
ear in one country as in the other. The Java djalak however
has an immense advantage over his Australian relations in
numbers, owing to the much greater abundance of food he
finds in the rich, cultivated volcanic soil. He is as tame and
friendly when you work in your garden in Java as the robin
is in England; and for this reason the Dutch call him
“makker,” meaning comrade or mate.
Another very common bird is the gelatik , known to most
English people as the Java sparrow, or rice sparrow. He is
a most charming little fellow in appearance, with his red beak
and smart white wing facings, but he is a greedy pest, and by
no means beloved of farmers or gardeners. These little
birds gather in flocks like the common sparrow and are just
as impudent and easily tamed. Given the slightest encourage-
ment in the way of scattered grain, a colony of them will only
too willingly adopt your garden as their own, selecting some
special tree as their roosting place, to the delight of that
shrewd tactician the family cat, who soon learns that his supper
awaits him nightly among the packed ranks of sleepy birds
in the branches, without the trouble of hunting for it. A
fluttering, and a few startled twitters announce the tiny
tragedy, whose regular recurrence fails entirely to teach these
perky but silly little birds the elements of wisdom.


An occasional visitor to mountain gardens is a hosch-hahn ,
one of the wild brown jungle fowl with which the forests
abound. They might easily be mistaken for our domestic
bantam, of which they are probably the prototype. It is
always startling to hear one of these little cocks crowing in
the depths of the forest; and still more so to see so domestic
looking a bird rise and disappear high on the wing among the
great branches overhead.
The great white rice bird, which the Javanese call tjanga
odor, a member of the heron family, will sometimes honour
a mountain garden by coming to roost in a pommelo tree for the
night. He is a welcome guest as well as a beautiful one,
for his sharp eyes seldom miss a snake, especially the slender
black and cream banded variety that sometimes finds its way
in from the maize fields: a titbit of which he is very fond.
At the other end of the scale in size are the tiny honey-
eaters, of which Java has many varieties. One of the most
charming of these birds is pale delicate grey green in colour,
so that when a flight of the fragile little creatures settle, as
they will, amid the feathery foliage of a mimosa tree after rain,
they would be perfectly invisible if it were not for their quick
nervous movements. Another kind is black and scarlet;
and when a flock of these settles on a tree in your garden, the
effect is as though it had burst miraculously into flower.
These dainty birds are so tiny, and some of Java’s wealth of
butterflies and moths are so large, that it is often difficult to
be sure which it is, as these exquisite fragments of living
colour flit to and fro among the flowers. The butterflies of
the East Indies are world famous, and Java has its full share.
Their colour and brilliance are as astonishing as their size;
and so is their capacity for flight. They will fly out to a ship
lying far off the shore, flutter all round as though making
observations, and then return to land without having made
the least attempt to settle. The smaller butterflies are often
to be seen in great numbers on the banks of streams in
sheltered mountain places, half hidden among the grass like
flowers, or rising as you approach, in clouds of sky blue,
white, or yellow. And you may often see a single specimen,
enjoying the sunshine with outspread wings on a warm
smooth stone in the middle of a mountain pathway, a quivering


jewel of electric blue or green set in an intricate pattern of
velvety black.
The only drawback to this wealth of lovely butterflies, from
the kweekerij point of view, is the inevitable corresponding
abundance of caterpillars which do an immense amount of
damage to flower and vegetable crops.
Dragonflies, “glasmakers” as the Dutch call them, of all
sorts and sizes, are to be seen in thousands, especially in the
high plateaux towards the end of the East Monsoon, adding
yet more brilliance to the scene with their sudden gleaming
flashes of blue, red, or gold. And at night, as in all tropic
countries, fireflies are everywhere.
In spite of all this wealth of lovely living flying things with
which nature has filled the air about and above them, it would
seem that the Javanese are still not satisfied, and must needs
make more contributions of their own. So it is that as a final
touch you will often see what appear to be super giant butter-
flies moving rather jerkily high in the breeze against the blue
mountain background; they are the gay coloured paper kites
that are the pride of the highland villagers, made and often
flown with as much enthusiasm by grandfathers and fathers
of families as by their young sons.


C H <A T T E \ SIXTEEN,
The Great Post Road
THE “Great Post Road” of Java, which runs up hill
and down dale for a thousand kilometres from Anjer
on the coast of Bantam, the extreme westerly point of
the island, to Panaroekan, a few miles from the coast at the
eastern end, is a legacy to the colony from the ruthless but
efficient Governor Daendels, founder of the beautifully planned
town of Weltevreden. Originally, and for some decades, the
only road by which wheeled traffic could travel, it remains
to-day the backbone of the remarkable road system that has
gradually stretched out to give easy access to every smallest
and most remote hamlet in Java.
The building of this road was an extraordinary achievement.
The conditions in Java when Daendels arrived there in the
early years of the nineteenth century were so bad, in regard
both to the health of the community and its finances, that it is
more than doubtful whether so stupendous an undertaking
would ever have been attempted in the existing conditions
by a governor less determined or more squeamish. Daendels,
however, was hampered by none of the ordinary man s
conscience in regard to human life and suffering. It is true
that his concern to create a healthier town for the people of
Batavia was of immense public benefit. But the end in view
was practical rather than humane.
And so it was with the Great Post Road. In Daendels’s
opinion a main “through” road was necessary in the first place
as a military measure to facilitate troop movements in case of
enemy attack, and in the second to provide speedier transport
for the coffee and other cultures that he was inaugurating on
the grand scale. This decision once arrived at, a road he
must have at all costs; and to carry out his plan he set in motion
all the untrammelled powers at his command, on a scale that
even in the East India Company’s heyday had never been
attempted before.
The fiat went forth. Word was sent to the head men of
all the hundreds of dessas through which the road was to pass,


from one end of Java to the other. A route was worked out,
following, where practicable, the narrow footpaths and rough
cart-tracks that had been used by the people from time
immemorial. For hundreds of miles the way ran through
primeval jungle where the giant tree trunks of colossal girth
rose from dense forests of lesser growth, all woven together
by vines and creepers into an impenetrable tangle that defied
the puny efforts of man to violate it. Breathless, steamy, full
of mysterious sounds and the hum of myriads of insects, the
haunt of tiger and panther, the rich earth with its lush wet
grass alive with leeches, a forbidding scene indeed as the
setting of a main road! And as though all this were not
enough in itself when on the level, there were innumerable
mountain ranges to be negotiated, so that to the already
almost insurmountable difficulties of cutting a way through
the forests was added that of doing so amid a labyrinth of
steep and often precipitous slopes, and of finding passes
where none was to be seen.
Of rivers too there were plenty to be crossed. But these,
rapid and rock-filled, and in some cases liable to flood, as they
are, for the most part are neither wide nor very deep, and by
comparison presented only minor difficulties.
At all events the apparently impossible was tackled.
European overseers were sent to various points along the
route that had been approximately worked out. The man
power of every district, with its oxen and buffaloes, was
mustered, and set to work: felling jungle giants against
whose massive boles their puny axes seemed no more than
importunate flies, yet crashed to their doom at last; chopping
and cutting and crashing their way through the bewildering
undergrowth, their straining limbs covered with leeches;
digging and dragging with the combined strength of scores
of men to remove rocks and huge stones; collapsing from
exhaustion and fever and dying like flies, their tired-out
bodies pushed aside with no more thought than those of the
leeches they themselves had crushed by dozens. A terrible
price it was in flesh and blood and human misery that had to
be paid for the Great Post Road. Seldom in the annals of
road building, even in the East, can the ancient convention of
human sacrifice have been better obeyed, or human bodies


more lavishly buried among the foundations of any building
enterprise, than under this lovely motor highway that is
nowadays the delight of every traveller in Java.
The road was actually completed for traffic in about a year;
nothing less than a miracle of achievement in such country.
And now for the first time Java was to begin to take on the
complexion of one big Dutch colony instead of a collection
of colonies as distinct almost as those scattered throughout
the farther islands, for hitherto the only practical means of
communication had been by sea.
A journey overland from east to west, or vice versa (if any-
one should be rash enough to attempt it), in the days before
1808 was estimated to take about six weeks, not, of course,
allowing for the breakdowns and washaways that might delay
the traveller still more. But on Daendels’s Great Post Road
it was possible to travel from one end of Java to the other in
six days.
Daendels wasted no time in establishing communications.
The road was no sooner through as far as Buitenzorg, about
forty miles from Batavia, than a horse post was started,
described as “from Batavia along the Great Road to Buiten-
zorg and more distant places,” the service being extended to
those places as the road reached them. The road had been
started in 1808, and by 1809 a post and passenger service was
already running regularly between Batavia and Soerabaya.
The fare from Batavia to Buitenzorg by post coach was five
rex dollars per passenger, or a special private coach for four
passengers might be hired for eighteen rex dollars (1 rex =
4 5. 2dt). There were five stages at which horses, or rather
ponies, had to be changed on this forty mile section, which
gives an indication of what the road surface must have been
like, for this part of the route is not mountainous.
When the post service was started, Daendels issued orders
to the native regents of the districts all along the route to
supply relays of ponies and to erect bilik shelters at given
points. The coaches set off twice a week from both ends .of
the route, drawn by four or six horses according to the steep-
ness of the stage, from each of which also two extra horses
were always sent on ahead of the coach in case of accidents,
which appear to have been numerous.


On the route between Batavia and Soerabaya there were
twelve principal stopping places with good inns where
passengers could put up for the night if they so desired.
Each of these inns had six or eight bedrooms, stables, and
outhouses. The charge per day, which included “two good
hot meals, morning tea or coffee, breakfast, and afternoon tea
or coffee,” was FI. 2.55. So that in those days, as in ours,
Dutch hotels evidently offered generous hospitality at a
modest charge. These inns were obliged by the terms of
their licence to keep available for hire two post chaises for six
persons with the necessary ponies, and two riding ponies for
any persons who did not wish to use the regular coach.
There were at many other less important places along the
route, rest houses or pasang-grahans: probably very much the
same as those in remote places to-day. At these the traveller
could always get a bed and a meal of some sort.
A seat in a long distance post coach cost the passenger
5 stuivers (a stuiver = about one penny) silver per paal (1500
metres: roughly one mile); and a span of four ponies for a
private chaise, 16 stuivers per paal. A good riding pony,
called koeda aloes , cost the hirer half a silver florin or guilder
per three paal\ but a pony good enough for a native servant
to ride (a koeda gladag 1 ) might be had for no more than
\\ stuivers per three paal\ and it is only too easy to imagine
the pitiful walking skeleton it would probably be.
Travel by the post coaches must have been most select,
and “naice” passengers ran little risk of making undesirable
acquaintances. For, according to the old regulations, “no
vile or mean person” was allowed to ride in them, and it was
emphasised that “passengers must be of a certain style,
quality, and good condition.” It is sincerely to be hoped
that the passengers were always able to live up to the desired
standard; but the doubt is apt to intrude itself as to whether
a perfectly ladylike or gentlemanly “style” may not have fallen
off a trifle when the coach was bogged, or even perhaps capsized,
and its occupants were obliged to turn out in the mud and
drenching downpour of one of Java’s terrific mountain storms.
1 Gladag is the place outside the north gate of a Kraton (the royal palace)
where a Java sultan’s transport ponies, carts, and coolies must always be in
waiting. Hence koeda gladag means an ordinary service pony.


It was half a century before the Javanese people themselves
were allowed to use the road that their fathers had died in
thousands to build. The Great Post Road was known to
them as the “Herenweg” (the road of lords and gentlemen)
whose sacred surface might not be profaned by the clumsy
native grobaks. These they had to drive as best they could
through mud and stones and rivers on rough tracks following
as nearly as might be the course of the Great Post Road, so
that this lordly thoroughfare might not be damaged by their
weight. It was not until 1857 that the main roads, until
then reserved for Europeans and for the post services, were
opened to native traffic, and the making of supplementary
rough tracks for this was discontinued.
The vehicles in use as coaches and post chaises were
modelled more or less on the lines of those in Europe at the
time, but there were many others peculiar to Java itself. The
light two wheeled pony-carriage known as a sado , rather
resembling what used in England to be called a governess
cart, but with the addition of a top to shade it from the sun,
the most generally used passenger vehicle in Java, appears
to have been a native design; but its name is a corruption of
“dos-a-dos” (back-to-back) and dates from the period of
French domination just before the English conquest. The
name is firmly established in West Java; but farther East
the little carriage is called a dokkert , possibly from the English
dogcart.
A hundred years ago you could not only hire a “dos-a-dos”
or a post chaise, but a high two wheeled carriage drawn by a
trotting bullock, like those still used in parts of India to-day.
They were doubtless introduced to Java by Indian immigrants,
and were called in Java plankin-sapi.
The most conservative places in Java are the two remaining
Sultanates, and here, especially in the royal towns of Soerakarta
and Djokdjakarta, a type of vehicle long extinct elsewhere is
still in use. This is the andong , a large four wheeled pony
chaise with a flat canopy and a box for the driver, who wears
a uniform consisting of a black sailor jacket with white braided
collar and cuffs, white trousers, and batik headdress. These
jehus flourish long whips plaited round with coloured cord:
often to be seen in the making under the shady trees bordering


the streets. With these an endless tattoo is kept up on the
shaggy hides of pairs of miserable ponies that are a disgrace
to the Sultanates and all others concerned. The andongs
entirely replace the sado in the two royal capitals. Another
vehicle peculiar to these parts is a sort of barouche drawn by
fat white ponies and driven by men wearing the uniform and
odd tapering top hat of the Kraton. These carriages are used
by inmates of the Kraton only.
Another relic of old time transport, but of a later date,
is the kossong. It is what in England used to be known as
a “Victoria,” and was fashionable among Dutch as well as
English ladies when they took the air in pre-motor days.
In Java its name, which means “empty,” is a survival of the
times when these vehicles plied for hire as cabs in the streets
of all the towns, and the drivers, ever on the hunt for fares,
as their successors the native taxi drivers are to-day, used to
shout “ kossong! kossong /” as they gaily cracked their whips
and raced their smart pairs of ponies at a gallop to secure a
likely passenger. Nowadays a few still jog sadly about the
streets of Soerabaya, but all pretensions to smartness have
long since departed. They have arrived at the last stages of
shabbiness and are drawn by the poorest of ponies; regarded
by natives as many degrees lower in the transport scale than
the übiquitous sado , the kossongs are hired only by those who are
too poor to pay even the few cents fare asked by sado drivers.
Here is one glimpse we get of European travel in Java in
the days before the Great Post Road was thought of. In
1747 there had been a very serious epidemic of fever in
Batavia, where health conditions at that time were fast
deteriorating. The town records state that in consequence
of this, many sick persons were carried at their own cost from
Batavia to the Tjipanas hot springs by buffalo cart. For their
convenience a number of halts were established at which food
was obtainable at fixed prices, and a change of draught animals
was kept. The price of a buffalo cart from one of these halts
to the next was five-eighths of a rex dollar (about half a crown).
The interest of this lies in the fact that nowadays a run up to
the Tjipanas bathing pool for a swim in the morning, or
between tea and dinner, is a popular diversion with the
motoring public of Batavia.


For a time the Great Post Road remained the only highway
in Java on which it was possible to travel in comfort, and all
points not served by it could only be reached by means differ-
ing little frpm those in vogue a century earlier. But Daendels’s
example had not been lost on the rest of the white population,
either in the matter of road making or in the means to get them
made. The revolutionary change in the conditions of life
in the colony brought about by the post road had opened their
eyes to limitless possibilities, and once the English inter-
regnum was over, “herendienst” (forced labour) was revived
in full force, and an orgy of road making set in all over the
country. Not only were roads cut through from town to
town, but to serve the interests of private individuals and make
their particular way, to wheresoever their business or pleasure
might take them, as easy and pleasant as possible. So notorious
did this become that in 1835 the Government issued a decree
that no more new roads might be made, or old paths or byways
widened, without the consent in writing of the Governor-
General. It is to this earlier virtually unrestricted use of free
labour that Java owes to-day much of its extraordinary wealth
of roads and byroads.
The perfection of these roads, and especially their banked
curves in mountainous regions, makes them a pattern to other
lands. The volume of motor traffic on them outside the towns
is not great, and motoring in Java is still the joy it was in
England years ago, before it degenerated into mere speeding.
Here in Java you may still drive at your own pace as a means
of enjoying the beauty of the countryside, which was the
primary purpose for which the motor car was invented.
Perfect upkeep involves constant repair, of course; and big
red lettered “wegherstelling” signs are as frequent on your
drives as “Road under Repair” in England. But the scene
is more picturesque; especially when, as so often on the care-
fully graded mountain roads, a theodolite is in use. Then a
wide oiled-paper Chinese umbrella is held over the instrument
and its operator by an underling, and you are apt to think
at first glance that it is some stray sultan taking a walk abroad
that you are overtaking.
The settings of the roads are as well groomed as their
surfaces. The grass banks and verges are so trimly shaven


and shorn that they might be in a private park, but the local
councils have no need, as in England, to employ men to keep
them tidy. Draught animals are too many, and food too
dear, to let any grass go to waste, and everywhere women,'
and children are to be seen busy cutting it with their sharp
curved knives, and filling the twin bamboo baskets through
which the ends of the pikoelan are pushed. More roads than
not are avenues, and often clumps of rich red acalypha make
glorious blots of colour in their shade on the cool green grass.
A new section of road came into being recently following a
volcanic tremor which emptied the lake at Sindanglaya, West
Java, a few years ago, 1 .and provides an interesting example
of Dutch engineering skill. The lake, which lay in a deep
depression between two mountainsides, was bordered at one
end by a road, and this was swept away by the weight of
water as the lake burst its bounds, leaving two clean cut ends
of tarred surface separated by a chasm some 200 feet deep and
several hundred yards wide, broadening out into the empty
basin of the former lake. The day after the occurrence, I
had to make a detour of nearly ten miles to reach the point
opposite; but now the narrow footpath along which amorous
couples used to wander round the dreamy waters in the moon-
light, or stop at the boat house to hire a skiff, has been trans-
formed into a magnificent road, sweeping in a noble curve
round a great gorge veiled in ferns and vegetation which was
once the bed of the lake. The new road slopes easily down
to the former lakehead, there to cross a bridge and curve up
again to meet the farther end of the broken highway. If you
stop your car at the point where the road bears away from its
original route, and walk to the edge of the gorge, you can still
find the broken ragged edge of the old tarred surface showing
through the tangle of growth that has covered it. A stream
meanders gently down the middle of the lake bed, whose sides
are now as thickly clothed in green as though it had been as it
is now since the beginning of time; so closely resembling, too,
countless other such lovely mountain gorges that you are
reminded how often the face of this volcanic land must have
changed in the course of the centuries. A native house and
garden now occupy the space left free between the broken end
1 See Java Pageant.


of the old road and the curve of the new; so a line of brightly-
coloured washing hangs, banana leaves rustle, and naked
brown children play on the grass where once the motor buses
roared along the main road from Bandoeng to Buitenzorg.
In 1870 the first railway was opened, connecting Semarang
and Solo; and thereafter, like the road system, gradually
extended its tentacles to serve all the principal places in Java.
There are about 2000 miles of 3 feet 6 inch gauge track; and
what is more remarkable, as indicating the difficult nature of
the country with which the engineers had to contend, more
than 5000 bridges, many of them spanning deep gorges at
giddy heights, whose length altogether totals over thirty miles.
Strangely enough, there were many modern residents of
Java who knew nothing of the railways except from the
distance, until the “depression” transformed the common-
place convenience of yesterday into too costly luxuries and
suggested, among other economies, the possibility of travelling
by train instead of by car. In Java the price of petrol is more
than doubled by the petrol tax; and when, in the case of
British residents, this was aggravated by the fall of the pound
sterling from its par value of twelve guilders or florins to less
than eight, it was obvious that motoring could no longer be
taken quite so lightheartedly for granted as of old.
But every cloud has its silver lining. And in this case
it was the discovery that even after years of familiarity with
Java its acquaintance yet remained to be made from an entirely
novel point of view. And had it not been for the “daling van
de pond” (fall of the pound: a phrase that soon became hate-
fully familiar) it is probable that the unique panorama to be
seen from the windows of the Java State Railways would have
remained unknown to me for ever.
The names of the “ Eendaagsche” (one day train) and the
Java “ Nachtexpres” (night express) had both become house-
hold words in Java since these much advertised trains de luxe
had replaced the former slow, strictly daylight service. The
latter restriction had been in deference to native engine
drivers’ reluctance to risk offending the spirits that walk in
darkness; for a man maybe a first class mechanic and driver
and yet remain faithful to the beliefs of his forefathers. But
education can achieve wonders; and now, so the posters of


the Staatsspoorwegen proclaimed on all sides, travel on either
the day or night express compared more than favourably with
any in the world.
I was sceptical about the attractions of railway travel in
Java. But needs must when the devil drives. I had survived
long railway journeys in other hot climates, and reflected that
at worst it could hardly be as bad as a summer trip across
Queensland. And so one fresh delicious morning, just as
the eastern sky was changing from silver to primrose, I took
my place in a second class compartment of the famous “ Een-
daagsche,” and saw the sun rise as we ran smoothly through
the sweet scented gardens of the outer suburbs of Batavia.
I soon wasted no more regrets that for the first time I was
not setting out across Java in the car. Far from it. The
long airy compartment with the passageway down its centre
was almost empty, and I had my end of it entirely to myself;
so pleasant was it that a very few minutes served to convert
me to this, to me, new mode of Java travel. I knew the
Great Post Road from end to end, and hundreds of miles of it
and other lovely Java highways and byways were far more
familiar to me than any in England. But it became apparent
at once that the panorama to be seen from this railway carriage
was a revelation to one who had hitherto only travelled the
country at the wheel of a motor car. No longer was I a part
of the tangled pattern of life upon the roads, forced to thread
my way among sadoes , grohaks , bicycles, cars, buses, handcarts,
stray cattle, goats, dogs, fowls, ducks, buffaloes, and foot
passengers, ever watchful to adjust my pace to their vagaries.
All these terrestrial anxieties troubled me no more. I had
removed to another plane, whence, godlike and unassailable,
I could ride at my ease and survey the ever changing scene
as we raced along, high above crowded roads and villages,
houses and gay gardens, and the chequer board of ricefields,
on embankments that seemed to have been designed for no
other purpose than to provide the best of all possible observa-
tion points. The Javanese call an ordinary train kereta api
(fire carriage); but they have aptly amended the name to
kereta api sambong , the proud fire carriage, to describe these
fast trains that disdain to stop at any but the largest stations,
roaring past contemptuously unmindful of the humble human


atoms toiling far below, instead of ambling quietly along like
the ordinary trains, stopping to pick them up and carry them
for a few cents from one wayside halt to the next.
It was harvest time on the rice plains of northwest Java
when I made that first railway journey; and often as I had
watched the scene before, I felt that I was now seeing it
properly for the first time. As the sun rose, it lighted up
scenes of unimaginable colour among the golden rice crops.
We looked down as we passed above hundreds of men, women,
and children, dressed in every conceivable shade of red, blue,
green, pink, yellow, and lilac, streaming in single file along
the narrow earth banks separating the sawahs , on their way to
work; and on hundreds more already busy among the crops,
cutting, as we knew, but of course could not distinguish at
that distance, the heads of grain one by one with the odd little
knife they call ani-ani. The men mostly wore flattish pointed
straw hats, painted in all sorts of bright colours, and the
women’s heads were adorned with floating veils of equally
gay and varied tints. Mile after mile the colourful pageant
of the rice harvest was displayed: the same, yet ever shifting
and regrouping itself against its eternal but always different
mountain background.
We passed through countless kampongs , still on our high
embankment, so that we had a thousand intimate bird’s-eye
glimpses of a simple people’s home life that imprinted them-
selves like snapshots on the memory: a woman stirring a
cooking pot; another winnowing rice; an old man in his
garden splitting bamboo; a tiny girl very solemnly sweeping
the path; a mother with a child’s long black hair spread like
a shawl over her knees as she searches for parasites: little
pictures all set against backgrounds of hilik houses, and
gardens gay with flowering shrubs and colourful sarongs
hung out to dry in the sun dappled shade of palms and
bamboo.
Presently, leaving the lowlands, we began to wind our
way among rocky foothills, sometimes running close beside
the banks of wildly foaming torrents, the music of whose
waters mingled with the clatter of the train; climbing steadily,
all sense of direction lost, as the sunshine poured in now from
this side and now from that, and we twisted and turned


bewilderingly through a maze of mountain scenery where
every corner was a revelation, or so it seemed, of even greater
beauty than the last; not the cold austere beauty of the Alps,
but the green living beauty that clothes these tropic ranges to
their very summits with forest and grassland and, wherever
the hand of man can reach, with patches of bright green rice
or shimmering water on tiny, precariously perched terraces.
On and on, crossing bridges and viaducts from whose dizzy
heights we looked down on to magnificent gorges with silver
threads of waterfalls tumbling through the dense foliage that
covered their sides; until these too were left behind as the
line crept like a snake in among the higher ranges and out
at last upon a broad plateau bounded in the distance by yet
more mountains.
Not one of the countless rivers and streams that we had
crossed but had its parties of bathers, for the Javanese can
never see a stream without wanting to get into it, and not one
of the groups but included a delightful brown baby or so,
splashing water solemnly over its small fat naked person.
Here and there, too, would be three or four water buffalo
lying immersed with only eyes and ears and nose tip above
the surface, and others being scrubbed as they stood in the
sparkling water, obviously enjoying their bath at the hands of
naked brown boys. By the roadside at a river's edge the
driver of a buffalo cart was sometimes to be seen dipping
water and throwing it over his patient weary beast; and
always, wherever there was a river, there were women washing
and spreading out red, brown, and blue sarongs to dry on the
rocks.
All this was repeated over and over again with endless
variations as the train descended once more to lower levels
and we came into the sugar lands. Here for mile after mile
the line, now on ground level, ran between high walls of
sugarcane, just now in full flower, all crowned with heavy
cream coloured feathery plumes. And then, for a change,
came teak, or djati , forests, where the line took to the embank-
ment again, as though on purpose to give train passengers
a chance to look from above at the extraordinary giant foliage
of these trees and their masses of creamy buff blossom, and
at the “nurseries” of baby trees here and there among their


elders, looking ridiculously top heavy under their crowns of
enormous leaves much bigger than dinner plates.
Next, this obliging train took us through the tobacco lands
which, too, took on quite a new aspect as seen from the “Een-
daagsche.” The railway embankments allow a much more
extensive view of them than the motorist sees from the road,
and at one point near Djokdjakarta ten of the great drying
houses were in sight at once. The line passed many more of
these, distributed over a wide area; most of them standing at
this time of year, in the way that is so puzzling to strangers,
not in the midst of the tobacco that they are there to dry, but
surrounded by ricefields: the simple explanation being that
the two crops are alternated to prevent soil exhaustion.
Rice was being harvested in the fields of the Sultanates,
through which the line passes, but the scene was a very
different one from that we had watched in the morning: a
contrast much more noticeable to the traveller by train, who
sees both within a few hours, than to the motorist who usually
traverses the length of Java leisurely in several days. Instead
of the gay and varied throng of the West Java people in their
batik garments and painted hats, the workers here in Middle
Java were all clad in dingy blue, dyed with indigo grown by
order of the native rulers.
The passing show to be seen from the carriage windows
had been so enthralling that I had scarcely noticed the internal
arrangements of this admirable train. I still had the long
coach almost to myself, and so could stretch my legs or change
my seat as often as I wished in search of shade when, in our
shifting course among the mountains, the sun had made it too
hot for comfort on one side or the other. There was no doubt
that the train deserved all the praise that had been lavished
upon it. Electric fans hummed steadily to keep the heat at
bay. The split bamboo seats were as comfortable as they
were pleasing to the eye, and the best for coolness and comfort
that could possibly be designed for tropic use. Exploration
further afield did certainly reveal one flaw, but not in the
second class by which I was travelling; instead of the cool clean
bamboo here, and also in the “third,” the seats in the first
class had the very doubtful distinction of being upholstered in
shiny black American cloth: with the lamentable result that


many passengers who travelled “first” paid the penalty of
their exclusiveness by sticking to the seat, and emerging at
their destination with indelible traces of select travel written
on the nether portions of white drill trousers or silk summer
frock!
The conductor of the train was a wizened, cheery little old
native, a most companionable person, with none of the haughty
airs of conductors on European expresses. He seemed to
spend the entire journey wandering from one end of the long
train to the other, wiping dust off seats, windows, and wood-
work: an admirable idea, by the way, that might well be
adopted on railways elsewhere. Of the meals served in the
restaurant car I cannot speak at first hand; but the air of
bland repletion on the faces of the passengers who passed
through my compartment on the way back from lunch
suggested that its standard had been well up to the general
excellence of the train. At all events the iced coffee which,
on the friendly old conductor’s recommendation, I ordered
many times throughout the day from the djongos who made
periodical pilgrimages through the train, was delicious.
Served in a tall glass, in which tinkled a big silvery chunk of
ice, they cost about twopence each.
My fellow passengers were few, but just enough to provide
an occasional diversion. An elderly Javanese, obviously of
the upper class, smartly dressed in European white suit and
native batik headdress, sat opposite to me for a time, and
conversed with animation on the affairs of Europe and China,
regarding which he was at least as well informed as the average
Englishman or Dutchman, if not better. On descending at
his station he was met by two low bowing servants and greeted
with the utmost deference by the native stationmaster, past
whom he walked with a truly Oriental air of arrogance and
climbed into a smart sado with a uniformed driver.
Two dignified grey haired Chinese ladies, immaculately
clean and tidy in the becoming sarong-kebaya costume, were
also my companions for a short time; and so, less pleasantly,
was a fat Hollander, by all the tokens a “drummer,” smoking
a most pungent cigar, who boarded the train at a Mid-Java
station, followed by a skinny little porter loaded with four
bulging and obviously very heavy portmanteaux. These


safely stowed, the owner took out his purse and carefully
counted out three copper cents (less than three farthings)
into the man’s hand, receiving in return a deep bow and an
apparently grateful “Terima kaseh banyak , Toean ” (Thank
you very much, sir).
Two European ladies who travelled with me through some
of the loveliest of the mountain scenery were interesting as
examples of the oddly diverse preoccupations that blind
human eyes to the beauty of the world around them. One
of them, turning her back squarely on the window, took a
Bible from her bag, and never, so far as I noticed, raised her
eyes from its pages till she reached her station. The other,
an elaborately dressed matron of generous build, concentrated
with equal devotion on a fashion journal; seeing visions no
doubt, in her mind’s eye, of the creations that would presently
adorn her majestic proportions.
I was to travel often on the Java railways after that first
experience, and to make the acquaintance of many stations on
its lines. Many of these display one very odd inconsistency.
Their waiting rooms are delightful, and a greater contrast
between them and those in Europe it is hard to imagine.
Sitting in a big, cool, comfortable easy-chair, looking round
at an airy, pleasant room with tall jars of cannas and gladiolas,
and small tables covered with gay cotton cloths, each with
its bowl of roses, it is amusing to recall the discomforts of
waiting in the dingy, soot begrimed, cheerless equivalent at an
English or French junction, trying to warm yourself at the
dead ashes of a fire that looks as though it had been out for
weeks. But on the other hand, though so mindful of their
passengers’ comfort in the waiting rooms, the Java railway
authorities abandon them to their fate on the platform, and
seldom or never provide seats of any sort. So that if, as is
usually the case, passengers have luggage that they do not care
to leave unguarded, they are condemned either to stand, or to
pace up and down like a lion in a cage.
The station and railway employees are all natives, but the
differences in status among them are made obvious even to
European eyes. Stationmasters appear at each stop, resplen-
dent in freshly starched white uniform, red and gold peaked
cap, and laced shoes: manifestly dressed up specially for the


arrival of the “ Eendaagsche” the great event of the day.
This functionary’s wand of office is a little bat made of split
bamboo about the size of a ping pong racquet, painted white
with a green centre, with which he signals to the driver of the
train. Ticket collectors wear blue drill suits, peaked caps
perched on the top of their hatik headdress, which “grows”
on the male Javanese head almost as inseparably as his hair,
and leather sandals: these last indicating a certain status
upon which all those entitled to wear them are very insistent.
Porters wear black jackets and shorts, and go barefoot; but
they too wear a batik headdress.
The trains are not the only modes of transport with which
the ex-motorist in Java njay make acquaintance. The old
post coaches have their successors in the motor bus services
of which hundreds now scour the roads from end to end. In
these the post coach restrictions as to the “style, quality, and
condition” of the passengers find a modification to suit the
times in the division of the seats into first and second class.
Europeans, Chinese, and natives all use the buses, and the
only “style” anybody worries about nowadays is their ability
to pay the difference in fare. Europeans, however, usually
sit in the front first class seats as a matter of course, leaving
the relatively “vile or mean persons” behind to sort them-
selves out according to their own ideas of social station.
Fares, even in the first class, are very low; on an average about
half those on English buses. But even cheaper transport
is available for humbler folk in shabby old small car taxis,
into which these “vilest and meanest” pack themselves like
sardines and travel perhaps fifty miles for a few cents.
The main route motor buses are fine modern vehicles, and
the services excellent. Especially so are the “ sneldienst” ;
road-expresses stopping only at certain fixed points. These
can only be appreciated to the full when travelling by one of
the ordinary services which stop wherever they may happen
to be hailed. A native who is waiting to board one will never
dream of walking twenty or thirty yards back if he should see
it stop to pick up or drop another passenger before it reaches
him; he will stand where he is, watching it stop, start, and
get slowly under way; and then, just as the heavy car begins
to pick up speed, he will calmly wave to the driver to stop


again. The Javanese, happy man, is never in a hurry, and
he cannot possibly imagine why anyone else should be. Nor,
since he has been told that the bus will stop wherever it is
hailed, does he see why it should not do so half a dozen times
within a hundred yards, if it saves him trouble.
Although persons of impatient temperament will be well
advised to use the “ sneldienst” others with time to spare will
get plenty of amusement from watching their fellow passengers’
chafferings with the vendors of queer eatables, of lurid hued
syrups, and fruit of all kinds in cleverly made grass carriers,
who swarm like flies round the car at every stop. Even more
entertaining is the amazing variety of baggage that is piled
on to the top of the long suffering omnibus; for much of the
popularity of this method of transport is due to the fact that
there is no limit to the amount of luggage that may be taken,
and free of charge. Tin trunks, bulging suitcases, bundles
and baskets, barrels, bicycles, agricultural tools, crates of
fowls and vegetables, planks, iron sheeting, tiles, garden
seats, perambulators, and the rest, are swung deftly up and
roped into place by the conductor-general-factotum, who
spends most of his time scrambling up and down the iron
ladder, loading or unloading, and by a miracle, as it seems,
disentangling unerringly from the heterogeneous collection
the correct property of each owner as he arrives at his destina-
tion. This generous policy in the matter of baggage greatly
simplifies bus travel also for the European. There is nothing
to prevent him from taking all his belongings with him if he
wishes, as at any point where he may alight he will always find
plenty of willing hands waiting and ready to handle it for him
in return for a very few cents.
There are, of course, exceptions to every rule, in Java as
elsewhere; and the exceptions to the general excellence of the
motor bus services have the “Heath Robinson” touch. A
good example of these is in a long suffering mountain district
which is dependent upon the erratic transport provided by a
Chinese owned veteran which, by some oversight on the part
of the authorities, has been granted a licence to carry mail
and passengers. This fact, however, is no deterrent to its
proprietors, if profitable occasion should arise, to hiring the
ancient vehicle out to a picnic party, leaving the postbag to


wait until to-morrow to be called for, and its lawful passengers
stranded at its official starting place. When it does run, the
last ten miles or so of the journey up a steady but not steep
incline has to be done with a furiously boiling radiator which
is filled at least a dozen times on the way from roadside streams,
and the bonnet propped open, rattling wildly, to keep the
engine cool. Despite these slight drawbacks the bus is always
crowded, and is to be relied upon at least in one respect —
which is to cover its passengers’ hands and clothes with dirt,
oil, and grease.
Times change fast; it was a far cry from Daendels’s post
coaches to the so called “steam trams” that, until a few years
ago, used to tear through the streets of the chief Java towns,
with bells clanging and whistles screaming, like runaway
trains in a nightmare. But now they too have vanished into
the limbo of the past; they have been electrified as befits the
fine modern towns they serve, and the queer bulbous com-
pressed steam engines that drew them are no more seen.
The trams themselves, however, remain, with their old
fashioned first, second, and third class compartments, and
trucks barred like wild beasts’ cages in a travelling menagerie,
in which every conceivable kind of merchandise is carried,
with the bearers squatting beside their loads. Their progress
is still fairly sensational: probably because it has been found
that the long familiar noisy warnings are the only sure and
certain means of inducing the native population to get off the
rails. So the modernised trams, particularly in Batavia,
scour the town to the accompaniment of the same shrieking
whistles and clanging bells as of old.
The trams are popular with all races and classes: even the
Dutch, who are happily exempt from the snobbishness that
prevents the average Singaporean from using public con-
veyances. Dutch business men and mevrouws with shopping
bags mingle in the first class with Chinese and Eurasians;
a somewhat lower strata of the two latter, and better class
natives, travel second; and the coolie working class go third:
a scale of social gradation that seems to have been arrived at by
common consent. Fares even in the first class are extremely
cheap; they are collected by a barefooted native conductor
in khaki or dark blue uniform and batik headdress, who salutes


as he approaches and hands over the ticket with a polite bow*
I happened one day to find on boarding a tram that I had no
money; but the courteous little conductor confidingly gave
me a ticket, telling me his number, and saying that if I would
give the fare to the conductor of any other tram he would be
sure to get it, as, happening to meet him again a few days
later, I learned that he had.
These polite little people, however, are less trusted than
they are trusting. They are always closely followed on their
rounds by a native inspector whose superior rank is indicated
by his European shoes and a peaked uniform cap worn over
his batik kepala\ and, lest perchance you should not have
noticed these insignia of authority, he often tries to impress
the passengers by chivvying his underling.
The financial depression brought to the roads of Java
some new forms of cheap transport. The hard times were
felt more acutely in the densely populated eastern half of the
island where, in addition to the general malaise, the brunt
of the debacle in the sugar industry, in which was bound up
most of its prosperity, had to be borne. The closing down
of so many sugar estates and mills disorganised the whole
region by throwing out of employment not only hundreds of
Europeans, but also thousands of natives, and so reduced
spending power to thq minimum. Soerabaya, Malang, and
other East Java towns rose with practical common sense to
the occasion, and there appeared on the streets dozens of little
three wheeled taxis (“ amcos” as they soon came to be called)
in which an astounding distance could be travelled for about
twopence and the whole way from one end of the town to the
other for fivepence or sixpence. The hard-hit Europeans,
forced to lay up their cars, took to the “ amcos” like ducks to
water, and the door to door transport problem, which the high
charges of the old ordinary taxis made prohibitive, was solved.
A still later innovation is the appearance of fleets of smart
Austin Sevens; and as they run at the same low prices it looks
as though the three wheelers, now showing signs of wear and
tear after several years of faithful service, will soon be crowded
out of European use, to be relegated, like the old kossongs , to
a lower social strata of passengers. But they saved the situa-
tion, and deserve always to be remembered with gratitude.


The traveller soon realises their value through the lack of them
in the West Java towns of Batavia and Bandoeng, where the
full size taxis still have it all their own way. These towns
being the seat of Government and the home of Government
officials with fixed, though in most cases much reduced,
salaries, the effects of the “slump” were less apparent, and no
such hard time conveyances were introduced. It is true that
taxi fares and all other charges—rent, hotel tariffs, food,
wages, and so on —have fallen considerably in the last few
years; but they all, and the cost of living generally, remain
much higher at the western end of Java than at the other.


£H<ATTE\ SEFEN^TEEJi
Ancient Kingdoms
THE East India Company had been far too much
occupied in making conquests and profits to waste
any time over the historical or archaeological possi-
bilities of its colony. It was left for Raffles to sow the first
seed of what was destined to develop into one of the best
archaeological organisations in existence; and he did so, with
a thousand other forgotten things, in the intervals of entirely
revolutionising the administration and native land law,
pacifying an uneasy people hitherto in constant revolt against
oppression, and writing a History of Java which is still the
classic work of reference on the subject.
Raffles was the first white ruler of Java to make friendly
contact with the natives. Those of his predecessors had
been restricted to defeating and exploiting them. He made
frequent and prolonged expeditions into the interior of the
island and, gifted linguist that he was, talked much with the
people and learned their customs and legends and beliefs at
first hand. The existence of the Boroboedoer temple was well
known to the population of the Sultanates, though, hidden as it
then was in a tangle of tropical growth, it must have looked
like nothing more than a small, symmetrical hill isolated in
the midst of the surrounding ricefields. But the story of the
temple buried in it had passed into legend, and it was Raffles
who set a small army of men to work to uncover it. The
tangle of vines and coarse grass and undergrowth, the
accumulation probably of some four hundred years, was torn
away to reveal the extraordinary structure that had lain so
long hidden; and the work was continued after Raffles’s
departure, at least to the extent of preventing the lush tropical
growth from blotting it out again. But it was not until the
end of the century that the study of the wealth of archaeological
remains in Java was seriously undertaken. A research
committee was formed in 1901 and all the then known relics
of the vanished Hindu kingdoms were studied and described;
and in 1907 the restoration of Boroboedoer was begun under


A NATIVE HOUSEWIFE AND A FIREWOOD-SELLER. THEY DID NOT
SUCCEED IN COMING TO TERMS I


DRYING AND STORING MAIZE COBS AT THE HOUSE OF A KAMPONG HEADMAN,


Colonel van Erp. The work took four years; and at the
end this unique temple was revealed almost as its creators’
hands left it, a thousand or perhaps twelve hundred years ago.
All travellers in Java nowadays visit Boroboedoer, and it
would be strange indeed if they did not; for there is no other
quite like it in the world, with its tiers of galleries illustrating
the life of the Buddha elaborately carved in stone panels; its
hundreds of cupolas and Buddha statues; its noble flights of
steps; and its most lovely setting on the crown of a low hill
surrounded by palms and ricefields. Yet wonderful as it
unquestionably is, it seems strangely remote and empty of all
human association. It may be because no record whatever
of its origin or history has come down to us, and even legend,
usually so rich, is strangely silent where it is concerned.
Apart from its curious design, forming as it does a colossal
cap to the hill itself, into the sides of which it is built and
fitted, and its wealth of pictorial wall carvings, its principal
interest is the proof it provides that in Java, as in Angkor,
an amiable religious tolerance among the Indian conquerors
and colonists permitted the Buddhist and Hindu faiths, the
latter in its various forms of dedication, to Brahma, Shiva, and
Vishnu, to be practised side by side. For within only a few
miles of Boroboedoer and its attendant small temples of
Mendoet and Pawon, both of them fine examples of restoration
by the Dutch experts, which must have been the centre of a
wealthy and important Buddhist community, there is an
immense scattered group of Hindu temples on the site of
Prambanan, the capital of the first Hindu kingdom founded
in Java.
This group, known as Lorodjonggrang, covers many acres,
and the Government Archaeological Service, which in 1913
replaced the Research Committee, has (in 1939) been at work
on its restoration for about twelve years. Here the wall
carvings are much more varied and spirited than those at
Boroboedoer, and suggest that the artists who carved them,
perhaps students in the art schools of the day, may have been
light hearted fellows who didn’t care a brass farthing whether
the temple they had been engaged to decorate was Brahman
or Buddhist; and that, carrying the guess further, they found
their style rather cramped at Boroboedoer by the necessity of


confining themselves to the blameless career of the gentle
Buddha, whereas at Lorodjonggrang they could let themselves
go to their hearts’ content on the bloodcurdling adventures
of Rama and other heroes as told in the great Hindu epic
Ramayana.
It is a pity indeed that so few of the overseas tourists who
“do” Java are shown even a glimpse of Lorodjonggrang;
for while Boroboedoer is impressive, these panels in the Hindu
temples are not only remarkable but extremely entertaining.
One series shows Hanuman, the Monkey King, leading the
monkey army into Ceylon, to which they cross on a stone
causeway, built ahead of them by monkey engineers who carry
rocks on their heads and fling them down, hampered by giant
fishes and crabs which try to drag the stones away. The
army leads with it a dog on a chain, presumably as a mascot.
Then there is lovely Sita, Rama’s fiancee, sending her
ring to him by a bird as a token that she is in danger; and
farther along the dove with an anxious air is delivering it.
Rama, however, has other business on hand, slaying a giant
with a blow that drives his face through his ribs! We see
the good Monkey King captured by the wicked many-armed
Ravenna, who orders slaves to bind oil soaked rags round his
tail and set fire to it, all faithfully presented in stone in the
minutest detail. Then Hanuman, with tail ablaze, leaps on
to the roof of the king’s palace, which is burnt to the ground
and the city with it, giving the artist a fine opportunity to
portray a scene of panic, even down to a terrified dog
scrambling out of a lower window of the blazing palace.
This huge “temple-complex,” as the Dutch call it, includes
more than 150 shrines in three walled enclosures, one within
the other. The central and largest one is dedicated to Shiva,
and a pair of others, one on either side of it, to Brahma and
Vishnu respectively. In them are elaborately carved statues
of these gods.
All these temples are rich in decoration closely resembling
in style that at Angkor, proving how close is the link between
these two mysterious efflorescences of transplanted Indian art,
and how feasible the theory held by many archaeologists that
the founders of Angkor came from Java.
Lorodjonggrang is not the only relic of vanished glory that


the Archaeological Service have unearthed. Not far from
Prambanan is another Hindu group called Tjandi Sewoe,
guarded by two giant stone watchmen with clubs. In the
same region are the ruins of a temple called Tjandi Kalasan,
and of a Buddhist monastery. Farther away are the remains
of a great palace or kraton , probably resembling in its day
those still occupied by the sultans of Solo and Djokdja.
All this region belonged to the great Hindu kingdom of
Mataram, not to be confused with another Hindu kingdom
of Mataram on the island of Lombok, east of Bali, which at
one time rivalled Madjapahit in importance. The name was
retained when the kingdom was conquered by the Malay
Mohammedans, under whose rulers it remained a rich and
important state in whose many wars the Company several
times took a hand. It was split in 1755, as the result of one
of these, into the two present puppet Sultanates of Soerakarta
and Djokdjakarta; but the old name is preserved in part of
the Djokdjakarta territory. A traveller who visited Mataram
in 1656 has left an interesting account of the road that ran
from it to Samarang, and describes a bridge built of djati,
“strong enough to carry a thousand elephants.” It was
3000 paces long, and provided transport across the rushing
torrent of the River Damak. So, after all, it seems that the
poor ignorant natives of these islands do not owe quite all
their engineering knowledge to the conquering white man!
There are many more shrines in much the same style as
those at Prambanan and Sewoe, about forty miles away on
the Dieng Plateau; and farther east, at Singosari, near the big
modern town of Malang, are the traces of another large Hindu
city. Here a picturesque native kampong is now snugly
tucked in among the ruins of ancient temples; and as you
walk along its neat bamboo fenced lanes, under the shade of
palms and bananas, you will come here and there upon a space
left respectfully open, dominated by a portly Shivistic statue
in sandstone, looking out upon the tumbled remains of a
temple courtyard. And at the entrance to the village, instead
of the usual bamboo gateway, the way is guarded by two
enormous squatting figures something like those at Tjandi
Sewoe. A mile or so away are the remains of what must once
have been a very beautiful bathing place ornamented with


carved stone mouldings. There are records of a Hindu
kingdom hereabouts in the ninth century, and of another at
Soerabaya; and yet another, much earlier, where Batavia now
stands, called Taruma, which vanished and gave place to
Jacatra, as Jacatra gave place in its turn to Batavia. Taruma,
however, though long forgotten, has at least left its name
behind it in that of the River Tarum. A proclamation in
Sanskrit, signed by a King Purnavarman, engraved on a stone
found here, in characters similar to those used by the Pallavas
of South India, is one of the meagre proofs still remaining of
this perhaps great city’s existence.
But most interesting of all these relics are those of Madja-
pahit, the greatest of the Hindu kingdoms that between them
dominated Java for at least a thousand years, which is quite a
chapter in a country’s history when you reflect that it is as yet
less than that since the Norman conquest of England! The
actual remains of Madjapahit are sadly few and unimposing
for the capital of a state which the records prove to have been
of great wealth and importance. But the once great Hindu
stronghold has left its mark in a curious fashion on the strag-
gling kampongs that are now the only human habitations on the
vast site it covered in its heyday. The builders of Madja-
pahit used brick rather than stone; and when the city had
been sacked by its Mohammedan conquerors, and the temples
and palaces abandoned or demolished, the peasants of the
surrounding country, who crept back to their holdings when
peace was restored, doubtless thought it a wicked waste that
so many millions of bricks should be lying idle. That, at
least, seems the most likely explanation of the fact that, instead
of the split bamboo fences elsewhere universal in native
villages throughout Java, here at Madjapahit all the com-
pounds and gardens are enclosed by brick walls often further
embellished with tall brick gateposts. These are set up
without mortar, and are therefore very thick, so that the
contrast between their solidity and the flimsy bilik houses
behind them is oddly incongruous. Many of the irrigation
ditches serving the surrounding ricefields are also lined with
those same beautifully made bricks, all as sound and shapely
as when they left their makers’ hands anything from 500 to
1000 years ago.


The remains of Madjapahit are not very easy to find; and
the stranger who follows the vague native directions given in
response to inquiries is likely to take several wrong turnings
before he discovers the byroad that leads from Trowelan, an
inconspicuous dessa a few miles from the big modern sugar
town of Modjerkerto. This road soon degenerates into a
rough track; and it is here that the brick walls, by the mere
incongruity of their existence in so obviously poor a place,
attract attention, and offer their silent, incontestible evidence
that this kampong is not quite as others are.
As my car bumped slowly along the uneven track, the
inhabitants of the houses inside the brick walls came drifting
out, as is the native way, full of curiosity to see what a stranger
might be wanting here so far from the main road; and in
reply to my questions, and the offer of a cigarette, an unfailing
key to Javanese good will, a dignified old man squatted himself
on the running board and offered to show me the way. He
took me first to a partly ruined red brick temple of much the
same design as many of those in Bali, which latter in all
probability were copied from those here, refugees from
Madjapahit having fled to Bali when their country was over-
run by conquerors. This temple, said my guide, was called
Badjang Ratoe, and little was known about it; but he could
show me better things if I would leave the car a little farther
on and go afoot, for there was a stream ahead of us, and there
the track ended. So to the end of the track we presently
went, abandoned the car in the mud on the bank of the stream
and, wading across, took to a slippery six inch path on the
bund between two ricefields. Meanwhile I wondered as we
slithered along whether in a few hundred years’ time, perhaps,
visitors from other lands might not be picking their precarious
way along just such a path, guided by just such another dessa
man, in search of the last traces of Batavia or Soerabaya!
It is no more impossible, perhaps less so, than such an idea
would have seemed to the inhabitants of Madjapahit in the
fourteenth or fifteenth century, with a thousand years of power
and glory behind them. Whereas the Dutch have been in
Java less than 350 years, and their cities have been places of
dignity and importance for little more than a century.
One of the earliest references to Hindu Java is contained


in the Chronicle of the Buddhist Monk Fa-Hian who relates
that he went in a.d. 400 overland from China to India and
in a.d. 414 returned by sea via Ceylon, whence he set sail “in
a great ship with 200 persons on board, and a small ship in
tow carrying provisions.” On the way they visited Java, which
he calls “ Ya-vi-di,” or “ Jawa-dwipa,” and relates of it that “all
the people were of the Brahman religion, and he met only one
or two Buddhists” on his travels through the country. Bud-
dhism had therefore not yet gained the foothold it was destined
to attain later; four centuries or so had yet to elapse after this
Chinese monk’s visit before the building of Boroboedoer.
It is to a Chinese source also, the records of the Yuan
Dynasty, that we owe accounts of Kublai Khan’s attacks on
the coasts of Hindu Java in 1292 and 1293, at Soerabaya,
Padjetan, and Toeban. The attempts at conquest were
successful at first, but the enemy were beaten off eventually
“by the skill of the men of Madjapahit,” who had “great ships
with Naga heads on the stem.” The same records contain
many references to the importance and elaborate administra-
tion of Madjapahit, mentioning, among other interesting
details, that good maps of the country were obtainable, and
that there was a complete “National Register” of the popula-
tion! It is a little disconcerting to find that such a scheme
was in full working order in a vanished Hindu state six or
seven hundred years ago, which we have only now rather
nervously organised in modern England!
However: sic transit gloria mundi. Madjapahit, once the
centre and focal point of its Government Survey maps, is no
longer even a name on ours. Lost among a maze of ricefields,
located only through the good offices of a village native, the
symmetrical sunken water temple towards which at last my
guide waved a proud proprietary hand was indubitable proof
of a splendid past, for it was worthy to be what legend claims
for it, the bathing place of kings. Built on the plan beloved
of Indian architects in their Golden Age, with intersecting
squares and rectangles enclosing small square “islands”
carrying groups of miniature shrines, the enclosing walls rose
from the water in projecting tiers, decorated with carved heads
and floral designs. Parts of this outer wall were still quite
1 J. Legge (Oxford, 1886).


REMAINS OF A BRICK TEMPLE AT MADJAPAHIT, THE FORMER GREAT HINDU
CAPITAL IN EAST JAVA.
ONE OF THE ISLAND SHRINES RICHLY CARVED THE BATHING PLACE OF THE KINGS OF MADJAPAHIT,
THE VANISHED HINDU CAPITAL, NOW IN THE MIDST OF RICE FIELDS.


A COUNTRY SCENE IN EAST JAVA.
A SPECIMEN OF THE CARVED STONE PANELS AT BOROBOEDOER.
A JAVA MOUNTAIN HOTEL AND PART OF ITS TERRACED GARDEN ABOUT
5,500 FEET ABOVE SEA-LEVEL.


perfect; in others they seemed to melt imperceptibly into the
high grass bank that in its turn merged into the pattern of the
surrounding fields, giving to this strange isolated relic of
vanished glory a dreamlike unreality.
A sense of hallucination persists. Turn your back and
walk ten paces away and this last tangible trace of Madjapahit
has vanished; you are in the midst of the familiar ricefields,
and it seems impossible that you should have seen anything
so utterly irrational; turn back and there it lies: an elaborate,
costly, carven bath, with decorated walls reflected in the
gleaming water that they imprison, set in the midst of fields
whose silvery surfaces mirror only the slim green spikes of
newly planted rice: no more numerous, perhaps, than the
human life that crowded the sites of these very fields only a
few hundred years ago. If a reminder is needed of the
transience of temporal power, a visit to Madjapahit will
certainly provide one. All over the wide region once covered
by the vanished kingdom, scattered traces of it have been
found. Not only the tumbled remnants of buildings, but
carvings, pottery, and other relics of its arts, which are collected
in a small hilik museum at Trowelan: so unassuming a place
that the passing motorist on the high road is very likely to
miss it. Here, watched over by a six foot stone figure from
some old Shiva temple, is a motley assembly of small carved
stone objects, many of them beautifully executed. Among
the pottery found were water jars just the same as those used
throughout Java to-day, for fashions in such things do not
change though conquerors come and go. Another reminder
of unchanging custom is the blue Chinese porcelain found
buried among many of the ruins; suggesting that the old city
was probably just as full of Chinese shops and tradesmen as
are the towns of Java to-day.
The N.E.I. Archaeological Service came into existence
after the similar services in India and French Indo-China,
but it very soon forged ahead. The methods employed by
the Dutch experts were recognised as so admirable from both
scientific and aesthetic points of view that they were paid the
high compliment of being adopted by the archaeologists
responsible for the preservation of the Khmer ruins in
Cambodia, at Angkor, and elsewhere.


The Archaeological Service is included in the Government
Education Department, and is rightly regarded as one of
national importance in a country so rich in antiquities as Java.
In the years that ended with the financial depression, ex-
haustive surveys were made of all the known antiquities in
the island, a collection of many thousands of photographs and
descriptive records have been made, hundreds of carved
inscriptions excavated among the ruins have been deciphered
and translated, and the restoration and reconstruction of many
buildings has been carried out. Measures were taken to
prevent demolition of antiquarian treasures, such as the
removal of the Madjapahit bricks by too practical natives
already referred to, and also their removal on the grand scale
from their sites by well to do antiquarians, to Europe or the
United States.
Since 1931 the activities of the service have had to be sadly
curtailed, but even so, a great deal of invaluable work is being
carried on. The immense undertaking at Lorodjonggrang
is continuing, and the general care and upkeep of all the
antiquities is maintained. The rule has been made that all
discoveries made by natives must be reported to their regent,
the discoverer, however, remaining as a rule the owner in the
case of small objects, with the right to sell them, if he wishes,
to the archaeological authorities; but if he conceals what he
has found the penalty is confiscation.
The relics of the Hindu period in Java have been visited
by artists and antiquarians from all parts of the world; but
the ordinary tourist still seems to be convinced that he has
exhausted the historical monuments of the country when he
has paid a hurried visit to Boroboedoer!


C H <A PT E\ 3^
Yesterday , To-day , Cf To-morrow
OLD BATAVIA, founded by Jan Pieterszoon Coen
early in the seventeenth century on the site of the
native town of Jacatra, which he had burned to the
ground, was planned as far as possible on towns of the period
in Holland. It lay on the sea front, divided into two by the
River Tjiliwong, whose mouth only native craft could enter,
larger ships anchoring outside. The town was enclosed
within high walls and dominated by the Castle, in which the
Governor and other officials had their quarters.
The roads and streets were named after places in Holland,
and after animals supposed to be those native to Java. They
included a Lion Street; but whether this was due to over-
estimation of local fauna, or merely as an offset to Tiger Street,
is not recorded. This Tiger Street, or rather, Tijgersgracht
(Tiger Canal), was the Park Lane of Old Batavia, where stood
the mansions of the wealthiest residents, and along which
paraded the equipages of fashionable society in the cool of the
evening.
On these vehicles the ostentation that was the hallmark of
the time found one of its favourite outlets; and their elabora-
tion was as fantastic as the dress of those who rode in them.
To such a pitch did it come that in a report calling for restric-
tions upon them the East India Company stated that the
“extravagant luxury, pomp, and costliness of these vehicles
were helping to ruin the Company.” Regulations were
issued forbidding anyone except the highest Company officials
to possess “a glass coach” or one that was “gilt or silvered,”
or was shaded with an awning of costly material; and taxes
were imposed rising from 40 rex dollars up to 300.
Sedan chairs, here called tandoes , were much in use; and
these too the Company censured severely as “far too luxurious
and lavishly decorated.” They were the chief hire transport,
and there were stands at convenient points about the town,
as well as halts where bearers could be exchanged, on payment
of a fixed tariff rate from point to point. Tandoes were


usually made to carry either one or two passengers; but there
are records that they were even built for four! Tandoes are
still used in the Java mountains: but they are built to carry
one person only.
Along Jacatraweg, Antjolweg, and Molenvliet stood, and
in some cases still stand, more fine houses. These were the
quasi country residences of the wealthy burghers, just outside
the business centre, and here the mansions all stood in spacious
grounds. Fabulous sums were spent on these gardens, and
immense was the competition between their owners to attain
the most magnificent displays of colour: not, probably, so
much for love of their beauty as for sheer vulgar ostentation
and the desire to crow over their neighbours. But whatever
the motive, all these plutocratic streets must have been a
lovely sight indeed: especially the Molenvliet, where the
great dignified houses with their lofty pillared porticoes stood
back amid masses of croton, acalypha, coleus, alamanda,
hibiscus, and other gorgeous shrubs that made blazing splashes
of colour on the shaven turf, on both sides of the canal,
separated from it by the avenues of noble flamboyant trees
that are now all that remain of its former glories. And the
people that moved about in this colourful scene were by all
accounts as brilliant, though certainly not so beautiful, as their
setting; for the sums squandered by the merchants upon their
dress and that of their slaves were so outrageous that these
also the Company made the subject of legislation, and restric-
tions were imposed under heavy penalties.
In the households, as in the gardens, competition and
display were the characteristic note. The index to wealth,
and thereby to social superiority, for there was no other
standard in Company society, was the number of slaves that
were kept, so that everyone tried to outdo his neighbour
in the matter of staff. In some of those great old mansions,
now converted into hotels or warehouses, it is on record that
there were once more than two hundred slaves in a single
household, all dressed in barbaric splendour worthy of some
Oriental potentate in The Arabian Nights.
These slaves were brought from all over the archipelago
in the Company’s ships: the pitiful survivors of defeated
island populations. As likely as not, many of the men and


women who scurried hither and thither to do their masters’
behests in those Batavia mansions, and serve him with nasi
hesar (now known as “rijsttafel”: the Javanese rice feast
that the Dutch adopted in the early days of their conquest,
as the type of meal best suited to local conditions), were once
people of high standing in their own islands; as strange to
silch work as the doctors, artists, writers, and others who,
300 years later, were to be driven out by the Nazis, and forced
by circumstance to be house servants in the homes of England.
Few white women cheered the exile of the East India
Company men in the early days, and we may suppose that the
chatelaines of those handsome mansions were for the most
part the brown skinned beauties with whom the Company
founded the Eurasian families of to-day. But just what their
status was we cannot know, for history is mute. Did they
preside charmingly at their lord’s table, and grace his board
as well as his bed? Or did those lords, taking a leaf from the
native book, keep their women in subjection like better class
slaves, as creatures existing only for their pleasure and
convenience? All things considered, the last seems most
likely.
Strange to say it was not the Dutch language that pre-
dominated in Old Batavia. The Dutch might reign, but the
population was extremely mixed. The language of the
Portuguese traders had taken a firm hold, for there had been
much intermarriage and there were many half castes. It
may well be, too, that the similarity of Portuguese vowel
sounds to those of Malay and Javanese had something to do
with this language having been more easily assimilated; for
to this day many Portuguese words are firmly embodied in
Malay, and there is nothing foreign sounding about them.
Then, as now, Malay was the lingua franca used by all
nationalities, but Portuguese was a good second. It was in
Portuguese that the services in the Portuguese Church were
held, though the service was that of the Dutch Reformed
Church.
Batavia and the other chief Java towns have seen many
changes since those early days; but, although it was not to
be expected that they could escape altogether the blight
of modern “development,” they still remain very pleasant


places. According to old residents, and to photographs,
Batavia and Soerabaya, as well as Samarang, which is still
unspoiled, were, before the Great War, towns quite as
beautiful in their way as the country around them. Even
as lately as ten or twelve years ago, the rising tide of progress
was only lapping at their unique charm, and their principal
shopping streets were still unlike those of any other large
towns in the world. For at that time those streets had only
lately ceased to be wealthy residential quarters, from which
the owners of the old houses had drifted gradually away to
modern suburbs as the town spread and grew. Commerce
had flowed quietly in to take their place; the stately old
Colonial houses still stood back in dignified seclusion behind
the trees and lawns of their spacious front gardens, but they
had fallen from their high estate as rich men’s homes, and had
been turned into shops. So that when you drove round to
do your morning’s shopping you turned in between the
flowering shrubs to a wide semicircular drive, and your car
swept up with an air to the steps of a great voorgalerij , formerly
pillared and open, but now glass fronted and converted by
means of counters, shelves, and all the necessary paraphernalia
for the display of groceries, hardware, drapery, jewellery,
cameras, flowers, or whatever it might be.
There was a great charm about shopping in those days.
You could match silks, buy cheese or coffee or carnations, or
await the results of your latest Kodak film, knowing that you
were sitting where a hundred or two hundred years ago the
worthy burghers and their ladies too had sat, discussing the
scandals of the day or the latest news from Europe; or even
perhaps the machinations of that rascally fellow Stamford
Raffles!
Then came the post war boom, with its fortunes made in
sugar, quinine, coffee, rubber, and the rest, and the high
inexorable tide of progress flowed over these two most charm-
ing cities, submerging much of their beauty. Soerabaya
suffered most. The great boom in sugar caused a sensational
rise in land values, and the shady, quiet, front gardens that
hid the old houses along its central avenue found themselves
described as “valuable business frontages” at fabulous prices
per metre. That was the end of them. So rapid was the


transformation as to savour of magic, and black at that. Gone
now are the gardens and the trees, the flowering shrubs with
their masses of brilliant blossom, and their setting of velvet
lawns.
The long, once gracious avenue that ran through the heart
of the town is now almost as conventional as Piccadilly, except
that you may catch a glimpse here and there of one of the old
dignified porticoed mansions, peeping shyly through an
occasional gap between the big modern stores, like old-
fashioned country cousins elbowed out of the way by a more
assertive younger generation. These few survivors are built
in behind the new shops and shut out for ever from the once
shady avenue upon which they used to look out so proudly;
spending their last years in the condemned cell from which
they will soon go the way of their vanished contemporaries.
There are reminders of earlier periods in Soerabaya’s history
as you go farther back through the old town. Here the
houses were built close on the street and touching one another,
like the relics of the same period in Banda and Amboyna.
Many of them still stand, pillars and all, still immaculately
whitewashed, for such is the admirable Dutch law, and still
roofed with the crinkly reddish tiles that contrast so pleasantly
with their white walls. But their glory, such modest glory
as they had, is long departed. Some are warehouses; posters
deface their walls and doors and stout outcurving pillars;
and here and there, taking advantage of their narrow stoep
raised two or three steps above street level, a toekang djahitan
(sewing man) will squat before his sewing machine, busily
stitching at the garments he makes up so neatly and swiftly
for a few cents apiece. Others of the old houses have been
turned into Chinese shops and restaurants; but they all seem
to have a rather self conscious air, as though they can never
forget that they have seen better days.
In Batavia, though there are many changes, the layout of
the town with its intersecting canals and double avenues did
not lend itself so easily to such complete transformation as in
Soerabaya, and though here, too, many of the old houses have
vanished, many others happily remain, and means have been
found to build plenty of modern shops without sacrificing the
avenues of trees.


The suburbs of both Soerabaya and Batavia are charming;
and here it is Soerabaya that has the advantage. Its wide
boulevards with their tjimaras (casuarinas) and flamboyants ,
and their charming bungalows, each standing in a garden that
is a little paradise of shade and brilliant flowers, must surely
be the pleasantest suburban dwelling places in the world: a
far cry indeed from what in England is conveyed by the term.
Nor are they any the less pleasant because a trickle of com-
mercial progress is penetrating them, quite inoffensively, in
such a way as to save suburban housewives many a journey
to town. It is a little startling nevertheless to see quite
modern houses, large and small, already converted into shops
just as ruthlessly as their demode ancestors. A snug little
bungalow tucked away behind a mass of bougainvillea, in a
secluded cross road off one of the boulevards, may prove to be
a spick and span Chinese grocery store with shelves full of
shining tins adorning the walls of what was but recently the
best front bedroom. And in one very select neighbourhood
a large modern house announces itself as “Dames Kapper en
Permanent Huis”—or in other words a ladies’ hairdresser’s.
More staggering still, an imposing, not long built mansion
on a commanding corner of the aristocratic Darmo boule-
vard is labelled in huge letters: DARMO VLEESERIJ
EN WURSTFABRIEK (butchery and sausage factory)!
Imagination quails at the thought of what our British snobbery
would say to such a metamorphosis of some impressive Gentle-
man’s Residence in, say, Branksome Park, Bournemouth!
The residents would probably petition the council for the
tainted thing’s removal, or else evacuate the neighbourhood
themselves in a body. But in such matters Dutch common
sense prevails; they merely welcome the opportunity pro-
vided by the intruders to shop at easy distance, thus saving
them the tram fare or a bicycle ride to town.
Native as well as European taste in architecture has changed
of late years in the towns. Old-fashioned Javanese houses
have no windows, and inside their bilik walls the light is very
dim; but nowadays many of them are being modelled on
European style in miniature, with windows and verandahs,
not unlike Australian wooden bungalows in design; so small
that the heads of their owners, who are by no means tall, touch


the verandah roof. The effect of these rather attractive little
homes with their tiled gables and tiny verandahs facing each
other across the ten foot “gangs” that serve them as streets
is somewhat that of rows of dolls’ houses. And if you turn
up one of the lanes between blocks of shops in some of the
suburban streets you will find yourself at once in a sort of
Lilliput in the very heart of your ordinary full size workaday
world.
All visitors comment on the fearful and wonderful arrange-
ment of the Soerabaya tram stop islands which appear to have
been designed for the express purpose of decimating the
population. They are not placed in the middle of the road in
the usual way, but are in pairs, with the two tramlines running
between them, and motor traffic in both directions as well.
So that the pedestrian who reaches one island alive has to dodge
cars coming both ways before he gets across to the next: a
much more hazardous adventure than it sounds when there is
no speed limit, and no means of knowing whether a fast
approaching car intends driving on one side of the island or
the other. It says much for the intelligence of the population
that there are not more accidents, when it is remembered how
many safeguards in the way of “Look Right,” “Look Left,”
and so on, are considered needful to safeguard the people of
London.
The larger towns in Java have now followed the lead of the
rest of the world in adorning their principal crossings with
traffic lights. They are engagingly simple affairs like large
square dark-lanterns, and hang in the middle of the road from
cables strung across from trees at the roadside. The square
face is divided into three horizontal sections, covered with red,
yellow, and green glass, bearing the words “Stop! ” “ Awas! ”
“Djalan! ” (Stop! Look Out! Go!) Native drivers like them
immensely because of the fun they get out of pulling their
unfortunate ponies up on their haunches when the light
changes! At all events the lights are as meticulously obeyed
here as in any European country.
The Dutch in Java were in the vanguard of radio progress
and for many years the station at Malabar, near Bandoeng,
was said to be the most powerful in the world. Radio-
telephone communication with Europe was brought to the


highest perfection long before it was possible in British Malaya
to telephone from Singapore to Penang.
Family chats between parents in Holland and their married
sons or daughters in Java are a regular institution. The
ordinary charge for three minutes’ conversation between any
private house in Holland and another in Java is fifteen guilders
— 2ss. at par. But at New Year 1938 the service was
further popularised by the announcement that six-minute
talks would cost five guilders only during the holiday period.
The result was that there were more than 6000 happy ex-
changes of “voices across the sea.”
The country post offices of Java are delightful: dazzlingly
whitewashed outside and spotlessly clean within. And the
courtesy and efficiency of the native assistants, smart and slim
in their starched white jackets and batik headdress and sarongs
are just as pleasant as their cool airy offices. The system
under which they work is admirably thought out in every
particular, and foreigners need have no fear of difficulties
even if they should wish to cable home from some remote
country dessa. In such small offices telegrams are telephoned
to the nearest telegraph office. On the wall by the operator’s
telephone there hangs a chart displaying the letters of the
alphabet in large print side by side with the numbers 1 to 26.
Each letter corresponds to a number: A= 1; B= 2; and so
on. All native post clerks have learnt Roman type and script,
so when the message is spelled out letter by letter it does not
matter in the least whether it is in Dutch, French, English,
Malay, or any other language known or unknown to them,
provided it shares the same alphabet. They simply telephone
the numbers corresponding to each letter, and mistakes are
rare.
The fingerprint system is much used in Java. You cannot
get a driving licence without leaving the mark of your thumb
on the police records. And in every post office there is a
book of black ink paper on the counter wherein every native
employee sent to cash a postal order or collect a registered
packet must press his finger tip, and “sign” a form with it.
The post offices in Batavia and Soerabaya, though pleasing
to the eye, are trying to the temper, for they share to some
degree the disproportion of pretentiousness to efficiency
263
Yesterday , To-day , To-morrow


characteristic of Australian G.P.O.s. In Soerabaya, as in
Sydney, you gaze with admiration at the architecture and
seek in vain for the proper place to buy a stamp.
The ground plan of the big Java offices might serve as
models for those in cities the world over. But the customer
who enters the cool, light, airy hall anticipating that his
business will be as easily expedited as the setting suggests will
certainly be disappointed. All round the lofty skylighted
building, spacious as a church and spotless as a hospital ward,
with its tiled floor and polished brasses, are dozens of “ lokets”
all numbered and labelled with their particular mission in
the postal scheme, each of course designed to be presided over
by one of the pleasant, helpful djeroe toelis (clerks) we all like
sowell. But alas for the optimist! The available funds must
all have been spent on the buildings, so that there were none
left to staff it. You try one after another of the “ lokets,” only
to find them tenantless and marked “gesloten and from
those that are open, long queues like those waiting to enter
theatre pits or galleries stretch from side to side of the great
hall, crossing one another in the middle; moving very, very
slowly as each client holds great argument with the clerk
about his or her business.
An elderly uniformed official who wanders hither and
thither superintending all this with a fatherly, benignant eye
is always ready to give courteous information as to which of
the queues you should join. But sad to say, if you take your
place at the tail of the one indicated, arriving at the “ loket"
some ten minutes later, you are just as likely as not to be told
that you should have gone to some other. And then, having
patiently repeated the process and arrived in due course at the
number indicated, you may be directed back to the very one
you have just come from!
But there are ways and means of getting round these small
drawbacks in the service of the otherwise so admirable Post
Kantoors. If it is merely a matter of stamps, then one glance
at the long queue from outside is enough for the customer who
has discovered that certain Chinese storekeepers in the town
have provided for this oft recurrent contingency, shrewdly
anticipating that those who come to buy stamps will often buy
their attractively displayed goods as well! Or, if a visit to


the post office itself is necessary, a very small tip, or even none,
will send your native djongos (house-boy) rejoicing to stand
in queues for hours if need be; for to him it is a pleasant
opportunity of chatting to acquaintances all bound on the
same errand.
Official parsimony in the matter of personnel crops up in
some curious ways. The inhabitants of one big and busy
dessa deeply resented the closing down of their post office in
favour of a new one in a recently popularised mountain resort
some miles away; and to add insult to injury, they have even
been deprived of their native postman, whose munificent wage
was ten guilders (i6j. B d.) a month, on the score of economy
necessitated by the depression! Their post bag is now
brought by an erratic Chinese motor bus, and deposited at
the tiny office of the local wedono , where it is sorted, more or
less, in the intervals of dealing with water supply complaints,
disputes over boundaries, and handcuffed criminals just
arrested for some petty misdemeanour or other, who squat
outside the door and on the steps chatting with the policeman
in charge of them, and look on with interest as you enter and
help the clerk to hunt for your mail amid a heterogeneous
muddle of papers relating to all the affairs of the local
authorities which clutter two small tables and overflow on to
the floor.
Java has much to offer to lovers of the cinema. Excellent
French, German, Dutch, and Austrian films are shown, as
well as an occasional English or American one; and the
general quality is far above the average of those seen in
English speaking countries. Best of them all, up to 1938,
were the Vienna productions; it remains to be seen whether
their standard will be maintained under the Nazi regime.
All foreign sound films are shown with captions added in
Dutch; and the news reels are the same as those elsewhere,
only described, of course, by a Dutch commentator. It was
in a Java cinema that I met with the exception to what I had
hitherto believed to be an invariable rule: an entire absence
of humour in both Dutch and German mentality; to one or
the other, I never discovered which, belongs the credit of
showing H.R.H. The Duke of Windsor’s visit to Berlin to
the strains of The Vicar of Bray \


In addition to the films shown in the regular cinemas, some
of which are air conditioned, especially fine ones are imported
and shown by the “Kunstkrings” or “art circles.” These
latter are among the many admirable Dutch institutions that
might well be emulated elsewhere. The “circles” are groups
of subscribers to a fund which makes it possible to engage
musicians, dancers, and other artists, with the certainty that
their fees and expenses will be adequately met. In every
white community of any size in Java there is a “Kunstkring”
with a hall or theatre of its own; and by this means the
“exiles” in the Far East are able to see and hear many of the
world’s great artists who would otherwise not be able to take
the financial risk of visiting the colony. Any artist who
thinks of including Java in a professional tour has only to
write to the secretary in Batavia and, always provided dates
are available and the eclectic standards of the selection
committee are satisfied, the appearances are fitted in and
the success of the show is assured.
A kindred institution to the “Kunstkring” is the “Lezen-
gezelschap,” which also would be a welcome addition to the
amenities of life in British colonies and dominions. There
is one of these reading clubs also in almost every district.
They send out “boektrommels” weekly, containing collections
of the leading Dutch, French, German, English, and American
periodicals, and a novel or two, for circulation among their
subscribers. By this means, at the cost of only a few shillings
per month, it is actually easier to keep in touch with con-
temporary affairs and opinion when living in this far away
foreign colony than it is in England, at hundreds per cent,
greater expense. The English papers in these collections
usually include Punchy Illustrated London News , Bystander ,
Sphere , Strand , £sfc.
The English visitor to Java is constantly reminded of his
national insularity by the popularity among the Dutch of
English books on railway bookstalls and in shops and
libraries; shaming him with the thought of what surprise
the sight of Dutch, French, or German novels would cause
in similar places in a British country. Several reasons
probably contribute to the popularity of our light literature
in the Dutch East. One is the excellent teaching of


languages in Dutch schools; another is the abundance of
English cheap editions, which it does not pay to publish in
Holland for so small a population; and yet another is the
average Hollander’s desire to improve his knowledge of
English. Hence, when you travel by train you may be
pretty sure that some of your male fellow passengers (the
women are less ambitious in this regard) will be reading one
or other of the excellent “sixpennies” that are such a boon
nowadays to Dutch and English alike, and which are even
cheaper to the former on account of the high exchange value
of the guilder.
Nowhere are the genuine blessings of civilisation that the
Dutch have brought to their colony more marked than in
their admirable hotels, and many years’ experience has
convinced me that it is the Dutch and not the Swiss who
deserve the title of the world’s best hoteliers. The first
hotel of which there is any record was a “ Stadsheerenloge-
ment,” a “Municipal Boarding House for Gentlemen,”
established in Batavia in 1754 in response to complaints from
the residents that no “genteel accommodation” was available
for gentlemen visiting or staying in the town. It was a
licensed house under the control of the East India Company,
and the licencee was entitled to keep six carriages for hire.
The number was later increased to twelve, so it may be
inferred that in those days too the Dutch hotel keeper knew
his job, and the house did good business. In 1798 it was
still flourishing, and “two gilded coaches” were added to the
hire vehicles available to the public. In 1811 the records
state that “owing to altered circumstances” the establishment
ceased to exist. The English took over in that year; and
the horrid inference suggests itself that there may have been
a lack of persons sufficiently “genteel” to keep it going.
There is, however, no lack of support by the English in
Java nowadays for the abundant “genteel accommodation”
provided by the Dutch; nor of regretful appreciation that it
is so much better and cheaper than in their own colony just
across the straits. Probably nowhere else in the world is such
civilised comfort and cleanliness and such excellent service
to be had for so reasonable a cost as in Java, where in the most
modestly priced -pension you will find spick and span tile


floored bedrooms equipped with the very latest of shining
chromium, plateglass, and porcelain fittings, and bed linen so
white that it almost dazzles you, lightly starched and smooth
from the huge roller ironing presses installed in all Java
laundries.
Hotels in Java, with the exception of a few tourist hotels
de luxe , are almost all built on only one floor, often planned
so as to enclose inner courtyards on to which open the
“ voorgalerijs" or verandahs that go with every bedroom.
It is delightful to sit here in the very early morning and drink
your coffee, looking out on the great rain trees that shade the
courtyard; listening to the wakening birds and to the murmur
of native life in the distance as it streams along the road
outside; with perhaps a tokek lizard in some hidden corner
adding his queer contribution to the drowsy chorus now and
then.
In the warm coastal regions, hotel dining rooms are often
open to the air on two or even three sides; and in these a small,
rather charming diversion is sometimes provided by that
humblest of birds the house sparrow, which thrives in Java
as in most other parts of the world. He finds these big,
lofty, virtually open air rooms very much to his taste, and
makes himself perfectly at home, hopping about the tiled
floors in search of crumbs, perching cheekily on brightly
polished brass finger bowls to steal a drink, and roosting
cosily at night in long closely packed rows on high ledges near
the ceiling, chirping sleepily now and then as the blaze of
electric light disturbs his dreams.
Another of the diversions of the Java hotels, with the rather
embarrassing publicity of their open verandah sitting rooms,
is the stream of pedlars who appear one after the other, offering
a variety of goods that it would be hard to beat in a whole
day’s shop gazing. Approaching noiselessly on their bare
feet, the first warning of their presence is a softly spoken
“ Tahek , N'ya hesar ” —and you look up from whatever you may
chance to be doing to see a figure standing patiently awaiting
your attention. These vendors never try to force their goods
upon you in the infuriating manner of their English prototypes,
but depart at once without argument, as silently as they came,
if you should respond to the opening greeting with an emphatic


“No!” Given the slightest encouragement, however, the
whole stock in trade will be laid out on the floor for your
consideration. %
The goods vary in different parts of Java. In Batavia,
your first visitor may offer you sets of thin silver teaspoons
with handles formed of tiny wayang figures, always wrapped
in pink tissue paper. The next time you look up you will
perhaps see a stocky little fellow squatting between two huge
concrete flower pots containing shrubs in full bloom; a load
that must weigh a couple of hundredweight at least. Regret-
fully waving him away, you will be disturbed by a woman
batik seller, more persistent than any of her male rivals.
Sooner or later the toekang sepatoe (the shoe man) is sure to
appear, complete with block and tools, ready to do any repairs
that may be required, and very neatly too, for a few cents.
Then perhaps a vendor of wall hangings adorned with
elaborate paintings of familiar wayang characters, an adapta-
tion of native art to European material that is most decorative.
Next, two heavy upholstered armchairs, for which a motor
van would seem a more reasonable mode of transport than one
small coolie; a table, a set of bookshelves, or a big gong, may
be presented to your notice, followed by a man so hung about
with white curving snakeskin belts as to suggest a Medusa’s
head. You will certainly have a visit from the peripatetic
Wool worth’s with his stock of haberdashery, perfumery, bath
sandals, coat hangers, mosquito ohat , soap, face cream, pins
and needles, shoe laces, tooth paste, studs, suspenders, nail-
brushes, and a hundred and one other oddments: a collection
so ingeniously put together ft lat it is seldom it does not remind
you of something you really need.
In West Java this enterprising tradesman appears with two
big round baskets hung from the end of his pikoelan\ but in
East Java he wheels in front of him a little shop with glass
sides mounted on four wheels like an old-fashioned perambula-
tor, tinkling a bell and calling “ barang ” (a much used word
meaning all kinds of goods and chattels) as he goes.
Every kind of fruit in season is also carried round for sale;
bunches of roses and other flowers fresh from the mountains;
strong well grown seedlings ready to plant out in your garden
if you have one; cakes and pastries; the daily paper and a


variety of light reading, including fashion books and patterns
for industrious dressmakers. There will be little flowering
trees just coming into bloom, their roots tucked into earth
filled sections of bamboo: a picturesque and practical method
of portage enabling so many to be packed on one tray that
they look like a miniature Japanese garden.
In the Preanger local specialities are spoons and salad
servers, paper knives, pendants, and wayang figures all made
of polished buffalo horn, and weird birds with outspread
wings, the tip of the horn serving as beak; model krises six
or eight inches long of horn and bone, tiny ones mounted as
brooches, and wooden wayang golek puppets.
Tasikmalaya specialises in fine grass weaving, and bags
and purses not made elsewhere in Java are offered to visitors
here. At Djokja there are bags of another kind with queer
little figures, birds, and animals interwoven in coloured grass.
In East Java krises copied from old and beautiful designs are
brought for sale from Madoera across the narrow strait
that separates the islands: a strait only 2000 yards wide at
one point, and served by a steam ferry. The wood-carvings
for which Bali is famous, particularly half life-size heads of
native types, are another favourite stock in trade of the house
to house vendors. This Balinese carving is being exploited
for the tourist trade into something almost approaching mass
production; but so far, happily, it does not seem to have
caused any appreciable deterioration in the work of these
gifted people, many of whom appear to carve as instinctively
as they breathe.
A native craftsman in Soerabaya makes crocodile-skin
handbags equal to any to be found in London shops. He
finishes a half dozen or so, the work of weeks, then packs them
up and sets off on his bicycle to offer them from door to door:
thus earning enough to support his family in a tiny quasi-
European dolls’ house hidden away in a kampong behind a
big block of shops. A visitor who happens to receive a call
from this clever little person will have a chance to buy a first
class piece of work at about a quarter the ordinary price.
The Chinese klontong (pedlar) with his odd little rattle like
a tiny drum mounted on a six-inch handle, which he twirls
as he goes with a sound so characteristic that once heard it is


never forgotten, and his big pack of embroidered goods so
neatly wrapped in white sheeting, is a familiar and ever
popular figure in Java as in Malaya.
An interesting combination of native and European
commercialism is to be found at the annual fairs held in the
large towns: the Pasar Gambar at Batavia, the Pasar M.alem
at Soerabaya, and others. Here every sort of commercial
enterprise makes an advertising display, and the European
salesman of modern electrical or hygienic apparatus courts
your custom every bit as assiduously as do the native vendors
of wood-carvings and wayang figures. The entertainment
offered, however, is entirely Oriental. There are Chinese
plays galore; and Malay “opera,” so called, presenting
Shakespeare with Antonio in a black dress coat, near-white
trousers, and co-respondent’s shoes, and Shylock as a Chinese
clown.
Of all the queer little experiences that befall the English
visitor to a Java town, none perhaps is quite so odd as a sound
that will sometimes burst upon his astonished ears as he sits
peacefully on his verandah, enjoying a “short one” and a
cigarette, before dinner in the soft breeze that tempers the
warmth of the tropic evening. Suddenly, out of the darkness
near at hand, the quietness is shattered by the strident florid
jangling of a barrel organ in full blast, grinding out the tunes
familiar thirty or forty years ago. They transport you in a
moment back to childhood; back to gaslit rooms and dark
foggy winter days, before phones or planes or radio or motor
cars had reduced a pleasant world to distraction, and nothing
worse than barrel organs disturbed our peace. Why and
when they came to Java no one seems to know; but there
they are, some of the oddest of anomalies in these model
modern tropic cities.
These and a thousand and one other innovations have
been grafted by degrees on to the ancient simple ways of
Java: things great and small that have become part of the
fabric of ordinary everyday modern colonial life, and seem
to us as permanent and inevitable as the sunshine and the
ricefields.
But what the future may have in store no one can tell.
These are dangerous days for Java as for the rest of the world;


and it may be that this happy colony, created by the Dutch
on foundations laid long ago in blood and tears by their
ancestors, is fated to be overwhelmed as completely by modern
forces of barbarism as it was three centuries ago by the Dutch
East India Company, and before them by Indian and Malay
conquerors. But one thing is certain. Whatever else may
happen, the beauty and the essential spirit of this lovely land
and of its people are indestructible. Its mountain ranges
will still stand serene and mysterious in their delicate veil of
hazy blue against the primrose skies of dawn; robed in royal
purple at sunset or before approaching storm; or rich and
green and smiling in the midday sunshine, as they have
stood through all the human cataclysms, so shortlived and
petty in comparison with their age-long repose, that have
raged around their feet.
Bombs may destroy Batavia and Soerabaya as they have
destroyed Warsaw; and as Coen destroyed Jacatra. But
though they score a million wounds in the forests that clothe
the mountain heights, and in the richly cultivated terraces
brought into being by generations of toiling workers, they
can never destroy them. Nature, generous in these regions
as perhaps nowhere else in the world, will heal the wounds
and cover the scars in the forests and hillsides; and the
Javanese cultivators, patient and untiring as Nature herself,
will repair and replant the terraces.
There may be a “new order in Asia,” in which all our
laboriously built up civilisation will have no more place than
that of the earlier conquerors who came, and played their part,
and vanished from the scene, leaving behind them only a few
ruins for archaeologists to ponder over. But beneath the
surface changes, great as some of them have been, brought
about by each of these phases, that strange, secret, immortal
thing that is the soul of a people has lived on: untouchable
and remote as the lives of the birds and butterflies, the ants
and the rest of the humble creatures that go about their
affairs oblivious to all human interference.
And when these present days of storm and stress have
drifted into the past, when they are of no more account than
to add one more to the pages of history, the Java mountains
will still look down unmoved upon generations, as yet unborn,


of cheerfully toiling people in their fertile ricefields and their
kampongs tucked so snugly among the green bamboo groves.
And other strangers from overseas will look and marvel as
we do at these same scenes, changeless yet ever changing in
their eternal beauty as the heavens themselves.


INDEX
Advertising, 76
Agave , 179
Ancient kingdoms, 234-242
Madjapahit, 238, 240
Animals, 158
Ants, 208
Arachis, 172
Aret, 33
Badjang Ratoe, 239
Bananas, 72
Barbers, 78
Basket making, 144
Batavia, Old, 243, 246, 247
Batik , 138
Betel nut, 181
Bllikj woven bamboo, 68, 144
Bird life, 210
Birth, 54
Boroboedoer temple, 234
Bosch, van den, 142
Brass, 146
Bridegrooms, 43, 53
Brides, 46, 49, 5 2
Buffalo hide, 147
Buffalo horn, 147
Burial places, 56-58
Calves, 166
Charcoal, 206, 207
Children, 122-123
Christian missions, 94
Cinemas, 252
Cleanliness, 30, 96
Coffee, 204, 206
Coffee disease, 205
Cotton goods, 143
Crafts, 144-150
Crops, 172 et seq.
Cruelty, 159, 161, 165
Daendel, Governor, 214
Dancers, 133-134
Death, 55
Deer, 165
Dessa bank, 75
government, 59
officials, 60
Dieng Plateau, 237
Dogs, 163
Domestic animals, 158
Doves, 165
Dress, 87—90
Dutch East India Co., 94, 243
Dyes, 140
East Monsoon, 120
Education, 24, 25
Erp, Col. van, 235
Eurasians, 15 1-1 57
Factory district of Soerabaya, 92
Fingerprint system, 250
Five-day week, 119
Flower growing, 194
Forestry service, 192


Fruit, 202
Fruit-tree grafting, 204
Gambir , 181
Gardens, 17 1
Gogok hangan , 33
Goldsmiths, 146
Grass weaving, 144
Groundnuts, 172
Headdresses, 79
Hotels, 254-255
Indigo, 130, 142
Insect pests, 207
Irrigation, 31
Jacatra, 243
Javanese, artists, 149
characteristics of, 17-24
children, 123
cleanliness, 30, 96
dress, 19-20
women, 122-137
Kampongs , 82-85
Kapok, 174-176, 184
Katella , 174
Leatherwork, 147
Leper colonies, 94
Libraries, 26
Loewak , 206
Lorodjonggrang temples, 235
Madjapahit, 238, 240
“Magic,” 100 et seq.
Malabar radio station, 249
Markets, 64, 70-75
Motor bus services, 229
Music, 85
Native cleanliness, 30
fashion, 36-37
financial standard, 34
food, 34-36
houses, 84
ingenuity, 32, 33
newspapers, 25
ways, 30
N.E.L Archaeological Service, 241
Nurseries, 194
Opium, 80
Oranges, 202
Orchids, 209
Oxen, draught, 160
Painting, 149
Paper making, 193
Parang, 144
Pasar , 64, 70-75
Pea-nuts, 172
Pedlars, 255
Pets, 163
Pieterszoon Coen, Jan, 243
Ponies, 158-159, 161, 162-163
Post offices, 250
Pottery, 145
Raffles, 234
Railways, 222
Railway travel, 223-229
Religions, 86 et seq.
Religious ceremonies and con-
ventions, 86


Rice planting, 125
Roads, 214, 220
Great Post Road, 214-216
Rubber estates, 130
Ryoks , 42, 44
Samarang, 246
Sarong , 19
Schools, 80
Selendang , 65
Servants, 135, 207
Sirth box, 180, 182
Sisal hemp, 179
Soerabaya, 246, 249
Soya beans, 176
Storekeepers, 80
Sugarcane, 177-179
Sultanates, 218
Superstitions, 100 et seq.
Tea, 77
Tea estates, 126, 127, 128, 129
Teachers, 80
Temples, Badjang Ratoe, 239
Boroboedoer, 234
Lorodjonggrang, 235
Mendoet, 235
Pawon, 235
Temples, Tjandi Kalasan, 237
Tjandi Sewoe, 237
Tile-making, 145
Tjandi Kalasan, 237
Tjandi Sewoe, 237
Trams, 231
Trees, 185
Umbrellas, oiled paper, 148
Vanilla, 179
Vegetable growing, 201
Vehicles, 218
Veterinary clinics, 166
Water, running, 107-108, 209
Way ang heher, 27
JVayang plays, 26-27, 28
Weaving, 143
Wedding festivities, 47 et seq.
Weddings, 39 et seq.
Whip-making, 147
Wild cat, 206
Women, 122, 125, 128, 13 0—1 37
Women’s dress, 66, 67
Woodcarving, 148
Wooden sandals, 148
PRINTED BY THE RIVERSIDE PRESS, EDINBURGH. 1942.


COMMONWEALTH NATIONAL LIBRARY
By returning this book on or before the latest date
stamped below you make it available to other readers.
22558 9.40 St 8548
29 NO*
20 jm
30
2# JUN
■g SEP
20 OCI
29 DEC


VOA//J&# tf iv
j V :
P33U?' v=3- ?/?■
Po/ y. •
■I'


■ m
■ ■ :■ ’• ,'.v ;V 1 ‘^iv
I
