

at V\ \ vk
Vi I a. feS




I pii mi m


~Y


'


i % **
■ 1: j. 'V \" jEL HB J _ .|f Jk ' "*"•.'SE
11 JSm&M l_ «=«= -■ L
_ _ i m^QB
'
♦ I n
J I
I I
Hands laid hold of the boat's gunwale (page 97).


JERRY GOES TO
SEA
3
CAPTAIN K.MACIAIRE
Illustrated
SAVILE LUMLEY
THOMAS NELSON b SONS
Ibndon. JocantodPatis




CONTENTS
I. THE FIRST VOYAGER 5
11. THE RIVAL MAILS 18
111. MR. WATKINS GETS A SHOCK ... 29
IV. JERRY PAYS A CALL 45
V. FORAGING 59
VI. JERRY MEETS A TOWNIE .... 71
VII. THE RIVAL SHARKERS .... 85
VIII. AN UNAMIABLE HOST .... 104
IX. VENTRY ACTS GREEN ..... 117
X. THE EXPEDITION 134
XI. " ALL THAT GLISTERS IS NOT GOLD " . 152
XII. THE LAST CRUSHING AT MOUNT WEARI-
SOME 167
XIII. THE PURSUIT 180
XIV. THE HUT IN THE SCRUB .... 207
XV. MULLINS' PAYMASTER 220
XVI. UP THE RIVER 237
XVII. THE FLIGHT 257
XVIII. THE BOOM 274




CHAPTER I
THE FIRST VOYAGER
GERALD LECOUSTRE BURFORD
strutted. You are not to suppose him
vain, for the strut was occasioned by nervous-
ness. He was being stared at —he was being
jeered at. The little port of Nith Docks is not
celebrated for good manners, and Jerry's appear-
ance would have excited mirth in any seafaring
community. Behold him, then, as he stepped
from the railway station, that pleasant summer
afternoon, on his way to join, as a first voyage
apprentice, the four-masted barque Rowandale.
His double-breasted reefer suit was buttoned
with shining brass knobs—there's no other name


for them —as large as half-crowns. A pair of
sea-boots, affording ample accommodation for
several years' growth of the members which
they housed, clattered as he marched along the
dry and dusty pavement. Over one shoulder
hung a pair of field glasses in a heavy leather
case, and from the other, perhaps for the sake of
equilibrium, a large folding camera depended.
One crooked arm held a bridge coat, glittering
with brass, coyly half hidden under a travelling
rug, over which rampart Jerry's flushed and
perspiring face peered nervously. The tailor
in the small Midland town who had fitted Jerry
out to go " down to the sea in ships " had, as a
crowning effort, replaced the leathern chin-stay
on his cheese-cutter cap by one of gold braid
which, opened out, made an ornate frame for the
badge. (The Rowandale's house flag which was
reproduced in the badge was two red discs,
representing the two hemispheres, connected by
a heavy blue rope on a white field. Whatever
are the precise heraldic terms for this escutcheon,
they were not in common use on the Rowandale.
The apprentices described the device as " two
biscuits and a bone on an empty stomach," which
did not speak well for the vessel's commissariat
department.)
Jerry made a magnificent, although small,


figure as he clattered along, followed by a barrow
piled up with leather trunks. But Port Nith
failed to appreciate him.
" Light the binnacle, boy ! " squealed an
urchin, and dashed away from the angry eyes
which turned upon him.
After doing a goose step across the innumer-
able railway lines and dodging countless shunt-
ing trucks, through a great cloud of coal dust
came the glint of water and the blackened
spars of craft nestling fondly under the roar-
ing tips.
" 'Ere ye are, mate ; Rowandale ," announced
the porter who trundled Jerry's baggage. He
nodded towards a tall and blackened spectre of
a barque, misty in a haze of dust.
As Jerry halted to stare at his future home, the
tip beside him opened its maw, and ten tons of
coal charged with a thundering rumble down an
iron shute, cascading half a hundredweight of
dust as a nautical baptism upon the new appren-
tice. In haste Jerry mounted the narrow gang-
way. As he reached the vessel's rail he met the
inquiring gaze of a coal-smeared young man
who sat, coatless, on the after hatch, shredding
tobacco. The young man gazed an instant,
open mouthed, at the sumptuous apparition,
then without a word slowly rolled over back-


wards until he presented the soles of a pair of
heavy boots to the sky.
Jerry flushed with indignation, and descend-
ing to the deck, came face to face with another
individual, also inclined to gape.
" Can I see Captain Turnbull, please ? " Jerry
demanded in a voice which he strove to render
firm.
Without reply the second individual plumped
down on the hatch beside the other. " Jeff, do
my eyes play me false, or have they opened a new
box of sailors ? " he whispered in an audible
aside. " What'll we do about it ? "
" Don't let him see the skipper," bleated the
man addressed as Jeff. " I mean, don't let the
old man see him. He has a weak heart —he'd
burst."
Jerry was angry. " I say, I don't know who
you are, but I think you're beastly rude, and
I've a good mind to knock you down ! " He
drew himself up. His fifteen-year-old frame
was toughened by much exercise, and he had an
air of grim determination.
The younger man stared a moment at his
challenger, then flopped out on the hatch.
" Don't let him hurt me, Wally," he pleaded in
mock alarm.
The other man got up. " You're a new ap-


prentice, I suppose ? I'm mate of this vessel.
Mr. Wilson here " —he indicated his recumbent
and grinning companion—" is second mate.
The captain's ashore." He raised his voice—
" Archie ! "
A sail covering a small deck-house under the
after skids was violently agitated, shedding a
cloud of coal dust in the process, and a dungaree-
clad young man of about nineteen emerged.
" Sir ? " he questioned.
" Another lamb for the slaughter ; take him
into the fold," and with a wave of his hand
Mr. Wallace Newcombe, chief officer of the
Rowandale, dismissed Jerry from his presence.
The half-deck, as the house under the skids
was called, was the apprentices' berth. It was
about twelve feet long by nine feet broad, con-
taining eight bunks—four a side—flanked by a
line of sea chests. At the end of the berth,
alongside a small door, stood a group which had
the appearance of two skinny policemen holding
in custody a squat red-faced Irishman in festive
attire. But the group was really inanimate.
It consisted of two high, narrow, blue-painted
cupboards or lockers, between which, raised on
wooden legs, stood a small, square, green, iron
water-tank surmounted by a red earthenware
teapot. Over the teapot, on the bulkhead,


hung a Seth Thomas clock —an outcast from
the cabin —which, as Jerry entered, announced
the hour of six o'clock by a succession of buzz-
ing clicks. The four portholes, shrouded by
the sail, looked like black discs in the garish
light of an oil lamp which threw upon the erst-
wise white bulkhead the gigantic shadows of
four grimy youths seated at the long table which
occupied the major portion of the floor space.
A meal was just concluding, and judging from
the jumble of dirty enamel dishes, coal dust had
formed the chief ingredient of the repast.
Four pairs of eyes directed a questioning gaze
upon the intruder.
" A new shipmate ! " Archie announced ; and
Jerry was made welcome. A place was found
for him at the table, and one of the lads decanted
from the red teapot a pale yellow liquid, a
pannikin full of which he proffered to Jerry.
In the interests of economy, milk and sugar had
been put directly into the teapot in sufficient
quantities to obliterate entirely what natural
flavour the fluid possessed. To call it " tea "
was a slur on a noble beverage ; but it was the
cup of courtesy, and Jerry drank it as such.
The youths speedily became very friendly and
communicative ; then Jerry's baggage arrived.
The convivial chatter was hushed as the lads


regarded in silent wonder the imposing leather
trunks which the porter was dumping into the
berth. The pile grew and grew, until the faint
light of day which sifted through the open door
was all but eclipsed. Then Archie exploded.
" Say, young fellow me lad, where's the grand
piano ?" he exclaimed banteringly. "You must
have forgotten it! "
" And I don't see the mangle," tittered a red-
haired boy with a Jewish cast of features.
Jerry flushed and squirmed uncomfortably.
" Fat lot of use a mangle would be to you,
Benny," another boy sneered. "You never
even wash yourself unless Archie cuffs you into
doing it! "
Archie was pondering the stack of baggage.
" Bung it into the wash-house," he ordered
after a moment's deliberation. " We'll sell
it in Australia."
" Sell my clothes ? " Jerry expostulated.
" Sell all my things ? "
" What we don't want," Archie announced
blithely. " Got any money ? "
Had he been at school, Jerry would have
known well how to answer so impudent a ques-
tion, but he was in a new and unfamiliar w T orld.
He answered meekly, " About seven pounds."
" Good," Archie approved. "We were going


to sell Benny's watch to-night. Weren't we,
Benny ? "
Norman Bensusan, the red-haired boy, nodded
sulkily. " You were going to sell it," he cor-
rected.
" Same thing," Archie retorted airily, and fell
to helping the others transport Jerry's belong-
ings into a small two-berth cabin which opened
into the half-deck. This cabin the boys used
as a bathroom, and in it they hung their oilskins.
If Jerry was at first inclined to resent the
calm appropriation of his property, he soon felt
ashamed of the impulse, for it was quite evident
that the apprentices were eager to share their
possessions with him. He had no bedding,
nor mattress, and these were speedily provided
by his berthmates. He could not get at his
wardrobe, so Benny gave him a pair of shoes to
replace his ponderous sea-boots, while he re-
moved the gold chin-stay from Jerry's cap and
substituted a black one.
They were not endeavouring to ingratiate
themselves with the new apprentice because of
his money. Had they had money, they would
have been eager to share it with Jerry, but after
four weeks' sojourn at Port Nith their funds
were exhausted.
After the boys had bathed and dressed in


uniform somewhat less pretentious than was
Jerry's, they all went ashore together.
Jerry felt that he had stepped straight into
manhood as he marched up the main street. The
bronzed young rufflers gave the wall to no male,
and were inclined to swagger. It was evident
that the rougher element at Port Nith had learnt
to respect" gentlemen rope-haulers " when they
hunted in force. Jerry thought his shipmates
immense fellows, and his soaring estimation of
their manhood got rather a shock when Archie
made the first visit to a cake shop. True, his
deportment in the shop somewhat reassured
Jerry, for Archie prowled about the establish-
ment helping himself to pastries as they took
his fancy —from the counter, from the shelves,
and even from the window; devouring them as
he prowled. His consorts followed his lead, and
the bill Jerry had to settle proved that the supper
on the Rowandale had done little to blunt their
appetites.
Then came a music hall, followed by an orgy
of ham and eggs. About midnight the Rowan-
dales, loud with discordant song, marched back
to the ship.
During the next few days Jerry began to re-
adjust his perspective. He was a sensible
youngster, and when the Rowandale towed out


to single anchor in the roads he had learnt much.
Archie Lomax, the eldest apprentice, was the
ruthless despot of the half-deck, albeit a just
one. He had learnt that. He and Bob Nuttall,
an apprentice who had joined the ship two
months before at Antwerp, were the youngest,
and they, and they alone, had to fetch the meals,
wash up the dishes, and keep the half-deck clean.
The day the ship left the coal tips they spent
washing and scrubbing under Archie's critical
gaze.
The afternoon the ship went out to single
anchor Captain Turnbull came on board, and
half an hour later sent for the new apprentice.
As Jerry entered the after cabin the captain
emerged from his bathroom, dressed only in
trousers and vest; his braces, depending like
a misplaced tail, were twitching violently as he
burnished his face in a large towel from which
it finally emerged, red as a pillar-box.
" Poof ! Coal dust everywhere," he snorted.
" Look up, boy."
Jerry lifted his head and gazed steadily into
the lively blue eyes fringed with heavy grey
brows. Captain Turnbull was tall and portly,
with a square-cut grey beard which failed to
conceal a resolute jaw.
" How old are you, boy ? " he demanded.


Washing and scrubbing.
" Fifteen, sir."
" Humph ! I've a good opinion of my boys.
They deserve it. I've left my razor strop-
always leave something—go and fetch it." He
turned towards his berth.
" Where is it, sir ? " Jerry asked hesitatingly.
" Where ? Station Hotel. Room nineteen."
" How will I get back to the ship, sir ? "
" Think for yourself, boy. Must be self-
reliant," and the captain entered his state-room.
There was much coming and going between
the ship and the shore, and Jerry found no
difficulty in getting a lift to the landing, and at
once made his way to the hotel.


Although the best in the town, the hotel was
far from pretentious, and as Jerry passed through
the hall he caught sight of a familiar face in the
little lounge bar which adjoined it. He halted
in surprise, and to make certain he was not mis-
taken, carefully inspected the half-averted face
of a dark, well-groomed man talking earnestly
to a rough, sly-looking seafarer, who frequently
nodded grimly and darted covert glances at his
companion.
The dark-faced man, with an impatient ges-
ture occasioned by a remark of his companion,
turned towards the hall, and Jerry hastened to-
wards him.
" Why, Uncle Jasper, I didn't know you were
here ! "
The meeting was obviously a surprise to the
dark man, who sprang to his feet, then held out
both hands.
" Jerry, my lad, here's luck ! I came down to
see the last of you. I've just been inquiring how
to get aboard your ship. This good fellow is
joining her to-morrow. He's teaching me the
ropes." Uncle Jasper laughed. " He's your —"
he turned questioningly towards his com-
panion.
" Bos'n," growled the individual addressed.
" Glad to meet you, shipmate." He held out his
(3,742)


hand, grinning. " Mullins my name —Mick
Mullins."
Jerry had very little idea of a boatswain's
standing aboard ship, but he did not like Mullins.
He shook hands without enthusiasm.
During the half-hour's conversation which
followed, Jerry was given to understand that
Mullins was to be his very good friend. It
was worth while being in the bos'n's good
books, Mullin assured him, and Jerry, casting
uneasy glances at his new shipmate, felt that
any one in Mullin's bad books would have reason
to feel very uncomfortable.
Uncle Jasper went aboard with Jerry, and a
case of luxuries in tins, jars, and bottles accom-
panied him.
At a late hour that night Mullins sat on his
lodging-house bed counting a bundle of notes.
" And twice as much to follow." He licked
his lips and stuffed the money into his pocket.
" Come t' see the last of him, did ye, Uncle
Jasper ? Well, I reckon y'has." He chuckled
wickedly.
(8.742)


CHAPTER II
THE RIVAL MAILS
ON Friday the RowandaWs crew came on
board, and at daylight on Saturday morn-
ing a tug gave her a pluck down to Lundy
Island. A heavy fall of rain during the night
had cleared most of the coal dust from the
vessel's spars, and as Jerry stared up at the white
painted yards, glistening in the bright sunshine,
he determined to venture aloft if he could evade
the mates; for it is not customary to let a first
voyager go aloft until he has found his sea
legs.
The anchor came dripping to the cat-head,
shedding with sullen splashes the mud which
caked its flukes —the last piece of England it
would touch for many a month, perhaps many
a long year.
" Loose the topsails ! A couple of you
youngsters up the mizzen," shouted the mate,
bending over the bows. He never turned his
head to see who was obeying his order, and it


was not until the mizzen topsail was ready for
setting that he discovered Jerry was at the yard-
arm. He decided not to notice him, covertly
watching how he shaped. Mr. Newcombe had
no chance for adverse criticism. Jerry had
been well schooled by his berthmates.
The topsail set, the mate addressed himself to
the first voyager.
" Come down, you young marmoset! " he
roared. " Come down ! "
" Sir," Jerry's treble voice drifted down from
his seventy-foot-high perch.
" He says r loose the royal,' " yelled Benny
from the weather yard-arm.
Seeing Jerry lie into the rigging supposedly
to descend as he had ordered, the mate went
forward to hoist the main topsail. But Jerry
was not coming down. He looked with troubled
eyes at the royal yard ninety feet above him, and
set his teeth. The main topsail was being
hoisted to a shanty :
" Once there was a Black-ball ship,
Way, high, hay, ho !
That eighteen knots an hour could slip,
A long time ago."
The breezy swing of the song made Jerry's
pulses tingle. The Rowandale herself was a


speedy ship. He was in a vessel which had
made records. He mustn't funk climbing those
arrogant spars, raking proudly against the sum-
mer sky. He commenced to ascend, and the
words of the shanty came up to him:
" Tinkers, tailors, soldiers, and all,
Way, high, hay, ho !
They all shipped as sailors aboard the Black-ball,
A long time ago."
Fancy tailors shipping as seamen ! Well, he
was a sailor. Here he was one hundred and
sixty feet a,bove the sea all by himself, with only
that gull, seated on the truck, cocking its eye
down at him. Jerry laughed exultantly. Then
he glanced down and caught his breath. The
ship, far below him, looked like a huge white
beetle with two short feathery whiskers —the
threads of foam which parted at her bows.
Ahead of her the sea was like a furrowed green
field covered by a film of glass. The black
mouth of the tug's funnel, from which soared a
column of smoke, was all he could see of their
tiny consort. About the deck of the Rowandale
moved little black peas on abbreviated legs ;
they were men double Jerry's bulk. He hastily
turned his eyes aloft and resumed his climb.
The seagull, with a resentful squawk, opened


its wings and stepped off into the air. Was it
going to attack the lonely invader of its aloof
perch ? It seemed so near and so big. The
last three feet of his climb Jerry had to swarm.
With a one-hand grip on the tie of the yard, his
feet for an awful instant hung kicking in the
air, then he drew himself up. He was on the
yard. He shouted a song in sheer joy and it
blew down the wind. None heard him. The
universe was his. He yelled ecstatically as he
bent to his work. Benny had given him most
precise instructions, and Jerry carried them out
faithfully. He made no mistake. There was
only the bunt gasket left. He slipped it, and
with a rustle the royal flapped loose in the
breeze.
" Sheet home the mizzen royal! "he screamed
triumphantly, with all the might of his lungs.
Many startled eyes turned aloft at the hail.
" Glorious sailor ! " howled Mr. Watkins.
"We ain't set the upper topsail yet! "
Jerry glanced down. The mizzen mast ran
naked to the lower topsail. The royal fluttered
like a pocket handkerchief at the top of a lofty
and bare telegraph pole.
" Who sent that young jackanapes up there ? "
roared Captain Turnbull. " Come down, you
lunatic ! Do you hear ? "


A very mortified Jerry slunk down, passing
Benny, who was ascending to take the royal in
hand. " You should have held on to the bunt
until the t'gan's'l was set," Benny explained.
" You'll cop it."
Benny was a false prophet. It was Mr. New-
combe who " copped it " from the captain.
The next few hours were delightfully exciting
ones for Jerry. Lundy Island, a green mound,
abeam, the tug was slipped, drew alongside, and
on the bight of a heaving line took the last mail
for the shore and all the captain's loose change
to pay its passage, then dropped astern and
swung round, her siren blaring three raucous
hoots as a farewell to the departing " lime
juicer." The barque answered with three
cheers, which the tug, scurrying back to port,
acknowledged by one long hoot.
The Rowandale had commenced her voyage !
Sail after sail fluttered loose a moment, and
kicking like a restive horse were sheeted home,
their snowy expanse rounding to the gentle
breeze.
As the barque edged into St. George's
Channel Jerry became aware of an unpleas-
ant sensation. He took little unpremeditated
rushes hither and thither as the vessel lurched
easily on the slight swell. There was a tight-


" Sheet home the mizzen royal! "
ness about his throat, and he did not like the
way the mastheads swung among the clouds.
Then came the mustering of the crew and pick-
ing the watches. First the mate would choose
a man for his watch, then the second mate made
a selection. There was no competition for
Jerry's services. He stared at the dying sun,
playing jack-in-the-box antics over the rail.
It vanished as the ship careened to leeward, and
again leapt over the rail as she straightened up.
A wave ran hissing along the side, splashed
through a scupper hole, and trickled out again
with a gurgle. It was getting dusk, and a chill


wind blew across the darkening sea. Jerry
felt cold and miserable.
" That's the lot," announced the mate. " You
take the youngster." Mr. Watkins signed to
Jerry to cross over to the starboard side of
the deck where stood the starboard watch, Mr.
Watkins' gang, comprising Archie, Benny, and
eight seamen. " Port watch on deck," con-
tinued the mate. " Relieve the wheel."
Jerry tottered to the half-deck and clambered
into his bunk. He did not want any tea.
It was three days later when he again appeared
on deck, and the Rowandale had done some
travelling. She was nearly across the Bay of
Biscay, and was meandering along before a
light breeze. The decks were snowy, the ropes
neatly coiled, and all signs of coal dust had
vanished. A bright sun warmed Jerry's blood,
and his thoughts turned to the dish of curry
and rice which he would bring from the galley
at eight o'clock. Mr. Watkins welcomed his
young watchmate with a grunt of approval,
and set him filling the captain's bath with sea
water. Jerry's appetite was not diminished
thereby.
That day Jerry acquired much information.
He was greedy for nautical knowledge, and some-
what credulous. As his informants were not


over scrupulous, he had to sift the true from the
false as best he might.
As he sat at dinner the next day, after
completing the forenoon watch, the cry of
" steamboat" was raised on deck, and, the
meal abandoned, the three watchmates rushed
out to see the passing ship.
A large liner was swiftly approaching the
barque. As she drew nearer she altered her
course to pass still closer to the Rowandale,
probably to gratify the wishes of her passen-
gers, but the manoeuvre astonished Jerry. "Is
she going to speak us ? " he inquired.
Archie glanced superciliously at the questioner,
then winked at Benny. " Coming for our mail,
of course. Got your letters in, Benny ? "
" Last night," that untruthful youth an-
swered.
" Is she coming to take our mail home ? "
Jerry questioned, wide-eyed.
"Of course ! A steamer calls every Tuesday
for it. Didn't you tell your friends to write
to you c/o the Neptune Cruising Packet ? "
" No." Jerry was dubious.
" Get your letter written quickly ! " Archie
seized Jerry's field glasses. " That's Jumble-
thump" he announced, scrutinizing the liner,
" and her skipper won't wait long, I can tell you."


The chance of sending a letter home was not
to be neglected. Jerry dived into the half-
deck and got busy. Hungry as he was, he made
no comment when his watchmates divided his
dinner between them, assuring him that he had
no time to eat it.
" Into the skipper with it, quick ! " prompted
Archie, as the youngster finished his letter.
Breathless Jerry dashed from the cabin, and
collided in the alley-way with the black steward.
" Wat you want, boy ? "
" A letter," Jerry panted, and waved the
envelope.
The steward opened the mess-room door.
" De boy's forgot your post, or somet'ing,
captain," he announced, and shoved the youth
inside.
Captain Turnbull and his officers were seated
at dinner. The weather being fine, the bos'n
relieved the officer of the watch for meals.
" A letter for me you've forgotten, young-
ster ? " the captain questioned, and took the
missive.
"Am I too late, sir ? " Jerry panted. " Too
late for the Neptune Cruising Packet ? "
Mr. Watkins wheeled in his chair and gazed
open-mouthed at his young hopeful, while
Captain Turnbull read the superscription on


the envelope, then laid it beside him, smiling
slightly.
" Your mates are having a game with you,
youngster," he said. " I thought you were
smarter than to be caught like this. Wait a
minute."
The grinning faces of the two mates made
Jerry flush scarlet.
" Watkins," the captain continued, after a
moment's reflection, " you said there were some
Biscayan fishermen about. If you pass near
one, get him alongside —the wind's light —and
see if you can barter tobacco for some fresh
fish. Give them this letter and ten francs —I've
got a ten-franc note. They may post it." He
turned to Jerry. "If the letter goes, you can
have the laugh of your mates. But don't be
such an idiot again ! "
Jerry bowed himself out, and heard a burst of
laughter as the door closed behind him. His
first impulse was to fight Archie, big as he was;
but speedily realizing that there was no malice
in the joke, he decided to take it in good part.
A shout of laughter greeted his entry into the
half-deck. " Did you catch the mail ? " Archie
tittered.
" Not the Neptune Cruiser," Jerry answered,
" but the Lobster Pot Patrol. The captain


is going to buy some fish from one of these fish-
ing boats and has promised to give them my
letter, and mine is the only letter that will leave
the Rowandale this side of Iquique. It's worth
losing a dinner for I " Jerry pushed the empty
plates from him and started feeding on biscuits,
grinning the while at the two glum faces of his
watchmates.
They had fresh fish for breakfast next morn-
ing, and a week later an honest Biscayan fisher-
man, for the first time in his fife, posted a letter
to England.


CHAPTER 111
MR. WATKINS GETS A SHOCK
THE owners of the Rowandale pledged them-
selves, in Jerry's indentures of apprentice-
ship, " to teach him, or cause him to be taught,
the duties of a seaman." Such duties are multi-
tudinous. They range from cleaning out the
hen-coop to heaving the ship down. Jerry had
been taught how to clean the hen-coop by Benny,
who was relinquishing the task in his favour.
He had learned many kindred humble offices.
The customary method of teaching an appren-
tice is to let him pick up what knowledge he can,
and Jerry's quick intelligence and tenacious
memory took full advantage of his opportunities.
He asked questions ceaselessly, and every frag-
ment of information he acquired was, like a
precious gem, stored in the casket of his memory.
He never asked the same question twice.
On the other hand, Benny only absorbed the
nautical lore appertaining to his constantly
repeated duties, and he was jealous of the pro-


gress made by the first voyager. Benny was a
sluggard, particularly in the matter of washing
his clothes, and one Saturday afternoon when he
was lying reading on the hatch, Archie emerged
from the half-deck holding at arm's length some
dirty raiment he had discovered hidden in an
unoccupied lower bunk.
" These yours ? " he demanded.
" Yes, I'm going to wash them to-morrow."
"You filthy little blighter ! These are the
things you wore three weeks ago, when we were
loading coal; get up and wash them now ! "
Archie showered the dirty garments on top of
their owner. " And if I find any rags in that
bunk again, I'll ditch 'em."
With a flutter of arms and legs Benny disen-
tangled himself from the load, and, sighing
resignedly, procured a tub of rain water, then
seated himself beside Jerry, who was already
busy on the distasteful task of laundry work.
" I've half a dozen shirts here," he moaned.
" I've a good mind to tow 'em overboard."
" Shirts are easy," retorted Jerry.
" Do the neck, then the breast,
Wash the sleeves, hang the rest! "
he chanted, working away at a great mound of
soap suds which bulged round his bare arms.


" You know too much," Benny growled, and
shot a glance of enmity at his companion.
" Water's very brackish," he added after a
few moments' silence. " Got any sheave-hole
soap ? "
Lifting a grinning face, Jerry stared at
his watchmate. "Is it good stuff ? " he
queried.
Benny bent over his tub, his face averted.
" Great ! It lathers wonderful in salty water.
Slip into the steward and get a chunk, will
you ? "
Still grinning, Jerry rose, wiped his hands on
a wrung-out garment, and disappeared round
the corner on the half-deck.
Benny chuckled. The first voyager did not
know as much as he thought he did. Benny
could picture the wild gesticulations of the negro
steward when Jerry made his demand for the
mythical " sheave-hole " soap.
In a minute Jerry returned. He was carrying
something wrapped up in a shirt. " Couldn't
get any sheave-hole soap," he announced to the
staring Benny. " Will this do ? "
A large lump of coal fell with a splash among
Benny's washing, deluging him with a spurt of
dirty water.
With a cry like the despairing squeal of a


cornered rat, Benny leapt to his feet and dashed
at his watchmate.
It was a sorry business for poor Benny. He
was his opponent's senior by about a year, and
could give him a stone in weight. Bigger boys
than he had, at Welford Grange School, owned
Jerry their master, but Benny was not hauling
down his colours to a first voyager until he
had to.
Mr. Watkins, half hidden behind the jigger
mast, watched the fight with kindling eyes. He
was ready to intervene instantly should Captain
Turnbull come on deck, but he fervently hoped
that the old man was having a siesta, for it was
a brave combat.
Archie watched the encounter with a feeling
of misgiving. If Jerry hammered a boy a year
his senior when only three weeks at sea, would
he, in three years' time, be cock of the half-deck ?
As Archie helped the vanquished Benny to
the berth he decided to keep a firm grip on his
authority. " Now then, youngster," he flung
over his shoulder at Jerry, " wash up those soap
suds." Without demur Jerry did as he was
bidden.
As soon as he was sufficiently recovered,
Benny made his way to the galley. He had had
enough of washing clothes.


Benny leapt to his feet and dashed at his watchmate.
" Say, I'll give you half a pound of tobacco a
passage to wash my clothes for me," he suggested
to the negro cook, who rolled his eyes patheti-
cally at the outrageous suggestion.
" No, sah, I won't ! " he answered em-
phatically.
" One pound a passage, then ? "
" One pound ebbery mont' an' maybe I do."
" Half a pound a month," countered Benny
anxiously.
The cook pondered.
" Half a pound ebbery mont' den, an' ah do
dem on Wednesday wen ah makes de bread.
Do dem same time."
(3,742) S3 3


This unhygienic suggestion received Benny's
instant approval, and the cook feared he had
relented too easily.
" T'ree piece only ebbery week, mind," he
cautioned. " One sock count one piece."
" Oh, rot! " grumbled Benny. " Suppose I
have three pairs of socks to wash ? "
The cook, his eyes and nose wrinkled, did a
little sum in mental arithmetic.
" T'ree pair sock, dem is two week laundry,"
he announced, " unless you make it half-pound
ebbery week."
Benny was aghast at such cupidity.
" All right, you old grasper," he grumbled.
" Make it half-pound a week then, and you wash
all my clothes."
" Den I wash ebberything," the cook con-
firmed. " 'Cept blankits," he added hastily.
" I ain't agoin' to wash no blankits, mind! "
Thus was the bargain concluded.
By his victory over Benny, Jerry had incurred
the enmity of his berthmates. If a first voyager
thrashes his senior, the others feel that their
prestige is at stake and are eager to hammer a
proper respect for his elders into the victor.
Jerry was not looking for trouble. He was good-
tempered, naturally willing and obliging, and
his companions, finding that he bore the laurels


of his triumph with becoming humility, soon
reinstated him in their confidence.
Jerry's eagerness to acquire nautical lore was
readily pandered to by the more proficient of
the able seamen. Eric Olsen, a Swede, and
Tom Hamlin, a Londoner, were his chief men-
tors, and it would have been hard to find more
capable instructors.
Mullins, the bos'n, at first tried to patronize
Jerry, but the boy disliked the bos'n's oily
manner, and discovering that he was a much
less accomplished seaman than either Eric or
Tom, took pains to avoid him.
Jerry was no paragon. He suffered from a
youthful inclination to sleep at inopportune
moments, and Mr. Watkins was not long in
discovering this tendency.
In fine weather at sea, an easy-going officer
is content if, besides the man at the wheel and
one on the look-out, a " policeman," an A.B. is
awake ready, the instant the officer of the watch
requires them, to arouse the watch on deck, who
are permitted to snooze on the hatches. There
must also be an apprentice awake keeping time —
that is, striking the bells every half-hour. As
Jerry had neither wheel nor look-out to take, this
duty usually devolved upon him. He com-
menced his first night watch on deck firmly


determined to keep awake, but the gentle hum
of the steady breeze, the low swish of the sea,
and Mr. Watkins' rhythmic tread on the poop,
all tended to promote drowsiness. After half
an hour's pacing, Jerry sat down on the after-
hatch and leant back against the harness cask.
Slowly his heavy eyelids shut out the vision of
the sea and stars, and with a peaceful sigh he
entered the oblivion of slumber.
A roar of " Where's that gravy-eyed swab ? "
brought him, with a startled jerk, into conscious-
ness and a sense of his misdemeanour. " Come
up here, you young dormouse ! "
Jerry clattered up into the poop.
" What about six bells ? " snapped Mr.
Watkins.
Six bells ! Eleven o'clock ! Was it as late
as that ? Jerry dashed aft to the wheel box
and struck the bell.
" Yer in a hurry ter finish yer watch, ain't
yer ? " sniggered Tom Hamlin, who was steer-
ing.
The youth was still muzzy-headed. He
stared blankly at his questioner as the man on
the look-out, who had also been resting his eyes,
jumped to the bell on the forecastle head and
six bells clattered out over the Rowandale.
A hand gripped Jerry by the ear. " Come and


look at the clock, you young sweep," Mr. Watkins
hissed, and dragged him to the chart-house.
The boy blinked at the clock, rubbed his
eyes, and stared again. The time was two
minutes past nine.
" Now say you haven't been asleep, you
whelp ! " growled the second mate. " Over to
the lee side of the poop, get a capstan bar,
shoulder arms, and do sentry-go up and down.
If you go to sleep again I'll sluice a bucket of
water over you ! "
That was the first of many night watches that
Jerry spent on the poop ; but as Mr. Watkins
was a communicative soul, and usually called
the boy over to windward to discourse on ships,
sailors, and the sea, he gained much by his
weakness for playing " shut-eye," as the second
mate termed it.
The Rowandale crossed the line, and King
Neptune gave violent attention to those new to
his domain. His majesty complained that Jerry
was looking pale, and after a shave and a ducking
administered a couple of pills the size of marbles,
composed of eggshells, tar, and slush (salt-beef
fat), to the patient. Apprentices have the diges-
tive organs of ostriches. Anyway, it is certain
that Jerry felt no ill-effects from the boluses he
swallowed.


The south-east trade winds pushed the barque
well to the southward, where she picked up a
westerly breeze which kept her company until
she was in the latitude of the River Plate. At
midnight one night she lay rolling listlessly in
a gentle swell under a starry sky.
It was Jerry's watch below, and to the sigh
of the rustling sails he went asleep. He was
dreaming of a " rough house " at Welford
Grange School —an exceedingly " rough house."
Desks overturned with a crash. The house-
master came on the scene and roared like a
wounded bull, while the boys yelled muti-
nously. They were yelling such silly things
too. Jerry laughed in his sleep. Then some
one grabbed his arm and shook him violently.
He struggled.
" All hands ! Jerry, tumble out! A pam-
pero's struck us ! " It was Archie who was
yelling in his ear.
Jerry sprang from his bunk and sprawled
across the table. The chests lay overturned,
and their contents were washing about in water
a foot deep which swished across the floor. The
lamp hung at an acute angle and swayed jerkily.
With a crash a sea smote the half-deck and hissed
through the closed door, making a noise like the
emptying of a powerful syringe. The door had


been hooked open when Jerry had turned in, and
the caress of the soft night air had been on his face
when he fell asleep. He put on his clothes and
oilskins, opened the door, and slipped into pande-
monium. He was in a world of utter blackness.
He heard the dull beat of slackened canvas,
the crashing of blocks, and the wind. He had
read of gales whistling, but while a ship presents
so much as an inch of canvas to the wind, it
never has so kindly a note as a whistle. A
thousand lions roaring in unison would have
sounded more friendly than the howling of the
gale. It flung the boy against the side of the
half-deck and held him so as a blaze of lightning
streaked across the sky.
He saw the tall masts leaning at a fearful
angle against the rushing leaden heavens ; the
lowered sails rigid and bulging amid a chaos of
leaping blocks and streaming cordage. The sea
stretched to leeward like a mottled grey side of
a long hill, against which the Rozvandcile was
leaning. Blackness closed in and a peal of
thunder deafened him for a moment, then he
heard the faint tumult of human voices. A noise
like the swift rending of silk came from some-
where amidships, followed by a crash and a
rattle as a rope shrieked through a sheave near
by. A sea leaped the rail, rolled him into the


scuppers, and flooded over him. Was he over-
board or inboard ? Was the Rowandale doomed ?
He clutched, caught nothing, and found himself
moving swiftly, the water all about him. A
hand grabbed him by the collar, dragged him to
his feet, and, as lightning blazed, Mr. Watkins
peered into his face.
The second officer was annoyed. " Why the
dickens didn't you stay below, kid ? I haven't
time to pick winkles like you out of the scuppers
—haul the mainsail up ! "
Shouting and hauling on the gear of the main-
sail were Jerry's watchmates, and as he joined
them he realized that the huge sail, now all but
spilled of wind, had been the cause of half the
fearful clamour which had alarmed him. He
blushed with shame. He had been badly scared,
and here was Benny jesting and laughing as he
hauled on the gear.
The sail clewed up, Jerry followed the men
aloft and found himself at the bunt, or middle
of the yard, sandwiched between Hamlin and
Mullins.
" This ain't the place for fly-weights," Ham-
lin observed. " You should be at the yard-arm,
kid." He spoke truth. The bulk of the sail
is stowed at the bunt. The youngster had,
however, no time to lie out on the yard; Mr.


Watkins, stationed at the slings, was exhorting
the crew to get the sail up.
" Muzzle her, bullies ! Knock the stuffing
out of her! " he cried, and twenty pairs of arms
grabbed and punched, trying to get a hold on
the bulging canvas.
" Now, now, sons ! When she's not look-
ing ! " roared the officer, as the gale for an
instant abated. " Hit him again : he's got no
friends ! "
The gale thundered as the sail was gathered
up and the clawing hands and weary arms were
strained to their utmost to retain their grip.
" Hold hard, my bold fish-hooks! " the
second mate encouraged. " Let go the man's
sail, can't you ?" This to the furious wind which
threatened to recapture all the labouring crew
had gained.
At last the bucking monster was gathered on to
the yard and only wanted securing by the rope
gaskets.
Sit on the foot-rope, Jerry, and swing a
gasket up foreside o' the yard t' me," Mullins
ordered. The boy, not without a tremor,
loosened his hold on the yard, sat on the slender
foot-rope, and leaning forward, his cheek against
the yard to keep his balance, swung up the
gasket as instructed.


The sail was not up snugly enough for
Mr. Watkins. "Up with her, you farmers !
R-o-1-1, you sons of hayricks, r-o-1-1! "
Quite unaware of Jerry's situation, the crew
obediently leant over the yard, took a new grip,
and at the word "roll," strained together to
bring the sail, now a ninety-foot-long roll of
canvas, on top of the yard. As twenty pairs of
legs shoved the foot-rope backwards, Jerry
slipped from his seat, clutched wildly at the
yard, and with a scream vanished into the
blackness below him.
"The kid's gone ! " howled Mullins. "He
was sittin' on the foot-rope ! "
" You knew he was sitting on the foot-rope
and didn't hold him, you swine ! " roared the
second mate, and springing to a backstay, slid
down to the deck.
A flash of lightning blazed an instant, and
Mr. Watkins had a fleeting vision of a stark
white lower mast, a tangle of glistening wet
ropes snaking about in the water which swirled
across the deck, but no sign of the expected
mangled body of his young watchmate.
He felt sick with impotence. Tottering to
the rail he stood trembling. What use shouting
" Man overboard " ? Nothing could be done
on such a night. The kid —the poor kid !


Jerry clutched wildly at the yard.
Mr. Watkins flung off his oilskin coat and drew
one seaboot half off. It would be madness.
He could do nothing in that sea. He paused,
irresolute, and received a kick on the side of
the head. Looking up, he saw a black shape
climbing down the lazy tack. He embraced
the climber, and lifting him to the deck, shook
him vigorously.
" You young maggot! Does it take you ten
minutes to swarm down from the main yard ? "
he growled in a shaky voice.
" I didn't know where the rope led to,"
Jerry panted. "It might have led into the
sea."


"So it might," the second mate agreed.
" You go and turn in, my lad. You've put ten
years on my life this last half-hour." He led
the youth aft.
Jerry was not loath to obey the order. He
had had excitement enough for one evening.
To each of the two clews to the mainsail
is attached a heavy rope —the " lazy tacks."
When the sail is stowed, these ropes depend from
the centre of the yard, and fortunately for Jerry,
when he slipped off the foot-rope, he managed
to grasp one of the lazy tacks and so had slid
down safely.
When Mullins heard of Jerry's miraculous
escape he was loud in his rejoicings. No
timely flash of lightning showed up his white
and scowling face. The incident would be
remembered, and that, in time to come, might
prove embarrassing for the bos'n.


CHAPTER IV
JERRY PAYS A CALL
THE pampero rushed the Rozvandale down
to Staten Land, where a gentle breeze, like
a smooth-tongued and hypocritical usher to that
ocean graveyard, Cape Horn, coaxed her south,
and then left her to force her passage westward,
if she could. Far away on her beam, a grim
bulk of mountain, with a cap of snow set awry
on its head, squatted Cape Horn, awaiting the
coming contest between ship and elements.
No impartial referee this, but a partisan of the
foulest tricks of wind and wave, ready to lend
a hand in the work of destruction, should the
unwary craft be driven within the grip of the
outlying rocks.
Alone, on the vast expanse of heaving grey
waters, lay the Rowandale , trim, alert, intrepid ;
a valiant knight-errant courageously awaiting
the onslaught of ambushed, cunning enemies.
She had not long to wait.
Over the horizon came a great black cloud
hurrying to bar her passage, and a gale of hurri-
-45


cane violence chased her south until the mush
ice came hammering upon her sides and bid her
away. Then round she went, her weary crew,
half-frozen and saturated, lugging at the ice-
stiffened ropes, the chill water swishing about
their middles, or clinging for dear life to the
braces while green seas submerged them, leav-
ing them wondering if the stricken ship were
still under their feet. With her decks full of
water to the rails, her wash ports clanging like
castanets as it sluiced from her sides, the
barque staggered north, winning a precious
mile or two of westing, until the ugly bulk of
Cape Horn came into view, or the wind headed
her. Then it was all hands wear ship again, and
once more she headed south. For ten days,
back and forth she went; then a snow-laden
gale roared out of the eastward, and with yards
squared the RowancLale charged past Cape Horn.
The drear Diego Ramirez, brooding darkly over
the turbulent seas, saw her edging north towards
a kinder clime. How small and frail the barque
must have looked from those bleak rocks; a
graceful little thing, chased by roaring, foam-
crested seas, the frenzied gale thundering amid
her slender spars. A dainty piece of man-made
conceit —a conqueror of the elements' utmost
fury.


" I'm a flying-fish sailor," hummed Mr. Wat-
kins, jauntily patrolling the poop ; " meet you
again, old son; and beat you again, ta-ta ! " He
waved his hand to the frowning Ramirez drop-
ping swiftly astern.
Cape Horn forgotten, one sunny morn the
Rowandale glided past Juan Fernandez, famous
as Robinson's Island. St. Felix and St. Am-
brose, those two abandoned penal settlements
off the Chilian coast, gave her a land breeze
one night when she sorely needed it, and four
days later she crept into the shade of the Andes,
to anchor off Iquique, sixty-nine days out from
Nith docks —a very smart passage.
That night a bag of mail came on board with
the agent, Mr. Marwood, a dapper little man who
stood talking to the captain, sneering super-
ciliously at the whoops of delight which accom-
panied the distribution of the letters.
As the contents of the mail bag grew less,
ominous mutterings among the crew increased!
A newspaper or magazine from one's home land
bridges time and distance by little intimate,
familiar touches even more effectively than does
personal correspondence, and there were neither
magazines nor papers for the Rowandale. The
crew, rightly surmising that these had gone to
grace the agent's breakfast table, eyed him


angrily. Mr. Marwood continued to sneer.
He was indifferent as to how he stood with
common seamen. He was to learn better
manners.
Next day the barque took her place among the
tiers of vessels moored head and stern in the
open roadstead, and commenced discharging
cargo. This work was performed entirely by
the crew. The Warrior, a fast ship with a
reputation for smartness, was the Rowandale's
nearest neighbour. The former had come out
in eighty days, so the Rowandale, having licked
her at sailing, needs must beat her at discharging.
The officers on both ships were in their ele-
ment, for the two crews worked like steam
navvies. Mr. Watkins, who was in charge of
the unloading, knew how to get the most out of
his gang; but Mr. Newcombe was a little too
enterprising to suit the crew. His visits to the
hold had to be discouraged. While they were
digging down, the work was of course performed
in full view of the deck, but once the skin was
reached and they were working out of sight of
the deck, the crew desired no intrusion.
Welsh coal is very dirty, and it was an easy
matter to fill a couple of sacks with dust; these,
placed in the 'tween-decks under guard of an
apprentice, were kept ready for action. If the


mate showed any inclination to descend into the
hold, a kick at a pile of coal would dislodge the
crest and create a fog of dust, to which would be
instantly added the contents of the two sacks,
and the resulting choking gloom was quite
sufficient to sap Mr. Newcombe's inclination to
venture below.
Stationed one afternoon in the 'tween-decks,
as C.O. of the dust screen, Jerry was indulging
in his favourite pastime of shut-eye, when the
violent ringing of shovels against the step of the
mast in the lower hold shattered his dreams.
" Enemy closing in ; instantly provide dust
screen," was the interpretation which Jerry
gave to the urgent signal.
In the hold the crew had ceased their work
in order to minimize the dust, while Mr. Mar-
wood, immaculate in white ducks, gingerly
descended the ladder. He had complained that
the crew were breaking the coal unnecessarily.
It contained too much dust. If proof of this
contention were lacking, it was, at that instant,
amply provided by Jerry. A hundredweight of
dust gushed over the climber, enveloping him in
a swirling dun-coloured gloom. Mr. Marwood
lost his nerve, flung his arms and legs round the
iron ladder, and with the velocity of a pile-
driver descended to the hold. The force of
(3,742)
4


his impact on the side of a pile of coal started
it running, and ten tons of roaring blackness
charged down around him.
No one came to his assistance. Bruised and
ragged he climbed to his feet. The crown of his
twenty-dollar panama hat had vanished, and
its brim, like a coal-smeared halo, dropped
limply over his blackened face.
" Lumme, look what I've found," sniggered
a Cockney. " It's a coal maggot! "
" It's the cook's brother," suggested Hamlin.
" What did you say, mate ? " He cupped his
hand to his ear, and with a puzzled face bent
to listen to the storm of abuse Mr. Marwood
was spitting at him. " Any of you fellows speak
Swahili ? " Hamlin demanded, looking ques-
tioningly at the grinning crew who clustered
around.
" You'll pay for this ! " screamed the agent.
" You'll get gaol ! I'll have the law on you,
you "
" Law ? " Mr. Watkins pushed his way into
the group. " What the dickens do you mean
by coming down here and stopping my men from
working ?" he demanded angrily. " Your job's
ashore, and if I find you prying down here again,
I'll give you a night in the bilges to teach you
manners. Be off ! "


The second mate was in the right. The agent
might be a very great man ashore, but if he
came on board the Rowandale without permis-
sion, he could be regarded as a trespasser.
Still spluttering wrathful threats, the agent
climbed shakily out of the hold. Then Mr.
Watkins turned upon the crew. " Any more
of this monkey business, and you'll hear about
it! he snapped, and climbed into the 'tween-
decks. A moment later a bulky object was
precipitated through the trimming hatch, slid
swiftly down the twenty-foot-high pile of coal,
and resolved itself into Jerry, enveloped in a
couple of coal sacks. There was not much went
on aboard the Rowandale that Mr. Watkins did
not know about.
It was not customary to allow the crews of
ships discharging in the bay to go ashore, and
as far as social intercourse goes they were little
better off than when at sea. The apprentices
have more freedom, but they certainly earn it.
At 5.30 a.m. they had a three mile row to the
shore and back to bring off the day's supply of
fresh meat and vegetables. In the evenings they
also did a considerable amount of boat work,
ferrying the captain to and from the shore or
ship visiting. Often the youths would not get
to their bunks before 2 a.m., but if they were


not up by 5.30 a.m. Mr. Watkins, assisted by a
bucket of water, would hasten their movements.
The Warrior was the Rowandale's chummy
ship, and many a pleasant evening Jerry spent
in the former's half-deck while Captain Turn-
bull was entertained in the cabin. It is a point
of courtesy with apprentices never to turn in
while their uninvited guests remain on board,
no matter at what hour the visiting captain calls
for his boat. The owners thoughtlessly never
provide for the entertainment of visiting appren-
tices, and if the youthful hosts make good this
oversight by carefully organized raids on the
cabin pantry, surely they are not to be blamed.
These enforced visits had to be followed up
by voluntary calls on Sunday afternoons, when
the boys' time was their own. On the Rowan-
dale's first Sunday in port, across the hundred-
yard strip of water which separated her from the
Warrior , came three hatch covers, on each of
which sprawled an apprentice, propelling his
unwieldy craft by a vigorous kicking of the legs.
The succeeding Sunday the Rowandales had,
of course, to emulate the feat. The fact that
Captain Turnbull would much sooner have lent
them a boat than have them risk their lives and
his hatches in their escapade worried them not
at all. If the Warrior's boys had walked across


Propelling his unwieldy craft by a vigorous kicking
of the legs.
on a tight-rope, the Rowandale's needs must do
the same.
As soon as the captain and officers were in-
dulging in their afternoon siesta, three of the
fore-hatch covers went overboard, and the star-
board watch of apprentices, clad only in dunga-
ree trousers, splashed after them.
The passage was made safely, and after a
pleasant afternoon, when the visitors were pre-
paring to return, to their dismay they observed
Captain Turnbull taking a constitutional on the
Rowandale's poop.
In growing alarm the boys waited for the


captain to go below, but dusk closed over the
bay and he still paced on. To make matters
worse, a long swell was rapidly getting up. The
return journey would not prove too easy.
" I'll have to ask our old man for a boat,"
Jim Kitson, the eldest apprentice on the Warrior,
announced as he and the three adventurers
stood at the rail peering towards the now scarcely
visible Rowandale.
" We'll go back the way we came," announced
Archie. " Ready, lads ? "
"You can't go ! " Another of the Warrior
boys, in haste, joined the group. " The surf
signal's up ashore —you'll never get across ! "
The Rowandales stood a moment silent,
exchanging uneasy glances. When the surf
became so heavy as to be dangerous to boats, a
warning signal was hoisted ashore.
I'll ask for a boat," Jim Kitson insisted.
" You can't swim in this ! "
The Warrior heaved herself up on the bosom
of a long oily swell, leaned heavily towards the
shore, then straightened up, her chain cables
jarring as she flung her weight upon them.
" You can't go, fellows ! " Jim repeated, and
stared at Archie.
" Rot! Frti going; let the kids stay ! "
Archie announced.


" Let the kid stay," corrected Benny, and
fetched his hatch.
But Jerry was not going to be left behind, and
Archie, astride the rail, cast a worried look at
his young watchmate's preparations. " You
hang out here, Jerry; this is a stiffish job." He
only meant to question Jerry's weight, not his
courage, but his choice of phrase was unfor-
tunate.
A hatch was tipped overboard and two dull
splashes followed—Jerry had taken a header
from the rail. Giving him a moment to get
clear of the side, Archie and Benny followed.
Down the side of a long swell Jerry tobog-
ganed; a black wall of water stood either side of
him, and left him gazing at a star-sprinkled
wedge of dark sky. He wished he had not been
quite so impetuous. He might at least have let
Archie go first, then he would have known his
watchmate was near him. Perhaps Archie had
not yet left the Warrior. Jerry wished he knew,
but he wasn't going to call out just because he
felt lonely. A wave lifted him up and gave him
a momentary view of the faintly discernible
masts of his own ship. They looked nearer
together, somehow. He kicked out wildly. The
Rowandale's masts could not be getting nearer
together; he must be drifting astern of her!


Down into a sombre valley of water glided
the hatch. A cross sea caught it, and spun
it like a top. It seemed suddenly to be
transformed into a wooden demon, viciously
attacking its trusting victim. Jerry struggled
furiously, freed himself, and rose panting to
the crest of the wave —minus the hatch. The
Rowandale 1 s masts were in line. He was right
astern of her ! Dim, silent, and austere she
looked. Her indifference to his fate seemed to
him to be calculated cruelty. He opened his
mouth to yell for help; a sea slopped into it,
and he sank, choking.
When he rose again, he heard the dull thunder
of the surf. What use crying out now ?
Another sound came from out the night.
A long wail. Jerry felt his heart thumping.
Was it Archie, or poor old Benny ? The sound
was repeated, harsh and long. It was a sea
lion ! His mates w r ere safe and would come for
him soon. It would have to be soon !
The noise of the surf was growing louder.
Borne up on the top of a swell, his eyes dilated
with horror. Shoreward was a grey jumble of
water not one hundred yards distant. It was
only a matter of a few moments now and he
would be the sport of those crashing grey seas.
It couldn't be helped. He clenched his teeth.


Were he again safe on the Warrior he would
have again plunged. If he could not follow
where Archie led, he just had to drown, that
was all. He pictured Captain Turnbull at the
Sunday evening service, which he always held
in the cabin, peering over his reading spec-
tacles in search of the absentees, and Mr.
Watkins hotly predicting that Jerry was playing
shut-eye. He almost smiled. Mr. Watkins
wouldn't have funked that swim, Jerry knew.
Well, he hadn't funked it either, and he might
come through the surf alive. A Kanaka could.
Half dazed, up again on the swell he rose,
and a howl, half fear, half challenge, burst from
his lip 6. There was a splash of white on the
sea in front of him. He was in broken water.
Was it broken water ? Why did it creak instead
of roar ? Could it be a boat ?
A beam of light stabbed down upon him, and
some one cried, " Hold water ! In bow oar! "
There was a splash near by, and a well-known
voice roared, " Lay in that boat-hook, you fool,
Mullins ! You nearly cracked him on the head !
Take the steering oar, Hamlin." Then another
heavier splash.
" Good old Mr. Watkins ! " Jerry tried to
collect his thoughts. " Why wasn't the second
mate at the service ? " Something gripped him,


and he struggled feebly. Was it the surf ? He
could do no more; it must have its way with him.
The sea and the stars seemed to race away from
him, and he knew no more.
It was Captain Turnbull bellowing from the
poop which restored Jerry to consciousness.
" Have you got him ? "
" Aye, aye, sir ; not much amiss with him,"
Mr. Watkins responded.
As the second mate carried Jerry up the gang-
way the captain met them.
" Had a dip yourself, Watkins," he growled,
then peered down at Jerry. "The steward has
fixed things for the boy; let me know if you want
anything more. Ye didn't get the hatch, I
suppose ? Well, those three young scamps will
have to pay for a new one."


CHAPTER V
FORAGING
CLOSE-HAULED to a light breeze, showing
a high side above water, the Rowandale
was working seaward from Iquique, bound to
Astoria.
If you are as ' 4 cargo wise " as the boys of the
Rowandale thought they were, you will under-
stand why " Astoria for orders " had aroused
discussion on the half-deck. Astoria is at the
mouth of the Columbia River, in Oregon, U.S.A.,
the " Granary of the West"; thence also comes
Columbia River salmon, and you have no doubt
heard of Oregon pine. What was the Rowan-
dale's cargo to be —grain, timber, or tinned
salmon, and for where ?
Having suggested for all three commodities
a few possible markets which would have aston-
ished the owners, the boys dismissed the topic
and turned to a more vital theme.
" Where's the roast chicken the steward


promised us ? " Archie demanded. " Isn't it
high time we had it ? "
" Put not thy faith in nigger stewards,"
murmured Benny, for it was indeed patent that
the steward had forgotten his promise made off
Cape Horn.
During the bad weather on the outward
voyage the boys had lost many a half-hour of
their watches below transporting the cabin food
from galley to mess-room. Time and again one
or other of them had, for ten minutes on end,
perched on the fife rail holding high above the
splashing water some choice dish destined for
the enjoyment of the officers. Not a drop of
salt water had invaded the hash kids, not a dash
of the briny had sullied the coffee. For this
yeoman service the steward had spoken of
rewarding the boys with roast chicken and
pumpkin pie when fine weather set in.
Fine weather came, but not the roast chicken.
Archie had at last protested in a gentlemanly
manner. He had threatened to " unship the
steward's ugly black figure head." The steward
only grinned expansively and explained, " All
de chickens has been drownded off de Horn, and
I ain't agoin' to buy no moa."
This was highly unsatisfactory, and the
apprentices decided that they would have to


take the law into their own hands and help
themselves.
It is only fair to the boys to state that, while
the steward would have turned green with
apprehension had he left as much as a tin of
cocoa lying about, neither he nor any one else
in the ship would have dreamed of locking up
personal property. In the forecastle or half-
deck such an insult as a locked chest was un-
heard of —indeed a locked box would have been
instantly and summarily kicked open by the
owner's indignant berthmates.
The officers left money and jewellery lying
anywhere, but would suspiciously take stock of
the plate of sandwiches destined for their mid-
night snack had an apprentice visited their
"cabins, to which apartments the youths had
free access. Theft of any personal property
of the master, officers, or crews on a British
sailing vessel by shipmates is practically un-
known. If edible stores disappear, the appren-
tices are always blamed, en masse , and suffer
accordingly.
The lazarette, or store-room, of the Rowan-
dale was under the cabin, and entered through
a hatch in the pantry. In this compartment
sundry small deck stores were also stowed, and
whenever the boys descended to procure any of


these stores, the steward made it his business
to search them on their exit. The galley and
the pantry were also carefully guarded. They
were more accessible than the lazarette, but
offered less plunder, and Archie, like a gallant
commander, proposed to strike at the enemy's
stronghold—the lazarette. How was it to be
managed ?
" Drop a line down the poop ventilator,"
suggested one of the boys in the port watch;
" make it fast to something good next time we
are in the lazarette, then haul it up at night."
" The second mate would give us a hand to
pull it up, I suppose," sneered Archie. " He'd
let us fool about the poop at night. I can see
him!"
" When the steward went into the lazarette
he'd take the line for a cobweb, perhaps,"
sniggered Benny.
" You've got to leave this job to our watch,"
Archie pronounced.
" Well, how's it to be done ? " growled a port
watcher sulkily.
" The fact is, you youngsters neglect your
studies," Archie said severely. " You never
know when you might learn something useful
from books."
A battery of contemptuous glances was


turned upon the nautical publications which
lined the little book-case. It was obvious that
the boys held them in extreme disfavour.
" What's study got to do with it ? " one
asked.
Archie explained. " A sailing ship of our
length must have one water-tight bulkhead —the
collision bulkhead abaft the forepeak. Water
entering the ship anywhere aft of the collision
bulkhead must have access to the pump well.
Did you know that ? "
" Well, what about it ? " questioned a youth.
" If water gets into the lazarette, how would
it get to the pump well ? "
" Through the 'tween-deck scuppers, of
course ! "
Archie triumphantly flourished a pillow-case.
" Stuff a couple of pounds of sugar into that
and it will go through the scuppers under the
lazarette's bulkhead, won't it, you lean-witted
loons ? "
Archie was hailed as a big-brained benefactor
of the human race, and a few days later Jerry
and Benny, ordered into the lazarette to ball up
spun yarn, took the pillow-case with them.
The steward was not in the pantry when the
boys made the descent, and in order that he, if
he entered the pantry hastily, might not descend


to the lazarette more precipitously than he or
they could wish, the boys pulled the hatch into
place after them.
They were familiar with their surroundings,
and in a few moments the pillow-case was
stuffed full of sugar, tea, raisins, and figs, and
was hurried to the spot where the scuppers
passed under the bulkhead. One glance at the
small hole through which the distended pillow-
case was to pass, and the greedy youths sank on
to their haunches with sighs of regret. It was
obvious that they would have to unload three-
quarters of their booty before it could come
safely to Archie, who had slunk into the 'tween-
decks and was crouching over the waterway like
a cat over a mouse-hole.
It was impracticable to return the stores to
their allotted places. Jerry summarily tumbled
half the swag into the scuppers, and was again
tying up the mouth of the pillow-case when the
lazarette hatch was flung open and the shuffling
step of the steward was heard descending the
ladder.
Instantly extinguishing the lamp, the youths
crouched behind some sugar casks and awaited
developments.
Unaware of the boys' presence, the steward
placed a kid and a lamp on top of a flour tank,


and removing the man-hole door plunged his
hands into the aperture. The contents of the
four-feet-high tank were evidently out of his
reach, for with a grunt of annoyance the negro
sought for a small case. Placing it conveniently,
he mounted it, his head and shoulders disap-
peared, and one leg waved in the air as he dived
down to reach the scant remains in the tank.
Jerry, his mouth full of figs intermixed with
tea-leaves, nudged Benny, who nodded com-
prehendingly.
There was a scurry of feet, and the ship
plunged violently —at least, so thought the
steward, for the box disappeared from under
him, his legs were flung upwards, and he sank
head-foremost into the flour.
A vision of two huge splay feet kicking wildly
hurried the boys' retreat. Dashing up and on to
the deck, they collided with Mr. Watkins.
" Why this unseemly haste ? " demanded the
second mate, eyeing the flushed faces and bulg-
ing cheeks before him. Then a grin quivered
at the corners of his mouth. " Overhaul the
gear of the main royal, Jerry," he ordered,
" and you, Benny, get up the fore."
It must be supposed that Mr. Watkins was
startled by the steward's appearance when he
rushed wildly on deck, half-suffocated and
(8.742)


flour-caked. The two boys, high above the fret
and turmoil, watched the encounter with grave
misgivings; but the second mate apparently
substantiated the alibi he had created for the
steward's aggressors, for at length, with great
hands flapping an angry protest, the steward
slouched away.
But the negro was to win the round in
a manner which gained the appreciation of
Mr. Watkins.
It is customary for the steward to weigh out
and distribute certain stores to the crew once
a week. Calling for the " whack " tins on the
first occasion after the unsuccessful raid, Jerry
got a shock.
" Dat's right, ain't it ? " questioned the negro,
as Jerry stared ruefully at the trampled mass of
figs filling the tin which should have contained
six pounds of good marmalade. With a sinking
heart Jerry transferred his gaze to the sugar tin.
It appeared to contain the sweepings of the
lazarette, which they indeed were.
" I see yo' was gettin' yo' 4 whack ' ready de
oder day and left it in de scupper. I put it in
de tins fo' yo'. Like to weigh it up ?" The
grinning steward pushed the scales towards
Jerry, but the boy turned and fled.
Over sugarless tea and dry biscuits Archie


" Dat's right, ain't it ? " questioned the negro.
became morose. To be out-generalled by a
nigger steward was unthinkable. The " big-
brained benefactor," although discomfited, was
not yet beaten.
His ambition to " get even " with the steward
was not to be easily accomplished, for all strategic
points in the barque's commissariat department
were henceforth vigilantly watched. It was
pure chance that an opportunity presented
itself.
At Iquique the steward had purchased from
a Dutch vessel three small cheeses. One of these
had gone to augment the cabin fare, The other


two, sewn up in canvas and painted in order to
preserve them, were one day hung up to dry
before being stored in the lazarette against time
of need.
Jerry was working under the skids where the
cheeses were suspended, and unobserved he
busied himself with a piece of twine, taking
measurements. He was no clumsy bungler.
His intentions were subtle.
In the dog-watch he borrowed the carpenter's
saw —by the simple process of taking it when
the carpenter was not there —then descended
into the fore-peak, where his business was among
the dollies : round billets of wood of varying
circumferences used in discharging cargo. A
few moments later the sound of sawing filtered
up to the deck.
Next day, when the paint on the cheeses was
dry, the steward removed them to the lazarette.
Apparently he never noticed that the stitching
on one of the canvas covers was new and un-
painted, and if the cook vaguely wondered
why the galley oven next morning smelt
of toasted cheese, he failed to report the
matter.
By the time the barque picked up the pilot
off the Columbia River Bar, sixty days out from
Iquique, the cabin stores were running low, and


the captain was pleased to order up the last
cheese to supplement the meagre supper.
The steward, with an air of modest pride,
placed the little canvas-coated roll on the table,
and Mr. Watkins, by a deft sweep of his knife,
removed the top of the cover. The second mate
was not interested in forestry, but for a long
minute he stared, open-mouthed, at the excellent
billet of pitch pine which he had uncovered.
"What's the matter?" queried the captain,
eyeing Mr. Watkins anxiously. " Isn't it
good ? "
"I'm afraid it's not fit to eat, sir," the officer
answered, and hastily passed the supposed cheese
to the dumbfounded steward.
"Too bad, too bad," the captain murmured,
and hastily engaged the pilot in a spirited con-
versation.
Mr. Watkins left the table, and following the
steward to the pantry, with a restraining hand
quieted the negro's ravings.
" It's near Christmas," he said, " and the boys
will expect some special treat for their festive
dinner. Give them a cheese, all sewn up in
canvas and never opened," and Mr. Watkins
winked.
When the " cheese " was delivered in the half-
deck with the captain's compliments on Christ-


mas Day, it was hailed with a shout of laughter;
for the Rozcandale was at Portland, loading
timber for Australia, and a substantial dinner
awaited the boys at the Seamen's Mission.
They could afford to laugh.


CHAPTER VI
JERRY MEETS A TOWNIE
A FEW days after Christmas Archie partook
of his last meal in the Roicandale's half-
deck. The company's ship Annandale, also
at Portland, lacked a chief officer, and Mr. Wat-
kins was to fill the berth, while Archie, elevated
to the dignity of " Mr. Lomax," became second
mate of the Rowandale.
" I wish Watkins would hurry up and clear
his dunnage out, I want to get fixed up," Archie
drawled, and pushed from him the dish of lob-
scouse as unworthy of the attentions of a second
officer, however hungry. " A couple of you
kids had better scrub my cabin out first thing
in the morning—and you needn't bother having
a snooze on the settee while you are about it,
either. I'm up to your little games, mind ! "
" New brooms " one of the boys com-
menced; but meeting the second mate's eye, the
rest of the remark trailed into silence.
" You're going to pipe Mr. Watkins over to


the Annandale, aren't you, Archie—er, Mr.
Lomax ? " inquired Benny.
" Oh, if you kids have set your hearts on it"
—Archie stretched himself —" I suppose I'll do
it." His tone was annoyingly condescending.
Jerry winked safely at Benny, and ten minutes
later the two held secret consultation.
The idea of piping the popular Mr. Watkins
over to his new ship emanated from Archie
before he had heard of his own unexpected
promotion. He had six months of his appren-
ticeship yet to serve, and Captain Turnbull
was paying him a compliment in making him
second mate. To do Archie justice, it was not
unmerited, for he had made it his business to
learn his work.
When Mr. Watkins about 8 p.m. paused at
the head of the Rowandale's gangway to say
good-bye to Mr. Newcombe, he exclaimed with
annoyance as his glance turned towards the
wharf.
" What's the silly ass game ? " he demanded
hotly. "The fellows on the Annandale will
think I come from a blithering lunatic asylum,
not a ship ! "
Drawn up on the snow-covered jetty was the
entire starboard watch, shouldering the various
packages which constituted the second mate's


belongings. At the head of the cavalcade was
a being resplendent in bonnet, plaid, and kilt,
taking mighty gulps of the frosty air prepara-
tory to setting in motion a vast set of bagpipes
which nestled under one elbow.
" Thank your lucky stars it's dark, anyway,"
Mr. Newcombe sniggered, and remained at the
gangway while the procession moved off.
Mr. Watkins, all reluctantly, marched behind
the now violently animated piper, the martial
strains of the " Campbells are Coming " roaring
like a blast furnace in his ears.
There are not many seagoing pipers who could
perform so " brawly " as could Archie, and it is
safe to say that the denizens of the near-by
forest had never pricked up their ears to so
hideous a din. The few ships which lined the
route of march buzzed with commotion, and
flung half a score of men on to the wharf to
gape and cheer. Mr. Watkins clenched his
teeth and anathematized popularity as a snare
and delusion. His ordeal was drawing to a
close.
The night was dark, and the wharf poorly lit,
so the cavalcade kept close order in the wake
of Jerry, who, with hurricane lamp held aloft,
led the van.
On the shore side the long wharf was raised


to serve as a railway platform, and at its extremi-
ties gangways ran to the level ground four feet
below. No doubt Jerry knew the position of
these gangways —perhaps he was intoxicated by
the stirring music ; perhaps he was in a hurry to
get away from it —anyway he led at a swinging
pace to where the gangways were not, and it is
to be feared he was grinning. He disappeared
with astonishing suddenness. The music ex-
pired with a cough, and Archie had vanished.
File after file of the close-marching company
stepped forth, and were gone ! If an infuriated
octopus had been submerged in that snow-drift,
it could not have created half the flurry. Arms
flung up, grabbed at scrambling legs, brought
their owner sprawling, and chaos continued.
Jerry was not among the maelstrom of wrig-
gling humanity —he had had the foresight to
jump sideways. When the mass had at last
disentangled itself he had made himself scarce.
He had no wish to be interviewed by Mr.
Watkins.
It was a very bedraggled new chief officer who
joined the Annandale that night; and later in
the evening a battered Highlander sat in sombre
aloofness in a bare and littered cabin in the
Rowandale, gazing with mournful pride at a
riven set of bagpipes.


The new second mate was not vindictive,
and Jerry's part in the grand parade went un-
punished. Archie soon shed his pomposity for
the useless thing that it was, and settled down to
be a conscientious and zealous officer, but some-
what inclined to laxness where his former berth-
mates were concerned. This did not tend to
make the youngsters mend their ways.
The Rowandale went to Sydney with lumber.
Two months later she towed round to New-
castle to load coal for San Francisco. From
Newcastle comes a tale of a newspaper vendor
being set adrift in the river in his booth for
selling out-of-date papers to apprentices. The
Warrior was in port at the time as well as the
Rowandale , and it is assumed that they joined
forces on the occasion of the outrage. They
also probably had a hand in the next affair.
The aged skipper of a small steam ferry plying
between Stockton, the new township, and the
Dyke, permitted some graceless apprentices to
take charge of his vessel and her single youthful
engineer on her last trip for the night. Some
argument among the youths arose as to the im-
possibility of the passengers abandoning ship
speedily. They decided to put the matter to
the test.
Ten minutes' hard work in the stockhold gave


the tiny steamer an alarming list, then a geyser
of roaring steam gashed out of the funnel amid
confused shouts, contradictory orders, and a yell
of " Abandon ship ! " It was not hard for the
half-dozen bemused passengers to believe that
the vessel was sinking under them. They
rushed for the single cockboat resting on the
after-deck, had it in the water, and were clear of
the presumably doomed ferry with a celerity
which amazed the supercilious rope-haulers.
By the time the heroic crew,who had remained
by the vessel, got her coal trimmed and the
vessel again under way, the cockboat had van-
ished into the night.
The shipwrecked passengers landed on the
river bank one hundred yards distant from the
scene of the catastrophe, tramped upwards of a
mile back to Stockton, and told their tale to an
amazed old skipper who had just seen his boat
tie up for the night alongside the jetty.
Fortunately the arrival of two other British
ships who could raise cricket and football teams
kept the youngsters out of further trouble.
The two chummy ships left Newcastle on the
same day, and for forty-eight hours raced side
by side. Then a brisk northerly wind sent
the barque buzzing along with " a bone in her
teeth," and Jerry insultingly dangled a rope's


end over the stern, offering a tow to the out-
paced Warrior.
The barque was somewhere near the Hawaiian
Islands when Captain Turnbull, grave faced,
called his officers into the cabin.
He held up a thermometer attached to a
length of signal halliard. " It's 88° in the fore-
hold," he announced. "The coal's smoul-
dering ! "
Coal-laden ships have rain pipes leading to
the bottom of the hold, lashed to the hold lad-
ders, and twice a day the captain himself takes
the temperature of the coal. A hold temperature
of 88° was a grim warning.
An attempt was immediately made to get at
the seat of the trouble, but after shifting two
hundred tons of coal, the heat became so great
and the gases so overpowering that it was im-
possible for the crew to continue the work.
The pumps were rigged, and for three days a
continual stream of water flowed over the cargo ;
but smoke continued to pour out of the hold.
The ship now had eighteen inches of water
in her, and while half the crew pumped the
water in, the other half were kept busy pumping
it out. On the fifth day blue flames commenced
to show amid the clouds of smoke, and the
captain, deciding the fire could not be extin-


guished with water, gave the order to batten
down all the hatches and plug all the ventilators
in an effort to smother it.
The ventilators, and even the masts, soon
became too hot to touch ; the pitch ran out of
the seams, while the deck planks dried and split.
The forecastle became uninhabitable, and the
crew took up their quarters under the break of
the poop. Fortunately the barque had a steel
deck under her wooden one, which, for the mean-
time, kept the fire imprisoned below decks.
For two days it appeared as if the trouble had
been mastered. Then wisps of smoke eddied
up through the plugged ventilators. When the
seas leaped higher than usual, on the port side
forward, they drew forth an angry hiss from the
nearly red-hot steel plates, and a cloud of steam
drifted upwards. Captain Turnbull was sailing
a raging furnace across the quiet ocean !
The boats were swung out and provisioned.
The crew, apprehensive of face, clustered under
the break of the poop, murmuring fearfully.
Another anxious day and night passed, then
daylight disclosed gushes of smoke, like spurts
from tiny volcanoes, dotting the fore-deck.
At any moment the pent-up gases might toss
the hatches skyward, and the roaring flames leap
unchecked upon their prey. Honolulu was


The boats were swung out and provisioned.
distant but twenty hours' sail when grim-lipped
and dominant Captain Turnbull served out
loaded revolvers to his officers and the boys,
bidding them quell any rush for the boats.
Jerry glowed with pride as he received this mark
of the captain s confidence. He was now seven-
teen, and realized that he was expected to play a
man's part. He felt ready for it.
Throughout the long night which followed,
the captain and officers paced the poop, convers-
ing in low tones, while Jerry and Benny in
thoughtful silence stood sentry over the star-
board lifeboat.


When day dawned land was in sight. No
signal of distress fluttered from the Rowandale's
peak, and the tug which, before 8 a.m., took her
in tow, made a modest bargain. Inside the
harbour the tug shortened the towing hawser
and her skipper hailed. " Where do you want
to anchor, captain ? "
" Tow me on to the sand flats. I'm afire ! "
roared Captain Turnbull, and the tug's skipper
stared in stupefaction. Twenty years he had
waited for a " sugared plum " to come his way,
and here was a miniature Vesuvius worth nigh
upon £30,000, and he had towed her into
safety for the pitiful sum of £2O ! Tumbling
to a seat on the flag locker he mumbled the order
for full speed ahead, as a string of coloured
flags, calling for urgent assistance, fluttered up
to the Rowandale's peak.
Fire floats clustered around her as she took the
ground, and in a few hours the barque was saved
from the flames. The underwriters (insurers)
of the Rowandale were just men, and supple-
mented the £2O agreed upon by the tug skipper
by a handsome cheque.
The barque was not to take to sea again in a
hurry. Part of the cargo had to be discharged,
repairs made good, the ship surveyed, and the
cargo re-loaded. It meant some months' delay


JERRY MEETS A TOWNIE 81
at least, and when the Rowandale went alongside
the wharf, the boys took full advantage of
the opportunity of shoregoing thus offered.
Always interested in vessels of all rigs and
sizes, Jerry, lounging along the quay one evening,
was accosted by a stranger.
"Of the Rowandale , ain't ye ? " Jerry as-
sented, and the man drew alongside him. " I
was having a crack with some of your crowd
the other night," the new-comer ran on; " thev
tell me you come from Thursby."
" So I do."
"Go on. Come from Thursby, do you ?
Shake ! "
The stranger's grip was cordial and his
humorous lean face was not unpleasing. The
shrewd blue eyes somehow gave the lie to the
little round mouth which wore an expression of
perpetual ingenuous surprise.
" Dan Ventry, that's me," the man intro-
duced himself. " Maybe some o' my folks
lives at Thursby now. It's ten years since I was
back home. What's yer name ? "
Jerry told him.
Burford go on ! Any relation to Jasper
Burford of Thursby Old Hall ? "
" He's my uncle ! "
" ° n ! J as P er Burford's yer uncle. Well,
' 6


well. And ye don't know my cousin, maybe ?
Do ye mind Jasper Burford's gardener ? "
Ventry shot a glance at his companion.
Jerry shook his head. The Hall was his
home, but since his father's death, when Jerry
was nine, Uncle Jasper with his son Ralph had
come into occupation, and Jerry had been little
at the Hall. Returning on his first school
holiday, he found himself among strangers.
The old servants whom he knew and loved had
all departed. Subsequent holidays were spent
at the seaside or at continental hotels. Uncle
Jasper had given his nephew a good time. No !
Jerry knew nothing of Uncle Jasper's gardener.
He tried to turn the conversation to Thursby
village, but Ventry showed no enthusiasm.
"The folks and places has all gone clean out
o' my memory," he stated. "You and me is
sailors, lad, and we ain't over interested in rabbits
and trout o' Thursby, though they be prime good,
I'll allow. Now yer see yon brig with the single
topsails ? That's the hooker what Billy Hayes
and Pirate Pearce skipped from Samoa in. He
was a oner was Bully Hayes. I sailed with him
in the Leonora what he stole out Chiny way.
Louis Beck —he was supercargo —and a lively
lad at a scrap was Louis afore he took ter
writin'. That schooner astern o' the barque


JERRY MEETS A TOWNIE 83
has smuggled more Chinymen into Australy
than there's maggots in cheese ! "
Ventry had a tale to tell about every vessel in
the bay, and held Jerry absorbed as they strolled
towards the end of the wharf.
" Ah, there she is ! There's the little skip-
jack that can travel! " Ventry pointed to a small
schooner lying some distance out in the bay.
"That's the Mororo, my barkie. I'd show yer
over her, only she ain't comin' alongside this
trip. I've got a heap o' canibile spears an' clubs
an what nots. Ye could ha' had yer pick o' 'em
—'twould ha' been a nice curio to take home to
Thursby—but I guess ye'll ha' plenty o' they
afore ye finish seagoing. Here's my boat—so-
long.'' He held out his hand. Jerry hesitated
to take it. He wanted that "canibile spear."
" Would you like to nip aboard and get yer
curio ? " Ventry laughed. "Y' can if ver
like."
" Will your boat land me again ? "
" Sure, lad. Ye'll give the boys a dollar for
their trouble, I don't doubt ? "
The youth assented eagerly and was ferried
out to the schooner, in whose cabin Ventry con-
tinued for a while his reminiscences of bygone
ships, and those who sailed them.
But you 11 be wantin' ter choose yer curio—


when I gets talking of old times I just don't
know when to stop." He rose, unhooked the
lamp, and pushed open a panel in the forward
cabin bulkhead. "The curios is in the trade-
room," he explained, and motioned Jerry to
precede him.
The light was held so high that the narrow
doorway lay in obscurity. For an instant Jerry
hung back, then sprawled through the opening,
propelled by a heavy kick. The panel slid into
place, the lock clicked, and Jerry was left in
profound darkness.


CHAPTER VII
THE RIVAL SHARKERS
JERRY picked himself up, bruised but sound,
struck a match, and looked about him.
The Mororo's trade-room was poorly stocked
with goods, but he saw at a glance that it was
quite strong enough to hold him fast.
What object Ventry had in kidnapping him
he could not divine —he would have to wait
until his captor chose to enlighten him ; and
meanwhile there was no sense in shouting him-
self hoarse. He trundled a bale into a con-
venient position to serve as a pillow, and settled
down to sleep.
During the night he was dimly aware of a
commotion over his head, and later had to alter
his position as the schooner, listing over, rolled
him off his pillow. When he awoke many hours
later, he heard the rhythmic slap and wash of
the water racing along the side. The MOTOTO
was at sea !


He sat up, yawned, stretched himself, and
turned his eyes towards the door leading to the
cabin. Some one was calling him.
" Cap'n he talk along you. He topside,"
announced a Kanaka. Jerry rose, dusted him-
self, and silently followed his guide.
The Mororo, listing to a stiff breeze, was dash-
ing along, flinging over her bows clouds of
spray which twinkled like jewels in the early
morning sunshine, then fell in a pattering
shower to the deck.
Seated on the skylight, dressed in pyjamas
and sea boots, swinging one leg in time to his
shrill whistling, sat Ventry.
" Good-morning, squire," he greeted Jerry
cheerfully, and grinned.
" It's a charming morning," Jerry replied,
gazing about him. He leaned against the rail
and regarded Ventry attentively, as if awaiting
his explanation of an interesting but entirely
impersonal riddle. " But why should I not be
enjoying it at Honolulu ? "
" Cool un, ain't yer ? " Ventry laughed.
" But yer don't want to die yet awhile, maybe ? "
Jerry cast a startled glance at the speaker and
somehow felt relieved. He could not credit
that the smiling man in front of him could com-
mit cold-blooded murder —and why should he


murder Jerry ? " What's this abducting busi-
ness about ? " he questioned.
" What are ye worth alive, that's what I want
to know ? " Ventry's eyes were speculative.
" How much, eh ? "
Jerry laughed. " Holding apprentices to
ransom is surely an original form of villainy.
If we all club together in the half-deck we might
raise five pounds. I think it's a lunatic asylum
you'll be put into, not a gaol."
Fumbling in the pocket of his pvjama coat,
Ventry drew forth a pipe, a stick of tobacco, and
a bunch of notes. "Twenty-five quid." He
flourished the notes at Jerry. "That's what
yer worth, dead! "
Jerry's jaw dropped as he gazed at the money.
" Well ? " he questioned thickly.
" You ain't helpful," Ventry frowned peev-
ishly. " Here's the tale. I ain't never been to
Thursby, but a bloke off the Rowandale schooled
me in the yarn I spun to you. He give me
these twenty-five pounds to take you to sea and
finish you. Why ? Why a bloke who can put
a couple of iron shackles inter a sock and biff
you one, then topple you overboard, should
pay some other fellow to do it, beats me. And
I never heard tell of a bos'n what hated a guy
twenty-five quids'worth. That's my yarn; now


it's you to play, lad. Who wants yer done in ?
Who'll be the gainer if yer vanish ? That's
the question."
Jerry listened to this recital in amazement,
which gave place to consternation, and finally
horror, as he realized that there was one person,
and only one, who would be richly the gainer
if he died —one whom he trusted and loved;
one who had lavished every kindness upon him.
He shuddered. No; he would not believe
it! Yet what if it were true ? Ventry was
obviously speaking the truth. His father, he
knew, had been a wealthy man. The Hall, the
estate, everything would be Jerry's when he came
of age. If he never came of age !He turned,
and leaned heavily over the rail, his eyes misty
as he stared over the radiant sea. "Oh, Uncle
Jasper ! " he moaned. " I would cheerfully
have given all I possess a thousand times over,
sooner than this ! " Several past events linked
themselves together in Jerry's memory. Uncle
Jasper's surprise visit to Nith Docks, and his
talk with Mullins. Twice Mullins had nearly
made an end of Jerry. Was it Mullins who had
bribed Ventry ? Uncle Jasper was compara-
tively poor—would have to vacate the Hall when
Jerry wished. He had another uncle in Aus-
tralia, but he was wealthy and would not ques-


" Twenty-five quid." He flourished the notes at Jerry.
tion Uncle Jasper's possession of Jerry's property
should he vanish. Jerry choked with sobs as he
recollected his uncle's studied kindness and
cheery comradeship. Why, Uncle Jasper had
been a chum! He swung about, his face
flushed, his shoulders squared. What sort of a
pal was he to let the first breath of suspicion
extinguish the bright flame of friendship !
" You miserable, lying scoundrel! "he cried,
" what's your dirty game ? "
Ventry had silently watched the hunched form
drooping over the rail. His face bore a queer
expression as his gaze met Jerry's. Slowly he


again drew the notes from his pocket. "Is
these lies ? " The truculence had left his
voice.
Jerry bit his lip. " There's something behind
it; it's not Uncle Jasper!" he cried fiercely.
" I won't believe it! "
" Eh, Uncle Jasper!" Ventry quietly repeated
the name. " Him who has Mullins' brother
for a gardener—and Mullins, he give me the
money. You're an orphan belike, and Uncle
Jasper "
A swift rush and Jerry had Ventry by the
throat. " Confess you're lying, you scoun-
drel ! " he hissed.
Pale blue eyes calmly returned Jerry's fierce
glare. Ventry never raised his hands. "Maybe
you're right, lad," he mumbled. " I'll help ye
play the game out."
Jerry's grip relaxed and Ventry rose. " I've
told ye the truth, but it don't go far. Maybe
there's a kink somewheres. Anyway, Mullins
has twenty-five quid less than what he might
have, that's certain."
" You'll put back to Honolulu ? "
" No, I won't, lad. You're that sort o' a
kid that wouldn't believe harm of no one, ye're
so—so Well, some one wants yer scuppered,
and Mullins or some other guy would have a


knife atween yer ribs sooner or later, and as like
as not Mullins 'ud try to do me in for double-
crossing him, and I ain't fond 0' trouble. Make
yourself free aboard here." He walked to the
cabin hatch and paused to look back at Jerry,
who, realizing the futility of argument or at-
tempting force, was again leaning listlessly over
the rail, gazing seaward.
" I saved yer life by kidnapping yer —straight,
I did," Ventry exclaimed in a peevish whine.
44 Ye ain't grateful! "
A short derisive laugh came from the rail,
and Ventry looked aggrieved. He hesitated
a moment, then crossing the deck stood beside
Jerry. His arm stretched out over the sea and
something fluttered slowly from his fingers.
With a start Jerry saw the banknotes dancing in
the schooner's wake. As he released the last
note, Ventry leaned far over the rail, and a well-
seasoned clay pipe toppled out of his shallow
breast pocket.
" Lumme, me pipe's gone ! " he exclaimed
in vexation.
His face was so rueful that Jerry burst out
laughing, and an answering grin overspread
Ventry's countenance.
"I'm afraid you make a very poor black-
guard," Jerry smiled, and extended his hand.


" Go on," Ventry scowled ferociously, grinned
feebly, shook hands, and shuffled away.
At breakfast Jerry learned where the schooner
was bound.
" Sharks, lad, that's what we're after. Didn't
know there was money in sharks, did you ? "
Ventry stuffed a fried banana into his mouth
and nodded convincingly until he was able to
resume speech, then added, " Good money,
there is."
In the conversation which followed, Jerry to
his surprise learned that dried sharks' fins and
tails were worth £6O per ton, while the oil
extracted from the fish fetched £5 to £7 per
barrel.
" The Chinks buy up all the catch, and we'll
catch plenty. Arricefos Lagoon is full of 'em
—sporting like kittens in a basket."
It was to be a new and novel experience for
Jerry, and although the alarm his disappearance
would cause his friends worried him consider-
ably, he found his situation far from unpleasant.
He and Ventry were the only white men on
board, and Jerry soon found himself acting in
the capacity of mate —Tom, the Kanaka bos'n,
accepting Jerry's promotion without the slight-
est trace of jealousy or ill-feeling.
Ventry's description of Arricefos Lagoon did


not belie the reality, Jerry had to admit, when
at length the schooner entered that great mid-
Pacific lake. It indeed teemed with sharks,
and within a week of the schooner's arrival
huts and try pots were erected on one of the
seventeen small islands which surrounded the
lagoon, and fishing commenced.
Each day two hundred to three hundred
sharks were caught, and as darkness closed in,
the friends, lolling on the hard clean sand,
smoking, would eye contentedly the long line of
fins and tails suspended to dry between the
palms. With happy smile Ventry would com-
pute the value of the day's bag; then, their pipes
finished, they would draw their blankets over
them, and with the wind blowing softly upon
them, sleep till dawn, when work was again
resumed.
On the morning of their tenth day at Arricefos
a ship was reported, and two hours later a large
brigantine entered the lagoon.
As the new arrival approached the schooner,
Ventry announced her to be the Wasp, owned
by a half-caste named Todd. " He's a nasty
cove that was trying to pump me as to where I
was going t' fish. I'd rather he hadn't shoved
his oar in here, but I reckon there's room for
the two of us."


As the Wasp drew abreast of the schooner a
score of unkempt creatures leaped to her rail,
and amid the crack of revolvers a shower of
bullets whistled through the Mororo's rigging.
Ventry, who was coopering up a cask of oil,
stared in amazement, then rushed to the rail.
" What's yer game, you filthy half-caste mon-
grels ?" he roared, and shook a huge fist at his
assailants.
A short-bearded man at the brigantine's stern
wagged his revolver threateningly. " Clear out,
you poachers, or I'll ham-string the lot of you,"
he cried.
" Clear out yourself," yelled Ventry challeng-
ingly. " This is my fishing ! "
A howl of foul abuse and a further hail of
bullets came as a response, and Ventry stag-
gered from the rail.
" It's nought, lad," he expostulated, and
shook the blood from a slight wound in his arm
which Jerry was fumbling to bandage. " Here's
a dirty trick ! Here's piracy ! What'll they
be doing of next ? "
" Your friend means business ! " Jerry nodded
towards the camp a mile distant, where the
Mororo's alarmed Kanakas were grouped on the
beach, staring anxiously towards the schooner.
" What of the camp ? "


The dinghy was fortunately alongside.
Ventry gaped, then with a muttered impreca-
tion dashed for the hatch. " Get a gun, lad !
We'll teach these mongrels to leave peaceable
folks be."
The dinghy was fortunately alongside, and
with their pockets stuffed full of cartridges the
friends tumbled into her and pulled swiftly
towards the camp.
Meanwhile the Wasp had anchored a mile
farther up the lagoon, and before the dinghy
had put one hundred yards between herself and
the schooner, a large gig full of men swept round
the brigantine's stern, and headed for the shore.


The heavily-manned gig outpaced the dinghy,
gained the shore a hundred yards in advance of
her, and its dozen occupants fell upon the Kana-
kas, who, with knives and sticks, prepared to
defend themselves. Before the onslaught of
the armed men they retreated inland, and when
the dinghy grounded, were some distance from
the shore.
With a shout of alarm four of the Wasp's
crew left the fight and dashed towards the new-
comers, firing as they ran. A bullet sang past
Jerry's head, and the next second an ugly grin-
ning face glared into his. Jerry swung his re-
volver, the grinning jaw clicked sideways, and
the man toppled on to the sand. Another man
rushed upon the youth. The Marquess of
Queensberry's rules were not meant for battles
such as this. Jerry raised his knee, and with
a grunt his second assailant doubled over it.
The revolver butt crashed upon the bent head,
and its owner crumpled into a heap.
Jerry looked about him. The Kanakas,
surrounded, were throwing down their arms.
They would come to no harm. He knew they
were too valuable as shark-catchers to be wan-
tonly murdered. Ventry had downed one of
his antagonists and was at grips with the other,
who seemed to be having a bad time of it.


Jerry dashed to the dinghy; with a heavy push
he sent it half a dozen yards from the beach.
The Wasp's gig he also managed to set adrift,
and was heaving at the schooner's lifeboat,
which the Kanakas had had ashore, when Ventry,
having settled his second opponent, joined him.
With howls of anger the rest of the Wasp's
landing party raced down the beach. Jerry
swung an oar and their leader went down just
as Ventry, with a titanic heave, got the boat
clear of the ground. The friends scrambled
aboard as two men dashed into the water after
them. Hands laid hold of the boat's gunwale,
and their fingers cracked as the butt of Ventry's
oar smashed down. With a violent push of his
oar, which rested against the coral, Jerry sent
the boat into waist-high water. None followed.
Shark-infested Arricefos was no place for pad-
dling. There was much fumbling to load empty
revolvers, but the friends had marshalled the
two other drifting boats and were thirty yards
from the beach before the first shot was fired.
But a seaman with a revolver at thirty yards'
range is not to be dreaded.
With the loom of his oar Jerry stubbed a
hole in the dinghy, then, serving the Wasp's
gig in the same manner, cast them adrift. It
was quite enough to pull one heavy boat, and
(3,742) j


on the brigantine there was great bustle.
Pursuit was imminent.
" That'll worry them," Jerry grinned, and
shipping his oar, the boat moved toward the
schooner.
" You've flummoxed 'em, lad," Ventry
growled, and Jerry grunted. He was watching
the Wasp.
" There they go ! " he exclaimed suddenly.
Ventry jerked his head round, and an angry
cry burst from his lips. "My schooner ! The
mangy scoundrels ! They won't hurt my
schooner ? " His voice was shrill with anxiety.
The Wasp's lifeboat had darted from her
side and was pulling strongly towards the
Mororo.
"At 'em, lad ! " roared Ventry. " Ram the
blackguards ! Touch my vessel, would they ? "
But to ram the other boat they had first to catch
her, and although the heavy lifeboat, propelled
by the friends' long swinging strokes, fairly
tore through the water, it soon was apparent
that the rival boat, pulling four oars, was not to
be caught. She dashed out of sight behind the
schooner before the friends were within twenty
yards of her.
The clatter of oars hastily tossed and a burst
of excited shouting was swiftly followed by a


shower of bullets as the miscreants clambered
to the schooner's unguarded deck.
" Give me my schooner and I'll clear out! "
howled Ventry, standing up in the boat, indiffer-
ent to the shots which spattered around him.
" Give me my schooner, ye filthy pirates ! "
His voice was trembling between rage and
anxiety.
A howl of derision burst from the Mororo,
then Todd sprang to her rail.
" I finish dis business proper," he cried.
" I come and kill you quick, now ! "
" Come and be blistered, ye dirty Chinese
Kanaka Dago! " Ventry howled, and plumped
down in his seat as the revolvers answered his
challenge.
Jerry had seized both oars and was tugging the
boat shorewards. After hurling a torrent of
invectives at the miscreants who had boarded
his beloved Mororo , Ventry took his oar and
rowed awhile apathetically. Suddenly he
brightened. " I'll lead the skunks a dance ! "
he exploded. "Pull easy starboard," he ordered,
and swung the boat's head towards a small islet.
Standing up to his oar, facing shorewards, the
better to guide her, he shot the boat in amongst a
honeycomb of reefs. Half the time Jerry felt
his oar rasping against the coral as they pro-


ceeded, turning and twisting. Ten minutes
of this tortuous navigation and they glided
into a narrow strip of water which encircled
the islet.
" This'll give us a night's grace, I'll gamble,"
Ventry announced as they hauled the boat up
on to the sand. " They curs don't know Arri-
cefos like what I do. What with holes in the
coral, electric eels, sting rays and sharks, they
won't dare wade ashore here; and if they cast
about looking for the channel, we'll pick 'em off
like Aunt Sallys at a fair ! "
The islet was saucer-shaped, its centre below
sea-level. The friends could lie hidden behind
a buttress of sand, while invaders would have to
make targets of themselves. Jerry nodded his
approval of the location. " We're certainly
safe from surprise. Any water ?" he queried.
" Yon's the only well on the lagoon," Ventry
answered, indicating a barrel near the centre of
the island, half buried in the sand. " I sank it
myself. Twenty feet down the water comes
filtering through the coral and sand, sweet as a
mountain spring."
Seated on the beach munching coco-nut,
which abounded on the islet, the friends watched
the activities of their rivals. The Wasp's life-
boat was passing and re-passing between the


two vessels, apparently employed in the con-
genial task of gutting the Mororo.
Late in the afternoon a roar of savage triumph
came from the schooner, and a second later the
boat pulled swiftly away from her.
" What's to-do ? " Ventry murmured anxi-
ously, then leaped to his feet calling down ven-
geance upon the half-caste, his voice half choked
with rage and anguish.
"Me schooner !" he wailed. "Me beauti-
ful little Mororo ! May the sharks chew the
poisonous curs, and chew 'em slow ! Oh, me
sweet little barkie!" Streams of smoke, growing
in volume each moment, were wavering about
the little craft. The flames grew from out the
smoke, and seizing mast and boom leaped up-
wards, making play amid the tarred rigging.
Sombre-eyed and muttering, Ventry watched
the fire take deadly hold upon his vessel. He
scarce seemed to see. He certainly did not heed
the boat-load of yelling miscreants nearing the
islet, bent on accomplishing the final act of their
dastardly crime—the murder of the white men.
Jerry clutched Ventry's arm and stopped his
mumbled ravings. " Here they come ! Say
it to them —with bullets ! "
Ventry drew his revolver and, glaring hatred,
silently awaited the approaching boat.


The light was failing, and possibly the half-
castes were rendered careless by success. Charg-
ing at speed towards the beach, the foam curling
and hissing round her bow, her crew howling
taunts and insults, the boat crashed full upon
the reef.
A babel of angry cursings was drowned by
the crack of the friends' revolvers. The boat
backed off swiftly, hesitated a moment, then
turned and fled. As Ventry had prophesied,
none of the desperadoes cared to trust himself
to wade ashore in the danger-infested water.
" See that ? " Jerry pointed excitedly as the
boat made off up the lagoon. " They're bail-
ing ! She's started a plank when she bumped."
" Ah, they ain't sure how long she'll float;
they're going to beach her," Ventry supple-
mented as the boat headed for an islet half a
mile away.
" Do you think there were many men left on
the Wasp ? "
" Quite a sprinkling. She was stuffed full
of men." Ventry shook his head. "Ye mean
take her ? That dodge won't work."
" That's the only boat they've left," Jerry
stated. "If it vanished during the night they'd
be like the cockle when the tide was out." He
looked quizzically at his companion.


"Go on! " Ventry was surprised, then he
emitted an admiring chuckle. " I reckon their
shark-catching cruises is ended if they ain't got
a boat."
" Well, let's call it ended, then," said Jerry,
and laughed.


CHAPTER VIII
AN UN AMIABLE HOST
THE injured boat lay upon an islet which was
connected by a pier of coral, about two
hundred yards long, to the one upon which
stood the camp.
Before darkness closed down, the friends,
watching from concealment, saw a string of men
gingerly picking their way along the coral
towards the camp. Judging by the number
who had made the passage, no very strong guard
was left with the boat. Jerry was of the opinion
that Todd would send back some of the original
landing party to guard the injured craft. Ventry
thought otherwise.
" Maybe that's what he reckons to do; but
you'll mind the anker of spirits what we landed,
and if Todd can chase his ruffians away from
that, he's a better man than I take him to be.
They'll moor alongside that anker, every man
jack o' them."
If Ventry's prediction proved correct, it
would greatly assist the friends in the plan which
104


they had agreed to put into execution. Never-
theless they carefully tended the loading of
their pistols before softly launching their boat,
well after midnight.
Taking their direction from a huge fire that
had been lighted near the camp, they pulled up
the lagoon in a heavy darkness which well suited
their purpose. In stealthy silence the boat
grounded, and its two occupants crept furtively
ashore.
" Must have heard their mates at jollification
and wasn't going to be left out," Ventry
whispered as the two friends stood beside the
Wasp's unguarded boat.
" They've hauled her up far enough," Jerry
remarked. " I guess we couldn't shift her."
" This will!" Ventry interposed, as he leaned
forward and placed a bulky package into the
stranded boat. " Now some brushwood a' top
o' that. You carry on, lad. Good luck! "
Hands clasped in the darkness, then Jerry strode
swiftly along the beach.
In five minutes he reached the coral pier and
stared into the darkness ahead. If he met an
enemy on that ridge of coral he had to kill him,
or try a swim amongst the sharks —no pleasant
alternative. Grasping his revolver he com-
menced picking his way along the coral. It


was hard going, without any chance of conceal-
ment ; but he was across at last, and felt the
firm sand under his feet.
The noise from the camp had died out, and
nothing but the soft rustle of the palm fronds
and the gentle splash of the tiny seas on the
beach came to his straining ears. He moved
stealthily forward, then flung himself on to his
face as a scuffling sound came from his right.
The sound ceased and he crawled softly on-
wards, to halt again, crouching, his body gather-
ing for a spring. A black object lifted from the
ground within hand-grasp of him, and green eyes
stared into his. Jerry leaped forward, grappling
furiously. Something wriggled from his clutch,
and he found himself embracing a lump of coral!
A faint scraping sound informed him that a
large lizard was hastily departing. Had he cried
out ? He was not sure. He lay still, panting.
He had cut his hands and bruised himself in
a panicky fight with a sleeping lizard. He was
a bright sort of chap to send on a daring adven-
ture. Jerry had the ability to laugh at himself.
Rising to his feet he made swiftly towards the
fast dimming fire, but caution did not desert
him. Within ten minutes he had discovered
where the Mororo's Kanakas lay; then climb-
ing to a little knoll, he sat down to wait.


His vigil was soon rewarded. Far down the
lagoon a small flame sprang into being, wavered,
and multiplied.
The sleeping half-castes awakened suddenly,
scrambled to their feet, and stared stupidly at one
another. What had disturbed them ? Ah, there
it was again. The sharp crackle of distant shoot-
ing drew their gaze to the newly lighted fire.
With a bellow of rage they charged towards
the coral bridge. Some one was burning their
boat, and the guard was defending her. "To
the rescue ! " they howled, and jostled one
another drunkenly. Todd believed that the
guard on the boat had been faithful to their
trust, but four men who tottered in his wake
were under no such delusion. They wondered
in a muddled way who was fighting who. They
had arrived late at the orgy, and had made up
for lost time. The anker of spirits was empty.
The party arrived at the boat to find it deserted
and stacked full of tinder-like brushwood which
was burning merrily. Clustering round their
doomed craft, the half-castes clawed at the blaz-
ing wood and scattered it like a shower of meteors.
But the boat contained something else besides
blazing wood. A gush of flame leapt skywards,
and with a roar the boat flew into a thousand
fragments. Ventry's parcel had served its pur-


pose. A bailer from the lifeboat, stuffed full of
cordite emptied from revolver cartridges, and
covered with canvas, made an effective bomb.
Three of the Wasp's crew lay inert upon the
sand when the others, dazed and bruised,
picked themselves up and became aware that
all was not well at the camp.
Jerry had lost no time in mustering his men.
As soon as Todd and his fellows had gone to the
rescue of their boat he sped towards the camp,
yelling as he ran, " Tom! Sammy! Bingo !
Come on, Mororo's boys ! "
The Kanakas had been unbound, for what
apparent chance had they of escape ? Todd
thought that they would work for him as blithely
as they had worked for Ventry. He believed
that a man's fidelity could be estimated by the
amount of money he could put in his pocket
thereby. It is a mistake most rogues make when
they attempt to deal with honest men.
With a chorus of delighted yells the Kanakas
clustered around the youth. " Grab what stores
you can, lads, then follow me," Jerry ordered.
They were swift about their work, but they
took long enough for the dazed brain of one of
the Wasp's men, who lay under a palm inanely
gaping at the sky, to conceive the idea of slaugh-
tering the phantoms which teased him by the


rapidity of their movements. Rolling on his
elbow, he sent six shots at the swiftly flitting
Kanakas. The bullets found no targets, but the
noise brought Todd and his fellows racing back
to the camp.
Hidden among the palms, the Mororo's
crew saw the Wasp's men dash past, then raced
towards the beach. They were within twenty
yards of the spot where Ventry and the boat
awaited them when a squat figure raced out of
the night.
Long muscular arms closed around Jerry,
holding him in a grip like a boa-constrictor's,
while in his ear Todd's voice was yelling,
" Wasps ! Wasps ! " An answering roar came
from the camp. Jerry struggled frantically,
but his adversary's grip was not to be broken.
He could hear the yells of the Wasp's men close
upon him. The Kanakas, unaware of his
capture, had passed out of sight. The sturdy
captain of the Wasp remained immovable, de-
spite the youth's cunning shifts to break his
hold. There was only one way, and Jerry took
it. He sat down abruptly, and as Todd loosed
his grasp to break his fall, Jerry with hands and
knees shot the little half-caste over his head to
fall sprawling on the sand.
It is not often one plays " Bobbies and


Robbers " for dear life, but a youth who had been
considered the finest three-quarter in the School
League wasn't going to be caught by a bunch of
shuffly-footed half-castes. Jerry enjoyed seeing
his clumsy antagonists embracing the empty
air and colliding with each other as he skipped
and slid hither and thither. It gave him a
pleasant sense of superiority. But his eye
watched for an opening to break through the
half-dozen men who stood between him and
the boat. A swift retreat, a lightning side-step,
and he was through and racing for the beach.
Then the owners of the heavy feet which
plodded after him remembered their pistols.
A spray of bullets whistled past him as Ventry,
at the head of the Mororo's boys, dashed up from
the beach. Jerry swung about and charged
with them, but the Wasp's men had tired of
the game. They had done more running that
night than for many a preceding year. They
went back to the anker of spirits, and they went
heavily.
Safely afloat, and flushed with victory, Jerry
proposed attacking the Wasp. The Kanakas
had no arms, but the brigantine could not have
many men to guard her, Jerry pointed out.
Ventry shook his head. " She was buzzing
like a hive with the rats," he said. " I reckon


He was through and racing for the beach.
there's a dozen still aboard." Nevertheless
they made for the brigantine.
They were within ten yards of her when
Pasquel, her mate, hailed, his voice shrill with
anxiety. "For goodness' saka, gentlemen, donta
fighta no more! " (Pasquel's Greek father
had given his English a twist which his Kanaka
mother had vainly tried to eradicate.) "We
has plenty mens, plenty guns, so donta fighta
no more, gentlemens. Come in ze morning—
we talka of peace."
In a swift monotone the friends discussed
Pasquel's remarks and came to the conclusion


that a little sleep would be acceptable, and that
nothing would be lost by postponing the further
parley until daylight. Pasquel had no option
but to seek terms, so Jerry argued. The Wasp
had no boats, and it would take hours to make
a serviceable raft. Even if a raft were con-
structed, it would be very much at the mercy of
the swift moving boat if any attempt were made
to ferry off the men at the camp. No ! Todd
and Pasquel were both in check, and the game
could be resumed at daylight.
The couple of hours of darkness which re-
mained, Pasquel found useful. When light
came the brigantine was at the entrance to the
lagoon, and as soon as the passage through the
reef was visible, she set her sails and winged to
the sea, leaving friend and foe alike to shift for
themselves.
The question now arose, were the Mororo's
crowd to wait a rescuing ship, or set forth in
the lifeboat in the hope of being picked up or
making Strong Island, three hundred miles
distant ?
The majority of the Kanakas were for a
lazy life upon the atoll. There was plenty of
water and plenty of food. They had no fear
of the half-castes : in a short time they would
be troubled by lack of water, and would gladly


accept any terms to obtain it; nor would the
handy natives remain long without a boat of
sorts. The two tomahawks which Ventry
gave them out of the lifeboat's equipment were
sufficient tools for their purpose. Jerry, Ventry,
and Tom had elected to take their chance in
the boat.
With forethought rare in masters of small
craft, Ventry had kept his lifeboat fully equipped
with the stores required by the Board of Trade
regulations, and a few others not in the schedule
issued by that august body. If you want to
know what a ship's lifeboat must contain, here
you are : A set and a half of oars with row-
locks or thole-pins attached by lanyard to the
boat; two plugs ; two bailers ; a compass,
with lamp and a gallon of suitable oil; a lamp ;
signal rockets ; matches in tin canister ; sea
anchor with line attached ; oil bag and a gallon
of heavy oil for use in breaking seas ; biscuits,
meat, and full water-breakers, and also two
tomahawks or hatchets.
The mast and sails required by the Act had
unfortunately been taken out of the boat when
she was employed in the messy business of
shark-killing. The other stores, stowed in the
bow and stern lockers, were complete, and in
addition a few fishing lines, a harpoon, and a
(5,742) 8


grain (a barbed pitchfork-like implement for
spearing fish).
A generous proportion of the stores retrieved
from the camp were added to the voyagers' out-
fit, and the water-breakers filled, the adventurers
were ready to set forth. But Jerry did not relish
the possibility of rowing three hundred odd
miles. The masts and sails must be somewhere
about in the lagoon, as they had lain on the Mo-
roro's deck, and probably had not been taken
by the Wasp's men.
A careful search among the reefs brought
ample reward; a barrel of beef, a canvas boat
awning, and the masts and sails belonging to
the lost gig were salved. The beef and the
awning were left with the Kanakas in exchange
for a further share of the tinned food ; the masts
and sails were made to serve the lifeboat.
At daylight on the succeeding day the boat
put to sea. Her sails would not have excited
admiration on the Solent in the month of
August, especially as her masts and rigging
were draped with fish which the voyagers were
busily slaughtering and drying against time of
need.
There are many authentic records of notable
voyages in open boats, and that voyage from
Arricefos ranks amongst the most astonishing.


Boats' compasses are seldom very reliable, and
the navigation of a small craft presents special
difficulties. Wind, wave, and current govern
the course, and it is not surprising that the
adventurers missed Strong Island, stewed for
four days, burning with thirst, in an Equator
calm, and drifted south clean past the Santa
Cruz group. They had been twenty-five days
at sea, had covered 1,500 miles, and were in a
sorry state when a schooner and a ketch hove
in sight.
There was no wind, and it required the sum
total of the adventurers' remaining strength to
coax their boat alongside the ketch. Once
there, they collapsed, and like a bundle of rags
were tumbled aboard by two of the ketch's
men. Jerry was the first on his feet, and stood
holding a shroud, gazing dull-eyed at a burly
individual.
" It's a waste o' grub to feed them skeletons,
Pyle," complained the man, regarding the voy-
agers most unfavourably.
A wasp-like little white man grunted, and
turned to Jerry. " How long has you been
adrift, mate ? "
Upon Jerry answering, Pyle turned to his
companion. "If they can stick twenty-five
days in an open boat they're tough beasts !


They'll serve, I reckon, when they've lined their
ribs some."
The burly man snorted contemptuously.
" 'Ave yer way; I'd as soon shove 'em adrift
ag'in and give some other guy a chance ter turn
his ship into a blinkin' 'ospital. But try what
a feed'll do —bundle 'em for'ard ! "


CHAPTER IX
VENTRY ACTS GREEN
THEIR unpromising reception on the ketch
Petrel aroused the friends' misgivings, but
during the ensuing weeks, while they gathered
strength, they had little of which to complain.
Duboise, the burly captain, and Pyle, the wasp-
ish mate, took little note of them and showed
no interest whatever in their previous adven-
tures. This was disquieting. They could not
put Duboise's lack of curiosity down to deli-
cacy —it was obviously total indifference ; and
if he were indifferent to their past adventures,
he would no doubt be equally callous as to
their ultimate fate. The friendly Kanaka crew
fed and cared for them until they could look
after themselves, then they were expected to
pull and haul with the rest.
The ketch's destination was unknown to
the Kanakas, and the friends had to wait many
days before they had an opportunity of ques-
tioning Pyle on the subject.
" Where is we bound ? Cuttin' cedar wood,"
117


Pyle answered. 44 When we has a full cargo
we makes fer Sydney, belikes," he grinned at
Jerry, and noting the youth's troubled face went
on, " It's on'y fair. You pay fer yer keep in
work, and a few months cuttin' cedar won't hurt
ye none."
The suggestion was reasonable enough, but
somehow it gave the friends no satisfaction.
They might at least have been allowed to ex-
press their willingness to fall in with Duboise's
plans. The vessel had passed several island
groups upon which the friends could have
found passage to Sydney, but Duboise had never
suggested landing them.
At length, one early morning, a well-wooded
island was sighted, and the crew were busily
preparing to land.
" This is the spot, I suppose," Jerry remarked
to Tom as the vessel drew inshore. " Plenty
of timber here, anyway."
" Plenty ceda' ! " Tom laughed savagely,
" but maybe Cappie Duboise not get him."
" Why ? " Jerry asked. It was something
new for Tom to show strong emotion.
" Ceda' no belong him," Tom replied, and
slouched away to obey an order. It was appar-
ent that his customary veneration of white men
did not extend to Duboise.


The boats were got out, the two vessels
towed some way up a narrow creek, and moored
to a bank at a spot which seemed to offer the
best facilities for transporting and loading the
cut timber.
Tents were erected, and the friends found
themselves berthed with the Kanakas. It is
not the custom in the islands for w r hite men to
live with Kanakas, but as the gentle brown men
were better company than their masters, the
friends made no complaint —Jerry because he
liked his camp mates, Ventry because it better
suited his purpose.
The same afternoon they commenced felling
trees under the supervision of Duboise, who,
with knotted rope's end in his pocket, and re-
volver at his waist, made the work go merrily.
Jerry was for instant open revolt, but Ventry,
with a wink and a w r hispered word of caution,
induced him to w T ork uncomplainingly. Dark-
ness had fallen before the work ceased, and over
their camp-fire Ventry aired his views.
" Act soft and act green, that's the way to
get to windward of coves like Duboise. He
don't mean to act straight by us. From a word
or two what I've picked up, I reckon him and
Cassidy, the skipper of the schooner, is stealing
this here timber, and they're in a hurry to fill


up and clear out. I guess it's their notion to
leave us behind, and that's what ain't goin' to
happen. For the present, lie low, and act
green, lad—that's my motto, and it'll see ye
through many a scrape; act green ! "
Ventry's advice was good, and for some days
Jerry took his lot uncomplainingly, working
from dawn to dark among the Kanakas —Du-
boise daily becoming more rough and bullying
in his manner.
About a week after the vessels' arrival, a
handful of anxious and badly scared natives
appeared, and weakly protested against the
felling of the trees, demanding some payment
for the timber cut.
Duboise and Cassidy answered them with
oaths and the flourishing of revolvers, where-
upon the perplexed natives hastily retired.
Discussing the incident with Ventry, Jerry
inquired whether the natives would not retaliate
and, attacking in force, wipe out the whole
camp.
" Not they, lad. The poor blighters don't
know what's what. A missionary or an honest
trader comes ashore; they play some monkey
tricks on him, and along comes a cruiser, and
tells 'em to behave theirselves —perhaps burns
village or two to impress it upon their


memory. Then these scoundrels rolls in and
pinches their timber, and they don't know
whether ter thank 'em fer cuttin' down the
trees, or ter knock their heads off. They ain't
forgot the cruiser, yer see, and don't want no
more trouble. If they felt sure they wasn't
being naughty they'd wipe the camp, schooner,
and ketch out in half a tick, and ask fer a
few more to massacre. Here, as anywheres
else, the honest man is passport fer the
rogue."
" There's nothing more loathsome than
rogues exploiting trusting savages! " Jerry
exploded hotly. " Hang it, let's play fair!
That's how we British have gained our world-
wide prestige."
"Go on ! " Ventry gazed speculatively at
his friend. " Well, tell the nigs they're being
swindled; there'll be a pretty to-do, I reckon."
A voice came out of the darkness. "We
get a ship all right, then ! "
The friends turned and stared at Tom, who
had come from nowhere and was standing
behind them, quietly filling his pipe.
" No, no!" Jerry exclaimed hastily. " They're
white men, after all. We mustn't set the natives
at them. It would be wholesale murder! Can't
we arrange it some other way ? "


Tom applied a match to his pipe. "Me
Penrhyn boy. What you call Kanaka," he
said, and strolled away.
" What's he up to ? "
"Ye heard 'im. I reckon he takes yer cue,
Jerry. But he won't find it so easy. He's a
stranger here, and he's no ' white fella papa-
langi' —they'll crack his nut fer 'im if he strays
from camp."
Jerry was relieved to see Tom at work next
morning, but the Kanaka was evidently in a
truculent mood. He was kneeling at a saw, and
Jerry, who was working near, heard a heated
interchange of words between him and Du-
boise.
" Stow yer chinning," roared Duboise, and
followed the admonition with several hefty
kicks.
In an instant the Kanaka was at his aggressor's
throat, but Cassidy and Pyle leapt to Duboise's
assistance and flung Tom to the ground. As
he regained his feet Duboise's revolver came
out. One shot rang through the woods before
Duboise's wrist was clutched, and his arm drawn
behind his back.
"You fight like the cur you are! " Jerry
was beside himself with rage. " Use your
fists, like a man ! " With a swift twist he


Duboise's wrist was clutched.
got possession of the pistol and slung it
into the bush. " Now, what about it ? " he
challenged.
The burly ruffian gazed into the intrepid
grey eyes which stared unflinchingly into his.
Cassidy and Pyle were British enough to stand
by and leave Duboise to settle man to man.
Ventry drew near, an axe in his hand.
A moment Duboise hesitated, his fists
clenched, his face crimson. Then his gaze
wavered. " After the Kanaka, lads!" he howled,
and rushing past Jerry, plunged into the shrub
whence Tom had vanished. But the Kanaka


was not to be caught by clumsy seamen.
Blown and sullen, Duboise returned empty-
handed, and went in search of his revolver.
He did not find it.
Jerry's interference on behalf of the absconded
Tom earned the ill-will of the four white men.
Cassidy and his mate, Herriot, had at first been
quite genial to the two friends. If Duboise
and Pyle liked to work them like slaves, it was
none of Cassidy's business; but if the friends
were going to interfere on behalf of a Kanaka,
they might take it into their heads to interfere
with Cassidy's badly-treated but docile gang.
He issued a warning.
" If you was one o' my lads, I'd tie an over-
hand knot in ye ! " he growled at Jerry.
A swift glance from Ventry induced Jerry to
hold his tongue. It was the Mororo's skipper
who replied.
" Tom was our shipmate, and as good a
hand with an axe as any. It's cruel bad to chase
him away. We'se short-handed now, and we
ain't getting our share o' the timber."
41 No one's stopping ye," snapped Cassidy;
and Duboise took up the cudgels. The ketch
was much lighter manned than was the schooner,
and while her crew were employed half their
time in clearing the scrub, some of Cassidy's


men were busily cutting down the best timber,
commencing on half a dozen trees at once.
" Yer picking the best timber and leaving
the donkey work fer me! " Duboise growled.
" Yer take the big uns, and we've got to clear
the little uns afore we can get up to the big
timber ! "
" There's plenty a' good uns left."
" Aye, half a mile from the creek," Duboise
grumbled. " Fair play's a jewel. I reckon we
ought to draw lots for the timber as we clear
the scrub."
Cassidy swore, but Duboise persisted, and
at length they agreed to draw lots for the timber
which had to be felled next day.
It was Ventry who procured a piece of chalk
from the ketch and marked the trees for their
respective ships. There was much growling
and cursing over the affair, and when it was
finished Ventry handed the chalk to Cassidy,
who, in argument with Duboise, mechanically
slipped it into his pocket.
" Yon's the last of the chalk," Ventry re-
marked, and Cassidy grunted.
At the meagre supper Ventry seemed in high
spirits; but the other white men were near, and
Jerry had no opportunity of inquiring the cause.
In the middle of the night Jerry awoke to


find some one moving near him, and opened
his eyes in alarm.
44 Been walking in my sleep," Ventry chuckled,
and slipped beneath his blankets.
When they were called to work next morning,
they found Duboise standing before a splendid
timber, roaring furiously —Cassidy at his side
expostulating angrily.
44 Didn't ye mark this tree fer me ? " Du-
boise swung upon Ventry. 44 Speak up ! "
Ventry gazed at the timber and scratched his
head. 44 I thought this un fell to your lot."
44 Well, is that my mark ? " shouted Duboise,
pointing to the timber.
44 Don't look like it," Ventry mumbled.
44 Maybe some one's changed it. Did yer keep
the chalk in yer pocket, Captain Cassidy? "
Cassidy swore. 44 Keep the chalk yerself! "
he snapped, and flung it on the ground at the
feet of Duboise, who glared hatred at him.
44 But yon's my timber, and I'll have it. Ken
yer stop me ? " Cassidy continued, and shoved
his jowl into the face of the ketch's skipper.
Duboise stamped the chalk into the ground.
44 We'll mark 'em with axe cuts to-night; ye
can't rub 'em out, Cassidy ! "
44 Aye, yon ud be better. Two cuts for the
ketch, one fer the schooner," Ventry suggested.


"You keep yer hash trap shut! " growled
Cassidy, " or I'll plug it for ye ! "
"No offence, captain. I thought it was a
good idea, that's all."
Coldness reigned between the two captains
for the rest of the day; but when the work
was finished and lots were drawn for the next
day's timber, Duboise brightened up when the
best trees fell to his share and the two indelible
axe cuts were blazed upon their trunks.
" Are you going to walk in your sleep to-
night ? " Jerry whispered, as he and Ventry
rolled themselves up in their blankets.
A bony elbow nudged Jerry in the ribs.
"If I had a pard he'd see as I didn't walk
into the creek, or some such."
" Well, give me a nod when you commence
your stroll," the youth retorted, and snuggled
down to sleep.
The blazing of the trees had not been inter-
fered with when next morning Duboise, rubbing
his hands with satisfaction, called his men to
work. He had put a stop to Cassidy's little
game. The four-flusher wouldn't get to wind-
ward of him. " Come on, you lazy hunks! "
he howled. " You'll fell this timber afore
yer eat."
The "lazy hunks'" breakfast was going to


be deferred indefinitely. They clustered round
Duboise empty handed, whining and expostu-
lating.
" What ? " shrieked Duboise. " What de
yer say ? "
" They gone ! Finish," whimpered a Ka-
naka. " Axes, saws, all clear out! "
u Stolen! " howled Duboise, his face black
with rage. u All my tackle stolen ! His
choleric gaze fell on Ventry.
" Maybe Captain Cassidy can lend us some ?
He's got spare uns, belike ? " Ventry muttered.
With a roar, Duboise raced towards where
Cassidy and his men were placidly working.
44 Where's me tools, ye dirty thieving Irish-
man ? " Duboise spluttered. " Give me me
tools ! " He brandished his revolver.
44 What tools, ye lunatic ? " Cassidy stared
in amazement.
44 Axes, saws, everything. You've stolen
'em ! "
Slowly the situation dawned on Cassidy.
44 Have they gone ? " he grinned. " Well,
ye've yer sheath knives, maybe ye can cut some
corn stalks ! "
Duboise's revolver was levelled to fire, when
the butt of an axe sent it flying. With a scream
of rage and fear he leaped upon Cassidy.


Herriot again swung his axe, and Duboise
dropped.
Pyle was rushing up to support his captain,
but came to a halt before Cassidy's levelled
pistol.
" Hold off, Pyle," Cassidy cautioned. But
if Pyle was for peace, the Kanakas were not.
The ketch's boys were Marshall Islanders, and
the schooner's crew were from the Ellis group.
They had long wanted to fight, but if the white
men were friends they dare not. This was
their chance. Empty handed as they were, the
ketch s boys flung themselves upon their rivals.
The three white leaders kicked and hit im-
partially to quell the melee, and Jerry, rushing
to assist, was grabbed by Ventry.
''This is our cue, lad; there's none but the
cook on the ketch." The youth shook him off
and dashed towards the fight.
Ventry shrugged his shoulders. " Well,
maybe ye're right," he muttered, and followed
at speed.
Jerry was active amid the swirling mass of
brown legs and arms when some one commenced
shooting. " Put up that gun, you ass ! " he
yelled, and pulled at a brown leg, the heel of
which had chucked him none too gently under
the chin.
(3.742)
9


It was madness to shoot. The Kanakas had
a gentlemanly Anglo-Saxon notion of a scrap.
Weaponless they were indulging in a frantic
rough and tumble, but if a bullet claimed a
victim nothing but wholesale slaughter would
appease that victim's allies. But the bullets
came thicker. Who was the idiot who was
shooting ?
Jerry straightened himself, felt Ventry tug-
ging at his belt, and saw spurts of flame darting
from the scrub.
" The local bucks is takin' a hand," Ventry
announced. " Pad the hoof, lad."
" Run if you like, I take my chances here ! "
Jerry picked up a hatchet.
Ventry groaned. " Lumme, Don Quixote,
ye're mighty embarrassing ter yer friends
ye're meant ter run, I tell yer! "he whispered
hurriedly.
As soon as the other white men and the war-
ring Kanakas understood that they had a common
foe, they drew together, and hastily retreated
towards the vessels. When Ventry finished
speaking he and Jerry were already several
yards behind the others, and with a howl a score
of dusky forms rushed upon them from the bush.
Jerry's axe was dashed from his hand, and with
a yell of anger he turned to find it imprisoned


under Ventry's foot. The two were surrounded
and roughly dragged towards the scrub —Ventry
placid, Jerry struggling wildly.
" You double-dyed scoundrel! " he hissed
at Ventry, and went down with three brawny
natives struggling to subdue his frantic limbs.
" You're the lad as knows yer friends, ain't
yer ? " Ventry guffawed as Jerry was borne into
the bush and dumped down, three stalwart
natives standing guard over him.
For an anxious hour he sat listening to an
intermittent firing and much shouting. Then
quiet was gradually restored.
Nearly an hour later Ventry, side by side
with Tom, late of the Mororo , strolled towards
him.
Jerry was on his feet, his face flushed with
resentment. " Well, where do I come in, in
this little scheme of yours ? " he questioned
bitterly.
" You've got such queer notions o' right and
wrong, I didn't know whether ye'd take kindly
to my plan, so I kept it dark. Yer mind yer
said yer didn't take kindly t' the idea of Kanakas
thrashing white men ? Well, I did. Tom can
speak these bucks' lingo, and the night I set
out to change the chalk marks on the trees, I
met him scouting near the camp, waiting to


speak to me. He wanted you and me t' join
the natives, but I knew yer wouldn't stand fer
fighting white men with niggers—and I wanted
a ship, so I told Tom to scare Cassidy, Duboise,
and Co. out of the lagoon. The trouble was that
there was a government surveyor on the island
last year, measuring up, and the nigs thought as
how Cassidy and friends was the second act of
the surveying job ; but if I could persuade 'em
Cassidy didn't belong governmen',the nigs would
go fer him all right. I reckoned if I pinched
Duboise's tools it would set 'em scrapping, and
that ud satisfy the nigs as they wasn't govern-
ment chaps. And it worked. The schooner's
gone with the whole bunch of blackguards on
board o' her, and the little Petrel is in the creek
awaiting yer highness ! "
" Seems I'm pretty good at doubting my
friends," Jerry said thickly. He lifted his gaze
to Ventry. " I'm sorry I'm such a rotter ! I
hate a fellow who can't stand by his pal! "
Ventry flung his arm round Jerry's shoulder
and shook him.
" Don't look so miserable, lad, or I'll swear
you're a pirate, and let the Kanakas cut yer
throat just to show yer you was right and I am
a villain. But you don't approve me little
scheme ? "


" Was any one hurt ? "
" Not a one ! Duboise got a crack on the
nut, but he's got a thick head."
" Yes, a very thick head," Jerry agreed, and
fingered a revolver hidden under his shirt.


CHAPTER X
THE EXPEDITION
TEWARA'S infinite faith in the prowess of
the white men was flattering ; it was also
exceedingly annoying.
" Why can't the old gentleman paddle his
own canoe ? " Jerry lamented when Ventry
explained matters to him.
Tewara was the king of Marwa, and having
driven Cassidy and Duboise to sea in the
schooner, he was minded to make the seamen
useful. The might of the white men was great,
and Maniban had become an exasperating nuis-
ance. The white men must deal with Maniban.
Up in the hills, master of a band of followers
and a thriving village, Maniban made persistent
raids on Tewara's territorv, and never returned
empty-handed. Tewara had it that Maniban
was a profound and malignant villain. The
truth of the matter was that Maniban was the
king's younger brother, and in that lay his sin.
Tewara wanted no younger brother with a
healthy desire to hold a little land in his own


right, so it would be convenient if the brave
white men " polished off " Maniban.
Tewara made his request in the most polite
English at his command, then set a guard on
the ketch. They were, in fact, prisoners ; and
it was courteously pointed out to them that
while Maniban was at large Tewara did not
feel himself safe, and he must entreat the white
men —a couple of armed sentries enhanced the
entreaty —to remain with him until they had
disposed of the rebel.
" Where is this bloke Maniban ? " Ventry
demanded petulantly, and Tom told him.
As a tactician the rebel was to be respected.
His village stood at the top of a precipice on a
table-land which backed on to another precipice.
Two sides of this plateau were thus unapproach-
able. Skirting the third side was a swift-run-
ning and broad river which, after passing for
some miles through a canyon, took a hundred
feet drop just beyond the village. A wall of mud
and coral, constantly guarded, protected the
stronghold's fourth side.
A bold frontal attack was the obvious course
open to an invading party, but Jerry had other
views. Such an onset would inevitably result
in much slaughter. Also the reputed unnavig-
able river challenged his capabilities as a seaman.


If it contained enough water to swim a duck,
he determined he'd use that river.
While the two friends, with Tom and a
heavily laden band of selected warriors, made a
detour to fetch the inland entrance of the canyon,
Tewara and his braves marched upon the front
of the village and ambushed. The king's
battalion poured a devastating fire into the mud
wall and cheered lustily at the noise they thereby
made, while Maniban's liegemen howled their
contempt. Just to show that they had not
tired of the sport and gone home, the beleaguer-
ing army fired an occasional round as night
closed down, and so kept the village wall manned
by their enemies.
About midnight a large, hastily constructed
raft made of bamboo pushed into mid-stream,
and guided by poles drifted down toward the
dark entrance of the canyon.
Jerry was busy at the raft's stern bending
on to one of the ketch's stream anchors a strong
mooring wire, which in its turn was fastened to
another similar wire. The length of the two
wires totalled 240 fathoms, or over a quarter
of a mile.
" That'll hold her against any current,"
Jerry announced, straightening himself after
his task.


" Aye, if there's aught to hold to." Ventry
glanced at the rocky sides of the canyon. "I've
a hunch the bed o' this stream is rock, smooth as
a billiard table."
Jerry looked alarmed. The natives had as-
sured the friends that the river bed was stone
and mud which would offer good holding ground
for the anchor; but should the bottom prove
to be rock worn smooth !
The canyon had closed about them; there
was no chance of returning, or making a landing
where they were.
" We'll try to check her way now," Jerry
suggested. There was a sullen " plonk," and
the anchor settled to the bottom of the shallow
stream. With a turn of the wire hawser round
a specially constructed cross-piece lashed to
the raft, Jerry gently tried to check the raft's
progress after a hundred feet or so of wire had
run out. Grave-faced, he let another couple
of hundred feet round out, and checked again.
The wire straightened out, throbbing gently,
but the raft's speed was scarcely diminished.
The canyon's black walls, rising sheer on
either hand, seemed to be closing in on them,
and the stream's babble rose to a chuckling
hum as the speed of the current increased.
Feverishly Jerry played out the wire, checking


only when almost a bare end was reached ; still
the raft swept onwards, towing the anchor and
a quarter of a mile of wire as easily as a child
might tow a toy engine.
" She's not holding! " Jerry turned anxiously
to Ventry.
" I kin see that; and I reckon we ain't fur
from the first hurdle. Hear it ? "
The rumble of the stream blended with a
dull, resonant boom, which each instant grew
in volume, and the faint glow of a fire stained
the sky on their left. They were near the vil-
lage, and just beyond it lay the falls.
Jerry looked at the Kanakas, and meeting
their docile, confiding gaze, gulped with emo-
tion. It was his foolhardy over-confidence
which had led these trusting, child-like savages
to needlessly sacrifice their lives.
The rapid flood, gathering itself for a mighty
leap, dashed over boulders, flinging a perpetual
drenching spray over the raft. Deeper and
deeper grew the roar of the cataract, until it
filled the canyon with its thunder and shook
the very walls. Ventry crawled to Jerry's side.
" It's the 4 Captain Webb Act ' for us all,
sonny !" he yelled. " It's a blamed unnatural
river, this! Give us a shake o' yer starboard
fore lift, lad." He extended his hand.


" It's all my fault, Ventry," Jerry lamented.
"But there's a chance yet. I'm going to try
to take a line to a boulder," he rattled on. " I'll
make across the current, and maybe I'll get on
to some rock where I can catch a turn with the
line. Stand by the wire ! "
Ventry stared. " Ye'll be bashed ter pieces! "
"We all stand a good chance to be." Jerry
shook Ventry's hand.
" Take hold while I get a line." He held up
the slack wire, stumbled forward, doubled over
the cross-piece, and a cry of pain escaped him
as his left hand jammed between the wood
and the veering wire. Ventry sprang to his
assistance.
The wire, taut and straining, was breaking,
dripping from the water until it stretched far
up the canyon, straight as a shaft of light, and
humming like a tuning fork. The anchor was
holding !
The rushing waters rolled themselves into
little waves over which the raft skipped like a
surf-board. Occasionally losing her stride, as
it were, she buried herself, and a knee-deep
tide surged over her. The low buzz of the wire
and the jerking raft warned the friends that
they must act, and act quickly, before their
craft went to pieces beneath them. The preci-


pice on the left bank had fallen away, and abreast
of them lay a narrow stretch of rocky shore.
" Stand by for a jump, lads ! " yelled Jerry,
and flung his weight upon a steering oar Ventry
had shoved over the end of the raft. Brac-
ing it against a cross-piece, they held it at
an angle to the current. The oar bent like a
hoop, and then the raft, with a sweep like a
mighty pendulum, suddenly released from a
severe angle, swung across the stream, smashed
into the rocks, and in a thousand pieces hurtled
over the falls.
On a little shelf of rock half a dozen bruised
figures scrambled to their feet.
" All alive O! " Jerry, sucking the fingers
of his injured hand, counted his party.
" 'Ere's a brave army to tackle Maniban ! "
Ventry sneered. " Tom's the only bloke what's
saved his musket."
" We must go forward, lads," Jerry pointed
out. " Like Caesar we've burnt our boats
behind us ! "
" Burnt! " Ventry snorted. " Unless that
guy Caesar was shot out o' a catapult, he's got
nothin' on us ! I hopes Maniban thinks we's
fairies sent from the sky t' help him, and makes
us welcome, fer I reckon we can't put up much
o' a scrap."


They held it at an angle to the current.
" We look like fairies ! " Jerry laughed, and
scanned his dripping, shivering, gloomy band.
' But we'll see what Maniban thinks of us.
Forward ! "
The rebel chief was surprised to see them.
The shrill cries of his warriors brought him from
his hut to gape in amazement, but the cold
frown which slowly gathered on his brow made
it apparent that he in no way conceived the
new-comers connected with fairies. " What
you want along me, white mans ? " he at last
demanded surlily.
Jerry sat down upon a rock and motioned to
141


Maniban to do likewise. The youth had a lot
to say, and Maniban listened attentively. The
sudden unexplained advent of the visitors was
perplexing, and no one could be so completely
self-possessed as was Jerry unless he had a
trick or two up his sleeve, thought Maniban,
and squirmed uncomfortably. If he had any
inclination to fall upon his uninvited guests, he
repressed it.
A huge savage, armed with a club, slunk
behind Jerry, and Maniban watched his visitor
closely. Not by so much as the flicker of an
eyelid did the youth betray that he had even
noticed the savage's movement. The least
tremor, the slightest sign of apprehension, and
he knew his life and the lives of his companions
would pay forfeit. He saw Ventry's hand twitch
in his coat pocket, but the pistol which lay there
remained hidden. The savage with the club
was close behind him, and Maniban made no
sign. With his gaze fastened upon the chief,
Jerry talked fast and to some purpose; for at
length, at a word from Maniban, the savage
moved away, and Jerry breathed again.
Meanwhile Tewara's host waited in vain for
the commencement of the attack from the river
which was to be the signal for a general ad-
vance. The mad papalangis have been hurled


to death over the falls, the warriors decided,
and thought of their sleeping mats. One by
one they slunk through the wood, and when
Jerry at length hailed them, half the army was
on its way home.
The shout of acclamation was hushed to angry
mutterings as Tom explained the terms of the
rebel's capitulation.
The mountain village would be abandoned,
and Maniban and his adherents make a new
home at a bay ten miles distant. Henceforth
they would live at peace with Tewara's people,
Tom explained. Occasionally our speakers or-
nament their discourses by some apt and sono-
rous Greek or Latin phrase whose majestic
cadence adds force to the oration. Probably
Tom had never heard of Latin or Greek, but
he knew one foreign language, and he used it
effectively. His concluding words, delivered
in English with dynamic vehemence, clinched
the argument.
" Hearken, O King Tewara!" he cried in
the native tongue. " These are the just decrees
of the all wise white men, and if thou art too
warm in thy stomach to take oath by them, then,
by golly, we 11 knock seven perishing bells out
0' ye ! "
Although the terms, and the penalties for


refusing to accept them, did not suit Tewara,
his warriors shouted their approval. If they
were not to have a fight, they could at least have
a dance, and that hurt less. Maniban and his
people were received enthusiastically, and friend
and foe, now on the most amicable terms,
marched coastwards.
Next morning the Petrel dropped down the
creek and headed seaward.
Ventry jammed his knee against the wheel
and filled his pipe. " It's the first time I've
took a blamed greengrocer's shop ter sea," he
complained; "and as fer them razor-backed
pigs, run 'em over the side, lad."
His criticism was not without justice. The
ketch's rigging from the rail to half-way up the
masts was festooned with fruit, while the decks
accommodated half a dozen lean pigs that slith-
ered hither and thither to the vessel's easy roll.
A score of squawking skinny fowls, on scraggy
wings, made rail-high jumps to dodge the ava-
lanche of sliding hogs.
It was a matter of deep regret to the friends
that Tom had elected to remain on the island,
his accomplishments having earned him a place
in high authority under Tewara, and all Ventry's
efforts to enlist other help had failed. The
only volunteer for service on the Petrel had not


been invited. Jerry was the first to spot him
when he went forward to ascertain why the
pigs had trotted aft like a noisy deputation with
a grievance to the captain.
" Well, I'm blowed! " Jerry cried. " Here's
a stowaway, Ventry ! "
Ventry ducked his head under the boom, and
the stowaway, turning uis gaze from Jerry, looked
aft with troubled eyes. He probably judged his
intrusion was to be questioned, and to prove his
innocence he flopped out at full length on the
fore-hatch, yawned, then, with head on one side
and guileless eyes regarding Jerry with wistful
hopefulness, his stumpy tail beat an intermit-
tent tattoo on the hatch.
" I never see'd that tyke afore," Ventry
stated. He ain t a native dog. I reckon
him or his dad came to the island on some ship."
The object of the remark laid his muzzle
between his extended fore-paws and feigned
to sleep the sleep of an easy conscience, one ear
cocked to catch the first hint of menace in the
voices of the arbiters of his fate.
" Looks like a mongrel smooth-haired re-
triever," Jerry suggested. " Here, boy! " The
dog opened his eyes, and his tail wagged ingratiat-
ingly. But he lay still. He had been beguiled
into trouble before by a kindly tone. He wanted
(3,742)


to be sure that the object of the invitation was
not to kick him overboard. A keen look at
Jerry, and he was satisfied. In an instant he
was at the youth's feet, making ecstatic little
leaps to reach his face, pushing in and out be-
tween his legs and mouthing the hand that
stroked him.
" Cadger," as Jerry called the dog, proved
quite an acquisition. He took the keenest
delight in learning the many little duties which
the friends taught him, and performed them
with zeal. No autocrat of the quarter-deck ever
kept tighter rein upon a refractory crew than
did Cadger upon the pigs and chickens. But
the ketch was short provisioned for a lengthy
voyage, and the number of the dog's charges
steadily diminished. By the time the vessel
was within a hundred miles of the Australian
coast, the live stock was exhausted.
Ventry had decided to make for Brisbane as
the nearest satisfactory market for selling the
ketch and the cedar wood. To this proposition
Jerry readily agreed, and proposed to seek out
his uncle. Unfortunately he had a very hazy
idea as to where his uncle lived. Somewhere
on the north-east coast, he told Ventry.
" North-east coast, Australy ! That ain't an
address," Ventry snorted. " Suppose you go to


London, see my brother, tell him yes, as the
Chink from Hong-Kong says to the lascar
fireman. Anyway, Australy is a big chunk o'
dirt, and if we keep agoin' we'll hit it! "
They did ! But not precisely as they had
intended.
For two days a leaden haze obscured the
sky and prevented the ketch's position being
verified by observations. On the morning of
the third day a strong breeze, which speedily
increased, sent them hurtling westward. It was
hard work snugging the vessel down, and by
the time it was accomplished a heavy gale and a
high sea kept the two weary voyagers actively
employed in securing anything movable about
the deck.
About noon Ventry had a look at the barom-
eter, and reported the mercury to be " sinking
like the sand in an hour-glass, and pumping like
a shark's heart." In crude figures, the glass
had fallen precisely seven-tenths of an inch, but
so rapid and ominous a fall justified Ventry's
exaggeration. As the whole eastern seaboard
of Australia lay at no great distance to leeway,
the ketch was hove to.
By midnight the gale had increased to hurri-
cane violence, but the ketch behaved admirably.
She sank her nose into foam-crested seas, and


green water, waist deep, surged over her. But
a ducking was nothing to the two weary seamen
who clung to the wheel anxiously gazing to
leeward. There was no doubt the ketch was
drifting to leeward—and drifting fast!
Above the roar of the wind, sharp plaintive
howls came from the cabin scuttle. Cadger,
alone in the disorder below decks, sliding hither
and thither as the vessel reeled and staggered,
heard the groaning of the straining timber, the
clatter of the miscellany of oddments which
charged to and fro, the crash of the boarding
seas, the booming of the gale, and faintly—so
faintly—the voices of his beloved masters.
Did he want to succour them, or did he solicit
their aid ? Squatting on his haunches, balan-
cing precariously to the motion of the vessel, he
threw back his head and howled, his wistful
eyes fixed upon the smoky, ill-trimmed lamp
which swung jerkily from the deck-head. The
ship dived, and a foot of water and an assortment
of oddments surged about the dog. With an
eager yelp Cadger plunged amid the flotsam.
When Jerry descended to the cabin some
hours later, Cadger was jammed in a corner
fast asleep. Between his fore-paws, supporting
his muzzle, was one of Jerry's old canvas shoes.
When he returned to the deck, Jerry brought


Who clung to the wheel anxiously gazing to leeward.
good news. " It's on the up-grade," he shouted,
referring to the barometer.
" About time, too ! " Ventry retorted. " The
port bulwarks is gone ! " Jerry looked forward.
Right from the main-mast nearly to the wheel
the two-feet-high rail had vanished.
" Wonder if the fore-hatch is all right ? "
Jerry exchanged anxious glances with his friend.
"I'm going to have a look."
" Hold the wheel, I'll go!" Ventry announced;
but Jerry, watching his chance, was off, working
his way along the weather rail.
The wind had taken off a little, but the seas


appeared to have become steeper, and wave after
wave surged over the craft. If the hatch had
split, tons of water must be pouring below.
Jerry, taking advantage of a lurch to leeward,
slid down upon the hatch, and hastily ran his
hands over its canvas-covered surface. With
nothing to hold by, he knew he was at the mercy
of the first boarding sea, but he had to make sure
that the deck in the wake of the torn bulwarks
was sound. The ketch soared upwards, reeled
as if exhausted by the climb, then rushed down-
wards, and a wall of water tumbled over her.
Jerry felt himself lifted bodily up. Arms and
legs kicked and clutched, and found nothing
solid. Then he felt the water rushing by him;
something was stopping his progress. He
clutched, and the sea dropped beneath him,
leaving him half a dozen feet up the lee main
rigging.
The wave passed, and he dropped to the deck.
Then something happened. There was a roar
and a clatter, as if the whole of the universe
were crumbling beneath him. Jerry went down
beneath it. A sea welled over him; he strove
to rise, and failed. The main-mast had gone
over the side and the weather shrouds pinned
him to the deck. The heavy mast, pounding
alongside, held the shrouds rigid as steel rods.


He struggled frantically, gasping for breath as
the water subsided. The ketch had lost her
buoyancy. She leaned over and did not re-
cover —she was ashore !
Another desperate wriggle, and as the water
fell away from her, he heard a shout. " Over
the side, lad, she's fallen in half; over the side
fer yer life ! "
A swirling cascade of water drowned Jerry's
reply. The remaining fragments of the port
bulwarks crumbled under the pressure of the
rigging which the fallen mast pulled tighter and
tighter across the youth's prostrate body. His
lungs were almost bursting when the water at
last subsided.
" Ventry ! " he yelled as the air rushed like
the stab of a knife into his straining chest.
" Ventry ! "
The howling wind flung the cry to leeward.
No human voice answered the hail. With a
dull roar, a great sea tumbled aboard and a deep
curtain of green water flooded over the pinioned
youth.


CHAPTER XI
4 4 ALL THAT GLISTERS IS NOT GOLD "
s the water again fell away, Jerry, his senses
l \ slowly returning, heard a swift succession
of dull thuds, and turned his head towards the
sound. Through a rift in the clouds a faint
leaden-hued shaft of dawning light focused
upon the shattered craft, silhouetting a black
shape clinging to the weather rail, dealing hur-
ried blows with a hatchet at the shrouds.
The after part of the ketch had disappeared,
and a jumble of wreckage encumbered the fore
part of the deck, curling and writhing in the ever-
present water, threatening to enmesh and drag
to his death the courageous seaman labouring
to windward. With a dull " twang " two of
the shrouds parted, and Jerry could breathe
without agony, but the remaining shrouds held
his limbs imprisoned.
" Well done, Ventry! " Jerry howled.
44 Hold on, man ! hold on ! " A solid wall
of water piled high above the weather rail,


seemed to pause an instant, then with a thun-
derous roar tumbled, foaming. An agonized face,
white and strained, appearing like a bodiless
cameo set in the green mass of rushing water,
swept past Jerry and was gone. The weather
bulwarks folded to the deck as if hinged, and
the fallen mast jerked wildly, but the stout
rigging held.
His eyes wide with horror, Jerry stared
dumbly towards the spot where Ventry had
vanished. A moment he gazed, hope dying in
his heart, then over the side clambered Ventry,
bedraggled and grim, the axe still in his grasp,
and clawed his way back to windward. The
rigging once more shook to his furious blows.
Over the sea came a wave mightier than its
fellows, tossing its hissing crest a full thirty
feet about the broken craft. There was a
rasping of timbers and the wreck was torn bodily
from the rocks, to roll over and over in a welter
of spume. The wave passed, and left behind it
a tangle of ropes and a few shattered fragments.
Engulfed in the body of that mighty sea,
Jerry kicked wildly and shot to the surface.
He was free, but where was Ventry ? He clutched
a floating mass of timber and looked about him.
Some distance to his right, battling weakly
towards a balk of timber, was his shipmate, his


strength spent. Now it was Jerry's turn to act.
His chest and limbs were stiff and bruised —
each stroke would mean an agony to be endured
—but he left the sanctuary of the spar and struck
out towards Ventry.
Fortunately the reef to seaward, on which
the ketch had grounded, robbed the waves of
much of their power, but Jerry's task was suffi-
ciently arduous. Some fifteen minutes later
he staggered up the beach supporting Ventry,
tottered above high-tide mark, and laid his
burden down. Kneeling beside him, and find-
ing that he was breathing regularly, Jerry rolled
over on to the sand and immediately sank into
a sleep of utter exhaustion.
A little later a third survivor of the wreck
crept ashore, and after a congratulatory lick at
the faces of the unconscious men, sprawled at
their feet and went to sleep.
Cadger was the first to become alive to the
necessities of the situation. A series of staccato
yelps brought his companions in misfortune to
a sitting posture in time to see the dog attempt-
ing to retrieve a large crayfish from its native
element. A sharp jab on the nose, however,
convinced him that he had better seek else-
where for a meal.
Stiff and aching, the friends arose and sur-


veyed their surroundings. The storm had
given place to a light refreshing breeze, and a
bright sun warmed their blood. A smooth
white beach stretched to the horizon in either
direction, while behind them cedars and black
butts skirted the shore for miles. With their
first object salvage, they searched the beach, and
found the after part of the ketch lying almost
intact in a few feet of water. Here was a
stroke of luck! A couple of hours' work pro-
vided them with a host of useful articles : two
shotguns sadly rusted, a couple of water-tight
tins of cartridges, fishing lines and hooks, a
sail and a quantity of edible stores.
After a meal, they returned to their salvage
work, and before sundown had made themselves
fairly comfortable. They had flour, sugar, and
tea from the little pantry ; but most of the tinned
stuff had broken loose and sunk in deep water.
This, however, they considered no great loss,
as the sea teemed with fish, and the bush
would probably yield its quota of game and
birds.
A long night's rest greatly restored the sur-
vivors, and next morning they set out to explore
their surroundings. Their expectations were
fully justified. Half a mile from the shore they
struck a veritable orchard of white currants,


while wild honey was plentiful. A black
quadruped which scurried away from them
Ventry pronounced to be a rock wallaby, very
good eating; and a little farther on they chanced
upon a lagoon where black duck gathered in
their thousands. The incessant soft " coo "of
wood-pigeon announced the presence of yet
another luscious form of food. But sign of man
or habitation there was none.
" Well, I reckon we won't starve," Ventry
remarked as he and Jerry, with a brace of duck
each, walked back towards the shore. " I
votes we hang out here a bit. Some guy may
blow along and tell us just where we is." He
shoved the bushes aside and stepped out on
to the beach. 44 I figure we're a bit to the
north'ard of our camp." He looked about him.
w Why, hallo ! " he exclaimed in a subdued
tone.
Jerry peered over his companion's shoulder,
but saw nothing either curious or alarming.
" What is it ? " he queried.
"Yes, I reckon we stays here some. See
yon ? " Ventry pointed along the beach.
" See what ? "
" The sand ! That sand ! "
" 'Course I see it; very nice sand too.
What about it ? " Jerry glanced in astonish-


Ventry was scooping up handfuls of black sand.
ment at Ventry, who dropped his gun and raced
off along the beach. Jerry followed more
leisurely.
Ventry was scooping up handfuls of black
sand and letting it sift through his fingers when
Jerry came up with him.
"Are you balmy?" demanded Jerry. "What's
the idea ? "
Ventry chuckled, and elevating his hand let
a tiny cascade of sand trickle down. Jerry bent
close, and his eyes opened wider. " What is
it ? " he queried. Amid the jet black sand
tiny sparkles blinked in the sunlight.
157


" Gold, lad ! Black sand around this man's
country means gold dust! This is where we
camps till we've washed that sand grain by
grain. It'll maybe take us a month, but we'll
get a poke o' gold big as a marrer, or I'm a
bashi-bazouk."
The camp was moved to the bank of a small
stream, little more than a trickle, which ran
from the bush near the black sand, and another
visit to the still existent wreck furnished them
with a couple of hitherto despised tin wash-
hand basins. With these and the aid of the
tiny stream they commenced their task.
They had struck a rich patch, probably
washed up in the recent gale. The first dish
yielded nearly two pennyweight of gold, and
in high spirits they fell to with a will upon the
work before them.
The patch of sand, shaped like a bean-pod,
sixty feet long, three yards broad, and three
to eight inches deep, meant a month or six
weeks' strenuous labour ; but no healthy person
minds work under such ideal conditions —
plenty of food (for which they had ever a great
appetite), delightful surroundings, bright sun-
shine, and a daily golden harvest value £2 to
£3. Nor was there any need for them to slave
at their task when conditions were unfavourable.


Ventry soon discovered that on windy days their
takings fell to nearly half, the gold dust being
so fine that a quantity was blown away ; and on
such days a shooting or fishing expedition to
replenish their larder made a welcome break.
From such jaunts they would return at night
tired and hungry, but extremely happy, with
a couple of dozen fine fish or several brace of
bronze-winged pigeon, and perhaps a golden
plover and a rock wallaby to keep them com-
pany. Such trips were an ecstasy of delight
to the faithful Cadger.
Stretched before the embers of their fire,
their pipes glowing, the friends would lie
silently content, listening to the continued
rumble of the surf that gleamed white in the
starry darkness over the black sea.
They had put in three weeks' work when one
forenoon Cadger, his hair bristling, noisily
challenged some undefined sound in the scrub.
The next instant the bush at the edge of the
beach parted, and a face peered out. With a
swift glance right and left, the new-comer took
in the scene, then slowly advanced.
" Hallo, mates! " he hailed the campers,
who regarded him unfavourably. His battered
slouch hat, ragged shirt, and unlaced boots
might have made him an object for sympathy


had his red-rimmed eyes been less furtive and
cunning. He was a big man and slow, heavily
bearded.
" How's she panning out, mates ? " he
asked as he advanced. He swung his bundle
from his back, dumped it on to the ground,
and seating himself commenced filling his
pipe.
" Not much to it," Ventry replied. " Where
are you bound, mate ? "
" From Lake McGinnis makin' fer Port
Towers to do a spell at the sawmill. Yon's
a new game ter me," he rambled, nodded at the
friends' occupation, and shot a furtive glance
at Ventry. " Never thought yon stuff was
worth working. Do ye reckon t' get much ? "
" Summat," Ventry responded. " But we
ain't in no hurry. Just loafing around, and it
don't hurt us none to stop awhiles here."
The new-comer grunted. " Kin I stop around
here awhile ? "
Ventry nodded, and the old bushwhacker
smoked in silence for a full hour before he
spoke again. " Ain't been humping yer bluey
(swag) long, has yer ? "he asked as, withdrawing
his pipe from his mouth, he pointed its stem
towards the wreck. "Off 'er ?" Receiving
nodded assent, he turned a crafty eye upon


Jerry, who was busily preparing a meal. " Kin
I have ago at that, mate ? " He rose slowly
to his feet and plodded towards Jerry. " I
reckon ye ain't got the 'ang of it! "
Jerry, receiving a nod from Ventry, thank-
fully surrendered the unwelcome task to the
sundowner ; and Cartwright, as the new-comer
called himself, had nothing to learn about
cooking. For twelve years the old bush-
whacker had drifted up and down the country,
his billy in his hand and his swag upon his
back, begging when his tobacco ran low, or
flour and tea were hard to come by; stealing when
an unlucky jumbuk (lamb) strayed across his
path; working rarely; for the most part taking
the good things of the earth which nature so
bountifully provided, and calling no man
" master." Laconic, when he was not alto-
gether silent, he proved an acceptable camp
mate, and his cooking was beyond reproach.
But Ventry held him in suspicion.
A miner's licence is not necessary for gold
washing on the beach, and Cartwright could
have commenced working alongside the friends
if he had cared to risk a fight—and he did not
look like a man to be daunted by the chance
of a scrap. Jerry hotly countered his friend's
suspicions. The old bushwhacker was indiffer-
(9.742) II


ent to gold, he argued, but Ventry shook his
head. " What's he hanging about here for ? "
he growled.
" Hang it, don't underrate our charms!"
Jerry laughed. " Isn't our society sufficient
inducement ? And if Cartwright's been loafing
around for twelve years, why shouldn't he moor
up to our sugar barrel for a few weeks ? —it isn't
empty yet."
" He ain't a cove what's fond o' company,"
Ventry snorted, and kept a shrewd eye upon
their uninvited guest. A shotgun is not much
of a weapon, but he saw to it that Cartwright
never had more cartridges than were needful
for shooting, and the guns were under Ventry's
hand at night.
When the last dish of sand had been washed
out and the last grains of gold dust transferred
to the tobacco tin, which was Ventry's safe,
Cartwright suggested a number one beanfeast
to celebrate the occasion. While the friends
made ready for their tramp to Port Towers,
eighty miles down the coast, the swagman
prepared the banquet.
A bucket of wild honey, a great dish of cur-
rants, and a brace of black duck lay ready for
Cartwright's good offices. He had yet another
dish for the feast. He came shambling across


the sand and presented a large crayfish for
Ventry's inspection.
" This 'ere lobster all right ? " he growled.
" I ain't much o' a 'and at fish, never 'aving a
mind ter them."
44 What's the matter with it ? " Ventry ques-
tioned.
44 I've heard tell as how they be poisonous at
times." His shifty eyes regarded Ventry keenly.
44 Better leave it be. I'll go catch a mullet."
He dropped the crayfish, and getting a fishing
line slouched off. He was a long time over the
job, and when he returned he carried a single
large pink bream which he made haste to pre-
pare for the oven.
Ventry rose and commenced playing with
Cadger —burying stones in the sand for the
dog to dig up. Such activity Jerry considered
to be discordant. He sprawled, lazily smoking
in the evening sunshine, and saw the dog race
along the shore and pass out of sight, Ventry
in hot pursuit. In his mouth Cadger held the
head of the bream.
The youth was not left in peace. Ventry
44 halloo'd "to him to come to see an octopus,
and with a sigh Jerry went.
Cartwright was eating the lobster, as he
called it, when they arrived late for the meal.


" I reckon an ostrich ain't got a better inards
than what I 'as," he rumbled as, with covert
glances, he watched the friends help themselves
to the bream, then shuffled away to dish up the
ducks. When he returned the two plates were
clean and the bream had disappeared.
For an hour after supper they sat smoking
and yarning. Then Jerry and Ventry entered
the tent, while Cartwright pulled his blanket over
him and composed himself —to wait.
In the tent the friends held whispered con-
versation. " It's very queer ! " Jerry whispered.
" I can hardly believe it."
"It is queer, but it's true. Them pink bream
may be quite healthy and fit ter eat one month,
and the next be deadly poisonous. You know you
can catch a dozen fish in as many minutes, and
Cartwright took an hour to catch one. That's
why I set Cadger digging for its head, and when
I looked into the mouth, the cat was out of the
bag. You see'd its mouth and tongue was
bright yeller, streaked with thread of dirty
brown. Them's the danger signals. I know
them signs all right, and you may reckon you'd
'a bin dead within a couple o' hours if ye'd eaten
that joker ! "
"The miserable blackguard! " Jerry growled,
and half rose to his feet.


Ventry pulled him down. " Maybe the cove
has a gun. He's a crafty old sinner. There
ain't no use scrappin' when ye ain't called to.
I've laid fer our mate —and it'll be sport —but
keep yer gun handy." Ventry bent closer and
whispered something into Jerry's ear. There
was the sound of a smothered laugh.
It was about midnight when the alert ears
of Cartwright heard a low moaning issuing from
the tent. Grim-faced and somewhat shaky he
approached and peered in, a shaft of moonlight
gleaming over his shoulder.
On the sand on one side of the tent, stiff and
inert, his mouth lolling open, lay Jerry. On
the other side was Ventry, doubled up and
writhing in apparent agony.
" Salt water —quick, mate ! Salt water ter
make me sick —I'm poisoned ! " jerked out of
Ventry's contorted mouth. With a moaning
yelp he wriggled in the sand; slowly his limbs
stiffened, then twitched convulsively.
The swagman stepped forward and bent over
the tortured form. " Where's the pain, mate ? "
he whispered. His eyes were wild and his
hands trembled as they were busy about Ventry's
clothes.
" Salt water! —salt water! " Ventry gabbled,
and lay still.


With a grunt of satisfaction Cartwright
lurched out of the tent. He held a tobacco
box in his hand, and opening the lid he chuckled
as its contents glowed dully in the moonlight.
Then with a fearful glance over his shoulder
he sped swiftly away.
In the still camp behind him his " victims "
were again in convulsions—with mirth.
" That's one lead spitchered ! " Ventry at
length grumbled, and gazed ruefully at the
stump of a sinker for a deep-sea fishing line.
" Near filed my fingers off, I have ! Who was
the bloke what said, ' All is not gold as
glitters ' ? "
" That 4 bloke ' was Shakespeare," Jerry
laughed. " I don't think he would have mis-
taken lead filings for gold dust, even in the
moonlight! "


CHAPTER XII
THE LAST CRUSHING AT MOUNT WEARISOME
T a point where the coastal range throws
l \ out a spur, upon a small plateau sparsely
dotted with eucalyptus trees, stands Mount
Wearisome Mining Camp.
Some tireless prospectors,crossing the plateau,
stumbled upon rich outcropping reefs. The
news sifted through to township and station,
and the motley army of gold seekers flocked
to the newly discovered El Dorado, and with
them came all and sundry who could hope,
legitimately or otherwise, to gather profit from
the labour of the miners. But to the miners
Mount Wearisome had little to give except
healthful toil. The rich promises of the out-
cropping reefs were not fulfilled, and the camp
slowly dwindled until only a score of confirmed
optimists remained, grudgingly pouring the
bulk of their hard-earned gains into the insati-
able coffers of Issy Nathan, the store-keeper.
Issy was a good business man. He could judge
the yield of gold from a load of stone by one ap-
-167


praising glance, and would grant its owner credit
for flour, tobacco, sugar, and other luxuries,
at bush prices, up to and a little over the value
of the gold they would obtain from the crushing.
Thus Issy always kept the miners a little in his
debt and labouring, like the honest men that
they were, to clear their accounts. He was
careful not to give too much credit, and thus
deprive them of all hope of making a little out
of their labours.
The store-keeper was the first to sight the
two foot-sore travellers, with a dog at their
heels, who one evening trudged into the camp.
He welcomed them with a friendly hail, prom-
ising himself some profit. It was the supper
hour, and at the hail a battery of eyes turned
upon the new-comers, while bulging cheeks and
heavily laden mouths momentarily suspended
operations.
For some days Jerry and Ventry had travelled
leisurely along the coast, shooting, fishing, and
hoping for more black sand. Then a mounted
police trooper had shown them the trail to
Mount Wearisome. They wanted to see what
a mining camp looked like, and their first view
of the dozen dilapidated bark humpies and the
bright little fires which dotted the glade was
not disappointing.


" 'Ave some supper, mates ? " called a scraggy
little man, seated with three others round a fire.
As he spoke he made room for the seamen, who,
dumping their swag on to the ground, grate-
fully seated themselves. The same instant, a
bulky figure detached itself from the group
around the next fire and shambled off into the
dusk. Jerry nudged Ventry, who was talking
to their host, but when Ventry turned to look
the burly figure had vanished.
" Oo telled yer ter come 'ere ter make yer
fortin' ? " inquired the little man, whose name,
the friends learnt, was Riddle.
" Just stumbled in on our way north," Ventry
responded. " Ain't she goin' well ? "
A hollow guffaw from all four miners followed
this question, and Riddle swiftly outlined the
state of affairs to the new-comers. The case
of Riddle and his mates was similar to that of
nearly all the other gangs. They had raised
about forty tons of stone in thirty weeks, and
expected it to yield about five pennyweight of
gold to the ton. This meant a total yield of
about £BO worth of gold. This crushing would
cost them £4O, and Ted Halliday,who owned the
crusher, was only charging a fair price. They
owed Nathan £52, and £9 for the keep of their
horses, which were worth £25 each. The


horses Issy held as security. It looked as if
they would have to leave one of their nags
behind to square their liability, and rather than
do this they were prepared to work on in the
hope of getting quits with the " dirty swindler."
Oh, Issy was making money all right, if no one
else was !
Refusing to share the already overcrowded
humpie of their new friends, Jerry and Ventry
settled down for the night under a convenient
tree a short distance from the rest of the camp.
" Did you spot him ? " Jerry questioned,
when he and Ventry were at length alone.
" Who ? "
" Cartwright. It was he who slunk away
when we arrived."
"Goon ! He ain't the sort to do ballocky
work fer this bloke Nathan's benefit, I reckon.
Are ye sure 'twas him ? "
" Quite ! "
" Well, he must 'a got a sceer when he seen
us. His mates better keep an eye on their
pokes. We'll warn 'em in the mornin'. Goo'-
night."
Jerry lay long awake. He was much annoyed.
The miners had proved themselves kindly,
generous fellows, and that Issy Nathan should
hold them to ransom, as it were, was in Jerry's


opinion contrary to all justice. He decided
to fight Issy with his own weapons —guile and
cunning. Before he slept he had formulated a
scheme which, if it did not conform to a strict
moral code, had the complete approval of
Ventry and his four camp mates when he im-
parted the plan to them next morning.
After breakfast the friends strolled across to
the next humpie with the laudable intention of
introducing Cartwright to his mates. But the
old swagman and his companions had departed,
a neighbour informed them. They had only
been in camp a week, and had not raised a ton
of stone " which weren't worth the crushin',"
their informant told them. " Them coves
knowed more about cuttin'throats than workin',"
he spat disgustedly.
It was obvious Cartwright had been up to no
good, but the arrival of the two men he had
tried to rob and murder had no doubt scared him
away. They did not imagine Cartwright had
more ambitious plans than the filching of a poke
or two of gold.
The swagman dismissed from their minds,
Jerry and Ventry set themselves to accomplish
the undoing of Issy Nathan.
On the following afternoon would come the
turn of Riddle and his mates to put their stone


through the crusher, and preparations had to be
made. That day the friends spent in feeding
the crusher for Halliday, who was glad to pay
them for their assistance. He foresaw that the
miners were all itching to be off, and the sooner
he got the crushing done, the sooner he could
shift his plant to more profitable fields.
After supper the two friends, accompanied
by Riddle, took a stroll. Deep in the bush they
lit a fire, and Ventry, with a sigh, detaching the
leads from his two remaining deep-sea fishing
lines, handed them to Riddle. Over the fire in
a tin plate the leads were melted, and into the
molten metal Ventry emptied his box of gold,
stirring the mixture, then set it aside to harden.
Ten minutes later they returned to the camp.
The crusher had been idle a couple of hours,
and Halliday was storming at the delay when,
just on sundown next day, the first load of
Riddle's stone arrived.
" I ain't goin' ter shove that through now,"
Halliday stormed. " You've wasted half a
day ! "
" Just this load, Ted," pleaded Riddle.
" Just ter see if we'se any luck, Ted."
" Bring it in, then," Halliday snorted, and
leaving Jerry and Ventry to handle the stone he
rushed round to stoke up his engine, the fires


of which he had been on the point of drawing.
As soon as Halliday's back was turned Ventry
made off and strolled into Nathan's stores.
" Give us a drink, Issy," he demanded. " I
ain't goin' ter shovel no more o' that mullicky
stuff o' Riddle's. Don't believe it's worth a
darn, anyhow ! "
The store-keeper flung an order to his
Chinese boy, and made for the door. If Riddle's
stuff was going through the crusher, it behoved
Issy to learn what chance he had of collecting
his money, or if he might, with reasonable hope
of being paid, make sundry additions to his
bill.
Halliday was busy drawing his fires, and
Riddle and one of his mates were excitedly
examining something, when the Jew, blown with
running, arrived at the crusher.
" W'at luck, boys ?" he cried, and Riddle
with a start dropped something into the box
containing the amalgam crushed from the stone,
and slammed the lid down. " About seven
pennyweight ter the ton," he announced sulkily.
" Let's see some of it! A little part of it
is ter be mine, boys." Issy dived for the
amalgam box, and before Riddle could stop
him had lifted out a misshapen lump.
"My word ! " he gasped. " You tried to


cheat me! " He turned the lump of amalgam
this way and that, and chortled with delight.
He did not observe that, had the lump of metal
been flattened out, it would have had the form of
a tin dinner plate.
" Mostly silver," snorted Riddle. " I've
heard tell there's a lot of silver in some o' these
loads. It ain't worth working ! "
"Try it out," Issy suggested. " I reckon
there's plenty of gold in this."
" Ain't got a retort," Riddle answered sulkily.
" Here, give us it! " He snatched for the
amalgam, but Issy pulled it away.
" You're a fool miner !" he yelled. " Give
me a shovel! "
Jerry handed him one, and the Jew darted
round to where the drawn fires lay glowing
on the earth. Riddle and his mate followed
grumpily.
Over the red-hot embers Issy held the iron
shovel on which rested the lump of amalgam.
Slowly the iron grew red-hot and the lead
dissolved, charred, and passed away, and on the
blade of the shovel lay a little heap of hard
frosted gold, glittering in the firelight.
" There! " Issy screamed in triumph. Then
with an effort he got himself under control.
" You've struck it lucky ! Who says Mount


Over red-hot embers Issy held the iron shovel.
Wearisome is played out ? Come for a drink,
boys, it's on the house ! "
" We'll help Ted clear up first," Riddle
answered morosely, roughly jerking the shovel
from Issy's hands. " You keep yer mouth
shut, Issy ! There ain't no need fer no one
ter know of this lot. No one , see ? "
" Sure ! " Issy assented. " I'll go back to
the store, and I'll ask you to-night before the
boys how you've panned out —got me ? "
The store-keeper was in a hurry to be gone,
but he did not go to the store. Riddle did not
want any one to know of his luck. Then Riddle


intended to cheat his two mates who were loading
at the digging. Issy chuckled as he made at a
run for Riddle's claim.
He dropped into a leisurely walk as he came
within sight of the diggings and saw 7 Riddle s
two mates loading up the stone into a wagon
in order to ensure an early resumption of the
crushing next morning.
The diggers hailed him with a derisive cry.
" Feared ye ain't goin' ter get yer money, Issy ?
one laughed. " Jake " —he indicated the black
wagon driver —" says the stone is yielding about
seven pennyweight. 'Taint more than yer ex-
pected, eh ? "
" Seven pennyweight —dat wat Riddle he
say," stated Jake, wagging his head in a series
of confirmatory nods. " Halliday he say
same !
With a swift glance in the direction of the
crusher Issy sat down. " That stone 11 go
twelve to fifteen pennyweight! Not so bad,
eh?"
The diggers paused to stare, then one guf-
fawed. "Go ter bed, Issy! Ye can't string us!"
The store-keeper became hot. " I reckon I
knows gold when I sees it! " he exclaimed.
" I've see'd enough of it! "
"If ye reckon ye can teach Bob Riddle,


there's something wrong with yer reckoner ! "
snapped one of the miners, and digging his
spade viciously into the pile of stone he con-
tinued shovelling.
The Jew rose excitedly. " I backs my opin-
ions !" he exclaimed. " I tell yer there's ten
pennyweight to the ton in that stone."
" Comin' down, ain't ye ? It was fifteen a
minute ago ! " one of the diggers jeered.
With an effort Issy controlled his apparently
rising temper. " Look here, boys, I'll give
you £5O each for your share in the crushing
and call our account square, and give ye yer
'osses ! There, ain't I a man what backs his
opinions ? "
The diggers again ceased work to stare,
then without a word commenced carefully to
examine the stone.
"Is it a go?" Issy, trembling with sup-
pressed excitement, glanced furtively behind
him. No one was in sight. No doubt Riddle
was going to wait until after supper to swindle
his mates out of their shares. "Is it a go,
boys ? "
" I never heard o' you takin' a chance o'
losin' nothin' ! " growled a digger, peering at
the stone. " Make it a hundred, and ye can have
my share."
(3.742) I 2


" Fifty each. I've gone enough! " Issy
stated. " Maybe too much —say forty each ! "
" Lumme, I'll take yer fifty ! " growled one
of the diggers, and flung down the stone he was
examining. The other followed suit.
Issy instantly produced fountain pen and
paper, and on the tailboard of the wagon the
transfer of interest was duly drawn up and
signed.
The store-keeper fairly danced back to the
camp. For £lOO he had, he judged, purchased
at least £l,OOO worth of gold, or maybe more.
If each of the forty tons of stone yielded even as
much as had that little lump of amalgam he had
tried out, he foresaw £2,000 as his share. It
was only one small lump of amalgam he had
seen. He wished he had looked more carefully
into the amalgam box.
There was a row in the store that night when
Issy informed Riddle that he had bought out his
two mates. So furious did Riddle become, and
so threatening was the mien of the apparently
swindled diggers, that the store-keeper retired
to the back of his premises, leaving the Chinese
boy to serve, while he gloated over his bargain.
Had he heard the peals of joyous laughter round
Riddle's supper fire, he would have been less
pleased.


After supper Jerry and Ventry, with Riddle's
two mates who had sold out, made ready to
quit the camp. In Ventry's pocket was a
tobacco box filled with hard frosted gold.
"Meet yer at Pigeon Lake then, Riddle!"
one of the diggers said. " And here's yer fifty
quid in case Issy gets uppish and yer can't get
yer nags."
" Give Issy my love," laughed Jerry, " and
tell him he can have my shovel to roast pea-
nuts on! "
The friends were not present at the denoue-
ment, but Riddle's stone was the last ever
crushed at Mount Wearisome.
Subsequent events indicate that Issy had a
sneaking admiration for the youth who had
outwitted him. He certainly bore Jerry no ill
will, and, after all, his profits allowed him to
lose occasionally without whimpering.


CHAPTER XIII
THE PURSUIT
JERRY was an enthusiast. At the moment
he was heart and soul a sundowner, and he
sang lustily:
'' Gaily the swagman camped upon the billabong,
Under the shade of a kulibar tree ;
And he sang as he watched his old billy boiling,
' You'll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me.'
Up came a jumbuk drinking at the water-hole.
Hungrily the swagman grabbed it with glee;
And he sang as he ducked it into his old dilly-bag,
' You'll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me."
From his song you will infer that he was
enjoying life. He even had a kindly feeling for
the dishonest hungry swagman. His rendering
of the next verse betrayed his sympathy.
"Up came a squatter, riding on his thoroughbred ;
Up came policemen, one, two, three.
' Whose is the jumbuk you've got in your tucker-bag ?'
Unfortunately the jumbuk (lamb) was the


property of the squatter, and the swagman paid
the penalty for his crime.
Jerry refused to permit the fate of the unhappy
sundowner to depress him. He commenced
another song about ham-bones, bacon, opossum,
and melons (he had ever a healthy appetite),
and he was singing this when Cadger, all unasked,
joined in the chorus.
"What's up?" Jerry questioned, and stared
at the dog, which had darted towards the scrub,
snarling viciously. There was no sight nor sign
of other humans, but Cadger was confident.
" Some Johnnies been spying," Jerry com-
mented, and pointed to a patch of trampled ferns
to which the dog had led them. He picked
up a broken tendril and proffered it for Ventry's
inspection. The sap still oozed from the frac-
tured stem.
" The Myalls (savage black aborigines) has
been seen about here," Ventry nodded. " But
this ain't just chance spying ! " He indicated
some trampled, withered vegetation. " They's
watching the trail."
" Great Scot! What if they nabbed Riddle's
two mates ? They must have ridden past here
about dawn." Jerry stared at Ventry in alarm.
" Well, it ain't no use stoppin' 'ere to 'ave
our 'eads busted in. Let's push on to Lanes


Water-hole. It can't be far off, and maybe it'll
tell us if there's been a fight. The blacks
would want the other coves sittin' quiet at the
water-hole afore they did 'em in."
There were traces of a recent camp at the
water-hole, but no sign of any fight or flight.
Somewhat reassured, the two seamen set about
preparing supper.
" There's some queer points about that spy-
ing business ! " Jerry remarked meditatively
at the conclusion of the meal. " Some one
has been watching the trail for days. That
some one let Riddle's mates pass unmolested.
The mail man we met this morning must have
ridden by here. And the sergeant and his
three troopers, riding to Mount Wearisome,
camped here two nights ago. Why didn't the
blacks scupper them if they're only out for
murder ? Why didn't they crack us on the
head ? "
" Maybe there's only one black, who didn't
feel as he could safely tackle two blokes."
" Those troopers will be riding back this way,
probably to-night," Jerry ran on slowly, follow-
ing up his own deductions. " And they will
be carrying gold —the gold from Mount
Wearisome ! "
"Go on ! " Ventry stared open-mouthed


" How could the blacks know as the gold was
comin', and what good 'ud it be ter them,
anyhow ? "
" Not much good to them, but it would inter-
est Cartwright, and he knows when it's likely
to pass. What do you say to coming up astern
of that fly fellow ? Can you do the piloting ? "
" I kin try. Come on ! "
Cadger, ordered to guard the swags, with
envious eyes watched his masters set off. It
was hard going in the bush. Off the trail the
trees grew thickly, and shut out the faint light
of the darkened sky. Vines clutched at the
intruders' ankles, and angry snakes slithered
from under their feet, lifted red luminous eyes,
and darted venomous fangs at the invaders of
their territory. Closer and closer grew the
trees, and the interlacing vines were dense as
a thatch above their heads. The adventurers
moved as if their eyes were muffled in cloaks —
so dark was it that the trees seemed less solid
than the darkness.
After about two hours' stumbling they saw
the faint light of a fire sifting through the under-
growth. In an instant they were on their
hands and knees. It was not pleasant crawling
through the snake-infested bracken, but they
much desired to find out who used that fire.


They were within fifty yards of it when
Ventry clutched Jerry. " Hist! "he whispered.
Lying prone and silent, the faint swish of
feet moving rapidly through the bracken came
to their ears. A twig crackled almost abreast
of them, and a black shadow seemed to solidify
out of the night. Another and another glided
by, until half a score of black figures had passed;
then came some noise, complaining and bitter
hushed curses from the four white men who
brought up the rear of the procession.
" Cartwright! " Jerry whispered. " We're
in this —come on ! "
But the trail was not so easy to follow, for
they had to move with caution. The crafty
blacks were near, and an unusual noise would
bring them back to enact a swift vengeance on
their trackers.
When still some distance from the edge of
the scrub a ragged crackle of rifles and confused
yelling warned the seamen that fighting was
afoot. Abandoning caution they plunged for-
ward, and a sudden fierce burst of firing, shrieks,
and howls greeted them as they dashed on to
the trail. They were in the midst of the fight.
Ventry went down under a smashing blow from
a club. A huge black form launched itself at
Jerry, and he crashed to the ground without


The lash of a stock whip curled about the youth's ankles.
firing a shot. He saw red ! In an instant he
was on his feet and racing after his attacker. A
thong, crackling, leaped out of the night, and
the lash of a stock whip curled about the youth's
ankles, and for the second time he fell. Strug-
gling to free himself, he was jerked to his feet
by a trooper.
" Here's one of the jokers! " the man cried,
roughly hustling his captive towards a strag-
gling group of men and horses amid which already
stood Ventry bemused and shaky.
" Lynch the swine ! " growled an angry
voice. " There ain't no law for murderers and


gold thieves this part o' Queensland. Up
with 'em ! "
Half a dozen voices acclaimed this suggestion.
" Let 'em swing ! Lynch law fer gold thieves!"
" Rot, and set fire t' the gold!" yelled another,
kneeling by a prostrate form. " What about my
mate Bill, here, as they've murdered? String
the swine up ! " He bent again and murmured
over the still form.
"We were coming to your rescue ! " Jerry
cried. " Look at our guns, loaded in every
chamber, and stone cold ! "
"Cummin' ter the rescue! —lumme, that's
good, that is ! " guffawed a man, and bent closer
to inspect the youth. "Jemima! it's the kid
as salted Riddle's mine, and his mate ! "
" Salted a mine, did he ? " A big man in
the uniform of a sergeant of the police-troopers
shouldered his way into the group surrounding
the prisoners. " You're a couple of butes,
you are ! Who was yer mates, eh ? "
Jerry vehemently repeated his protestations
of innocence, but his hearers, three troopers
and a sergeant accompanied by half a dozen
miners from Mount Wearisome diggings, would
have none of it.
" What's all the chinny ? " expostulated a
miner angrily. " String 'em up, sergeant, or


we will ! Ain't Bill dead, and Duster's head
half blown off ? We don't want to worry
the assizes over these red-handed murderers.
Lynch 'em ! "
There was a chorus of eager assent, and the two
miners proceeded to pass ropes over a convenient
eucalyptus bough. Jerry's protestations became
vehement. His nails dug into the palms of his
clenched hands as he strove to repress a shudder
of alarm.
" Our swags are at the water-hole. You'll
find them there ! We weren't with the bush-
rangers ! . . . We'll show you our tracks ! "
" Better take 'em to Port Towers for trial,
boys," struck in the sergeant somewhat lamely;
but the miners were in an angry mood, and
demanded a rough and ready justice.
Ventry was confusedly wondering what it
was all about. A rope thrown about his neck
restored his faculties.
" I'll turn King's evidence! " he cried.
" I'll blow the gaff on the others ! "
"Eh ? I thought you didn't know nothin'
about it ? " snapped the sergeant.
I do. I know who done it! "
The miners and escort clustered round to
hear Ventry's confession. The old sailor had
now recovered the full possession of his wits,


and he meant to make the most of the respite
he had gained. He commenced his tale from
the time of the wreck of the Petrel , and told it
so ably and so lucidly that his hearers were
grudgingly impressed. He finished up by point-
ing out that their swags being at the water-hole
proved that they had not camped with the bush-
rangers.
" Aye, yon 'ud 'ave been a good alibi if yer
hadn't been catched ! " sneered a miner.
" A bloke what's bright enough ter salt a
mine could 'ave thought of that plant with the
swags," growled the sergeant. " You'll come
right along to Port Towers, and we'll take no
risks."
The captives, their hands tied behind them,
were each mounted behind a trooper and their
feet lashed under the horses' bellies, then the
party set off.
As they approached the water-hole the horses
commenced to caper.
" What the blazes is that ? " shouted the
startled Tozer, tugging at his mount.
" Part of our alibi," Jerry murmured.
" Down, Cadger, old lad ! " he admonished the
dog, which, unheedful of the dancing horses,
was making frantic efforts to reach its master.
The night was passed at the water-hole, and


at daylight the fallen miner was buried with
all reverence: then Tozer the sergeant again
interrogated his prisoners.
" I've sent to Mount Wearisome for Jake, the
black tracker, then I'll hunt down them bush-
rangers. Are you coming along to help us,
honest ? " He eyed the prisoners keenly.
" Sure ! Jake will prove our yarn true,"
Jerry supplemented.
Tozer stared at him closely for a moment,
then: "Cut 'em loose, boys!" he ordered.
"No tricks, mind ! " He tapped his revolver
significantly. " I'll be ready for you ! "
About noon, Jake, riding hard, accompanied
by an exhausted trooper, Issy Nathan, six
miners, and two led horses, arrived at the water-
hole, and after a short rest the pursuit of the
bushrangers was commenced.
Jake speedily confirmed the friends' report of
their movements, and later, at the spot where the
bushrangers had camped, gave them good news.
" Only four hosses been here, boss ; and
four white fellows. Many black fellows go
along with them. They not go quickly, boss ! "
Tozer nodded, and the cavalcade moved
forward at speed. Jerry and Ventry, mounted
on the spare horses, made " heavy weather"
of it, to quote Jerry.


Night came upon them before they had
reached the first halting-place of the fugitives,
who had apparently ridden straight towards
the mountains —the blacks still in company —
so Jake averred.
Ventry dropped from his horse and sank to
the ground, leaving a grinning trooper to tend
to the animal.
" Hosses, camels, hasses, and 'obby-'osses—
how I hates yer ! " Ventry moaned.
"My kingdom for a feather cushion! "
whined Jerry, " or a nice leisurely elephant with
a howdah to ride in ! "
"I'd rather ride a blamed 'edge'og than sit
on yon 'oss again," Ventry wailed, and gazed
at the active troopers with querulous envy.
A good supper and a sound sleep somewhat
restored the seamen, and at dawn they clambered,
grumbling, to the saddle again.
Three hours' hard riding brought them to the
spot at which the bushrangers had camped, and
Tozer ordered a halt. The fugitives had been
careless. Their bivouac had been selected
with surprisingly little forethought. The open,
grass-grown shelf, high above sea-level, had
during the night been sprinkled with frost which
the morning sun had turned to moisture, and
the softened ground bore clearly defined tracks


of the recent campers. The tale they told was
plain to read. About a score of naked feet
had proceeded south, while the four horsemen
only went towards the mountains.
Tozer's snort was a mixture of contempt and
triumph as he sat down to a hastily prepared
breakfast. " It's the white scoundrels we wants,
boys ! Them and the gold. Why, the darned
fools won't make four mile an hour. We could
go quicker on foot." He gazed at the mountains
ahead. " They's blamed idjots ! "
" I wonder ? " With a worried frown Jerry
regarded the cocksure Jake.
" Won'er what ? " Tozer demanded.
" How near the ' blamed idjots ' are ! "
" How near ?" Tozer stared. " Why, maybe
they's a ten mile start "
" Yer on the wrong track!" Ventry struck in.
" What's the notion, lad ? "
" If I'd pinched a sack of gold, I'd want to
sell it quick. There's no banks there, is there ?"
Jerry nodded towards the mountains.
A burst of argument ensued, and Ventry
called for silence. " Hear the lad out; he's got
a head, he has—go on, shipmate ! " With an
air of pride he turned towards the youth.
Jerry withdrew his face from his billy of tea.
Nothing much! " he answered. He was


quite composed, despite the frowning stare of
the troopers. "If I had stolen gold, and had
stolen it from troopers, I'd expect to be followed,
and I'd try to throw the pursuers off my trail.
At a spot like this I'd leave a lot of nice tracks
that did not tell the truth. I'd set blacks on
the horses to ride towards the mountains, while
I headed south with the bare-footed brigade.
I'd make for a place where I could hire horses—
Where did you pasture Riddle's nags, Issy ? "
"At Ringwood station, ten miles inland
from Mount Wearisome."
There was a growl of confirmation of Jerry s
reasoning, and he continued : " Then I d make
for the nearest bank without a telegraph."
" Stewart Cove, forty miles north o' Mount
Wearisome !" a miner muttered. The lad s
got it! That's sense, that is."
Tozer rose as the murmur of admiration died
down, and without a word clutched Jake by
the ear and dragged him towards the jumble
of footprints heading south. "Is any of them
feetmarks white men's?" he demanded wrath-
fully.
The inference to be drawn from those all too
clearly marked tracks had been so obviously
apparent that Jake had given them but a cursory
glance. Now he had grudgingly to admit that


some of the footmarks looked like those of
white men. He could have been emphatic on the
point, but even a black tracker has his pride, and
he did not like to be tripped up by raw seamen.
After a lengthy discussion the stubborn
Tozer elected to follow the party on horse-
back, and detailed one trooper, Issy, and four
miners to go with Jerry and Ventry to track
the footmarks southwards. He probably re-
sented Jerry's officiousness and was glad to
be rid of him.
An hour later Jerry and Ventry sat under a
wild apple tree smoking, while the trooper
fussed and fretted about. At length he turned
upon Jerry. " Well, the trail's lost. A mighty
fine mare's nest you've set us on ! "
" Ain't they blazed the trees fer yer ? "
Ventry sneered, " or dropped tram tickets, or
made chalk marks ? lam surprised ! "
The trooper scowled darkly.
" Don't you know the way to Ringwood or
Stewart Cove ?" Jerry rose and knocked his
pipe out.
The trooper swore. " Ye're blamed clever,
ain't yer ? I'm making fer Ringwood—it's
nearest —to see whether this 'ere is a wild-goose
chase or no. You and yer mate can push on
to Stewart Cove. Issy Nathan goes with you.
(3,742) j-3


He'll be good company." The trooper grinned
acidly. " 'Sides, he knows the bank manager
at Stewart Cove."
" That's good sense," Jerry remarked, and
rose. " Coming, Issy ? "
" Sure! " Nathan assented, and ran for his
horse.
If the trooper thought that the Jew would
cause rancour during the ride to Stewart Cove,
he was much mistaken. So long as it did not
interfere with business, Issy could be a cheerful
companion and a good camp mate. The luxu-
ries he had brought from his store he shared
generously with his companions, and the subject
of the " salted " crushing was never mentioned.
All next day they rode hard, and just before
sundown cantered into Stewart Cove.
As they were about to enter the narrow main
thoroughfare of the township Jerry tugged his
horse to the roadside in a hurry. The animal
showed a proper spirit of resentment, and Jerry
had some difficulty in keeping his seat. He
darted an angry glance at a slim horseman who
brushed past him, galloping furiously; then his
eyes widened in surprise, and with a yell he
wheeled his mount.
" He's off ! Jerry's off ! " shouted Issy, and
reined up.


Ventry gazed at the retreating cloud of
dust into which Jerry, hotly pursued by Cad-
ger, was disappearing. " He's a lad as can
look after hisself!" He glanced at the store-
keeper's perturbed face. " Oh, he ain't runnin'
away!"
" Sure he ain't. But who's the cove he's
a-chasin' ? "
" I d'know. An old shipmate, belike."
Issy glanced after the vanishing Jerry, grunted,
and resumed his ride. Ventry followed.
The bank was closed, and the young Chinese
boy who admitted them led the way to the upper
floor, where an astonished young man rose from
his supper table to receive them.
" Where's the manager ? " Issy snapped.
The young man flushed, and regarded his
visitors angrily.
"I'm the manager," he answered.
" Yer new ter me. I knew Hopkirk."
" I've been here four months. What can I
do for you ? "
Issy's knowledge of his predecessor had
reassured the new manager, but his self-com-
posure was short-lived.
" Mount Wearisome gold convoy's been
robbed ! " Issy blurted out. " Any one tried
ter sell yer gold ? "


A chair overturned with a crash as the manager
staggered back.
" Robbed ! " he gasped, then ran on excitedly,
" I knew there was something crooked. Why
did he come to me ? Now he's got clean off!
How could I stop him ? One policeman and
no telephones in this one-horse burgh. I can't
shoot a fellow for trying to sell me gold, can I ?
Now he's clean away ! "
" Did ye buy it ? " Issy screamed. But the
young man was absorbed in his own line of
thought. " I knew he was lying, the dirty
scoundrel! There's only the boy here with me.
I couldn't shoot a fellow on suspicion. What
could I do ? "
" What didyou. do ? " Ventry roared. " Did
you buy it ? "
" No, no ! Of course not! " The bank
manager sank into a chair. " But I've let a
bushranger slip through my fingers. Nice tale
for them at Brisbane." He laughed bitterly.
" They'll sack me, I expect; but what could
I do ? "
After hearing the manager's story, the visitors
had to confess that he had done all that prudence
demanded.
A short while before Ventry and Issy's
arrival a slim young man had gained admittance


to the manager and had offered some gold for
sale. The manager was not empowered to buy
gold, but was sorely tempted to purchase the
parcel. He foresaw a substantial profit, as the
vender appeared to have little knowledge of
gold values.
A sight of the gold restored his natural
caution and aroused his suspicions. The metal
was clean gold dust, free from any alloy, and
the slim young man had told him that he had
procured it in an unnamed creek on Upper
Burdekin River. Gold from a river bed is
usually in nuggets or rough grains, and the metal
he had been offered had been retorted. The
manager had heard of no crushing mill and no
retorts on the Upper Burdekin. He had de-
cided to have nothing to do with the gold, and
had referred his visitor to the bank at Port
Towers. He had sent his boy for the police-
trooper, but he was out fishing.
" That's policemen, that is! " Ventry snorted.
" Well, let's get a gang together ! "
The manager agreed to rouse out a number
of the most dependable citizens, and his visitors
departed. When again outside the bank, the
store-keeper shot an accusing glance at Ventry.
"Yon cove what galloped past us was the
cove with the gold ! " he stated.


" Think I knew it, or Jerry neither ?" Ventry
was hot. "He weren't no pal o' Jerry's, I'll
gamble ! Don't go gettin' bees in yer bonnet,
Issy. We're playin' square, Jerry and me ! "
The store-keeper answered by a growl that
might have meant anything, and together they
set about mustering a party.
Darkness had fallen, and for upwards of a mile
the cavalcade silently wound along the narrow
trail, to halt suddenly as the sound of rustling
bushes came to their ears. In an instant Ventry
and the trooper slid from their horses and dived
into the scrub. A cry of surprise and a mut-
tered exclamation followed, then Ventry emerged
leading a horse.
" Jerry's ! " he announced. " Hobbled in
the bush there." He jerked his thumb over
his shoulder. " Must have done it hisself, I
reckon ! "
" What do you make of it ? " growled the
trooper.
Issy laughed savagely. " Joined his mates, I
expect."
" Talk sense ! " Ventry snapped. " His
mate, as you call him, was on a horse and rode
on. Why should Jerry leave his but to follow
on foot 'cause he was feared o' bein' seen ? "
" Then the fugitives left the trail hereabouts."


The trooper commenced inspecting the ground.
He had no skill at the business, but an inflated
idea of his importance kept him at his task.
After wasting ten minutes, he returned to join
in an argument.
Some of the party were for following the trail
which, a short distance ahead, came out into a
glade. Having to cross the open glade was, they
contended, sufficient reason for Jerry leaving
his horse. Others wanted to scour the wood.
Ventry took no part in the discussion. He
wondered why Jerry had chosen to follow the
horseman alone, when a shout at the commence-
ment of the chase would have brought his friends
to his side. He had a profound respect for
Jerry's wits, but he was worried by the youth's
complete disappearance.
Meanwhile Ventry's companion had come to
no decision, and the argument was being waged
fiercely when he interrupted it with a precau-
tionary " Hist! "
The chattering ceased, and the party drew
together, eyeing the bush and fingering their
weapons.
" What is it ? " muttered a man, and was
silenced by an imperative whisper. Whatever
was approaching was making no secret of its
movements. There was a snapping of twigs,


a rending of foliage, and a dark object sprang
from the scrub.
" Hold yer fire ! " yelled Ventry, and the
half-dozen rifles were lowered. Bending, with
groping hands Ventry tried to seize an animal
which was making frenzied leaps at his face.
" Down, Cadger! Down, lad! Lumme, what's
he carryin' ? " He took something from the
dog's mouth and held it up. It was a dilapi-
dated broad-brimmed hat which had been
Jerry's !
Ventry dashed it to the ground. " Into the
wood, ye gapin' galoots ! " he cried, and turning
to lead the way, stumbled over the still ecstatic
Cadger. " Out o' it, ye mongrel ! Why in
thunder can't ye take us to yer master ? "
Five minutes' floundering in the scrub and
Ventry realized it was only wasting time.
" Here, you Schnapper Jack ! " he hailed a
fisherman, the only black in the party. " You
get busy like anything and track man belong that
hat! " He thrust Jerry's hat into the face of
the offended black, who gave it back hastily.
"Me not dog, me fishaman ! Me free Brit-
ish subject."
" You'll be the subject of an inquest if
yer don't move yerself, and mighty quick ! "
Ventry snapped; then added more persuasively,


" In there, maybe," he announced.
Come, you've got us all beat at this game,
Jackie boy ; we'se the dogs, we'll follow you."
Jackie was rather ashamed of native instinct,
but somewhat flattered by the eagerness with
which the rest of the party awaited his lead; he
warmed to his task, and performed it with con-
siderable skill. He led them diagonally through
the scrub and halted at the edge of the glade.
" there, maybe," he announced, and
pointed.
" In there," Ventry repeated in a whisper,
and stared over the black's shoulder.
In the centre of the glade stood a small hut.


Some energetic pioneer, armed with implements
devised by man's genius, had tumbled the mighty
trees, uprooted the shrubs, cleared the vines,
and in his arrogance built his home. His
triumph was soon contested. The exuberant
plant life, inexhaustible and inquisitive, had
crept irresistibly onwards, encroaching, imped-
ing, until the vigorous arm of the pioneer had
wearied, and knowing the battle lost, had aban-
doned the contest and let nature come again
into its own.
Now a green billow of vines smothered the
tiny kitchen garden, choked the laboriously
sunk well, and climbing the hut had torn a gap
in the roof, then, as if in subtle mockery, had
repaired the rent with a profusion of large wax-
like flowers. The one-time home of the pioneer
jutted up amid the luxuriant vegetation, deso-
late, sombre, decaying.
"In there ? What's he doin' there ? "
Ventry questioned lamely, then pulled himself
together. " Now, slip across and look see if
any fella stop along hut."
Jackie was quick about the job, and reappeared
too suddenly and too stealthily to suit Ventry's
strained nerves.
" You're the flannel-footed guy! " Ventry
exclaimed, lowering his rifle. " Well ? "


" Plenty fighting black fellows and some
white men stop along hut one day, no more.
All gone," the fisherman announced, and Ventry,
motioning his companions to follow, led the way
across the glade at the double.
Crowding into the empty hut, and striking
a succession of matches, they commenced to
overhaul its interior.
" Not much here," Ventry muttered gloomily.
The search had disclosed bare wooden walls,
a rough table, and an iron fire basket set under
a square hole cut in the roof. " This don't
tell me much! "he grumbled, staring at the hard
clay floor. " How in thunder d'ye know who's
been here ? " he demanded, turning incredu-
lously upon Jackie.
The black grinned, and pointed to the basket
of ashes. " White men cook," he explained.
" Outside black men cook." He pointed to one
corner of the hut. " Guns and spears stop
along there. White men hang guns." He indi-
cated a number of nails sprinkled freely over
the hut walls. " All happen to-day ! "
" How do ye know that ? " Ventry queried.
Issy laughed. " You ain't much of a wood-
man," he sneered. "Ye can see with half an
eye that them ashes is still hot—shove your
hand into 'em. Bushwhackers ain't over care-


ful about sweepin' up their hearths. There's
one day's ash and no more there."
Ventry grunted. " Well, it don't help us
ter Jerry," he lamented. " What's the game ?
It's them bushrangers, I reckon. Have they
stuck a knife inter the lad ? "
" No. No killed ! " Jackie struck in. "White
feller stop along corner, all tied up —tied up like
anything ! "
" Fer the love o' mike how do yer figure that
out ? No foolin', mind ! " Ventry shook his fist
threateningly. "Tell the truth or I'll bash ye! "
The black smiled confidently. " White mans
hang rifle up. Plop ! down come nail; white
man tied up along corner, hands like that."
Jackie put his hand behind his back. "He find
nail and write message "
" Message —where ? "
" Look ! " Jackie again indicated the corner.
"Me busy like anything. Get back fix up
nets." He strode off, but no one heeded him.
All were peering over Ventry's shoulder as he
knelt, fumbling with the match-box.
A match flamed, and a murmur of astonish-
ment filled the hut. Roughly scrawled upon
the clay floor were six irregularly shaped letters:
PALOMA


" P-a-l-o-m-a," Ventry read the scrawl with
difficulty. " Paloma. What's that ? Where's
that ? "
" An island," Issy murmured, " 'bout 600
miles off the coast. It's mostly owned by a
big bug named Burdett—Burnett—or some-
thing."
" Burbridge," corrected the trooper. " I once
seen the old cove at Townsville. Wealthy as
Monte Cristo he is. Burbridge w r ere his name."
Ventry, still crouching in the corner, stared
thoughtfully from one to the other of the
speakers. "Ye both seem certain as the old
feller's name begins with a ' Bur,' " he said
slowly; " how about Burford ? "
" Yon's him," Issy and the trooper chorused ;
the latter adding, " I knew it had summat to do
with a river."
" Well, if we've got the name right, I reckon
the riddle ain't hard to read ! " Ventry rose
to his feet.
" How ? "
" Why, the lad they kidnapped, my mate, is
Jerry Burford, old Tom Burford's own nephew."
There was silence while the others of the
party tried to assimilate this startling announce-
ment.
Issy, the quickest witted, was busy with


pleasant thoughts. If he was spending his time
in an attempt to rescue the nephew of the fabu-
lously wealthy Tom Burford, it was not misspent.
He glowed with conscious rectitude as he re-
alized that his generous heart had embarked
him upon so profitable an errand. But Issy
also felt genuinely concerned about his young
acquaintance.
" Them bushrangers ain't takin' Jerry ter
Paloma fer his health, I reckon ! " he exploded.
" They means ter use him as a bait ter catch
the old 'un ! "
" Just so," Ventry acquiesced. "Is there
a fast craft in port ? "
"By gum, we'll get one ! " Issy was violent
and earnest. " We'll stop them coves' capers,
if we has ter go ter Paloma in a jolly-boat! "
" Well crowed, my bully ! " Ventry cried.
" Half a dozen like you and we'd swim it!
But we'll get a boat, nevertheless."


CHAPTER XIV
THE HUT IN THE SCRUB
WHEN Jerry turned his horse to pursue
the hurrying rider, he confidently antici-
pated a brisk gallop would put him alongside
his quarry. Therein he was much mistaken.
He was not holding his own, and having been
three days in the saddle he found no pleasure in
galloping. He brought his voice to the rescue
and howled lustily, " Ahoy, there! Heave to !
Jerry Burford coming aboard ! "
The rider in front of him cast a glance over
his shoulder, gave a cry, urged his horse on,
then drew rein and awaited Jerry's arrival.
What ho, Ralph, old lad ! How are you ? "
Jerry rode forward, his hand extended in cordial
greeting. " Why, what's up, cousin ? " Jerry
continued, the smile fading from his lips.
" You look as if you'd seen a ghost! " He
stared in alarm at the other's white, drawn face
and nervously fumbling hands.
" Goodness, Jerry boy, you did startle me ! "


Ralph's voice betrayed his agitation. " I am
glad to see you," he added, and there was
genuine sincerity and relief expressed in the
remark. " How did you get here ?
" Why, a sailor may turn up anywhere,"
Jerry laughed. " But fancy running across you
galloping through Queensland bush like a high-
way man!"
" Highwayman ? " Ralph shot a startled
glance at his cousin, then looked away. " I'm
riding to catch a ship."
" Catch a ship be blowed for a yarn! Come
and catch some supper. The ship can wait.
Does your craft nest in the eucalyptus trees ? "
Jerry nodded at the trail Ralph was following,
which led straight into the bush.
Ralph flushed. " There's a creek " He
broke off and looked about him fearfully. " I
must hurry on. Wait for me at the hotel;
I must go ! " His eyes were restless. " See
you later."
"I'll ride with you," Jerry suggested, and for
a second Ralph looked alarmed, then brightly
said, "Your horse is spent, old lad. You can't
move fast enough in this gallop —see you later."
In thoughtful silence Jerry watched his cousin
ride off. Before he plunged into the bush
Ralph turned and waved a hand, to which


gesture Jerry responded, then turned and, deep
in thought, rode towards the town a mile distant.
He had not proceeded far when he again halted
and addressed his only listener, who wagged
his tail in appreciation.
" Cousin Ralph's jumpy. Did you remark
it, Cadger ? The less we know about him, the
better he seems to like it." With clouded
brow Jerry stared at the dog and meditated.
Had Ralph got into trouble ? It was like enough.
He had been a quick-tempered, wild youth.
It was " up to " Jerry to help him, if help were
needed ; and he did not want to bring Ventry or
Issy into the job. His brow clouded when he
thought of his companion's mission to Stewart
Cove and Ralph's hasty exit. Was there any
connection between the two ? Once again he
wheeled his horse and rode into the bush,
Cadger at his heels. Half an hour's hard riding
brought him to the open glade, but no sign of
Ralph. His cousin must have ridden very fast
to have got clean across that glade and out of
sight so quickly. There was no trail other than
the one he had followed, as far as Jerry could see;
but he certainly could not see far. Climbing to
the topmost branch of a convenient tree he
materially increased his horizon. His activity
was renewed. Far to the eastward he caught the
(3,742) &
14


glint of a ribbon of water —the creek —and half-
way in the same direction a thread of smoke
ascended.
If Ralph's objective had been that ribbon of
smoke, he had used an easier trail than did
Jerry; for no sooner had he ridden into the scrub
than he found his passage barred by a lacing
of latana vines which, covered with a carpet of
leaves, hid the earth. At every second step his
horse came squealing to its knees.
There was nothing for it but to proceed on
foot; so hobbling his mount, the youth carefully
picked his way forward, quite forgetful of the
faithful Cadger, who, advancing by a series of
short prances, was close in his wake. Reaching
a more open stretch of bush Jerry paused and
peered about him. He must be near the spot
from which he had seen the smoke ascend.
He was about to move cautiously forward,
when Cadger, in a conversational growl, ex-
pressed his opinion of the enterprise. His
master stopped, irresolute. Intent upon his
object, he had been oblivious of the dog's
presence.
Cadger's courage was undoubted, but had he
the discretion necessary for the success of the
adventure ? He had a noble scorn of subter-
fuge, and would without doubt issue a loud-


voiced challenge on the slightest provocation.
Master and dog eyed each other. Cadger had
the unhappy conviction that he was not to be in
at the death. He was right; but he was not to
be subjected to the indignity of bonds.
Jerry flung his hat down. " Still! On
guard ! " he ordered in a stern whisper.
The dog flopped down, and by a bored yawn
signified his perfect understanding of the task
allotted to him.
Ten minutes' crawl and Jerry was within sight
of a small hut from which issued the smoke.
A jaded horse, nosing dejectedly amongst the
vegetation for something edible, satisfied him
that Ralph was not far to seek. Jerry was not
likely to forget the heavy chestnut mare which
had nearly trundled him into the ditch. But
how was he to proceed ? The hut probably held
more than one tenant, and he had no wish to
complicate matters for his cousin—or himself.
He settled down to watch.
He had not long to wait before a heavy slouch-
ing figure emerged from the shack, shouted a
few words to those inside, stared about him,
glanced at the sky, and returned. The youth
crouched further into concealment. There was
no mistaking that figure, and if Cartwright was
an inmate of the hut, Jerry felt it could furnish


no entertainment to his liking. But Ralph
was evidently mixed up with Cartwright's gang,
and he must be separated from his associates
before the hunt, which Jerry conceived Ventry
and Issy had already put on foot, closed about
the quarry. Would such an opportunity pre-
sent itself ?
Dusk descended and his cousin had not re-
appeared, but still Jerry lingered on.
Some distance behind him Cadger, quivering
with excitement, every hair abristle, strove
valiantly to retain his self-control. Fierce-
eyed, he turned his head this way and that
to watch the half-dozen dark forms moving
swiftly through the bush. A sharp, agitated
yelp broke from the bush, and the cavalcade
halted, listening ; then—
" A blamed dingo (native dog)," a man
growled. " Inter the scrub, you Fishbone and
Honeysuckle, an' scare the brute. We don't
want 'im yelpin' along this 'ere trail! "
Two black forms advanced into the bush,
beating the undergrowth with clubs; but Cadger,
more courageous than a dingo, crouched at his
post and lay quiet.
Fishbone did not find the dog, but returned
goggle-eyed with excitement, and whispered to
his leader.


" What ? 'Ere ? " the white man queried.
Fishbone nodded violently in assent.
" Rot and burn it! Move soft then, and nail
1m !
Jerry, lying in the bush, his eyes intent upon
the hut, was suddenly aware of a snapping of
twigs and a rush of feet. He scrambled to his
knees, then went down struggling like a netted
wild-cat, black arms embracing him.
Dazed by a blow on the head, he was dimly
aware of being carried from under the trees ;
a babel of incoherent voices and a glare of light,
and he was dumped down. A door behind
him closed with a bang, and scrambling to his
feet he found himself in the hut surrounded by
angry faces. Cartwright and three white mates
confronted him, and behind them a number of
ugly black countenances peered, curious and
fiercely menacing. A startled cry from his
right directed Jerry's gaze upon his cousin.
" You ag'in, ye swine ! Well, it's the larst
time ! " Cartwright's knife flashed as he sprang
forward, his eyes blazing hate.
Instantly Ralph was upon the bushwhacker.
" Drop that! "he yelled, and seizing the swag-
man's arm at elbow and wrist he gave it a
violent wrench.
Cartwright screamed, and the knife clattered


to the ground as he retired spitting curses and
holding his twisted arm.
" Keep your paws still! " Ralph snapped, and
turned upon Jerry. " What do you want here ? "
he demanded, and Jerry caught the flicker of an
eyelid.
" You didn't invite me certainly," he answered,
breathing hard. " Your good friends brought
me." What was Ralph's game ? Whatever it
was, Jerry realized that he would have to let
him pipe the tune for the present.
" Well, what were you creeping around here
for ? " Ralph bent closer, and a second guarded
wink warned Jerry to be cautious. " You're
the chap who stopped me on the trail. Still
looking for your mates ? " He laughed dis-
cordantly. ''You won't find 'em here."
" Lookin' fer his mates ? " Cartwright snorted.
" They're in Stewart Cove raisin' a hunt—and
he knows what for ! " He pointed an accusing
finger at Jerry, and looked at Ralph. " Leave
this cove ter me ; 'e won't do no more spying ! "
" Keep your mouth shut! " Ralph flung over
his shoulder, and continued to regard Jerry
in obvious perplexity. "Tie the kid up,"
he ordered at length, " and get the stuff
together."
" What's to happen to the kid ? " growled a


squat dark man who was the author of Jerry's
capture. " This ain't the time ter be dainty."
44 Maybe I'll take him along with us."
Ralph stared coldly at his questioner. 44 See
if the schooner's up, Foster," he ordered, and
turned away.
The squat man shuffled his feet. 44 Lumme,
we ain't carryin' passengers to Paloma "
44 Who bade you yap ? " Ralph swung upon
the critic. 44 Your tongue won't wag so loose
after I've told the boss of your chattering ! "
He was genuinely angry. 44 See if the schooner's
up —you heard me ! "
Foster, muttering wrathfully, shambled off,
and the others fell to gathering their belongings
together.
Jerry, huddled up in a corner, his hands tied
behind him, found little to his liking in the con-
versation. What did his cousin intend ? Was
Cartwright to have his way at the last ? Was
he to be left imprisoned to starve in the hut ?
His cousin was certainly hand in glove with the
desperadoes and had some authority over them.
What was his object in keeping his knowledge
of Jerry and the kinship a secret ? Was it
Ralph who had sought his death—bribed Mullins
—planned the kidnapping at Honolulu ? Jerry
shivered. No ; he could not believe it. Be-


sides, Ralph seemed to wish to serve him; but
how was it to be contrived ? His unruly fol-
lowers would certainly not permit the prisoner
to be peacefully liberated. Jerry gave the prob-
lem up, and wriggling in discomfort swept the
floor under him with his fingers. No wonder
he had been uncomfortable. A nail was not a
pleasant thing upon which to sit. Could it
serve him ? He grasped it in his fingers, and
with contorted wrists tried to pick at his bonds.
It was a dismal failure. He resigned himself
to await the verdict of his captors. He was
under no delusion that it would be a merciful
one. The best that he could hope for was that
they would take him with them to Paloma,
wherever Paloma was. He wondered if Issy
knew. The store-keeper could follow the trail!
Jerry clutched the nail, and the perspiration
poured down his face as he scratched at the
clay floor. None noticed his activities. He
moved his place slightly, and was about to try
again when Foster reappeared.
" She's up," he announced ; " and there's
a gang of coves nosing about. Get a move
on! "
The blacks loaded up with the gear which had
littered the floor, filed out, then Ralph nodded
to Cartwright. "You next! "he ordered.


A short-arm jab caught him on the chin.
Jerry's breath was suspended, and for a
moment his heart almost ceased to beat.
" I've a bit o' business 'ere," the swagman
retorted, and glared sulky defiance.
" Outside ! " ordered Ralph peremptorily.
" Think yer the high muck-a-muck, don't
yer ? " snarled Cartwright. His eyes were
wicked, and his angry face was thrust close to
Ralph's—too close. A short-arm jab caught
him on the point of the chin, and he sat down
violently.
" I said 4 outside ' —now march! " This time
Ralph's injunction was accompanied by a hearty
kick which propelled Cartv T right, like a meteor,
217


through the door. There was dead silence as
he picked himself up and drew his sleeve across
his copiously bleeding mouth. One murderous
look he darted at his aggressor, then slunk away
like a beaten cur.
Grim-faced Ralph watched him depart, then:
" The prisoner goes with us," he snapped.
" Gag him. Lively now ! "
There was no object to be served by resistance.
Failing to catch his cousin's eye, Jerry shrugged
his shoulders and submitted.
Carried like a bag of sugar over the shoulders
of a gigantic black, who resented his unnecessary
burden, scratched and torn by the scrub through
which he had to pass, bruised and aching in
every limb, Jerry, with anxious roving eyes,
sought for signs of his friends.
A shadowy form closed up upon the burdened
black, and a knife gleamed. Was it Cartwright ?
Jerry wriggled frantically, and the black exploded
in fierce, modulated gutturals. The dark form
dropped back into the shadows, and tense with
apprehension, Jerry was for the remainder of the
journey oblivious to shrub or thorn.
The journey was over at last, and Jerry un-
ceremoniously dumped in the hold of a small
vessel lying in a narrow creek. The hatches
were clapped on and he was left in utter dark-


ness, dully wondering what would happen to
him next. He did not expect to be consulted
in the matter, and squirming into as comfort-
able a position as his bonds permitted, he fell
asleep.


CHAPTER XV
MULLINS' PAYMASTER
JERRY opened his eyes, then blinked. He
could see nothing. The profound darkness
of the hold made him as one blind. His
arms were numbed, and his back and shoulders
ached as if from a violent thrashing. The lash-
ings which bound him were not the work of an
amateur. Groaning, he rolled over on his side,
and saw a beam, like the ray of a tiny search-
light, travel slowly across the floors, light up
for a moment a foraging rat, then swing for-
ward a pace or two, moving restlessly.
The sun must be very near its zenith to throw
that little shaft of light through the broken
corner of the closed hatches, Jerry argued ; and
by the rhythmic swaying of the vessel he knew
her to be at sea. High noon, and he had slept
throughout the night. He felt a sense of satis-
faction at the achievement. His thoughts turned
upon breakfast.
When the meal at last arrived it was but a


sorry one for a hungry youth. The jug of water
and the handful of biscuits which a stolid and
uncommunicative copper-coloured savage pro-
vided were welcome, but how was Jerry to
profit by them ? He wriggled his bound arms
to show the Kanaka his difficulty, and the man
only stared.
Other eyes were watching, and an order was
shouted from the deck. The savage cut the
captive's lashings, and muttering at the len-
iency departed, covering the hatchway with a
grating across which he clamped an iron batten.
Jerry enjoyed the luxury of a stretch. It was
something to be rid of his bonds, even if his
freedom were bounded by a hundred feet or
so of gloomy hold. What did it contain ? The
biscuits and water did not delay him long; he
then set out to inspect his prison.
The little cabin and the store-room beneath
it were enclosed behind a bulkhead at the after
end of the hold. There was no exit that way.
He turned forward, passed a mast-step, followed
the kelson along until he discovered another
mast-step. Here the entire absence of light
made progress difficult. His hands extended
before him, he moved carefully forward. The
floors were rapidly narrowing ; he had scarcely
room to walk between the kelson and the frames.


What a sharp entry the vessel had ; she must be
a flyer with so keen a run. A smart blow on
the head brought him to a halt. With groping
hands he investigated the obstruction, and found
it to be a panting-beam or breast-hook—a sort
of wooden shelf of heavy beams strengthening
the vessel's bows. He scrambled up on to the
little platform, and found he could lie upon it
without much discomfort. Up here he was out
of the way of any sudden attack. He decided
to make it his sleeping quarters.
Returning to his seat on the kelson, under the
open grating, he spent the rest of the day listen-
ing to the voices on deck. It was a profitless
occupation. No one came near him or addressed
him throughout the long day, and after a
meagre supper, a replica of the earlier meal,
furnished by the same silent Kanaka, he clam-
bered on to the breast-hook, and jamming him-
self between the frames, settled down for the
night.
If Jerry was apparently taking his imprison-
ment placidly, it was because he saw no benefit
in doing otherwise. He had every intention
of taking energetic advantage of the slightest
opportunity offered.
It was very evident to him that he was in a
tight corner. His cousin seemed inclined to


defend him, but why was Ralph entangled with
a gang of desperadoes, apparently their leader ?
What had happened to him to induce him to
throw in his lot with the scum of a mining
camp ?
Jerry well remembered his cousin's departure
from Thursby. Talented, well-educated, and
high-spirited, Ralph had left home in a blaze of
triumph, for was he not going out to Australia,
to make his home with his wealthy Uncle Tom,
at that gentleman's express invitation ? What
else could such an invitation mean but that
Tom Burford had chosen Ralph as his suc-
cessor. Why then did Jerry find his cousin
hand in glove with bushrangers and Cart-
wright ? With a shudder, Jerry remembered
the old sundowner's murderous attack. Here
was a glorious opportunity for Cartwright to
settle his account. If, in the quiet of night, he
crept into the dark hold, bent on murder, who
was there to thwart him ? Jerry felt he did
well to avail himself of the small security his
perch on the breast-hook offered.
Sleep was long in coming, and when at
length he did doze, his anxieties bred in his
fevered brain a series of fearful nightmares,
which kept him restlessly tossing on the border-
land of consciousness to wake suddenly, every


faculty intensely alert. The darkness of night
intensified the gloom of his prison. No sound
broke the silence but the faint creak of the
strained timbers and the dull gurgle and roar of
tiie seas parting at the vessel's rushing forefoot.
Jerry, his lips set grimly, and his heart throb-
bing like a Westinghouse brake, crouched against
the beam and stared at a bright blotch of light
which slid and darted hither and thither across
the bare floors. Some one with an electric
torch was searching for him !
His hands groped feverishly around his little
shelf, but discovered nothing which would serve
him for a weapon.
Slowly the dancing light drew nearer. Was
its bearer Cartwright ?
Drawing himself together, Jerry prepared to
hurl himself upon his attacker. His six-foot
elevation would impart to his spring an impetus
which could not fail to give him an advantage.
But would the searcher come near enough for
him to put his plan into effect ? Perhaps he
would use a revolver. More likely the silent
knife ! Jerry's blood ran cold at the thought.
Bushmen are often adepts at knife throwing.
Horror in his eyes, he found himself listening
for the soft " hum " which would herald the
death-dealing blow.


In a sweep the light left the floor, danced in
Jerry's blinking eyes, and remained fixed. Now
for the knife ! A cold shiver ran down his
spine as he huddled against the beam.
" Jerry ! "
" Ralph ! "
Unutterable relief was expressed by the
almost incoherent whisper.
" Come down under the hatch, so that I can
nip up if any one comes."
For a moment Jerry hesitated. " Where's
Cartwright ? " he asked.
" Sick as a dog, else I wouldn't have had a
chance of being here. But there's worse than
Cartwright aboard here ; I think he's the fiend
himself! " Ralph added with fierce hatred.
" Come down and talk ! "
" Ralph lad, what's all the mess up ? "
Jerry demanded, as he clambered down and
accompanied his cousin aft.
" Not so loud ! They'd chuck me overboard
if they knew I was down here. They'd do it
anyway, only I'm the only navigator ! " Ralph
seated himself on the kelson under the hatch,
upon which the grating had been replaced.
For a moment he sat silent, then: " It's a
miserable tale I have to tell you. Oh, how I
wish I could get out of this horrible mess ! "
(3,742)


he went on fiercely, then laughed bitterly. " A
fool must pay for his folly, I suppose, but what
a price ! Great Scot! what a price ! "
" Ralph, there's two of us now. Give me a
gun and I'll help you to pay your creditors."
Jerry was grim and very earnest. " We'll get
to windward of the sweeps. Come, lad, a gun,
and we'll get busy right away! Clap the hatches
on the curs, and take this ship back to Port
Towers ! "
"No go, Jerry, old son! " Ralph smiled
wanly at his cousin's enthusiasm. " Listen ! "
With bent head Jerry gave silent attention to
his cousin's account of the incidents which had
involved him in his present unhappy situation.
Ralph left Thursby for Australia when he was
nineteen, three years prior to Jerry going to
sea. It appeared that he had won the complete
confidence of his uncle, and was frequently
entrusted with business missions to Townsville,
the nearest place of consequence to Tom Bur-
ford's island estates. These missions Ralph
accomplished with credit, with the result that
Uncle Tom left the financial concerns of his
property more and more in his nephew's hands.
Tom Burford had, at an early age, gone into
the world to plough his own furrow, and he had
done it with marked success. He saw in his


" Come, lad, a gun, and we'll get busy."
nephew the embodiment of his own youthful
courage and spirit. But he forgot that in the
days of his youth his pockets were more
frequently empty than not. Ralph's pockets
were usually well filled with his uncle's gold,
and that made a vast difference.
He was not an impecunious youngster bat-
tling gamely with the world. He was a pigeon
well worth the plucking, and Townsville did
not lack those who would undertake the pro-
cess with whole-hearted zeal. It was not long
before an unscrupulous beach-comber marked
Ralph down as his prey.
Amid the cosmopolitan and transient crowd


at the busy isolated seaport there was many a
worthy and honest wanderer who believed that
he held information worth much money, could
he but finance it —pearl beds; guano deposits;
cedar forests ; gold to be picked up in creek and
on hill —and some of these schemes finding the
necessary backing often brought fortunes to
the promoters. Thus it was only natural that
Ralph should give a ready ear to a plausible
old scoundrel who brought him a tale of an
unexplored river in the Solomon Islands, which
would reward a daring adventurer with a harvest
of rubies. Foster, the teller of the tale, had only
escaped from the murderous and cannibal
Solomon boys with his life. He bared his
flattened head and disclosed an ugly scar run-
ning from crown to ear —the Solomon boys were
ugly customers ! Perhaps Ralph wouldn't care
to go poking his nose into that wild country ?
Foster was manifestly surprised at the young
man's enthusiasm for the venture, and for a
week he tried to cool his ardour by tales of
daring, suffering, and adventure. Steaming
swamps; impenetrable cane brakes; weary
marches, aching and dizzy from malaria, the
dull boom of the tom-tom throbbing as the
hideous cannibals drew in upon their quarry.
Better stick to Townsville, where a man can


sleep o' nights and come down to the comfort
of a well-cooked breakfast. To Foster's appar-
ent surprise Ralph thought otherwise. How
much would be needed for the venture ? he
wanted to know.
A ship, of course, food and equipment —say
a matter of £5OO.
Ralph had only about £2OO of his own.
Foster pronounced it impossible to make so
small a sum suffice, and Ralph put the venture
to his uncle on his return to Paloma, Tom
Burford's island station.
His uncle laughed, led Ralph to the veranda,
and pointed to his coco palms, sugar plantations,
rubber trees, and beyond to the hills covered
with tall cedars and iron bark. " There's
rubies in plenty for you, and no cannibals or
malaria between you and them," he smiled
good-naturedly. " Leave wild-cat schemes
alone, sonny; your job's here."
Ralph was restless and unconvinced. " You
would have gone in for the venture when you
were my age," he contended.
" Maybe I should." His uncle picked up a
book and strolled indoors. " But I had my way
to make in the world then."
The young man stared sulkily after the re-
treating form, then gazed out over the expan-


sive estate. He had had no part in the making
of it. He was no spoon-fed infant unable to
fend for himself. He had his way to make, and
he would make it as he thought fit. It is hard
for a spirited youth to follow a luxurious, prim-
rose path when the bait of adventure lures.
Next visit to Townsville Ralph pledged him-
self to finance the venture to the extent of his
£2OO, Foster promising to obtain and invest
a similar sum.
In the chartering and storing of the ship
Ralph's money dwindled fast, and the expedi-
tion was but half equipped when his funds
ran out.
Foster had not so far provided the promised
contribution, and at length he gloomily admitted
that he could not borrow the money. He had
no credit, whereas Ralph could easily get the
necessary loan.
Ralph had written to his uncle informing him
of his purpose ; to be forced to abandon his
project and shamefacedly return to Paloma was
unthinkable. He decided to borrow the neces-
sary money, and found it surprisingly easy. Into
the sympathetic ear of a visitor to Townsville,
named Schultz, Ralph poured his woes, and
Schultz offered to lend him £SOO on a note of
hand only. Ralph did not find this astonishing.


He accepted the offer, and preparations for the
voyage were resumed, only to terminate suddenly
when one morning the incautious youth found
that the ship, £SOO, and Foster had all dis-
appeared.
The scheme had, of course, been kept secret,
and Ralph had no wish to label himself as a
" plucked pigeon," when derisive laughter would
have been the only solace offered. Had he made
the matter public he might have learned that
the chartered schooner was the property of
Schultz, and no one else was likely to make a fuss
over her disappearance. Nor did Schultz make
a fuss over the vessel when Ralph told him of his
trouble. The money-lender was only concerned
about his money. How did Ralph propose to
redeem his note of hand ? The prospects of
his uncle coming to his rescue seemed to the
misguided youth to be hopeless. He talked
wildly of his hope of an estate in England.
Only a youth stood between him, broad lands,
and a handsome revenue. Schultz was inter-
ested but dissatisfied. Having gathered explicit
details of the house of Burford at Thursby, he
pronounced his inability to wait for his money.
He would go to Paloma and get Tom Burford
to retrieve his nephew's note.
For his ambitious schemes to end by his


creeping back to Paloma, like a whipped cur, to
plead for his uncle's aid, was out of the question
for the high-spirited Ralph. He would work his
fingers to the bone to pay Schultz. To the
youth's earnest pleadings the money-lender at
length gave way. He would wait for his money
on the chance that Ralph might in time make
it up with his uncle and inherit a fortune.
But such leniency deserved an adequate reward.
Ralph would make the note of hand for £5,000,
only to be paid when he inherited a sum suffi-
cient to pay. The youth was only too glad to
sign the document and turn to honest toil.
He was happy to discover that Schultz imme-
diately departed from Townsville. He never
dreamed to what lengths the rascally money-
lender would go.
Schultz went to England, where he arrived
some months before Jerry's departure to sea.
If Jerry were to disappear at sea, who could
connect the tragedy with his cousin ten thousand
miles away ?
Schultz made it his mission to discover what
he could about the Burford household, and
Mullins, the gardener, provided information.
Master Jerry was going to sea on a fine
barque on which the gardener's brother was
bos'n.


Luck was with the money-lender. In the
bos'n he found a promising tool, and with him
he arranged for Jerry's quiet disappearance.
He did not intend to be content with £5,000
if he could get more.
He returned to Australia, proposing to make
further use of Ralph.
The Rowandale arrived at Newcastle, and
Jerry Burford was still in the land of the living.
Schultz became impatient, and a stormy inter-
view with Mullins resulted in the shanghaiing of
Jerry at Honolulu.
Judging his business well done, Mullins cabled
to his paymaster, who made haste to renew his
acquaintance with his dupe.
Ralph was labouring at a small seaport when
Schultz visited him and unfolded his net. He
came bluntly to the point. Jerry Burford had
been murdered, he told Ralph, and who more
likely to arrange the crime than his heir: the
heir who had given a written promise to pay
£5,000 at Jerry Burford's death — for Jerry
Burford's death, a jury would undoubtedly
say, Schultz pointed out, and reminded Ralph
of the fact that his promissory note was made
out to bearer. Schultz had stipulated for that,
pleading business reasons which Ralph was in
no position to dispute.


Oh, Schultz had himself well screened. He
could arrange for documents and evidence to
come to the hands of the public prosecutor,
and his own name never appear. Was Ralph
prepared to stand his trial for the murder
of his cousin, and the attendant scandal, if
not a conviction and hanging ? Or would he
give Schultz some small help in a little
enterprise ?
If ever Ralph had murder in his heart it was
that night in the lonely hut he called his home,
when Schultz showed his hand. It was well
for the money-lender that Foster was with him,
for it took the united efforts of the two to master
the frenzied youth.
During a seemingly age-long night Ralph was
left to consider his decision.
Doubting his ability to prove his innocence
when matched against the arch cunning of
Schultz ; fearful of bringing a stigma upon
the name of Burford ; cut off from his family
and penniless, is it to be wondered at that
he gave up the unequal contest and agreed
to do Schultz's bidding ? If he made mental
reservations, Schultz knew nothing of them.
Next day the schooner Emu sailed for North
Queensland, and off the mouth of the lonely
creek near Port Towers awaited the passing of


a certain barque known to be loading with cedar
at Paloma.
It was during a shooting trip ashore that
Schultz fell in with Cartwright and his three
cronies, and, anxious to recruit white despera-
does, enlisted them. His own bodyguard of a
dozen savage Marshall Islanders, led by Lebona,
a hideous and ferocious creature, were left in
the hut with Ralph and Foster to see that the
new recruits did not play false or desert—
Cartwright averring that he had some business
ashore and could not go aboard until it was
completed.
The nature of the business he imparted to
Foster, and that worthy, with what he considered
to be consummate cunning, made a sugges-
tion. Why not send Ralph Burford to sell the
stolen gold ? It would implicate him and
keep Cartwright in the background. Ralph
dared not give the game away, Foster asserted.
Perhaps he was right. At least, for certain
reasons of his own, Ralph agreed to the
proposal.
Although nominally captain of the schooner,
and apparently enjoying the complete trust
of Schultz, who at all times supported his au-
thority over Foster, Ralph knew he was a care-
fully guarded and secretly spied upon prisoner.


He was returning from his mission to the
bank when he encountered Jerry.
Such was the series of events which, partly
from Ralph's tale, partly from his own know-
ledge, Jerry pieced together as side by side the
cousins sat in the darkness of the Emu s hold.


CHAPTER XVI
UP THE RIVER
"A ND now for the last act. Do you know
l \ what it's to be ? " Ralph's tone was a
sneer.
Jerry stirred restlessly, and eyed his cousin
with gloomy foreboding. " What ?" he asked.
" The murder of Uncle Tom ! I'm to pilot
these scoundrels up to Paloma so that my bene-
factor may be butchered ! That's the work
Schultz has planned for me ! " Ralph laughed,
and his laugh was less mirthful than the snarl
of a cornered dingo.
In horrified silence Jerry stared at his cousin.
From a radiant full moon a shaft of pale light fell
upon the hatch, and the shadow of the grating
was projected like prison bars behind which
huddled the dejected form of Ralph. Was it
an omen ? Ralph lifted his head, read the
horror in his companion's eyes, and smiled
wearily.
" You'll not do it ? " Jerry leaped to his feet,
gripped and shook his cousin's shoulders.


8 JERRY GOES TO SEA
" You'll not help these villains to do their devils'
work ? "
" Seems easy for every one to believe me a
villain." Ralph rose and pushed Jerry away.
"Doit ? No!" His voice rang with suppressed
anger. " I was going to slam the schooner on a
reef, rip her bottom out, and drown the whole
Satan's brew. Then you turn up, and I can't
do it! " He passed his hand across his eyes
and sighed hopelessly.
A moment Jerry stared, then: " I don't under-
stand. Why did you try to sell the gold ? "
" I intended not to sell it. I hoped that would
make Cartwright and his mates back out of
Schultz's scheme and take the gold elsewhere.
Schultz's party would be weakened, and Cart-
wright and the stolen gold might have been
captured. It was a chance. I did not mind
the bank manager circulating my description as
that of one of the bushrangers. No one was
ever to see me again. And why did I consent
to navigate the schooner, you would ask ?"
Ralph continued. " Because a dozen others
would do it for a few pounds, and not slam
her on a reef —that's why ! That cedar-loaded
barque from Paloma means that Uncle Tom has
just netted about ten thousand pounds. That's
what Schultz is after."


" The police " Jerry commenced, but
his cousin cut him short with a weary gesture.
" I wanted to keep the name of Burford out
of this mess. I had no friend to confide in, and
little chance to communicate with one if I had.
Foster was within pistol shot of me when I
went to the bank. He must have seen you,
but I suppose he mistook you for a chance
acquaintance. Schultz generally keeps watch
with me, but as we are now far at sea he no
doubt thinks I'm harmless. Thank goodness
he doesn't know who you are. He knows only
what Cartwright can tell him of you. What
a mercy Cartwright did not know your name
or " Ralph hesitated.
" I know," Jerry nodded, and his cousin ran
on excitedly :
" That's why in the hut I admitted having
seen you before that day. Had I denied it and
Foster had seen us, his suspicions would have
been aroused and he would have told Schultz.
I thought I could settle this mess for good and
all; now you butt in, and I can't do it! "
"Do it, Ralph ! Slam her on a reef ! We'll
take our chances." Jerry's voice rose un-
guardedly.
" Hist! " Ralph ejaculated. " We've three
or four days yet to think of some other way."


" And two of us to tackle the job ! " Jerry
struck in vehemently. " We'll get to wind-
ward of the crooks yet! "
" Where's the skipper ? " shouted a rasping
voice, and Ralph whispering, " Schultz," darted
to the ladder and slid behind it as a swift step
approached the hatch.
" You down there, Burford ? " Schultz de-
manded angrily.
Jerry shambled into the moonlight. " What
do you want ? " he demanded sleepily.
" Are you alone down there ? "
" Snakes alive, no! There's millions and
millions of rats. Sociable little chaps —don't
worry about me, you'll have plenty of worries
of your own. There's a cruiser at Towns-
ville "
Schultz swore. " What that perishing fool
Burford wanted to drag you along with us for,
beats me," he murmured half to himself, then
raised his voice. " Who the blazes are you ?
And why are you nosing about our preserves ? "
" I saw Cartwright " Jerry commenced,
and was cut short.
" Pity he didn't slit your throat when he had
the chance ! "
" I was afraid I'd be superfluous," Jerry
murmured.


Schultz flung an oath at him and marched
off forward.
As the sound of departing footsteps grew
fainter, dark hands whisked off the hatch grating,
and with a murmured " Another time," Ralph
vanished up through the opening. A few
moments later his voice, rendered faint by
distance, drifted down through the hatchway.
" What are you black sweeps making the row
about ?" he yelled, and Jerry smiled. His
cousin was a rapid climber to get so far up the
rigging in so short a time. " Where the dickens
is that fool I sent for the spunyarn ? " the voice
continued, and Jerry knew Ralph was again
descending to the deck.
Would the slender alibi satisfy Schultz ?
Evidently it did, or else he was not yet ready
to quarrel with his skipper, for when Schultz
returned aft the two conversed amicably to-
gether.
Meditatively Jerry returned to his lair in the
breast-hook. Happy in the knowiedge of his
cousin's innocence, he felt the game was far
from lost. Friend Schultz might yet get a
nasty jar. Jerry discovered he w r as whistling
a merry tune, and was surprised at his own
optimism. He remembered the brown hands
which had removed the grating. His cousin
(8,742) l 6


had at least one friend among the crew ; and if
one, why not more ? Pondering this comfort-
able suggestion, he fell asleep.
For two lagging days he waited and watched
for the reappearance of his cousin. Ralph was
at least at liberty and about, for Jerry heard his
voice. A whisper from his ally would have
stimulated the sadly tried confidence of the
anxious prisoner. Had Ralph decided to carry
out his plan, or had he tamely submitted to the
bidding of his villainous master ? He could at
least have surreptitiously dropped a note through
the grating—some crumb of comfort. But not
a word or a sign came to revive Jerry's hopes.
Just at sunset on the third day he sat brooding
on the kelson, when a soft whistle directed his
gaze to the hatch. The grating was lifted up
and a brown arm came through the opening.
Jerry, leaping forward, was in time to catch a
bulky package which dropped from the brown
fingers.
Quivering with excitement he scurried for-
ward, and in the darkness of his retreat opened
his prize. He chuckled with awakening hope
as the contents of the packet came, one after
another, through his appraising hands. So his
cousin meant business after all. What was this ?
A candle. Good lad, Ralph ! Jerry groped


amid the wrappings, and there was a tiny rattle
as a box of matches overturned. His hand
closed upon it. The feeble light of a candle on
the breast-hook would never be observed from
the hatch. It was quite safe to light it, and how
could he read the letter without it ?
There was a smile of grim resolution on
Jerry's face when he had mastered the contents
of the long, hastily scrawled epistle. He glanced
at the revolver, knife, and box of cartridges.
Yes, his cousin meant business ! But there was
yet a whole night and day to wait. He blew
out the candle, and for long hours sat medi-
tating upon his cousin's scheme. It left a good
deal to chance, but he did not see how it could
be improved upon.
The morose Kanaka seaman found him in
a talkative mood when next morning he served
the prisoner's breakfast.
" You black feller by-'n-by snick-snack ! "
Jerry drew his fingers across his throat. " All
finish —too much dead ! You like him —
finish, dead ? "
The Kanaka stared into Jerry's frowning
eyes and grunted. The youth continued:
" Suppose you keep along me, play fair, then
plenty tobacco, plenty kia-kia (food), plenty
everything. No snick-snack—finish ! "


This attempt at bribery was received in con-
temptuous silence. The Kanaka turned away
and shambled towards the hatch. The man
was obviously not Ralph's ally, and Jerry feared
he had been indiscreet. He need not have
worried, for the seaman, with a fidelity worthy
of a better master, knew himself to be incor-
ruptible and did not bother to repeat the con-
versation. The crew of the schooner, with the
exception of one, had been in her for years, and
everything the blackguardly money-lender did
was in their eyes unquestionably right.
Towards evening the stamping of feet and
clank of chain announced that the cable was
being ranged and the anchor catted for letting
go. So far Ralph's calculations had been ac-
curate. An hour later the Emu rounded to,
and the anchor was dropped. Breathlessly
Jerry listened to the sounds on deck. A crackle
of blocks was followed by the splash of a boat
taking the water. The programme was going
like clockwork.
To take a vessel in over the treacherous, ever-
shifting banks on the Paloma River bar during
darkness was suicidal. For Ralph to insist
upon first sounding the channel from a boat was
no more than a very necessary precaution.
About two hours later the boat returned from


its survey. Would it be hoisted, or left in the
water ? If hoisted, the cousins' plans must in-
evitably fail.
" Lay aft and hoist the dinghy ! " shouted a
voice, and Jerry's eyes dilated with dismay and
perplexity, for the order had been given by his
cousin.
There was a patter of bare feet, then Ralph's
voice again rose above the noise.
" Drop the boat astern; I'll go ahead in her
to pilot the schooner in—it's safer."
" No, it ain't!" Foster's voice struck in. "We
might find a sandbank what you missed, and
you might pull away forgetful like, and get ashore
before us."
"We'll hoist her up, then," Ralph cried;
" but we'll wait until daylight before I tackle
that bar, if I have to pilot you from the deck
here."
How was the dispute going to end ? Jerry's
heart beat fast.
" Drop the boat astern! " Schultz was having
his say. " Burford won't play any tricks with
me!"
" Bravo, Ralph ! " Jerry muttered. He now
understood the motive of his cousin's first
order, the countermanding of which would
appear to be second thoughts and lull suspicion.


But Foster had more to say. Ralph had dis-
missed the crew and ordered them to get some
sleep, as the vessel would get under way in a
couple of hours' time.
" Two hours," growled the mate. " I reckon
it will be slack water in under an hour."
"You seem to know a thundering lot! "
snapped Ralph. " Like to take her in yourself,
perhaps ? "
" I don't think Burford intends to miss the
tide. It would be most unpleasant for him if
he did," Schultz laughed sourly.
" Oh, I'll not miss the tide ! " Ralph laughed
too, and the speakers moved aft, leaving Jerry
listening to the gradually diminishing sounds
of life. Occasionally a patter of bare feet passed
the hatch, and the low guttural murmur of
sleepy voices from forward were the only sounds
to denote the presence of the watch on deck.
At last even these sounds were stilled, and the
silence was broken only by the slap and gurgle
of the water against the hull, and the tap, tap
of a slack rope as it gently pounded against the
mast, agitated by a steady off-shore breeze
which poured into the hold, fragrant with the
breath of a myriad sweet-smelling plants.
For about an hour Jerry sat in the silent
darkness. Then at a low hail from the schooner's


bows he stiffened into eager alertness. From aft
a muffled voice answered the hail, and some one
walked forward. Another and brisker step
followed.
" What is it ? What's the matter ? "
Schultz's voice shouted. He was apparently
curious and in a hurry, for abreast of the hatch
he broke into a run.
Jerry darted for the ladder, and looking up
saw the grating softly lifted off. Reaching the
deck Jerry nodded to the dusky figure who
stood at the hatch, grating in hand, and dodging
round a small structure peered about him. His
eyes, accustomed to the blackness of the hold,
instantly picked out familiar objects, although
individually he had never seen them before, but
he knew what to expect. The little sentry-
box-like thing beside him was the galley, of
course, and that bulky dim mass would be
the lifeboat, lashed amidships upside down ;
that was the handy sort of way schooners
carried their lifeboats. The beehive affair was
a cabin companionway or scuttle, the little
illuminated biscuit-box-shaped thing the sky-
light, and beyond it the wheel-box. The coast
was clear! Jerry darted aft, and stooping,
fumbled for a rope; found it, and softly drew
the boat up under the schooner's counter.


A muttering of voices grew louder; men were
coming aft. He had no time to lose. Mount-
ing the rail he silently lowered himself into the
boat. Although he had crouched low when
climbing the rail, his bulk had no doubt been,
for an instant, silhouetted against the sky. Had
he been observed ?
He was not long in doubt.
" Where did that swine go ? " demanded
Schultz's voice almost above Jerry's head.
" Who ? " Ralph's tone held a note of
alarm.
"Is the blamed ship bewitched ? " Schultz
was petulant. " First some one hails that there's
a canoe under the bows. There's no canoe, and
the ' some one ' who hailed can't be found.
Then I saw a black swine crawling around here.
Where did he go ? "
" It might have been the steward come up to
close the skylight. You're getting jumpy. Go
below and question the steward."
Holding the boat close under the counter,
huddled in the bows Jerry breathlessly awaited
the outcome of the altercation. If Ralph could
induce Schultz to go below, the two youths were
to escape, warn Tom Burford, and help him
and his servants to repulse the attackers.
But Schultz had not yet gone below. He was


J Wlwjr i - ■ ■ _ Mm"
He silently lowered himself into the boat.
still arguing with Ralph, and the tide was on the
turn. No doubt this fact would soon become
known to those in the cabin. They were a
wakeful lot. Where he crouched Jerry could
hear laughter and the clink of tumblers.
Above his head a dull yellow orb of light
threw a dim glow into the darkness. Unable
to restrain his impatience, Jerry rose carefully
to his feet and peered through the open port
from which streamed the light.
He saw nothing to reassure him. Cartwright
and the other white men were playing cards,
and as Jerry watched, Foster threw down his


hand, stretched himself, and with a start of
sudden recollection glanced at the clock.
Feel her rolling ? It's slack water now or
I'm a bandicoot! " he growled. " That cove
young Burford's up to some game. I'm going
ter have a look at the tide."
Jerry could scarcely restrain himself from
howling a warning to his cousin. He glanced
wildly about him, then lifting an oar let the
flat of the blade descend upon the water with
a resounding smack.
"Now what in thunder is that ? " Schultz
turned fierce, suspicious eyes upon his com-
panion.
" A sting ray, I expect." Ralph stooped over
the stern rail. He heard Foster and his com-
panions noisily ascending to the deck. In a
moment it would be too late, and the carefully
prepared and so far successful plan would
undoubtedly end in the murder of the abscond-
ing cousins. His hand closed round a belaying
pin and surreptitiously drew it from the rail.
" Why, where's the boat ? " he ejaculated, and
leant farther over the rail.
Schultz bent to look over the stern, then
swiftly straightened himself. " Can't you see
it ? " he cried. The next moment a blaze of
light from an electric torch dazzled Ralph's


eyes, and his upraised arm clutching the belay-
ing pin was revealed.
With a scream of rage, the money-lender
flung the torch into Ralph's face, drew his
revolver, and fired.
Ralph stumbled back from the unexpected
attack, and the shot missed him. A second
shot grazed his cheek before he half rolled,
half vaulted, the rail, and plunged into the
water.
Jerry was ready for him. The light of the
torch had shown him how affairs were likely
to end, and he had slipped his knife through the
boat's painter. With a heavy shove against the
schooner he sent the dinghy away into the dark-
ness. But he had not lost sight of his cousin,
and twenty yards from the vessel Ralph
scrambled into the boat.
They were fifty yards away before Schultz
found his torch, but its power was not sufficient
to aid the marksmen, and the bullets splashed
harmlessly all round the fugitives.
As the fusillade ceased the cousins settled
down to row in earnest. The schooner, in
addition to the well-stowed lifeboat, had another
boat, a gig. Pursuit was imminent.
It was low tide, and despite its shallow
draught the boat had to proceed warily amid the


sandbanks, but once over the bar they had a
clear river before them.
Head to starboard ! " panted Ralph.
" Schultz knows the wharf's to port. He'll
expect us to land there. It's the only landing
for miles, but he may not know that; and
when he does not find the boat, he'll perhaps
carry on up the river in pursuit. Then we
can sneak across, land, and be at the bungalow
hours ahead of them. They won't dare to
bring the schooner in until daylight."
At its mouth the Paloma River is fully a mile
across, the channel winding among innumerable
sandbanks and little verdant islands which, as
the river narrows, grow fewer and smaller, and
finally disappear two miles from the bar, just
above Burford's Wharf, where the stream is
scarcely one hundred yards wide.
On the narrow strip of mud which forms the
right bank, crowds the jungle. Gnarled tree-
stems, twisted mango plants, and mud-coloured
vines, amazing in their contortions, laced the
whole into an impenetrable barrier —reeking,
ever moist, steaming in the blaze of the tropic
sun, or pouring noxious vapours, clammy and
stifling, into the night air. The jungle swamp
held nothing wholesome, nor aught to tempt the
most venturesome or greedy to invade its stench


and mire. No wonder Tom Burford had left it
to the lazy crocodiles which found sanctuary in
its mud. But the cousins were prepared to risk
a tussle with a crocodile rather than a fight with
the merciless Schultz. Into the mangrove
swamp ran the dinghy, and poling through the
squelching ooze, came to rest. The moon had
lifted from behind a cloud-bank, and like an
ebony stopper in a tube of quicksilver the black
wharf lay, clearly defined, at the end of the
stream of moonlight which fell across the river.
The boat had lain in concealment about ten
minutes when Jerry's quick ears detected sounds
of pursuit.
" Here they come! " he whispered, and
Ralph grunted. He was still a little breathless.
Another five minutes and the sound of shout-
ing came from the channel.
" What the dickens are they yelling about ? "
Jerry muttered. " Want to rouse the whole
island. Good luck to 'em ! "
" There's not a habitation within four miles.
They won't be heard. But what's it all about ?"
"By Jove, I've got it! There's a couple of
boats after us, and one has grounded. She's
shouting to the other for assistance. They've
been nippy in getting the lifeboat into the
water ! "


" A couple of boats ! " Ralph's voice was
strident with consternation. " Then it's not us
they're after ! They mean to attack the bunga-
low, leaving the schooner outside. He's a fool !
Unless he's left some one with sense aboard the
schooner, she's doomed ! They'll have to watch
her at the strongest of the ebb. It runs like a
mill race. If she so much as touches a bank
she'll topple over like a skittle."
" Well, we needn't worry about her," Jerry
struck in.
" But I never thought Schultz would risk
it," Ralph protested. " Now they'll get ashore
ahead of us —twenty of them. We can do
nothing —poor old Uncle Tom ! There they
go, the murdering fiends ! And we can do
nothing to stop them ! "
As Ralph spoke, into the moonlight glided
two boats which, observing an orderly silence,
ranged alongside the wharf, and the occupants
leaping ashore, vanished against the darkness of
the forest.
A rough hand fell on Ralph's shoulder. " Can
we not land, make a detour, and beat them to
the bungalow ? Think, old lad ! " Jerry spoke
with swift insistence.
Ralph roused himself. "No ! the scrub each
side of the track is as thick as a hedge."


" Higher up the river, then ? "
"No landing for seven miles. The bungalow
is four miles up."
Jerry was busily shoving the boat clear of the
mango roots. " It's up the river, then —give
way ! "
"You can't make the landing and get back
in time 1 " Ralph complained, but seized his
oar.
" We'll land at the bungalow ! "
"You can't! " Ralph protested querulously.
" I tell you it's on the top of a precipice one
hundred feet high. You can't climb it —I
ought to know ! "
" We'll have a ' look see,' anyway," Jerry
answered determinedly. " It's no use staying
here ! "
" It's hopeless," Ralph mumbled, but he
obediently fell back on his oar, and the boat,
aided by the flooding tide, shot up-stream.
Hugging the right bank to keep out of the
moonlight, a bend in the river soon effectually
screened the boat from the wharf, when she
headed into mid-stream and got the full benefit
of the current.
About half an hour later they ran the boat
on to a little shelf of mud, and Ralph flung his
oar clattering on to the thwarts.


"Now where's your wings ? " His sneer was
directed as much against himself as against his
cousin. "We might as well be the other side
of the world for all the help we are to Uncle
Tom. For pity's sake do something , Jerry !
Even now those fiends will be slinking around
the bungalow. I'll empty my revolver —uncle
may hear it and have a chance."
" Hold on ! " Jerry clutched his cousin's
arm and stared up at the wall of rock. For the
first twenty feet it was as steep as the side of
a house, and as bare. Above, it was less pre-
cipitous and more irregular. Trees, roots, and
stout shrubs grew at intervals, and suggested
the possibility of fair holding for an agile
climber. But how to come at those roots and
shrubs ?
"I'm going up that cliff. Lend a hand ! "
Jerry cried, and jumped into the bows.


CHAPTER XVII
THE FLIGHT
UP with it! " Jerry exhorted. " Now, bear
down and shove the end into the mud —
good ! that's fine." He straightened himself,
and with a gratified smile regarded his handi-
work.
The four oars of the dinghy overlapping,
and lashed together with the stranded painter,
formed a fairly stout, if slender, erection, one
end of which was firmly buried in the mud, the
other resting against the cliff.
" I think I'll do it! " Jerry eyed a clump of
shrubs a few feet above the end of his impro-
vised scaling ladder. " Take down this barber's
pole after I'm up, and wait around until dawn.
. . . There's no use arguing again ! " —he inter-
rupted Ralph's expostulations—" I'm going !
There's no earthly use for two going when one
can do as well. Besides, some one must stay
y oat • • • and I'm the better climber—
(3,742) 267 j j


if I'm not, I ought to be ! So long ! keep your
weather-eye lifting and your ears triced out."
Had he been less nimble Jerry's scaling ladder
would have proved a complete fiasco, for it
showed a strong inclination to slip sideways
despite Ralph's efforts to hold it upright. Jerry,
by a nice adjustment of his body, managed to
reach the upper extremity of the rickety erection,
and taking a firm grip with his knees, slowly
straightened himself. The shrubs came within
his grasp, and drawing himself up, he got a
foothold. He waved his hand to Ralph, then
turned to face the more dangerous part of the
ascent.
From the river the upper portion of the cliff
had promised fairly easy climbing; now, from
Jerry's aerie in the shrub, it seemed almost
unscalable. Had he been a little less resolute
he could easily have left out the " almost," and
pronounced it " quite " unscalable —but he was
there to climb it. His nerve and agility were to
be taxed to their utmost.
Fifty feet up he paused, crouching in a bush,
his eyes raised to a stout root projecting several
feet above his head. He glanced downwards.
Could he retrace the last little bit and find a
better spot for the ascent ? He decided he could
not. Rising to his feet, he shuffled them gently,


endeavouring to find a solid " take off" for his
spring. He hoped Ralph had shoved the boat
off. If he fell into the river it might be no great
matter; but if he hit the boat . . . He wasn't
going to pause to conjecture what might be the
result. The shrub crackled as he leaped upwards
and gripped frantically. A tuft of grass came
away in his right hand and a shower of clay
and stones fell about his face. His legs dangled,
but the stout tendril over which his left hand
had closed held firm. A wriggle and a grab, and
his right hand had possession of the root. A
moment later, panting from his exertions, he
lay amid the shrubs and eyed the grim, for-
bidding wall of blackness which still towered
high above him.
Well, it was no use cringing there like a
scared kid. He had tackled the job, and he
had to finish it —one way or another. He rose
and resumed his climb.
The tangled, luxuriant vines held numerous
traps and provided many unexpected thrills for
the venturesome climber. At last, bruised
and breathless, he gained the summit of the
cliff, and murmured a prayer of thankfulness.
A moment he rested, then pushed through the
bushes which skirted the verge of the cliff, and
looked about him.


''I'm Jerry Burford . . . bandits . . . twenty
of them . . . fully armed, are coming up the
trail . . . call your men, quick, uncle ! " Jerry
In the centre of a large clearing stood the
bungalow. He couldn't mistake it. Away to
the left that line of low buildings would be the
labourers' barracks. Not a light was visible.
The wind had dropped, and the silence was so
profound that he could almost believe himself
stone deaf. He shuffled his feet and gained
comfort from the faint rustle of the coarse grass.
He was first, then. Schultz and his cut-throats
had not arrived. He raced across the open
space and mounted the steps which led to the
bungalow. He had not been noiseless, and as
he gained the veranda the light of an electric
torch flashed into his eyes.
" Hallo, young man ! Who are you, and
what do you want ? " inquired a surprised but
not unkindly voice.
panted, as he gazed at the beam of light which
sifted through the mosquito net covering a
camp-bed placed in a corner of the balcony.
The mosquito net was thrust apart, and
large man, with a long white beard, came
towards the youth. Tugging at a lanyard about
his neck he produced a whistle, and blew three
long blasts.


"So you're young Gerald ? Well, nephew,
you don't bring pleasant news with you ! "
Tom Burford flung the torch on to the table
and sat down. " What's this about bandits ? "
" I tell you a dozen cannibal blacks and half
a dozen white men are coming to murder you ! "
Jerry shouted excitedly. " Coming now ! They
may be here any moment —don't you under-
stand, uncle ? "
" Quite ! " Tom Burford crossed his legs.
" Don't get excited, laddie; we'll do what we
can ! "
Three partly dressed white men clattered up
on to the veranda, and saluted their employer
respectfully.
" A band of savages led by white men are on
the way to attack us. Better get the boys across
to the bungalow, Hannan. You other two
barricade the doors and windows." Tom Bur-
ford rose. " Come and get a rifle, Gerald ! "
He led the way indoors. "We're so honest
here, we haven't a bolt or a bar in the place.
A dozen savages, you say ? Well, well, we'll
have to kill a few of the poor fellows. Who's
leading them ? "
The old man rattled on as he moved about
without apparent haste, but Jerry was surprised
at what was accomplished in a short space of


time. Beds, book-cases, and tables were piled
before windows and doors. They were block-
ing up the veranda steps when a dog barked,
another followed, and half a dozen were soon
howling a challenge into the night.
" The boys are long in coming ! " Tom Bur-
ford complained, and picking up a rifle, turned
towards the veranda steps.
Jerry clutched his arm. " The savages will
cut you off . . . they must be near ! "
" But they may cut my boys off! " the old
man explained simply. " They're unarmed,
Gerald ! "
" It's madness ! " the youth protested.
" Your boys are not here because they know
themselves to be cut off already ! "
"We'll see!" answered the old man, and
marched off into the moonlight. With a groan
of despair Jerry picked up a rifle and rushed
after him.
How would the news of Ralph's presence
affect his uncle ? Jerry glanced uneasily at the
stern face beside him, and had doubts. Surely,
amid the night's alarms and surprises, the return
of the prodigal would pass unchallenged. The
youth decided the moment a fitting one to make
the disclosure.
" Ralph's in a boat waiting below the cliffs.


"The savages will cut you off."
He wanted to climb up, but I wouldn't let
him ! " Jerry announced a little breathlessly.
The old man stopped dead. " Ralph ? Well,
I'm glad he's back. He came with you ? "
Jerry opened his mouth to reply, when, amid
the crackle of rifles, half a dozen bullets whistled
over their heads.
44 Did Ralph come with you ? " The old man
had not so much as turned his eyes towards the
spot whence the shots had been fired.
44 He came to warn you ! " Jerry almost
shouted. He was exasperated by his uncle's
calm indifference to danger.


" Well, I'm glad he's back ! " Tom Burford
repeated, and moved on towards the barracks.
Jerry was aghast at such foolhardiness, but
determining to be a worthy lieutenant to the
old warrior, drew alongside.
" This isn't all bravado, laddie," the old man
smiled. " I know these black scoundrels. They
need a lot of shouting and noise to keep up their
courage. They'll lie hidden in that grass until
we make a bolt for it —and that's just what we
won't do ! It'll give Hannan a chance to get
my boys round by the scrub. Ah ! too late ! "
If the blacks were timorous of attacking the
two dauntless figures in the glade, they had
found less courageous enemies in the barracks.
A single revolver rattled itself away —Hannan's.
Then a burst of rifle-fire blended with howls
and shrieks, disintegrated, and melted into the
distance as the unarmed labourers ran screaming
into the woods with death at their heels.
Tom Burford at last broke into a run—but
towards the fight, not away from it.
Schultz had his white allies well in hand, for
several rifles kept up a hot fire upon the two in
the clearing. At last the old man halted. "My
boys have scattered ! " By his tone he seemed
to consider himself responsible. " I was too
slow. If they get into the scrub, these yahoos


won't find them ! " He brightened up at the
suggestion. " Well, we'll get back ! "
At the same unhurried pace they returned to
the bungalow, bearing to the right so as to
give the two overseers on the barricaded veranda
a chance of using their rifles effectively.
Why Schultz and his scoundrels did not rush
the dwelling at once it is hard to say, although it
is probable that the white men of his party
intended to live to enjoy the spoils of the raid.
They no doubt meant to leave the dangerous
work to their native allies, who, scattered by
their pursuit of the labourers, were at the
moment not available.
Although old Tom was not in the least
daunted by the strength of the attacking party,
he did not want to expose his small force to
grave risk, and Jerry easily persuaded him to
abandon the bungalow.
A brisk fire was poured into the residence,
and the shouting on the verge of the scrub made
it evident that Schultz was endeavouring to rally
his bodyguard of blacks to lead the attack.
The defenders had little time to prepare for
tne evacuation. Out of a back window they
dropped, and flitting from cover to cover,
reached the cliff edge as a wild howl heralded
a rush by the attackers.


Yells of fury, and the crashing of woodwork,
followed as the deserted dwelling was ransacked
with violent haste.
Muffled shouts and cries again grew clear as
the savages once more flocked out into the
moonlight, and Schultz was heard cursing and
screaming above the general din.
" Scatter and find 'em, you heathen mon-
strosities ! " he howled. " Catch 'em and
butcher 'em ! After 'em, you limping, flea-
bitten, mongrel dingos ! "
The fugitives were not dallying. One end of
a stout rope brought from the bungalow was
hitched round a firmlv rooted shrub, and the
coil thrown over the cliff.
A faint " coo-ee " from the river informed
them that Ralph was on the alert, and under-
stood their intentions.
"You first, uncle ! "
" The captain last, Gerald ! Down with you,
Mills. ' Coo-ee ' when you're safe."
The overseer addressed lowered himself over
the cliff and vanished from sight. The rustling
of bushes and the rattling of stones bore evi-
dence of his progress.
It was as well that Schultz's bodyguard was
composed of " salt water " men —that is, savages
whose custom it is to live on the shore and


obtain their meagre wants from the sea —for
had they been bushmen, the hiding-place of the
three refugees would not long have remained
undiscovered.
A soft " coo-ee " from below, a nod from old
Tom, and the second overseer slid out of sight.
He was in a hurry, and his descent was recorded
by a noise which, to the two waiting on the
cliff top, sounded like a rock-crusher working
at high pressure. The sound reached other
ears, and with a yell of triumph three savages
broke through the bushes.
Their joy was short-lived. A spear sang
past Jerry's cheek. He swung his rifle, and
a savage crumpled under the blow. Tom
Burford had been equally active. The bushes
quivered behind the hastily departing third
savage, whose yells for reinforcements were
answered by eager cries from half a dozen
directions.
Down with you, uncle ! " Jerry panted.
" They'll be here in force in a few seconds ! "
" After you, Gerald! " the old man answered
smoothly and firmly. " I'll check them ! "
" You'll come when Mills 4 coo-ee's ' ? The
rope will hold two easily."
" Certainly, if I can ! Thank Ralph for me.
Good-bye, laddie ! "


Jerry disappeared over the cliff edge and was
lost to view.
Tom Burford, lying prone on the ground, his
rifle ready, awaited the assault, but the bandits
were not over anxious to expose themselves.
They preferred a crafty and cautious approach,
and they would have been long about it had
not Cartwright arrived bellowing amongst them.
The old man dropped his rifle as a low
" coo-ee " came to his ears, and slid quietly
over the cliff as Cartwright, with half a dozen
at his heels, plunged through the bushes.
When he desired to move quickly, Tom
Burford was no sluggard. He was twelve feet
from the cliff top when, looking up, he saw a
gleaming, stabbing spear uplifted, and an evil
black face looking down upon him, grinning
horribly.
Checking his descent with one hand, the
old man drew his revolver. His heavy body
caused the loosely-hanging rope to gyrate,
and as he raised his hand to take swift
aim he found himself looking out across
the river, his would-be assassin out of sight.
He wriggled frantically, his arm raised to
shoot.
There was a spurt of flame, a loud report, and
a black mass hurtled through the air to splash


into the river far below. Tom Burford stared
at the cliff edge above him. The grinning savage
had vanished. He laid the barrel of his pistol
against his cheek. It was stone cold. He had
not fired.
" Down you go, uncle ! " The words, in a
soft whisper, came from the bushes on his
right.
"Gerald!" Tom Burford muttered, then
obediently slid down into obscurity.
Less than half a minute had elapsed since
first the evil savage face had peered over the
cliff. Its place was now taken by another : evil
enough, but more intelligent—Cartwright's.
" A knife, ye fools ! " he growled, shaking the
rope and finding it taut. "One o' the swines
fer the high jump ! "
" Cling to the bushes ! " Jerry howled warn-
ingly, and loosing his hold amid a cascade of
stones, slid downward a dozen feet, to be pulled
up with a jerk, half throttled by the tendrils of
a vine. Dazed by his scramble, he groped for
the rope, missed it, heard it thud about him,
drag through the bushes, and vanish. Had
his uncle gone with it ? Those in the boat
were raking the cliff top with rifle fire.
His uncle might not have heard his warning
cry. Scrambling hastily downwards another


twenty feet, Jerry checked suddenly, and lis-
tened.
"Go easy, Gerald ! You'll sweep me away
if you come down like a miniature avalanche.
The rope's caught up in those bushes on your
left there. So I'll be last down after all." Tom
Burford laughed softly.
The rope recovered by Jerry and again
secured, the remainder of the descent was
safely accomplished.
" Hot work, Ralph ! " Tom Burford greeted
his nephew ; " and I don't know what it's all
about," he added with resigned complacency,
as he took his place in the boat.
After a hasty consultation the dinghy headed
up-stream, and vanished into the darkness.
In the bungalow Schultz and his white com-
panions were searching for Tom Burford's
much-rumoured hoard of minted gold, while
the savages looted indiscriminately.
The dwelling was a simple structure ; the
sides and roof were innocent of any place of
concealment. The struts which raised the house
six feet from the ground were not enclosed, and
the floors could hide no secrets.
Before a little steel safe in Tom Burford's
bedroom stood Schultz, swearing fiercely. That
tiny receptacle could not hold any great sum


in coin—and paper-money was a dangerous
thing to steal. He had no wish to be the hare
in a paper-chase, and leave a trail of bank-notes
for the sleuths of the law to follow. If he had
to be content with paper-money, it was all the
more necessary that none should be left alive
who could bear witness against him. He dis-
patched Cartwright and half a dozen blacks to
the wharf. The fugitives might be foolhardy
enough to make for the open sea in their cockle-
shell of a boat. Cartwright would have plenty
of time to cut off their escape, for the tide,
although running slack, was still flowing up the
river.
Schultz had not come unprepared to tackle an
obstinate safe door. The safe was carried into
the open, a stick of blasting dynamite attached
to the lock, the fuse lit, then Schultz and his
helpers scurried to a safe distance. There was a
burst of flame, a roar, and the safe fell in two.
Down on his knees, with blistered hands
Schultz groped amid the debris, and saw the
glint of gold.
A few moments later he scrambled to his feet
and tottered, wild-eyed, away. He had com-
mitted brigandage, robbery, and murder—and
for what ? He dashed a handful of coins down,
stamped them into the ground, and shrilled a


torrent of curses upon Ralph, upon Tom Bur-
ford, upon his informants who had led him to
put his neck into a noose for a paltry score of
sovereigns.
Although Tom Burford in the early days of
his prosperity had demanded cash from his
then unknown traders, and at times large sums
had lain for weeks on end at Paloma, these days
were long past. Mutual confidence and credit
had been established, and his bankers at Towns-
ville, Brisbane, and Sydney looked after his
financial interests. The few pounds he kept in
hand were for the use of the boys to make in-
cidental purchases from the trading schooners,
and there was little call upon the fund; for the
old man saw to it that his labourers lacked
nothing for their comfort, health, or recreation.
Schultz, raving wickedly at the barren harvest
of his villainies, was the more bitter on account
of his own foolishness in believing in the fairy
hoard of gold. What business man would stack
up gold in a wooden shack on a semi-savage
island, when he was in almost weekly com-
munication with banking houses ? Yet schooner
captains had told him tales of paying thousands
in hard cash to old Burford. He realized now
that in all probability such rumours were years
old, and that the sums had grown in compound


proportion with the years. He fell to cursing
himself as he plodded down the trail at the head
of his men, who staggered along laden with a
miscellany of loot.
Behind them, the sky glowed crimson over
the smoking ruins of Tom Burford's island
home.
(3,742)


CHAPTER XVIII
THE BOOM
THE Peggy , once a sea-going schooner-
rigged scow, had fallen to baser uses.
Tom Burford had, at no great expense, saved
her from the hands of the ship-breakers, worked
her to Paloma, where, her masts sheared to
stumpy posts, her bulwarks raised, and her
deck-fittings removed, her broad beam and
shallow draught ably equipped her for rafting
cut timber from up-river down to the wharf.
Not the cedar, of course, for that was sum-
marily tumbled into the stream and allowed
to find its way to the river mouth where Tom
Burford had devised means of dealing with it.
But the iron-bark, heavier than water, had to
be rafted, and in this employment was the Peggy
occasionally engaged; for iron-bark was felled
only to fulfil orders. Its uses were limited,
but the piles and girders of the wharves of
Australasia bear testimony to its value.
As the dinghy bearing the fugitives grated
against the weed-festooned side of the Peggy,
274


Sammy, a grizzly-headed old native, was there
to meet her. For two hours he had stared
down-river, chattering excitedly to himself.
The crackle of rifle fire ; the splashes of red
flame which flickered above the distant trees
and were gone; and later the ruddy glare in
the sky —all spoke of wonders, or horrors, be-
yond his ken. His curiosity was soon satisfied.
A few hurried sentences from Tom Burford,
and Sammy was darting about among his
visitors helping them to unmoor the scow.
The tide had just turned, and the steady wind
which filled the two big lateen sails of the old
craft took her along at a swift pace.
The flaming, smoking pile on the crest of the
cliff swept into view, and the sight was hailed
with varying emotions by those on the Peggy.
Tom Burford alone remained silent as he saw
his cherished home crumbling into charred
ruins. His lips were grim as he turned his
head away, and stared into the thinning darkness
of the channel before them.
Seated at the stern with his two nephews, he
heard of the events which had led up to the
attack on his house. Ralph made no effort to
shield himself. His story was told in a manly,
straightforward manner, but the earnestness of
his tone spoke eloquently of his grief at being


the cause of his uncle's troubles. When Ralph
had ceased speaking old Tom laid his hand on
the youth's shoulder. " Well, we'll have to
build a new house, Ralph —that's certain !
Remember the sketch you made of a bungalow
surrounding a patio—like the old Spanish
missions ? Shall we try that ? It will take a lot
of timber." The old man ran on happily, en-
larging upon the project, suggesting innova-
tions and modern comforts ; but his eyes roved
restlessly, scanning river and banks, and a
loaded repeating Winchester lay across his knees.
One of the overseers joined the group at the
stern. " Porter has a good-sized motor boat
at Batumba," he remarked hesitatingly. " She's
a better sea-boat than this craft's likely to be ! "
" Batumba's a station forty miles up the
coast! " Ralph explained to Jerry, who nodded
down-stream.
"The Paloma bar's a nasty place to tackle in
this," he remarked.
The advancing dawn was just melting the
screen of darkness, only to replace it with a
heavy bank of mist, white as steam, and as
obscuring.
" Keep over, Sammy," Ralph ordered with
a motion of his hand, as the bank to starboard
commenced falling away to form the shallow


bight in which lay the wharf. "This mist will
lift in half an hour," he added.
"By Jove ! they've got her in ! " Jerry ex-
claimed, pointing down-stream. A sharp puff
of wind had rent the steaming vapour, disclos-
ing the schooner lying at anchor in mid-stream.
The next instant she was again obscured.
" Foster is a better seaman than I thought! "
Jerry muttered. " Wonder if they saw us ? "
" Keep her over —keep her over," Tom Bur-
ford motioned to Sammy. "You can pass the
schooner quarter of a mile to starboard. Silence
now; we must be close abreast of the wharf.''
Sammy nodded, and put the helm over, his
keen eyes vigilant. The river banks were hidden
and the Peggy appeared to be almost motionless,
although the ebbing tide was rushing her swiftly
along. The heavy yards creaked as a fitful puff
of air lifted the drooping sails an instant, then
died away. The rudder groaned, hit by a tiny
sea, which fell with a splash and dropped astern.
Dank and chill, a cloud of mist drove over the
silent craft, and with it came a sound which
drew the group from about the wheel to cluster
at the starboard rail.
" Oars ! " Jerry muttered, and bent to listen,
then straightened in alarm at a sudden shout
from Sammy.


" Anchor, anchor ! " the black howled. The
wheel spun round under his hands, and the
little craft, her sails aflap, pivoted slowly.
Jerry had learned the virtue of obeying first
and asking questions afterwards. He raced
forward. Thank goodness the anchor was at
the cat-head ready for dropping. With a sharp
kick he released the tumbler. A rattle of chain
followed, and the anchor plunged into the river.
The vessel jarred heavily when she felt the
check, straightened up, and lay still.
There were excited whisperings at the stern
when Jerry returned aft. " What's up ? " he
inquired.
Sammy flourished his arms and gabbled inco-
herently, and the youth turned to old Tom,
who murmured, "The boom," and pointed.
Not a dozen yards away the rushing water
piled up in dancing foam, and poured seawards
over a great bow of heavy timber which stretched
across the river.
" What is it ? " Jerry repeated, staring.
" I had it made to catch the drifting timber,"
Tom Burford explained. " It's chained round
the tree stems on one bank, and a winch on the
wharf drags it across. Schultz must have dis-
covered the winch and guessed its purpose."
" Got us bottled! Can we cast off this end ?"


" No, no ! the shackles will be rusted hard.
A stick of dynamite ..." Tom Burford
slipped below. An excited shouting from the
shore advised those on the Peggy that the
rattle of cable had not passed unnoticed. A
boat-load of desperadoes would soon pay them a
visit, which could not end happily for the out-
numbered fugitives.
Jerry hauled up the dinghy, which still
floated astern. " I'll go." He held out his hand.
" Give me the dynamite ! "
Tom Burford, who had returned to the deck,
pushed past him. "I'm going ! "he said.
Ralph sprang forward. " I can set a charge,
uncle," he argued ; "let me go."
"The three of us had better go," Jerry
announced, watching the rapidly flowing water.
" One could never pull clear of the boom
against this tide. How long does the fuse give
you ? "
" One minute."
Jerry dropped into the boat, and Ralph and
the old man followed. As they neared the
boom Jerry threw in his oar and grasped the
boat-hook. " We'll have to cross the boom ! "
he announced. " The boat would never lie
this side ! "
Choosing a gap between two logs the boat


was safely worked over the connecting chain;
then catching a turn with a rope round the
fastenings near the middle of a log, Jerry held
the boat, stern up-stream, close up, while the
old man prepared and fixed the charge. Ralph,
two oars shipped, was ready to give way. Tom
Burford, with practised hands, went swiftly
about his task.
" Hurry, uncle ! " Jerry exhorted. " Here
they come ! " The creak of oars and the growl
of a petulant voice came from out the mist.
A boat was skirting the boom in search of
the vessel whose anchor had announced her
presence. Would old Tom never finish ? The
muttering of voices in the approaching boat
grew clearer and clearer, and the old man was
still placidly and unhurriedly busy. Jerry felt
for his pistol.
" Give way ! " Tom Burford dropped into
the seat at the stern, and Jerry, with a single
tug, released the painter.
" What's that ? " howled Foster's voice.
" After 'em, bullies ! Rouse 'er out o' the
water ! "
The cousins bent to their oars, and Foster,
shouting curses and orders, tried to quiet his
noisy crew while he judged the direction of the
fugitives.


" Pull port . . . hold water starboard . . .
pull starboard, ye mangy curs —they're off
down-stream. . . . Pull, ye dun-coloured
Choosing a gap between two logs.
skunks ! " His voice rose high in horrid
taunts of the fate in store for the fugitives.
A shimmer of light in the fog-bank, a fear-
fill roar, and Jerry and Ralph toppled off their
thwarts as if pushed by the invisible hand of
a giant. The mist parted, and disclosed a
shattered log upright in the air ; beneath it,
the schooner's lifeboat, Foster standing in her
stern, horror frozen on his distorted face, his


head twisted towards the boom. One form lay
limp across the gunwale, and five others, their
faces buried in their arms, crouched on the
thwarts. The next instant the log fell. The
boat split like a peapod. One shrill, tremulous
yell, a gurgling howl, and the boat and its occu-
pants had vanished.
Jerry clambered on to his seat. " Put back to
the Peggy " he advised in a swift whisper.
" Here comes the other boat! " announced
Ralph. " It's between us and the boom.
Look ! they're after us ! "
The morning sun, gaining in strength, was fast
dissolving the mist. A puff of wind, hastening
the work, cleared a stretch of the river, and for
a moment disclosed the fugitives to Cartwright
and half a dozen natives in the schooner's gig.
The second boat was wasting no time in
searching for the survivors of the calamity. It
instantly swung about in pursuit, and Cart-
wright was quick with his revolver.
" Hit, Ralph ? Here, give me your oar ! "
Tom Burford climbed from his seat in the stern,
and Ralph, his right arm hanging limply,
changed places with him. The haze again
enveloped the dinghy, and Cartwright, replen-
ishing his revolver, cursed his scratch crew into
further efforts. Four of his oarsmen were of


Schultz's bodyguard, and not too handy at the
work. The other two were the sole survivors
of the schooner's crew ; for the lifeboat, besides
Foster and two white men, had contained four
of the Kanaka seamen.
But inexpert as were Cartwright's crew, they
could still outpace the dinghy.
" Hold water, and they'll pass us ! " whis-
pered Jerry. " They're pulling wide of us."
Holding the light boat against the tide, in
anxious silence they awaited the result of the
manoeuvre.
On swept the pursuing boat, Cartwright's
strident voice ceaselessly abusing his crew. It
drew level ... it passed . . . then the mist
opened, and with a howl of wrath the swagman
discovered the ruse.
The fugitives had no time to use their
weapons. Oars snapped as the boats came
violently together, and swift confusion ensued.
It was soon ended, and the three sorely battered
fugitives were tossed into the gig, which made
towards the schooner.
Schultz was standing at the gangway to
receive them. He shouted angrily, bidding
Cartwright make more speed.
" Where's Foster ? . . . where's the crew ? "
he demanded.


" Here's the birds we wants ! " Cartwright
nodded complacently at his prisoners. " There
ain't so many ter go shares, boss ! Foster and
the nigs 'as taken soundings and fergot ter come
up. There's half a boat floatin' around, if yer
wants it."
Schultz became shrill. Cartwright was
" trash," he declared. The swagman could
drown, and take his purse-cuttin' mates with
him. It was Foster and the seamen he wanted.
He tossed a hank of cod-line into the boat.
"Tie those swine up ! " he ordered, " and move
yourself, you mongrel bush dingo ! "
" Ye're mighty uncivil," Cartwright growled
as he climbed aboard ; " what's ter do ? I've
got the old 'un for yer ! "
" A ship, you fool! " Schultz pointed sea-
ward, and dashed off to help his two remaining
seamen to get the schooner under way.
The three prisoners, their arms lashed behind
them, were bundled aboard, and left standing
near the stern, two of Schultz's savages on guard
over them.
The mist had disappeared, and looking sea-
ward Jerry saw a small brig standing in for
the bar. "Do you know her ?" he asked.
Old Tom shook his head. "Not one of my
regular visitors," he answered.


Whatever was the object of her visit, those
on the brig must have heard the sound of the
blowing-up of the boom and the subsequent
firing. They would certainly be curious, and
Schultz would have difficulty in satisfying
them. Unless the Emu got to sea before the
brig's arrival, Schultz would be in a tight corner.
Jerry turned from contemplating the incoming
vessel and started.
" Too late, Schultz ! " he cried tauntingly.
" There goes the news —you're booked for a
hanging ! "
Schultz, who was loosing the mainsail, lifted
his head to stare, and cursed vehemently.
Round the bluff, her great lateen sails spread
like the lifted wings of an angry swan, glided
the Peggy.
" If I'm not clear of this within the hour, I'll
strangle you with my own hands! " Schultz
snarled, and sealing the threat with a horrible
oath, bent again to his task.
Her anchor away, the schooner, with all sail
set, headed for the bar, where lurked the sand-
banks over which the ebb tide was now running
at six miles an hour.
Schultz danced anxiously from side to side
of the deck as the Kanaka seaman at the bows
howled urgent steering orders to his fellow at


the wheel. Tempted to add to the confusion,
Jerry shouted taunting predictions as to the
certain fate of the vessel under such navigators,
and Schultz flung him a wrathful glance.
" Keep those hounds quiet, and keep them
out of sight!" he cried; and Labona, the hideous
head-man of the bodyguard, fell upon the
prisoners, beating them to the deck with the
flat of his spear.
Groaning, Ralph rolled over to ease his
wounded arm. "My fault! " Jerry said con-
tritely, and for a moment, with anxious eyes,
watched his cousin; then wriggled into a
sitting position, moved slightly, and his wrists
went over the iron hook of the halliard block.
He worked cautiously at his bonds.
The pilotage of the vessel was not going
forward smoothly. The wheel was whirling
" hard up " or " hard down " to a volley of
contradictory orders.
Glancing through a scupper hole at the
swirling tide, Jerry shrugged his shoulders.
He considered catastrophe inevitable ; he de-
sired to be ready to meet it, and redoubled his
efforts to loosen his bonds.
It came sooner than he expected. Splutter-
ing orders the Kanaka raced aft from the bows.
The two brown seamen w T ere whirlwinds of


energy; jostling the gaping, black Marshall
Islanders hither and thither, they let go the
halliards, dropped peaks, and let fly sheets.
The schooner checked suddenly. There was a
rasping jar ; she fell over on her bilge, her top-
masts snapped, and a deluge of ropes and
blocks thudded and crashed about the prisoners.
jerry set his teeth into a black leg which was
suffocating him, and Lebona, howling with
pain, scrambled to his feet and crept aft, gaping
in fear and bewilderment. The vessel lay over
at an angle of 45 0 , her lee scuppers under water.
Jerry had no wish to shrink and tighten his
lashings by wetting them. He rose, and leant
against the bulwarks.
A mass of struggling humanity in the scuppers
disentangled itself and gazed with dumb dismay
at the wreck. Cartwright was the first to find
his wits.
" You've done it, ye swine ! " he rumbled,
venomously kicking the crumpled and still
form of the helmsman. " Get up and do
summat! " A second kick failed to arouse the
seaman to action, and Cartwright turned else-
where. " Where's Schultz ? " —he felt the need
of a leader. " Where's Schultz ? "
The money-lender lay abaft the wheel, one
leg doubled grotesquely under him. "The


boat, you fool! "he cried. " Carry me to the
boat, and get out of this ! "
The boat! Cartwright understood that. He
scrambled aft, saw the boat bumping alongside,
and jumped into her. " Come on ! "he howled,
and slashed at the painter with his knife.
Each moment the schooner was listing more
and more, the rushing tide already a foot deep
over her lee scuppers. With a howl of panic
the surviving bandits rushed for the boat and
tumbled into her. One alone stood fast:
Lebona the hideous remained faithful to his
master.
Schultz raised himself on his elbow and
screamed threats and pleadings at his deserting
confederates. The clatter of oars came to his
ears, and his face became livid with fear and
hate. " Shoot the swine!" he screamed.
" Lebona, shoot them ! "
The savage clambered to the companionway
and took a rifle from the rack. He knelt, brac-
ing his body against the skylight. The repeating
rifle kicked at his shoulder as he emptied it at
the departing boat, then tossed it away. " 'Tis
done, master ! " he announced.
Other eyes were upon Schultz's deserters.
Hidden in the scrub near the wharf, a party of
Tom Burford's boys, eager for revenge, watched


the boat, now pulling two oars only, limping
shoreward. They fingered their weapons im-
patiently, and waited.
" Now kill the prisoners, and tumble them
overboard ! " Schultz was almost incoherent
with excitement. " None know me on the
scow. Our wits will save us yet. Hurry,
Lebona; the brig must be close in! "
His stabbing spear gripped in his teeth, the
savage commenced working his way towards
the prisoners. In the swiftly-falling tide the
schooner slowly rolled farther and farther over.
If deep water lay to leeway of her, it could be
but a matter of moments before she turned
turtle.
Jerry wrestled frantically with his bonds, his
gaze upon the advancing savage.
A yell of English voices and the " clack "
of fast-moving oars warned Schultz that there
was need for haste. " Finish them !" he yelled
in a frenzy of fear. " Over with them ! Be
quick ! "
Tom Burford and Ralph were both on their
feet. The old man, his chest thrown out,
gazed calmly at the fierce, ruthless eyes of the
approaching savage. With a groan of anguish
Ralph made a swift dash for a winch amidships,
and doubling over it he held himself from
(B,7iZ) 19


slipping again to the scuppers, then rolling
sideways he got a grip on the stay rods.
One fleeting glance Lebona shot at the youth
and grinned wickedly. A bound man would
find no sanctuary from the savage's deadly
spear.
" The old man first! " shrieked Schultz.
" Make sure of him ! "
The savage grunted. No use taking chances.
He must be within arm's length of the victim.
He marked the column of Tom Burford's
throat, bared by his open shirt. That was the
spot. Lebona drew back his spear.
There was a swift rush of feet as Ralph
charged down the steeply-inclined deck and
crashed into Lebona. The spear sang past the
prisoners, stuck quivering in the bulwark, and,
with a scream, Lebona and Ralph hurtled over-
board together.
" He's bound, the lad's bound ! " cried old
Tom, and wrenched fiercely at his bonds.
Jerry was working his wrists over the still
quivering spear. In an instant he was free,
and plucking the spear from its hold, cut old
Tom Burford's lashings.
" See to Schultz ! " the old man growled,
and plunged into the river.
A howl from the oncoming boat told Jerry


Ralph crashed into Lebona.
that Tom Burford had been observed. He
glanced over the side, waved his spear in wel-
come, then dropping it overboard, turned aft.
" Jump ! Jump for your life ! " The advice
was chorused by half a dozen lusty voices.
The youth ignored it. He must save Schultz,
if only for the gallows ; and the helmsman —
Jerry felt he owed much to the helmsman.
The schooner was nearly over on her
beam-ends, and he had hard work to win his
way aft.
Schultz had managed to drag himself to the
wheel, where he clung, shrieking in agony, his


broken leg twisting grotesquely in the swirling
tide.
" There's a boat coming—I'll get you
safe into her! " Jerry cried encouragingly.
" They've picked up uncle and Ralph," he
ran on cheerfully, as much to keep his own
courage from flagging as to buoy up the hopes
of the stricken man. " We'll both be out of this
in a jiffy! " He bent to place his arms round
Schultz.
" Your uncle ? " The words came as a moan
from the livid mouth contorted with agony.
" Tom Burford . . . your uncle ? "
" Yes, I'm Jerry Burford. Up we come ! "
His face was close to that of the money-lender,
and the fierce hatred which blazed in the hollow
eyes went unobserved.
" Jerry Burford ! " The name seared
Schultz's brain like molten lead. The youth
whom he had held captive—Jerry Burford, the
heir !
The thrust of a knife and he could have given
Ralph a fortune, three parts of which he could
have bullied and threatened out of him ! And
he had let Jerry escape to wreck this profitless
and disastrous raid. With lightning-like rapidity
Schultz loosened his hold on the wheel, and
flung his arms round the youth's legs.


" Jerry Burford ! " His scream was the scream
of a maniac. " Jerry Burford, you'll come
with me ! "
The words ended in a choking gurgle as
Schultz and his would-be rescuer slid under the
water running deep over the lee deck.
Unprepared for the immersion, Jerry had
little breath to sustain a long struggle. His
strength ebbed fast as he strove to free himself
from the murderous grip. He felt his head
thud against the bulwarks, and sought for a hold
to drag himself above water, and found none.
Was he to drown in a couple of feet of water
in the scuppers, like a chicken washed from
the coop ?
He strove to kick, and found his feet pinioned.
His knees were still encircled by the murderous
arms. Had the maniac Schultz been trans-
formed into an octopus ? What was happen-
ing ? His head thumped against the deck, and
his legs were clear of the water. A hand groped
at his shirt, and he heard a fearful scream as
his head came above water.
" Golly ! his leg's broke ! " Issy Nathan
let go of Schultz's leg on which he had been
dragging, grinned at Jerry, and dived for the
money-lender's shoulders.
Jerry, gulping for air, was grateful for the


support of Ventry's arms. " Just in time, lad 1 "
Ventry cried. "To the boat —quick ! "
"The Kanaka?" Jerry feebly panted, "and
Schultz ? "
Ventry hesitated, then, as Jerry broke away
from him and clambered aft, he followed.
Together they lifted the still unconscious
helmsman, and bore him to the boat, into which
Issy had already tumbled Schultz.
As the boat backed away the schooner rolled
completely over and lay bottom up, a hundred
detachable objects bobbing to the surface to
drift seaward.
" 'Tweren't no use savin' him—he's gone! "
Ventry rose from where he had been kneeling
over Schultz.
" It's the young 'uns what counts, ain't it,
Mr. Burford ? " Issy glanced hopefully at old
Tom, seated in the stern bandaging Ralph's
arm.
" Why, we all count." The old man glanced
proudly at his two nephews. " Some more than
others, I suspect! "
" This nigger'll live ter be hung." Ventry
was bending over the slowly recovering Kanaka.
" He weren't much o' a helmsman, that's
sartin ! "
" Perhaps he steered better than you think,"


Ralph interposed. "He was afraid of Schultz,
and outwardly served him, but secretly he -was
my ally."
" We've had some staunch allies to help us
out of our trouble ! " There was admiration
and gratitude in Tom Burford's glance as it
roved from face to face. Issy Nathan wriggled
delightedly.
" Don't ferget the blokes as got yer into
trouble," Ventry growled, and picked up an
oar. " You'll mind for why I took the money
from Mullins ?" He scowled significantly at
Jerry
" I remember how you often imperilled your
life —not to earn it! " Jerry smiled.
" Well, that ain't honest! That ain't the
sort of cove to call an ally !
"No ? " Jerry said softly. " Well, he's the
sort of ' cove ' I'm proud to call my friend 1 "
THE END
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
THE PRESS OF THE PUBLISHERS


BRITANNIC SERIES
Of Stories for Boys and Girls. A Beautiful
Series. Well Illustrated. Gilt Binding
Cloth, 3s. 6d. net
For Boys
THE COCK-HOUSE CUP Harold Avery
THE TREASURE OF SAN JACINTO Frank Riley
JERRY GOES TO SEA Captain K. Maclure
THE OBEAH TREE Colonel F. E. G Skev
Colonel F. E. G. Skey
THE CRUISE OF THE AIR YACHT
SILVER CLOUD " Rowland Walker
WHO GOES THERE ?
PERILOUS SEAS
Harold Avery
C. G. Holland
For Girls
MERIEL'S CHOICE E. L. Haverfield
THE LOST CUP OF WALLA Theodora W. Wilson
THE GIRLS OF MYSTERY GORGE E. E. Cowper
THE HEART OF GLENAYRT May Wynne
THE HOMESTEADER GIRL Bessie Marchant
THE HOUSE OF GOLDEN HIND Margaret Middleton
GIRLS ON THE TRAP-LINE E. E. Cowner
E. E. Cowper
THE FOOLISH PHILLIMORES Ethel Talbot
THE RIDDLE OF THE RECTORY Doris A. Pocock
JEAN'S TWO SCHOOLS Ethel Talbot
Ethel Talbot
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, LTD.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


KJ cop j


• *


c=
<


