

HER STORY
W. M. FLEMING


_ -"I - . -v". - . * - - -j * / - ■ *•*- _
; ■ | t r / W £ -bU )r 1 K: - ; ■ : -
.1 €l iki - r; ':.


•• 2' w.—rr ,* > v
»Vjb 1 "** . 'ttii -- *■'4. V •■*-.:• w ;• > V %jT*
-i I®-® >•& :-, r ,
•■ V tj Jw.- arial *v • -<£•& :* •' s • " • . a
>.--..^•ukJ. ■ i - 4*- --r- ;
« ■<-• > -c. *
Jvl.t\AtVS:> * -vti ./.. ' ■: - ~ \ . .i-
r ’-„i ■«.*.«-< ■ .
. Af '4


- * - , --ysg- --'*s - ---- «- - - - - .v
•
- ' T -
'■v-
-
- --
■
' V - - - :»3 ' *
• -
- . <- • 1 . -
■
- -- . _ — -
• - • ■- - ,, . V*.. - ’ - ' #>-
-
r •■ ■ -. •• — - "L *-•' ■ ■- 41


#
3/6


Thousands of men and women,
now grey-headed, have ridden on
Jessie, the Elephant who came as
a gift from the King of Siam to
the Government of New South
Wales. From the days when she
was the reigning attraction at the
old Zoo at Moore Park to the tmie
of her death at Taronga Park,
literally millions of children had
had rides on Jessie. The author of
this book about the best-beloved of
elephants has been supplied with
the authentic history of Jessie,
from her earliest days in Siam.
Innumerable Quaint facts and anec-
dotes about her life have been
woven into a fascinating Juvenile
story by W. M. Fleming, and it is
inevitable that many grown-ups
who buy this book for their off-
spring will be discovered reviving
thrilling memories of the days
when they, too, rode on Jessie the
Elephant.


JESSIE THE ELEPHANT


the Same Author
"BUNYIP SAYS SO"
A Great Book for Children, Old
and Young.
The Bunffip may or may not be
a fabulous Australian creature
and W. M. Fleming has used Mr.
Bunyip with excellent effect in
this book of Australian bush lore
set out in the attractive guise of
a juveniles' story. The bush-
creatures—the koala, the kooka-
burra, kangaroo-rat, lyre-bird,
and many others —belong to two
clubs—the Daytime Club and the
Night-time Club. They meet to
swap stories—and what stories!
If Mr. Bunyip did not “say so,” it
would be difficult to believe some of
them.
The truth about the book is that
the author has very cunningly em-
bodied in it the knowledge gained
through a life-time spent in the
Australian bush. W. M. Flem-
ing has not only “the seeing eye
and the understanding hea/rt;” he
has the inestimable knack of tell-
ing children a story without pat-
ronising them.


Jessie the Elephant
Her Life Story
W. M. FLEMING
Sydney
NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 North York Street.


Registered in Australia for transmission by post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
New Century Press Pty. Ltd., 3 North York St., Sydney.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
COPYRIGHT.


CONTENTS.
Chapter
I. Jessie Dreams of Her Early Days .. .. .. .. 11
11. And Jessie Arrives at Sydney 1883 .. .. .. 16
111. Who’ll Have First Ride? 21
IV. Jessie Has a Few Callers .. .. .. .. .. 27
V. Jessie Sees Many Strange Animals and Birds .. .. 34
VI. Now for the First Ride! .. .. .. .. .. 39
VII. What Is It? What Is It? . . . Just a Mouse .. .. 44
VIII. Jessie Becomes a Champion Handbag Eater .. .. 49
IX. Just a Small Example of Bad Temper in an Elephant .. 53
X. Jessie and the Other Animals Find a New Home.. .. 58
XI. And They All Vote the New Zoo a Great Place.. .. 63
XII. The Little Mouse that Scared an Elephant.. .. .. 67
XIII. An Elephant in Boots.. .. .. ~ .. .. 72
XIV. Celebrating Fifty Years of Service to Australian Boys
and Girls 75
XV. Jessie Has Her Bad Days .. .. .. .. .. 80
XVI. Some Birthday Parties with Cake and Candles .. .. 84
XVII. Jessie Becomes a Trouble-maker Through Jealousy .. 88
XVIII. Big George, Little George and Many Georges Visit Jessie 92


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author acknowledges with great
appreciation the assistance given in the
production of this book by the officials
of Taronga Park and by the lately-
retired keeper of Jessie, Mr. Fred.
Lyons. Acknowledgement is given also
to the proprietors of the “Sydney
Morning Herald” for permission to re-
produce many of their photos of Jessie
and related subjects.


. s -.< :^-.
' •.
;.% x^viv-a^
|l|pi:. !Bff- : i^^^^M^WBr.. -f
fi '***> .o, i IB
... <•
,. • ■' -.-.v’ j
From 1883 to 1938
some three millions
of hoys and girls,
some of them now
fathers and
mothers, grandpa’s
or ma’s yes, and
even great grand-
pa’s and ma’s
had a ride on Jessie.
And, mind you,
these came from all
over Australia and
New Zealand and
from all over the
world. What a host
of friends and what
a record of service!




CHAPTER I.
Jessie Dreams of Her Early Days.
“AH!” thought Jessie as she eyed the birthday cake with all the
candles upon it, “I seem to be getting along in years. This is the
biggest cake and the most candles I have had.”
As she watched the keeper give a piece of cake to the numerous
girls and boys clustered around, her thoughts strayed back to her
youthful days, and she remembered suddenly—as if it were yesterday—
all about her mother whom they called Chugga, her sister Digge, and
her youthful playmate Yiggi. Her early recollections were of the vast
forest where she, with her mother and her sister and her playmate Yiggi,
and other members of the great herd of elephants roamed. How clearly


she could remember the sweet young tree shoots and grass upon which
they all fed, the water from the river where they drank, and with which
they hosed one another—filling their trunks time and again, and splashing
the water over themselves and each other. Then the playful gambols
with Digge and Yiggi and the other young elephants of the herd. Each
year, very slowly of course, they all grew a little bigger, until at the
age of twelve or thirteen she was quite a big girl and well developed
for her age and without a trouble in the world.
Then something happened to alter it all. One day, as Jessie well
remembered, a great hullabaloo arose amongst the herd, and there was
much agitated rushing to and fro as something entirely strange to the
herd suddenly came upon them. Jessie, being very young, had only a
foggy idea of what it was all about; but after a lot of noise and rushing
first in one direction and then in another, she found herself being driven
along with others of the herd towards a strange place far away from the
forest. When at last they were allowed to rest, she discovered herself
to be confined in a great walled yard, from which none of the elephants
could escape. Jessie was alongside of Digge, her sister, but of her
mother Chugga, and her playmate Yiggi, there was no sign. This was,
of course, a painful separation for Jessie, and as she thought of it now
she sighed deeply and a tear seemed to drop from her eye.
Still thinking back into the past, Jessie remembered how, after many
days of confused jostling and marching to and fro, of chains on the legs
and other indignities, fife started to become more orderly, and she found
herself one of the elephants in the herd of the King of Siam, whose
keepers and trainers proceeded to teach these newcomers how to behave
and how to become useful. Jessie, even after all these years, felt a very
great pride at being one of the Royal Herd; for, as you probably all
know, in Siam, as in other places like India and Ceylon, the elephant is
the king of beasts, and is trained to be useful in all walks of hfe. Emperors,
Kings, Princes, Rajahs, and all people of royal blood pick the best elephants
and they are trained to perfection, being used on all ceremonial occa'
sions, in the hunt, and when such a thing occurs (which is very seldom
in these days) for war. Amongst the people, too, the elephant is used
to do much of the hardest work, and so in many parts of Asia and in
Africa, too, the elephant is a most important animal.


*1
#»:■: •>. :tfa&8&Ss&»wffi%ffisR^^
: : v . ». &x' : :.
~ : xiSS* \. -< :^.v:.^:: ' • j|' ■ ';..
': ; ; > V< : ij
;-.Mr:f-i¥: " . &
i .. x:s ■ ’.-is
; .: ;x-v.<vy .j]Hr v&rcvfU Xv. v.■■ vXyvXv. ■vJotv^SSS
So Jessie, thinking back over all those many years to her early
life, felt how great she had been. A Royal elephant, covered with
magnificent trappings embroidered in pure gold and silver, and with a
All the boys said “U-m-m!” to a gorgeous cake this year.
What the girls said, well
gorgeous howdah on her back, trained to march quietly and evenly
with the King or some other high person belonging to the Court of
Siam, taking her place in a long procession of other richly^covered


elephants—well, if you had been an elephant like Jessie, wouldn’t you
have been proud?
Still thinking over those early days, she hardly noticed that her
birthday cake was getting less and less as so many of her young friends
pressed forward to receive a piece. Still wrapped in thought, Jessie
suddenly remembered her keeper of those early days talking to another
keeper.
“It is said that our Royal Master plans to present one of the Royal
elephants to a far-off English place called New South Wales. Hast
heard of this, O Rasmus?”
“No, Suliman, such has not yet come to mine ears, but by the
beard, if his Majesty so plans, we shall hear of it in good time.”
Jessie, hearing this, wondered what it meant; who would be sent
away, and where was this place that the keeper referred to? She asked
Digge and some of the other elephants that night if they had heard of
what the keepers had said. None of them had heard of the sending
away of an elephant, they told her, and they held up their trunks in
scorn at such a story! No Royal elephants were ever allowed to go
from the Royal Herd, they answered in chorus, and this story of Jessie s
—well, it was only a story!
k
But it was soon to be seen that Jessie’s story was a true one, and,
to her astonishment and dismay, she was the elephant chosen to be
presented to the people of New South V/ales. Of course, it was no
use Jessie protesting or asking to be let off. As with all other elephants
of the Royal Herd, the will of the King was supreme, and that was
that. So preparations started for Jessie s great adventure. A passage
by a large ship was secured, a great deal of food put aboard, a couple
of keepers selected to accompany her and then the wonderful day
when she went aboard and the journey began. “Ouch!” thought Jessie,
“what a journey! I did not know which foot to stand on next as the
ship rolled this way and then that —and then it seemed to sink right
away, and then back it would come again! Very uncomfortable, all
of it.” So thought Jessie, giving a little shudder even now, as she looked


back on that journey. But at last it was all over —like everything else
both good and bad —and the ship slipped into a vast harbour where
the water was smooth, and where she could stand steadily and quietly
without discomfort.
And still thinking of the old days, Jessie suddenly came back to
the present as her keeper, having satisfied all the girls and boys with
birthday cake, said:
“Come along, old girl, home for the day,” and led the way to the
elephant house.


CHAPTER 11.
And Jessie Arrives at Sydney 1883.
WHEN, one morning in the year 1883, Jessie was landed in Sydney
at Circular Quay, it was a decidedly uncomfortable business. She was
not yet fully grown up, being only years old. “A bit slow
in growing up, you say. But Jessie did not think so. Being an
elephant, she had a long way to go and live —things that have a long
way to go live slowly. You wouldn’t expect time to pass as quickly
for an elephant as for a mosquito, would you?
Ouch! said Jessie to herself. “I don’t think much of this.
Ouch!”
They had put big straps under her—the ship’s company called it
a sling—and she was swinging in mid-air.


“B-r-r-r!” she said. “This is no way to treat one of Blood Royal.”
You see, she had been given to the Colony of New South Wales by
the King of Siam, whose flag is a white elephant. So, of course, she
must be of Blood Royal. But Jessie was no white elephant, that being
a useless animal that never works, but only eats. And things that
never work and only eat are not much use to anyone, not even to
themselves. Jessie was just an ordinary-looking elephant. That is to
say, her skin looked like a piece of half-cured leather. It was a dirty
grey-brown.
Had she been white millions of children would have missed a very
happy experience, and this story of Jessie the Elephant would never
have been written. For actually two and a half millions of children
rode on Jessie. Some of them had many rides. Most of them loved
Jessie and Jessie loved most of them. Animals love children that are
kind to them. All children who knew Jessie just had to be kind to
her; she was so good and strong and patient, putting up with all sorts
of things that sometimes must have been very trying to her temper.
Dangling between sea and sky, swung out above the floor of the
wharf, poor Jessie was wondering what was to happen next when she
found that she was being lowered. Soon she felt her feet on the solid
decking of the wharf.
“Ah!” she said, and swayed from foot to foot to see just how
solid it was. All the way from Siam to Sydney she had been swung
this way and that, up and down, sideways, end on, all sorts of ways;
nothing seemed firm or solid. Now it was different. This might not
be quite right, but it was better than what she had come through.
“Ah!” she said, “Ah!” and blew through the long nose which was
her trunk. The keeper who had come with her from Siam undid the
straps that held her. He took her by the ear and off they marched.
When she got off the wharf, and her feet felt the bare earth of the
road, Jessie paused.
“Come on, old girl,” said her keeper. Even if he was an Indian,
fancy calling a young lady of twenty-five old girl!


But Jessie didn’t mind. She just waved her trunk about a few
times, twitched her funny little tail with the wiggly hairs on the end
of it, and walked along.
Sydney was not such a big place in 1883 as it is now. But word
ran along like wildfire. “An elephant! An elephant!’’ Hundreds and
hundreds of children were out in a moment and stood along the streets
and the roadway to see Jessie on her way to the zoological gardens
at Moore Park.
“Ho!” they cried. “Isn't she wonderful!”
“It isn’t she, I tell you; it’s he,’’ said some of them. “How could
a she be as big as that?’’ They little knew what a friend Jessie was to
become to them all.
“Is she a riding elephant, Mister?’’ a small boy called. The keeper
nodded. Word went down the line: “It’s a riding elephant! It’s a
riding elephant!’’
When she saw the first grass she could reach, the newcomer swung
her trunk round and grabbed a mouthful. But when she put it into
the slit into her head which she used as a mouth, she let it drop out
again. The roadside grass was gritty and sour. It had, too, a strange
taste after the good food she had been given on the ship when she did
not feel too sick to eat. After they were clear of the city she managed
to grab a milk thistle here and there. She found them good, with less
of that strong taste. But the keeper would not let her have much by
the way. He knew that nice oaten hay with grain in it and a bunch
of green lucerne would be waiting for her in her house. He wanted her to
have a good meal in her new home. You see, he knew enough, that
keeper, to understand how important it is to make a good first impress
sion. As soon as they got to the gates of the zoo Jessie could smell
good food. When they reached the gate of her new home, which was
really a yard, she could see the good food, and at sight of it, her keeper
still holding her by the ear, she walked straight in and was soon quite
at home. Her meal finished, she went to the gate and looked out. The
day was fine and the sky bright, a little too bright, but after the cramped


1
* ISSk
1 ■ !
: ..«ii3jy ; 'f
x ■xv:^k&^xv:^ga^&S»S^
m I '>t' , V 11 H I I n
{ m »■ |||||B :
And young Jessie with Yiggi and Digge fed on the tender tree shoots, etc.


and stuffy ship, it was grand to have room to move about, fresh air
to breathe and trees to look at. Wild elephants live in forests and all
elephants love trees. Jessie felt that life in this new country might be
quite good; that this could be home. She sighed with satisfaction. The
keeper who had come with her turned to the other zoo attendants,
who were watching to see how things would go.
“It will be all right,'” he said. “She will not give any trouble.”
That was all. “She will not give any trouble.” And it was Jessie he
was talking about.


CHAPTER ID.
Who’ll Have First Ride?
ALL along the road which Jessie and her keeper had traversed, children
were still talking about the new elephant. Three of them, small boys sit"
ting together in the shade of a Moreton Bay fig-tree on the city side of
Moore Park, were having their say on the subject.
“Don’t she move along easy like?” said Dan Mercer, the biggest
of the three. “She don’t hump herself along the same as old Jumbo
does. Ought ter be all right to ride on. When’ll they let us have a
try on her, I wonder? Maybe she ain’t broken in yet.”
Georgie Durden, the smallest of the three, a fair-haired, blue-eyed
little chappie, got up from where he had been sitting on an exposed
root of the fig-tree and stood looking at the distant buildings of the zoo.


I d like to be ”he began and stopped.
“What would yer like ter be?” asked Dan. He looked at the
small figure rather contemptuously. “P’raps you’d like ter be the first
ter ride on her?”
Georgie did not reply, only walked slowly away. He did not like
Dan s way of talking, and he had no intention at all of telling him what
was in his mind. Quietly he walked away, not in the direction of the 2,00,
but across a street. He passed slowly along till he came to a cross street.
Here he paused and looked about him, glanced back to where the other
two were still sitting in the shade where he had left them, and then
quietly slipped round the comer. He muttered to himself: “Me and
Martie. Why shouldn’t we?”
to °k anot^er at 2°° an d turned up the side street.
When he came to a cottage that had two camellias in front of it, one
with white blooms, the other with pink, he stopped and stood looking
m at the fence. 8
f Well Georgie, came a cheerful, motherly voice from inside the
house. Wanting to see Martie? She’s in the back garden with her
puppy. You can come through.”
Shyly enough Georgie went through the gate and passed along the
path that ran past the house. He found Martie, as her mother had
told him he would, playing with her puppy. She looked up.
Hullo, Georgie! What are you after this time o’ day?”
He wasted no time in preliminaries. “Did you see the new
elephant come along the road?”
The little girl looked up from her puppy, which was tugging at
one of her shoedaces. “What elephant?” she asked.
The new elephant that s come to the 200,” he answered.
u ? OV 3i U now^ > Martie’s voice sounded as though there
could hardly be such a thing as a new elephant.
But Georgie was sure of his ground. “I saw it myself, with my
own eyes.
“Is it a nice elephant?” asked Martie.


HER LIFE STORY 23
“A nice, smoothdooking elephant,” he told her.
“A new elephant? A nice, smoothdooking elephant? And you
saw it yourself?”
Georgie nodded.
“I’d like to see it,” said Martie.
“O’ course,” agreed Georgie.
Martie was a decided little girl who always liked to see things done.
She jumped to her feet and ran inside. “Mum!” she called as she went.
She reached the door. “Can I go with Georgie and see the new
elephant?”
Georgie could not hear the mother’s reply, but Martie went on,
“It’s at the zoo. Georgie saw it going there. All right, Mum, we’ll be
careful. Dunno when we’ll be back. Come on, Georgie!”
In no time they were out of the front gate and making for the 2100.
“Am I the first you’ve told?” asked Martie.
Georgie nodded. “The very first,” she insisted.
“The very first,” he assured her, and added, “I tell you what.”
His eyes were on the 2100. “I tell you what.”
“What?” asked the girl, her dark eyes glowing, her face eager.
“Suppose you and me get the first ride on her?” he suggested.
“How much’ll it be?” asked Martie.
“Dunno. Same as any other, I s’pose. If we can get it.”
“It would be nice to have the first ride,” agreed Martie. “Elephants
live a long time. Perhaps our children’ll ride on the same elephant and
we’ll be able to tell them we were the first to do it. That would be
something, wouldn’t it? What’s its name?”
“Don’t know her name,” admitted Georgie. “Don’t think she’s
got a name yet.”
“Silly, of course she’ll have a name!”


“Not a name for here,” said Georgie. “But I forgot. They won’t
let us inside at this time of day. Anyway, I have no money.’’
Martie stopped short. “No, I never thought of that.’’
They stood and looked at each other hopelessly. Georgie brightened
up. “Suppose we walk round and see what we can see from the outside.
You never know.”
“May as well,” agreed Martie. “Nothing else to do now.”
When they came to the enclosure they could see nothing. Walking
on, they went right round the outside of the grounds, stopping at two
gates and peering in. But they could see nothing of what was going on
inside. They came back to where they had started from.
“No good,” said Martie, “we’ll have to go back home and come
again this afternoon with some money.”
They stood looking rather forlorn. Georgie suddenly had an idea.
“I know,” he exclaimed. “Come on!”
He started towards where two gum trees grew close together in the
park just outside the zoo wall. “What do you know?” asked Martie.
“You just see,” answered Georgie, and Martie followed him towards
the trees. He stood at the foot of the tree and looked up. “You can’t
do that,” said Martie.
“Can’t I?” he replied, and started to climb.
“Mind you don’t fall and hurt yourself so’s I’ll have to carry you
home,” Martie warned him.
Georgie did not answer, but from the first safe place where he could
perch called, “I can see in.”
“What can you see?” she asked.
“Not much yet —I’m going higher.”
He reached another branch and straddled it. “See more from
here,” he announced. Then, triumphantly, “I can see her! I can see
her! Just a little bit of her!” He pointed wildly with one hand.


I j
"3SL01mMm^^
/ Slllr . **- &
. #, ;% ?lir ~Jmlm*
\ i > - -wr* —
m •■' #
I :
vN^ajamy^v . I&$i»»lilis^
yftf- ■>&vSc«H4t5ffiB :
I 1 1^®^’
§St4: ""r
i-~ :$£■ . . .'¥ ..'• -:; ss^w
" \‘VT ’ ■ ■
■ ? : Ip
i : 1HH mm
And now the keepers spend many hours training Jessie for her
future career.


‘Tm going out along this limb.” He edged his way along the
branch till he came to where it forked.
“I can see her now, all of her,” he shouted down, and almost fell.
“Don’t do things like that,” came from Martie. “Georgie, don’t
do it!”
He took no notice. “I can see the man that came with her,” he
shouted down. “He’s walking all round her. She is quiet.
“Wish I could see,” said Martie, and added quickly, “Oh! Georgie,
don’t do things like that. You’d better come down.”
“I bet Fm the first boy who’s seen her in the yard,” exulted Georgie.
“Yes, but come down now.”
“Not yet,” he replied.
Martie was silent for a moment. She looked up_again. If you 11
come down now, Georgie, I’ll get Mum to give us the money and we 11
come along this afternoon and be the first two children to_see the new
elephant in the zoo.”
“O’right,” he said, and began to move along the limb. He turned
and looked back into the zoo. Twisting his legs round the branches, he
put his fingers to his mouth and gave a long, shrill whistle. He waved
his hand about wildly. Then he got down.
As soon as he reached the ground Martie asked, “What were you
doing waving like that?”
“Letting the man with the elephant know I was there. He’ll be
able to back me up when I say I was the first boy to see the new elephant
in her yard, and when we come along and tell him that he’ll p’rhaps give
us the first ride on her. Yes, I reckon you and me’ll get the first ride on
the new elephant.”


CHAPTER IV.
Jessie Has a Few Callers.
SOON after one o’clock in the afternoon George and Martie were along
at the 2,00 to see if they could get a ride on the new elephant. They
were told that she would not be given any work to do for at least three
days, so they went home again, having made up their minds that on the
fourth day they would again be there in plenty of time.
But Georgie could not wait for those four days to pass. The very
next morning he was hanging about the 200 for hours but could see no one
who could or would tell him anything. The next day he managed things
better and, seeing the new elephant’s keeper at work, he edged round till
he could speak to him.
“Mister,” he said.


The man looked up from his work, cleaning out Jessie’s stall.
“Mister,” went on Georgie, “Fm the boy who was up that tree. Do you
think you could let me be the first little boy to ride on the new elephant?”
“Why should you be the first?” asked the keeper.
“Well, you see, Mister, I want to take a little girl with me.”
The keeper looked at him for a moment. George thought he saw a
rebuff coming, but a smile broke over the keeper’s face. “Come and see
me in two days’ time and I’ll let you know when to be here,’ he said.
“Thank you, Mister,” said George, and raced away to tell Martie.
In those days of grace before she was put to work Jessie was learning
the ways of her new home. She did not altogether like it. Her food
was very good and her quarters were right enough except that there was
not room to wander about. And there was altogether too much sun.
Never had she seen so much hot sun, for in her own country the forests
were thick with trees and so were most of the swamps and hillsides. Here
there seemed to be so few trees that she wondered how the birds and
animals got on at all. She knew, for both her nose and her ears told
her, there were plenty of birds and animals about, but they were mostly
of kinds she had never seen or heard before. It was not till the third
night in her new home that she had anything to do with them. Then it
was Ginger Groogie, the ’possum, who began it.
Ginger always was an inquisitive fellow. He is also pretty good at
getting the food he wants, and he’ll eat nearly anything. When he wanted a
change of diet he could always get it inside the zoo. You see, fences and
walls that would stop most things mean little to him. He can climb over,
squeeze through or jump across almost anything. This night Ginger
had an idea that he would like a mouthful of the juicy green lucerne he
could smell in Jessie’s yard. Also as likely as not he would pick up a
piece or two of biscuit lying about. So along he went.
It was a clear, moonlight night, though it would have been all the
same to Ginger had it been quite dark. Only in strong sunlight that hurt
his eyes did he find any difficulty in seeing, and then his nose was so good
he could smell anything, pretty well anything. He swung along into the
elephant’s yard and saw Jessie.


“Hullo!” he said. “You’re a newcomer here. I hope you’ll like
the place. How are they treating you? You don’t mind if I pick up a
bit of this?” He nipped the flowers off two lucerne stalks that Jessie had
left and ate them with evident satisfaction.
With the freedom that belongs to all wild animals, Jessie was in no
way surprised at Ginger’s actions. Anyway, what he was eating was so
little to her and so much to him. “I’m glad to see you,” she said. “You
belong to this country?”
“Bom and bred here,” answered Ginger breezily. “One of the
oldest families.”
’Ah!” sighed Jessie, “like elephants in Asia.”
’Asia! So that’s where you come from, eh? Far away?”
’Across the sea,” replied Jessie. ’’Ugh, the sea!”
‘Never been on it,” said Ginger.
“Well, don’t, unless those humans make you go to sea, as they made
me. By the way, have you royalty here?”
Ginger was still munching the lucerne. “Royalty!” he said. “What’s
that?”
“Kings and Queens and those who belong to them,” said Jessie.
“Don’t know ’em,” replied Ginger.
Jessie smiled to herself. Did you ever see an elephant smile? Ginger
never had. He said, “Do that again.”
“Do what again?” asked Jessie.
Ginger suddenly realised he had made a mistake and covered it up
by politely saying, “What made you smile?”
Jessie knew that she also had very nearly made a mistake, so she
answered, “Well, you know, I was given to the Colony of New South
Wales by the King of Siam, so I supposed the Colony of New South Wales
had a royal family here.”
“So it has,” answered the quick-witted Ginger. “It’s the people.”
“But,” objected Jessie, “the people are not royalty.”


“Not where you come from, perhaps,” said Ginger Groogie. “But
you’ll find a lot of things different here.”
He heard sounds that he did not like and skipped back over the wall
to the safety of the hollow tree he had left. He began laughing to him'
self. Woop'Woop, the owl, heard him, “What’s the joke?” asked
Woop'Woop.
“Go and have a talk with the new elephant,” said Ginger. “She’s
lonely.”
“Now?” asked Woop'Woop,
“Right away,” replied Ginger.
So silently that he could hardly hear himself moving, Woop'Woop
flew across to Jessie’s stable and alighted on the wall.
“How do you do?” he said in dignified manner.
When Jessie heard his soft, purring voice, so different from Ginger’s
harsh, guttural manner of speaking, she knew at once that here was someone
who would understand.
“How do you do?” she replied. “It is nice of you Australians to
call on a stranger like this.”
“It is a pleasure to do so,” replied Woop'Woop,” and in this case
doubly a pleasure. The elephant is amongst animals what the owl is
amongst birds.
“And that is?” asked Jessie.
“The one who thinks before it acts,” replied Woop'Woop.
“What about those cunning animals, human beings?” asked Jessie.
“Oh, they are in a class by themselves,” answered Woop'Woop. “Not
that I have anything against them, except that they chop down trees. But
surely you with your intelligence and strength don’t worry about them.
They should not trouble you at all.”
“Look around you,” said Jessie.
Woop'Woop turned his head to the left till it was exactly back to
front. Then he turned it to the right till it was in the same position. Then


“Everyone to his kind,” replied WoopAVoop, the mouse in his claws,
and silently disappeared into the night, leaving Jessie to profit by what she
had seen and heard.
“Owls are such wise birds,” she told herself. “He must be right.”
Her mind was at rest; she lay down and went to sleep—the first really
good sleep she had in the new country that had already begun to feel
like home.


CHAPTER V,
Jessie Sees Many Strange Animals and Birds.
NEXT morning Jessie was taken for a look round. You see, she was not
being kept at the 200 at a cost of more than three pounds a week merely
to be looked at. Not being a white elephant, she was going to be taught
to earn her living. At any rate, that was what the 200 authorities hoped.
There were great discussions about what she would cost and what she
might earn, but they turned out to be very short of what she really did
earn. This tour around the gardens was the very beginning of the train'
ing that was to fit her for her job of carrying children on short rides
about the grounds. She must know what was expected of her and just
how to do it, how to behave like a a mother and a perfect
lady all in one. For though she would never be called upon to actually


look after the children in any way she must know how to put up with
them and never lose her temper. An elephant in a bad temper is not
the sort of thing for children to be near.
Jessie, as I have already told you, turned out to be so perfect a lady
that she carried more than two and a half millions of children on her
back. And that’s an awful lot of children, even if it did take her fifty'
six years to carry them all.
Jessie’s trainer did not know how many children she was going to
carry. He only knew that it was his job to train her to carry them. The
first thing was to get her thoroughly acquainted with her surroundings so
that nothing would ever startle or annoy her. Then she would be shown
exactly what she was wanted to do and how to do it. So now, his goad
in one hand and Jessie’s lead in the other, the keeper was taking her on
a tour of inspection. She was still a bit stiff after that long sea trip, but
she got along all right, moving in that queer, shuffling way of all elephants.
When they are walking they shuffle. When they are running they heave,
roll, lumber along and look very terrifying. When an elephant starts to
run it is time to get out of the way. So Jessie must never be allowed to
run. She must be taught to move quietly and in a manner that would
frighten nobody, not even the smallest and most timid children or their
anxious mother watching them on their first ride.
As she was being led out Jessie stopped at the gateway to her yard.
Her trainer let her stand while she sniffed the air. He knew that some'
thing strange was puzzling her and wanted to give her time to be satisfied.
He had noticed how quickly she had dropped the first mouthful of grass
she had plucked by the roadside on her way from the ship to the zoo.
He did not yet know why she had done it and wanted to find cut. This
might help him. So he stood and let her sniff till she was ready to move
on. They passed the cages where Australian and South American
parrots, not being satisfied with being the most highly'coloured birds in
the world, were trying to prove themselves to be also the noisiest. They
did not interest the elephant. She had seen and heard that kind of thing
before. They came to where eagles and vultures sat sullen and rapacious
with the bareTeaded Great Condor, the most eviMooking of them all.
Nor did these interest her much. Eagles mean nothing to elephants.
When they saw the Cassowary with his ridiculously ornamented head and
the melancholydooking Jabiru, Jessie was rather amused. Monkeys she


had seen before in plenty, and took no notice of them. It was the ham
garoos and wallabies that startled her. When she saw them moving about
she just stood still and stared. Never had she seen anything like this.
You may have noticed that elephants are never still, but forever
shifting from one foot to another as though afraid that the earth might
be slipping away from under them. And elephants have four legs on
which to balance. Here were animals with only two legs, just like
humans in that respect. But unlike men, they did not use their legs one
after the other, but both together. How did they do it? No elephant
would have the courage to do that.
Years afterwards, when her keeper was teaching her to stand with
her legs crossed, Jessie remembered those kangaroos. When kangaroos
could do all they did on two legs, surely an elephant could do what her
trainer wanted her to do with four legs. Perhaps she thought it was her
trainer who had taught the kangaroos to be so clever. She may even
have believed that she could become as agile and graceful as a kangaroo.
One never knows!
Moore Park zoological gardens were sixteen acres in extent, sixteen
acres of flat land from which one could not see a great deal. But when
Jessie and her keeper reached the south-eastern comer of the grounds and
looked out over what then was open country, Jessie stopped short. The
strange taste of that first mouthful of grass was again in her mouth, the
new perfume she had noticed as soon as she was on land again in her
nostrils. She stood and took in the air through her sensitive nostrils.
Her keeper, not knowing what was troubling her, and seeing nothing that
should disturb her, urged her on. He had to touch her on the neck,
just in front of her shoulder, with his goad before she realised that he
wanted her to keep on moving.
When they turned at the north-eastern comer the wind was behind
them. Jessie set her four feet squarely on the ground and deliberately
turned her head in the direction from which the breeze was blowing.
Despite slight impatience on the part of her keeper, who could see no
good and sufficient reason for her action, she insisted on standing there
for a full half minute, feeling the air. Then she let him continue the
round, walking beside him quite docilely.


And as
bent thr
§PS|
lUl
'jHHpp
/WmW, WAk' *\ .
>■"- ■/JPP' *fi& Ji \
J| ■&■ JmSSKSmmm
4 ;
m i?, ■-, - %/ ? .£ '■)<
HHv w| 1 x
wl ; W% wzmMm -A^&
SSKv vjflSnGuni HBMmmewSam j. .
M - ■?'. v - i, i^m
v ||P >, • j||| ■..,. ■■ .
ter mind back to her early years, Jessie, now a mature old lady, inclined to stoutness and
ough the weight of carrying millions of boys and girls, feels somewhat sorry for herself.


What sit all about? he asked. But of course she could not tell
him, even had she wished to, for as yet she did not know.
There were many strange plants and flowers that she had never seen
before but they did not mean much to her. It was when she saw the
tree'kangaroos that she again became really interested, thrilled, if an
elephant can be thrilled. Like the other kangaroos, she had seen they
could do wonderful things when hopping about on the ground, using their
two legs together. But when they went to climb they used their hands
as human beings use them! She looked hard at them to see whether they
were men or kangaroos. She took a sniff and knew that they were not
men. After that she was too puzzled to be much interested in anything.
Her keeper took her round another turn or two and spoke to her a coupfe
of times. Then he was disgusted. “Reckon you’ve had enough for one
day, he said. “It’ll take you a while to get used to it, I can see.’’ He
took her back to her yard, where she was glad to see a bundle of sweet
oaten hay waiting for her with the grain on it.


CHAPTER VI.
Now for the First Ride!
JESSIE’S life work had begun. Day after day one of the two Indians
who were her keepers had taken her round the grounds till every sight
and sound was familiar to her. They knew that, like all wild things, she
was more sensitive to sound than sight; that she would more easily be
frightened, and therefore more dangerous, more readily by what she heard
than by what she saw. So they took special care that she should see and
hear everything. And now they knew exactly how different things she
might see and hear would affect her. They even caused a cattle dog to
growl savagely and then rush out at them. Jessie had never been heeled
by a cattle dog. She took no notice of him. Just as the blue Smithfield
was diving in to sink his teeth in her hind heel they called him off. Jessie


never knew how those teeth could hurt. So that was all right. They
did this quite a number of times till the elephant was quite sure that dogs
would do her no harm. Therefore, she would not be frightened by them
and do something silly. All the same, dogs were strictly prohibited in
the zoo.
The keepers taught Jessie to walk beside them, either of them, from
her yard to the small pavilion in which her saddle was hung aloft waiting
to be put on her back. She learned exactly where to stand so that it
would come down squarely, and as comfortably as possible, on her strong
back. She was taught how to place herself so that the long straps that
held the saddle in place, however many it was carrying, could be best
fixed. She knew, too, what load she would have to carry, for did they
not put on her four men who together weighed just about the same as
the ten children that would be on the saddle, five each side? Three times
they took her with this load round the course where she would be carry-
the children. Of course the men did not squirm and wriggle as some
of the children would be sure to do, but they did shift and rock about
quite a bit, just to try her out properly and to get her used to what the
children might do. There were some things that the children actually
did that they never thought of doing. But we shall come to that later.
When the day for the first real trip with children had arrived, George
and Martie were there waiting. They had arranged it all with one of
the keepers, both of whom were now their friends, and had persuaded
Martie s mother to be there early. George had had no mother for many
years.
When everything was ready, and he saw them waiting, the gateway
was opened. They were first in. The keeper signed to George and
Martie. The attendant lifted them into the saddle beside each other. Joy!
Jessie stood as quietly and patiently as if she had been doing this sort
of thing all her life. She stood as still as any elephant can stand while
the eight other children took their places, three beside George and Martie,
five on the other side of the saddle. All the same her trainer, who stood
at her head, could see that she was not quite as stolid about it all as she
looked to be. She leaned towards him as though relying on him to do
the right thing. She even passed her trunk softly over his head and down
his shoulder. He stroked her and whispered something that she seemed
to understand.


\ A A * >*> _ ■ vJG* : .'''_.
At his word of command she moved off slowly and smoothly. There
were little shrieks from two of the children, but nothing to disturb anyone.
But it was easy to see that this was an Occasion.
They approached the Hons’ cage. Leo, the lion, who came from
Africa, looked up. He could only partly see what was going on. But
what he could see interested him. He got up from where he had been
Frequently Jessie would pick up one of the keepers or some other person
with her trunk and place them upon her back. This in a most gentle way.
lying and strode to the front of his cage. Looking through the bars, he
lashed his tail, and the bristles of his mane rose all along his neck. It was
evident that he was angry.
“Disgusting!” he said. “To think that any elephant would allow
itself to be used like that —even if it is a She ought to be
torn to pieces for disgracing her kind. I can’t see one of my old friends
doing that for any man!”
The tiger, who belongs to Asia, where Jessie had come from, loved
annoying Leo, who claimed that he is the king of beasts, but who really


is no match for tiger. “There are two kinds of elephants,” he re
marked softly. The Asiatic, which is a kindly animal, and the African
who, like most things that come out of Africa, is not to be trusted.”
Of course the tiger had no right to speak of all Africans like that,
but he did want to annoy Leo.
Anyway,” growled the lion, “they wouldn’t do that with Africanus.
Rle d tear the whole place down first.”
“Yes,” purred the tiger, “and be shot for doing it. But what’s
wrong with what the elephant is doing? It’s no worse than some of the
things they make you do.”
“Not out in the open!” growled Leo. “They never try me out in
the open! They know better than that!”
“But you were out in the open once,” said the tiger softly.
hungry ” before they tra PP ed me when I was
And you’ve never been hungry since.”
Yes, I have—when I wouldn’t eat.”
Much good that did you!” sneered the tiger.
, You v Afncans hav e no sense. Elephantus Africanus won’t be tamed
so they shoot him and use his tusks for playthings like piano keys and
chessmen. Elephantus Asiaticus lets them tame him, feed him clothe him
Ll m wen, a too S ”° Ver h ' m m thdr triUmpha ‘ “ arch - and processions.^He
I d rather be dead,” raged Leo, lashing his tail angrily.
Better a live dog than a dead lion,” smiled the tiger.
qi, o tail and walked away to a corner of his cage to sulk.
Ihe children on Jessie saw him going. Of course they could not under'
stand the conversation that had been going on, but Jessie did.
or tJ K 6 6 r d ! he .® ayS j Why doesn,t he )' ust a keeper
or two. He d soon be dead then, said the tiger to Jessie as she passed.
His reputation has arisen from the noise he makes,” said Jessie. “He
is not really very brave. He is a trouble-maker, nothing else.”


She leaned over towards her attendant, who stroked her ear. One
of the bystanders threw two bananas on the roadway just ahead of her.
With one sweep of her trunk she picked them up together, opened the
slit in her head that she uses for a mouth, put out her tongue and shoved
in the bananas, never faltering in her stride. The children on her back,
and also those beside the path, were very amused.
Before she had gone another twenty yards someone threw Jessie a
cake, with pink and white icing on it. She caught it in the air and
treated it as she had done the bananas. Her keeper smiled; Jessie was
having a good time on her first round with children on her back. And
they were enjoying it as much as she was. They turned and went back
to the pavilion. When they had reached it, and the children were pre-
paring to dismount, Jessie reached up and touched Martie caressingly with
her trunk. Marties mother started forward anxiously, but a tall, thin,
well-dressed man, wearing a helmet, who was standing close beside, said
quietly, “No need for anxiety. The elephant will not hurt her. Elephants
are keen judges of character. You will be proud of that little girl.”


CHAPTER VII.
What Is It? What Is It?
Just a Mouse.
THE first ride had been a complete success. Walking back beside her
to her yard, holding her by one ear, the keeper said nice things to Jessie.
He said them quietly and in such a way that she could understand them.
That s how nice things should be said. And it would not do any harm
if a lot more nice things were said and less nasty ones, though in most
cases it is not necessary actually to hold the ear.
Whether it was the nice things her keepers said to her, the nice
things that were being done to her, or just her natural temper, no one
quite knew, but everything went well with Jessie and she quickly became
a great favourite. Already some children spent all their pocket money in
rides, or, if not all, at least a very good deal of it. Some of them had so


v g i I « i &p|a& . , : '» s -
&.■ 4, * 1 i JRH .. |||£&& '■
little left that Mrs. Smith, who kept the lolly'shop at the comer, asked
what was the matter with them.
“Oh, it’s Jessie,” she was told.
“And who’s Jessie?” she asked.
“Don’t you know?”
And after the day’s work was done Jessie would stand out in frordb of the
elephant house and talk things over with the other elephant.
Mrs. Smith shook her head.
“Jessie’s the new elephant at the 200. The best elephant ever.”
Then something happened. All the other attendants about the zoo,
the keepers of the animals and those who looked after the birds and
gardens, were white men. Only Jessie s two trainers, or keepers, were
Indians. They had come.to Australia with her and had looked after her ever
since. The few times when a white man had attempted to do anything


for her she had shown her displeasure. She had learned to do quite a
lot of things for herself. Amongst others she would, if she were allowed,
go along by herself to her daily bath. She would stand by the pool,
suck the water up in her long trunk, and squirt it all over herself. She
would even take the hose and wash herself down with it, doing it as well
as any man could. Every two or three weeks she was oiled all over so
that her skin should be kept soft and in good order. The funny part of
it was that a different kind of oil was used for each half of her—one kind
for the front half and another kind for the back half. All this was done
by her black attendants, and things were so arranged that they should
never both be absent from the grounds at the same hour.
By this time Jessie’s temper was well known. It was about as good
a temper as any animal ever had. She could be jealous at times and was
not very polite to ladies. She preferred men. The one thing she did net
like, and showed quite plainly that she did not like it, was naughty
children, not children who were frightened, as some children are when
they come amongst animals, but children who were bad-tempered and
sci earned with rage. On more than one occasion when a child near her
screamed with temper, she picked it up with her trunk and put it down
in another place. Every time she did this the child ran away as fast as
it could. So, of course, Jessie went on doing it whenever a child really
annoyed her, whether it was a boy or a girl, on her back or on the
ground. But she never made any mistake. Never did she frighten
children who were already frightened or in any kind of trouble —only
those who were downright naughty.
No one thought that Jessie herself could ever be frightened or
naughty. But she could. Any of you who have lived near a 2;oo know
that at night, especially in the very early hours of the morning, the animals
sometimes get restless and make a great noise. The lions roar, the bears
and monkeys make strange bowlings and gruntings, the birds scream and
chatter, even an elephant may trumpet. Then the row dies away again
and all is quiet.
It was that way at Moore Park, particularly on windy nights, but
sometimes when a night was quite calm, something, no one ever knew
what, disturbed the caged birds and animals. The same thing happens
in wild life. Some nights birds and animals go about their lawful occa-
sions as quietly and comfortably as can be; on others they are all restless


and some of them quite frightened. But one night at Moore Park it was
worse than that —much worse. For some reason both Jessie’s attendants
were absent. When the sun had set a lovely young moon was hanging
in the western sky. But it had hidden away, and by nine o’clock all was
in darkness, though there was nothing unusual that one would notice —
nothing that would make anyone wonder what was going to happen or
anything like that. It was just an ordinary night.
Everything had settled down in the ordinary way and most of the
birds and animals, like most of the people who lived near Moore Park,
were either asleep or getting ready to go to bed when there was a terrible
commotion. It came first from Jessie’s yard. Soon all the birds and
animals were joining in. Such a screaming and stamping you never did
hear! Keepers came running from all sides. Each one looked at his own
charges, saw they were all right, even if they were making a noise, and
ran on. Jessie’s yard was locked, and in no time every keeper and
attendant on the place seemed to be standing there trying to look in
through the iron bars of the big gate. Jessie was screaming and dancing
like a mad thing. The men who looked after the guinea pigs and
’possums cried: “What’s the matter?’’ The keepers asked each other, and
one of them shouted through the gate, “What’s up, you mad hummock?”
Another, who knew Jessie, said soothingly, “Steady, old girl. Don’t
make such a noise. We’ll get the key and see what’s wrong. But for
heaven’s sake don’t make such a row about it.” Jessie, went on dancing
and screaming. She screamed and danced so madly that when they did
get a key the manager, who had now come on the scene, would not let
anyone enter her yard. He was trying to think what should be done
when one of the Indians came running out of the darkness. He was im'
mediately followed by his fellow'trainer. They had heard the commotion
and, recognising Jessie’s screams, had raced back to take charge of her.
When he saw them the superintendent opened the gate just wide enough
for them to squeeze in one at a time. As soon as the first one spoke to
Jessie she calmed down and stood trembling. In the darkness her two
keepers felt all over her to find what was the matter. They could detect
nothing wrong. Jessie was now quite steady, and except for an occasional
call or scream from one of the other cages, all was quiet. Suddenly Jessie
began again. She almost danced on one of her keepers and her screams


were deafening. The man on whom she had almost trodden suddenly
stooped down, tore off one of his shoes, and threw it.
“Right now!” he called.
The other stepped out and picked up his shoe and something beside
it. The keeper who was standing by Jessie soothed her to quietness, then
quietly walked to the iron gate holding his shoe, and, hanging by its tail,
a mouse.


CHAPTER VIII.
Jessie Becomes a Champion Handbag Eater.
WORD had gone round that Jessie’s two Indian keepers were to return
to their own country, which meant she would need to have white attend'
ants looking after her. All the birds and animals that had come from
other countries wondered how she would like that. She did not like it
at all. When the opportunity came she said so. Bundah and Muraway,
the kangaroos, who had never got to know her very well, were surprised
at the way she took it. To them there was not much difference between
black men and white men. One might be worse than the other, but they
did not know which, Gnoorie, the emu, said they were all equally to be
avoided, all equally bad. But Gnoorie always was a dissatisfied, fault'
finding sort of a creature. Slow Tom, the koala, or native bear, did not
agree with her. “At least,’’ he said, “our blackfellows did not destroy


trees like white men go on doing. And if they go on doing it much
longer what is to become of us all?”
“Hear! Hear!” said Ginger Groogie, the ’possum. “And them too.”
That left them all a bit puzzled. But what Ginger Groogie meant
was that men and elephants, too, were dependent for their existence on
trees, though they did not seem to know it. And he had seen Jessie
pulling up trees by the roots with her trunk or pushing them down with
her head, when her keeper told her to, and he thought she should know
better than that. He had spoken to her about it, and she had said, “What
does a tree or two matter? Plenty more will grow.”
Ginger Groogie had expected Jessie to be wiser than that. You see,
he did not know that in the country where elephants, anyway Asiatic
elephants, come from, trees grow faster than they are wanted. _
But though trees did not matter to Jessie, other things did. She
did not want to have white men looking after her or having anything to
do with her. Not that their colour, or lack of colour, troubled her in
the least. It was quite other than that.
You see, to elephants, as to very many other birds and animals, sound
and smell mean much more than sight. To Jessie white men looked all
right but smelt worse than black ones. They did not talk so quietly and
softly. They did not stroke her so soothingly. They did not under-
stand what she wanted even when she made a noise about it, as she did
that night when the mouse had scared her so badly. Never by any
chance could they see or feel what she wanted before she knew it herself,
as the Indians sometimes did. Altogether she found them harsh and
stupid. No, she did not like white men. She would show them so and
perhaps her black attendants would be left with her. Jessie did not know
anything about a White Australia. But she had to learn, though it took
a long time and meant a lot of trouble to teach her. Jessie, like all wild
animals, had always shown more dislike for some men than for others.
Two were selected to whom she appeared to have least objection. They
were sent round to help the Indians. That was all right so long as they
did not put their hands on her. When one of them touched her she was
angry and let them see she was. So an arrangement was made whereby
there should always be one white man and one Indian with her whenever
anything was to be done, when she was being fed, washed or attended to


in any way. After this had been going on for some weeks one of the
white keepers got on her back. She immediately tried to pitch him off.
You should have seen her humping her back and throwing herself about!
When she could not get rid of him in that way she tried to pull him off
with her trunk. Prevented from doing that, she sulked, and it took all
the persuasion of her black attendant to make her carry him back to her
This was certainly a cake made for Jessie’s 65th birthday and with 65
candles on it. Did Jessie blow them owt\ in one puff? Well, I’ll say.
yard. She was being just as difficult as her Indian friends had warned
the overseer she would be.
The overseer guessed there was more in this than appeared on the
surface. He talked to the Indians about it. “Look here,” he said, “we
are getting rid of you only because we are compelled.’ 1
It took him quite a long time to explain what he meant by that, but
in the end they understood. One of them shrugged his shoulders. “It


is the will of Allah,” he said. After that Jessie was much more manage'
able, but not for three months did she even begin to do what either of
the white men told her without showing she did not like doing it, except
when it came to carrying the children. That she seemed to enjoy doing,
not only because some of the children, or their mothers, sometimes gave
her buns, apples, bananas, cakes and lollies, but because she really liked
children unless they were naughty ones.
She was not always so nice to grown'up people; in fact, she was
sometimes very rude to them, especially women, for, as you have already
been told, she always liked men better than women. But even to the
men she could show her dislike, as, for instance, when she sucked up a
trunkful of water and squirted it all over one when he annoyed her.
Generally her behaviour was very good, but not always. Some'
times, though not often, she slapped women with her trunk, or pushed
them aside in a way that showed quite plainly what she thought of them.
And she developed one rather alarming, and certainly very annoying, habit.
One would hardly think that ladies’ hand'bags were particularly good
to eat, even for an elephant. Whether it was that the first hand'bag she
tried had something very nice in it or not, no one ever knew, but it had
become unsafe to be near her with one. She would be passing by quietly
when she would see a hand'bag. Out would shoot her long trunk and
the bag would be snatched from the hand that held it. Its owner might
shriek or not, Jessie took no notice. She just twisted her trunk back
with the hand'bag dangling on the end of it, opened her mouth, stuffed
the lot in, and the bag with all its contents had gone forever. Strangely
enough none of these queer tit'bits seemed to disagree with her. When
one comes to think of the pills and powders, face creams, cotton reels,
needles and scissors that some of them must have contained, it’s time we
gave up talking about the digestion of an ostrich and used instead the
digestion of an elephant, or, perhaps the digestion of a Jessie, though
when you say it to yourself, “Jessie” does not sound quite like a name to
be used in that way, so perhaps we had better just leave it as it is and
go on with our story. There is such a lot to say about Jessie that we
shall hardly know where to stop.


CHAPTER IX.
Just a Small Example of Bad Temper in an Elephant.
BY 1903 Jessie had been in the zoo at Moore Park for twenty years. She
had learned a few tricks, such as standing with her legs crossed, lying
down when her keeper told her to, lifting him up with her trunk on to
her back and taking him down again, picking up coins and handing them
to him. She was also very useful in doing odd jobs about the gardens.
She would take hold of one end of a heavy garden seat while two men
took the other and help them move it and place it wherever it was
wanted. Often she carried the rubbish cans and sometimes helped to fill
them. As I ve already told you, she would shove down trees with her
head or pull them up with her trunk, according to how she was directed.
But her chief use and occupation was giving rides to children. She had


carried hundreds of thousands of them on her back. Nearly all of those
children loved her, she was so patient and intelligent and seemed to like
having them about her—all but a few of them. She seemed to know how
a child would behave when she saw it. Some, just one or two, she
caressed with her trunk. Others she seemed to enjoy seeing. Of many
she took little notice. A few, very few, it was evident she disliked, even
going so far as to make it plain that she did not like them coming near
her. Those she liked she would allow to run about between her legs,
pick them up with her trunk, and place them on her back and gently
put them down again. Some special ones she would encourage to seat
themselves on her trunk, which she would gently coil round their body,
lift them up and swing them about while they shrieked with laughter, and
one would fancy he could see her grinning. She seemed to know when
there was anything wrong with a child or when it was only being
naughty. Naughty, bad'tempered children she did not like. She had a
great objection to being touched behind the saddle. When any of the
children she was carrying insisted on touching her there she would stop,
feel round with her trunk, seize the bad child, lift it down and deposit it
gently but firmly on the ground, generally howling with fright. Then
she would go on her usual round quite undisturbed. But it was no use
that child asking for another ride. Jessie would not carry it.
Once it was much more than that. The usual number of ten
children were on her back. She was moving along quite quietly when
she stopped with a jerk. If they had not been strapped in all of them
would have been thrown out. The attendant knew at once that some'
thing was wrong. He waited to see what would happen. A small, red'
headed boy from Surry Hills was amongst the riders. Jessie’s trunk
swung up and seized him round the body. Quite roughly she pulled him
from his place, held him out in front of her, shook him and dropped him
on the grass beside the roadway. As she shook him something dropped
out of his hand. The attendant picked it up. It was a long, black hatpin.
He had been sticking it into Jessie, he said, “to see how thick her skin
was.”
When the keeper had soothed her down Jessie ambled on as easily
as ever. But that boy never had another ride on her.
That same afternoon something happened that pleased Jessie very
much and almost if not quite made up for what had happened on the
previous round.


You will remember that little Georgie Durden and his sweetheart
Martie were the first two to be put on Jessie’s back for the very first ride
on which she ever took any children. For the following three years, on
But do not think Jessie went short of cake. All those present at the party
thought she should get the biggest pieces.
each of their birthdays, they both had a ride on Jessie. After that they
thought they were too old to ride elephants with a lot of small children,
but often went to the zoo, and seldom without speaking to Jessie.


When George was twenty and Martie eighteen they were married.
Young George was born next year, Martie two years later than George.
George was now nine years old and Martie seven. They had been inside
the zoo often enough and knew all about its birds and animals, especially
the animals, but their parents had long ago made up their minds that
they were both to have their first elephant ride together on Martie’s
seventh birthday.
What a day that was! Jessie quite evidently recognised George and
Martie and seemed to know that these were their children. She caressed
little Martie with her trunk just as she had done little Martie’s mother
long years ago, and even touched little George with her trunk, as though
wishing to show that she knew who he was. Dozens of people noticed it
and were very interested. Some of them were quite excited, more excited
than little Martie and little George or their parents.
That evening when her two attendants, who were now both white
men, were feeding Jessie and bedding her down for the night, they were
talking over what had happened that afternoon, as were most others who
had seen it.
“I always did reckon,” said Keeper George, “she knew a bit. But
after this I take my hat off to her. She knew how to deal with that
young devil who had the hatpin and was using it on her. There’s nothing
so much in that. But the way she picked out them other two! Wonder'
ful, I call it.”
“Yes,” agreed Fred. “It’s wonderful all right.” He stopped in his
work and leaned on his pitchfork. “You know I always did reckon that
these here wild beasts know more than we give ’em credit for knowing.”
“Of course they do,” agreed George.
“You see,” went on Fred, “they’re not like tame animals that have
had all the sense knocked out of them and just wait to do what they're
told.”
“Same as us,” said George, as he went on spreading straw.


HER LIFE STORY 57
“How same as us?” asked Fred.
“We just do what we’re told, don’t we?’’ replied George.
“Well, yes,” agreed Fred, “up to a point.”
“Don’t know where the point is,” said George. “Anyhow, I’ve had
enough. You can look after the old girl from now on.”
So Fred became Jessie’s chief keeper and from that time on she was
better than ever, for Fred was a man who understood animals. And she
elephants, just like little girls, or any other females, need sympathetic
handling.


CHAPTER X.
Jessie and the Other Animals Find a New Home.
ON the 12th of June in the year 1902 the youngest member in the
Parliament of New South Wales, being interested in birds and animals,
told the House that Moore Park was an unfit place in which to keep
animals. He said, in fact, that Moore Park zoo was a horrible place;
that it was cruelty to animals to keep them there, and that so many
animals crowded into so small, and so badly drained, an area were a danger
to public health. The young man was laughed at loudly. But the oldest
member of the House, who happened to be a doctor of medicine, got up
and said that the speaker was right. He endorsed his statement that the
place was a menace to public health. From that time on the birds and
animals at the zoo could feel that there was something in the air. Many
inspections of their yards and cages took place. There was much shaking


of learned heads —and heads that were not so learned. The “zooites”
did not like it. They were used to being where they were, as far, they
thought, as they ever could become used to being locked up for people
to stare at. Most of them did not want to be dragged about looking for
a new place that would be just as bad.
For Jessie, Moore Park was not at all a bad home. When asked by
the black puma what she thought of the idea of moving, she short-sightedly
said that she would rather stay where she was. You see the treatment
they had from mankind had not given either the birds or animals,
especially the animals, much confidence in what they could expect. So
the black puma was annoyed.
“It’s all right for you, perhaps," he snarled. "You’re taken out for
a walk every day. You have fresh air and exercise and see what is going
on, and the mothers of the children you carry about give you fruit and
cakes. No doubt it’s all right for you, but what about the rest of us?”
Jessie had no answer for that, and having no answer was wise enough
not to try and make one. She walked on, hoping that no move would be
made. She did not know that a progressive Government had selected a
really fine site for a new zoo and were going on with the work of getting
it ready.
The new site was called Taronga, an aboriginal word which people
like to think means sea-view. It is situated on the shores of Sydney’s
lovely harbour with a view of the open ocean, and whether the name
means what it is supposed to or not does not really matter; it always was,
and still is, a beautiful spot. The ground slopes up from the water’s edge to
a height of three hundred and twenty feet above sea-level. Being of what
is known as Hawkesbury sandstone, it is well drained and easy to manage
in every way. Especially is it good for the making of caves and other
shelters, such as so many animals love. Its aspect is east and south, so
that the morning sun and the cool, fresh southerly breeze that comes
sweeping up the coast keep it sweet.
Great work was done there. Paths were made; cover and shelters
carved out of the easily-worked sandstone, fine, airy cages erected, com-
fortable, sloping roads and pathways constructed, shrubs and flowers
planted, most of the original trees preserved, well-ventilated houses built
and everything done that could be thought of for the health and comfort


of the creatures that were to spend their lives there. It was the aim of
those responsible for the move to make Taronga Park the healthiest and
most comfortable, as nature had already made it the most beautiful, zoo
in the world.
The sooites —the birds and animals that belong to the 2,00 —did not
know this. They only knew that a great deal of disturbance was going
on, giving rise to a general feeling of unrest and dissatisfaction. Not that
many of them had ever been very happy at Moore Park, but they feared
a move might be one from the frying'pan into the fire.
When the day for the great trek came Jessie was taken alone. Since
coming to Moore Park, ago, she had never been outside
the grounds. When, on the 24th of September, 1916, her keeper ap'
peared before daylight, told her to come along and led her out the front
gate on the road, one would have expected her to get excited. But if
she did she did not say anything about it. She waved her trunk about in
the fresh air as though trying to make sure of something, then just
shuffled along beside her keeper.
Where clumsy omnibuses, drawn by horses, had run when Jessie was
taken to Moore Park were now tramways; but that did not concern her.
Where there had been no houses were now streets. She took no notice
of that. Only when any strange noise was heard, especially any sudden
noise, she leant towards Fred as though for protection.
By the time they reached Circular Quay, having passed through the
city without incident of any kind, it was about half'past six. People were
coming in to their work. Many of them were interested to see Jessie.
Jessie was not so interested to see them. She just kept as close as she
could to her keeper, and quite readily followed him on to the punt which
was waiting to take her over to Taronga. But when, fearing she might
get frightened, rush about and do damage, they put a chain on one of
her hind feet and fastened it to a stanchion, did she show the least sign
of concern. When she moved, the chain rattled. That she did not like,
but a few words from Fred, her keeper, and she was all right again. Quite
possibly she had thought it might be one of the great horrid snakes that
live in the swamps and forests of Siam, her native country. ‘ All went
well. The water, rippled by a slight breeze, was bright and beautiful.


CJ
•<s>
e.
►si
D»
e
<»
►si
05
ss>
oo
CO
Co
•S
<»
•<s>
06
Co
•<s>
rO
<oi
rSi
■W
<»
CO
§
CJ
s
o
ft*.
rii
c
<»
►sa
•<s>
►Si
Co
CO
C»
o
Q


The air was fresh. The punt moved smoothly. After about half an
hour of slow, easy travel they arrived at Taronga. The chain was taken
off Jessie’s hind foot. Her keeper beside her, she walked off the punt on
to the landing platform, up the gentle slope to the new 2,00. When they
were halfiway she stopped dead and swung her trunk about inquiringly,
looked at the forest of eucalyptus trees, took a deep breath, and, apparently
quite satisfied, quietly went on again. She had found out what was the
smell that had seemed so strange on her first day in New South Wales
and sometimes ever since, when a strong wind swept over Moore Park.
It was the smell of eucalyptus, a clean, fresh, healthy smell that belongs
to Australia, strange to Jessie, as of course it would be to any elephant
or other oversea animal, but incense in the nostrils of the Australiamborn.


CHAPTER XL
And They all Vote the New Zoo a Great Place.
TARONGA PARK, the new zoo, was to Jessie a perfect delight. She
had always been well fed and, when she was being taken about the grounds
doing odd work or carrying children, had always had a good deal of room
to move about in. Here she not only had even more room, but the air
was fresher, the surroundings more pleasant and her own house, built of
concrete, surrounded by a concrete yard with a big bathing pool in it,
was all that any elephant could ask for.
When she was called upon by her keeper to help in putting the new
grounds in still better order her delight knew no bounds. There were a
few trees to be pushed down —not many —for most of the trees were
being carefully preserved. Later on they would have labels put on them,


telling people what sort of trees they were—a good idea, for the more
interest people can be made to take in trees the better it will be for all of us.
Then there were garden seats to be moved to more suitable places.
Some of these, when she picked them up, she whirled round in the air
just for the fun of the thing. Others she purposely put in the wrong
places so that she would have to move them again. And the dust boxes
and rubbish bins had to be emptied and put back where they belonged,
as well as other clearing up to be done. None of the other “zooites,”
much as they were enjoying their new surroundings, were quite as happy
as she was.
The giraffe, towering up over the fence, looked out of his yard and
called across to the camel, “Isn’t this just fine?”
But no camel was ever known to say anything was good. “Fine!”
he grunted. “It’s a bit better than where we were. That’s all I can say
for it.”
“And that’s a lot, coming from you,” said a baboon.
The mountain sheep looked down from the high cliff on which he
was standing. “That’s right,” he said. “Some folk are never pleased.”
“Are you?” asked the goat, for after all the mountain sheep is not a
particularly joviaMooking animal.
“I am,” replied the sheep. “You are too, I fancy.”
“Oh, I’m all right,” mumbled the goat, his mouth full of grass. “I’m
always one for making the most of my opportunities, you know.”
The monkeys, for the first time since they had been in a zoo, now
had plenty of room and lots of places for swinging. They were chasing
each other everywhere and enjoying themselves mightily.
Almost all the birds were more than contented. Even the eagles,
aloof and sullen as they always are, took advantage of the space to exercise
their mighty wings. From the cages of the smaller, more kindly birds,
came a song of joy. Here, on top of the hill, they could get the sun
or the shade—whichever they wished —and a pleasant breeze was blowing
through all their cages all the time, giving them the sweet, fresh air which
they love and which should be their perpetual heritage. Even the meh


ancholy Jabiru, lower down in the more sheltered spot that suited him,
had perked up enough to speak to Brolga, the native companion, who
was quite startled by such a thing happening, but not too startled to
answer him politely before turning to the Great Crane and exchanging
congratulations with him. Equus, the wild horse, raced round his em
closure, kicked up his heels and came back for another mouthful of hay
Even the littlest girl or boy was at once at home with Jessie, Even if she
did weigh tons and was so big, well, there was never anything to fear
about Jessie.
that lay so close on the ground; his short neck compelled him to widen
out his forelegs before he could reach it properly. The bisons, with their
sad, dark eyes, looked quietly at each other under the trees scattered about
in their enclosure. The brown bears explored their caves, choosing the
places where they would sleep through the winter, while their forty'
second cousins, the polar bears, which look as though they might also be


forty-second cousins to the seals, splashed about in their bathing pool
and looked for fish. They did not have any luck about the fish, but they
did enjoy the swim.
So it was everywhere; everything seemed satisfied and most of them
happy. To those who love animals and visit zoos, that is very pleasing;
for to all wild things freedom is the greatest thing in life, and when we
take that away from them, we should do our best for them in every other
way possible. But Jessie had nothing to complain about. In her new
surroundings she was as happy as a child at the seaside. When she saw
Fred, her keeper, trying to get a big bundle of hay out of an awkward
place with no one to help him, she immediately went and gave him a
hand —no, a trunk.
Fred had tied a long rope to the bundle of hay and was trying to
hoist it up out of a hole. Seeing him in difficulties Jessie walked across,
took hold of the rope with her trunk, and began to pull up the hay. After
each pull she would drop the slack of the rope and put her foot on it,
holding it firmly while she took another grip with her trunk till she had
the hay where he wanted it, and was just as pleased about it as he was,
especially when he immediately gave her a big mouthful of the best of it.
When Jessie, munching slowly, and one could have believed with a
twinkle in her eye, had finished the hay she was given, they went on and
did some more straightening and moving of the garden seats.' One
Jessie picked up and twirled round in the air as she had done_earlier in
the morning, and put it back again ever so gently. Fred stopped to speak
to George. He was telling him about what happened with the bundle of
hay, when Jessie, just to show how good she was feeling, picked them up,
one after the other, and set them on her back. Then, as though
thoroughly enjoying the joke, she began in her clumsy, uncouth fashion
to prance about, making it hard for them to stay there and even harder
to get off. When she thought her joke had gone far enough, which was
not as soon as Fred and George thought it had, she lifted them down one
by one and, leaning over to Fred, showed that she wanted him to pet her.
Which, of course, he did.
Is it any wonder that her keepers were just as fond of Jessie as were
any of the nearly three million children she carried on her back?


MmW
CHAPTER XII.
The Little Mouse that Scared an Elephant
JESSIE had had a bad night. Shortly before midnight a mouse had
appeared in her bedroom —some people called it her stable and some her
stall —but it really was her bedroom, and quite a comfortable bedroom at
that. She had stamped and screamed like any weak-minded, hysterical
woman.
It was odd that Jessie should have such a dread of mice. Generally
she was so calm and level-headed that it took quite a lot to disturb her.
Certainly she did not like strange noises, but who does? We depend on
our eyes very much more than our ears, but with Jessie, as with so many
animals, it was the other way round. She relied much more on her
hearing than her sight. Which seems to be much more sensible. When


you see a thing you can form some sort of an opinion as to how it will
affect you. When you hear a strange noise you can only guess at what
it means; you are in the dark. And when it happens in darkness, as it
so often does, you are more than ever in the dark!
That is just how Jessie felt about it. She was seldom afraid of any"
thing she could see. But as we know from the way she behaved that
night soon after her arrival at Moore Park, and once or twice since, she
was terrified of mice. And this one, only a little one, had come into her
bedroom in the darkness and wakened her out of a good sleep. However
brave we are, we don’t like being awakened in the middle of the night
by something we dislike. Anyway, Jessie didn’t.
Her bedroom was always locked at night, so she could not get out
into her yard. All she could do was scream and stamp and make a terrible
noise. She did that all right, my word she did!
As soon as George, the keeper, heard the commotion, he came
running as fast as he could, unlocked the door and let her out into the
yard, where she stood trembling. Knowing what to look for, George
took a pitchfork and turned her hay bedding over and over till at last
he found the poor little mouse shrinking into a comer. He killed it,
took it out and showed it to Jessie. He had to spend quite a lot of time
persuading her to go back to her stable. As it was she would not He
down again, but stood up for all the rest of the night, and morning found
her strung up and nervous. As it happened, she was not taken out to
do any work in the gardens that morning, so that when two o’clock came,
the time at which she began her work giving rides to children, she was
still uneasy.
It being holiday time, three bad boys at Woolloomooloo found time
hanging heavily on their hands. They began practising with pea'
shooters at targets drawn with charcoal on a blank brick wall.
The boy who had been doing the poorest shooting suddenly had an
idea. “I know,” he said, “we’ll go over to the zoo and shoot at the
animals. I got the money. The animals is all caged. They won’t be
able to get at us.”
“Naw,” said one of the other two, one who was later to become
well known as a boxer. “I don’t think much of that idea. Where’s the


fun in teasing anything that can’t hit back at you? I don’t think much
of that at all.”
‘The elephant ain’t caged,” suggested the third. “Suppose we tease
the elephant. It’s good and big to shoot at. Let’s go elephant'shooting.”
“What! Shoot at Jessie?” asked the one who had first spoken. “You
wouldn’t shoot at Jessie!”
“You’re frightened,” jeered the other. “You know Jessie could deal
it out to you if you made it too rough.”
The future boxer said nothing, only looked from one to the other.
The boy who had not wanted to tease Jessie felt that he was being made
to look like a coward. He swallowed hard.
“O right,” he said. “Let’s go over and shoot at the animals. Jessie,
too, if you like.” He tried to be jovial. “We’ll do a bit of elephant'
shooting.”
“You’re sure you got the money for all of us?” the future boxer
asked.
“Yes, I got it all right.” He showed the money.
‘That’ll do,” they all agreed.
So without letting anyone know what they had in mind, the three
slipped away through Hyde Park, down to Circular Quay and across to
Taronga Park. They had all been there before, and though there was
plenty to interest them at any other time, this afternoon they had in mind
only one thing, and that was to show each other that they were not
afraid to shoot at Jessie. They laid their plans on the way over on the
ferry steamer.
Having paid their fares and entrance charge, they had no money left.
By this time it was well known that Jessie objected to being tickled, or
even touched, behind the saddle. Since they could not find money to
pay for rides, and they had agreed to annoy Jessie as much as they could,
they arranged with four other boys, with whom they chummed up and


who had enough money to pay for rides, that they should do that part
for them. As they said, there was no danger in that.
Bravely, their peashooters ready, they took up their stand on the
pathway along which Jessie was always taken from her yard to the
saddling place, where the rides started from. Their peashooters would
carry effectively for about fifteen feet, so they stood about ten feet off
and waited. When Jessie came along they all blew their shots together.
Two of them hit her on the shoulder, one on her trunk. Those that hit
her shoulder had no effect, but her trunk, being much more sensitive, felt
the sting. She showed signs of annoyance. Her keeper, never suspecting
what had happened, spoke to her. As they passed, he saw the boys out
of the corner of his eye only, and took no further notice of them.
Jessie was saddled and the usual ten children seated on her. She
was led out and started on her usual round. The three boys stood near,
watching to see what would happen. Before she had gone twenty yards
Jessie was humping her back and showing signs of annoyance. Finally
she heaved up her hindquarters so as to almost unseat the children in the
saddle. Her keeper turned and warned the riders to stop their tricks.
The three boys who were looking on disappeared. This time the attendant
noticed them and looked to see what they were up to. He saw them re'
appear, put their peashooters to their lips and blow. That was all he
saw. That was all he had time to see. Jessie gave a shrill, whistling sort of
snort through her trunk and, quite forgetting the children on her back,
charged at her tormentors. They fled along the path, Jessie lumbering after
them, her riders clinging on as best they could, two of them screaming with
fright, most of the others laughing wildly.
One of the boys who had fired the shots, the future boxer, suddenly
decided that running away like this was a cowardly thing to do. He stood
and made ready for another shot at Jessie. She swept him aside with her
trunk and left him to pick himself up out of the grass while she chased
the other two, trumpeting loudly. No other two boys ever ran so fast
in the zoo, before or since.
Things were getting serious, both for the boys Jessie was chasing and
for the children on her back, when the two fugitives divided and dis'


appeared behind some rocks. Jessie stopped and stood shaking with
anger and excitement. Her keepers came up to her, soothed her ruffled
feelings and led her back to the usual round. As they went they saw a
pea'shooter that had been dropped by one of the boys. Very deliberately
Jessie put her foot on it. That was the last of the pea'shooter. And
no one ever tried that trick again.


CHAPTER XIII.
An Elephant in Boots.
AFTER the day of the peashooter Jessie’s attendants kept a watchful
eye. But a thing like that was hardly likely to happen twice, especially
when everyone knew what a terrible fright the boys had received. Never"
theless, fright or no fright, it is remarkable how small boys copy one
another and how one thing leads to another. The tickling behind the
saddle that had always annoyed Jessie became so frequent that those who
had charge of her decided she must wear a leather flap from the back of
the saddle to her tail. At first she did not like it at all, but after a time
grew quite used to it and always waited for it to be put on before the
rides began. Mischievous children who delighted in teasing the elephant
had now to find some other way of doing it. As you all know, some


children are so full of bad mischief (for mischief is of two kinds, good and
bad) that they must always be teasing helpless things. Not that Jessie
was helpless. Far from it. But those bad boys and girls knew, or thoug t
they knew, that Jessie was too much under control to be allowed to do
them any harm. So they played all sorts of tricks on her.
The story of the boy who had been caught sticking the long black
hatpin into Jessie’s back to see how thick her hide was had got round
everywhere, and everyone knew that he had never again been allowed
inside the zoo. None of them wanted that to happen to them, so they
had to think of things that might be just as annoying to Jessie and not
seem so bad if they were found out. So they used to run in and out
between her legs, give her bad fruit, or sour lollies instead of sweet, and
things of that sort.
Of course it was only a few children who did things like that. Most
boys and girls wanted to be friends with the elephant. And most of them
were. She would allow them to sit on her trunk three or four at a time.
She would lift them up and down, swing them gently in the air, put them
up on her back and take them down again. The more they showed their
delight the better she was pleased. As for her keepers, she was always
playing with them, picking them up, putting them on her back, suddenly
swaying over towards them, poking her trunk into their pockets, picking
up pennies and placing them in their hands, and things of that sort. And
all she wanted in return were her usual oaten hay and green lucerne, a
few kind words and some gentle rubbing about the head or the top of
her trunk.
But an unfortunate thing happened! Jessie went lame in one of her
front feet. A stone bruise it was, A stone bruise is a very nasty thing.
Some of you who have run about without anything on your feet may
know what it means. Those of you who have never felt or seen one
should know that it makes the sole of the foot swell up and become very
painful, so painful that sometimes one cannot put the damaged foot to
the ground. That’s what happened to Jessie. Everyone became most
excited about it. Those who were in charge of the zoo were more excited
than Jessie, for you see Jessie was not only the greatest favourite of all
the birds and animals, she also was the best money-maker, far the best


money-maker. When the money-maker goes wrong a lot of fuss is always
made about it. So everyone fussed over Jessie.
A veterinary surgeon, or animal doctor, was sent for. He looked
wise and went away again. Two veterinary surgeons came, for animal
doctors are very like the doctors who look after us. They know a lot
about dogs and something about horses and cattle, but you couldn’t expect
them to know much about elephants, now could you? The “vets,” is
they are usually called, decided, however, that the best thing they could
do for Jessie was to put ointment on the sore place and have a leather
boot made for the damaged foot. So a bootmaker had to be called in.
After close inspection and considerable thought he measured Jessie’s foot
and made a boot for it, a boot of soft leather that covered her foot enhrely
and laced up round her leg. It had four layers of leather on the sole. Jessie’s
shuffling way of getting along was rough on sole leather. But it
is easy enough to mend soles. Jessie returned to work, her leather apron
behind her saddle, a leather boot on her near foreleg. It made little
difference to the way she carried her loads, but she came in for a lot of
sympathy over it, so much sympathy that she began to think she was a
person of some importance. In fact, she was growing a little too self-
portant. And that in an animal as nice as Jessie was saddening. But
then you must remember that we are all like that, and so Jessie cannot be
blamed for knowing how popular she was with all the zoo visitors, not
only the boys and girls, but also their parents, uncles, aunts, grand-parents
and all other citizens.


CHAPTER XIV.
Celebrating Fifty Years of Service to Australian Boys and Girls.
AS I have told you, Jessie was given to the State of New South
Wales by the King of Siam. You may remember a conversation that
took place between her and Ginger Groogie long ago at Moore Park.
On one occasion before she had come across to Taronga, Jessie had
felt that royalty was piesent. But it had only been in a dim and in'
direct way. Now, after some days when all the attendants in the
gardens had been particularly busy making everything look its very best,
and there was an air of general expectancy, royalty was again present.
Jessie was paraded, but no special notice was taken of her; royalty was
thinking of other things. Though Jessie knew in her heart that a visit
of this sort could not be so important to her as that of some of the


thoughtfuMooking old men, and not'SO'old men, who had come and looked
at her through thick spectacles and thin spectacles and no spectacles at
all, nodded their heads wisely and gone away, she could not help being
thrilled by it, even if she were not particularly noticed. Her excitement
showed in every movement, though why she should be excited was a
puzzle to most people. The fact is that there are only two things from
which we cannot get away. One is our family line. The other our
childhood. Jessie’s young days had been spent in touch with royalty, and
all the glamour by which it is surrounded. To the end of her days she
would be impressed by it. That had never stopped her from being the
same to everybody who was kind to her, nor from being loved by every"
one. And now that she had not been taken special notice of on this
great occasion, she seemed to remember that, after all, she was only one
of the crowd.
Jessie had now been in Sydney for fifty years. To avoid future
arguments it may be as well to mention that a claim is sometimes made
that Jessie came to Sydney in the year 1882. The zoo authorities, and
they ought to know, say that she arrived in 1883. Not that it really
matters much whether she reached here in ’B2 or ’B3, But when it appears
in this book that she came in 1883; someone who wants to show that he
knows better is bound to say it was 1882. I don’t want anyone to seem
to know more about Jessie than this book reveals, so I repeat the zoo
authorities say positively the right year is 1883. If I did not convince
you on this you might be inclined to think that some of the other things
in this story of Jessie the elephant were not true. But they are, every
one of them, even those that most people know nothing about, such as
what Jessie said to other animals and what other animals said to her.
They’ll want to know how I know these things. Well, that’s what comes
of having been taught by our aborigines, who understand, and sometimes,
though very rarely, teach white children something of what they know.
You see, while our aborigines don’t know a lot of things that we know,
they do understand a lot that we don’t. For instance, when the
aborigines saw the first shot fired from a gun they could not understand
how the shot reached them. But when you were thirsty, sometimes very
thirsty, they could look at the sky and tell you where to find water and
get a drink. So, you see, it never does to be too sure that because a
thing is a mystery to you, it must also be a mystery to every other person.
Quite a lot of people make that mistake.


There’s another thing I want to put right. One of our greatest author"
ities has written that elephants usually live only about forty years. Others
who think they know say that elephants live to be a hundred years old.
For my part, though I don’t know much about elephants—except Jessie
—I don’t believe any of them know. What we do know is that Jessie
actually lived fifty-six years in Sydney, and it is generally believed that
she was about twenty-five years old when she came here. Anyway, she
was fifty-six years at the zoo, and that is claimed to be the longest time
that any elephant has been known to be in any zoo. We’ll have more
to say about that later.
What I want to tell you just now is that up to this time in our story
Jessie had carried about a million and a half children, and that the rides
altogether came to more than forty thousand miles. What do you think
of that? More than 40,000 miles (it looks bigger in figures, don’t you
think?). Either in letters or in figures it is a very long way. It is almost
twenty times across Australia.
Sometimes it made Jessie tired, round and round the same old track
at Moore Park for thirty-three years, and now at Taronga for seventeen
years. By the end of the day, especially when it happened to be a holiday,
she had had quite enough and was glad to get back to her stable, where
she could rest.
But one day a thing happened that, at the time, pleased her very
much. She had a visit from, and was formally introduced to royalty,
black royalty at that, which was the colour of royalty she had known
when she was a girl and, therefore, in her mind was the right colour for
royalty to be. Prince Tugi, consort of Queen Salote and Prime Minister
of Tonga, came to the zoo. Jessie was a little disappointed when she
spoke to him in elephant language, and he did not understand, as royalty
from India certainly would have done. She wondered whether it was his
fault or hers, whether he did not know elephant talk or she had forgotten
how to use it.
But he was royalty, and that was something! And before he left
he seemed quite pleased with all he had seen there, Jessie included.


Next morning she did not feel so satisfied. On thinking it over she
had decided that the black prince was quite different from royalty as she
had known it. Either she was altogether astray in her memories or
royalty was not what it used to be. All morning she puzzled over it.
And the more she puzzled the more hazy the whole thing became, the
more she feared that she had been deceiving herself when she thought
what a gorgeous thing a royal show was, and how it was somehow
different from any other kind of show. Her belief in the grandeur of
her past was being sadly sapped.
Now it happened that the zoo authorities had decided they should
do something to celebrate the fact that Jessie had been with them for
fifty years, which, they had learned on good authority, was a most
unusually long time. Also they knew that Jessie in those fifty years had
earned a great deal of money for the zoo. If she were made enough of
she would earn a great deal more. So they decided to hold a celebration.
Like Jessie, they had the idea that elephant parades in India were
really gorgeous affairs, so they sent over to India to find out all about it.
“Yes,” said the authorities over there, “elephant parades are very
gorgeous affairs. If you want to do the thing properly we’ll send you
some of the right sort of trappings for the occasion.”
“Yes,” said Sydney, “we certainly wish to do the thing properly.
Our elephant has been with us for fifty years, and we want to show how
proud of it we are.” So the Indian authorities sent along the gorgeous
trappings. When they arrived and the Sydney zoo authorities saw them
they opened their eyes.
“Whew!” they said. “Now we’ll astonish the natives.”
They invited two hundred country people to come and have a day
at the zoo free of all cost, for you see country people are more easily im-
pressed than city folk. You may be sure the country people came. A
day at the zoo for nothing! Of course they came.
And what they saw fairly took their breath away. The things that
the authorities in India had sent were really truly gorgeous trappings, and
there was Jessie all dressed up in them —decked out like a peacock in
spring-time. And Jessie, finding that her memory had not played her


false, but that she really did belong to a family that was connected with
royalty and was very grand, was just as proud as a peacock in spring'
time, especially when she heard everyone saying how wonderful she
looked and how perfectly those gorgeous trappings suited her—that in'
deed she was to the manner bom. Jessie was a proud elephant that day,
but not as proud as she was to be later.


CHAPTER XV.
Jessie Has Her Bad Days.
NEVERTHELESS, the royal visit, the mouse at midnight and the pea'
shooters seemed to be a bit too much for Jessie. Outwardly she appeared
to be as calm as ever. She helped her keepers with garden seats, dust-
bins and the watering hose much as usual, as though she looked on it
as her regular and proper work. All the same, both Fred and George
knew that she was not quite her placid, good-tempered self; she was more
affected by those little everyday annoyances that are always cropping up.
Somehow one feels that a thing as big, and one that lives so long and
has such a lot of time in which to think over things, as an elephant, should
not be annoyed by little things. Though when you come to think of it,
a flea or a mosquito, a cross word, or being made to do something, however


small, that one does not want to do, annoys us all alike, big and little,
especially when, like Jessie, we are growing old.
How much elephants, or other animals, think about these things one
cannot say; but Jessie, like most other animals, had some secret way of
knowing as soon as she set eyes upon them whom she would like or
dislike. She had her ways of showing it, too.
As a rule she took little notice of any of the other animals and
generally displayed no preference or dislike for people, either children or
grown-ups. But when she did she did, and there was no mistaking it.
Once when a very important lady was looking at her she shot out her
trunk, roughly seized the lady’s handbag and stuffed it into her mouth,
gave it three rounds and a swallow and looked at the lady with her small
eyes twinkling and her loftiest expression, as much as to say, “That’s
what I think of you and your faMals.” The lady looked astounded, and
when she could speak murmured that it did not really matter. What
she did think about it, or what the zoo authorities did about it, I don’t
know. For her part Jessie took no further notice of the grand lady or
anything connected with her. Fred put his hand over his face. Fm
afraid he laughed. Whatever satisfaction Jessie got out of doing that
unpleasant thing it did not last long. It was one of her bad days. Another
lady gave her a bun that looked all right but apparently did not taste
all right. Whether the giver of the bun thought it was all right no one
knew, except perhaps Jessie. Anyway Jessie thought she knew. When she
took the bun she had been walking along past the lady. As soon as she
put it into her mouth she stopped dead, dropped it disgustedly, looked
round sideways, saw the lady who had given her the bun, roughly pushed
her over in the grass and continued on her way.
That tfine Fred did not laugh. Instead he gave her a little prod
with the goad he always carried in case of need. It was not a hard prod
—just enough to show her quite plainly that he did not approve of what
she had done. Jessie hesitated in her stride, twisted her trunk towards
him, slowly drew it back again and went on as though deciding to let it
go at that. As all her attendants said of her, she could do everything
but talk, and never in the years they knew her did she show
any signs of ilhtemper that was not fully justified.


Some days, of course, Jessie was brighter and better than others. But
we’re all like that, whether we think in silence like elephants, chatter like
monkeys or talk like human beings. And of how many of us could it
be truthfully said that we had never showed signs of bad temper that
was not justified?
But Jessie's bad day was not yet through. There must have been
something in the air that day. For the fourth ride of the afternoon she
had an unpleasant lot of children. They pushed and shoved and said
nasty things to each other, till two of the boys began to fight. Jessie stopped.
Her attendant spoke to the children in stern tones, very stern tones, and
she went on again. But though none of them actually started to fight again,
those children were bickering and shoving about all the time, Jessie was
as glad as her keeper when she got back to the dismounting place, and
she thought she had seen the last of them. But, as I have said, this was
Jessie’s bad day. Even a bad day usually has some good spots in it, and
the next load of children Jessie carried was quite a nice one, and at the
end of it the mother of two of the children gave her two bananas —real
bananas —long, ripe, yellow ones from Fiji. Jessie ate them skin and all
and thoroughly enjoyed them.
Then a man who knew good apples when he saw them, or perhaps
when he grew them, came along with-a dosen from Bowenfels on the
Blue Mountains. While the next load of children was getting on he
handed the apples to Jessie one by one. Did she like them? One could
have believed she smiled on that man from the mountains. Anyway he
went away smiling, for as a boy he had ridden on Jessie and he was pleased
she had liked his apples.
The time for children’s rides was from two to four o’clock. This
afternoon they were running a little late. It had been a hot day, and
after all her troubles —and perhaps after the bananas and apples—Jessie
was thirsty. When she was put back in her yard she went to the
big basin for a good splash.
On the lower side of the yard, that is, just outside the lower end
of the yard, some people were standing. Amongst them were four boys.
At first she did not notice the boys particularly, but soon saw that they
were up to no good. Their pockets were bulging and their hands very


restless. Bulging pockets sometimes meant good things, restless hands
never.
After watching the elephant enjoy her bath for a little while, the
growmups moved away. This was what the boys had been waiting for.
They watched the older people till they were out of sight.
“Now,” said one of the boys, “let her have it.”
A shower of stones descended on Jessie. The stones did not hurt
her —her skin was too thick for that —but she knew quite well that they
were intended to hurt. Still she seemed to take no notice.
“Harder this time,” said the boy, and another shower of stones fell
on Jessie. She did not move, only put the end of her trunk in the water.
“Want something heavier,” said one of the boys. He searched
round and found an empty bottle.
“This’ll make her know it’s hit her,” he said.
“No,” objected one of the others, “not that. It’ll break to pieces
and cut her.”
“What do I care?” said the one who had the bottle. “I’ll learn
her.” He went to throw the bottle. But Jessie got in first. Without the
boys noticing, she had sucked up more than a bucketful of water. Before
they could move, or even guess what she was going to do, she swung her
trunk up and soused them. The force of the water knocked down two
of the boys. The others ran for their fives. The boy with the bottle,
who was one of those who had been knocked down, showed signs of
fight. Jessie gave him another dose, not such a big one this time, for
her supply was running out, but quite enough to send him after his com'
panions. Just to show that she meant it she lumbered along to the end
of her yard after them.
But not one of the boys looked back.


£ST 2b y
. . ■^.-^-^MO
CHAPTER XVI.
Some Birthday Parties with Cake and Candles.
THE fifty years’ celebration party was such a success, Jessie had behaved
so well and such warm and widespread interest had been aroused, the
zoo authorities decided that Jessie must have a birthday party. You see,
everyone must have a birthday whether they have a birthday party or
not, and when you don’t know on what day your birthday falls, and no
one else does either, you can fix any time you like for the party. That
can be very handy.
Those responsible for the running of the zoo realised this of course
they would not have been running the zoo so successfully if they had not
been up to that sort of thing. As no one could argue with them about


it. they fixed Jessie’s birthday on the seventh of September. It was as
likely a date as any other, and is at the very best time of the year in which
to hold an outdoor shivoo, especially at a place like Taronga Park.
They made sure of making it a real spectacle by securing all the
gorgeous trappings Jessie had paraded in on the fifty years’ kick-up which,
as they had guessed would be the case, really did astonish the natives.
But since the birthday party would be for everyone, city and country
folk alike, it had to be more carefully thought out, planned and prepared
than the fifty years’ party. That, you see, had been meant to please only
country folk, and country folk who, having been invited to a free show,
could hardly be other than pleased with it. But this was for all-comers,
so everything had to be done in the very best style. It was, too, as you
can see by the pictures.
A huge birthday cake was made with sixty-four candles on it, that
being believed to be Jessie’s age. Children and grown-ups gathered from
afar and near. Jessie was paraded in all the gorgeous trappings, and
didn’t she know it!
Then she blew out all the sixty-four candles on the cake. When it
was cut, a very big slice was given to her, and the rest handed out to the
children. Newspapermen were there, speeches were made, photographs
taken, and altogether it was a great show. Then and there it was decided,
and announced to all the visitors, printed in the press and talked about all
over the city and throughout the country, that Jessie would have a birth-
day party every year, and that everyone would say nice things about her
and those who looked after her, and the children could all get a piece
of her birthday cake. Jessie herself would be pleased, and those running
the 2100 would be most pleased of any of them. At the next birthday
party (just as good as the first), Jessie was not the only elephant. You
see, she could not be expected to go on forever. And, as I have told
you, the people in charge of the 2100 know how to run a 2;oo. They were
wise enough to get another elephant, a young elephant which they could
train to take Jessie’s place.
If you look up the newspaper accounts of that party you will see
that Jessie’s age is given as sixty-six, and that of Sarina, the little girl
elephant who was to be trained to take Jessie’s place when Jessie got too
old to carry on, is stated to have been six. There is something wrong


somewhere. Jessie could not be sixty-dour in 1937 and sixty'six in 1938,
because elephants don’t live faster than we do and we only go ahead a
year at a time, don’t we? I only mention this to show you that this story
is much more reliable than any newspaper. I don’t know why it was,
whether Sarina had not behaved herself as well as she should have done
in such company, or had a pain in her tummie, or something like that, and
could not be present; whether, as may have been the case, Jessie had
been jealous about anyone else being given too much attention at her
party, or what was the reason for it, but Jessie had the next birthday
party all to herself, and a very successful party it was. When she heard
some of the children asking where was Sarina, Jessie did not altogether
like it. But everyone knew that she was growing very old and a bit
cranky. No wonder she was beginning to be cranky; her eyesight was
fading. Some people talked about giving her spectacles to wear. Fancy
an elephant in spectacles! I daresay Jessie, with her love of display,
would have been quite pleased to wear thm. Some people I know, and
perhaps you know some, too, wear pincemez, or carry lorgnettes, for the
sake of effect. All the same, I can hardly think that an elephant would
be quite at home wearing spectacles.
As I was saying, Jessie was showing signs of old age. Not only was
her eyesight beginning to fail; she was not as active as she used to be.
Her teeth, which had always been kept in good order, were getting worn'
out. No one, as far as I know, ever suggested a set of false teeth for
her. What a fine job it would be for a dentist to make a set of false
teeth for an elephant!
The zoo authorities saw that Jessie was ageing fast. They knew that
even elephants can’t five forever. So, with that wisdom they had shown
in other ways, they decided on holding a really big birthday party for her,
a party that would be bigger and better than any party ever held for any
elephant in any zoo in any part of the world. They would show what
they thought of Jessie.
Invitations were sent far and wide, to the Durden family amongst
others. Of course they could not all be present, not by any means, but
twenty'two of them, young and old, were at that party. And little
Christina Durden, aged seven, enjoyed her slice of Jessie’s birthday cake
with all the candles on it as well as did any other of the four thousand


children who were there with the thousand grownup relatives to look
after them. What a day it was! Pictures of it were taken and sent all
over the world. And Jessie, more being made of her than ever before,
was proud of it all. But at the end of the day when it was all over,
when the children had been taken home again and she was led to her
stall, she was tired. “Ah!” she said, “I am growing old. But what a
life I have had! I don’t believe any other elephant ever had such a life
or as many people making as much fuss over her as they make over me!”


CHAPTER XVII.
Jessie Becomes a Trouble-maker Through Jealousy.
ANOTHER new elephant had been brought to the zoo, a big fellow.
Though Jessie had never had much to do with old Jumbo before he died,
she was glad to see one of her own kind again. But, as she did not go
out of her way to make friends of any of the other animals at the zoo,
she was not nearly as pleased as one would have expected her to be.
That was for two reasons. Though she had never made close friends
of any other animals, she did like talking to them now and again, especially
the Australians that had never before seen an elephant. To them she
was something wonderful. And we all like being wonderful.
This new elephant was bigger than she was, and, despite what they
might say to her, Jessie had a secret belief that it was her size that had


most impressed Ginger Groogie, the ’possum, Slow Tom, the koala,
Bundah the Fighter, the big brown kangaroo, Miss Muraway, the blue-
flyer, and all the rest of the kangaroo family, as well as birds like the
Jabiru, Keen Eyes, the eagle-hawk, Brolga, the native companion, and all
the other birds that had never been out of Australia. Of course the
migrating birds, that is, those who go abroad every year, did not think
her wonderful at all. They had seen elephants, hippopotamuses, rhino-
ceroses, and all the other big “-oses,” in other parts of the world.
But the new elephant was a boomer. How would it be if her keepers
thought more of him than they did of her? She must not let that happen.
The newcomer was put in a yard that adjoined hers. Their stables
were close together under the one roof. They could talk to each other.
But beyond saying “How-do-you-do?” and asking him where he came
from, Jessie said nothing to him that first night.
He had told her that he came from India. As she had come from
Siam, that gave her something to think about. Since they were both
Elephantus Asiaiicus they belonged to the same family, but she knew that
elephants in Siam and elephants in India lead very different lives. She
also knew that in India some elephants are not treated very well and are
made to work very hard. Others are used for hunting, which is dan-
gerous, much more dangerous for the elephants than for the men who use
them —at any rate, so the elephants think.
Special ones are kept for show purposes, such as carrying Rajahs and
other important people on parades. Those were very carefully trained
and put through their paces. It was not altogether fun, but they were
well fed and looked after much better than most of the people were.
Jessie did not expect the newcomer to be one of them. It was hardly
likely that a Rajah, however nice he wished to be, would part with a
highly-trained elephant just for a zoo. And she had left Siam, which after
all was not quite the same as India, when she was still young and, though
an elephant never forgets, she did not feel quite sure that she knew all
about elephants in Siam, let alone in India. So she decided to say nothing
further till morning, after having had all night to think things over.
When she had lived in Siam such a thing as an elephant having a
white keeper was unheard of. But she remembered that at that time.


and for years after, elephants in Australia had black keepers. Now they
were all white, and had been ever since her two Indian friends had said
good'bye to her at Moore Park. It might be the same in India. If it
were so this new chap would be as accustomed to white keepers as she
was, and would know how to treat them just as well as she did or even
better, for over there there would still be quite a lot of elephants to tell
each other all they knew, while since she had come to Australia she had
hardly had one to talk to. So all she knew about white keepers she
had been compelled to learn in the school of experience. And that,
though the safest of all ways of learning, is awfully slow. She feared the
big fellow might know more than she knew, which, added to his size and
strength, would make him first favourite. She knew she could never bear
that.
When she awoke in the morning, after a very uneasy sleep, for a
moment she could not make out where she was. The familiar stable was
all around her and she could hear the birds outside just as usual, but
everything seemed strange. A noise came from next door. “Ah!” she
said, “that’s it. It’s that new elephant. I wonder what I should do
about it. I know.”
She stood near the wall and said “Good morning!” Then she
added sweetly, “I hope the mice did not disturb you at all during the
night.”
“Mice! Good heavens!” blared the big boy! “Are there mice
here?”
“Oh, yes,” she replied.
I won t stand that! I won’t stand that!” trumpeted the big
fellow, and began to stamp round and make an awful noise.
Both the keepers came running. Jessie heard them coming.
“Don’t make such a noise,” she called to the other. “You’ll rouse
the snakes.”
The keepers unlocked his door. 1 Snakes!” he bellowed. “Snakes!”
and rushed out into his yard, almost knocking down both the keepers as
he went. They jumped aside and swore at him.
Ah! said Jessie to herself, “that’s a good beginning, anyway.”


It was not a nice thing for Jessie to do, was it? But, you see, she
had been made such a lot of for such a long time that she just could not
bear the thought of anyone displacing her.
Jessie need not have worried. The new elephant was not wanted
for giving rides to children. He was to be used for other kinds of work,
and was meant to be looked at. In both of these, especially being looked
at, he did very well, and though when she got to know him better she
found him somewhat slow and stupid, Jessie never had cause to find fault
with his behaviour towards her.
Did she regret her behaviour on that first morning? Not at all.
She thought that might have had quite a lot to do with his being so nice
from that day onwards.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Big George, Little George and Many Georges Visit Jessie
FOR nearly fifty'six years Jessie had been giving rides to children, ten
at a time. Allowing for those who had more than one or two rides, she
had now carried about two and a half million different children. Of all
that number she had taken special notice of very few, and they were
mostly boys who had forced themselves upon her attention by playing
unpleasant tricks upon her. Less than a dozen children had she picked
out for particular favour. Of these, the original George Durden and
Martie, who became his wife, were first. Before the zoo was moved, and
Jessie with it, from Moore Park to Taronga, she had carried on the special
sign of interest that she had shown in the first Martie to Martie the
second and, in a lesser degree, to George the second.


George the second married early in life. He also had a son named
George. So now there were three Georges—George the first, George the
second and George the third.
I believe I have forgotten to tell you that in the year 1924, when
George the third was taken for his first ride on Jessie, she seemed to pick
him out also, but not with quite the same amount of interest she had
shown in the others. George the third also married early in fife. In
the beginning of the year 1938 his wife presented him with a son —
George the fourth.
All these Georges got together—Great-grandfather George, Grand-
father George, Father George and little George, though little George did
not know much about it. The family decided that on the first birthday
of George the fourth they would all visit the zoo. Little George would
be too young to ride on an elephant. That could come later. But he
could, and would, be introduced to Jessie.
Taronga Park, overlooking the water, with its trees and flowers, its
well-designed buildings, its splendid caves, yards and cages for the birds
and animals all open to the breeze, had become such a beautiful and in-
teresting place that on Sundays and holidays it was always crowded with
picnic parties.
On little George the fourth’s first birthday all the other Georges,
their wives and children, those who had any, and nearly all of them had,
added one more to the number of picnic parties at the zoo to see Jessie.
There have been many big family picnics at Taronga Park, but I am
sure this was the biggest there ever has been. I won’t tell you the exact
number it contained, because if I did some other family is sure to come
along and claim they had a bigger one. A few of the members of that
big party lived near the zoo, and came in from the top side, but most of
them gathered at Circular Quay and took the ferry. The man at the
turnstiles, who knew some of them well and who also knew that Grand-
father George and Grandmother Martie were the first two children ever
to have been on Jessie’s back, laughed when they came along and said
jokingly, “All for a ride on Jessie.”
George the first, his bald-headed son standing beside him, shook his
gray head and laughed. “Some of us are a bit old for that, and this one”


—he nodded across at little George—“is a bit young, don't you think?
His turn’ll come later.”
“I hope so,” said the man at the gate. “Four generations! Four
generations, and all of them riding the same elephant! I should think
that would be a record for any 200. You ought to ask about that.
Might get a free ride out of it.” He looked over them again. “Reckon
that’d just about take up a whole afternoon.”
“When it comes to the little chap’s turn we’ll see about it,” replied
George the first, and the whole crowd of them poured on to the ferry
steamer. They held their picnic under the Bangalay trees, the older people
quietly enjoying themselves, the youngsters skipping about like monkeys
and making as much noise as the cages of cockatoos.
Someone suggested that there should be a special riding party of ten,
all of them members of the clan. The youngsters objected to that. They
said it would be better fun for them to mix with other children in the
ordinary way instead of making it the noticeable thing a family party
would be. And though one of the mothers talked about a photograph
of the ten of them all together on Jessie, and said that it would be some'
thing to be proud of, the children had their way. So George the second,
who knew the attendant well, and George the fourth s mother, took little
George along and showed him Jessie. He did not seem at all interested,
but Jessie did.
“Can’t say whether it’s the parents or the kid,” said the keeper, “but
she knows there’s something unusual about it.
As though in proof of what he said, Jessie gently poked her trunk
out towards them. Much to George the second’s disgust, little George’s
mother got frightened and turned away with him. Not for all their
persuasion would she turn back towards the elephant.
“Time enough,” she said, “when he’s big enough to get on her back.”
And that was the end of it.
4 .
All the same, I am still of the opinion that was the biggest family
picnic ever held at the 200, and believe that little George is the only white
child on record of the fourth generation to see the same elephant—and
that elephant was Jessie. Jessie had never suffered from any illness since
she had been in Australia. The only thing that had ever been known


to be the matter with her was the stone'bruised foot, for which, you
will remember, the leather boot was made. She wore out four or five
boots and the foot was better long ago. Spring was here again. All the
animals were wearing their new coats. The plumage of the birds was
bright and fresh. The trees had put on new leaves. Even those that
did not shed their leaves in winter were showing new growth; many of
them were coming into blossom. Wistaria, roses and honeysuckle per'
fumed the high places. Everything was at its best. The zoo authorities
were looking forward to another big season with money pouring in from
rides on Jessie, now over eighty'one years of age. Suddenly, as so many
old things do, Jessie died. One day she was quite well, and the next day
she was dead. In town and country, in high places and in low places,
were heard expressions of sorrow. To the writer they seemed to be
summed up in a small, fairdiaired, chubby'faced little boy sitting beside
a pathway in the zoo crooning to himself: “Poor old Jessie’s gone. No
more Jessie, Poor old Jessie’s gone. No more Jessie.’’
Few animals have been more widely loved or lived a more useful life
than that of Jessie the elephant.
THE END


YOU ENJOYED THE STORY OF JESSIE?
Then you will be joyously interested in the
COMPANION BOOK
“BUNYIP SAYS SO”
W. M. FLEMING
The author, although he has used a fantastic plot, has told a story in which is revealed
his marvellous fund of first-hand knowledge of bush-creatures. For the purposes of
the story he has emus, koalas, kookaburras, crows, cockatoos, opossums, porcupines,
brolgas, tiger-cats, dingoes, pelicans, magpies, owls, hares, plovers, lyre-birds, snakes,
rabbits, iguanas, lizards, wag-tails, kangaroos, and other Australian birds, animals
and reptiles, meeting together and talking in a common language. They swap
yarns —and what yarns! Some of them break into songs, and the words of some
of those songs may easily become part of the folk-lore of Australia. But, above all,
the book is entertaining. The bush-creatures talk as they would talk if they could
talk. (And how do we know they don't?).
The thirty-six illustrations are delightfully quaint, and the whole book is produced in
such a way that it will be a permanent delight to every proud young possessor and
many a young person will find his book in an oldster's hands!
A TALE OF THE AUSTRALIAN BUSH CREATURES
ALL BOOKSELLERS AND NEWSAGENTS EVERYWHERE—3/6.


- . '* *W
' ~ - - .. ' -*tc --
'■'■■■ : ” ;Si\ * •>,.• . ■* "' Cj >.r. - ■ -A: - . ~'~ r ». ’ -m-
.
' 5*ifc''
\
->»'•*'■ : ■_; : ‘ S» • -


— . ;■ ' yfek- ,’ ,r B& A'~X± . .• -. •■ - ■“■■ -- ----* r*T - S’" ■* * — | * ' _ ■ - sp-
'■ ■ ' ' ' > ■ » -«
- ' .- r * * », - - *y i
, T i'"' ■
■ , •. . i = 'SaB ., --■ •*/ -aSte
.'■ » .tat u - 4 HrV..-
- lySlgfc i IP® 1
s s ■ " sSflPorNM:
' . _-i— AjL
>*l. - .t V : ‘ - . ■
.- - P”-'- -Sir:.-
,<«i *•■ ttsmt*.


- "•*%. v- „• , v' . > >»>* >%•* ■ ■ * ■---■ . *Mt<
- ••:*? '£p'~ * . - * > *. - : iaat* ■ 3
’ * **~ ■' rf - - it,' -’• ■*-' r AjfT'jr ■ -jo ' — glj> .'r* * -J**
- ' r yM? ~ iajr-*-J*-' ' . ~ '*■ ,jpT *-...», •' ■/<*• “—'§■« '.• HfljpSf; T-—• ' V.-'
: - ,-4.:- W*Siri5&*jZ; * j «•- ' * * :<■ - - . - .-;
J *#" ■ -3 ■ >• ,-«••■- ■ T>-< 7, ~ ...» - ■• P* * •-_ -IT*®*'- • - •*:.» »-> .
F l-f. - ,■ ? ■ ' r
:■- jn 7r y ; #«t * ■*. r


