

JESUS OF NAZARETH PASBETH
BY. ftfty
A SERMON BY THE
REV. ANDREW GARDINER,
M.A.,
Delivered in St. Stephen’s Presbyterian Church,
Macquarie-street, Sydney, on Sabbath
evening, 31st May, 1874.
Re-de'ivered by request, in the same place on
Sabbath morning, 14th June, 1874.
JOSEPH PAXTON, MACQUARIE-STREET,
SYDNEY.




f) 335571 T fSA/
X6-S-17
.A. SEBMOIT
BY THE REV. ANDREW GARDINER, M.A.
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by." —Luke
xviii. 37.
Jesus Christ was on His way from Galilee
to Jerusalem. Instead of proceeding south
through Samaria He crossed the Jordan and
went down on the other side of the river till
He was opposite Jericho, when He recrossed
and set His face towards Jerusalem. Besides
His disciples He had many foi lowers, and thtir
number was augmented as they went along.
For it was the week before the Passover, and
the Jews were crowding to Jerusalem to keep
the feast. Around Jesus they gathered, for
His fame was now abroad over all the land.
It was rather a great triumphal precession
than the annual pilgrimage to the Passover.
Onwards the multitude moved, Christ in the
midst, till now they are nigh the gates of
Jericho. Outside the city, in a shaded spot
by the wayside, a blind man is sitting. He
has been there since morning and many days
before. Indeed he is a familiar object to all
travellers on the Jerusalem road. Many an


alms he has got from the Passover crowds in
days gone by. As he sits there now we
can read interest and attention on his face.
He is listening intently. What sound has
reached the acute ears of the blind man ? Is
it the rustling of the trees that run down the
road-side ? Is it the murmuring waters of
the more distant Jordan ? Is it only the
blind man’s fancy ? No, none of these, for
louder and nearer the sound has come, till
now he can distinguish the trample of a
thousand feet and the voices of men. There
has been no multitude like this in his day,
he reflects, and bis mind runs back over the
Passover crowds that have come and gone.
At the foremost the blind man asks, “ What
is the meaning of this ? What has brought
these people here ?” And he, with a look of
pity on the poor blind man, exclaims, “Jesus
of Nazareth passeth by.” Look, look what
a change has overspread the sad—the hope-
less countenance of the blind. Surely he
has heard good news who, with eyes closed,
can wear a face like that. There is joy,
there is hope in its every line. Then, sitting
there, he raises the cry of a man in earnest,
“ Son of David have mercy upon me.” In
this cry there is faith as well as earnestness.
They said, “Jesus of Nazareth,” but he says
“Son of David.” It was as if he cried—
‘‘ I believe Thou art the promised one—the


Messiah—the Saviour. I have heard of Thy
marvellous woi ks, and Thou canst save me. ”
But the crowd had no sympathy with his
earnest and confident appeal, and they told
him to hold his peace. “You are spoiling
the procession with your noise. Christ can-
not stop, and we cannot stop for you, poor
blind man. ” But he cried the more, and his
cry was the same, but it was stronger—
“ Thou Son of David have mercy upon me!”
“And Jesus stood. ” How beautifully graphic
and simple the whole description. “Jesus
stoodand on the Lord every eye is now
turned. “Bring him to Me,” the Saviour
says. The blind man hears the gracious in-
vitation and before the disciples or the crowd
could obey the command, he who is blind has
thrown off his long flowing garment lest it
should impede his course, and now he makes
for Jesus. There is silence over all the crowd
as He who is the Light of the world and this
son of darkness stand face to face. What
will be next ? is the question of every mind.
Listen, oh crowd, listen all to the majestic
voice of God—“ What wilt thou that 1
should do unto thee?” “Lord that 1 may
receive my sight,” replies the blind man.
Then come the gracious words of Jesus
Christ—“ Receive thy sight, thy faith hath
saved thee. ” And he is no longer Bartimeus
the blind, but Bartimeus the follower of


Jesus Christ. For he has left the old seat
under the sycamore tree for ever, and now
he has joined the travelling throngs. For-
ward they move through the old streets of
Jericho, and there is a silence over all the
crowd, for each has a deeper sense of the
power and the love of Him whom men call
Jesus of Nazareth.
So much for the narrative. Now we wish,
with all simplicity, but with all earnestness,
to preach the Gospel. With this end in
view, and in humble dependence on the help
of the Holy Spirit, we shall speak of
I. Man —blind, poor, and helpless.
11. A Saviour, able and willing to save
him—Jesus of Nazareth.
111. A saving time—Jesus of Nazareth
passeth by.
I. Man —blind, poor, and helpless.
There you sit as Bartimeus sat that after-
noon, and you are blind as he. “ Nay, nay,
we are not blind ; what is there we cannot
see ?” is the cry of the natural heart. “ The
world we can see, and we can discern its
beauty. We can gaze on the works of man
and admire the creations of the Almighty.
The earth and sea and sky, and faces of men,
and light and darkness are outs as they are
■yours. How say ye we are blind ?” There
is a world you cannot see. The eyes of
your understanding are darkened. You can-


not see the sin that exists within you, nor
the burden of sin that you are carrying
about with you, so as to get them removed.
You have no desire in that way. The
Saviour Himself —He who alone can help
you, you cannot see. The light of the
glorious Gospel is shining, but it is all dark-
ness to you. Light in heaven, light on
earth, light in your fellow men, but no light
in you.
“ Oh, dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of noon.”
And sinner, sinner, this is you.
But like Bartimeus you are not only blind
but you are poor. I wish to speak plainly,
and I have to tell you from my master that
no matter how much you have you are beg-
gars only. Silver and gold do not go for
much in the reckoning of God. And as in
the case of Bartimeus this poverty is the re-
sult of your blindness. It is because you do
not see Christ that you do not possess Christ.
If you saw Christ he would be yours, and all
His unsearchable riches. Poor, poor, how-
ever rich you be, and there are those whom
you call poor who for worlds would not
change places with you.
And the blind and the poor like Bartimeus
are helpless indeed, and so are you who have
not seen and who do not possess Christ.
He could beg, but he could not open bis
eyes, and so you can do your work in the


world after a fashion, but that is all. You
cannot see and you cannot make yourself see.
You are poor and you cannot make yourself
rich ; or to lay figures aside, you are a sinner
and you cannot make yourself a Christian.
Therefore you are helpless. Christ is out of
your sight and heaven is out of your reach.
I speak too plainly, you say. I am willing
to take all the blame if only I could lead you
to know yourself as you are. There, oh sin-
ner, you sit in God’s house as the beggar sat
that day when Christ and the multitude
passed on the way to Jerusalem. We are going
—many of us are going to the Holy City,
but you are sitting still—-sitting still, for you
are blind and poor and helpless. There is a
sorrow in your case which you do not feel
and which the eye of sense cannot discern.
And yet your countenance is not sad!
Would God you knew yourself as you are!
“ Why, if with such increase of knowledge,
there is such increase of sorrow ? ” do you
say ? Because, though you are helpless you
need not be hopeless. Because there is a
Saviour who can save you, for He is mighty
and He is willing, and his name is Jesus of
Nazareth.
Listen while I speak of Him, for in every
word there is hope to you.
11. A Saviour able and willing—Jesus of
Nazareth the Son of David and the Son of God.


There was only one person in the world
who could heal the poor blind man. The
wisest physicians were powerless for him.
Oh, blind one ! there is only one person in
the universe who can heal you, and the
saviours that men have sought out are
powerless. But He can. Do you ask me
for the proof of my assertion ? I give the
reply Bartimeus would have given if he had
been asked that question. ‘‘ I have heard
of this Christ healing others, and He can heal
me. He has opened the eyes of those blind
from birth, He has cured the sick. He has
raised the dead, and I know He can restore
my sight.” Oh, sinner, He can save you,
and no other can, again we assert; for there
is no statement the sinner finds harder to re-
ceive and believe than this. The best of men
are powerless to heal your sad disorder. As
powerless they to save you as you are to save
yourself. I remember an honoured minister
of the Free Church, in Edinburgh, relating
a touching incident which, more than any-
thing I can say, shows the impotence of man
and the omnipotence of Jesus Christ to save
a soul. A revival was passing over a fishing
village in the east of Fife. This clergyman
was present from Edinburgh assisting in the
work. One forenoon in visiting some of
the houses, he entered one where only the
mother was present. “ Where are the


children?’’ he asked. “I have only one
boy—Peter, but 1 cannot tell you what's the
matter with him. 1 think he’s no very well.
He’s so quiet and sad. He has not been at
school for a day or two, but he can always
go to your meetings at night.” “I would
like to see Peter.” And Peter, a young
lad of ten or twelve, with blue eyes and
fair hair, and with an anxious face, came in.
“Dear me, Peter, what’s the matter with
you ?” said the clergyman kindly, laying his
hand on his shoulder. And Peter, bursting
into tears, with his face in his hands, only
said, “Oh, sir, its heavy, heavy.” “What’s
heavy?” “My burden o’sin.” The clergy-
man adds : “ How intensely I felt the desire
to help, and yet how helpless I.” But not
many days after when that young lad had his
burden removed it was again demonstrated
that Jesus of Nazareth is able. Able to save
others and therefore able to save you—able to
save him and therefore able to save ; and able
because He is God. There are no sins He
cannot pardon. There are no hearts He can-
not melt or break. He can save to the utter-
most. Nothing is too hard for the Lord, for
He it is who is our Saviour. Our Creator is
our Redeemer ; and He who made us can re-
make us. ”
“ A lowly man He trices my sins, and bears
the heavy load,


A lowly man he takes my hand, and leads
me up the road,
And when I know this lowly man is my
Creator God,
Oh, this has solved me much dark speech
and loosed tongues that were dumb.
For all creation round me now a gospel has
become,
And what had seemed to me before a wild
confused Babel.
Is now fire-tongued Pentecost proclaiming
Christ is able.
The thunders in the crashing skies announce
it as they roll,
The lightnings on the black-storm wall write
it in vivid scroll;
And stars repeat it down the dark in mystic
jewelled light.
The Urim and the Thummim on the breast-
plate of the night.
And strong Orion shouts to me what slum-
bered in old fable,
And echos from eternal night-vaults answer
ABLE ! ABLE ! ”
And this Jesus of Nazareth is as willing to
save you as He is able. The proofs are the
same and as many for the one statement as
for the other. He is willing because he has
said so ; because he has shown his willing-
ness in saving others, and because He is God.
Oh ! blind one ! you cannot see your willing


Saviour, standing with open arms, but you can
hear His words of sorrow over you, “I would
but ye would not.” Listen to this other word
in which He anticipates all your objections—
“ Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise
cast out”—“in no wise”—not for any
reason ; not even though you are so un-
deserving such a Saviour—not even though
your faith is so poor—not even though your
sins, and your doubts, and your fears are so
many. He will not cast you out, but He will
save you. Have His earnest invitations not
always been made good ? Did you ever hear
of anyone who went to Him, but whom He
did not receive. Look around you in this
house, and you will discern some whom He
has received. He will receive you. He
will. Methinks I am showing but poorly
how willing Jesus of Nazareth is to save you.
I cannot tell you—words cannot express the
love there is in His heart for you. There is
nothing in the world to which I can liken the
intense desire of that ‘ ‘ Immortal Love. ” Oh
sinner, sinner, you wrong Him if you doubt
Him. The Mighty One, the Christ of God,
Jesus of Nazareth wishes, desires, yearns to
save you.
“ He is able, He is willing,
Doubt no more. ”
TIL A saving time—“ Jesus of Nazareth
pcuselh hy." There is a sense in which the


whole of a man’s life may be called a saving
time. From the years of reflection up to the
hour of death Jesus of Nazareth passeth by,
and a man may And salvation if he will.
While this is so it is also true that there are
special saving times when Jesus comes very
near, and when the most helpless may be
healed. What are some of these richer times
of grace.
The time of youth is a saving time. Let
the children listen, for here are words for
them. As a general statement, it is true
that it is easier to become a Christian in
childhood than in manhood or in old age.
And it has also been said by those who have
had great experience and success among
children, that more do find Christ at that
period than at any other. You know the
reason of this. Though a child be inclined
to evil, yet its burden of sin is light—light
compared with him of threescore and ten.
“ Oh, there’s nothing on earth half so holy
As the innocent heart of a child. ”
The world has not yet acquired its terrible
power over the human heart. The child is
trustful and loving and true, and thus Jesus
Christ is near. Children, children, He is in
sight—He is passing by. Oh, there is em-
phasis in the words of God—“ They that
seek me early shall find me.


When the Gospel is preached with power
is also a saving time. This is the means
which God has appointed to reach the
hearts of men. In every earnest sermon
Jesus is present, and He is passing by. Even
to-day, O ye who are poor and blind and
helpless, He is so near that He may be
found. He is as nigh you as He was that
blind beggar man. “ Passing by. ” Do you
not hear the sound of the Saviour’s foot-
steps ? Slowly, slowly by : it may be some
one in the next pew has found Him. He
has been near you in God’s house many times
before perhaps. Long ago in Scotland when
you were a lad in your father’s pew in the
old parish church, you heard his voice
but you did not follow Him. In the
distant bush years after, in the little
meeting house into which you stumbled
one dark night, you heard Him again, but
you did not obey Him. And often in this
house He has been near you since. He is
here again. He is here now. Will you de-
tain Him, or will you let Him go ? Here for
you! “Jesus of Nazareth passeth by. ”
A time of revival is a saving time. At
such a time more than any other Jesus may
be said to be passing by. Sinner, the time
when men are seeking salvation, and finding
it, is the time for you. Who shall dispute
the statement when we affirm that such a


time is the present. In Scotland and in
England the Spirit of God has been work-
ing wondrously. The means employed and
the results produced show that it is not
man’s work, but God’s. It has filled many
good Christians with wonder as well as with
praise. A few weeks ago I had a letter from
a divinity student in which he says that he
and another were returning one night from a
revival meeting which they had been ad-
dressing in the old town of Edinburgh, when
the one said to the other these impressive
words—“ I never saw anything like this in
the world before.” Jesus of Nazareth is
passing through—is passing up and down
our fatherland. Men are being saved every-
where, and for us there may be salvation
too. Here there is a spirit of inquiry abroad.
The people of God amongst us are asking
earnestly, “May we not get a share of the
blessing ?” That is a good omen. It is the
rustling of the Saviour’s garments as He is
coming nigh. Oh, sinner, listen, hear ye not
the sound of Him who alone can save you ?
Will many be saved and will you be lost ? He
passeth by. This is your opportunity. It is
a crisis in your life. There are many around
Him, but He has time for you. He is linger-
ing and looking back on you with love and
sonow as you sit unconcerned. Oh blind and
poor and helpless one ! It is you He came


to save. It is you He comes to save. Jesus
of Nazareth passeth by.
But is there some one asking earnestly how
he can improve this gracious opportunity.
Just as the poor blind man did, for you are
in the same plight as he, and the Saviour is
at hand to you as He was to him. Let the
prayer of Bartimeus be the language of your
soul, —“Thou Son of David, have mercy on
me ?” These words are the words for you.
They are words of faith—“ Thou Son of
David.” They are words acknowledging
guilt and helplessness—“ Thou Son of David
hare mercy.” They are words expressing
intense personal desire for salvation—“ Thou
Son of David have mercy upon me.” Let
this be your earnest prayer to God. Do not
be surprised if some of those who profess to
follow Christ tell you to hold your peace, as
they told Bartimeus. Like him cry the
more, and let your cry be, “mercy, mercy,
mercy Lord forme.” And Jesus Christ, who
is passing by will stand still, and will speak
with you. 0 listen to His words, for He is
the King of mercy, and they are the words
of a King—“ What wilt thou that I should
do unto thee ?—come unto Me ?” Obey His
command, and take a lesson from Bartimeus.
As he threw off his garment lest he being
blind should trip, so do you. Off with the
rags of your own righteousness. Down


with every idol. Leave behind you all your
plans of saving yourself, and go to Him thus
and you will not fall by the way. Then
make answer —“ This is what I want. lam
blind, and poor, and helpless, Lord, but Thou
art able and willing. Lord, help me ; Lord,
enrich me ; Lord, open my eyes that I may
see Thee.” And He will answer you. I tell
you from Him that He will; and the opening
of your eyes is the entering of His Holy
Spirit into your darkened understanding,
and the sight you see through that enlight-
enment is Jesus Christ of Nazareth, thy
Saviour ; and that is salvation. ‘ ‘ Let there
be light,” says Jesus Christ, and there is
light; light within you, around you, and
above you ; light to see that your heavy
burden of sin has been lifted off' by Christ ;
light to see the beauty of holiness, and the
beauty of believing, and the beauty of the
Saviour, and the beauty of the land that is
afar off. This is salvation. To be saved is
in sober truth to go
“Out of shadow into sunlight,
Out of darkness into day. ”
Endless day.
Listen to the next words of Christ, for the
caution they contain is necessary —“Thy
faith hath saved thee.” Was that true?


Was it not Christ that saved him ! Most
certainly, and it is Christ who will save you
and no other. But it was his faith that
brought healing to the blind man, and so
with you. Faith is the hand that takes hold
of Christ. Faith is the instrument of your
salvation. And in this sense it may be said,
“thy faith hath saved thee.” Now being
saved, it is yours, as it was the blind man’s,
to follow Him. Join the company of His
professed followers, and go with Him, and
go with them to the New Jerusalem —the
city of holiness. Will you? Will you, 0
blind and helpless ones ? or will you let my
words pass away again as a tale that has been
told ?
Now how shall we best conclude in order
to lead you to turn to the Saviour at hand, 0
sinning one ? Surely by the solemn con-
sideration that Jesus of Nazareth is 'passing
by, bi/, by. He is not standing still. He
will soon be away —away perhaps never
again to return to you. He has nearly,
passed, but he is still in sight lingering, lin-
gering to see if you will come and be healed.
You can overtake him, and if you say,
“Lord, have mercy,” He will stand still.
This is your time. Christ never passed
through the streets of the old town of Jericho
again, and it may be he will never more pass
by your door. Will you not apply to Him ?


Oh s ; ck at soul 1 0 blind at heart !
Why lift ye not your cry,
Since He who hath all power to save,
To-day is passing by.
Oh listen to God’s word if you will not
listen to mine—“ Seek ye the Lord while He
may be found, call ye upon Him while He
is near. ” Near, but passing ; therefore make
no delay, but now believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shalt be saved.
May God add His blessing. Amen.
JESUS OF NAZARETH PASSETH BY.
What means this eager anxious throng,
Which moves with busy haste along?
These wondrous gatherings day by day,
What mean these strange commotions pray ?
In accents hushed the throng reply—
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
Who is this Jesus ? Why should He
The city move so mightily ?
A passing stranger, has He skill
To move the multitude at will ?
In accents hushed the throng reply—
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”


Jesus ! ’tis He who once below,
Man’s pathway trod mid pain and woe,
And burdened ones where’er He came,
Brought out their sick, and deaf, and lame,
The blind rejoiced to hear the cry—
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
Again He comes ! from place to place
His holy footprints we can trace,
Ho pauseth at our threshold—nay
He enters—'condescends to stay,
Shall we not gladly raise the cry —
“Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
Ho ! all ye heavy-laden come !
Here’s pardon, comfort, rest, and home,
Ye wanderers from a Father’s face,
Return, accept His proffered grace,
Ye tempted ones there’s refuge nigh—
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
But if you still this call refuse,
And all His wondrous love abuse,
Soon will he sadly from you turn,
Your bitter prayer for pardon spurn,
“ Too late ! too late ! ” will be the cry,
“Jesus of Nazareth has passed by.”
X 2 f k*
