

JESUS CHRIST
RESURRECTION AND THE LIFE;
litlouwl giss
SERMONS
IN MEMORIAM
MRS. J. LANGDON PARSONS.
The Rev. S. MEAD, M.A., LL.B
The Rev. WILLIAM CLARE.
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY JAMES WILLIAMS, KING WILLIAM STREET.




le3Us Christ the T^EgURRECTioiM
THE I^lfE.
Jesus said unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life: he that
believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live :
And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die.
Believest thou this ?
She saith unto Him, Yea, Lord : I believe that thou art the Christ,
the Son of God, which should come into the world.—John xi., 25-27.
PERHAPS there is no chapter in the Bible so often
read in the times of bereavement as this. What a
blank there would have been in the New Testament had
this chapter never been written ! By argument and by
comparison of Scripture we might perhaps have deduced
as inferences all that is contained here; but we should be
sorry not to have as Scripture these strong, sublime, and
divine words of Jesus, “I am the Resurrection and the Life.”
From other inspired teachers we should have inferred that
Jesus sympathized with human griefs; but what Christian’s
heart but would have missed the sweet force of that shortest
and tenderest verse, “Jesus wept.”
The narrative of the death and resurrection of Lazarus
is but slightly condensed, and is remarkably full of graphic
details. There are some things, indeed, not told us, for
instance, what the disease was of which Lazarus died, nor


whether he endured much pain prior to death, nor what
were his thoughts and emotions in dying, nor what was his
new experience when at the summons of Christ lie returned
to life, nor is there a hint dropped as to what he had seen,
heard, or thought, while in the unseen world. We fancy,
at least, how much he might have disclosed concerning
the world of spirits had it been right for him to have done
so. Notwithstanding the absence of such information, we
have reason for thankfulness that the inspired narrative is
so complete.
I think it shows the gracious wisdom and tender com-
passion of our Father God, in ordaining the insertion in
the New Testament of this description of Christ’s contact
with death as it fell on one of His disciples. Do we not
all look with most earnest interest on any letters which
have been written to inform us of the decease of some
loved relative, far away from us in some distant land?
This chapter is such a letter, only that it brings upon the
scene the visible presence of the Son of God. In this
incidental way we see the marvellous completeness and
the thoroughly human character of God’s Word.
Let us first look on Christ as the Lord of
Life, standing in the Presence of Death.
At the solicitation of the sisters, he had journeyed from
a distance to be there. It was no surprise to Him to be
informed on His arrival that the illness of "Lazarus had
issued in death. Away beyond Jordan He had already
I told His disciples that their mutual friend Lazarus was
sleeping the sleep of death. He also distinctly told them
that He was going to Bethany to loose the iron grasp oj


Death on its victim, and to call back Lazarus into conscious
existence.
Could our Lord forget, on such an occasion as this, that
soon He Himself would be Death’s victim? Jerusalem,
with its Calvary, lay over the other side of the Hill of
Olives, and He who knew what was in man, knew what
was in store for Him there. Lazarus, whom He was about
to raise from the dead, would then behold Him dead; now
Jesus views the grave of Lazarus, then Lazarus would see
His grave; now Jesus raises him into life, then Lazarus
sees Him after His resurrection. To-day you and I witness
the busy forms of life moving around us, to-morrow they
are still in death; this week others look upon us as strong
and well, next week they come to see us laid in our
graves.
Standing in the presence of death, we find our Lord
using the occasion to reason about life and immortality.
Not with the bemourned, but with the mourning ones did
He reason. There were no useless regrets, no eulogies of
the dead. There was a calm utterance of truth, important
for the living to apprehend. Christ spoke of the future; of
the future, not as it concerned Lazarus alone, but as it
concerned Martha and Mary, and as it concerns us.
How much better this than to have the mind occupied
with the unimportant circumstantials connected with the
progress of disease. Some exclude all definite thought
about the future, allowing the mind to sink into a sluggish
condition of vacant hope. But our Lord most absolutely
declares that the character of that future will be determined
by the relation borne to Him by each one prior to death.
A real and living faith in Him will render our future bright
and blissful; the absence of such faith will make it dark


and woeful. It is true that no one can absolutely see into
the heart of another; but the exercise of faith in Christ is
such a simple action of the soul that we need be in no
perplexity about our own or another’s future. To raise a
question for one instant as to the present bliss and glorified
life of the one who left us last Friday week would be to me
nothing short of an absolute sacrilege. We know in whom
she believed. We know Him who has said, “Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will'give thee a Crown of Life;”
and inasmuch as His word cannot fail, she has received
that “ Crown of Life.” Such language cannot be used of
all, nor dare we use it of some here, were you to pass out
of this world as you now are. You have not surrendered up
your soul to faith in Christ. For this reason you are not
His disciples. He is not your accepted Saviour. By the
memories of the departed one, who may have sat with you
often in this building, by the thought of her present joy
and bliss, I pray you receive by faith Christ Jesus into
your heart to night.
Observe, Secondly, that Christ as the Lord of
Life here asserts and unfolds His Sovereignty
OVER BOTH DEATH AND LIFE.
In the book of Revelation it is declared that He has
“ the keys of Death and Hades.” This is to possess the
right of authority over the invisible realm. At Bethany He
showed that He possessed this right by summoning back
Lazarus from the world of spirits, saying, “Lazarus come
forth ;” and he who had lived some days among the spirits
of the departed re-occupied the forsaken body—that body
having at the moment been rejuvenated and freed from


every trace of disease and corruption; its muscles regained
their tension, the heart began again to beat, blood once
more throbbed along the veins, the eyes opened and saw as
before, and the tongue spake.
Only on two other occasions did our Lord actively
exert His power in recalling the spirits of those who had
passed through the gates of death—l refer to Jairus’s
daughter and to the widow’s son at Nain. But Jesus, in
healing diseases, was constantly showing His power over
the precursors, the sentinels, the harbingers of death. It
is remarkable, too, that at His own death many of the
graves in the cemeteries surrounding Jerusalem were
opened, and at His resurrection many saints came forth
from their graves and walked in the city. Thus, as He
entered into the realm of spirits, for reasons undisclosed
to us, He either allowed or actually sent forth some of
those spirits to retake possession of the dead body and
appear amongst men.
These several facts demonstrate how that it is nothing
but the sovereign will of our God and Saviour, Christ,
which keeps the spirits of the departed from appearing
among us. I think it all but certain that, whilst not directly
permitted to appear among us, yet they are allowed to visit
us. Were they suffered occasionally to appear in visible
form to us, this would greatly complicate the relationships
and pursuits of life, and besides would alter the distinguish-
ing feature of this dispensation, as being one of faith rather
than of sight. But when our Lord for divine reasons
spake to the departed spirits, they instantly heard and
obeyed. The concealed spirit of Lazarus knew its name
as Christ called it. Lazarus as a disembodied spirit was
near. The spirit of Jairus’s daughter was near. The


spirit of the widow’s son was near. The spirits of those
who went forth from their graves at Christ’s death and resur-
rection were near. We say “near,” but this is employing
an earthly and material idea. For aught that we can tell
distance is to the spirit world an unknown quantity.
Dwelling in the presence of God in heaven, perhaps it is
only necessary for them to will to be at our side and
immediately it becomes the fact. Ido not know why
Christ our Lord should disallow this. They are interested
in us; they love us. Though they have passed out of the
range of out vision, it by no means follows that we have
ceased to be within the range of their vision. It is not for
me to say to what limits they are restricted in commu-
nicating with us. We know at least their desire would be
to help us, to comfort us, to stimulate us—as seeing Him
who is invisible. Possibly our loved ones may sometimes
speak to us in the night visions. I shall relate no experi-
ence of my own on this point, but I will give you an extract
from a letter written last Monday, by one tenderly attached
to Mrs. Parsons. The letter says, “In dear Mrs. Parsons’s
death I have lost a very dear friend, and I feel that I
can scarcely believe the sad news. * * ** We
must all feel now that we have another link binding us
to the better world. I dreamt last night that Mrs. Parsons
came back to you all, and I was with you ; and she said
she was so very happy, and she thought that if we could
only realize how very thin and slight the veil was that
divided her from us, we should none of us grieve very
much, because she was so near to us, and so near to God,
and her love for all that she had known here was only
deepened and made purer.” She is now one of the great
cloud of witnesses holding us in full survey. She is united


with the general assembly and church of the firstborn.
She is in the presence of her Lord, who ever holds sove-
reign sway over death and life.
“I am the Resurrection and the Life.” In these words
Christ proclaims not simply a present, but a future lordship
over the issues of death and life. He is “the Resurrection,”
as being the One through whose voice on the morning of
earth’s final day the myriads of the dead will be called
into conscious bodily life. The awards of eternity will
then be made known. With the same ease that He called
Lazarus back into life, will He then call the multitude that
no man can number to corporeal life. We stand in adoring
awe before Him, as we behold Him at Bethany summoning
one spirit into bodily life—think of a thousand million
spirits bidden by Him to resume their bodies in a moment
of time!
“I am the Life,” He declares. By this He does not
merely mean that He is the Author and Continuer of exist-
ence ; but is and will ever continue to be the Fountain of
all that is worthy the name of life. Mere existence in the
future, bereft of His smile and without His love, is never
designated “life” by the pen of inspiration; that existence
only is “life” which is lived in blissful fellowship with
Him; all therefore that is bright and blessed in the future
is identified with Him. “I am the Resurrection and the
Life.”
Strangely do these words of the Lord of Life and Glory
sound in our ears, “Whosoever liveth and believeth in me
shall never die.” But Christians do die. Yes; but so
comparatively small is that event which we call “death,”
that Christ passes it over as if of little moment. And,
indeed, what is this that we name “death” compared with


that long eternity lived without the sunlight and without
the benediction of God, and which is the only true “ death ?”
That which we name “death,” looked at from Heaven’s
standpoint, from God’s side, is but the opening of the door
to let the weary one come home to the Father’s house;
it is but the dropping of those clogs and fetters which
weigh down the spirit, so that freed therefrom it may
mount up into the joy of eternal liberty.
And to our departed sister, death was just this, and no
more. She became clearly and calmly convinced that it
was her Lord’s will that she should soon have to bid fare-
well to those she loved. That love was deep, was true,
was self-sacrificing. It seemed to her at first as if the
giving up of the loved and loving was more than she coufd
bear. Assured by the one who spoke to her that Christ
gives to His trusting ones needed grace and strength when
and as it is needed, she firmly placed the feet of her trust
on this truth, and afterwards, without a moment’s doubt,
cheerfully anticipated the hour of her departure, knowing
that she should be with her Lord, which is far better.
We here see the Lord over Life and Death
in the Presence of Sorrow.
He sympathized with that sorrow. He wept with those
that wept. He did not rebuke their grief, but sanctified it.
He illuminated their sorrow with His glory. The sisters,
at their brother’s sepulchre, learnt more of the sublime
truth of their Master’s teaching than they had known
before. There they saw a brightness in His glory hitherto
unperceived. The tenderness of His sympathetic love had
to them a new and softer lustre.


In the death chamber of the disciples of Christ it is
often given us in a peculiar manner and degree to behold
the glory of God. Within the last twenty-four hours of
her earthly life, our loved friend whose loss we to-night
feel so deeply could say with a vividness and fullness un-
realized before, “ I have seen the King in His beauty.”
With the inner eye- of the soul, purified by the Spirit
of God, she saw the Christ of God—your Christ and mine.
“ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.”
This was her blessedness many hours before she went to
God. We have heard of those who have asked prior to
their departure, “ Do you not see the angels in the room
who have come to convey me up to Heaven?” But
to Mrs. Parsons it was emphatically given to see her
Lord. No wonder, therefore, that it was deemed a blessed
privilege to be where she was. No wonder that the last
day of her earthly life was one of rapture. No wonder
that the suppressed sorrow of loving ones, as they gazed
and listened, became transmuted for the time being into
joy. They could not but find joy in her joy; and now look
back with joy at her joy, and look up with joy in the
contemplation of her present bliss.
That you may carry away with you a connected impres-
sion of her life and death, let me pass in review the chief
incidents of her brief and beautiful life.
Mrs. Parsons was born in England, Nov. 29th, 1845.
She was the only daughter of the late James Johnson, Esq.,
of Manchester, and granddaughter of George Fife Angas,
Esq., of Lindsay Park. She arrived in this colony, May
1848 ; and was united to Mr. Parsons by marriage,
January 23rd, 1866. They immediately went to Dunedin,
where her husband had for two years laboured and


prospered in the establishment of a Baptist Church.
Within six months she was compelled by ill health to
return to this colony. Again she went back to Dunedin,
and again was compelled to return hither. Once more
she tried the colder climate/ of New Zealand, but finally
left Dunedin on Christmas Day, 1867. After making
a tour of New Zealand, she with her husband came to
Angaston, spending a year there, while Mr. and Mrs. Han-
nay were absent in England. Mr. and Mrs. Parsons
removed to North Adelaide that Mr. Parsons might take
the pastorate of the Baptist Church on the retirement of the
Rev. G. Stonehouse, June 1869. In November 1872, they
sailed for England, and returned at the end of November
1874. Her health on the whole since has been fairly good;
but last year both of the children and herself were attacked
with scarlet fever. About a month ago, their elder child
was taken ill with what ultimately proved to be croup.
The devoted nursing of the fond mother doubtless
weakened and impaired her own health. She with her
two children went to Angaston on the 26th February;
she remained there a fortnight, and was joined by her
husband. On Sunday, the 12th inst., a fortnight ago,
she complained of a slight soreness of throat, but was
at church in the morning and stayed up until the usual
hour. On the following morning the needful pre-
parations were made for coming to town, and though the
day was hot she did not complain of any special fatigue.
A friend called in the afternoon and found her very poorly;
and to her husband, on coming home from a deacon’s
meeting held to make arrangements as to Mr. Carter’s
arrival, she complained of great prostration. She was able
to take some supper, and after taking medicine, fell asleep.


On Tuesday morning Dr. Campbell was called in, and from
the first was impressed with the seriousness of the symp-
toms ; the disease was diphtheria. The Tuesday night
passed without any great accession of the disease; but
next morning her husband desired Dr. Campbell, if
he felt at all doubtful about her case, to call in Dr.
Way, who saw her during the day. On Thursday
she was manifestly worse. The children were sent
away; her mother was telegraphed for; but then no
thought of fatal consequences had been entertained.
During Thursday night she was very ill, and on Friday
morning alarming symptoms became manifest. She
herself evidently began to realize that she was near the
immediate presence of God. About ten o’clock she said
to her husband, “ I think I am going to die, and, oh! I
wish I felt more fit,” He replied that “ all the fitness we
require, Christ came down from heaven to give us —that
of ourselves we could not make ourselves fit.” Most
sweetly she answered, with a bright smile, “ Ah, that is
very, very true ! it is no use trying to make ourselves fit, is
it?” From that moment all anxiety disappeared, and she
was ready to depart. A little while after, by her own re-
quest, she was lifted out of bed, and sat on a chair, when
she wished her husband to read from the Bible and pray.
Portions of the eighth chapter of Romans were read, and
prayer offered. She was supremely peaceful—the shadows
of this world had all faded out, and the brightness of the
world that is brighter than this streamed into her soul.
Drs. Campbell and Way called again and again, but all was
in vain. Symptoms of greater and greater gravity became
manifest. The dark lividity of color and the sadly difficult
breathing which betoken the end were seen, and her


husband was called out of the room to be told by Dr.
Campbell that there was no hope. Friends at a distance
were then telegraphed for. Already she realized that the end
of this life and the beginning of the better was at hand.
Her face became bright and brighter still. To her
mother she said, “ Oh, if I get over this illness, my
one desire will be to do all the good I can !” then,
turning to her husband, she added, “ especially to our
children,” or “to children,” we cannot tell which —for
she loved all children and longed for their welfare. Her
own were sent for, and though she was dotingly fond
of them she parted from them most calmly, commending
them to the love of God and the care of Jesus. Then
she sent messages to nearly all her relations by name,
the message in each case being “Give my dear love
and tell them ‘to love Jesus,’” or “ to live for Jesus.”
She said good-bye to every member of the household with
great affection, and urged them to love Jesus. Once she
said, “ I have done so little, I wish I had done more for
Jesus ! but I am not afraid to die. lam so happy.” Then
she turned to us and said, “Jesus has revealed Himself to
me so sweetly; oh, no one can tell the loveliness of
Jesus!” Very soon after she said, “I should like
to live for the sake of the dear children, and for
you all! but Jesus wants me, and I must go. He
will take care of the dear children, and my dear
husband, and you all. And it is ‘so beautiful to die ’ and
go to Jesus.” Again and again with unutterable fondness
she spoke to her husband, telling him her wishes and her
wishes for him. To her mother she said, “ Oh! it is ‘so
beautiful to die.’ I used to be afraid to die ; but when you
come to die, you will think it is ‘ so beautiful to die.’ ”


Looking back in retrospect on her past life, she said, “ It
has been such a bright life, but it is “so beautiful to die.”.
Then looking round on us who were present, and men-
tioning the names of several of her nearest relatives, she
said, “ Yes, I am going to Jesus, and we shall all meet there.
There will not one be wanting—not one.” She sent a
special message to her Sunday-school scholars at Angaston ;
and after mentioning the names of many of the members
of the North Adelaide Church, and sending her love to
them, she said, “ I cannot recollect all the names, but give
my love to all the people.” She continued speaking
earnestly, lovingly, intensely, until gradually her voice
became fainter and fainter, and then at last, in utter
calmness, her spirit passed away at twenty minutes past
five o’clock, Friday afternoon, 17th March, 1876.
Hers was a quiet life, but you here know that there was
power in that life. The position she was called to fill in
this Church was both delicate and difficult, one from which
a nature such as hers would naturally shrink. But she has
rendered more true service to the Church than you will
ever know—a service which only the one dearest to her,
and her Saviour can adequately comprehend. It was not
only a quiet life, but it was beautiful. She herself spoke
of it as a bright life ; “ Mine has been such a bright life,”
she said ; while she at the last felt it was beautiful to die.
I feel that her life was beautiful to behold. She was not
given to religious talkativeness, but she could and did
speak on fit occasions with calm, reverent, and joyous
confidence of her faith in Christ. She had a word of
genial salutation for all, and it was scarcely possible to
come into her presence without feeling the warmth of her
sympathetic and gentle love.


We are wont to speak of death as “the King of
Terrors,” and to the non-believer it may well be so.
Though Mrs. Parsons was naturally timid, yet the fear of
death was wholly taken away from her. He who is the
Resurrection and the Life did this for her, even as He
promises to do for all who trust Him. Her mental
faculties, her memory, were in fullest and clearest exercise
up to the very last; hence, with her spiritual powers
intensified and purified, she was enabled to catch the
radiance of the dawning glory. Hers was a glorious
departure—a true rapture —calm, intelligent, and beatific.
Her fragile form was borne to the grave amid flowers.
Wreaths which loving hands had prepared for the occasion
were laid on the coifin'. The coffin itself was laid upon
a bed of autumn blossoms, and then loving hands dropped
flowers in such profusion that it was entirely covered.
There was an entire absence of the habiliments of mourning
—the paraphernalia of funereal customs were dispensed
with—this being in harmony with her often expressed wish.
She was but thirty years of age. Only those who have
experienced the like can at all comprehend the loss sus-
tained. To our finite vision how necessary her presence
here seemed to be. But He, without whose permission
not a sparrow falls to the ground, deemed it best to call
her away to live in the purer bliss of heaven. You who
have your loved ones spared to you, be it yours to love
them, care for them, watch over them, anticipate their
wants and wishes while you may.
.What a different life would Mrs. Parsons’s have been,
had she not in early days chosen Christ as her Saviour !
PTojv has He blessed her since ! What joy and peace He
has imparted to her life! What a victory He gave to her


in death! She being dead, yet speaketh; and what does
she say ? What but this—Choose you to-night her Saviour
for your Saviour, her Jesus for your Jesus, Hers was a
clear, child-like, and full-hearted trust in the personal
Saviour Jesus. By her bright life, by her happy death, by
her present bliss, you who have not as yet confided your
souls to Jesus, now take Him as your all in all.




The Beloved His
LU-lEg.
“My Beloved is gone down into His garden to gather lilies.”—Song
of Solomon vi., 6.
THE members of this congregation who have been
with us on the last two Sunday evenings will have
noticed, from the nature of the sermons then delivered,
how deeply we have been impressed by the sad event of
which we desire to speak more particularly to-night, the
death of one long known and long loved by most of us,
Mrs. J. L. Parsons. A fortnight ago we spoke to you
from the words, “Be ye therefore ready also : for the Son
of Man cometh at an hour when ye think not;” and
although we then made no pointed allusion to the theme
which was uppermost in the minds of us all, we dwelt
upon the uncertainty of human life and the necessity of
preparation for a more durable existence. Last Sabbath
evening our text was, “For me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain;” and, still refraining from any personal
allusion, we tried to show the ’necessary connection
between a Christ-like life, a triumphant death, and a
blissful immortality. During the past week considerations
have been presented to me, by which I have been induced


to bring more prominently before you the story of her life
whose loss we all lament. Disdaining before God the
flattery of the dead as much as we disdain the flattery of
the living, we have no intention of making of this sermon
what we believe the departed would herself abhor —an
unqualified panegyric, yet we thank God that in speaking
of her there is much good to tell; and we thank God that
it is possible for one Christian to speak good of another
without laying himself open to the charge of adulation,
for when we extol the gifts and graces of any brother or
sister in Christ we do not thereby minister to human
pride, but glorify that divine goodness which makes them
what they are.
“ My Beloved is gone down into the garden to gather
lilies.” Such is the happy way in which those nearest to
her are able to think of her removal. No rude or unsym-
pathetic hand has taken her away, but the Beloved has
gathered her to Himself. Why she was not kept a little
longer in this world of ours, where the thistles are so
plentiful and the lilies are so few? is the first sad question
of the bereaved. We cannot tell. Perhaps there was
work waiting for her in another world which needed to be
done. Perhaps He saw she needed a more congenial
clime. Perhaps—but wherefore multiply our suppositions ?
All that we know is that He has taken her, and that He
doeth all things well. Better than all our surmisings,
which may be wicked, and which at best are vain, will be
the calm determination to acquiesce in His will, the sober
resolution to learn the lesson He would teach, and “ find
in loss a gain to match.”
The story of her outer life is soon told. She was
born in 1845. In early childhood, bereft of the protecting


care of an earthly father, she became heir to the glorious
promises which God has given to the fatherless. At the
age of fourteen her religious life was ripe enough for her
to make profession by baptism of her love to the Saviour.
Then followed the attempt to show that love in acts of
service, and she entered upon the field nearest to her
hand —the Sabbath-school. Here she laboured long and
patiently, and there are those living who still think
affectionately of her as “Teacher.” In addition to this,
she was able by her skill in instrumental music to assist
in the psalmody of this Church. Thus in humble service
and quiet happiness the years of maidenhood were passed,
till, in 1866, she became a minister’s wife, and with high
hopes, both of happiness and usefulness, accompanied her
husband to New Zealand. The colder climate of Dunedin,
however, soon forced her back to Australia, and, after one
or two voyages to and fro, it was found necessary to bid a
final farewell to the sister colony. The remainder ot the
story is still fresh in your memories. The year which
Mr. and Mrs, Parsons spent in Angaston the members of
this Church will not readily forget, and of their subsequent
residence and labour in North Adelaide it is needless for
me to speak.
A quiet life, but full of a quiet heroism. In its out-
ward details quite an ordinary history; but the power of
such a life for good, which of us can tell ? Precluded by
her delicate health from taking any active part in those
benevolent works with which she so deeply sympathized,
her own home was the centre from which her light shone
forth. She found romance enough in the discharge of
her home duties, and joy enough in a Saviour’s love.
Thus by reason of household charities and domestic piety,


her life became, to use the exquisite phrase of Coleridge,
“ Beautiful exceedingly.”
We would pause for a moment before we look upon the
closing scenes of her earthly existence. When we speak
of her life, we are treading, as it were, the outer courts of
the temple, where though indeed all had been dedicated to
God, yet it may be that sometimes an unconsecrated thing
had come ; but when we speak of her death, we have
penetrated into that temple’s inner shrine—we stand in the
very holy of holies, where the presence of the Lord filleth
the place, and the glory of the Shekinah shines forth. It
was given to her to bear in death a brighter testimony even
than in life to the saving efficacy of the Redeemer’s blood
and to the sanctifying power of His indwelling Spirit.
The thought of separation from all that she held dear on
earth, which to so sensitive a nature could not have been
devoid of pain, were to her as the filmy clouds which
gather round the westering sun, and which, so far from
diminishing, only enhance the splendour of his departure.
If there were pain in the thought of her husband’s coming
loneliness, even that thought could be pain no more when
she remembered that he could not be alone since God was
with him. If it were a sorrow to leave her dear children,
that sorrow was so illumined by her faith as to forget its
nature, and be no longer sorrowful when she reflected that,
though taken from her bosom, they were left in the lap of
God. Thus she felt that in her death all would be well for
others, and she knew that all was well for herself. At first,
indeed, the thought of death seemed to bring a shadow,
and she said, “ I wish I felt more fitbut there was one
at hand to remind her “that all the fitness we require
Christ came down from heaven to give; that, of ourselves,


we could not make ourselves fit.” It was enough, “ Ah!
that is very, very true. It is no use trying to make ourselves
fit, is it ?” And so, resting in the fitness of Christ and full
of the peace which passeth understanding, she entered
upon the last hours of life here. These hours were
supremely happy, as you have already learned.
Then her spirit passed away, and it was known in the
house that the “ Beloved had been in His garden gathering
lilies.” Such is the story —one that speaks for itself and
needs little comment. “ Her face grew brighter and
brighter;” as though, like the dying Stephen, she had seen
the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing at the
right hand of God.
“ And looking upward, full of grace
She prayed, and from a happy place
God’s glory smote her on the face,”
so that to those around her it seemed as it were the face of
an angel. The story which we have read is, however,
necessarily imperfect, and there is one omission which it is
my place to supply. She sent messages to nearly all her
relations by name ; but neither her love nor her messages
were limited to her relationships, and amongst the many
friends of whom she thought in her dying hours were the
friends in Angaston. Them she could not mention by
name, for they were many and the time was short; but to
her Angaston friends she sends a comprehensive message,
and all of us who have known her, however slightly, may
regard it as ours. To each of us then who have known
her, let it be understood that she sends (I give as near as
possible her own words) her dying love, and she wishes
you to love Jesus and to be sure that nothing in this world
is worth living for apart from Him, It is a simple message,


but is it not a moving one ? Oh! you who long have
listened to the voice of the living, urging you to love the
Great Lover, what say you now to this voice from the
departed ? “ Her dying love;” not that her love was dying,
but that she was, for love is a thing that death can never
kill; and now, in “ her second state sublime,” her love to
you is as strong as ever, and were it possible that she could
leave for awhile the glory into which she has entered and
appear with us once more, I doubt not but that she would
plead with you still her Saviour’s cause. Yet, if ye believe
not Moses and the Prophets, neither would ye believe
though one rose from the dead. If her dying expectation
avails nothing, it would avail no more though the miracle
of Lazarus were repeated, and she returned to speak to you
with the old voice and with the old love look in her eye.
I would fain say something to you which should add
power to her message; but I fear lest by adding to it I
should destroy its simplicity, and by expanding it I should
take away its power. What, indeed, is there more that I
can say? “Love Jesus” —that is the beginning and the
end of human wisdom —the Alpha and the Omega of
human joy. “ Love Jesus.” The mystery is how you can
know so much of Him, yet love Him not. “ Love Jesus.”
How strange it is that a man, with his high ideas of
the noble and heroic in human life, who will go into
rhapsodies over the grand deeds and grander sufferings of
mere earthly heroes, can contemplate unmoved the calm
nobility and majestic heroism of the love of God. “ Love
Jesus.” How strange it is that a woman, with her sympa-
thetic nature and yearning heart, whose eyes grow moist
over tales of human sorrow, can listen to the story of the
matchless sorrows of the man Christ Jesus and not lay her


arms about Him in unutterable love. “Love Jesus.” How
strange it is that a sinner, death-doomed and death-
deserving, can hear the words which mercy utters from the
Cross, and whilst he knows that to love Him is to live
for ever, whilst he hears the voice saying, “ Come unto Me
and I will give you rest,” can turn his back on so much
loving-kindness and say, “I will not have this man to
reign over me.” “Love Jesus” because He loves you so
much, and love Him because “there is nothing in this
world worth living for apart from Him.” Now, I ask you,
is not that true wisdom ? Is there any thing worth living
for apart from Christ? “Yes,” perhaps one will say; or,
if not say, will think, “God has made me an animal
capable of pleasure, and pleasure is worth living for.”
Oh, man! has God made you an animal capable of
pleasure, so he has the swine that wallows in the mire.
Has he not made you a spirit capable of immortality?
Are the passing pleasures of sense better than the eternity
of heavenly joy? “Yes,” another will say, “I have a
happy home, and it is worth living for.” Oh, man! so
have the birds in spring-time their happy homes, but by
and by—
“ When the summer fields are mown,
When the birds are fledged and flown,”
all that is left to them is an empty nest. Far be it from
me to say that a human home is not worth living for. I
know that it is the most heavenly place out of Paradise,
But the question is— Apart from Christ ?—apart from
Him ? Oh, think of it, ungodly man ! You are learning
here to love wife and children that you may meet them
hereafter in the sad kingdom of the damned. Think of it,
oh, Christian mother! learning to love your children here


that hereafter you may spend eternity with them in that
sad realm where hope and joy can never come. Is home
worth living for ? Yea, surely, if Christ be there; but
apart from Him, oh, my brother! “Were it not better not
to be ?”
Tell me what there is worth living for apart from
Christ. Through long years the world has beenjseeking,
but has found it not. One there was of old time who
sought it ‘in pleasure; sensual, emotional, intellectual.
Endowed with every gift for which humanity could aspire,
he employed the resources of the world to minister to his
delight, yet in the end he had to confess that all was
vanity and vexation of spirit. The wisdom of the world
has not advanced in this respect since Solomon’s time, nor
has any “ greater than Solomon ” appeared to preach to it
a gospel which should provide an object worth living for
apart from a Saviour’s love.
“Love Jesus!” Love Him for His own dear sake.
Love Him for His .-wondrous heroism; for His untold
sorrows; for His boundless love. Love Him, because
“ there is nothing in this world worth living for apart from
Him.” The pleasures of earth, innocent or guilty, will
soon cease to please, and another world will open upon us
in which the only joy will be “ the joy of our Lord.”
These, then, are Mrs. Parsons’s last words to us—“ Love
Jesus.” But if we may learn much from her words, we
may learn yet more from her example. There is much in
her life and in her death to encourage the meanest saint and
to withhold the saddest sinner from despair. Let it be
remembered that she was originally such an one as our-
selves, and by nature a child of wrath, even as others.
The saintliness of her life is not to be attributed to any


inborn goodness or native merit, nor to the absence of
that natural bias towards evil, which is the sad heritage of
humanity; but only to the grace of God, which she
sought and which she found. In the course of my
reading during the past week I have met with a letter
written by Robert Hall to one of his friends upon the
death of her sister —a Mrs. Parsons. The remarkable
appropriateness of his words, and the singular coinci-
dence of names, prompts me to quote from it. “In the
loss of her,” he says, “how many losses are united.
She has left a husband to lament the most lovely of
wives; you the most endeared of sisters ; the Church of
Christ one of its brighest ornaments; and the world one
of its fairest examples. * * * * I hope you will by
degrees inure your imagination to dwell less on your loss
and more on her happiness. What a glorious display of
the power of Christianity ! What a triumphant departure !
Oh, that I may die the death of Mrs. Parsons, and that my
last end may be like hers ! Her life was an ornament to
Christianity—a pattern to her sex. Immortality dawned on
her enraptured mind even before it quitted its earthly
abode, and her pure and elevated soul made an easy transit
to the society of the blessed. Her career was short, but
illustrious, and she crowded into her little sphere the
virtues of a long life. Short as her continuance was upon
earth, she was permitted to exemplify the duties of every
character, and to imprint in indelible traces on the
memories of all who were honoured with her acquaintance,
the perfections of a friend, a sister, a mother, and a wife.
It is true that she has slept the sleep of death, but she
sleeps in Jesus ; she has gone before you into the holy of
holies ; she will meet you at the great rendezvous of being


—the assembly of the just. * * * I must say, I never
heard, on the whole, of so triumphant a death. It seemed
as if she had been permitted to step into heaven before her
final departure, that she might thence address herself to
her friends with more serenity, dignity, and effect.”
I have made this quotation, not so much from its peculiar
appropriateness to her of whom we speak, as for the
purpose of showing that the example which we bring
before you this evening is not a solitary one. We thank
God that her life is but one star in a glorious galaxy of
saints, in numbers beyond number, numberless. Perhaps
every man who has the happiness to be a member of a
Christian household can point to some parallel case in the
annals of his family. It need not be a matter for surprise
that the Mrs. Parsons of whom we have been speaking
and the Mrs. Parsons whose friends were weeping eighty
years ago, should have resembled each other in the saint-
liness of their lives ; for even we by the sanctifying grace
of God may be like them in that. Neither need it be a
cause for astonishment that in each case so saintly a life
should have been crowned with so triumphant a close;
for even we, if we be trusting in Christ, may find that He
“causeth us alway to triumph.” Do we indeed, brethren,
understand that there is no reason why we should not
equal the brightest examples of Christian holiness ? The
grace which sanctified St. Paul or St. John is promised to
us, and he who will put it to the test shall find that that
grace is sufficient. When we scrutinize our own characters,
and in that sad but salutary exercise learn duly to estimate
the deep depravity of the human heart, we may well be
surprised that so many examples of so exalted a piety are
presented to the world. But when we turn from ourselves


to contemplate the sufficiency of the divine grace, and to
meditate upon the fulness of the divine promises, then we
are no longer surprised that such examples are so frequent,
but can scarce repress our astonishment that they should
be so rare.
The only insuperable impediment to our advancement
in holiness is when we do not desire it. When once that
is taken out of the way, every other obstacle will only serve
to strengthen our faith; and even if we are sometimes to
fall, it will only be that, “with new acquist of true
experience from the sad event,” we may rise to renew the
strife, and press onward to victory.
There are, alas! examples of what we charitably call
Christian life, which seem to give the lie to the statement
of the sufficiency of His grace, by which the honour of the
Saviour stands; but be it known that the sins of Christian
people are not due to the faithlessness of Christ, but to
the faithlessness of those who say they trust in Him.
This it is, then, which I would urge upon you
to-night—to fulfil the dying injunction, and to follow the
fair example of Mrs. J. L. Parsons. The injunction and
the example are after all identical, for that life of blameless
piety was rooted in her love to Christ. It seems but the
other day that she was worshipping with us in this chapel;
now she is taken from us, and we look up wistfully to the
heavens whither she has gone ; and whilst we wait with
watchful eye and listening ear if, perchance, some sound
may reach us from the garden gate, hark! her voice
falls like a falling star, the voice of the dead upon the ear
of the living—“ Love Jesus;” and again, “Love Jesus;”
and that is all.






