

|fSMS C'lrrist, tjie #n(g JfoimSja&m.
A SERMON,
PREACHED AT CASTLEMAINE, ON NOVEMBER 26th, 1862,
In connection with the Half-Yearly Meeting of the
Congregational Union of Victoria.
ALEXANDER GOSMAN,
MINISTER OF THE DAWSON STREET CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
BALLAARAT.
Published by request. Profits devoted to Congregational College.
BALLAARAT;
*
S. L. BIRTCHNELL, STURT STREET.
Melbourne : W. B. Stephens, Collins Street.
• 1862,
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


The following Sermon is published at the request of the Council
)f the Congregational Union of Victoria. It is but right to state
hat it does not appear exactly as it was delivered; but almost
ivery sentence in the original discourse is incorporated into the
present. Whether it is worth being published is not for me to say,
; have my own doubts as to whether it will be pecuniarily pro-
itable. It may add, therefore, something to its money value, and
n promote its circulation beyond what it deserves, when it is
rwn that the profits, if any, will he devoted to the Congregational


f 40.50 J / r
O- <c‘ 71
JESUS CHRIST, THE ONLY FOUNDATION.
“ For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.’’ 1 Cor. hi. 11.
We are assembled here this evening in connexion
with the half-yearly meetings of the Congrega-
tional Union of Victoria. We have most appro-
priately commenced our proceedings by invoking
the blessing of the Divine Spirit, that all our delibera-
tions and conclusions may be in harmony with the
mind of Christ; and for the honour and glory of
his great name. By no mere law of dead formality
we trust, have we, as brethren, surrounded the
throne of grace ; we have poured out our hearts in
prayer in obedjence to our spiritual instincts, and
given expression to our deepest convictions and
wants, in the consciousness of being heard and
answered. We know that we need in the midst
of us, “ the Master of assemblies ” ; we know that
he has promised to come at our call, to cheer us
with his presence, and direct us by his wisdom;
and we know that we can do no better nor truer
thing, than look devoutly up, and say, “ according
to thine own promise, even so come Lord J esus.”
A 2


And now, having as it were, presented our-
selves to God, we are next expected to listen for
a short time to the elucidation of some portion
of that word he has given us for our instruction
and guidance. The duty of preaching to you
has devolved upon me; and 4 here let me say in all
sincerity, and without the least atfectation, that
I wish the duty had devolved upon some one else.
It seems to me to be highly desirable, if not
necessary, on such an occasion as the present, to
give distinct utterance to some fundamental doctrine
of our common Christianity. At no time should
the trumpet of the gospel ministry give an uncertain
sound; much less when the leaders of the Lord’s
Hosts are assembled in solemn convocation. It
would therefore have been better had some one been
chosen, well qualified to instruct you. Who would
have been able to give sufficient prominence to some
of those doctrines most surely believed amongst us,
and who, both from his experience and position,
would have been able to speak to,you with some-
thing like paternal authority and affection. How-
ever as the position I now occupy is not assumed ;
as it was in a manner thrust upon me, there was
really no alternative but to accept it, with all its
responsibilities and duties. The task assigned me
then, I must now endeavour to fulfil, relying with
confidence upon your intelligent sympathy, and
humbly depending upon Divine assistance.
The passage of scripture I have read affirms Jesus


Christ to be the only foundation. In the following-
discourse I shall endeavour, in the first place, to
explain in what sense Jesus Christ is the only
foundation; in the second place, I shall point out
some of those qualities which belong to Jesus Christ
as the only foundation ; and lastly, I shall direct
your attention to those practical inferences which
arise directly out of the doctrine of Jesus Christ as
the only foundation.
I shall endeavour to explain in what sense
Jesus Christ is the only foundation.
It is hardly necessary to premise that by Jesus
Christ we mean the historical personage of that name.
The documents which narrate the events of his life,
and delineate the features of his character, we receive
as genuine and credible on evidence which we believe
to be perfectly satisfactory. With us, therefore,
Jesus Christ is no mere mythic character, no mere
personification of some poetical idea of human per-
fection ; the embodiment of his age, or the highest
manifestation of humanity, whatever these may
mean; but one who really lived, and who proved
himself to be what he professed to be ; the Son of
God, and the Saviour of the world. It is of the
Christ of history, who was also the Christ of God, it
is said that He is the only foundation.
Now the foundation of a building is that on which
the whole superstructure rests. When Jesus Christ


is said to be the only foundation, the meaning
evidently is that He and He alone is the ultimate
basis of our faith ; and sole ground of our acceptance
with God. And what is affirmed of Christ gene-
rally, is more particularly affirmed of his work in his
office of Mediator. It is not only Christ; but Christ
crucified that is the foundation of our hopes towards
God. Jesus suffered and died, not as other men
suffer and die. In laying down his life, he did not
merely pay the debt of nature; nor did he die simply
as a martyr, bequeathing an example of heroism to
posterity ; but he suffered and died as a victim. His
death was vicarious ; on Him as our substitute were
laid all our sins, and on him as our Saviour rest all
our hopes for pardon and eternal life. His blood
alone cleanseth from all sin. “ Neither is there sal-
vation in any other, for there is none other name
under heaven given among men whereby we must
be saved.”
Let us clearly understand, then, that Jesus Christ
is the sole basis of our faith, the only ground of our
acceptance with God. By his sacrifice, as moral and
responsible creatures, we are placed in a new posi-
tion in relation to the government of God; a position
of contingent salvation or condemnation, as we avail,
or neglect to avail ourselves of the only foundation
Jesus Christ. On him we must either build or
perish.
That Jesus Christ is the only foundation, will ap-
pear more fully from the following considerations:


I. That we have in ourselves, in consequence of
our sin, no basis of faith, or ground of acceptance
with God.
This assertion needs neither illustration nor proof.
Had we never sinned; had our minds never been be-
clouded ; had our hearts never been alienated ; had
our consciences never been corrupted; had the deep-
drawn and clearly-defined lines of God’s image in
our souls never been defaced and nearly obliterated
by our opposition to God, doubtless we should have
rested on our natural innocency and purity for accept-
ance with the Father of Spirits. But this founda-
tion has gone, and in its place is the black suspicion
that God has forsaken us, and left us to perish. Our
first parents abandoned the foundation of their own
natural innocency, when they retired from the pre-
sence of God, and hid themselves among the trees of
the garden; and we, their children, feel that we dare
not stand before him whom we have offended, or at-
tempt to justify ourselves for our rebellion and sin.
Death and hell long ago conspired against the foun-
dation of natural goodness, and succeeded in com-
pletely overthrowing it; and now there is nothing
for those who build upon its ruins, but a fall that
will carry them into the dark depths of ruin.
That Jesus Christ is the only foundation is proved
2ndly. By the fact, that every mere human at-
tempt to discover a basis of confidence towards God,
.has failed.
Idolatry in none of its forms can be accepted as a


solution of the question : “ How shall a man be just
with God ?” The ultimate development of idolatry
is the prostitution of the human soul to the lowest
powers of nature. No system of philosophy can
satisfy either the demands of the intellect, or the
cravings of the soul. The mystery of existence is
not to be solved, and the proudest discovery of the
science of mind, is a “ learned ignorance.” What
has superstition contributed to the pacification of the
conscience, or to the increase of the true knowledge
of God ? Her mystic ceremonialism has only aug-
mented the sum of human misery, and imposed fresh
burdens on the already over-loaded soul. To the
question: “ Wherewithal shall I come before the
Lord ?” there is no answer; either from the altars
of heathenism, the oracles of philosopy, or
from the shrines of superstition. There is nothing
around us and over us but darkness, thick darkness
and thunderous clouds, whose flashing brows
are to us as so many images of an offended God;
and the burden of whose mutterings seems to be,
there is no peace to the wicked. The whole history
of humanity sufficiently testifies that no mere device '
of man has ever succeeded in satisfying the con-
science, or securing the favour of heaven; and there-
fore we conclude, that if heaven itself has not laid a
foundation for us, there is no hope for sinners either
in time or eternity. And this leads us to observe.
3rdly. That the work of Jesus Christ is that
divine scheme for the salvation of men; that as a


scheme it is essentially one, and fully satisfies all the
demands of reason and law.
There is but one mediator between God and man
—the man Christ Jesus, who, although he knew no
sin, yet became sin for us, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. The covenant of
grace ratified in him is the same by whatever word
we distinguish one historical development from
another. God’s design to save the race, was first of
all made known to Adam; it was repeated both to
Noah and Abraham, and confirmed to the latter by
an oath. It was shadowed forth in the ceremonialism
of Mosaism, and typified in the kingdom of Israel.
It was curiously inwrought on the web of history, by
those whose prophetic eyes had seen the heavenlyde-
sign traced by the very finger of God. It spoke out in
living words and actions in the life of Him who came
to do His Father’s will; and now that He has purged
our sins, and sat down at the right hand of God, the
same purpose is pursued, the same design will be fol-
lowed, until the redemption of the race is completed,
and the Father glorified in the salvation of men.
The purpose to save sinners through the sacrifice of *
Christ is never lost sight of, never deviated from. It is,
indeed, the one idea which gives unity, intelligence,
and benevolence to the divine j government. The
different economies are but different sides or form,
of the same truth; that “ God so loved the world
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoso-
ever believeth in Hint should not perish, but have


everlasting life.” And when we come to examine
the scheme itself, we are more convinced than ever,
that other foundation can no man lay, than that is
laid—which is Jesus Christ. Conflicting interests have
been reconciled ; justice has been satisfied; love has
reached her object; the law has been honoured and
magnified; and the profound problem has been
solved, how God can be just and at the same time
the justifier of the ungodly. The conscience is un-
burdened, sin is condemned and atoned for, and the
sinner, being justified by faith has peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore we
conclude, on the great law of the divine economy of
causes, which is seen to pervade the whole
that as the plan of salvation is one, and fully adapted
to the purpose for which it was originally intended,
there is but one foundation on which to build, one
offering, one atonement, one intercessor, one Re-
deemer. If, therefore, we reject Him, there re-
maineth no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain
fearful looking-for of judgment, and fiery indigna-
tion, which shall devour the adversaries.
To reject the doctrine of atonement on the ground
that it represents God as too mercenary on the one
hand, or too vindictive on the other, is grossly to
misapprehend the whole teaching of Scripture, and
the first principles of moral government. For neither
from the word of God, nor from the writings of
theologians, is there any reason for holding up the
doctrine of atonement to contempt, as a mere commer-


cial transaction ; far Jess reason is there in the ob-
jection that the blood of Jesus as generally conceived
of, is too suggestive of the shambles of heathenism.
To say that the doctrine of atonement is absurd be-
cause inconceivable, is a mode of reasoning we had
supposed almost universally abandoned; for theories
of atonement, whether true or false, can never alter
the fact, that the Scriptures declare that God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself; and if in
Christ, and Christ alone, then other foundation can
no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Having explained in what sense Jesus Christ is
the only foundation, I shall now point out some of
those qualities which belong to Him as the only
foundation.
And here I remark :
Ist. That Jesus Christ is a firm foundation.
Before anything can stand secure, that on which
it rests must be solid and immoveable. The best
foundation is the solid rock ; and hence to bring out
this idea of firmness and perfect security in Christ,
He is frequently represented in scripture as a rock.
The pillars of the earth are the everlasting rocks
which support the weight of both sea and land. And
if the foundation of the earth be firm, —how much
more is Christ, who upholdeth all things by the word
of his power! But Jesus Christ bears up the sky as
well as the earth. He is the foundation of the whole


visible universe. All things were made by Him,
and without Him was not anything made that was
made. For of Him and through Him and to Him
are all things. And the teachings of scripture are
in perfect harmony with the conclusions of science,
for from facts we deduce Lavs, and from laws we
infer government, and from government we come to
the conclusion that there must of necessity be a
governor: so that our last analysis and generaliza-
tion give us a person as the substratum of all things.
That person is Christ.
He who is the foundation of the heavens and the
earth is the only foundation of our confidence towards
God. His almightiness is more than sufficient to
bear up and sustain this universal frame. The
idea of Christ is the idea of God; and one of the
ideas of God is that of stability. In Jesus Christ,
therefore, we have a foundation as solid as the ever-
lasting rocks; as immoveable as God’s throne ; as
sure as his own infallible word; and as unyielding
as His own unchanging character.
I observe 2ndly, That Jesus Christ is a broad
foundation. In our ignorance and littleness we
would narrow the basis and circumscribe the limits
of the grace of God. But the law of the Lord is
broad ; his love is broader than his law; and Christ
is as broad as his love. There is provision in the
gospel for every sinner of the human family who
will avail himself of the offers of mercy, and submit
to the conditions of pardon and acceptance. The


extent and depth of our sin and misery are more
than anticipated in the laying of that only founda-
tion, which is Jesus Christ. On him, who is broader
than the earth, the little child may rest with simple
confidence who has learnt only to sing :
“ Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,
Look upon a litlte child;
Pity my simplicity,
Sutler me to come to Thee.”
On Him who is wider and deeper than the sea,
the profoundest thinker may rest with conscious and
unquestioning assurance; for he, if any one, should
know that the highest data of consciousness must be
accepted on trust —that all human knowledge ulti-
mately rests upon primary beliefs, paramount to all scep-
ticism. “If any man willt/o his will, he shall know of the
doctrine.” Sects and parties may measure off a portion
of this foundation and fence it round, and say there is
no salvation beyond our lines ; but Christ is broader
than definition, and cannot be circumscribed by
creeds or confessions. No system is the measure of
the breadth of Christ. One of the most important
qualities of this only foundation is breadth ; and we
do err, not knowing the scriptures, if we conclude
that whosoever builds beyond our lines, or above
or below our level—does not build upon Christ.
The breadth, and length, and depth, and heighth
of this foundation, surpass the highest knowledge;
and yet man, ignorant man, would seek with his
sectarian measuring rod, to reduce its divine dimen-


sions to his own narrow and limited capacities.
But, notwithstanding, Jesus Christ, the only foun-
dation, is exceeding broad. In Him every soul bur-
dened with sin, and sinking under the weight of
despair, may find a sure resting place. There is
breadth enough in Him for the upbuilding of the
most ample and lofty superstructures of character.
Jesus Christ is the foundation of that glorious
spiritual temple of which every sanctified soul is a
living stone; whose extended courts and high
towering pinnacles will be the admiration of all
intelligent creatures ; and in which God himself will
delight to dwell for ever, and beautify with his
presence.
3. Jesus Christ is a lasting foundation. The
first stone of this foundation was laid in Eden,
and the last on Calvary; and both during the time
of its construction and since, it has withstood every
change, and survived every shock. Adam built on
it, and notwithstanding his fall looked for better
things to come. Abel built his altar on it, and
thereby offered a more acceptable sacrifice than
Cain. When the flood came and swept away every
thing earthly, not one stone of this foundation was
either injured or removed. Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, being pilgrims and sojourners on the earth,
built on this foundation, and thereby declared that
they sought that city whose builder and maker is
God. And what glorious things have the old
Hebrew bards said of the “ ro’ck of our Salvation!”


What joy in Heaven, what fear in Hell, when the
last stone was laid on Calvary, and when the cry
went forth from the expiring Saviour ; It is
finished ! And now although nearly two thousand
• years have gone by since this foundation was com-
pleted amid conflict and blood, it is neither weakened
nor impaired. Cities have arisen from the dust, and
crumbled into dust again ; tribes have grown into
nations ; and nations into empires; and empires have
become old and feeble and passed away; languages,
laws and customs have changed ; and one genera-
tion after another has entered, and passed over the
stage of existence, and gone behind the scenes again
into the regions of the invisible ; but that foundation
is still as firm as ever. It has survived the countless
changes of the past; it will also survive all the
changes of the future. It can never give way, never
become old; it is from everlasting to everlasting.
The proudest monuments shall fall ; the most
gorgeous palaces shall be demolished; the most solemn
temples shall be overthrown ; and ruin’s stern
ploughshare shall go through their deep foundations,
and level them with the dust ; but our rock cannot
be moved. On it the forces of destruction shall
spend themselves in vain, and whoever falls on it shall
be broken to pieces. Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but not the foundation of our hope and confidence
in God. The works of creation shall perish ; but
Thou 0 Lord remainest; and they all shall wax old
as doth a garment and as a vesture shalt Thou fold them


up, and they shall be changed; but Thou art the
same ; and Thy years shall not fail. For all flesh
is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of
grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof
falleth away ; but the Avord of the Lord endureth
for ever. And this is the word which by the Gospel
is preached unto you ; that other foundation can
no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
I shall now direct your attention to those
practical inferences which arise directly out of the
doctrine of Jesus Christ as the only foundation.
And here I observe —
Ist. That every one should faithfully examine
himself as to the basis of his faith, and never rest
satisfied until all his hopes for eternity are founded
on Christ.
It must be a strange spectacle to angels, however
common alas to man, to see a rational and immortal
creature with capacities for the noblest pursuits and
the purest enjoyments, seemingly indifferent both to
his present happiness and future destiny. <e Where-
fore do ye spend money for that which is not bread,
and your labour for that which satisfieth not ?” ex-
presses the astonishment of God, as well as His dis-
approbation at such extreme folly and thoughtless-
ness. But how many of those whose reflective
powers are in active operation turn aside from
thoughts of God and eternity, and who never seem


to imagine it to be their duty to determine their
relation to either. They study the motions of the
heavenly bodies, they can tell the names and magni-
tudes of the stars, but they shut out from their
field of vision the “ Star of Bethlehem.” In ima-
gination they hold converse with men of all ages,
but they never seek even by night an interview,
nor exchange one word with Jesus of Nazareth.
They see men around them sicken and die, yea their
closest companions fall at their side, and are carried
away to their long home, and yet 'they never
seriously ask themselves the question ; ff How shall
it be with my soul when I shall have passed away
from all earthly scenes, and joined the great congre-
gation of the dead ?” Now such carelessness and in-
difference to the concerns of the soul are both un-
reasonable and culpable. How urgent and pressing
then the duty of faithful and searching examination
as to the basis of one’s faith and hopes for
eternity. To be exposed to the fears of uncertainty
in any sphere is not at all desirable. Who would
risk his body in a ship that was not believed to be
sea-worthy ? Who would imperil his fortune in a
speculation whose prospects he had never examined ?
Who would endanger his character by identifying
himself with a movement whose moral end he
had never studied ? And yet men will live on from
day to day, from week to week, and from year to
year, and never enter into serious converse with
their own souls as to where they are in God’s


universe; and what their prospects are for the future.
They cannot brook uncertainty or doubt in respect
to their health, or their business, or anything which
affects their position in this life ; but uncertainty as
to the state and prospects of the soul never
seems to affect them, or cause them the
least alarm. How can we but exclaim : “ Oh!
that men were wise, that they would consider
their latter end.”
But while the great majority are kept from
serious concern on the things of eternity by sheer
indifference; it must be confessed there are some
who are kept from giving serious attention to the
one thing needful by the lurking suspicion that con-
scious forgiveness of sin, and assurance towards God
are not to be attained in this world. But God has
not only given us a foundation in Christ; he has
given us eyes to see it, judgment to test it, and re-
flection to know whether we rest upon it or not.
It is therefore, simply a matter of consciousness—of
self affirmation, not only as to our being,but as to our
states of mind, and hopes for a future world. <f I know
that my Redeemer liveth,” says Job; and Paul says :
“ I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded
that he is able to keep that which I have committed
unto him against that day.”
If then by careful and conscientious examination
you are forced to the conclusion that you are not
sure what you are resting on, or that you are not
resting on Christ; let me beseech and implore you


to give yourselves no rest, until you attain the happy
consciousness that your hopes are founded on the
rock of ages. How can you remain unsettled any
longer ? How can you be happy without an intel-
ligent and well grounded hope of better things to
come ? A mere wish, the upheaving of some devout
desire, will never bring you real and lasting peace, or
transport you from earth to heaven. To be without
Christ is to be without a harbour of refuge to fall
back on srhen the storms of life beat around you,
and threaten you with destruction. To be without
Christ is to be without anything that will buoy you
up when the black wave of death rolls over you, and
washes away everything that is mortal. What else *is
there then for you but now to accept of Christ, as
he is offered to you in the gospel? What better
thing can you do than abandon every false and un-
proved foundation ; and choose Him on whom if you
build you shall never be put to shame. Here you
have every reason to hope that your sins will be for-
given ; and here alone you will be able to cherish
that loving confidence in the Father of Spirits,
without which existence is an intolerable burden.
On this foundation laid for you by the hand of God
himself, and exposed to view, and made accessible
by the Holy Spirit, you may repose with the feeling
of perfect security. But you must accept it by
simple faith, believing and never doubting that God
will do just exactly as he saith, and save all who
come to Him for salvation through his Son. Look
b 2


unto Him, all ye weary and heavy laden sinners, who
alone is able to give you rest. Look to Christ, 0
ye sin-burdened souls; for He alone can ease you of
that burden who has borne it for you in his body own
on the tree. Look to Christ, 0 ye troubled souls, and
let these balmy words sooth your sorrows, and calm
your anxieties ; “ Let not your hearts he troubled, ye
believe in God, believe also in me.” 0 ye saints, look
unto Him, when this cloudy world is fast sinking
from your view, and when the dim outlines of the
“ unknown land ” are rising above the distant wave.
Let no gloomy terrors take hold of you who believe
in Him who hath brought life and immortality to
life through his gospel. There is nothing for you
or for me either in life, or in the prospect of death,
but simple, child-like faith in the declaration of God:
“ Whosoever believeth shall be saved; whosoever
believeth not shall be condemned.” Most firmly do
I accept the testimony of Bunsen, one of the greatest
of scholars, and profoundest of philosophers, who
has recently passed away from the midst of us. He
is reported to have said on his death-bed : “ All the
bridges which are erected by us in order to come
into personal communion with Christ, break down
beneath us in the last extremity; and it is only
simple faith which remains as the only way to Him.”
And how frequently is the Christian experience of
a life time summed up by some dying saint in the
phrase which contains the whole philosophy of
human existence, and the plan of salvation : “I am


a great sinner hut Christ is a great Saviour .” Let
every one then faithfully examine himself as to the
basis of his faith, and let no one rest satisfied whose
hopes both for life and eternity are not founded on
Christ.
2ndly. Let a credible profession of faith in Christ
as the only foundation be the sole condition of
Church membership amongst us.
We have heard a great deal of late about schism ;
and as Congregationalists we are charged with being
separatists, and consequently pelted as one of the
insufferable sects by those who are united only in
claiming for themselves, and denying to all others,
the right of being a church; but what is a church? and
what is a sect ? A visible church is a body of believers
united together on the principle of the common parti-
cipation of the divine life, and a sect is a body of pro-
fessing Christians united on that basis and something
more. The principle of the common participation of
the divine life is universally comprehensive and inclu-
sive : —the practice of imposing additional conditions to
a credible profession of faith in Christ is exclusive , and
the inevitable result is the multiplication of sects
and schisms. When a visible church demands more as a
term of communion than Christ has imposed as neces-
sary in order to spiritual connection ivith himself she
loses her catholicity, and descends amongst the sects.
She may claim for herself the proud pre-eminence
of being a church, or even the church of a district or a
nation, and she may grow indolent and haughty as


she lays the flattering unction to her soul ; hut un-
less the terms of communion are such as would
admit all who truly love the Lord Jesus Christ, she
is but a <e sect,” although it may be a dominant and
powerful one. It matters not what that extra con-
dition is, —whether it is doctrinal or ceremonial in
its character, —whether it is Calvinism or Arrnin-
ianisra; the creed of Athanasius, or the tenets of
Socinus ; it matters not whether it is the confirma-
tion test, or the experience meeting condition, or the
necessity of public immersion. The truth or falsehood
of these beliefs is neither raised nor argued, but
the assertion is made without fear or qualification
that their imposition as necessary conditions of church
fellowship is both unscriptural and sectarian. There
are many little acts of uniformity passed, in the
history of the sects; and if those who are guilty of the
sin of non-conformity are not persecuted as well as
cast out, it is because such sticklers are now for the
most part destitute of the power. Congregationah-
ism as a principle is free from the creed of secta-
rianism. The one condition of membership almost
universally recognised by our churches is a credible
profession of faith in Christ. We demand nothing
less, we dare ask nothing more. It is necessary in
the government of our church affairs that everything
be done decently and in order; but there is
great danger that in the admission of members con-
formity to our rules and regulations be insisted on
as an insuperable condition. It is to be feared there


are many pious men and women not in formal con-
nection with our churches, who are kept hack hy
the dogged tenacity with which we cling to mere
forms and non-essentials. We cease to he Congre-
gational when in addition to a credible faith in Christ
in an applicant, we insist on his being waited on,
conversed with, or subjected to any unnecessary
and petty annoyance, from which he either through
sensitiveness or principle recoils. Our Puritanic
fathers bought this freedom with a great price—the
freedom namely, not only of worshipping God ac-
cording to the dictates of their conscience; but the
freedom of forming Christian churches on the broad
principle of faith in Christ, and obedience to his
will, and although we have been born free, we are
not exempt from the temptation to sell our precious
birthright for some miserable and temporary advan-
tage. Let us stand fast in that liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free; and be not entangled again
in the yoke of bondage. Let us beware of those
who come amongst us to spy out our freedom, in
order the more effectually to enslave us ; who would
put restraints upon the action of our free constitu-
tion, to save us from the excesses of possible licen-
ciousness. Let us beware of those, who while pro-
fessing Congregationalism, have never outgrown
their ecclesiastical swaddling bands. We cannot
trust ourselves in the hands of such children, we
need an army of free men to fight our battles and
uphold our standards. The Congregational ark may


not even be touched by the officious and sacrilegious
hand of a slave. What a noble Avork brethren have
we before us in this young land. The mind of the
colony is ours if we are only true to our principles.
Congregationalism is but the religious side of our
free political institutions ; and what may we as a
denomination not accomplish if we would but rightly
interpi’et the signs of the times, and gird ourselves
for action and conflict.
But, brethren, we must raise ourselves above our-
selves ; we must, at whatever sacrifice, free our
system from the withering, blasting influence of
sectarian bigotry and exclusiveness ; we must
throw off whatever does not belong to us, and
purify and invigorate the whole constitution by
healthful exercise in work, not for sect or party, but
for Christ and his church. We are not created by
the breath of kings—our existence does not ulti-
mately depend upon the strength of a “protest” or
on the lifting up of a “ testimony .” We trace back
our origin to apostolical times, and profess to be
governed and guided by a free, unfettered Christianity.
The motto overhanging our communion table is—
“ whom Christ receives, we dare not refuse, but are
bound cordially to welcome.” With this simple,
godlike principle, our churches will rest securely on
Him who is the only foundation ; and then the gates
of hell shall not prevail against them.
3rdly. Let the doctrine of Christ, as the only
foundation, be the chief theme of the Christian
ministry.


The end of the Christian ministry is to bring men
back to God. Where this purpose is accomplished,
the ministry may be said to be a success; where this
purpose is lost sight of, or kept out of view, the min-
istry will inevitably be a failure. The main instru-
ment for the conversion of men, is the preaching of
the Gospel; the declaration of Christ as the Saviour
of sinners; the laying bare, as it were, the only
foundation men have to build on for eternity. The
most successful ministers are those who most intelli-
gently apprehend that aim, and who most steadily
and skilfully wield that instrument. It was the de-
termination of the great apostle of the Gentiles, to
know nothing among those for whose spiritual wel-
fare he laboured but Jesus Christ and Him cruci-
fied; and although he knew this exposed him to
almost universal contempt, he felt he could not turn
aside from his object. “ God forbid that I should
glory save in the cross of Christ, by whom the world
is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.” Look
also at the definite and concise instructions of the*
Master himself: “ Go ye into all the world and preach
the Gospel to every creature .” But how frequently
is this end lost sight of; and how frequently, where
it is apprehended, is the instrument of conversion—
the preaching of the simple Gospel—despised. There
are some preachers who seem to have no higher end
than pay .and position. Their flesh-hooks are con-
structed on the principle of securingthe largest joints;
and they would cease to serve at the altar, if it were


disreputable to wear the garments of a priest. There
are others, whose sole ambition is to exhibit them-
selves, and truly they have their reward. Their an-
tics* contortions, gesticulations, and other absurdities
of the outward man, with the strange mixture of
crudities they serve out as food for the soul, suc-
ceed wonderfully in calling forth the admiration of
those who are as destitute of intelligence as them-
selves, and whose tastes are too frequently formed
amid the glare and false glitter of third-rate theatri-
cal performances. Fortunately for the church, such
ignorant assumption and vanity are ultimately de-
tected, and visited with merited punishment. But
even among those who, in some measure, realise the
great end of preaching, how often is the declaration
of the Gospel as the proper instrument, either ne-
glected or despised! In this age of ours, which is
supposed to have attained an unusual pre-eminence
in enlightenment, we have no lack of poetry in the
pulpit, no lack of history, or of science, or of philo-
•sophy, or even of religion; but we have a mournful
lack of the Gospel. In many sermons, Christ is con-
spicuous only by his absence. No wonder the pulpit
of the day is said to be waxing feeble. If it has not
forgotten God, it has failed to testify sufficiently of
Christ. The power of the pulpit is at its height
when Christ crucified is the chief theme ; its power
and influence are gone, when Christ is lost sight of,
or concealed from view. If to preach Christ be fee-
bleness, it is divine feebleness, which is stronger


than human power; if it be folly, it is divine fool-
ishness, which is wiser than human wisdom. With-
out Christ there may be a kind both of power and
wisdom; but they cannot be the power and the wis-
dom of God unto salvation. If it be treason for an
ambassador to forget his mission, and not only fail
to carry out the instructions of his prince, but be-
tray him and his people; what shall we say of him who
is sent forth to preach the Gospel, and who, while
professing to preach it, has little or nothing to say
about Christ?
The Congregational pulpit has always been con-
spicuous for the prominence it has given to the
preaching of Christ. Our best and most successful
preachers are those who give most frequent and
distinct enunciation to the testimony of God con-
cerning his Son, namely that he was delivered
up to death for our offences, and raised again for
our justification ; and that whosoever believeth in
Him shall not perish but have eternal life. And
what my dear brethren in the ministry is the chief
theme of the Victorian Congregational Pulpit ?
There seems to be an impression in some minds, and a
lurking suspicion abroad, that although we preach
Christ, it is not with that power, freedom, frequency,
and fervour which the*state of our churches and the
wants of the colony demand. Surely my brethren
we have not yet forgotten the solemn charges that
were laid upon us by our reverend fathers in the old
land —charges all the more solemn that the voices of


some of those that delivered them have been hushed
in death—when we were set apart to the ministry
of the Gospel by the laying on of hands ! Have the
multiplication of duties, the changes, fermentations,
trials and peculiar temptations of colonial life, so
blunted our spiritual faculties as to make us in some
measure forget the main purpose of the ministerial
office: to seek by the preaching of Christ to
bring men back to God ? It is absolutely necessary
that as Christian pastors we feed the flock of Christ ;
—that we build up God’s people in their most holy
faith ; hut to do so to the almost entire exclusion of
the preaching of the gospel is to endeavour to build
without reference to the only foundation and to
forget that the very life and nutriment of the pious
soul is Christ. Our churches I trust will never dispense
with thoughtful, profound, original, scholarly, and
even philosophical preaching. I hope they will never
be led away with loud-mouthed shallowness ; or
whining sentimentality. I hope they will never
sympathize with the ravings of fanaticism, or the
babblings of pretentious ignorance; but true
to their spiritual instincts, the churches will refuse
and reject that teaching, which however learned or
profound, however imaginative or intellectual, does
not depart from and return to the foot of the cross.
Brethren let us no longer lie under the suspicion
that we do not give sufficient prominence to the
gospel of Christ. Let our pulpits henceforth ring
with the invitations of the gospel ; let them be


luminous with that divine light which alone can
scatter and dispel the moral darkness that broods
over this fallen world of ours. Let us in our several
spheres of labour be conspicuous, chiefly for the
prominence we give to the doctrine of Christ as the
only foundation. Let us exhibit to the eyes of men
a naked cross, and a suffering Saviour ; and let us
beware of concealing either the one or the other by
the drapery of poetry or the cloak of philosophy;
for the doctrine of Christ as the only foundation
should be the chief theme of the Christian ministry.
The importance of making Jesus Christ the only
foundation might have been shown in its influence
upon the character in every sphere of human life.
They who choose this foundation are not likely to
build their house of such material as the last fire
shall consume. Although a laborious process, they
have every Inducement to rear for themselves an
enduring habitation out of the solid and polished
marble of a godly and holy life. In this colony we
are now amidst the beginnings of things ; and it
might have been shown that the best, and indeed
the only foundation of social, commercial, and poli-
tical prosperity is Christ. We have much need of
many builders agreed on this common basis. The
welfare of the colony depends upon them. The
religion of Christ alone can save us from social de-
gradation, commercial disaster, and political disgrace.
“ Except the Lord build the house ; they labour in
vain that build it, except the Lord keep the city, the


watchmen waketh In vain.” But I must conclude, I
have endeavoured to explain to you in what sense Jesus
Christ is the only foundation. I have pointed out
to you some of those qualities which belong to Jesus
Christ as the only foundation ; and I have directed
your attention to those practical inferences which
arise directly out of the doctrine of Jesus Christ as
the only foundation. And now in conclusion, let us
all give ourselves more confidingly and unreservedly
to Christ. Shall we have faith in the firmness and
stability of the heavens and the earth, and not in
Him in whom all things find their repose ? Oh my
soul ! whence cometh thine aid ? Thy safety cometh
from the Lord who neither slumbers nor sleeps.
The rock of thy confidence is God; thy refuge
is far up among tire everlasting mountains where
neither alarms nor dangers can reach. “ They that
put their trust in the Lord shall be like Mount Zion
which can never be moved ; but abideth forever.”
Aorain let those of us who name the name of
o
Christ recognise a brother beloved in him. who
does the same. Let us guard against the spirit of
sectarianism, which is the spirit of littleness and
exclusiveness. How apt are we to look upon one for
whom Christ died as a heathen man and a publican be-
cause he follows not us; or belongs not to our church
or denomination ! Let the churches of the Congrega-
tional Union of Victoria give full scope to their free,
unfettered and scriptural constitution, and let them
recognise no other bond of church fellowship than


belief in Jesus Christ the only foundation. Let the
vital breath of the spirit of Christ recall us to
newness of life, with hearts purified from selfishness,
and expanding with the glow of Christian charity,
let us, pray that grace, mercy, and peace may be
with all who love the Lord Jesus Christ. Our little
rejoicings at mere party successes and paltry triumphs
should give place to a deeper pleasure. Let
our song be ; “Oh come let us sing unto the
Lord, let us make a joyful noise unto the rock of
our salvation.” And finally let those of us who
bear the vessels of the Lord be holy. Let no strange
fire ever burn on our altars. Let Jesus Christ the
only foundation be the burden of our message from
the mercy seat to dying men. Let us not be
diverted from the preaching of Christ crucified by
the peculiar and innumerable temptations that beset
our path. Let us remember the warning; No
Cross, no Crown. Oh let us so preach Christ that
multitudes may be converted, and turned unto the
Lord ! And when our work is done and the battle is
fought, leaning on our arms and looking back on
the field of conflict, we shall be happy in the con-
sciousness of having fought well in the service of
our Master. And when called away to our reward
Ave shall be made eternally blessed in the presence of
God, and the company of those we have been in-
strumental in saving from hell. “ For they that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmanent ;
and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars


for ever and ever.” God forbid that after having
preached to others, we ourselves should he lost.
Let us not only preach the word but do it. Let us
practice the wisdom we recommend, by building our
house upon a rock ; that when the rain descends,
and the floods come, and the winds blow, it may
stand. That rock is Jesus Christ, the only founda-
tion; “ for other foundation can no man lay than
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ; to whom be
glory, honour, and power, by all the church world
without end.”’ Amen.
WILSON AND MACKINNON, 78, COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
