

DECEMBER, 1889.
smisiisis




FU(37^
COMMISSIONER COOMBS,
Commanding Salvation Army throughout Australia.
Jecuels
Gathered.
A SUMMARY
OF OUR
Prison-Gate Brigade,
Rescued Sisters’ Home,
Samaritan Brigade Work,
Inquiry Department,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Office for Rescue Department, 246 Castlereagh Street,
SYDNEY.
GEORGE A. KILBEY, Brigadier.
+•l*'


Mrs. Bp. am well Booth.
(General Superintendent Rescue Work, Great Britain.)


ifi- io-<?z
Commissioner Coombs.
(Commanding Salvation Army throughout Australia.)


EEYIEW
OUR RESCUE WORK,
BRIGADIER KILBEY.
sending forth this little pamphlet to the public we
beg to state that no pretence at writing a book
has been considered ; but we have simply endea-
voured to give our friends a brief outline of the
rescue efforts put forth by the various agencies of the
Salvation Army, and furnish them with facts, figures, and
illustrations, showing the great good accruing therefrom.
And we venture to say that none of the many friends who
have helped us in this glorious undertaking will feel their
money has been misspent, or their sympathy wrongly directed.
While we rejoice that we have in our ranks officers who
count no sacrifice too great for the good of others, and who
are ready at any time to set aside all personal considerations,
to seek the interest of the fallen and needy, we give to God
all the praise and glory for every jewel gathered and brand
plucked from the burning.
We do not wish to be found simply lauding the Salvation
Army, but at the same time may be allowed to say, that no
one can have impartially studied its history and modus
operandi without admitting it to be a most successful organi-
zation in reaching the criminal and fallen classes of society :
upon these lines, we have a world-wide testimony.
On another page we give the photo of Mrs Bramwell Booth
(the wife of the Chief-of-Staff of the Salvation Army), who
has been so eminently successful in this work, and no doubt
the following figures will be interesting to all our readers, and
will serve to show what a gigantic affair has grown up around
her in Great Britain, viz. :—25 Homes, with accommodation
for over 400 girls, 95 Officers, wholly employed. 2,283 girls have
been received, of these 1,700 can be satisfactorily accounted
for. A Home for the training of Officers for this special
branch of labour has also been established.


In Victoria our Rescue Agency is rapidly developing, the
Government still continuing its sympathy and practical
assistance, not only financially, but in giving our officers every
facility for visiting prisoners of both sex, and also for holding
meetings in various gaols of the Colony (a splendid example
for New South Wales, which we trust will soon be followed).
In Brisbane a Home is in full swing, and most encouraging
returns are given, while New Zealand has its four Homes
very successfully managed, rich blessings attending the efforts
of the Rescue Officers, and many have passed through, going
forth to live new lives.
In the United States of America, Canada, India, Ceylon,
and South Africa, Homes have been established—of other
countries, the same might be said relative to this wonderful
work. Coming back again to our own Colony we must say
the opportunities were never so great as they are now, and at
no period in our history have so many doors been opened—
The harvest truly is great.
The Rescue Sisters’ Home, for the reception of fallen
women, in spite of our having taken larger premises during
the year, we often find inadequate for the demand, and
consequently we are unable to furnish room for the calls made
upon us, from all parts of the Colony, and we shall certainly
have to face, shortly, the question of securing a much bigger
house—the financial difficulty is the one barrier to this step.
Our Prison Gate Brigade has never been on more efficient
lines than at the present time, and we have recently made
arrangements by which we can accommodate at least 12 more
men than formerly ; the prison authorities have lately given
unmistakeable evidences of desire to assist us, for which we
feel extremely thankful,
Samaritan Brigade—this branch is a most important one,
as it furnishes assistance to those who have, by misfortune,
been brought to the lowest extremity, and it has also accom-
plished valuable results of a preventative character. Up to the
line of our ability, no deserving case is ever refused needed
help, but the enterprise has, however, been most seriously
crippled in the past for want of funds.
Our Enquiry Department has developed very considerably
during the year, necessitating our freeing the hands of an
officer, who has had long and valuable experience in our work,
to give this branch the requisite attention.
Letters are now sent to us from all parts of the world,
asking assistance in the finding of prodigal children, missing
husbands, wives, and relations. Not to thank God for the
success that has attended this departure would render us
guilty of the grossest ingratitude, for divine blessing has


certainly been ours in this undertaking. For the figures of
these various branches we must refer our readers to other
pages of this pamphlet.
We wish to thank our many friends and subscribers all over
the Colony for the ready assistance rendered, and venture to
look for a continuance of the same. May we not ask for
increased help? so that the next year shall be freighted with
greater blessings and filled with grander returns 1 Yes ?
Surely, yes !
The future will be largely what we make it, therefore, if
greater success is to be gained, we must beg our friends to
assist us even more liberally than in the past, as it will be
seen our funds are now overdrawn, consequently our hands
are tied for further advances. For Christ’s sake, and for poor
souls that are ready to perish, many of them on the threshold of
worse than death—come to our help and God will reward you.
“ Who will have her.”
From an Interview with Commissioner Coomhs.
CANADIAN RESCUE WORK.
“ Our Rescue Work ” is a magnificent thing, though you
find that in Canada the fallen women are several degrees
above those in this country (England), the reason being they
get so much money there.
We started nearly two years ago, for the first six or eight
months using only a small house. Then we built a large
Rescue Home, with accommodation for 50 women, beside
their officers. The first year we had 86 in the Home, and can
report favourably of
“ Sixty-six,” put in Mrs Coombs, quietly and eagerly, and
the “ Cry” man at once agreed with them that the percentage
was a good one.
“ This work will develop,” continued the Commissioner, “in
building the place we had in view, a Training Home for
Rescue Officers.”
Mrs Coombs said it was no use trying to get the girls oft the
streets. The only wav was to go to the houses of ill-fame.
Then there was a deal of difficulty in prevailing upon them to
leave, they had to go many times and show these lost ones
that “ The Army ” loved them.
“ Love always wins
she added.
Just then a humble dinner was brought in, which was par-
taken of by the Commissioner and his wife, savoured with
snatches of conversation.


“ In connection with our ‘ Rescue Home,’ said the Commis-
sioner, we have a regular officer appointed for the ‘ Police
Court.’
“ She takes her seat as regularly as the Stipendiary Magis-
trate, and always has the same seat reserved for her by the
authorities.
“ It is no new thing for a Magistrate to sentence a girl to
the Salvation Army, instead of to the mercies of the
Reformatory .” Several times a week you may find our woman
officer marching off these girls from the Police Court.
“ A case happened some little time ago. A girl was taken
from a questionable house and brought before the Police
Court. A lawyer, paid, I presume, by the very people with
whom she had been living, to plead her case, turned round
and said—
“ ‘ What hope is there for this girl ? She has lost her char-
acter. You would not have her in your home, and I would
not have her in mine ; there is nobody in this Court would
have her.’
“ There was silence in the Court, but all at once a voice
was heard,
‘ The Salvation Army will have her 1 ’
and we marched her off in triumph.”— English Cry.
A Letter'from Mrs Brigadier Kilbey.
Dear Friends,
Our thoughts run in the direction of “ Rescue Work,”
our hearts say praise God for the number that have been
restored by a hand of love.
Few but those who enter into this work know much of the
world of deceived and blighted lives that walk our streets
and fill the dens of despair.
Even at our very doors there are those who were once
bright and true, but by the world with its flatteries and fair
promises have been rushed into this abyss; with a disappointed
spirit and a heart crushed, caring little as to the future, they
have drifted on and on, some dying in this condition, others
are desirous of rushing away from this maelstrom.
We rejoice over many sought and found.
While going down a certain street in Sydney late one night
seeking to induce some fallen one to leave her sin, our atten-
tion was drawn repeatedly to a certain house out of which the
corpse of a dear girl had just been taken, who had lived “ a
fast, but short life.”


We also came across others who were like victims, amidst
opium-smoke and drink, which made us cry, “ who is sufficient
for these things,” this was answered by ti e blessed remem-
brance that it was for “ Sinners Jesus died,” and His unfailing
pity, His glorious sympathy towards the outcast inspired us
with hope and courage towards them. Some welcomed, some
reviled, but we left them with words of love, determined that
increased effort should be made to gather these “ Jewels for
our King thank God we can report success in this direction.
Then there are also mothers who crowd these houses of ill-
fame, who through drink and other snares have left their
homes, husbands, and children, some having drifted from
respectable positions, many of them once being the subjects
of religious impression, but have glided down, down, till how
terrible is the sight!
God and angels look on ! Heaven and hell wait! for the
Eternal happiness or misery of these our sisters, the issues
depend very largely upon the followers of Christ “ who is
able to save to the uttermost.”
A letter coming a few days ago from the husband of one of
these mothers, contained a £1 to be spent for her benefit, and
also this message, tell “ Mrs that baby is doing -well,
and is just cutting his teeth,” having a mother’s feelings I
thought this will surely break her down, but as yet no visible
signs of repentance have been seen. However, we are
confident that love must conquer.
We give God all the glory for those who have been
effectually helped and restored to husbands and children,
believing that only eternity will reveal the results, the labours
of hearts filled with love and zeal for these precious ones.
Yours to Save,
M. KILBEY.


Leaving Home.
Yes, I must leave this cherished home,
That home to me so dear,
I cannot calmly say farewell,
Or hide this scalding tear ;
For there my childhood’s happy hours
Were spent in careless glee,
And not a gloomy care or doubt
Hung o’er my spirits free.
No more within its humble walls
My brothers, sisters meet,
And many an old familiar face
That we were wont to greet;
These thoughts alone would make me feel
How hard it is to part,
With the bright visions that so long
Lay treasured in my heart.
But there was one far, far above
All friends that I have known,
And deeply have I cause to feel
That I am now alone ;
Yes, ’twas a mother’s gentle smile,
Her words of love and truth,
That to my heart so long endeared
That happy home of youth.
Ah, can I leave unmoved that home
That she so long has blest ?
For, like the weary dove of old,
There was my ark at rest;
And there my memory still shall dwell
Wherever I may roam :
I still shall see thee in my dreams,
My -well loved, happy home.


Brigadier Kilbey.
(.Superintendent New South Wales Rescue Work.)


RESCUE JOTTINGS.
BY CAPT. ROBINSON.
Being asked frequently how we are getting on in our work,
a few thoughts come before us. It is a work that i eeds our
earnest prayers, and much love on our part to get at the hearts
of those we seek to deal with.
When meeting with disappointments we turn to our God,
and remember that He alone can help us.
While uplifting our Master to the erring ones, greatly do we
rejoice when we see the wet eye and hear the sob of the broken
heart. We tell of God’s promises—of His power to heal.
Many cases come under our notice. We remember one dear
lassie who stood at the door of our home, and told us, with a
choking voice, that she had no home, no friends, nowhere
to go. Through sobs and tears we heard of a young life
blighted by the hand of one who had promised fair. She
trusted her"life to him —young in years, and ignorant of the
world’s ways—fascinated by his promises, the first wrong step
was taken. Further and further in sin she was led, trusting
that soon all would be -well ; but darker and darker grew the
path, and more firmly did the web encircle her. Alas ! there
was no turning back for her. Poverty, shame, disgrace stared
her in the face. Far from her home, mother was often thought
of, but sin held and bound her. Childhood’s days rose before
her: how bitterly she wept, anxious to drag herself away from
the bondage she was in—anxious, like the prodigal of old, to
return to a new life.
Her betrayer now left her to do as best she could.
God, in his great mercy, directed her to our home. We
prayed with her, and believe God saved her.
Many such cases we could relate, as we stand at the gaol
gates and witness the crowds of men and women with sin
stamped upon their faces. We again and again ask ourselves
the question—How are we to reach these people 1 May God,
who has called us to be co-workers with Him, fill our hearts
with love for them, and enable us to set the beauties of religion
before them.
Scenes of the poor wife and hungry children rise before us
as they come to our doors, stop us in the street, asking our
assistance. We take the advantage of not only giving them


the bread that perisheth, but tell them of the “ Bread of
Life,” —Jesus the mighty to save.
We cannot stand idly by while these precious souls are
dying, but, with a pure heart and free, go on to tell them of
deliverance.
We thank God for what He has enabled us to do. We
praise Him for the path He has marked out for us to tread.
Determined we are. We fight till we die, and then we shall
go home, bringing our sheaves wifh us. Hallelujah.
Rescued.
M B , although having many splendid advan-
tages as regards education, etc, fell into sin. Drinking meant
to her to be brought down to shame. Going from bad to
worse, she became so depraved that she sought the shelter of a
Chinese camp, and there carried on her terrible traffic. Our
officers hearing of her state became anxious about her, sought
her out, took her from her den. By good Godly council and
consistent living the poor creature was won for the Master.
Her husband, hearing of her conversion, took her to his home
again. Nearly two years have gone by, and both husband and
wife are happy, have a prosperous little business, and, above
all, are devoted servants of God, fighting in our ranks—soldiers
of the Salvation Army.
“ Forsaken.”
While one of our officers was out visiting one morning some
time ago, she met with an elderly person in great distress.
She had been sleeping out in the open air. Her husband dead
—family turned their backs upon her. We brought her to our
home, hearing her sad tale of want and misery. The landlord
had sold her out of her home to pay the debt she owed him ;
and she had gone deeper and deeper into drink while she could
get it. She had been brought up a strict Roman Catholic.
While in one of our evening meetings, and the hymn “ Depths
of mercy can there be ” was being sung, the poor woman
yielded up her all, accepted Christ as her Saviour. Four
months she stayed in our home, filling the position of laund-
ress. On leaving our home she obtained a good situation with
Salvationists, and is a soldier in one of our corps.


At Death's Door.
H C A native of Scotland, brought up a strict
Presbyterian, and a member of the established church
came to the colony very young. Parents honest,
hard-working people, with a large family. Married
at an early age a good tradesman, both attending their
church and living a consistent Christian life. After
a while she acquired the habit of drink : at first careful
least anyone should see her. Gradually the habit grew—she
could cover it up no longer. Separating herself from her hus-
band she procured a situation ; but the temptation being too
strong to withstand in her own strength, and finding herself on
the streets—nowhere to go—she came one very wet morning,
ill in body, at our home ; asked us if we would take her in.
We did, and she was sent to bed, and lying almost at death’s
door. We prayed with her, and told her of Jesus and His
love. The poor dear creature asked God, for Christ’s sake, to
pardon her, and we believe her heart was right with God.
After a time we wrote to her husband. He came to see her,
and wife and husband wept together. Since then we have
had the joy of knowing she is back to her husband, and they
are living a Godly life. Glory be to God.
One of Our Girls.
M , an only child, born in England, coming to the
colonies with her parents, was indulged in every way, think-
it would make her happy ; but alas 1 the parents found to
their sorrow that it only tended to bring grief to their hearts.
While young, she insisted upon going to a situation, thinking
to get more of her own way.
A snare was laid for her in the shape of an older servant
girl telling her of the easy life she would have if she went with
her. Availing their opportunity of escape, both ran away
from their situation and went to a house of ill-fame. Soon
sickness and disease laid hold of her. Whilst in the hospital
she made piomises that if spared she would serve God ; but on
recovery she flew from her good resolutions, and sank deeper
into shame. Poor M often thought of mother, and wanted
to see her ; but sin had such a terrible grip upon her that
made it impossible to free herself. However, she became
again ill, and whilst lying upon her bed she thought of the
Salvation Army Home. We can never forget the sight of the
poor lassie as she came and said, “ I want to be good, and
come into your home, and leave off sin.”


Oh, how gladly we took her in ; and as we prayed and wept
together, we had the joy of hearing her say : “ God has, for
Christ’s sake, pardoned my sins.” After a few months in the
home we were enabled to send her to her parents in Mel-
bourne. We are in receipt of a letter from her father, telling
us how pleased he is at the very great change that has taken
place. Frequently we get a letter from dear M , telling
us how glad she is that ever she fell in with the Rescued Sis-
ter’s Home, and more so that through its instrumentality she
was led to the cross. She is a soldier of the R Corps in
Victoria, fighting boldly for God.
Led Astray.
J S , lately from Y , England, was first led astray
by a young man who promised to marry her. After the birth
of her baby she came to the colony, and in despondency gave
way to drink gradually, sinking lower and lower. Getting
tired of her sin, she sought our home, where she was tenderly
cared for. We pleaded with her, and had the joy of pointing
her to the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the world.
The Lord saved her : she is still going forward. May He who
never slumbers nor sleeps keep her unto the end.
Only Fifteen Years.
C L , a young girl, homeless, looking for a situation,
presented herself one morning at the office. She was at once
forwarded on to the home. After talking to her we learned
that both parents were dead. She had relatives living in
Sydney, but not knowing where they resided, found herself
a total stranger upon the streets of Sydney, left to the tender
mercies of a cold world at the age of 15. We gave her a
hearty welcome into our home, and told her of our Saviour.
After a short stay we secured a situation in a minister’s
family, where she stayed for some time, giving every satisfac-
tion. Coming one day into town she met her uncle accident-
ally, who took her to his own home, where she is well cared
for and is leading a Godly life.


“Turned Adrift.”
E G , a native of Sydney, of respectable parents,
married when very young to a Christian man, both living con-
sistent lives ; but alas, she became fond of drink, and left her
home, husband, and family.
The devil, always ready to lay a snare, was successful in
this case, the temptation coming from a fiend in human form.
She listened to the tempter, and yielded. Having some
money of her own, they lived together in luxury for a time ;
but it quickly vanished. Finding herself at last penniless—
turned adrift by the man who had helped to spend her money
—she sought shelter where she could—low lodging houses,
damp tenements, at last out of doors, a boat-shed, any place
that could afford shelter. Receiving a telegram as
to her whereabouts, we hurried off, and found her in a ter-
rible condition in a house of ill-fame. We prayed with her,
and showed her the sin she was guilty of. She saw her state,
and realised that unless she gave up her sinful course she
would be lost for ever. With a broken heart she wept bitter
tears, God’s forgivenness. He heard and answered
her prayer. She was made to rejoice, being conscious that
her sins, which were many, were all forgiven.
“ Cast Out.”
A M F , a young woman, was sent to us from
M with a baby four months old, to all appearances most
respectable. Her friends had turned her out. She came to
our home, where she found Jesus, and is to-day living in a
Wesleyan minister’s house in P . Her mistress is well
pleased with her as a Christian, and would not like to part
with her. The dear girl thanks God that ever she came to our
home, and is anxious to serve the Lord to the end. “Go in
peace and sin no more.” She can be seen daily living a con-
sistent life, and dropping in to tea on a Sunday afternoon at
our home.


Mrs. Brigadier Kilbet.
Superintendent New South Wales Rescue Work.)


A Midnight Ramble through the
Opium Dens and Gambling Hells
of Sydney.
Accompanied by two companions we left the “ Home ” for
the purpose of visiting the above places. It was agreed that
we should first make for the “ Hell,” where a few nights pre-
vious (as reported in the papers) a poor fellow who had been
gambling met his death, caused by bursting a blood-vessel,
probably induced by over excitement. Some little difficulty
arose in finding the exact place, but, on enquiry, a man kindly
offered to guide us to the house. On arriving there no gam-
bling appeared to be indulged in, but our guide pointed out
the spot where the unfortunate man, coming from an inner
room, the blood streaming from his mouth, fell forward into
the arms of a person, and thus expired—going, without a
moment’s warning, into the presence of his Creator. Our
hearts sickened as we looked at the miserable surroundings,
and thought what a place, and in what a manner, to end one’s
earthly ca r eer. How prominently it brought before us the
uncertainty of life—one moment in robust health and strength ;
the next, going on “ that bourne from which no traveller re-
turns.” We were glad to leave such a den and find ourselves
once more in the open air.
On the way to our next house of call we could not help no-
ticing the unfortunate ” girls who paraded the streets, plying
their dreadful “ trade.” There were two who particularly
attracted our attention, both of them young- one, indeed,
little better than a child in years. They were in the company
of two sailors. It really made us shudder to witness their
shameless conduct, and to wonder how it was possible that
those so young could sink so low. But let us pass on. Wend-
ing our way through street and lane we reached a wretched-
looking hovel, the fumes emitted therefrom proclaimed it at
once an opium den. We had no difficulty in obtaining an
entrance, and, going into a back room on the basement, we
found three Celestials —two of whom were busily engaged in
preparing the opium prior to smoking (this process is effected
by burning it over a small spirit lamp). The preparation
seems very tedious, considering how short a time it takes to
smoke it—two or three draws (in some cases one whiff) is suf-
ficient to exhaust it, and the so-called pleasure is complete.
Great patience is exhibited in preparing for so short an en-
joyment—of course, wespeak only of thatderivedfromtheactual
smoking. The after effects are only too apparent, for the third


occupant of the room, who is huddled up in a corner, totally
unconscious of anything going on around him, his distorted
features, and the twitching of the eyelids, gave sure evidence
that he was under the influence. One of the others, bent on
being hospitable, kindly offered us a smoke, but we declined
with thanks. We put a few questions to him, but with charac-
teristic reticence he would “No savee.” Seeing there was no-
thing to be gained from him, we bade him good night. We
then went up a ricketty old staircase, at the head of which was
a room also occupied by three Chinese. They were similarly
engaged to those downstairs —one sleeping off the effects, the
others busy with their pipes—the dim light of the little lamps
adding to their ghastly appearance. The elder of the two was
nearly in a state of collapse ; his sunken cheek and heavy eye
only told too plainly the effects of this pernicious drug. The
younger man seemed, by his comparatively good condition, to
be more of a novice. He spoke better English, and was in-
clined to be more communicative. On being asked if he liked
opium, he replied in the affirmative, and when further ques-
tioned as to whether it did him any good, informed us that it
was better than spending his money in a public house. He
also stated that it cost him six shillings per night for opium,
this seemed to us a rather expensive luxury. Out of curiosity
we examined the pipe, and were told that the cost of this
article varied from two shillings and sixpence to £3.
Not being able to stand the fumes any longer, we thankfully
made our way into the street.
Our next visit was to a Chinese cook shop. We did not find
anything very interesting. It being long past midnight, the"
only persons astir were two cooks, who were busily preparing
the morning meal. Nothing more to see there we deemed it
advisable to turn towards home. On passing through a bye-
street a light in one of the houses attracted our attention, and
the noises proceeding therefrom plainly indicated that gam-
bling was at its height. Seeing the front door a little open,
we entered, and found the room full of all sorts and conditions
of Chinese. The excitement seemed most intense on a game
played with blocks resembling dominoes, there appeared to
be money freely changing hands. Some of the men eyed us
most suspiciously, evidently suspecting us to be police. This
was most apparent on our making our way into an inner room
where fan-tan was being played. This room was also full, and
on reaching its entrance we were interrogated by one who ap-
peared to be the proprietor. He was very anxious to know our
business there, and was much discomposed at our presence.
We tried to assure him that it was all right, but still he would
not be appeased, so, as a last resource, we told him that we


belonged to the Salvation Army. This did not have the sooth-
ing effect that was intended ; he was still incredulous, and
evidently put us down as a bad lot. We had by this time seen
sufficient here and elsewhere that vice and misery were run-
ning fast and furious in spite of police and Acts of Parlia-
ment.
As we retraced our steps homewards we could not help feel-
ing that a serious responsibility rested on one and all profess-
ing Christians in this and similar matters, and we, on our
part, determined that we would fight on still more desperately
to rescue perishing souls.
P.G.B.
Clippings from our Visitors" Books.
From our Visitors’ Book we cull the following, which may
prove interesting :
Visited the Brigade Home several times during a brief stay
in Sydney, conducted meetings among the men, and found
them orderly, the place clean, and everything conducive to
their welfare, temporal and spiritual. At the devotional exer-
cises I have been struck with the apparent interest and rever-
ence of the inmates.
DANIEL MATTHEWS,
Superintendent,
Maloga Aboriginal Mission.
I am glad to testify to the clean and orderly appearance of
the Home, and highly approve of the work it is doing.
ALEX. V. GOW,
Bourke.
I am greatly surprised with the cleanliness of this Home.
I heartily sympathise with the good work being done.
WILLIAM WHITE,
Redfern.
I have been through the Home and feel much pleased to
find it so clean and comfortable.
HENRY LIPSCOMBE,
Mayor of Burwood.


April 27,1888.
Have been through all the rooms ; find everything in first-
class order, and am of opinion that it is the grandest work the
S. A. have undertaken.
ROBERT SHEPPARD,
JUNEE.
Highly gratified with the Home. May the blessing of God
in Christ abundantly rest upon it.
J. G. SOUTHEY,
Incumbent St. Davids,
Surry Hills,
I have inspected the Home, and it gives me great pleasure
to certify to its cleanly and comfortable appearance.
WILLIAM DEITZ,
Burwood.
Having been shown through the Home by the kindness and
courtesy of the officers, I am very pleased to see such a grand
work being done, and will endeavour to interest my fellow
Christians on its behalf. 1 will certainly remember its officers
and inmates at the Throne of Grace. Everything seems to be
very comfortable for the inmates.
W. E. COCKS,
74 Botany Street,
Surry Hills.
I have much satisfaction in expressing my high apprecia-
tion of the noble work connected with this institution.
THOS. E. FISHER,
Glebe,
Having spent a happy hour in the P. G. B. Home, it affords
me great pleasure, mingled with joy, to find how the Home is
conducted, and how every scheme (God-like) is put forth to
rescue fallen humanity.
C. H. TIPPETT,
Wallace Street,
West Maitland.


SALVATION APY RESCUE WORK.
REPORTS
Prison Gate Brigade—Rescued Sisters’ Home —
Samaritan Brigade—Private Inquiry Depart-
ment.
MmßayggjEAß FRIENDS, It is with feelings of deep
gratitude to Almighty God that we are privi-
pg/4 I leged to present to you our annual report. In
J reviewing the past year we have a great deal to
be thankful for having been able to do a
hm? ’" more extensive work than hitherto. Difficulties
have arisen, but in the name and strength of Jehovah we have
gone forward, caring neither for obstacle nor discouragement,
but listening only to that voice which bids us “ Be strong and
of a good courage,” and, leaning on the promise, “ For the
Lord thy God is with thee ” —we have gone straight on to
victory.
Prison Gate Brigade.
Our year’s labour in this direction has again been most
signally blessed of God. What work is more needed
than that of giving the chance of right doing to him who, so
to speak, has lost all hope of otherwise regaining his former
position ; for with character blasted, friends turned to foes,
marks of prison discipline upon him ; what is he to do ? Who
will give him another chance ? Who will employ him 1 He
seeks it from those who ought to help him, but is refused.
Maddened, blinded by despair, covered with shame, he rushes
headlong into the road of misery and wrong he had, perhaps
through a mistake, entered at the first, until his whole career
is one of desperate crime. Thank God, by our Brigades we
have been able to bridge this gulf, and to offer to every man
as he emerges from the gaol—in fact, before that —a
“ home ” with its comforts, its protection, and its means of
helping him on to his feet again, his body, as well as his soul,


being cared for. Our Home meetings too are a source of
blessing, we fully realize that without a change of heart little
hope of permanent reformation can be looked for. Men are
also individually dealt with, which enlists their sympathy
and helps us more successfully to cope with the special
difficulties of each case. Our work is and must be more than
ever spiritual if it is to succeed.
We have during the year admitted as inmates 374 men—
-158 have professed conversion ; 119 have been sent to situa-
tions ; 14 restored to friends ; 12 restored to wives and
families; 47 otherwise satisfactorily accounted for; 164 left,
own accord, in search of work ; 18 discharged for various
offences. During the same period we have supplied 18,720
meals and 6,240 beds.
Men of drinking habits, deeply sunken in their sin, some
of whom have been sent by leading tradespeople and others,
have been taken in hand, careful attention has been paid
them, and we can look upon many who are to-day delivered
from the curse and in honest employment.
Clothing has been supplied to a large number of men— both
in and out of the “ Home.”
Rescued Sisters" Home.
That there is need for this work one only requires to look
upon our streets, to visit with us the terrible haunts of ill-fame,
to penetrate through the fumes and smoke of the opium dens
and kindred places, to see the very urgent need of such homes
and increased effort for the reclamation and salvation of our
poor fallen sisters, who are turned upon the street, plying.
their most dreadful trade, seemingly lost to all sense of shame.
Thank God something is being done to meet this.
Our Home in Newtown, which had been so wonderfully
blessed, had to be abandoned as the work had so increased.
To this end a large house was taken in Surry Hills, where,
being closer to our office, and with extra conveniences, a still
more definite work has been accomplished.
During the last year 140 girls have been rescued and
admitted as inmates to the Home, of this number 82 have been
sent to situations, 30 restored to their friends, 2 restored to
their husbands, 5 have married, 31 satisfactorily accounted for.
70 of the above have professed conversion, 5,570 meals and
1,840 beds have been supplied.
Female prisoners are met every morning as they leave
the gaol, and taken to the “ Horae.” Visits are also made to
houses of ill-fame, opium dens, &c., to induce young girls to
leave their terrible life of shame.


Samaritan Brigade.
In this branch we seek to relieve distress, and to do a kind
of preventitive work. We are almost hourly called upon to
visit some case of distress, much poverty exists in our fair
city, such misery as only those whose duty calls them to
witness can believe. At the office and at our homes very
frequent indeed are the calls for help ; to the best of our
ability we have rendered it, and by this means 582 families
have been assisted ; no assistance being given until due
enquiry is made into the case.
In the preventitive portion of this work much permanent
good has resulted, a little timely help has often kept men and
women out of gaol, for without it no other door was open to
them. 94 persons have so been helped, in some cases situa-
tions have also been secured.
Private Enquiry Department.
This work has been very largely conducted behind the scenes
(the same could also be said of the Samaritan brigade)
very few excepting those interested know to what length
this work has been carried. Our “ Salvation Army ” being
world wide, possesses within itself the most useful
detective agency possible. At every war or divisional
office this work of enquiry is established, and in turn every
officer is kept alive concerning matters of interest, such
as cases of private enquiry, making us aware of any of
either sex who are in danger, the seeking out of loved
ones who have gone astray, missing friends, &c. This work of
necessity means the strictest secrecy in its operations, yet
notwithstanding this fact, in the Sydney office during the last
year 358 cases have been sent in. Our official organ the WAR
Cry has ably helped us in this matter (its columns
are always open free of charge for any advertisement
for enquiry cases) considering that its colonial circulation at
the present numbers weekly 94,000 copies, speaks volumes ;
as a result many long lost ones have been found, many stopped
upon the very verge of destruction, happiness and joy have
followed, and many grateful hearts have prayed God’s blessing
upon our enquiry work.
Corps" Rescue Work.
It cannot be too clearly understood that all Salvation Army
effort is of a rescue tendency, and that in the 210 towns in
this colony in which we are labouring, this work is being


Vagrancy... ...
... 193
Drunkenness
... 130
Embezzlement
7
Forgery ...
6
Assault ... ..;
... 13
Robbery ...
2
Larceny ...
... 19
Attempted Suicide
1
Marine Offences ...
3
carried on. We might state that we have established
ourselves in every gaol, and nearly all police court
towns throughout New South Wales. Although not
adopting our usual brigade system, as in larger centres,
a very blessed work has been done, numbers of discharged
prisoners have been laid hold of and brought to
our barracks, and professed conversion. In the different
corps we have 180 of these still with us as soldiers in our
ranks, leading honest and consistent lives. Our officers in
these corps number 160, who are actively engaged in this
work, their hearts aflame to go after and reach these precious
souls ; blessed results have attended their endeavours.
Much more remains to be done both in our city and in the
country towns. In His name who came to “ proclaim liberty
to the captives, the opening of the prison to them that are
bound, forgiveness to her possessed of devils,” —we are de-
termined to go forward, until every man as he leaves the
gaol shall be taken in hand, every fallen woman helped back
to paths of virtue, every case of need supplied, the lost
restored ; there shall be shouts of praise to our God on earth
and in heaven, —“ The dead is alive, the lost is found,” and to
Him we will ascribe all the glory.
STATISTICAL REPORT
The following is the statistical report of crimes for the 12
months:—
374
Total number of convictions, 723 ; amounting to 240 years
4 months 6 days.
_ The above return shows that drink has been either the
direct or indirect cause of the imprisonment of the very large
majority of the cases mentioned ; whilst all those charged
with vagrancy are mostly those who that curse—drink—has
brought to destitution and poverty ; and in nearly every in-
stance, respecting the other crimes, drink, or the craving for
it, may be attributed the fall of all mentioned here.


A Vagrant.
“ A vagrant, your worship,” the policeman read
Aloud from the charge-sheet, as forth was led,
With tottering steps and slow,
From the prison cell, from its chilling gloom,
From its white-washed walls, oft the living tomb,
A victim of want and woe.
“ A vagrant, but never brought here before,
An honest old creature, although so poor,”
The pitying policeman said.
“ For each child she’s worked since her husband died
And her toil alone has their wants supplied ;
Now she cannot work, and she might have died
In the streets, from lack of bread.”
A vagrant she stood there within the dock ;
Oh, where were her child ren ? You surely mock —
Her loved ones must all be dead !
None worthy the name of children could bear
To see an aged mother stand weeping there :
A mother who once gave them all her care
Ere her years of strength had fled.
Oh, love, did’st though never yet seek to enthrone
Thy filial spark in those hearts of stone—
Those atoms of mortal clay ?
Or are they encased in the withering blight
Of a love of self, deep as shades of night,
When the soul has passed from the paths of light,
Too hardened to love or pray ?
Oh, most gracious God, cause their hearts to thrill
With a new-born love, if it be Thy will—
Oh, may they their error see.
Till then, mighty God, who sleepest not—
Who watchest, we know, o’er the lowliest lot,
Though her prison cell holds their mother’s cot,
Be her cry, “ Christ died for me.”


PRISON-GATE BRIGADE.
Marvels of Grace.—“Wasted Years/'
I feel it is my duty (knowing what blessed privileges have
been bestowed on me by Almighty God, and the gratitude I
feel at being drawn out of the mire of sin) to write a brief
outline of my life, trusting that any who may hear of it may
avoid the pit into which I fell.
I had the advantage in my youth of having good parents,
received a good education, and made as fair a start in life as
any young man could desire, holding good, responsible situa-
tions, gaining the esteem of my employers, and raising the
hopes of my parents and friends of my career being one of
usefulness, if not fame. However, I was not satisfie I with
going on slowly, but wishing to make headway too
quickly, I determined to come to the colonies, where I
always understood a wider field was open. On my arrival I
was doomed to disappointment, I found it was not so easy to
get into a position without friends to guide me. I soon made
some acquaintances for myself, and, being led by them, very
shortly became a frequenter of the public-house and billiard-
room. One thing led on to another, and something worse, until
1 awoke to the fact that I was penniless, homeless, friendless in
a strange country, and, what was still worse, a drunkard. It
would take too long to tell how slowly, but surely, I fell
to the most depraved condition a human being can fall.
Excepting to those who have gone through the ordeal,
it is impossible to know to what degredation this curse
can bring anyone. I travelled on foot from Victoria into
Queensland, getting an odd job now and again ; but the few
pounds I earned generally found its way to the publican of
the nearest bush “pub.” This sort of life continued for nearly
four years, when I arrived in Newcastle, N.S.W., with a little
money, which I soon “ knocked down,” and was obliged to
leave the place I was staying, haunting the different hotels,
willing to do anything to get a drink, feeling day by day
more wretched and miserable, until I actually contemplated
suicide. However, for pastime, one evening I attended a
meeting of the Salvation Army, where the spirit of God took
hold of me, and I felt what a worthless creature I was, and
became fully alive to the wasted years of a misspent life. I
then threw myself on the mercy of God, and, praise be to His


name, I left the meeting a new man, “ the past being under
the blood.” By the kindness of Major Spratt I was forwarded
to Sydney to the Prison-Gate Brigade Home, where I was cor-
dially welcomed. I have cause, and do daily thank God that
my steps were directed thither, for the kindness received, and
the general spiritual life of the home, helped to strengthen
what was indeed a very weak frame. I can now praise God
for His infinite mercies to me, and can go boldly forth rejoicing
in His strength.
How can I express my gratitude sufficiently for being raised
up once more to a position of respectability ? My only wish
is now to do what is in my power for God’s service in the
rescue of precious souls. May God bless the Salvation Army
and the rescue work all over the world is my earnest prayer.
Prayer Answered.
I was born at T . My mother was a native of the same
town—my father of L , the one being a member of the
Countess of Huntingdon’s, and my father belonging to the
Church of England. My earliest years were spent in L .
I received a liberal education, but being of a delicate consti-
tution, I was frequently prostrated by sickness and my life
despaired of. Contrary to the expectations of my family, I
outgrew my illness. At the age of twelve my mother died,
and shortly after I left England to join my brother in Sydney.
I there obtained employment as a draper, and continued in
that business for many years, leading a careless, thoughtless,
and sinful life ; but it was in Queensland that I became little
by little a slave to the demon drink. I lost one situation after
another through my intemperance, until I found myself pen-
niless, friendless, and wretched in body and soul, and in gaol.
Upon my discharge I travelled many hundred miles, some-
times getting an odd job, but nothing permanent until I
reached G gold diggings. There for a while I gave up
drinking, obtaining work in a printing office. I had a chance
of doing well. I was, however, suspected of a crime, (arson).
I was imprisoned for two years. Upon my discharge I strove
hard to get employment, but did not succeed until I was again
arrested by the law on a charge of having no visible means of
support. After undergoing a term of imprisonment at
Biloela I was met at the quay by Captain Turner, of the Sal-
vation Army Prison-Gate Brigade, who invited me to the
home, and while there by the grace of God, saw my need of a


Saviour who died that sinners might be saved. I have now
for some time a free and full salvation, and know that the
mercy extended to me is the gift of God through the instru-
mentality of the Salvation Army. My parents are both dead,
but their prayers for my conversion have, thank God, been
answered, and if God is pleased lo spare my life, I trust to
remain faithful to my Saviour until it is ended, and become a
humble member of his church and doer of his Word to the end
that others may be led to accept God’s mercies.
A. V.
Fought His Shirt.
B H says the devil, through strong drink, put him
in gaol, made him a curse amongst his family ; but now all is
changed. So far had the devil led him astray that he forgot
all the bonds of parental love and care. When in drink h$
had a fearful temper, and it was look out then. On one occa-
sion, there being no one near to thrash, he took off his shirt,
hung it upon the fence, and gave it a severe basting : but old
things have passed away, and the poor drunkard is a sober
man, and fighting as a true Salvation soldier. Hallelujah.
A New Man.
Dear Captain,—l now take much pleasure in writing these
few lines to you, returning my thanks for all the trouble you
and the lieutenant took on my behalf ; and I thank God that
He sent such a dear kind friend to take me by the hand when
I did not know where to go, as I had left my wife and child-
ren. I wandered away drinking, and not caring what became
of me or my home. At last I got myself into trouble, and I
had to pass away my time within the walls of Darlinghurst
Gaol. But I do praise God that when my time was up that
He sent such kind friends to meet me and welcome me to the
P.G. B. Home, and also pointed out the way of salvation to me,
and kept me in the home five weeks. I got nicely saved, and
also reconciled to my dear wife and family. I praise God it
was the happiest time in my life, and I thank God we are a-
happy family living for Him. Ido praise God that ever the
P.G.B. Home was started in N. S. Wales. It was the means
of making a new man of me in Christ Jesus.


And now, dear Captain, I must draw this to a close, with
heart-felt thanks for all you have done for me. May God
bless you and yours is my earnest prayer.
Your most obedient servant in Christ,
J F,
Tried to Commit Suicide.
J W , a native of Ireland, by occupation a clerk,
came to the colonies to try and better his position, but failed
in all that he attempted ; and whilst under the influence of
liquor he tried to commit suicide by taking poison. Upon his
release he was met by us. He professed conversion, became
very sincere, although previous to this he was a Roman
Catholic. He obtained a situation, and is still in the employ
of the Hon. T , of B , and doing well.
Child Drunkard.
J B , native of Victoria, father a terrible drunkard.
The son at an early age was thrown upon the streets, where he
learnt what was natural to expect—all manner of vice, in
which he became an expert. As a child, he was a drunkard,
and sentenced. In gaol his education in crime was greatly
helped, until he became a hardened criminal. At the age of
forty-one his prison record stood at a total of twenty-two
years’ imprisonment. After being in the home a few weeks
he professed conversion, and shortly after was transferred to
the Melbourne Home. Colonel Barker recently told me that
he was doing well in a splendid and responsible position.
Saved German.
F H , native of Germany, was met and received by
us at Biloela Gaol. After a day or two in the home he became
seriously ill, and we sent him to Little Bay Hospital, As soon
as he recovered we admitted him again to the home. The
German Consul assisted him, and procured him a situation.
Quite accidentally we met him one day in the street, well
dressed, and in the best of health. He told us that he was


doing well in a first-rate situation. When he came to us he
could not speak English ; he can do so now. He was exceed-
ingly grateful, and promised to come to the home and help us
Reconciled.
J E , in a drunken spree, stole a pair of trousers and
another garment, he was sefltenced to a term of imprison-
ment, we met him at the landing stage for Biloela prisoners
on November 6th, 1888. His wife, a brother, and sister were
with us. The scene was a most affecting one as the man
walked up from the Government launch. So altered was he
that his wife scarcely recognised him, and as he was passing
the conveyance we were in she thought it must be him, I
suggested she should call him by name, which she did. On
looking up he saw his wife, and with one bound he was up in
the trap, and in a moment husband and wife were fixed in one
another’s warm embrace. I had not intended to drive them
home, a distance of about nine miles, but not having the heart to
disturb them, I drove them home. A few days after he gave
Ids heart to God at the local barracks. His wife followed his
example on the next Sunday. Both became converted, and
are to-day soldiers in the Salvation Army. Before the end of
the first week after his discharge from gaol a friend procured
him work under the local municipal council.
Praises God for the “ Home.”
I feel it my duty to express my heart-felt appreciation of
the kindness received and the blessings bestowed whilst I have
been in the home. To me it is indeed a blessing that there is
such an army as the Salvation Army, and such a home as their
Prison-Gate Brigade Home. For years my life has been a
shiftless one, with its many ups and downs, and at last gaol ;
but thank Gcd the latter was the turning point of my life, for
on my release the “ Army ” took me in hand and gave me the
shelter of their home, treating me with every kindness, which God
will reward them for. Until now I never realised that Jesus
died to save sinners. lam now a different person altogether.
The peace of mind and joy of heart often makes me ask my-
self am I or someone else ? Thank God lam someone
else, for I am no longer the slave of the devil, but the obedi-


ent servant of God. Praise God that the Salvation Army
taught me this truth, for where everything was dark before,
all is now light. Whilst I was the slave of the devil I never
knew what real happiness was. I pray to God for strength to
help me, and he does. Had I accepted God for my friend
years ago, how much trouble and disgrace I would have been
saved.
I am away from the home, having made another start in
work, and doing well. I mean, by God’s help, to work myself
up again to a position of respect.
Again praying God’s richest blessing upon the Salvation
Army,—l am, gratefully yours,
A. H.
Often Before the Magistrates.
S P was a terrible drunkard and blasphemer. Has
been up many times before the magistrates for drunkenness,
obscene language, etc., and imprisoned many times, but was
never made any better for it, but rather grew worse. Many
a time he tried to be better, but this trying was in his own
strength, which only meant failure, until one day this poor
reckless soul cast his burden at the Saviour’s feet, and ever
since has been kept by the mighty power of God, and for
many months has been a faithful soldier in one of our country
corps.
Dug His Own Grave.
S B , who described himself as a glutton for drink,
went very far astray, and for different crimes was sent to gaol
several times. In his drinking bouts he had a mania for dig-
ging his own grave, which he did on several occasions, but
found it was not so easy to die. However, he heard of the
Saviour who came to redeem such as he. Tremblingly he
sought mercy : it was found, and is to-day a respectable
townsman, looked up to by all who know him, and is a devo-
ted Salvation soldier in the B Corps.


■I
<1
I
I
os
E 3
Szj
Oh
P
H
03
0?
a
p
◄
g
Oh
◄
O


Southern Tour.
During August of this year a tour south was arranged for.
Kescue funds : after much prayer a start was made in the
strength of our great Captain, who never did a battle lose.
From the first meeting it was evident that God was with us,
and a good work was going to be done. There were many
things which we had to contend with, numberless counter
attractions, while in our own ranks many of the officers were
about changing stations, some had changed and were new to the
people. Special meetings, &c., had been arranged to meet
their travelling expenses, nevertheless, in the name of our
Lord we went forward, and it meant to certain victory.
Space forbids going into detail and telling of the happy
meetings held in the fifteen stations visited, the most wonder-
ful sympathy displayed in spite of the very bad season just
experienced, the exceeding kindness of the people who made
the tour one of personal pleasure and profit; then, the great
kindness and sympathy of the officers I shall never forget,
every officer without an exception was one with us in our
endeavour to make the meetings successful —in some cases
officers had worked real hard bill posting, writing to out-
side friends, &c., in fact so hard had they worked, that non-
success was out of the question. May God richly reward
every one of them, I believe that He will.
Great crowds attended the meetings, and the utmost
interest was taken. Ministers of local churches, editors,
leading townspeople, in fact all classes came thus showing
the widespread interest in the Salvation Army efforts to
reclaim the lost.
Financially it was a success ; everybody gave. As we
looked upon some of the towns we wondered what our success
would be, little dreaming that the amount of success would
attend our effort that did. One town with only seven
hundred inhabitants came boldly forward to the rescue, and
placed themselves at the head of the poll with over £33,
hallelujah, what rejoicing, volley firing, and excitement as
we read out the total amount raised. God bless that town,
other towns followed doing their best for us.
We had arranged throughout the tour to travel by night
where possible, hold our meeting, get into the train for our
next appointment, so as to have the day clear for collecting,
&c., which was made a very considerable help to swell the
sum total.
Visits were also made to the Cooma, Hay, Albury, Wagga,
and other gaols, where very great kindness was shown us.
Much work remains to be done in these places, the dear


Tumut
£
83
s.
2
d.
6
Albury
25
10
6
Narandera ...
• *
22
6
0
Wagga
20
0
10
Cooma
18
2
6
Hay
17
15
6
Goulburn
14
10
0
Cootamundra
5
4
7
Mittagong and Bowral
5
4
0
Yass
3
4
6
Queanbeyan
...
3
0
6
Picton
2
5
0
Junee
• ••
2
1
0
Gundagai ...
1
10
0
Moss vale
• ••
1
0
10
fellows are anxious for our help. At Albury we held an open
air meeting on the hill just above the gaol, so that the
prisoners could hear the band, the singing, and testimonies ;
we believe good was done, we could see hands waved
between the iron bars in recognition—upon visiting the gaol a
warder informed us that the men were highly interested.
Visits were also made to the local resident magistrates who
expressed great pleasure in our rescue work, and promised
help in placing us within reach of those we are seeking after ;
they were also asked for, and donations received from them
for our work. May God bless the South, Amen and Amen,
Appended are the total amounts of the various towns;
P.G.B,


New South Wales Rescue Homes
Regulations.
1. Each person who has been in trouble, and sincerely
desires to be right before God and man, is heartily
Welcome to this Home.
2. During their temporary stay inmates must obey the
instructions of the officers in charge of the Home.
3. It is expected that all inmates shall engage themselves
in such work as shall be given them by the officer in
charge, or the person acting under his or her
command.
4. No inmate is at liberty to go out and in at pleasure.
The Home is conducted in the interests of those who
wish to lead new lives; therefore, express permis-
sion from the officer must be obtained for all
absences from the Home. All inamates must be in
by 9.30 p.m.
5. All intoxicating drinks are strictly forbidden on the
premises.
6. Smoking in the Home is not allowed.
7, Attendance at Salvation Army meetings is required
of all the inmates during their residence in the
Home.
8. A record (which will be confidential) of the past
history of the inmates will be kept. This is necessary
to facilitate the staff of the Army in obtaining suit-
able situations for the inmates.
9. Each inmate must attend to the following :—Rise,
6 a.m.; breakfast, 7.30 ; dinner, 12.30 o’clock ; tea,
5.30 ; retire, 10 ; lights out, 10.30.
10. All breaches of discipline must be reported.
11. All money earned by inmates must be paid to the
officer in charge, and goes to credit of Brigade.
12. Family worship, Bible reading, and prayers must be
regularly conducted by the officer in charge of the
Home immediately after breakfast; and prayer
must also follow every meal.
(Signed on behalf of the Commissioner)
GEORGE A. KILBEY,
Brigadier,
Supt. of Homes & Brigades.
246 Castlereagh-street, Sydney,


Prison Life.
I will deal as leniently with you as I can in justice to other
men. The sentence of the Court is, that you be imprisoned
and kept to hard labor for the period of 12 months on each
charge, the sentences to be cumulative eight years in all.
Such were the words that were addressed to me by his honor
the presiding Judge at the criminal sittingsof the Supreme Court
holden in Adelaide. I was then removed to the committal yard
of the gaol, a fine spacious enclosure radiating from the centre
circle, double tiered cells, fitted with hammocks running on
either side, a spaciouskitchenand dining-room at one angle of the
yard, the whole of which are scrupulously clean, and as bright
as soap and water, white wash, &c., can make them. After
sentence we were detained about six days, during which time
all external adornments, such as moustache, &c., were closely
clipped, until one morning we were told to prepare for our
transfer to the Dry Creek Labor Prison ; two and tw r o hand-
cuffed together, we were drawn up within the main gates, our
various belongings and property being all collected, the gates
were opened and we issued forth to where Her Majesty’s
Prison Van, commonly known as “ Black Maria,” was waiting,
drawn by four fine horses, and away we go on our seven mile
ride, escorted by four mounted troopers and a corporal, with
drawn swords. After a somewhat jolting ride, the comfort of
which is materially increased by a constant tug of your wrist
from your companion in trouble, and we arrive outside the
prison of Yatala. Descending we are arraigned inside the
gates, and the Superintendant calls over our names from the
warrant he holds consigning us to his care, we are then
handed over to the Chief Guard, a gentleman resplendent with
gold lace. Fall in, quick march, and we follow him into a
large yard, the dreariness of which is considerably lessened
by bright flower beds, Moreton Bay figtrees, and other shrubs,
and we halt outside a large room on the door of which is
inscribed “Court Room.” Entering, we perceive two pri-
soners, one the store-keeper, the other the dispenser, with the
necessary prison clothing for our use. Strip, and we divest
ourselves of all our clothes, and the prison uniform, white
moles, blue jumper, and cotton shirt, and (if we possess them
ourselves) flannels, all of which are glaringly branded with
our registered number, the broad arrow, and the letter G
(standing for convict), are handed to us ; being drsssed, the
Chief Guard addresses us, he tells us of the discipline of the
place, the necessity of good behaviour, &c., assuring us that
he and his subordinates will treat us as we do them, and we


march off to the wood-yard and cut wood ; later on the
Medical Officer arrives, and we are taken one by one into the
surgery to “ pass the doctor.” After a searching inspection
the majority are passed as fit for labor, then upon having our
descriptions and marks taken we are drafted into “ gangs,”
and cease to be new chums. Five days after our arrival, I
was kept in after the gangs had gone to work, and
found one of the blacksmiths waiting with a set of irons
ready to put on me, placing my feet upon a small anvil, one
by one the shackles were rivited on my ankles. I found
myself with 9 lbs. of iron to carry about, the sensation was
both degrading and uncomfortable, and these I wore for 15
months, but like everything else you get accustomed to them,
they are most awkward at night, not being the most desirable
of companions. Now I will give you a short description of
the work, discipline, &c.
There are two prisons, the old building and the new, the
cells in the former are fitted with bunks, and at night you are
supplied with a mattress and pillow, one pair of blankets,
and a rug ; in the latter the cells are fitted with hammocks
slung thwartships, and you are supplied with pillow, two
pair blankets, and a rug, a bell-handle is placed to the right
of the door, which, when pulled, rings a bell in the corridor,
and at the same time an indicator, with the number of the
cell on it, protrudes, showing the guard on duty who is ring-
ing, a patent trap door in the centre of the door lets down,
through which your food is passed in to you. It is customary
for every prisoner to put his clothes, together with his hand-
brush, outside his door every night, and these are passed in to
you by the wardman at half-past five every moning. In the
summer months the bell rings for five minutes at 20 minutes
to six, and at the quarter the guards come in, each guard is
allotted a floor, and he goes round calling out as he passes each
cell, “ doctor,” and if you wish to see him, you have to report
yourself sick, and do not go out to work. At six the bell
rings again, and you assemble in the yard, falling in rank in
your various gangs, the guards standing facing you, armed
with repeating rifles and revolvers ; the roll being called by
the Chief Guard, the word is given to left turn, quick march,
and off you go to the quarries, which are five in number, each
gang having an overseer, the remainder of the guards being
posted at regular intervals, forming a cordon round the works.
In addition to the quarry gangs are the shoemakers, tailors,
blacksmiths, carpenters, woodsmen, gardeners, horse-drivers,
washermen, cooks, Ac. Filling tanks with in. metal or
rubble, drilling, stone-breaking (which is considered light
labor), wheeling barrows, is your lot in the quarry. At 8 a.m.


you have breakfast, work again at 9, dinner at I, work again
at 2 till 5,15, and then lock up ; gas is supplied in some parts
of the prison, and the library contains an excellent assortment
of books, so that you have plenty of reading matter. The
winter hours are, breakfast at 7, work from 8 till 12.45, and
from 2 till 5, a quarter of an hour morning and afternoon
being allowed for smoking. The dietary scale is as follows—
Breakfast, 1 lb. of bread and 1 pint tea ; Dinner, 1 lb. of
meat, 1 lb. of potatoes, and pint of soup ; Supper, \ lb.
bread, 1 pint of tea, J oz. tobacco daily, this ration applies
only to those who earn full marks. Another scale of diet
(called medical diet) substitutes 2 oz. rice for the meat, and a
pint of gruel for supper, including the usual allowance of
bread and tea. Every four weeks you get a change for a
fortnight, one week roast meat, one week stew. The mark
system is in vogue, and every working-day counts a day-and-
a-half ; it is possible to earn 18 marks a week, equivalent to
three days, thus every week you count 10 days, and those who
are privileged to be in billets get marks for Sundays and
holidays. Marks are deducted for sickness and wet weather,
but you have the privilege of petitioning His Excellency for
these, and in most cases it is granted, indeed every prisoner
has the opportunity of petitioning the Governor at least once
a year, and, in numerous instances, when a man is well-
behaved, some concession is made. It is possible for a man
to do a two years sentence in 17 months, even if he works all
the time in the quarry. A choir is formed in the prison, and
sing the usual Church of England Hymns, and Sankey &
Moodys’, interspersed with Anthems, &c. On one or two
occasions Services of Song, such as the “River Singers” “ Billy
Bray ” have been given, the musical portion being rendered
by the choir, the words being read by some gentleman, who
kindly comes from Adelaide on purpose. There are two
Chapels, the new one is a very fine building, with a good
organ, clergy of all denominations attend, Church of England,
Roman Catholic. Lutheran, and Presbyterian. After I had
been there 17 months, and having my irons off, I was made
hospital wardsman. The Infirmary is a fine lofty room,
situated in the New Prison, containing 12 beds all covered
with blue and white quilts, clean sheets, and pillow cases, the
floor made comfortable with matting, and the room warmed
by a gas stove. Here I remained for the rest of my sentence,
and during my stay there I was brought face to face with
disease of all kinds. Typhoid fever, epilepsy, heart disease
in various forms, madness, and numerous minor ailments.
Very often I and my assistant wardsman would have to sit up
night and day with patients. One most remarkable case was


that of a “ Malay,” doing life, a native of “ Timor,” who
suffered terribly from epilepsy, sometimes having as many as
20 fits, one after the other, and requiring our united efforts to
prevent him from injuring himself. Poor fellow, he was
very ill, but grateful for our attention, which is more than I
can say for majority of white men there. Many cases of
imposture too came under my notice, such as men eating
pieces of blanket, soap (which will cause palpitation of the
heart), and may often, to the unitiated be taken, for “ a ugina
pectoris ” (a form of heart disease, shamming in every con-
ceivable way by fits, and in many cases so successfully as to
deceive the medical officer himself). The cooking is all done
by steam, there being an engine for the necessary supply,
except, of course, the baking portion, for which, of course,
there are two extensive ranges, on the most improved system.
On Christmas Day and New' Year’s Day every man has plum-
duff and roast beef, and all hands are allowed unusual free-
dom, and are permitted to sing, dance, and smoke “ad
libitum.” Smoking is prohibited save at the appointed times,
but, of course, is indulged in “ Silt Rosia.” A visiting magis-
trate comes up every week to hear any minor charges there
may be against prisoners, the penalty being from three to
seven days solitary on bread and water. On the whole there
is very little insubordination, the authorities believing in the
system of granting a little license to encourage the men to
good behaviour and industry. Three months previous to
your discharge, you are permitted to grow your beard, and at
last comes the long hoped for day. How many hours of
anxiety for it to arrive have passed ! You are called down,
your clothes are handed to you, and you dress, and then are
taken to the office, a discharge given you, and you issue forth
a free man. How shall I describe the sensation? Can you
imagine suddenly being transported, as it were in a dream,
from some gloomy surrounding to a state of unimaginable
rejoicing? You feel stupified as you drink in the blessed
pure air, and you feel were some one to speak to you, you
would utterly collapse. The “ bus ” is waiting, and you get
in, a little embarrassed it is true, as you know the other
occupants are aware of what you have been, perhaps an almost
imperceptible gathering of the skirt as you pass to your seat
displays the feeling of repugnance to you, but thank God a
subsequent experience as shown me that this is not universal,
and that there as those who take us by the hand, encouraging
us to press on, to have for our motto, “ Excelsior,” to be
cheered by the knowledge that, “ It is never too late to
Mend.”


A Rescue Girl's Song.
Tune —“ Come in, my Lord, come in.”
Once I was lost in sin
Upon the mountain cold,
I would not heed the Shepherd’s voice
I would not seek his fold.
I did not love the stream
Where living waters flow ;
I would not plunge into the fount
That cleanses white as snow.
CHORUS.
Glory to God on high,
All praise to Him be given :
He found His wandering sheep at last—
I am on my way to Heaven,
No more I wander now
In highways dark and cold ;
I listened to His gracious voice,
And stepped into the fold.
My all to Him I bring,
Low at His cross I bow ;
I know He is my heavenly King,
I know He saves me now.
Ye wanderers, come home :
Thy Saviour pleads for thee,
He bore thy sin and shame alone
Upon the cruel tree.
“Come unto Me and rest,
Ye weary, sin-bound soul,
And cast on Me your every care,
And I will make you whole.”
Oh come and do get saved
And happy you will be,
And join our blood-and-fire band,
From death and hell made free ;
And when the fighting’s o’er,
The victory is past,
We all shall meet on that bright shore,
And wear a crown at last.


Captain Robinson.
{Rescued Sisters' Home.)


In a .Lazaretto.
By Capt. Turner.
A Salvationist is found in all sorts of places where informa-
tion is to be gained or something to be learned to help us in
the great work of soul-saving. The above-named place may
not, to human feeling, be a very inviting spot, yet even here
we can find some thoughts.
One Wednesday afternoon I left the “ Home.” Before pro-
ceeding far, I met Mr B , a reporter, in whom we have an
untiring friend and helper in our rescue work. He asked me
if I had ever seen a leper. I replied “ No.” I had read about
them in God’s word, and also in medical works, but had
never looked upon one. My friend then invited me for a walk
to visit the Lazaretto. A very profitable conversation ensued
as we walked along the pavement, which was not altogether
asphalt, the ground being very rough and slippery. At last
we came to a gully, and there, hidden away in the wild shrub-
bery of the valley, lay some huts, which were fenced in. We
opened the gate and stepped in, and stood, myself for the first
time, inside a leper’s camp. Oh ! how my mind ran over the
scenes of our Saviour’s ministry upon earth, of the dismay of
mighty Naaman, of Syria, when he found, in spite of his great-
ness, his honour, and his valour, that he was after ail a leper.
What agony he felt as, for the first time, he looked and beheld
the symptoms of the foul disease. What did it all mean ?
An immediate separation from the home circle, parting with
all that was dear to him. “ Unclean 1 Unclean ! Naaman,
Thou art a leper 1” and but for the little captive maid his por-
tion would have been banishment to the lazaretto —there to
let the dire disease do its gradual work until death should put
an end to it all.
Many thoughts ran through my mind as we walked up to
the first hut. The keeper came to the door in response to our
knock, and, taking my friend for a “ medical gentleman ”
upon Government service, became very civil and obliging,
and gave us all the information possible. Our poor unfortun-
ate comrades were having their evening meal of rice inside the
hut, and it being dark we asked the keeper to bring the men
to the door. What had once been a fine-looking man, about
sft, 9in. in height, came to the door. I stood rivetted to the
spot I The first thought that presented itself to my mind
was—“ Is it possible for a human creature to be in this state
and yet live ?” Oh ! I felt I should gladly covet death rather
than live like this. The scene entirely beggars description. I
had heard and read a good deal about leprosy, but all my pre-


vious knowledge would not bear comparison with what I now
beheld. S— M—, apparently a man of 40 or 50 years of age,
stood leaning against the door-post. On being asked to show
us his hands, he lifted them up. I cannot describe them.
They were no longer hands ; the fingers had all dropped oft,
the palm of the hand had shrivelled up into a lump, and the
wrist wasted away. “ Lift up your foot,” was next asked. A
something which had once been a foot was shown us. Every
toe was gone, and as for the shape of a foot there was none ; a
round piece of swollen, diseased, and dying flesh was all that
there was to be seen. The face, too, was a most dreadful
thing to look at; the use of the eyes had long been lost. The
nose had been eaten from off the face, every tooth was gone,
and the mouth drawn up by the disease quite out of its shape
until it nearly reached from ear to ear. Gradually the foul
disease was making its way to the heart. “Ah 1” said his
keeper, “ him soon die now.” This poor fellow has been in a
living tomb for the last twelve years.
A— Y— plight was not quite so bad as the other’s, but the
dreadful work was being done —the features of the face were
going, the fingers were nearly all gone, some off at one joint
and some at another. Oh, how thankful we, who have health,
should be ! Never mind wealth—health is the wealthiest por-
tion to have. There is a maxim that says “ A hale cobbler is
a better man than a sick king,” yet how unthankful we some-
times are. I also learned that life is dear to all. Sam Mack,
although in such a dreadful plight, still clung to life, unwilling
to die. What pleasure in life is there for him 1
Another most painful observation was a dread of death.
These men had not the consolation of the Christian ; they
were steeped in the darkness of paganism. What a true type
of sin is this foul disease. View it in whatever light you will,
and you will see the analogy. Only Christ could cure it and
none other, but Christ can wash away our sins. “ Unconverted
one, sin has entered your soul, get it washed away and for-
given, or it will fasten itself more than ever upon you until
it eat away every desire for good, and you sink into Eternity
never more to rise, ”
With my friend I turned away, praising God that the
Christian, when sick and afflicted, who serves under the ban-
ner of the Lord, has the consolation of knowing that He who
wipes the tear from every eye is with him. What consolation
have the poor pagans in their lonely abode ? The only visitor
who breaks their dull monotonous life is a policeman or, per-
chance, some other person conveying them provisions for their
sustenance until the fell disease ushers them into Eternity.


“ What can I do to Help God's
Work?'’
Dear friend, if the above is your trouble, kindly look at
and ponder the following ; pray about it, and your doubts
as to what you can do will vanish.
By donating £4O you can keep a Prison Gate Brigade
Home with 25 men one month.
By donating £lO, one week.
„ £1 10s, one day.
„ £5, you can give 250 meals.
„ £2 10s, you can give 100 beds.
~ £l, you can buy blankets for two men
they leave the Home for employment.
By donating 10s, you can send, on an average, two
men to situations.
By donating ss, you can keep an inmate nearly a week.
„ £3O, you can keep the Rescued Sisters’
Home, with 20 girls, one month.
By donating £7 10s, one week.
„ £1 Is, one day.
~ £5, you can keep a girl the average length
of stay in the Home, viz., three months.
By donating £2, you can provide necessary things for
a satisfactory girl going to a situation.
By donating £l, you can provide food for 20 girls in
the Home two days.
By donating 10s, you can provide beds for 20 destitute
women.
By donating ss, you can keep a girl in the Home one
week.
Now, friends, who could refuse to help ? The strictest
economy is practised ; all the above figures cover the total cost
of rents, salaries, etc., etc.
Send your donations to
GEORGE A. KILBEY,
246 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney.


Letters.
Ipswich,
Dear Sir,
Major Wright no doubt has written to you about my
son William W , who at present is in Darlinghurst
Gaol and will be released shortly ; if you could do anything
for him in getting him a situation I should be much obliged.
When you see him you will understand his position, he is
twenty-two years of age, and too young to be lost even in
this life.
I am anxious that he might be allowed to be under the
influence of the Salvation Army for a short time, it might I
hope be the turning point in his life for better things—out
of small things sometimes come great events, the future is
hidden. I regard your Rescue work as a grand illustration of
the teaching of Christ, it will yet revolutionise the dead
churches, for eighteen hundred years the churches have been
trying to clear the world of sin in their own way, not Christ’s
way, the churches work above the people ; the Salvation Army
go under the people and lift them up, hence their success.
—Lift up is the real life of Christ’s teachings.
Wishing you all success in your noble work,
Yours truly,
J. S. W.
My Dear Captain & Mrs. Turner,
I have not been able to write to you
before, but I do so now to let you know that I reached here
safely. We had rather a long passage of it. It was half-past
six in the evening before we left the wharf, and it was half-
past nine on Tuesday morning before we landed. On my
arrival I found Y the young American who was in the
“ Home,” he had worked his passage over leaving the Friday
previous to my departure. I had a very cordial reception on
my arrival. lam going up country in a day or two, about
150 miles up to work with a travelling threshing machine—
the work will be new to me, but I am going to tackle it, as it
will give me an opportunity of pulling myself together and
saving a few pounds as well (when you answer this, as I hope


you will), address me as above and it will be forwarded to me.
We have had one or two very nice meetings. Give my kind
regards to Mrs. Turner, and remember me to those in the
Home.
I hope you will sometimes remember me in your prayers.
I feel daily the positive necessity of it, as well as the blessing
derived from constant pray er, in fact it is my only safeguard.
I will write from time to time to let you know how I am get-
ting on. lam more than ever determined to stick close to
God. Many thanks for your kindness to me whilst with you.
May God bless you all, and the Home, and make it a real
blessing to many.
Yours for the kingdom,
J. J. D.
The following letter came addressed as: To LITTLE TOMMY,
Prison Gate Brigade, Sydney.
Dear Tommy,
I am pleased you have adopted my advice with
respect to the Home. It only shows the amount of good the
Salvation Army is doing in rescuing prisoners from crime.
For what are poor prisoners to do who go from here homeless,
nearly without clothes and penniless ? Why ! they have only
one course open to them, viz. : drink, theiving, and gaol. I
sincerely hope that you will take all this into consideration,
and try to turn over a new leaf as I am doing here, and will
continue to do when I come out on the 18th, if the Home will
only keep me for a few days until I can get a pass to A ,
and so get away from my companions and crime.
I have heard from home and they will be pleased to see me
again in England.
Now, do try and pull yourself together. Wait for me and
we will try and prill together in leading an honest, sober, and
upright life, making ourselves a credit to whoever we may
chance to come into contact, and a blessing to our parents in
the future ; so that when their times come for departing from
us, they will be able to say —“ My prayer has been answered,”
thanks be to the Almighty. “ Thy will be done.”
Your sincere friend,


Parramatta Gaol.
Dear Sir,
Having received a visit a few days since from two
officers in the Army, and in mentioning certain matters to
them, they kindly instructed me to address you by letter ; if
I mistake not I am already known to you and therefore need
not enter into any details respecting who and what I am.
Who I am is clearly observable by the heading of this letter,
and if asked what I am I can only answer “Sinner,” and one
who earnestly desires to lead a better life. I have fallen and
repeatedly done so, but thank God I am alive to tell you so,
and while life remains there is hope for amendment, God
grant it may be so. Should you in the meantime hear any-
thing from those gentlemen who were here to see me, I mean
anything that you would consider it right to inform me of,
I should be thankful if you would kindly do so.
I have little else to add, save that I trust all and every corps
are in a state of prosperity, and hope with God’s help to be
permitted to enrol myself amongst its members.
I have the honour, &c.,
J. W.
Portland Place, Torquay,
October, 1888.
To the officer in charge P. G. B. Home,
Dear Friend,
I cannot tell how to thank God enough for
your love to the wanderer, in rescuing my beloved son from
ruin. How I have prayed and pleaded with my loving Father
for him, as I was sure he was gone wrong, poor dear fellow he
would not be obedient to his gracious loving Father, but
wandered from the fold. How very often I have cried and
prayed believing that my Father heard me, and pictured him
(my son) in the haunts of sin and Jesus just behind him ready
to snatch him away, when he got to the very spot where the
devil had taken him for his prey. Hours and hours I have
talked to Jesus about him in my affection and now the answer
has come. Praise God with me for it, and do please write and
tell me all you can about him, if he has gone away.
I wish it was in my power to send you a thank-offering, but
I have so little, I am a great invalid and a widow, but I will


pray for you and your work, and whatever I "can do I would
be glad to do for the Army here. God bless you. Do please
write to me soon. I shall long to hear from you. Good bye.
May God bless you and my darling F .
Yours very truly,
E. E.
To the Sydney Prison Gate Brigade Home.
Dear Comrade in the War,
I would be glad if you could give me a
little information re comrade B , whose name appears in
your War Cry of September 29th. Mr. J. H. B ,
engineer, left D for Sydney some five years ago, shortly
after the death of his mother, and his aged father (nearly 70)
has never heard from him since until yesterday for the first
time, a Sydney War Cry came to the old man, and the
address somewhat resembled the handwriting of the son. It
is almost useless to state that the father is indeed very anxious
to hear of the whereabouts of his son, and I can assure you he
would be overjoyed if he knew he was engaged in Salvation
Army work. He is also willing to forward cash if required to
pay his travelling expenses back to D .
Trusting that you will let me hear from you as soon as
possible.
I remain your brother in the Lord Jesus,
A. M.


Prison Gate Brigade.
Mr Oliver, £SO; Friend, £10; Air Butterfield, £9 143 6d ; Mr White,
£5 ss; Mr Thos. Butler, ex-Imnate, Air Solomon, Anon, £5 each ; Mr R.
Bennetts, £4 10s ; Refunded from Police Court, £3 lls ; Sale of Jewellery,
£2 15s; Mr Halsley, £2 10s; Mr J. T. Walker, Dr. Sydney Jones, Messrs
Buckingham and Pepper, Messrs Reid and Co., Messrs Beale and Co.,
Messrs. McArthur and Co., £2 2s each ; Mrs Taylor, Mr J. Ward, Mrs
Morris, £2 each ; Lady Allen, £1; Mrs Beer. ss; Mr Wigzell, £1 Is; Mrs
Bowen, £1; Mr Cole. £1 Is ; Two Ladies, £1; Sergeant-Major Ling, ss;
Captain Dutton, Is; Mr Firth, 10s; Auxiliary 528, Ryde Collection, 5s
each ; Mrs Moffat, £1; Sale of Jewellery, £2 ; Mrs M. Cooke, £1; Dulwich
Hill Collection, 8s ; J. Johnstone, 12s ; per J. Johnstone, 14s 9d; Mrs Furze,
Mrs Marrick, Is each ; Inmate Liverpool Asylum, 2s 6d; Special Sutton,
5s ; Capt. Dutten, Scribe Beer, Capt. Hayward, Is each ; Mr Mudiman, 3s ;
Aliss Hannigan, 10s ; Collected by Inmate, £3 10s 3d ; Lady, per J. H.
Buchanan, 10s each; Mrs Barnes, 2s 6d; Bi o. Bones, Is; Collected by In-
mate, £4 10s 9d ; Mrs Tuft, 4s; Auxiliary Winks, 5s ; collected by Inmate,
£4 3s; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s ; Mrs Bower, £1 10s; 0. S., 2s 6d ; A
Friend, 10s ; Mr Glow, £1; per J. K. Buchanan, 10s ; collected by Inmate,
£4 15s 9d; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s; Mrs Price, £1 Is; Mr Price, 10s;
Hon. J. Sutherland, Airs. White, £1 Is each; Rev. A. J. Clarke, £1; Dr.
Fawcett, Mrs Wigzell, Mr Kee, 10s 6d each; Air Hooker, Air J. Turner, Mrs
Harriman, A Friend, Mr Ward, Mr E. W. Holder, Mr G. W. Bayley. 10s
each ; Mr. F. Graef, 5s ; Kyneton Friend, 2s6d ; A Friend, 6d ; Widow’s Alite,
2s 6d ; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s ; Guss, ss; Mr Pollock, £1; per J. H.
Buchanan, A Soldier, 10s each ; collected by Lieutenant, 5s 2d ; collected
by Inmate, £3 3s ; Mr Fry £1; Mr Abel, 5s 3d ; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s;
collected by Inmate, £2 15s 9d ; Rev. Duppy, £1 Is; Mrs Toffle, 5s ; re-
funded expenses, £1; Air Amos Smith, 3s ; Mr E. Cocks, 10s 6d ; per J. H.
Buchanan, 10s ; Mr Mcßae, £1 Is ; per Airs Bowen, £1 ; Bro. Pocock, 5s ; J.
Matthews, Is ; Two Friends, Trade Depot, 2s 6d each ; Scribe Beer, Captain
Hayward, Is each ; S. 0 H., 5s ; per Lieutenant, 8s 3d ; collected by Inmate,
£1 15 ; Air Snow, 2s 6d; Mr Bryant, 2s ; Leichhardt Friend, 8s 3d ; Car-
lingford Friend, £1; Mr Shields, A Friend, 2s 6d each ; Airs E. Midson, per
J. H. Buchanan, 10s each; Air Sindall, Air Burrows, 5s each; Dr. Fawcett,
10s 6d; Balmain Bandsman, £1; Aliss Hannigan, Bro. Tubb, 5s each ; A
Sister, 2s 6d ; A Brother, 5s 6d ; per Airs Levi Parker, 17s ; Air W. Arthur,
£1 ; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s; collected by Lieutenant, £1 0s 5d ; per J. J.,
6s; Bro. Pocock, Is; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s; Unknown Friend, £1 ;
A Sister, 2s; S. O. H., 2s 6d; collected by Lieut., 6s; Air Alillar
£1 Is; Alayor of Burwood, £1; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s; Airs Creber,
£1; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s ; per Bro. Legroft, 6s ; per Lieutenant, 9s 3d ;
per J. H. Buchanan, Mrs Taylor, Bro. Bevau, 10s each ; Bro. Edmunds, 5s ;
Bro. Tubbs, Is ; per Lieutenant, £1 0s 4d ; per J. H. Buchanan, 10s ; per
Mrs Bowen, £1 10s ; Ballarat Friend, Is ; collected by Lieutenant, 6s; per J.
H. Buchanan, 7s 6d ; per Lieutenant, £1 9s 6d ; Air Todd, £1 Is ; per J. H.
Buchanan, 2s 6d; Miss Collins, £1 ; Bro. H. Savage, 2s ; Mr Mitchell, 10s ;
Mrs Manaoh, 2s 6d ; per Lieutenant, 15s Id; Mrs Levi Parker, 9s 6d ; Mr
Edwards, per Lieutenant, £1 each ; two Friends, Is each ; A Friend, 2s 6d ;
S. O. H.. 2s; P., 6d; ex-Inmate, 4s; Mrs H. Jones, 2s 6d; Dulwich Hill
Friend. 4s 3d; Ballarat Friends. 2s 6d ; Mrs Thompson, 13s 6d ; Mrs Bur-
rows, £1 8s 6d ; Bro. Dubadat, Alilkman, Drainer, 2s each ; Mr Matthews,
8s ; Mrs Norton, Hon. E. Vickery, £1 each; Mr Sindall, 10s; Burwood
Soldier, 2s 6d; T. Anderson, 6s ; J. Conway, Inmate Liverpool Asylum, Is
each ; per Lieut. Hooker, £1 4s 7d ; per Dr. Fawcett, £1 Is ; Mr Abel,
2s 6d ;Mr W. E. Cocks, £1 Is; Miss Craig, 10s; Mr T. Hall, ss; Loan


refunded, 5s ; Friend “ H,” £1; Mr J. Conway, Is ; Friends, 6s; per Lieut.
Hooker, £2 I3s 9s ; Mrs Couch, £1 Is; Anon., Mrs Walker, £1 each; Mr T.
Anderson, per J. H. Buchanan, 3s each ; Mr Hughson. ss; Mrs 8., Is ;
per Miss Watson, 6s ; per Lieut., £2 19s 6d ; Friend, 10s ; Mr R. Semple. £1;
T.. 10s ; Auxiliary 564, A Si-ter, 2s 6d each ; per Lieut., £2 10s 7d; Mr Gom-
meson, £1; Mr A. H. Jacobs, 10s; Value of Food, £3 18s; per Auxiliary
564, £3 14s 6d ; Mr R. Bennett, £1 Is ; Mr Pettitt, 10s ; Mr J. Conway, 4s ;
Mr Cole, 2s 6d; Loan refunded by ex inmate. Ss; Mr Boulton, 4s 8d ; per T.
Butler, £ll7s 4d ; per Lieut Hooker, £2 10s ; Value of Food, £1 10s Id; Mr
Nicholson, £1; Mrs Beer, 5s ; J. Hall, ex-inmate, 2s 6d ; Mr Corbett, 2s ;
per J. Butler, £2 5s 2d ; per Lieut. Hooker, £1 12s 7d ; Mr Wallace, 2s 6d;
Value of Food, £2; per Major Spratt, 6s ; per Mrs Couch, 10s 6d ; Mrs Little,
£1 ; ex-inma*e Fraser, 5s ; per T. Butler, £1 9s 3d; per Lieut. Hooker,
£3 12s 4d; Value of Food, £2 15s; per Colonel Barker, £5; Mr
Nield, £1; Miss Watson, 10s 6d; per Lieutenant, £2 11s 3d; per Mrs 8.,
14s; Value of Food. £6 4s; Mr Taylor, 10s; Fraser (ex-inmate), 3s;
White (ex-inmate), 2s ; Mr Middleton, Mr. Watson, 2s 6d each ; per Lieu-
tenant Hooker, £2 17s 7d ; Value of Food, £2; per T. Hall, 2s 6d ; Bro,
M., Is 3d; T., 8d ; per Lieut. Hooker, £5 17s 9d ; per T. Butler, £2 3s ;
Value of Food. £2 5s ; Miss Hannigan, £1; per T. Butler, £2 18s 8d ;
per Lieut. Hooker, £2 16s; Value of Pood, £1 15s; Mr W. Beaumont,
£1 Is ; Mr Horomun, £1; Sale of Bedsteads, 9s ; Doctor (ex-inmate), 10s ;
Tommy (ex-inmate), 4s 6d ; Mrs Perry, £1 Is ; Mr Corbett, 10 s; Friend, Is ;
per T. Butler, 12s 6d ; per Lieut. Hooker, £3 17s 6d ; Value of Food, £2 16s ;
Forest Lodge Soldier, 2s 6d ; per Lieut. Hooker, £3 0s lOd; Value of Food,
£2 5s ; Mrs Crook £1; Rev. Moore (Kogarah), 10s ; Five Friends, 11s 6d ;
Mr Hines, 10s ; Mr Ling, sen., 3s ; Amy Seely, 2s ; Miss Jackson, 2s ; per
T. Butler, 10s 4d ; Tommy, Is; Mr. Perry, 2s 6d ; A Soldier, 6d ; per Lieut.
Hooker, £2 2s 9d ; Value of Food, £2 ss; Mr Tillock, £1 Is ; per Miss Dillon,
£1 0s 6d ; per Lieut. Hooker, £2 17s 5d ; Friend, 10s; J. H. Buchanan
(ex-inmate), 2s 6d ; Mr. Coulter, Is; Mr Bowden, Is ; per T. Butler, 4s 6d;
Value of Food £2 6s; Burwood Friend, Mr H. Luke, Paddington, 10s
each; per Lieut. Hooker, £3 2s lid ; per T. Butler, £ll7s 10 1; Value of
Food, £2 15s ; Value of Chaff, 4s ; Part proceeds Capt. Turner’s Tour, £25 ;
per Lieutenant Hooker, £2 18s 8d ; per T. Butler, £1 11s 9d; Tommy,
Is; Mr G. Yelverton, ss; Cadet Ross, 2s; Value of Food, £2 10s;
Capt. Turner’s Tour, £67 14s sd; Mrs Tedd, 10s ; per Lieut. Hooker,
£1 19s 2d; per J. Butler, £2 15s; Value of Food, £2; P. G. Hanks and
Long, £1 Is ; per Lieut. Hooker, £3 Is 8d ; per T. Butler, 15s 9d ; Mr Cor-
bitt, 10s; Value of Food, £2 ; Mrs Metherill, Ifs; H. Bull and Co., £1 Is;
R. Harper and Co., £1 Is ; Messrs. Wallach Bros., 10s ; Mr John Hunter,
10s; per T. Butler, £1 11s; per Lieut. Hooker, 10s 9d ; Value of Food,
£2 5s ; part proceeds Captain Turner's Tour, £SO 7s Id ; Mr Rose, 2s 6d ;
Tommy. Is 6d; per T. Butler, £2 6s 8d; per Lieut. Hooker, £1 7s
lOd ; Value of Food, £2 0s 101; Mr C. Brown, ss; Messrs Hoffnung
and Co., Messrs Butler Bros, £1 Is tach; Mr P. Lassetter, 10s; Mrs
Mullens, £1; Mrs Lipscombe, 10s; Value of Food, £2 ; per T. Butler, 15s ;
per Lieut. Hooker, £1 5s 4d ; Mr Coulter, A Friend, Is each ; part proceeds
Capt. Turner’s Tour, £2B ;Mr W. Williams, £1; Mrs Cummings, 5s ; Messrs
Ariel and Co., Messrs McLean, Bros, and Rigg, Messrs Briscoe and Drys-
dale. £1 Is each ;Mr G. Yelverton, 3s ; per T. Butler, 10s 6d; per Lieut.
Hooker, 13s 101; Value of Food, £2 5s ; Mrs Mosher, £1; per Lieut. Hooker,
£2 4s 9d; per T. Butler, 5s 6d ; Value of Pood, £2 6s ; Value of Food, £2 ;
Forest Lodge Friend, 3s; Forest Lodge Friend, 2s ; Value of Food, £2 5s ;
per Capt. Kerley, £1 ; ex-inmate T. Hall 2s ; per T. Butler, 14s ; per Lieut,
Hooker, 4s; Mrs. Bexley, 10s ; per T. Butler, 10s.


Rescued Sisters’ Home.
Mr Oliver, A Friend, £lO each ; Mr White, £9 ; Mr White, £5 5s ;
sale of jewellery, £2 15s ; Mr Halsey, £2 10s ; Mrs Morris. Mr Angelenetta,
Mr Walker, Mrs Taylor. Mrs Morris, Mr McLean. £2 each ; Sister’s Mite,
£1; Captain Dutton, £2 2s; A Friend. Mrs Beer, L,. Mr Sutton, Woods Bro-
thers, sseach; Ashfield Friend. Is ; Mrs Edwards, 6s; per Captain Robin-
son, 7s; Woods Brothers, ss; Mr Mudiman, 2s; Mr Hilliard, 2s 6d ; Mrs
Pike, A Friend, 6s each; Mr Deitz, 10s; Mr Johnstone, 2s 6d; Mr Levi
Parker, £1; Forest Lodge Friend, 2s ; Auxiliary 528, ss; Captain Pratt,
2s 6d ; Mrs Johnstone, 4s ; per Lieutenant Edwards, 2s 6d ; Mr W. White,
Mrs Ford, 5s each; per Captain Robinson, 10s; Woods Brothers,ss; Mr T.
Beavan, £1; Mr Oliver, 10s ; Miss Mary Simpson, Woods Brothers, 5s each
Mr. Mudiman. 2s ; per Captain Robinson, 8s; A Lady, 10s ; Captain
Dutton, Is; Christian Friend, Hon. E. Vickery, £1 each ; Mrs Fletcher. A
Lady Friend, 10s each ; Miss Annie Diamond, Miss Ellen Brown, 5s each ;
Miss Carolina Lane, 3s; Wood Brothers, ss; Mr Newell, 2s 6d ; two
Friends, 2s ; per Sister Irving, A Milkman, 2s 6d each ; Mrs Tuft, 4s ; Mrs
Gow, £1 Is; A Friend, 2s; A Friend, 4s 6d; Wood Brothers, 5s ; Mr
Tanner, Forest Lodge Friend, 2s each ; A Mathoura Friend, £1; A Blayney
Friend, 10s ; Christian Sisters, Albury, £1; per Miss Rutter, 6s ; A Friend,
Is ; Mrs Boyd, 3s; Deaf and Dumb Man, 2s 6d ; Woods Brothers, 6s ; Mrs
Wilson (Melbourne). Mrs Brooker, £1 each ; Woods Brothers, Mr Wyatt,
5s each ; E. W„ 4s 6d ; Bro. Mathews, 2s 6d ; Captain Harper, 2s ; A Friend,
Is ; Mrs S. Johnson, 2s; per Major Jeffries, £1 7s 6d; Mr. B. Roberts,
2s ; Hon. J. Sutherland, Mrs Wright, £1 Is each ; Rev. A. J. Clarke, £1 ;
Dr. Fawcett, Mr Wigzell, Mr Kee, 10s 6d each ; Mr Hooker, Mr G. Turner,
Miss Harriman, A Friend, Mr Ward, Mr E. W. Holder. Mr G. W. Bailey, 10s
each ;Mr Grace, 6s; A Kyneton Friend, 2s 6d ; A Friend, 6d; Bro. Mat-
thews, Woods Brothers, 6s each ; Mrs Smith, A Friend, 2s 6d each ; Woods
Brothers, 5s ; Mrs Johnston. 2s ; A Friend, Is ; Sympathizers, 6s ; Miss Mary
Simpson, 7s ; Mr Fry, £1 ;Mr Jas. H. Bryant, 5s ; Mr Abel, 5s 3d; Woods
Brothers, ss; Mrs Wigzell, Mrs Carrol, 2s 6d each; Mrs Clarke. ss; Mrs
Clarke, 2s 6d ; Mrs Hickson, 5s 6d ; Mrs Toffle, ss; Mrs Cox, 10s 6d ; Hon.
E. Vickery, Messrs Miles and Mcßae, £1 Is each ; Mr J. Matthews, Mr Jas.
McLaughlan, A Gentleman, 10s each ; Mr Dean, 2s 6d ; Woods Brothers,
Mr Mudiman, 5s each ; Mr Snow, 2s 6d ; Leichhardt, 8s 3d ; two Friends,
6s; Mr Sindall, 10s ; Mr Newell, 2s 6d ; Woods Brothers. 6s ; Mr Thomp-
son, 2s 6d ; Mrs Johnstone, 2s; three Friends, 3s; Per Mrs Levi Parker,
17s; Bones, Is; Forest Lodge Friend, ss; Annaudale Friend, 2s; Mr W.
Arthur, £1; Mr Tindale, Mr W. Burrows, Woods Brothers, 5s each; Mr
W. Kirkman. Mrs Boulward, 2s each ; Auxiliary 864, Brother Woodbury, 5s
each ; Sister Jubb, 10s; Dr. Fawcett, 10s 6d; Mrs Saunders, 10s; Woods Bro-
thers, Mr Simpson, Mr Clifford, 6s each ; Sarah, 5s 2d ; Miss Davis, os ; Miss
Leader, S. C. H., 2s 6d each; Brother Edwards, Captain Chadwick, Woods
Brothers, Mr F. McLeod, 5s each ; Sister Ervine, 2s 6d ; Mr W. Williams,
Mrs Hammond, Sister's Mite (Albury). £ I each; Woods Brothers, 5s ; Sister
in Christ, 2s 6d ; Annie, Is ; A Tiugha Sister, £1 ;E. M., 10s ; Mr McLaugh-
lan, Miss M. Simpson, 5s each ; Woods Brothers, Mrs Clarke, Mrs Picke-
nell, 5s each ; per Captain Robinson, Lieutenant Edwards, Mrs Goodsell,
2s 6d each; Mrs White, Mrs Williams, Mrs Bellamy, 2s each ; Mr Deane,
ss; per Mr Butterfiell, £9 14s 4d ; Mr C. Wood, A Waterloo Brother, £1
each ; Mr. Crook, 10s ; Mrs Wigzell, 6s; Undertaker, Mrs Boyd, Wood
Brothers, Maud, 5s each ; A Pyrmont Friend, 4s ; Two Friends, 3s; A
Friend. 2s ; Mrs Melville, £1 ; Woods Brothers, An luverell Friend, 5s
each ; Lady Friend, Mrs Davis, 2s each ; Lucy 4s ; Mrs Heath, Mrs Hickson,
2s 6d each; Mrs Sergeant, Major Cummings, Mrs Johnstone, Mrs Ford,


Wood Brothers, Mr Woods, 5s each ; Mr Synbourne, 2s; Mrs Hickson,
2s 6d ; per Captain Taylor, 10s ; Woods Brothers, 5s ; Rockdale Friend, 2s ;
Mary and Ellen, 2s6d each; Mrs Edwards, £1; Dr. Fawcett, 10s; Woodsßro-
thers, 5s ; Mr Deane, A Friend, 2s 6d ea<h ; A Sister, 2s; Carrie. 5s ;
Hon. E. Vickery, Mrsßrooker, £1 each ; Mrs Boyde, Woods Brothers, 5s
each ; Mr Erviue, 3s ; Mrs Goodsell, 2s 6d ; Mrs W oodhouse, 2s ; Jane, 6s ;
per Captain Farquharson. 3s ; Sister’s Mite (Albury), £1 ; A Moonbah
Friend, 10s; Woods Brothers, ss; Mis. Blunt, sen., Mrs Blunt, jun., A
Burwood Friend, 2s 6d each ; Mrs Clarke, 3s ; two Friends, 2s each ;
Sarah, 2s ; per Major floskin, £1 8s ; Mrs Spence, 10s ; Woods Brothers, 5s ;
A Friend, 5s ; A Friend, 2s; Mr Newell, 2s 6d ; A Friend, 6d ; Mrs Platt,
2s 6d; Mrs Griffiths, 10s ; Rose, 8s ; Mary, 7s ; A Lady Friend, 2s 6d ;
Woods Brothers, 6s; Mrs. Shafto, 2s; A St. Peters Friend, 2s 6d ; A
Friend, £1; Bro. Sindall, 6s ; Mrs Law, I s; Woods Brothers, 5s ; Brother
Kee, 6s; Mrs. Goodsell, 2s; Friends. 12s; value of fcod given, 10s; Mr
James, 10s; two Friends, £s ; Woods Brothers, 6s; Mr Pettitt, 3s; two
Friends, 2s; per Mrs Cummings, ss; value of food, 10s; Mr W. Pepper,
10s ;Mr East, 10s; Woods Brothers, 5s ; S. C. H., Mr. F. Davies, Maud,
2s 6d each ; value of food, 8s; value of food, Is 6d ;Mr Watkin, Hon. E.
Vickery, £1 each; Lady Allen, £1 Is; Mr James, £1; A Lady, 10s; An
Undertaker, Woods Brothers. Dr. Fawcett, 5s each; Mr J. Conway, Mies.
Mary Tighe, 4s each ; A Sympathiser, 2s 6d ; value of food, 10s : per Major
Spratt,6s; Mrs Couch, 10s 6d ; A Friend. Is ; Captain Knight. Ids; New-
town Collection, £1 6s ; Woods Brothirs, 5s ; Mrs McLaughlan, 3s 6d ; value
of food, 12s; Blayney Donations, 10s 3d ; Mr Wcstley, £1 Is ; Cobar Dona-
tions, 5s ; Mr Craven, Mr Pepper, £1 each ; Mrs Wood. Mrs Angeletta, 10s
each ; Mrs Coles, 10s ; Mrs Hollis, 5s ; Mr Wigzell, £1 Is ; Mr J. Cook, £1;
Mr James, 7s 6d ; Mrs Smith, ss; Sisters (Albury), A Friend, £1 each;
Woods Brothers, Mr J. Gumming. 5s each ; Brother Barrington, 4s 6d ;
Woods Brothers, ss; Sister Reay, 2s 6d ; value of food, 8s; per Major
Spratt, £1 2s 6d ; value of fcod, £1 17s 9d ; Mr Boyd, 10s ; value of
food, 15s; Mr. White, £1; Mr Wigzell, 10s; Woods Brothers, Brother
Barrington, Mr J. F. Fedden, Brother Conver, 5s each; Mr. Deane, A
Sister, 2s 6d each ; John, 2s ; Frank, Is ; M. Simpson, 4s ; Homebush Dorcas
Society, £1; Mr A. D. Brown, Mr W. Farmer, 10s each ; Mr James, 5s ; A
Blaney Friend 2s 6d ; value of food. 12s; Sister Moon, £1; Mr J. Wad-
dell, £1 16s 4d ; Mr Wadden, 10s ; Woods Brothers, 5s ; Miss Davis, 10s ;
Mrs Symonds, 2s 6d; Brother Barrington, 2s; Mr G. Turner, 2s 6d; Re-
fund, 3s ; Miss Hannigan, £1 Is ; value of food, 8s ; Woods Brothers, Mrs
Symonds,|6s each; Woolloomoolco Friend, 2s; Mr Medcalf, 2s 6d ; Mr
Goodsell, 2s; Friends, 4s; Mrs Boyce, 7s; Forest Lodge Friend, 2s 6d;
Mr Jones, ss; Value of food, £1 10s; per Waterloo Treasurer, 10s; Woods
Brothers, Mr Thompson, 5s each; A Friend, 2s; Mr Irwin, 4s; Mr
Hickinson. 3s; per Brother Moore. 2s ; Mrs K. M. Smith, ss; Mrs
Walker, Hon. E. Vickery, Mrs Bowker, Is each ; value of , food, 15s ;
Sisters (Albury), £1; Mr Fidden, ss; Mrs A.. S. O. H., 2s 6d each; Mrs
Wigzell, 10s ; value of food, £1 ; Mr Ross. A Friend, 10s each ; Mr White,
£1; Woods Brothers, Mrs Sutton, Mr James, 5s each; Mrs Johnstone,
4s; Grandfather, A Friend, 2s each; Mr E. W. Knox, £1; A Cobar
Friend, 3s; Brother Butterfield, £1; Mrs K. M. Smith, Mrs Spence, os
each ; value of food, Mr Fidden, Woods Brothers, Dr. Fawcett, 5s each ;
Fanny, Is 9d; per Captain Taudy, 14s; Mrs Symonds, ss; value of
food given, £2 15s; per Captain Martin, 2s; Moy Sam, 2s 6d ; Sister
Rachel, 4s ; Forest Lodge Friend, 3s ; Woods Brothers, 5s ; A Friend, Is ;
Mrs Ibbetson, 2s ;Mr Hawkins, £1; Mrs Gowan, Is ; Mr Maicham, ss;
A Friend, 10s; Mrs Taylor, £1; value of food, 10s ; Mr J. W. Craven,
Woods Brothers, Mr Bennetts, 5s each ; Sarah, 3s ; Mrs Hickson, 2s 6d ;
Mrs Walker, Mrs Angelenetta, 10s each; value of food, £1; Mr and Mrs
Wigzell, 15s; per Captain Harper, 2s 6d; Brother Matthews, 9s; Mr
Fidden, ss; Mr Corbett, 2s ; Mr A. Bailey, 2s 6d ; Woods Brothers, 5s ;
A Newtown Friend, 6s 6d ; Ellen and Emily, 12s; per Major Spratt, 3s ;


per Brother Butler, £1 10s; Mrs K. M. Smith, ss; Mrs Miller, £1;
value of food, £7; per Sister Horus. £1 12s ; A Queensland Friend,
£1 ; Mrs Kee, 5s ; Bro. Matthews, 5s ; Sarah, 7s ; Mrs Rowlands, 2s ; per
Major Spratt, £1 2s 6d ; Mrs Beer, Mrs Rose, 2s 6d each; Bro. Clayton, Mrs
Walker. Mrs Ford, 10s each ; value of food given, £1 5s ; Mrs Sutton, Mr
Boyd, Woods Brothers, 5s each ; Mrs Johnstone, 3s ; Grandfather. A Friend,
2s each ; A Friend, 2s 6d; A Friend, Is ; Mr C. Brown, ss; Mr Waddell,
£1 SJ;5 J ; Hon. E. Vickery, £1; Mrs Symonds, ss; value of food, £1 7s;
Woods Brothers, Dr. Fawcett, 5s each ; Sister Dickson, 2s; A Newtown
Friend, 2s 6d ; Anon., Is 6d ; Mrs K. M. Smith, 5s ; value of food, £3
10s ; Mr and Mrs Wigzell, 12s 6d; A Friend, Woods Brothers, An Under-
taker. 5s each ; A Friend, 2s 6d ; Fanny, Ellen, 3s 6d each ; Mr Dean,
3s; Mr A. Bailey, 2s 6d ; per Moy Sam, Hs 6d ; value of food, £1; Dr. Faw-
cett, 5s ; Sister Dickson. 2s; Sister Irvine, 2s 6d ; Sister Amy Lascelles,
10s; Woods Brothers, Mrs Sutton, 5s each; Mr W. Morris, £1; value
of food, 15s; A Lady Friend, Mrs Ely Juchan. £1 each ; per Mrs Fuller,
£1 6s 6d ; Waterloo collection, 13s 6d ; Woods Brothers, 5s ; value of food,
£1; Miss Montgomery, £1; Mrs Walker. 15s 6d ; Woods Brothers, 5s ; A
Newtown Friend, 2s; Ashfield donation, ss; per Captain Whiteley, 2s 6d;
Mrs John Hood, 10s.
LIABILITIES TO END OF NOVEMBER, 1889.
BOTH HOMES.
£ s. d.
Alterations and fittings, new Rescued Sisters’Home.. .. 12 0 0
Furniture, Prison Gate Brigade 27 9 10
Rents, both Homes 19 2 0
Stationery. Books, and Printing 6 16 0
Stationery, Books, and Printing
£65 7 10


NEW SOUTH WALES
Statement of Receipts and Expenditure from
£ s. D.
To Contributions, ■viz.: —
Donations and Special Appeals
for Prison Gate Home .. 587 17 0
Collections from Corps .. .. 58 18 9
Sale of Books .. .. .. 2 5 2
Inmates’Earnings, P.G.B. 12 1 1
£66l 2 0
Donations and Special Appeals
for Rescued Sisters’ Home .. 292 5 7
Collections from Corps.. .. 99 11 0
Inmates’Earnings, R.S.H. .. 61 8 7
453 5 2
To Balance overpaid . • .. .. 16 5
£1,115 13 r
Audited and found correct,
W. L. LEIGH, Accountant.


RESCUE FUND.
Ist October, 1888, to 30th September, 1889.
£ S. D.
By Sundry Payments, viz.—
Maintenance, Rent, &c„ of the
Prison Gate Brigade Home.. 311 8 6
Out-door Relief from Samaritan
Fund .. .. .. 22 2 8
Gratuities to Inmates P.G.B. .. 12 2 6
Expenses of Staff, Office Rents,
Travelling, &c., &c. .. 129 12 1
Postage, Stationery, and Print-
ing, P.G.B. .. .. 29 10 11
Cost of Special Appeals for P.G.B. 9 16 3
Furniture .. .. .. 30 17 4
Payments on account of Loans .. 120 14 4
£666 4 7
Maintenance, Rent, &c., of the
Rescued Sisters’ Home .. 269 6 11
Out-door Relief from Samaritan
Fund .. .. .. 6 18 9
Staff Expenses, Rent, Travelling,
&c. .. .. .. 80 2 11
Postage. Printing, and Stationery,
R.S.H. .. .. .. 22 0 6
Cost of Special Appeals for R.S.H. 7 3 3
Furniture .. .. .. 53 1 7
Payments on account of Loans ~ 10 15 1
449 9 0
£1,115 13 7
Melbourne, December 8, 1889.


SONGS.
Tune—Turn to the Lord.
"j 1 Jesus, give Thy blood-washed Army
Universal liberty ;
Keep us fighting, waiting calmly
For a world-wide jubilee.
Hallelujah !
We shall have the victory.
2 Thou hast bound brave hearts together,
Clothed us with Thy Spirit’s might,
Made us warriors for ever,
Sent us in the field to fight.
In thy temple
We will serve Thee day and night.
3 ’Neath thy sceptre foes are bending,
And Thy name makes devils fly ;
Christiess kingdoms Thou art rending,
And thy blood does sin destroy ;
For Thy glory
We will fight until we die.
4 Cover land and sea with soldiers ;
Hell’s dark legions backward hurl ;
Make thy Army stronger, bolder ;
More triumphant flags unfurl ;
With salvation
Make us conquerors of the world.
5 Lift up valleys, throw down mountains,
Make all evil natures good ;
Wash the world in Calvary’s fountain.
Send a great salvation flood ;
All the nations
We shall win with fire and blood.


2 1 To the front ! the cry is ringing,
To the front! your place is there,
In the conflict men are wanted,
Men of hope and faith and prayer.
Selfish ends shall claim no right,
From the battle’s post to take us ;
Fear shall vanish in the fight,
For triumphant God will make us.
No retreating, hell defeating,
Shoulder to shoulder we stand ;
God look down, with glory crown
Our conqu’ring band.
Victory for me,
Through the blood of Christ, my Saviour ;
Victory for me,
Through the precious blood.
2 To the front! the fight is raging,
Christ’s own banner leads the way,
Every power and thought engaging,
Might Divine shall be our stay :
We have heard the cry for help
From the dying millions round us,
We’ve received the Royal command
From our dying Lord who found us.
3 To the front ! no more delaying,
Wounded spirits need Thy care ;
To the front! thy Lord obeying,
Stoop to help the dying there:
Broken hearts and blighted hopes,
Slaves of sin and degradation,
Wait for Thee in love to bring
Holy peace and liberation.
3 1 Guilty rebels once were we,
Full of sin and misery,
Lifting high rebellious arms against our King ;
But His love to us He’s shown,
So we’ve laid our weapons down,
And received the pardon He for all did bring.
On to conquer we are marching,
Leading sinners to the blood ;
Till our flag unfurled shall be waving over ev’ry land and sea,
And each nation own Jehovah as their God.


2 We are soldiers of our King,
He who did our souls redeem,
And who saved us from the guilt and power of sin ;
Now for Him the cross we’ll bear,
And His toil and triumph share,
As the lost and helpless to His side we win.
3 Many a drunkard has been won,
Many a wanderer has come,
And with broken hearts their sin to God confess’d ;
Many a miserable home
Has become a happy one,
Many a heart with full salvation has been blest.
4 We have conquered in the past
When the foe has gathered fast
To o’erwhelm our noble band in sore defeat ;
But from off His heavenly throne,
Jesus to our help has come,
And our foes have cried for mercy at His feet.
4- 1 Jesus, the name high over all,
In hell, or earth, or sky ;
Angels and men before Thee fall,
And devils fear and fly.
2 Jesus, the name to sinners dear ;
The name to sinners given ;
He scatters all their guilty fear,
He turns their hell to heaven.
3 Jesus the prisoner’s fetters breaks,
And bruises Satan’s head ;
Power into strengthlcss souls He speaks.
And life into the dead.
4 0, that the world might taste and see
The riches of his grace,
The arms of love that compass me,
Would all mankind embrace.
5 Happy, if with my latest breath
I may but gasp His name,
Preach him to all, and cry in death,
“ Behold, behold the Lamb 1”


5 1 Lord, through the blood of the Lamb that was slain,
Cleansing for me,
From all the guilt of my sins now I claim,
Cleansing from Thee.
Sinful and black though the past may have been,
Many the crushing defeats I have seen,
Yet on Thy promise, O Lord ! now I lean,
Cleansing for me.
2 From all the sins over which I have wept,
Cleansing for me ;
Far, far away, by the blood-current swept,
Cleansing for me.
Jesus, Thy promise I dare to believe,
And, as I come, Thou dost now receive ;
That over sin I may never more grieve,
Cleansing for me.
3 From all the doubts that have filled me with gloom,
Cleansing for me,
From all the fears that would point me to doom,
Cleansing for me.
Jesus, although I may not understand,
In childlike faith I now put forth my hand,
And through Thy word and Thy grace I shall stand,
Cleansed by Thee.
4 From all the care of what men think or say,
Cleansing for me,
From ever fearing to speak, sing, or pray,
Cleansing for me.
Lord, in Thy love and Thy power make me strong,
That all may know that to Thee I belong ;
When I am tempted let this be my song —
Cleansing for me.
(Musical Salvationist, December, 1887.)
Q 1 Ever at Thy bleeding side,
Jesus, Saviour, I would dwell ;
In Thy name, Lord, I confide,
Thou who doest all things well.
Keep me unspotted from sin, dear Saviour,
Keep me unspotted from sin, dear Lord ;
I’ll live for Thy glory,
To tell out the story
Of how Thou hast suffered and died.


2 Daily I will strive to seek
To live holy here below ;
To the dying I will speak—
Tell them how Thy blood does flow.
3 Heavy though my cross may be,
From it I will never shrink ;
In my life the world shall see
That of Calvary’s stream I drink.
4 When I come to pass away,
Death for me will have no sting,
In the land of brightest day,
With the angels I shall sing.
~J 1 There is coming on a great day of rejoicing,
When all the ransom’d shall gather their Lord as King
to crown ;
All earth’s sorrow and its sin then disappearing,
Every heart will the Saviour then own.
Oh, the crowning day is coming, Hallelujah !
Oh, the crowning day is coming, Praise the Lord 1
For our Saviour King shall reign,
He shall have His own again, Hallelujah ! Hallelujah !
2 From far distant lands, battalions now are marching,
Who will have part in the honours which Jesus will bestow;
God be praised for all the souls that are now starting,
Swelling the hosts that to victory go.
3 For the grand review, my comrades, we shall gather,
With all the brave and the true we shall pass before the
King;
Oh, what joy ’twill be for us then to remember
That we the world for our Lord helped to win.
4 There are many who would tell us we are dreaming,
Thinking that Jesus should reign o’er the nations of the
world ;
But with steadfast faith we still fight on unheeding,
Safe from the taunts that against us are hurled.
5 Do you, comrades, feel at times a bit down-hearted,
When in the fight all looks dark, and the foe seems fierce
and strong 1
At such times I find my fear has all departed,
When I remember that day coming on.


8 1 It is the blood that washes white
That makes me pure within,
That keeps the inward witness right
That cleanses from all sin.
Oh. the blood to me so dear !
Saving now from guilt and fear,
Cleansing now my heart within,
Making free from self and sin.
2 It is the blood that sweeps away
The power of Satan’s rod,
That shows the new and living way
That leads to heaven and God.
3 It was the blood that opened wide
God’s full salvation gate ;
The blood that turned the veil aside
To show the holiest state.
4 It is the blood that brings us nigh
To holiness and heaven,
The source of victory and joy ;
God’s life for rebels given.
Q 1 When I survey the wondrous cross
On which the Prince of Glory died,
My richest gain I count but loss,
And pour contempt on all my pride.
2 Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast,
Save in the death of Christ, my God ;
All the vain things that charm me most,
I sacrifice them to His blood.
3 See from His hands, His head, His feet,
Sorrow and love flow mingled down ;
Did e’er such love and sorrow meet,
Or thorns compose so rich a crown 1
4 Were the whole realm of nature mine,
That were a present far too small;
Love so amazing, so Divine,
Shall have my soul, my life, my all.


10 1
Oh, for a heart to praise my God
A heart from sin set free,
A heart that always feel the blood
So freely spilt for me !
A heart resigned, submissive, meek,
My great Redeemer’s throne,
Where only Christ is heard to speak,
Where Jesus reigns alone.
A heart in every thought renewed,
And full of love Divine ;
11 1
All hail the power of Jesu’s name,
And down before him fall;
To all the world his love proclaim,
And crown Him Lord of all.
Let every drunkard, every soul,
Who hears the Saviour’s call,
On Him their guilty burdens roll,
And crown Him Lord of all.
Let all our soldiers never tire,
In streets, in lane, in hall,
The red-hot Gospel shot to fire,
And crown him Lord of all.
Oh, that with yonder sacred throng,
We at His feet may fall,
Join in the everlasting song,
And crown Him Lord of all.
A humble, lowly, contrite heart,
Believing, true, and clean,
Which neither life nor death can part
From Him, that dwells within.
Perfect and right and pure and good,
A copy, Lord, of Thine.
Thy nature, gracious Lord, impart;
Come quickly from above ;
Write Thy new name upon my heart,
Thy new, best name of Love.
Crown Him, ye soldiers of our God,
And every sinner call,
Make known the power of Jesu’s blood
And crown him Lord of all.


SCRAPS.
To the Distressed
Mothers, Fathers, Guardians, Read !
The Salvation Army invites parents, relations, and friends in
any part of the world, interested in any woman or girl who is
known, or feared to be, living in immorality, or is in danger
of coming under the control of immoral persons, to write,
stating full particulars,, with names, date, and address of all
concerned, and, if possible, a photograph of the person in
whom the interest is taken.
All letters, whether from these persons, or from such women
or girls themselves, will be regarded as strictly confidential.
They may be written in any language, and should be addressed
to Brigadier Kilbey, Rescue and Enquiry Department, 246
Castlereagh street, Sydney.
* *
A degraded-looking, bloated, bruised faced woman, with
many marks of years of sin, was hunted down the street by a
drunken man. A brother followed her, caught her, and heard
her pitiful story. He spoke kindly to her, told her of a bright
future if she would give up sin, and offered to get her into a
home where she would be away from all such influences, and
could redeem her character and be cared for, so that her life
of sin and sorrow might be changed into a life of purity and
joy. Did he feel glad when in a few days he saw her in a
Rescue Home, that he had shaken hands with her, Jesus
Christ will repay him by-and-by !
Reformation Useless.
If thou art not born again, all thy outward reformation is
nought in the sight of God ; thou hast shut the door with the
thief still in the house.
Lost and Saved I
A poor girl on the street—an outcast. Nobody cared for
her soul, until an old sailor, who had proved the power of


God’s love to change a vile heart, came by where she stood.
She was contemplating whether or not to throw herself over
the bridge into the river and put an end to her existence, but
the kindly sailor told her of One who had said : “ Go in peace
and sin no more.” Possessing a very practical salvation, the
man took her to an Army Rescue Home, and she is now
a valiant soldier for Jesus, with a changed heart and a
changed life. Hallelujah ! Jesus can meet your case and
save you.
Loves the Army
I saw a sight recently which cheered my very soul. One of
our Rescue officers had brought a dear fellow into the meet-
ing. He became deeply convicted. Leaving the Rescue offi-
cer’s side, he walked up to the leader of the meeting, threw
his arms around his neck, and hissed him. Then he knelt at
Jesus’ feet and found mercy and deliverance. It did not take
a very obseryaxt person long to see that the poor “ drunk ”
still loves the Army. We are their friends.
Letter from the Chief Justice.
Annual Meeting of our Australian Prison Gate and Rescue
Work was held in Melbourne, June 24th. Representatives
from many churches were present, and letters of congratula-
tion and appreciation read from the Attorney General, the
Chief Justice, and the Inspector General of Gaols. The let-
ter of the Chief Justice ran as follows :
“ You will be at liberty to state, on my authority, that the
Rescue Department of the Salvation Army has for some years
past done, and is doing, public service of a highly useful char-
acter, in my opinion, not only by giving material help and
advice at a time when both are most needed, to persons re-
leased from gaol, but also by continuous efforts to rescue from
crime, through the means you adopt, young, inexperienced
persons, who are exposed to temptation, or who have taken
only one or a few steps on the road to ruin. ... I am
not aware of any other organisation than the Salvation
Army that has engaged itself systematically and on a large
scale in this double work of help and rescue, and I have seen
ample, as an individual, on this ground to give to the Rescue
Department of the Army my support and cordial sympathy.”


Government Recognition.
The Governor and Executive Council of Victoria, in pursu-
ance of the provisions of the Neglected Children’s Act of that
colony, has authorized Colonel Barker “to apprehend, without
warrant, any child apparently under the age of sixteen years,
found residing in a brothel, or associating or dwelling with a
prostitute, whether the mother of the child or not, and to
forthwith take such child before some two or more neighbour-
ing justices, to be dealt with according to the said Act.”
"Inasmuch as ye did it Not.”
You saw them in the street, heard the noise of sinful people
whilst on your bed ; you saw sin in all forms ; you knew that
person was sick, but it needed a little sacrifice to help ; you
felt you ought, but you didn’t ; you read and heard, and saw
many wrecked homes, but, somehow or other, although you
had a desire to help, you never did, and for aught that you did
things might have been worse than they are. You knew there
were broken hearts you might have healed ; you heard the cry
of distress which you might have alleviated ; you saw the
slaves to sin to whom you might have spoken about liberty,
yet, for some reason or other, you let them go. “ Inasmuch as
ye did it not unto them, ye did it not unto Me."
A Rescue Cat.
It would seem as though the very animals partake of the
Rescue atmosphere of the Homes, if we may judge from a
story told us by a comrade.
“ A beautiful cat belonging to one of the Homes started up
from her warm nook of comfort the other day, and trotted off
out of doors, re-appearing in a short time with a wretched ,
skinny , half-starved kitten in her mouth, which, with many
purrs of satisfaction, and a serene air of having done the
right thing this time, she deposited at the Captain’s feet.
Of course Kitty was taken up and cared for without loss of
time—its rescuer looking on with evident interest during the
undertaking. - ’ Seriously—Have you ever done as much for
the salvation and rescue of beings infinitely more precious ?
Thousands of your brothers and sisters are going down to
worse than death. Where is your helping hand ?— The De-
liverer.


A Saved Drunkard.
What is home ? Home is where affections bind loving
hearts in union, where the friends we love are kind, holding
sweet communion 1
If that is home, then I never had one. The demon drink
had a strong hold of one of my parents —the other drank mod-
erately.
When I was twelve years of age the family emigrated to
N Z . For a time there was an improvement, but
not for long, When I was about fourteen or fifteen—no one
being left at home but mother and I—my father and brother
being in different and distant parts working—my life was so
miserable that one day I remember standing on the banks of
a creek and contemplated whether it was better to endure the
ills I had or end my life, but, praise God, I determined to en-
dure. Till I was over twenty I never drank ; I had a horror
of it, my father and brother would ask me to come into the
hotel and have a drink with them, but I would not. But as
time passed I was induced to drink supper beer—a hot pie
and a glass of beer on Saturday nights before going to bed.
l< It won’t do you any harm—come along and I took the
first step, put the thin end of the wedge in. Time passes until
I take a bottle home with me and put it in my clothes-box to
have a taste now and then on the quiet of that invigorating,
stimulating, etc., Wolfe’s Schnapps—perhaps I might get a
pound in one of the wrappers 1 Until, one New Year’s night,
no one could make any mistake, “ I was drunk.”
I came over to Australia with £l4O, the saving of years, to
see the different colonies. I landed in Melbourne, stayed for
a few months ; came to Sydney, then went to Adelaide ;
stayed for a few weeks, then came back. In the meantime I
had become a confirmed drunkard. When my money was
nearly spent I went in for work again, but as soon as I got
my wages, after paying my board and lodging, I would spend
the rest in drink. Then on Sunday mornings I would be at
the pubs if I had 3d. or 6d. left to get some more. And so I
went on, working at what I could get, until one Saturday
night I got run in. Oh ! what a Sunday. “ Give me a drink
of water, please.” Time after time I asked for more. Then
on Monday I was sent up to Darlinghurst for being drunk
and disorderly, to be bolted and locked in as if I were a wild
beast —“ the result of supper beer.” Praise God, when I came
out I was invited to the Prison Gate Brigade Home,
where, by the consistent living of the officers, I came to God
and became a Salvation Army soldier.
Although drink was indulged in so much by my parents, I


was brought up in the belief of an Almighty God and that
the Sabbath day was to be kept holy.
And though I wandered so far myself I never took God’s
name in vain, nor lost my belief in God and Jesus Christ as
my Saviour. Even when I had no money or friends, and have
had to sleep anywhere and get a meal anywhere I could, I
never lost my faith in God.
I had lost all confidence in any religious sect through the
inconsistent living cf some of their professors, but now, glory
to His name ! I believe in God and Jesus Christ my Saviour
more than ever, and am determined, come what will, to trust
on, and by-and-bye to be called Rome. Amen. I have also
been in the one situation now 18 months, and never intend
to run away.— John B .
South Australia.
Although as yet we have no regular homes for the discharged
prisoners and fallen women heie, yet both classes are taken in
hand and dealt with. Great need is felt for the Prison-Gate
Brigade. Several men upon discharge have been taken hold of,
situations secured, and are reported doing well.
The Royal Commission appointed to enquire into the man-
agement and general order of the South Australian Stockade,
gaols, etc., says, in respect to discharged prisoners:—“The
Salvation Army Prison-Gate Brigade does a great deal of good
in assisting discharged prisoners, and we should be glad to see
such an institution doing a similar work here.’'
Major Jeffries writes as follows :—“ It seems to me as if the
Lord is going to force the Prison-Gate Brigade work upon us
in this city (Adelaide), for we are continually having men
from the gaol come to us, and now the gaol authorities are
sending the men to our war office when they leave the prison.”
We most earnestly desire to thank the following friends for
their weekly donations in kind ;
Bread. — Messrs. Wm. White, McLean, Perkins, Dingle,
Bruce, Hinds, Meadly, Weeks White.
Meat. —Messrs. Stanning, Wm. Smith, Bartlett, Hawke,
McGill, McNiven, Sraithfield Meat Company, Beatie, Drake,
O’Connel, Hall, Palmer, and Smith.
Vegetables. —Messrs. Smith, Hambly (2), Tasker (2)
Becker, Scholfield, Serg. Moy Sam, and others.
The proprietors of the following newspapers and periodicals
have also favoured us with their papers : — Sydney Morning
Ur raid, Daily Telegraph, Australian Christian World, Presby-
terian, Australian Record, The King's Business.


8/6 Uo
F 1112 7^
SYDNEY, N.S.W.:
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, GEORGE STREET.
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




Rescue & Prison-Gate Brigade Homes.
S "ST ID JE3 "ST .
WHAT ARil THE OBJECTS OF SUCH AN
INSTITUTION?
It is a place of refuge, to which girls, already fallen,
can fly for deliverance.
If affords a ready means of escape to pure girls who
are thrown into circumstances of danger.
Where girls who have been ruined and forsaken,
and are consequently in trouble, but are opposed
leading an immoral life, can find counsel and be
assisted.
Where the fallen can obtain counsel and help in
their troubles even before they have decided to
abandon their evil life. Such a home, it is believed,
will form a link between these girls and their
relatives. By it, also, the confidence of the “ un-
fortunate ” community will be gained, and the way
prepared for their restoration.
To such an institution parents, guardians, and
friends can apply for information respecting their
children, and others, whom they may have reason
to believe have gone astray, or are in danger of
doing so.
WHAT ARE OUR NEEDS?
1. The sympathy and prayers of all who wish for the
restoration of the fallen ones —alas! so plentiful
around us.
2. Regular subscribers, who will help us with the
burden of maintenance.
3, Donations of money, clothes, food, and other neces-
saries, will be thankfully received at Head-quarters,
or at any Divisional War Office, addressed to the
Divisional Officer.
P.S. —All donations will be acknowledged in the War
Cry, unless requested otherwise.
GEORGE A. KILBEY,
Brigadier.
