









JEWS IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
1836-1936
AN HISTORICAL OUTLINE
By
Hirsch M
W.E.A. TUTOR
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE






'
>■ MuxJ:''*' - . - iMliiiiff
. JHHi |B| ; ~
1 fc J » # ' ‘^ : ‘ jBi
fi //> w< ?*Wm
••• ; I inhhf
sBr |1||M
: .-A » **V. ?y^^f‘' * ! /' vV
|| ' -^
■% *■ '^ ;y^mf < A^P A ,,
III *w ■ , v;JMPIBMilMr
m 'H:;; *
mmmk & ? -4
. >
.„ fe Wr^^ S \- "- wsS^SSKt
%\{'/f' /
|'| || iiiiii 1 ' 1|| l ’~' '^ , ' : i 1 ' ||iV
: . If w^flHHr
: %>- 4lWK^# : fffli' «HHHH
li: - ;;^ - }/
JACOB MONTEFIORE, Esq.
Reproduced from photo by courtesy Art Gallery.


JEWS IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
1836-1936
AN HISTORICAL OUTLINE
By
Hirsch Munt
W.E.A. TUTOR
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
Preface by
DR. LEON OPIT
PRESIDENT OF THE ADELAIDE HEBREW
CONGREGATION
Foreword by
G. H. PITT, B A.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ARCHIVIST




PREFACE
The contents of this book will, I hope, help the community to
understand itself and learn of the glorious triumphs of its forbears
during their struggles as pioneers in this State whose centenary we
are so proud and fortunate to be celebrating this year.
Our assiduous author has accomplished a feat of which he
should be justly proud, and has rummaged all through my congre-
gational minutes, documents and such other matter relavent to his
research.
He has shown untiring efforts to unfold the truth in a purely
historical fashion illustrating the glorious march of events from the
appointment of one of our kinsfolk, J. B. Montefiore, by King Wil-
liam IV. in 1834, as one of the original eleven Commissioners, down
to the present day.
One notes too that Mr. Munz has devoted most time to the
earlier associations of our people than those of our own day; and
this is not because he is a “laudator temporis acti,” but having the
chronicler’s mind he is able to project himself in true perspective,
back to those grand old days when the foundations were laid,
whereupon we might build, by those whose memory is now sacred
to us.
The appendix of Vital Statistics is interesting as well as alarm-
ing, but happily does not indicate the true position of Australian
Jewry whose numbers, on the contrary, have increased.
For the executive and members of the Adelaide Hebrew Con-
gragation I am truly grateful to the author for this survey which
is an up-to-date and faithful reflection of the past.
LEON OPIT,
President Adelaide Hebrew Congregation.
10/2/36.




FOREWORD
The approach of South Australia’s Centenary has given a sharp
stimulus to historical investigations of every kind, for the occa-
sion affords a convenient vantage point from which to survey the
changes produced by a hundred years, to tell the life story of in-
dividuals, and to trace the growth or decline of institutions and
organizations.
Mindful of their four thousand years of history and the bril-
liant contribution by members of their race to the intellectual pro-
gress of the world, it is natural that the Jewish community should
at this time desire to place on record its contribution to the de-
velopment of the State.
Unlike the Lutherans who arrived on our shores in the early
days, the Jews did not come out to South Australia in bodies as
the result of an organised emigration, nor have they ever attempted
to become a political force. They have combined only for devo-
tional and philanthropic purposes, and it is mainly as individuals
that they have left their mark.
Material for a history of the Jews in South Australia exists in
a variety of scattered sources—in old minute books, in bundles of
correspondence, in newspaper files, and in that useful, but danger-
ously unreliable, source —old men’s memories. The collection,
arrangement and sifting of the mass of facts gleaned in this way
is a formidable undertaking, calling for patience in the search for
data, cai e in their acceptance when found, and judgment in giving*
to each point its due weight. The Jewish community is to be
congratulated upon finding in Mr. Munz, a student possessing these
qualities, as well as the courage and enthusiasm necessary for
undertaking at short notice a task, the extent and difficulty of
which he could at the time have no means of gauging.
Though never numerically strong as an element in our popu-
lation, it is fitting that a community from which has sprung citizens
of such worth as Emanuel Solomon, Philip Levi, Abraham Abra-
hams, and Benjamin da Costa, should find a place in our histories,
and it is to be hoped that Mr. Munz’s work will be regarded as an
introductory outline, to be followed later by researches by other
students.
GEORGE H. PITT, 8.A.,
Archives Department,
January 28, 1936.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
My thanks are due to all those who assisted me in the
compilation of this Historical Outline. I am particularly
indebted to Mr. G. H. Pitt for many valuable suggestions.
H.M.


INDEX TO CONTENTS.
Page
P REFACE .... .... .... .... .... .... <<>• .... .... 3
REW D •••• •••• .... .... .... •••) o
1. The Montefiores 11
2. Early Jewish settlers and the origin of the Community .... 18
3. The Community and communal affairs —1850/1870 31
4. Jewish Pioneers in Pastoral Life 35
5. Jewish Pioneers in Trade & Commerce 40
6. Jews in, Municipal and Parliamentary life of S.A 47
7. The Community and communal affairs —1870/1900 54
8. Jews in Social and Cultural life of this State 61
9. The Community till the outbreak of the War 71
10. The War and after 73
Appendix—a note on vital statistics 82




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
1. Frontispiece —Jacob Montefiore, Esq.
(By courtesy the Art Gallery.)
2. Joseph Barrow Montefiore, Esq.
(By courtesy the State Savings Bank.)
3. Emmanuel Solomon, Esq.
4. The old Synagogue, 1879.
5. Block of past Presidents.
6. The new Synagogue.
7. M. J. Solomon, Esq.
8. Rabbi A. T. Boas.




THE MONTEFIORES.
The very foundation of South Australia is insolubly linked up
with the name of a prominent Jew', Jacob Montefiore.
Jacob Montefiore, a member of an Italian-Jewish family which
domiciled in England at the beginning of the 18th century, was
one of the 11 commissioners by King William IV. for
the colonisation of South Australia. The Montefiores played a
prominent part in the history of British Colonisation. The dictum
“Trade follows the flag” was more than a mere phrase in the case
of the Montefiores. We find many of this enterprising family
scattered at the end of the 18th century and at the beginning of the
last alb over the new possessions of the British Empire where they
contributed greatly towards the development of trade and com-
merce. None, however, of this pioneering family was as prominent
as Sir Moses Montefiore. Sir Moses wias closely identified at the
beginning* of the last century with the banking interest and the
financial spheres of Great Britain. He was among the founders of
the Imperial Continental Gas Association which extended gas
lighting through the principal European cities, he was a Director
of the South Eastern Railways, and he was one of the original
directors of the Provincial Bank of Ireland, which gained for him
the honorary freedom of Londonderry. As a successful banker, Sir
Moses, financed on numerous occasions important Government
schemes,, notably the loan of 15,000,000 pounds,/ during the reign of
William IV. for the compensation for the owners of slaves. From
his diaries one gathers that he was largely responsible for the
appointment of Jacob Montefiore, his cousin, as a Commissioner
for the colonisation of South Australia. On 7th May, 1835, he
writes, “I called at Downing Street on the Right Hon. Spring-Rice,
Chancellor of the Exchequer. I was immediately admitted and
received by him in. a most friendly manner. I thanked him for hav-
ing, at my request, appointed Jacob Montefiore one of Her Majes-
ty’s Commissioners for the Colonisation of South Australia. The
Chancellor spoke of the many new schemes now afloat of Companies
of small capital, and said he would always be glad to see me.”
(Diaries of Sir Moses and Lady Monteliore edited by Dr. L.
Loewe, Vol. 1 p. 94).
Jacob Montefiore, who was born in Jamaica in 1801, was con-
nected prior to his appointment as Commissioner with the Colonial
Produce Trade. Although a Commissioner he did not make his
home in South Australia. He visited Australia in 1843, and in 1852,
when he came to Victoria as an agent for Messrs. Rothschild.
During his stay in Australia he visited this State, and was accorded


a great civic welcome. Jacob Montefiore watched the development
of South Australia during has long life with, great interest.
We know from the Hon. B. T. Finniss’s letters,to Montefiore
that he w'as keenly interested in the early stages of the Colony.,
The first letter dated in Adelaide, 17/5/1837, begins as follows:
“Before I left England you did me the honour to request from
me a full statement of all our proceedings in the new Colony. I
now undertake to do so in full reliance upon the high-minded feel-
ings of one of the Commissioners for South Australia-”
“The Southern Australian” for Friday, June 2nd, 1843, gives
the following vivid description of the great civic welcome accorded
to Mr. Jacob Montefiore on the occasion of his visit to this State.
(We must point out, how'ever, that the paper is mistaken as to
the name of Mr. Montefiore. The guest of honour at this distin-
guished gathering was not Joseph Barrow as is reported, but his
elder brother Jacob, the Colonisation Commissioner for South Aus-
tralia.)
“Yesterday a dinner was given to this gentleman at the Shake-
speare Tavern, as a testimony of gratitude and respect for his
eminent services to the Colony since its first institution. J. H.
Fisher, Esq. (later Sir James) in the Chair. Mr. Fisher was sup-
ported on his right by His Excellency the Governor, Major
O’Halloran, R. F- Newland, Esq., Manager of the Bank of Australia,
and W. Giles, Esq., Manager of the South Australian Company. On
his left were J. Montefiore, Esq., Edward Stephens, Esq., Mana-
ger of the Bank of South Australia. A. M. Mundy, Esq., Private
Secretary, and the Hon. W. Smillie, Advocate General. John
Morphett, Esq.,,acted as croupier, supported by John Brown and
G. S. Kingston, Esqrs. About seventy gentlemen were present-
“ The dinner was got up in the most excellent style by Mr.
Solomon, who spared neither trouble nor expense.”
The Chairman, who introduced the visitor assured the audience
that “he felt highly complimented in being the mouthpiece by
which the toast he had to propose Was to be conveyed, and he only
wished he had been more capable to explain the merits of the
gentleman who was the object of it.” He went on to say “that
the assistance which had been kindly rendered by Mr. Montefiore
from the very first was well known to many present. They all knew
that Mr. Montefiore was a member of the South Australian Com-
mission and that, both as a member of that body and before the
passing of the Act, he had been most indefatigable in his efiforts
for the advancement of the interests of this colony. Without the
unceasing exertions of that body, and of Mr. Montefiore in particu-
lar, they would not now be in that place, and he would not have
the honour of addressing them. If the presence of Mr. Montefiore
did not restrain him, he would have expatiated much more on the
unceasing services of that gentleman, and how much the colony


deserved at his hands, but he was aware that those services were
known and appreciated by most of them.”
Mr. Jacob Montefiore responding to the toast said that “he was
greatly delighted that he had been able to visit this colony in
which he had always felt an interest. He could not bear evidence
to its high possibilities and all its varied resources, and he could
contradict the innumerable falsehoods and the false impressions
that were rife at home.” “You have,” said Mr. Montefiore, “great
natural advantages; you have a splendid climate, a fine soil, and
numerous mines of copper, lead and other metals,, which I sincerely
wish will prove mines of wealth to you all. You have a persevering
and industrious body of colonists, an . excellent Governor, a wise
Judge. If you have not the reality of wealth, you have now the
prospect of it. You have had a severe lesson —you must then
learn from experience. Your motto must now be ‘slow and sure.’
I have always been a keen advocate of the colony, and from what
I have done you may know* what I shall do. It is my sincere de-
sire and purpose to advance the interest of the colony, and the
colonists may depend upon my aid in anything which I can do to
assist them.”
The Governor who addressed this meeting said in his re-
marks: “It must be particularly gratifying, to Mr. Montefiore to
[ find that his labours had not been in vain, to observe the strides
' which the colony was making in agriculture, and in various other
branches of industry.”
Many other speakers addressed the meeting, referring to the
great services rendered by Mr- Montefiore to the State from its
very foundation. We know from the same account that “the
meeting broke up highly pleased with the entertainment and with
the happy and harmonious manner in which it was conducted.”
This great interest in the progress of South Australia which
Jacob Montefiore displayed from the very beginning did not abate
till his death which occurred in England in 1895.
“The Observer,” of January Ist, 1887, pays a most glowing
tribute to Jacob Montefiore as one of the original founders of this
State, in connexion with the Jubilee Celebration of South Australia,
it reads as follows :
“It may not be generally known that Mr. Jacob Montefiore, who
was one of the 11 commissioners appointed in 1834 by King Wil-
liam 4th for the colonisation of South Australia or for the establish-
ment and regulation of the colony by the Mother country, is living.
Mr. Montefiore is the only surviving member of that Board of
which Col. Torrens w'as Chairman and Sir Rowland Hill was first
secretary- Mr. Montefiore, who is now in his 88th yean, and resides
in Hyde Park, London, enjoys good health, inheriting the Monte-
fiore characteristics of longevity and vitality, and still takes deep
interest, as he always has done, in the welfare of this Colony.
He was the eldest of three brothers and he was. born in Jamaica,


where his father was for several years a merchant and sugar
planter. When quite a youth he was taken to England where he
completed his education and entered into business with his
brothers. He is a J.P., a member of the Committee of the Royal
Colonial Institute, and a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society.
For a number of years he was a partner of Montetfiore Brothers,
London, who opened a large business in New South Wales and
possessed an excellent run of well-bred sheep in 1838. 4he house
was one of the leading firms in Sydney and in it Mr. Dalgety
(Dalgety, Blackwood & Co.), the wealthy wool merchant of Mel-
bourne, began his career. In 1844 Mr. Montefiore visited Sydney,
and in 1852 he came to Victoria with his family as agent for Messrs.
Rothschild. In Victoria he went into business and subsequently
returned to England.’’
Montefiore Hill overlooking the city from North Adelaide
perpetuates the memory of- one of the founders of this State. Mr.
Jacob Montefiore presented to the Adelaide Art Gallery a portrait
of himslf painted by B. Marks. The picture which hangs there
depicts Mr. Jacob Montefiore in the most life-like and characteristic
manner.
Joseph Barrow Montefiore, a younger brother of Jacob, having
been born in 1803, unlike his brother, spent many , years in this
State. We find him as early as 1837 acting as agent for this State in
New South Wales. The following letter, addressed by J. B.
Montefiore & Co- to the Colonial Secretary, is proof of his early
association iwith this State: —
Copy.
(Duplicate)
SYDNEY, 15th July, 1837.
“Sir,
“We have the Honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of
the 3rd ultimo acquainting us of His Excellency Governor Hind-
marsh having been pleased to appoint us ( Agents in this Colony
for the Government of the Province of South Australia.
“We feel much indebted to His Excellency for the selection of
our Firm in this appointment, and trust the high and important
confidence reposed in us will be attended with advantage to Plis
Government as well as benefit to ourselves.
“We have also to acknowledge receipt of your communication
of same date requesting sundry 'articles to be procured and shipped
by the first opportunity, which s'hall receive our best attention and
your instructions strictly abided by.
“We are fearful some delay may take place in the shipment of
the goods, owing to the difficulty of finding a conveyance as the
owners of the two last vessels of your Province positively refused
taking goods from anyone, and in fact would not acknowledge their
intention of sending the vessels there.


“We are, however, daily looking for the arrival of a small
vessel, the “Abercrombye,” belonging to ourselves, and we will
endeavour to arrange for her proceeding to your Port when we
hope to make some permanent arrangement for the future.
“We have the honor to be
“Sir,
“Your most Obt. servants,
“P. P. J. Barrow Montefiore & Co.,
“Thos. Breillat.”
€
“R. Gouger, Esq.,
“Col. Secretary,
“South Australia.
SYDNEY, 10th October, 1831.
“Sir,
“We beg to acquaint you that the co-partnership between
Joseph Barrow Montefiore and David Riliero Furtado having
expired, the business will in future be conducted in Sydney under
the Firm of Montefiore Breillat & Co., and in Hobart Town undei
the Firm of Montefiore Furtado & Co., which Firms are em-
powered to receive and settle all claims due to or by us.
“We have the honor to be
“Sir,
“Your most Obt. servants,
“J. -■' Barrow Montefiore & Co.,
(by their Attorney)
“Thos. Breillat.”
J. B. Montefiore was one of the founders of the Bank) of Aus-
tralasia, and was closely connected with the pastoral pndustry of
N.S.W. and this State. He resided in Adelaide during the forties
and fifties of last century. It is interesting to note that the second
marriage to be solemnised in Adelaide according to the Jewish rites
was that of Esther Hannah Barrow Montefiore and Eliezer Mon-
tefiore Levi. The marriage took place on 3rd May, 1848, in the
private residence of J. B. Montefiore, St. John’s Street, Adelaide.
The officiating minister, according to the register book in the
Adelaide Jewish community, was Burnett Nathan, in the presence
of Solomon Mocatta, Louis Joseph, George Mocatta, and Edmund
Levi. From the Montefiore letters, which are preserved in the
City Archives, one gains an insight into the formation of the early
Jewish congregation.
The Montefiores, Joseph Barrow and Eliezer Levi were in-
strumental in the forming of the Jewish community. When the
Governor, F. H. Robe, proclaimed on April 22nd. 1847, “the sum
of two thousand tw'o hundred and twenty-one pounds was voted
in aid of the purposes of the Christian Religion and Education,”


the following very important correspondence took place. On
August 18th, 1847, this letter was addressed to E- L. Montefiore :
“Sir,
“In reply to your letter of 13th instant, in which you make
application on behalf of the Jewish community in this Province,
for [the proportion to w'hich they are entitled of the Government
grant in aid of religion and education, I have the honour to obser\e,
they have not yet complied with the requirements of the Lieutenant
Governor’s proclamation of the 22nd April last, as to the manner
in which Trustees are to be appointed in the absence of other office
bearers.
“As soon as you have conformed to the terms oi phat Pro-
clamation the Lieutenant Governor will issue the necessary warrant
for the payment of the amount due to the community of which you
are a member, as their proportion of the Government grant above
referred to.
“1 have etc.,
(Signed) “A. M. Mundy.”
The following is Eliezer Montefiore’s answer to this letter:—
“ADELAIDE, 19th August, 1847.
“To the Plon. the Colonial Secretary,
“Sir,
“In reply to your communication of the 18th inst., stating that
I have -not yet complied with the requirements of the i Lieutenant
Governor’s Proclamation of the 22nd April last, I shall be glad if
you will inform me in what manner those terms are to be carried
out in the case of the community of which I am member differing
as it does from that of any other denomination, there being at pre-
sent no place of worship and consequently no minister or congrega-
tion.
“I have the honour to be,
“Sir,
“Your obt. servt,
(Sgd.) “E. L. Montefiore.”
1 shall deal subsequently with the matter respecting Govern-
ment Aid for Religious Purposes to the Jewish Persuasion.
The premises of the importing firm of J. B. Montefiore were
where the Imperial Plotel now-stands. J. B. Montefiore was one of
the most prominent business men in this city, w'here he was en-
gaged in commerce and shipping. Mr. Montefiore was one of the
original trustees of the State Savings Bank when it was established
in 1848.
(There is unfortunately a lot of confusion as to the Montefiores.
The Trustee of the State (Savings Bank was not J. Montefiore as
we find it in numerous references, but J. B. Montefiore. The list


>
'■
* : ■ iV; ■ . . ,
•.; . • : : ’
■> -
h
A , , </ ' •' ■■
■Bl ■ •
' # - A JSKP ; PI
’
lllll
;
JOSEPH BARROW MONTE FIORE, Esq.
Reproduced from photo by courtesy State Savings Bank.




of the first trustees to the State Savings Bank gazetted in the
S.A. Government Gazette for January 6th, 1848, gives the name
J. B. Montefiore.)
He was a member of the Stock Exchange and also a member of
the committee of the Chamber of Commerce in 1851-52. He is to be
remembered as one of the earliest pioneers in the mining industry
of this State. He was closely identified with tpe mining interest
of S.A. and served on the Board of many companies in the capacity
of trustee and director. He was a trustee of the Royal S.A. Mining
Company, which was established in December, 1846, with a capital
of £IOO,OOO.
The Montefiores never settled permanently in this State.
Because of the fact that their main interests were in England and
New South Wales, their stay in South' Australia, was of an ephe-
meral nature only, and this explains why they did not take such
a prominent part in the social life here. Eliezer Montefiore Levi,
however, was a member of the first Circulating Library, in the year
1844, and J. B. Montefiore was a Justice of the Peace and on the
boards of numerous charitable institutions.
Sir Moses Montefiore, who had never been to Australia, was
well informed about this country by Governor Gawler, who was
his intimate friend lor many years. We know that Governor
Gawler travelled .with Sir Moses and Lady Montefiore to Palestine
in the year 1849. From a life sketch, “George Gawler,” compiled
under the direction of his daughter, we know that “early in 1849
George Gawler accepted an invitation from Sir Moses Montefiore
to accompany him together with Dr. Adler and other friends on
a tour to the Holy Land. They were, however, delayed three
weeks by the illness of Lady Montefiore. George Gawler person-
ally was not disappointed at the delay, as he was hard at work
studying Hebrew and Arabic preparatory to the tour, and that time
would make a vast difference in his progress.”
They started on 15th May, 1849, and the party arrived home
on 13th September the same year.
The last link with the Montefiores in this State was severed
by the death of Mr. Moses H. Montefiore, who died on March 11th,
1920, at his residence, Union Street, Kensington. He had resided
in Adelaide since 1876, and was not engaged in any public activity.
He was a nephew of Mr. J. 8./Montefiore and Jacob Montefiore.
Mr. Montefiore was an invalid for many years and he died in his
89th year. Mr. M. H. Montefiore was buried in the Jewish cemetery
at West Terrace.


EARLY JEWISH SETTLERS AND THE ORIGIN OF THE
COMMUNITY.
It is difficult to ascertain who the first Jewish settler in this
State was. As early as September 11, 1836, there is a certain John
Levey who arrived from London on board the “Cygnet. 55 1 here
is no evidence, however, from the earliest register books of the Ade-
laide Jewish congregation of his connexion with the Jewish fellow
citizens in subsequent years.
The first Jewish settler to come out to the colony was Philip
Lee. Mr. and Mrs. Lee left London on June 30th, 1836. After five
months on the sea they landed at Glenelg in the ship
“Tam O’Shanter” (Captain Freeman), on the 20th November, 183(5.
The ship “Buffalo, 5 with Governor Hindmarsh, arrived six weeks
after. Mr. P. Lee is mentioned on the list of landowners for the
year 1840. His land was located on Section 79 south of Adelaide.
Mr. Lee was among the of the Adelaide Hebrew congre-
gation in September. 1848. He did not, however, take part in public
life. He died at Glenelg on January 21st, 1861. A daughter of
Mr. Lee was married to Col. Solomon, tjhe son of the Hon. J, M.
Solomon, the first President of the Hebrew congregation.
A certain James Solomon of West Maitland. New South Wales,
is mentioned amongst the grantees of Adelaide Town acres; Acre
No. 899, 1837, the land granted, w ! as north side of Buxton Street.
It is possible, however, that James Solomon never resided in this
State. Early Jewish settlers to come out from London, who were
later connected with Jewish life and affairs, were J.'M. Phillippson
and P. Levi on board the “Eden. 55 They arrived in Adelaide on
June 24th,,'1838. Phillipson and Levi were both destined to play,
in later years, a very important part in the pastoral life of this State.
We shall return to them when dealing with the Jewish pastoral
pioneers in South Australia.
The first Jewish settlers in this State who made their presence
felt in Jewish life and formed the very nucleus of the Jewish com-
munity were the Solomons. Mr. Emanuel Solomon came from Syd-
ney, in 1838; and his nephew, Judah Moss, arrived in the colony in
1840. It was in Mr. Solomon's Temple Tavern that the first meet-
ing was held on Sunday, September 10th, 1848, “for the purpose of
forming members of the Jewish persuasion into a body. 55 Till that
time no organized body of Jewish people existed in this State. Prior
to the time when the Jewish congregation was formed the adult
members of the Jewish persuasion used to hold occasional services
on holidays in hired rooms. Mr. John Stephens informs us, in


“The Royal Almanac for 1846,” “that the descendants of Abraham
have as yet no synagogue in the town, but a congregation is in the
habit of assembling for worship according to the Jewish rites in
the house of Mr. Burnett Nathan in Currie Street.”
From the register book of the Adelaide Jewish community we
know that as early as May, 1846, the first marriage was solemnised
according to the Jewish rites between Charles Jacobs and Elizabeth
Joshua, in the private residence of Mr. Michael Joshua, Hindley
Street. We should like to add that this first married Jewish couple
were the parents of that well-known citizen of Adelaide and old
identity, Mr. S. J. Jacobs. The second marriage, that of Hannah
B. Montefiorc and E. Montefiore Levi was mentioned earlier. Mr.
Barnett Nathan acted as minister on these occasions. Reference
was made to the first meeting at Mr. Solomon’s Temple Tavern,
which marks the birth of the Adelaide Jewish community. We
consider this first meeting to be of great' historical importance. We
reproduce, therefore, the minutes of this meeting as recorded in
the first Minute book of the Adelaide Elebrew congregation:—
“At a meeting held at the Temple Tavern on Sunday, Septem-
ber 10th, 1848, for the purpose of 'forming members of the Jewish
persuasion into a body for making arrangements for the forth-
coming holidays and such other business as may occur, Mr. Louis
Joseph was unanimously elected to fill the Chair. Moved by Morris
Marks and seconded by Judah Solomon that Mr. Louis Joseph’s
rooms be accepted to perform divine service in for the forthcoming
holidays. Carried unanimously. Moved by Mr. Judah Solomon,
seconded by Mr. Morris Marks, that a committee be formed for the
purpose of obtaining weekly subscriptions in order to raise a fund
for the erection of a permanent place of worship. Carried unani-
mously.
“Moved by Mr. Emanuel Solomon, and seconded by Mr.* John
Lazar, that a deputation wait upon Mr. J. B. Montefiore for the
purpose of requesting him to act as president—lost by a majority of
14 to 9. Moved by Mr. Morris Marks seconded by Mr. John Barnett,
that Mr. Louis Joseph act as president for the first 12 months.
Moved by Mr. Joseph Abrahams, seconded by Mr. John Lazar, that
Mr. Judah Solomon act as president for the first 12 months. Moved
by Mr. Owen, seconded by Mr. Frederick Collins, that Mr. Barnett
Nathan act as president for the first 1 12 months. Moved by Mr.
Judah Solomon, seconded by Mr. Morris Marks, that Mr. Henry
Keesing, Jnr., and Mr. Samuel Lawrence act as scrutineers. Car-
ried unanimously.
“The election having gone to Ballot for president, the votes
were as follows: —
Mr. Jq Solomon 12
Mr. Burnett Nathan 6
Mr. Louis Joseph 3
Mr. Judah Solomons Was declared duly elected president for the
first 12, months.


“Moved by Mr. Ralph Raphael, seconded by Mr. Henry Kees-
ing, Jnr., that Mr. Louis Joseph act as treasurer for the first year.
Proposed by Mr. Emanuel Solomon, seconded by Mr. Frederick
Collins ,that Mr. Burnett Nathan act as treasurer for the first year.
ml
The election having gone to ballot for treasurer the votes were as
follows: —
Mr- B. Nathan 13
Mr. L. Joseph 9
Mr. B. Nathan was duly elected treasurer for the first I*2 months.
It was unanimously agreed that five gentlemen be elected to act
as a committee from the number now assembled; it having gone to
ballot, the following gentlemen were duly declared to act for the
first 12 months :
Mr. L. Joseph 18
Mr. J. Lazar 17
Mr. N. Joshua 15
Mr. M. Marks 12
Mr. V. Solomon 8
Mr. Morris Marks volunteered to act as honorary secretary for the
first 12 months, which was unanimously accepted. Moved by Mr.
John Lazar, seconded by Mr. Isaac Solomons, that Mr. Louis
Joseph vacates the chair, and that a vote of thanks be returned to
him. Confirmed September 24th, 1848. J. M. Solomon, President.”
Ihe abovementioned matter respecting Government Aid for
Religious Purposes to the Jewish Persuasion was before the Legis-
lative Council on Tuesday, 3rd August, 1847. In the' South Aus-
tralian Government Gazette, No. 32, August 12th, 1847, we read:
“Major OTlalloran made his Motion, pursuant to notice, respecting
Government Aid for Religious Purposes to the Jewish Persuasion.
His Excellency stated that he was unwilling to introduce any Bill
for that object until he had received an expression from the Mem-
bers of the Jewish Persuasion of their desire for such a measure.”
That the members of the Jewish Persuasion expressed their
desire for such a measure is seen from the next issue of the S.A.
Gazette for August, 19th, 1847, when “Major O’Halloran presented
a Petition from the members of the Jewish Persuasion praying to
be placed on the same footing with their Christian Brethren in the
matter of State support to Religion, which, was read and received.”
We should like to add at this stage that the estimates of the
Treasury for 1847 contain an item for £5/16/-, a grant lor the
Jewish Community. This money, however, was not actually
granted, as is seen from the statement of Receipts and Expenditure
of the same year. I could not ascertain why the money was not
granted; perhaps the members of the Jewish persuasion, as there
was no community then, did not avail themselves of such a grant.
There is no reference to any grants in subsequent years. From the
minutes of the Adelaide Hebrew Congregation meeting held on
Sunday, Ist October, 1848, one learns that no application for a


grant was made in connexion with the building of the synagogue.
“It was moved” at that meeting, “by Mr. Louis Joseph, and
seconded by Mr. M. Joshua Senior, that a subscription list be
opened by the gentlemen of the Jewish persuasion for the purpose
of raising sufficient funds for the erection of a synagogue. Car-
ried unanimously. Moved by Mr. B. Nathan, seconded by Mr.
Joshua, that the subscription be raised for the furtherance of the
object stated in the former resolution, be upon (the voluntary prin-
ciple only, and that no assistance be applied for from H.M. Colonial
Government towards the furtherance of this object.”
We shall give below a summary of the early meetings which
are the initial stages in the history of the Jewish community.
At a committee meeting held at Mr. Solomon’s Temple tavern,
on September 18th, 'IB4B, it was “moved by Mr. John Lazar,
seconded by Mr. M. Joshua, Snr., that the committee be empowered
to hire a room for holding divine service for the approaching holi-
days. Mr. M. Joshua undertook to obtain the room.” At the same
meeting it was “moved by Mr. John Lazar, .seconded by Mr.
Joshua, Snr., that the following gentlemen read Prayers for the
ensuing holidays, say “Yom Kippur” or Day of Atonement: —
Mr. R. Raphael—Shachrit (morning prayer).
Mr. N. Hart —Moosaf (midday prayer).
Mr. Louis Joseph —Neilah j (evening prayer).
“Moved by Mr. Louis Joseph, seconded by Mr. Joshua, that
Mr. Lazar reads the “Conidere” (Kol-Nindrey).”
The first steps towards the erection of a synagogue were taken
at a general meeting held on Sunday, 24th September, 1848, when
“Mr. Burnett Nathan brought forward a box containing the sum
of £5/7/3, having been collected for the purpose of rendering assist-
ance to all poor and unfortunate Jews in our colony, and also to-
wards erecting a permanent place of worship.”
At the same general meeting it was moved by Mr. Burnett
Nathan, and seconded by Mr. Joshua, Snr., that “a subscription of
1/- per week be paid by all persons professing the Jewish religion
in South Australia. One dissenting voice!”
Mr. Michael Joshua moved at a meeting, on Sunday, Ist October,
1848, that “Mr. J. B. Montefiore be invited to attend our place of
meeting on Yom Kippur, Day of Atonement, to deliver a lecture in
English after additional morning service.” This meeting is of
particular interest and deserves special mention because the name
Beth Israel, which has now adorned the Hebrew community of
Adelaide for almost a century was given them. The resolution
reads as follow's: —“It was agreed by the president and committee
that this Society be called Beth Israel.”
We know from the records that —
“As early as Sunday, October 15th, of the same year, at a
general meeting, a letter was read by our worthy president from,
Mr. Weir, Architect, in reference to the amount required for the


erecting of a place of worship, plans accompanying the specification.
It is from this meeting that the first definite steps were taken to-
wards the erection of a place of worship, a necessity long overdue,
and one of the main causes of the very first meeting of the members
of the Jewish persuasion in Adelaide. At the meeting referred to
above, a “building committee was formed for the purpose of select-
ing a suitable piece of ground for the synagogue and such other
arrangements as may be deemed necessary.” The first mention
of a site was brought up at a committee meeting held on Sunday,
sth November, 1848, when “Mr. Louis Joseph brought forward a
rough statement of a piece of land as an eligible site for the erec-
tion of a place of worship.” We should like to mention at this stage
that the code of laws for the government of the A'delaide Jewish
Congregation was passed at a public meeting of that body on Sun-
day, November 19th, 1848.
Mr. Louis Joseph is to be remembered as one of the most active
members of the committee in selecting a suitable site for the future
synagogue. Thus at the same general meeting we find that he
“animatverted at some length, on the subject of procuring a site
for the erection of a permanent place of worship in Rundle Street.”
Mr. John Lazar, however, proposed “That a piece of ground in
Gilles Arcade, ofifered by Mr. Emanuel Solomon, be accepted. The
twb named propositions having been put the first was carried.”
That the building fund was growing rapidly from the voluntary
contributions of the community is seen from the first Auditor’s
Report of March 18, 1849, when the subscriptions on account of the
building fund stood at £lO3/4/-. The Building Committee convened
on Wednesday evening, April 11th, 1849, at a meeting when it was
“Proposed by Mr. Marks and seconded by Mr. Nathan, that the
sum expended for the building' of the synagogue do not exceed
£4OO, and immediate steps be taken to procure tenders for its erec-
tion. Carried unanimously.”
Mr. M. Marks, a member of' the building committee, at a meet-
ing held in Temple Tavern, Sunday, 17th June, proposed “That a
room, 35 x 20, be immediately erected for the purpose of a school
room and to be used as a place of worship. Carried unanimously.”
From a meeting of the Trustees held on December 11th, 1850.
we learn that the land in Rundle Street for the erection of the
synagogue was purchased from Mr- Moffatt for the sum of £2BO.
The Adelaide Synagogue Act which was passed in 1881, reads
that the land was purchased on 11th day of December, 1848 from
George Morphett, of Adelaide. There is unfortunately some con-
fusion in the early minute books of the Hebrew congregation as to
this name. It is given as Air. Moffatt, and on another occasion as
Air. Moffitt- The name registered in the general Registry Office is
that of George Morphett, Esq.
The problem of finance in connexion with the building of the
synagogue became quite an acute one. AVe know that at one stage


the President of the Congregation, Mr. Judah Moss Solomon,
moved at a general meeting on June 30th, 1850, his proposal being
seconded by Mr. Morris Marks, that “Major .O’Halloran and the
Hon. Jacob Hagen be requested to apply to the Legislative Coun-
cil for a grant of £4OO to defray the debt due on the Adelaide Syna-
gogue.” After a few remarks made by Mr. A. C. Cohen, in which
he suggested the raising of the required amount by a loan amongst
the Jewish body to be constituted into Shares bearing interest; it
was “moved by Mr. John Lazar, and seconded by Dr. Baruh, that
the sum of £4OO now required towards the liquidation of the Syna-
gogue liabilities be constituted into shares, say 40 at £lO each, such
shares bearing interest at a rate to be fixed upon by this meeting.
This being the amendment to the foregoing proposition, it was then
put to the vote and the numbers taken resulted as follows: —
“For the Amendment 10
“For the Proposition 3”
The adoption of this amendment with such an overwhelming
majority proves conclusively that no grant was applied for from
the Government for the building or finishing of the Synagogue.
The issue of shares, apparently, did not prove quite successful.
We know that a loan of £3OO was raised from a certain Peter
Belches in 1851, who secured a mortgage on the Synagogue. The
mortgage was freed and discharged in 1854.
It is important to add> at this stage that the first reference to
the Jewish Synagogue outside the Jewish community was made in
South Australian Register, July 18th, 1849, when the building of
the Synagogue was well advanced* It reads as follows: —
We are happy to learn that a Synagogue is about to be imme-
diately erected in Bundle Street, near Tavistock building, by our
brethren of the Jewish persuasion. The', estimated cost of the build-
ing and land is about £6OO and a sum between £3OO and £4OO has
already been contributed (partly by members of Christian bodies.
As is 'is not intended to apply for any portion of a Government
grant to complete the building, and as donations from private
sources will be thankfully accepted, we heartily recommend those
who can do so conscientiously ta give their mites towards the good
work, the more especially as many Hebrews had pecuniarily helped
to rear some of our Christian places of worship.” (The South Aus-
tralian Register, Wednesday, July 18, 1849.)
The subsequent meetings of the community/were devoted to
plans and suggestions how to solemnize the opening of the syna-
gogue which was decided to take-place oiH9th August, 1850. The
consecration of the synagogue, however, did not take place until
4th September. It proved to be an, event of foremost importance
not only in the Jewish life but that of Adelaide in general. The
South Australian Register for sth September, 1850, has a long and
vivid description of the consecration of the last Jewish synagogue
in South Australia. Because of the fact that this description gives


us an insight into the history of the Jews of this State we deem it
fully warranted to reproduce the account of this opening according
to the paper in its entirety.
Consecration of the First Jewish Synagogue in South Australia.
(From the South Australian Register, Thursday, sth September,
1850.)
“We have often thought that the most pure and exalted feel-
ings of which human nature is susceptible are those which occupy
the minds of the truly devout and sincerely grateful, upon occa-
sion of their being permitted for the first time to engage in public
worship in a temple reared by their own instrumentality, and set
apart for the worship of God in a strange land, or one far removed
from the homes of their fathers; and wfe believe such feelings oc-
cupy the minds of many amongst the congregation of our Jewish
brethren, upon the solemn occasion which caused them to assemble
yesterday.
The new Synagogue in Run die Street is in the Egyptian style
of architecture, and the interior fittings correspond with the appear-
ance of massive construction which characterises the exterior. We
were particularly struck with the neatness of the pew's, composed
of polished cedar, in which elegance and comfort are combined
to perfection. The coup d’oeil presented on entrance, though not
exactly grand, is most pleasing and well-calculated to inspire
reverential feelings towards that Omnipotent Being who is God
of the Jews and Christians alike, and who has in such a signal
manner expressed and manifested his regard for his chosen and
peculiar people.
Immediately in front of the Reader’s desk, and at the east end
of the Synagogue, is a highly furnished recess, representing the
Ark of the Covenant, before the folding doors of 'which is drawn
a lofty and expansive curtain, of white brocaded satin, and bordered
with azure. The centre of the curtain is adorned with two equi-
lateral triangles interlaced, symbolical of the shield of David.
Above and below the shield are handsome inscriptions, the one be-
low being “Adelaide,” in the Hebrew character, with the date of
the Jewish year, 5610, and surrounded by an arch enriched with a
Hebrew inscription in gold letters and the following translation
also in letters of gold:—
“Know before whom thou standest, the King of Kings, praised be
His holy name.”
Underneath the Arch are The two tablets containing the ten
commandents, also in Hebrew. On either side wall are two
conjoined tablets (one having its golden inscription in Hebrew
and the other in English characters). The tablets on the right
contain a prayer for the Queen, Prince Albert, Prince of Wales,
and the Royal Family; those on the left contain the memorable
words addressed to Moses when the Deity caused his glory to
pass before him.


The internal arrangements comprise a handsome gallery over
the entrance door, in which the female portion of the congrega-
tion worship apart, in accordance with established usage. Ihe
bronze chandeliers and other furniture are handsome, appropriate,
and strongly demonstrative of the liberal spirit which characterises
the Jewish community in this province. The Consecration Ser-
vice commenced by certain members of the congregation arraying
themselves in scarves of white silk, with azure or purple borders,
which simple preliminary being adjusted, four individuals (War-
dens) advanced from within to the entrance door, bearing a canop\ r
supported on staves of turned and polished cedar. The voice of the
Reader was heard without, saying, ‘‘Open unto us the gates of
righteousness, we will enter them and praise the Lord.” The
entrance doors being opened, he made his appearance bearing the
sacred scrolls of the law. enveloped in a case elaborately adorned,
and took his position under the canopy. The subsequent services
were in the following order: —
Reader.
“Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, into his courts with praise,
“Come let us worship and bow down, let us bend the knee before
the Lord our Maker —
“Worship the Lord with gladness, come into his presence with
exalting song.”
Congregation.
“Come let us sing unto the Lord, sing aloud to the Lord, sing aloud
to the Rock of our Salvation. [ Let us approach his presence
with thanksgiving, and sing joyful hymns unto Him.”
The procession then proceeded to the Ark, during wLich the
Reader and the Congregation sang: —
“Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord, we bless ye
from the house of the Lord.”
I
Then followed several psalms chaunted by the Reader and the
choir.
When the Sacred Scrolls had been placed within the Ark,
those who had composed the procession returned to their seats and
the Reader chaunted the 29th psalm. The assistant Reader then
standing before the Ark read an impressive prayer on behalf of the
whole congregation of Israel, the Hebrew portion of which prayer
was composed by the late Rev. Dr. Solomon Hirschel, Chief Rabbi
of the British Jews. Then followed a beautiful Consecration An-
them, written by the father of the late Dr. Hirschel, which was
chaunted by the Reader, each verse being followed by appropriate
responses by the choir. Then followed the prayer of King Solomon
at the dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings, viii. 22 to 61. This was
succeeded by a prayer for the Queen, the Prince, Members of the


Royal Family. The service closed with the Hallelujah Chorus,
which was harmoniously and delightfully performed.
About two hours after the conclusion of the solemn and very
interesting consecration service, of which we have endeavoured to
give a faithful outline, some 30 members of the l congregation
assembled around the festive board in the Lodge-room, at
the Temple Tavern, where a sumptuous dinner, a recherche dessert,
and excellent wines, were unsparingly provided in Host Lazar’s
best style, and the whole very deservedly lauded by the guests.
The Reader, Mr. Abraham Solomon, briefly supplicated a
blessing; and after the conclusion of the dinner .returned thanks.
After the removal of the cloth,'the chair was taken by Mr. Burnett
Nathan, and Mr. Judah Moss Solomon occupied the vice-chair. The
glasses being right-loyally charged at the invitation, of the worthy
Chairman, he proposed “The health of her Majesty the Queen.” All
her subjects he said, lived in the full enjoyment of that liberty
which was so dear to them ; and he (Chairman) rejoiced in being
a native of England. Under the benign sway of the British Sove-
reign all enjoy safety and protection to a greater extent than in
any other country. The toast was drunk with proper demonstra-
tions of loyalty, but the musical honours were omitted in conformity
with the delicate suggestion of Mr. Judah Moss Solomon, who
alluded to the recent decease of the Chairman’s father in terms at
once kind, feeling and appropriate. The Chairman next proposed
the health of Prince Albert. The Prince Consort, he said, had en-
deared himself to the British nation, not only because he was
chosen Consort of their beloved Queen, but because he had proved
a good husband, an exemplary father, and one who delighted to
cherish the arts of peace.
The proposed Exhibition, which would produce a united dis-
play of the industry oif all Nations was calculated to procure him
lasting honour in the estimation of all who felt the sentiments of
brotherhood in regarding the great human family. It was quite
evident in the happy case of his Royal Highness, 'that a liberal
government was best calculated to cherish liberal ideas and the
sentiments of a genuine fraternity. The toast was warmly received
and affectionately responded to. .
The Chairman next proposed the health of His Excellency, Sir
Henry Young, and said that although there might be some little
difference of opinion as to the Governor’s general policy, he was
sure that, in the main, his administration would be regarded with
sentiments of high approval. The toast w'as exceedingly well re-
ceived.
The Chairman next proposed “The Health of Rev. Dr. N. M.
Adler, Chief Rabbi of the Jews in England.” Mr. Solomon Marks
responded. He admitted his diffidence, and consequent inability
to do justice to the toast in attempting to acknowledge it, but he
was not unacquainted with the merits of the Rev. Dr. Adler. He


was a learned and pious man, and although more accustomed to
those ideas of liberty tolerated by the higher classes in Germany,
he had imbibed the more expended sentiments of Britons, and was,
he believed, as liberal and enlightened in his religious and politica 1
views as could be desired. Not only had the Rev. Dr. been per-
sonally respected by the Rothschilds but by the amiable Duke of
Sussex, and that was enough to make him respected everywhere,
as well as the people with whom he was identified. Ihe toast was
drunk by the Company in reverential silence.
The Chairman next proposed “Lady Young and the ladies of
South Australia.” Mr. J. M. Myers, in returning thanks, spoke in
the following terms: —Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, —Consequent
upon the reception of such a toast as that which has just been
given, it is, I believe, usual in most cases for a younger member
to rise to return thanks. Why it is so I am at a loss to determine,
but such being the case, I take upon myself the pleasurable task
of replying. I only regret my inability to do that justice to which
a toast of this nature is deservedly entitled. It is a toast which
animates our best feelings; a toast wdiich recalls to our minds one
of the great sources of terrestrial bliss; and the anti-quixotic in
deed must he be who would not, as it were, rise spontaneously to
acquiesce in the sentiments so ably expressed by the proposer. But
were I possessed of the eloquence of a Demosthenes, or the oratory
of a Cicero, I should fail in endeavouring to point out the many and
inestimable virtues exercised by the fair sex. Search history, both
ancient and modern; look to public and domestic life, and every-
where you will find that wherever the genuine spirit of woman pre-
sides there will be peace, comfort and happiness. Individuals and
society alike must yield to their charming influence. King Solomon
has said in favour of the virtuous sex, what is difficult to do justice
to in translation; but the British people has it thus: “Whoever
finds a virtuous woman, finds one whose price is far above rubies.”
NoW, we migdit infer from this that such an occurrence was rare,
' o
but no. Solomon puts it down as broad fact (the truth of which
he was fully convinced of their many praises he bestows on the
“Maids of Judea” and “Daughters of Zion”). He who is possessed
of a worthy wife is indeed blessed of one whose value is far above
the price of rubies. I must now return you my most sincere thanks
in their behalf, and conclude with the words of the sage monarch:
“Deceitful is grace and evanescent is beauty; the woman who fear-
eth t)he Lord she shall be praised. Give unto her the fruit of her
hands, and her own works shall proclaim her in the gates.” The
toast was drunk with the warmest demonstration of respect and ad-
miration.
The vice-Chairman proposed the health of Mr. Burnett Nathan,
a liberal, enlightened, and zealous member of the congregation, to
whom they were much indebted for the interesting consummation
which they had that day thankfully witnessed. The toast was
warmly and enthusiastically responded to by all gentlemen: present.


Mr. Burnett Nathan (evidently muah affected by an expression of
kindly and respectful sentiment, which was hearty and unanimous)
returned thanks. He was gratified beyond measure by the assur-
ance that his past efforts had been approved of and he (hoped to
continue in the same course as that which had procured for him
such a lively expression of general approbation as that conferred
upon him. They had had many difficulties to contend with, but
they had been overcome, and he certainly felt some degreeiof pride
in having assisted to overcome those difficulties. (Loud and long
continued cheering). He now felt it his duty to nourish the religious
institution they had together so happily succeeded in founding.
Mr. J. M. Solomon proposed “The health of Mr. Samuel Hart,
the treasurer,” and warmly eulogised his liberality and zeal ir
carrying out the design and meeting the w'ants of the congregation.
At the time Mr. Hart was in office he was accustomed to find funds
whether he had money in hand or not. His heart was evidently
bent on forwarding the good work. Mr., Hart briefly and feelingly
returned thanks. He assured his brethren that in the event of his
again becoming their treasurer, he was as ready as heretofore to
give his best assistance in furthering a good work.
The Chairman said he felt much gratification in proposing the
health of Mr. Emanuel Solomon. He (the Chairman) had been
honoured with their grateful acknowledgments as the chief pro-
moter of their congregational union, but he begged to say that Mr.
E. Solomon was the first to take a very important step. More than
five years ago that gentleman called a meeting, raised subscriptions,
and having obtained from the Government a grant of one portion
of the public cemetery, he had it fenced in and prepared as a place
of sepulchure, and they must all feel that'‘this community was much
indebted to Mr. Solomon for a first and very important measure.
The toast was w'armly responded to by all present. Mr. Solomon
returned thanks and expressed the pleasure he felt in the assurance
that his early efforts had been so kindly appreciated.
Mr. J. M. Solomon proposed the health of the gentlemen of the
Committee and the Trustees. Mr. Morris Marks returned thanks.
He had cheerfullv given his services as one of the Committee, and
whenever /those services were required, they would be as readily
and zealously given as heretofore. The toast was exceedingly well
received. Mr. Louis Joseph returned thanks on behalf of the Trus-
tees. He was one who had assisted in selecting and purchasing the
land upon which they had built the Synagogue, and he felt much
gratification in having become instrumental to the advancement of
the good work.
Mr. Lazar proposed the health of Mr. Judah Moss Solomon.
That gentleman, he said, was distinguished for that feeling of uni-
versal brotherhood which did not allow him to make any invidious
distinctions between Jew ! s and Christians. As to his special ser-
vices, and the efficient manner in which he had drawn up laws for
the rule and guidance of the congregation, they must all


feel greatly indebted to him. Mr. J. M. Solomon in returning
thanks, which he did with much feeling and eloquence, alluded to
a former testimonial With which he had been honoured by his
brethren. There was scarcely a day of his life in which that tes-
timonial did not attract his regard, and he would esteem it as a
valuable heirloom, which he hoped would descend to his children
and stimulate their future endeavours to become useful to their
brethren and the community at large.
Mr. Louis Joseph, called on for a toast, proposed, “The Execu-
tive Officers of the Jewish Synagogue,” and made honourable men-
tion to Mr. Henry S. Coronel, of whom, he thought, he could not
speak in too high terms. Mr. Coronel returned thanks in very ap-
propriate terms, and, in conclusion proposed, “The healths of their
parents, and absent friends at home and abroad.”
Mr. Burnett Nathan proposed, in very kind terms, the health
of their kind and diligent host, Mr. Lazar. Mr. Lazar, “in happy
vein,” made his grateful acknowledgments acceptable to all. He
was rejoiced, he said, to see his friends around the festive board,
and especially so when he considered that they had been engaged
in the good work of opening a Synagogue for the worship of the
Almighty.
Mr. Morris Marks proposed the healths of their Christian
brethren in South Australia, who had not only given their sym-
pathies, but their ready assistance.
Mr. J. M. Solomon proposed the health of Mr. Joseph Barnett,
who, not content with the expression of his readiness to co-operate
with his brethren, had generously given them a handsome sum
(£IOO, we believe) to assist them in enabling to undertake the
building of a Synagogue. The toast was received with all the
warmth and feeling that might have been expected.
“The Press” was proposed by Mr. Coronel, and acknowledged
by Mr. Akehurst, who proposed “The Israelites of South Aus-
tralia.” Mr. J. M. Solomon acknowledged the toast, and hoped the
day would arrive when Jew and Christian would be included in
one common bond of brotherly union.
After the departure of the Chairman, the remaining company
indulged in strains of dulcet harmony, and, at a reasonable hour,
separated in friendship and in peace, highly delighted with the
principle event and of the minor occurrences of the day.”
One of the most important meetings after the opening of the
Synagogue was called for the purpose of appointing trustees to the
Jewish burial ground. This meeting took place on Sunday, August
sth, 1851.
It w*as resolved at this meeting “that the following gentlemen:
Messrs. Samuel Hart
Louis Joseph
Morris Marks
Burnett Nathan
should be the gentlemen appointed to accept a Grant from Her


Majesty’s Colonial Government for the ground alloted for the
Jewish burial ground in trust for the Jewish community.”
That such a grant was made to the community will be seen
from the Copy Memorial which was ordered by the Legislative
Council and printed in the S.A. Gazette on September 19th, 1854,
w'hich we reproduce herewith: —
WEST TERRACE PUBLIC CEMETERY.
Ordered by the Legislative Council to be printed September 19th,
1854.)
COPY MEMORIAL.
Date of Instrument —Tenth day of September, one thousand eight
hundred and fifty two.
Name of Parties —Sir Henry Edward Fox Young, Knight, Lieute-
nant Governor of the Province of South Australia, to
Louis Joseph, Samuel Hart, Morris Marks, and
Burnett Nathan, all of Adelaide, gentlemen.
Name of Witness —B. T. Finniss.
Nature of Instrument —Land Grant upon trust for the appropria-
tion thereof as places for the interment of the dead,
being deceased members of the Jewish faith who may
have resided in South Australia.
Description of the Property conveyed —All that piece or parcel oi
land, portion of the Cemetery for the City of Adelaide,
piece of land with the measurements and boun-
daries thereof, delineated and shown in public
maps, 1 deposited in the Survey or other proper office
in Adelaide, and in the plan drawn in the margin of
the Land Grant and therein coloured green, and with
all rights' and appurtenances to the said land belong-
ing but excepting and reserving two separate pieces of
land of the width throughout respectively of six feet
particularly described in the said map or plan and
which pieces of land are respectively marked A B and
C D, and therein coloured blue, w'hich pieces are reserved for the
purpose of making drains.
Consideration—Her Majesty’s special grace.
We may state here that in 1858 the late Gabriel Bennett, who
was a liberal contributor to the Synagogue and held office for
several years, presented the post and rails of the cemetery. The
first member buried was the late Nathaniel Levi on July 21st, 1843.


THE COMMUNITY AND COMMUNAL AFFAIRS—IBSO-1870.
The office of Minister was filled from time to time by various
laymen. The first minister who officiated on the occasion of the
first Jewish marriage ceremony was ißurnett Nathan. It was in
his house in Currie Street that the members of the Jewish per-
suasion used to meet for prayers on Holidays before the community
was formed in 1848. Prominent lay members of the community
who filled these offices of Minister and Reader were Messrs. R.
Raphael, B. Nathan, John Lazar, B. Gollin, S. Mocatta, A. Abra-
hams, S. B. Saunders, and others. A. G. Solomon acted for three
years as Reader at a yearly salary of £SO. At a committee meeting-
on January 16th, 1853, the following resolution was adopted: —•
“That until a minister is duly appointed by the congregation the
president for the time being shall officiate or appoint a duly quali-
fied person to officiate in all ceremonial matters and should any
member of the congregation officiate without such sanction he will
be subject to a penalty of Ten Pounds and not be entitled to be
considered a member of this congregation until the same be paid
and that such parties that get married by such an unauthorised
person subject themselves to the penalty of non-Registration in the
Synagogue book.” Messrs. Solomon Mocatta and B. Gollin were
appointed by the committee and registered as officiating ministers
in the Government Gazette, September 23rd, 1857. The first step
towards appointing from abroad a qualified minister were taken on
a special selection committee meeting on June 25th, 1857. The
minutes of this meeting record that “it was convened by circular
for the purpose of receiving suggestions for providing a competent
minister for the Adelaide Hebrew Congregation.’ The sum of
£lOl/10/- was collected at this meeting towards this purpose. Mr.
Emanuel Solomon donated twenty-one guineas. After a long cor-
respondence with the Chief Rabbi of England, the late Dr. Rev.
Nathan Adler and a specially'appointed committee in London, the
Rev. A. T. Boas was appointed minister in 1869. He arrived by the
sailing ship “Tamesa,” on 13th February, 1870. Rev. A. T. Boas
officiated at the consecration of the New Jewish Synagogue in 1871.
This new Synagogue, the foundation stone of which w*as laid by
Mr. Gabriel Bennett, then President on 7th July, 1870, was a more
commodious building necessitated by the growth of the Jewish
community in this State.
Members of the Jewish persuasion, who numbered in 1846
48 souls, increased by 1860 to 360, when they formed 0.3 per cent, of
the total population of Adelaide. Some five years after the con-


gregation was established it possessed 130 subscribing members
and the census of that year records 250 in all. This proves an ad-
mirable proportion of contributing members, and is a strong evi-
dence of religious zeal and earnestness in the newly formed com-
munity. In the London Jewish chronicle of December 23rd, 1859,
there appears the following statement respecting the community;
“We have amongst us some very influential families, ;and I am
happy to say that there are few* who do not support to the best
of their ability a small but neat Synagogue which is capable of
holding about 150 ,persons. It has previously been a matter for
consideration whether our divine edifice were not almost too
spacious, but every six months it becomes more apparent to its
members that a more commodious building is much needed, a
circumstance which must show that we are progressing favourably.
The number of marriages and births during the last two years
has increased at an average of about 200 per cent, over that of
preceding years.” In the year 1859 Henry Moses, of Finsbury
Circus, London, presented the congregation with a “Sepher Torah”
(“Scroll of the Law”). On the evening of “Succoth” (The Feast
of Tabernacles) there was a consecration of the “Sepher.” Great
interest was evinced in the erection of a “Succah,” the first com-
munal one in Adelaide, and it was thronged during the holidays
with many happy congregants.
A very important communal institution, the oldest in the con-
gregation, the Adelaide Hebrew Philanthropic Society, was estab-
lished in 1852, 12th June, for the purpose of relieving distressed
families. It was founded by the late Emanuel Solomon, Ralph
Raphael, Samuel Lawrence and Burnett Nathan. The Society since
its foundation has proved a boon to poor co-religionists by timely
and monetary assistance, dispensed to those belonging to the Jew-
ish community and to sojourners.
The late Henry Senor Coronel was the first secretary to the con-
gregation. The late Daniel S. Hart was appointed in 1863 Collec-
tor, and later secretary. In 1863 Solomon Saunders was appointed
Reader and Shochet, and also carried out the duties of secretary
for three or four years.
We mentioned before the laying of the foundation stone of
the new Jewish Synagogue; this proved to be a very important
event, and like the building of the old Synagogue attracted wide
attention in the Colony. The S.A. Register for Saturday, July
16th, 1870, gives the following description of the ceremony
The New Jewish Synagogue.
“The foundation stone of the new Jewish Synagogue, Rundle
Street, was laid on Thursday, July 7th, by Mr. G. Bennett, Presi-
dent of the Adelaide Hebrew* congregation. A large number of the
congregation were present and afternoon service having been read
in the existing building, they proceeded outside, when Mr. M. J.


EMMANUEL SOLOMON, Esq.




Solomon, Treasurer of the Synagogue and Chairman of the Build-
ing Committee, read the following document which was to be
placed under the stone :
“In the glory of God.
“On the eighth day of Tamuz, A.M. 5630 (corresponding with
the 7th July, 1870) in the 34th year of the reign of her most
gracious Majesty, Queen Victoria, the cornerstone of this Syna-
gogue was laid by Gabriel Bennett Esquire, President, assisted by
the Rev. A. T. Boas, Minister. The following gentlemen consti-
tuted the Committee of the congregation:—Moss Judah Solomon,
Esq. Treasurer, Messrs. Abraham Abrahams, Charles L. Klisser,
Aaron Edwin Cohen, Israel Simmons, Moss Judah Solomon, Isaac
Solomon; Daniel Simon Hart, Secretary and Collector.
The Building Committee consisted of the following pc n-
tlemen. —Moss Judah Solomon, Esq., Chairman; Isaac Solomon,
Esq., Treasurer; Messrs. Gabriel Bennett, Alex. Kauffman, Ralph
Raphael, Charles L. Klisser, J. M. Solomon, Jnr., Hon. Secretary.
Architects, Messrs. Wright, Wood and Hamilton; Builder, Mr.
Frederick Harrison).”
There were also placed in a bottle under the stone beside
several coins of the realm, copies of the “London Jewish Chronicle
and Jewish Record,” a Hebrew Almanac, “The Register,” “Adver-
tiser,” “Evening Journal, and Express.
Mr. M. J. Solomon remarked in his speech “that in respect to
the obtaining of funds towards the erection of the proposed build-
ing, the thanks of the Building Committee as well as that of the
Community was certainly to be given to their Christian friends
who had come forward so nobly to assist them in their undertaking.
(Hear, hear). The description of the Synagogue, according to the
paper, is as follows: —“4 he new 1 building is to adjoin the existing
structure on the western side. The front to Bundle Street will be
in the Italian style, but the doorway will be blocked up and
entrance gained, until funds permit to a handsome portico being
put up, through the old Synagogue, which will be converted into a
schoolroom. It will be of Dry Creek stone with cement dressings
and main quoins being of freestone. Above the doorway will be a
double window recessed into an Italian arch, and on-each side a
single window. The interior dimensions will be 46 x 29 ft., the
height of the wall 23 ft., and to the highest parGof the ceiling 28
ft., and the building will be very plain, scope being left for decora-
tion in the future. The exception to this will be the Ark at the
north end, in which the law is kept, which will be approached by
three steps. The ladies gallery will extend around three .sides,
be supported by light iron columns and have an open cast-iron
front. Light will be admitted through seven windows, four of which
will be on the western side of the gallery, and three on the facade.”
The dedication of this new Jewish Synagogue took place on
March 26th in the following, year. The “Register” of March 28th,
1871, records that “nearly all of the Hebrew community were pre-


sent, besides about 200 ladies and gentlemen of other denomi-
nations, seats being placed in every available )space for their ac-
commodation. Afternoon service having been read in the old
Synagogue, the voice of the Minister, Rev. A. T. Boas, was heard
outside the door of the new one, exclaiming in Hebrew, “Open
unto me the gates of righteousness; I will enter them
and praise the Lord.” The door being opened, the Minister and
five past and present honorary officers of the congregation entered,
each bearing a scroll of the law, covered with handsome crimson
mantles. The choir which consisted of 20 male and female
voices, with Mr. Solomon Saunders who officiated
as Reader, then chanted some verses, commencing,
'‘How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, thy tabernacles O
Israel!” The procession advanced to the Ark and stood under a
canopy of mauve velvet, .which is ordinarily used by the Jews in
their marriage ceremony, when, “Blessed be He that cometh in the
name of the Lord, /‘we bless you from the house of the Lord,”
was sung. The procession then passed around the Synagogue
seven times. During each circuit the choit chanted a psalm after
which the veil of the Ark w'as withdrawn and the scrolls of,the
law placed therein by the President, Mr. M. J. Solomon. This
was followed by an ode chanted by the Reader, with a chorus by
the choir after Which the Rev. A.T. Boas delivered an address. He
reminded his brethren of the house of Israel that on their mutual
love depended the resistance to the attacks of their enemies, and
to this end they should merge all various differences and cast away
dissensions and ill-feeling from amongst them. Love to their
fellow men was love to God. The house of God, which was a monu-
ment of unity, should influence them to\ be 1 united. The appearance
of the edifice concludes the paper, both externally and internally
is very pleasing. It is estimated that the' floor will accommodate
250 and the gallery 120 persons.”


JEWISH PIONEERS IN PASTORAL LIFE.
As early as the 40’s and 50’s of last century, prominent Jewish
people were closely identified with the pastoral and commercial
life in this State. P. Levi, in the middle of the century, and N. E.
Phillipson in its later decades, were amongst the foremost pioneers
who rendered yeoman service to the pastoral industry of South
Australia. “South Australia,” Mr. Cockburn tells us in his “Pas-
toral Pioneers of S.A.” “would not be in the position >she is in to-
day but for the activity and commercial acumen of Mr. P. Levi.”
From the Press of his day and from Cockburn’s book one gains the
following picture of Philip Levi: —
“A real identity and a type of a fine old-fashioned merchant of a
bygone school is a phrase which bears close application to the late
Mr. Phillip Levi, who for more than half a century was among the
most familiar figures in Adelaide. When he died one who knew
all about him said, “South Australia would not be in the position
she is in to-day but for the activity and commercial acumen df Mr.
Levi, who in the early days put his whole heart and soul into the
work of opening up the North.” The only wonder is that a man
of such outstanding ability and exceptional driving force should
have eventually fallen upon evil days, but he held up his head until
the end. He w’as the eldest son of Nathaniel Philip Levi, whose
name appears in the list of first holders of occupation and depas-
turing licences taken out lin December, 1842. His early education
was obtained at Brixton Hill school, Surrey, and at the age of 16
years he came out here, in June, 1838, in the ship “Eden.” Two
fellow passengers were Mr, Phillipson, father of Mr. Clement Phil-
lipson, and Mr. Charles Beck, who founded the mercantile firm of
Messrs. Beck & Co. The areas suburban to Adelaide were then re-
garded as pastoral lands; indeed Mr. Levi actually grazed sheep
over the now thickly populated suburbs of Prospect and Walker-
ville. His first job, however, was with the Customs. It is recorded
that Mr. Levi exhibited great faith in the future of the young
country to which he had migrated, that he helped substantially with
his clear brain and busy hands to develop it, and that South Aus-
tralia owed more than could be fully estimated to this interesting
character and others associated with him, who were full of the
pluck and enterprise of the genuine pioneers. Mr. Levi combined
pastoral activities with mercantile pursuits, and his first real ven-
ture in connexion with the former was a sheep run known as the
Dustholes near Truro. A few years later he opened the com-
mercial house of Philip Levi and Co. at the corner of King William
and Grenfell Streets, Adelaide, where the Imperial Hotel now


stands. That locality was once known as Levi’s corner. His
brothers. Edmond and Frederick, were associated with the mercan-
tile business.
“Being a man of remarkable energy and financial ability with
a daring speculative spirit, tempered by sound judgment, most of
Mr. Levi’s ventures were brought to a successful issue, and he
speedily made a large fortune. This he lost, however, mainly
as a result of the American Civil War, which affected the prices
of cotton and tobacco, and of the great drought of the 60’s, which
brought down many a worthy colonist.
“Soon after severing his connexions with the Customs, Mr.
Levi went to New South Wales with a party for some sheep, which
they travelled overland to South Australia. One of his companions
was the shepherd, Pickett, who discovered the Burra copper mines
and received the modest reward of £IOO. The party were attacked
by aborigines near the Rufus . . . Mr. Levi’s pastoral operations
developed upon a colossal scale and eventually he became one of
the largest stockholders in the colony. He held an immense area
of country in the North and North-East, and on Eyre Peninsula,
some of it in partnership with others.
“One of his principal freeholds was Gum Creek run, which he
owned originally with Messrs. George Williams and Henry Short.
The last-named two, according to the Hon. John Lewis’s “Fought
and Won,” “found out that the place was not so good as they
thought it was, and Mr. Levi, in his good nature agreed to release
them of their liability and took the property over himself.” Up to
50,000 sheep were depastured at Gum Creek. Messrs. Williams
and Short were also associated with Mr. Levi in the lease-of 56
square miles of country known as “The Coffin Bay” run with a
grazing capacity equal to 107 sheep to the square mile. Mr. Levi’s
interests alo included Booleroo, Moolooloo, Mount Margaret, Cal-
lana, Marachowie, Wadnaminga, Dustholes, Wirealpa, and Man-
golo or Franklin Harbour. With Mr. H. L. Sprigg he had 25
leases, comprising 820 square miles known as Oulnina, where 30,000
sheep were carried. This property was afterwards worked by his
trustees and then purchased by Sir W. W. Hughes for his nephew,
the late Mr. Walter Duncan, M.P. The Mount Margaret run was
formed for Mr. Levi by Stephen Jarvis in 1863, and is now* known
as the Peake. Messrs.! Levi and Williams had Parnaroo in the
north-east, 204 square miles, and the former also had an interest
with his brother-in-law, Charles J. F. Campbell, in the North-west
Bend Station. Altogether it is etimated that in the halcyon days
of his career, Mr. Levi, who could count his stock on a thousand
hills, owned quite 172,000 sheep and cattle. After his failure, the
causes of which have already been mentioned, some of the proper-
ties were submitted to public auction by Messrs. Townsend. Bot-
ting & Co. in the early seventies by order of the trustees of the
estate. Gum Creek Station was the subject of two sales. On the
first day 5,000 acres out of 13.855 offered sold up to 47/- an acre.


The stock was disposed of separately,. 20,205 sheep bringing
£10,855, or 10/8 a head. Later 35,000 acres wtis purchased by Sir
W. W. Hughes for £2 an acre. Mt. Margaret Station in the Far
North, comprising three leases of a total area of 483 square miles,
was auctioned together with 2,700 cattle, and 50 horses, and the
price obtained was £3/10/- per head. More than 200 allotments in
Portland Estate were also sold under the hammer, and altogether
the clean-up was a very satisfactory one. By 1874 the creditors
had been paid 20/- in the £ and there was a surplus for interest.
John Chambers sold Moolooloo, Wirrealpa and Bobmonnie Stations
for £48,000. The Moolooloo lease alone comprised 756 square miles
of country and Wirrealpa 878 square miles. The drought of the
middle sixties struck them. Mr. Lewis’ book says that an effort
was made to met the stock down Gum Creek, but out of 2,200 heads
mustered, only 98 mere frames reached their destination. Mr. Levi
arrived at Gum Creek the day after and was very angry, remarking:
“This would be enough to break Rothschild.” The same author
gives an interesting account of how he successfully shifted at a
very dry period 8,000 sheep for Mr.. Levi from the Coconut, still
another property that he purchased on Yorke Peninsula. “When
I arrived at Gum Creek,” he says, “Mr. *Levi, who had come up
from Adelaide, met me there, and asked me why I had brought the
sheep over. I said I had brought some of them, and he enquired,
How many have you lost? ‘Ten.’ I told him. ‘Ah,’ he said, ‘that’s
not so bad, but I gave you orders to stop and shear them, and you
ought to have obeyed orders if you broke the owners. However,
I will overlook it this time, he said with a laugh.
“He was a grand old man, and he admitted that I did quite
right in not trying to shear the sheep there. At the aforementioned
auction sales, after the crash, Moolooloo, Wirrealpa and Bobmonnie
were sold for under £17,000 or £31,000 less than they cost Mr. Levi.
Moolooloo had just under 30,000 sheep and the station w'as disposed
of to Mr. J. Rounsevell for 8/- a head or a total of £12,000. Wir-
realpa, with only 1,000 cattle and 50 horses, was sold to Mr. E.
Laughton for £4/8/6 a head. Sir W. W. Hughes paid £13,500 for
Oulnina and Wadnaminga (900 square miles) and the Booleroo area
0f 1 144 square miles passed to Mr- S. Sabine for £IO,OOO, and is now
one of the biggest wheat producing districts in the State. Mr. Love
paid £7,000 for Marachowie and Pordechuna.
Mr. Levi was one of the founders and a trustee of the Adelaide
Club, his connexion with it dating back to the time when the insti-
tution was located next to White’s rooms (now the Majestic
Theatre in King William Street). He was an ardent patron of
sport and a familiar figure at race gatherings. An excellent judge
of horses, he always drove a good team, and even at an advanced
age was frequently seen in his stylish dog cart or drag skilfully
handling the reins behind a spanking.team. He w'as the life and
soul of any social gathering he attended, being a good raconteur,
and a man full of reminiscences. In his palmy days Mr. Levi was


noted for his lavish hospitality and for the liberal manner in which
he met every legitimate appeal for help from whatever quarter it
came. He was connected with the noted Jewish families of Gold-
smidt, Mocatta, Montefiore, and one of the Rothschilds/’ . . . .
Mr. Levi died at “Vale House,” Walkervilie, on May 13, 1898,
at the age of 76 years. Every notice of him spoke of his very high
commercial integrity and of his unfailing urbanity and courtesy.
His remains were interred in the Jewish cemetery, West Terrace.
Mr. Levi remained a bachelor and never thought to take part in
public life. His character might be summed up by the remarks
that in business he was the soul of honour, and in private life his
society was much courted.”
Nathaniel Edmund Phillipson comes next only to P. Levi in
the great pioneering activity in the pastoral life of S.A.
Mr. J. Pascoe gives the following outline of Mr. Phillipson’s
life :
“Mr. N. E. Phillipson was born in Adelaide in 1844, the son
of the late Mr. Montague Phillipson, and nephew of the late Mr.
Phillip Levi, well known in pastoral circles. In 1862 Mr. Phillipson
went to the distant Umberatana Station owned by the late Sir
Thomas Elder and there began his extensive connexion with the
expansive but often elusive north country. He quickly gained the
confidence of his employer, and becoming his representative, en-
abled that larger investor to obtain considerable profit from his
stations. In 1866 when Sir Thomas introduced Afghans with
camels from India, Mr. Phillipson studied the language of the
former and displayed considerable business tact in connexion with
the camel trade. He had the management of immense interests and
the trust confided in him bore fruit. In the early “seventies” Mr.
Peter Waite, who subsequently became Chairman of Directors of
Elder, Smith & Co., became joint manager with Mr. Phillipson,
and the two together formed a powerful combination. The north-
ern holdings of that large house were transferred to the Beltana
Pastoral Company, of which Mr. Phillipson was the largest share-
holder and became the Managing Director. His knowledge of the
country and of the history of its climate, was such that he Was pre-
pared for almost every emergency to the advantage 1 of the flocks
and herds under his control.
“In 1892 Mr. Phillipson removed from the North and took up
his residence in Walkervilie, Adelaide. He married in 1880 Miss
Levien, of Sydney, and left a family of three daughters. His retire-
ment was not for long, for on August 18, 1898, he died after six
months’ illness. His funeral Was attended by representatives of the
principal South Australian pastoralists by whom he was much ad-
mired for his abilities. Mr. Phillipson is remembered for his almost
unique and decidedly beneficial work *in the North.”


Edmund Levi.
The Adelaide “Observer” for Saturday, August 3rd, 1895, gives
the following brief account of the great pioneering activities of Mr.
Edmund Levi: —
“Mr. Edmund Levi was born at Balham Hill at Surrey, on De-
cember 6th, 1827, and arrived in the colony in 1842 in the “Juno.”
In 1854 he joined the firm of Philip Levi and Co. He took an active
part in the importation of stock overland from NeW South Wales
and subsequently in partnership with several of his relations was
engaged in squatting and mercantile pursuits. During the long
drought of 1861 the firm with which Mr. Levi was 1 connected, and
which for years had carried on commercial and pastoral operations
on a very large scale suffered severe reverses, and it was only by
superhuman exertions that the business was kept from collapse. Mr-
Levi devoted the last years of his life to mining pursuits.”
Mr. Edmund Levi, unlike his brother Philip Levi, took a very
keen interest in the affairs of the Adelaide Hebrew congregation.
Although not an active member on the Executive, we find numerous
references in the early minute books of the congregation which
testify to his association in the building of the first Synagogue. He
was a financial member of the congregation and supported it most
generously on many occasions. He died in 1895 and was buried in
the Jewish portion of the West Terrace cemetery.
Mr. Gabriel Bennett is to be remembered as the founder of
Messrs. Bennett & Fisher Ltd. I am greatly indebted to Mr. S. J.
Jacobs for the following information: —
“Mr. Bennett started life as a butcher. He later became a stock
and station agent and was famous in his day as,: one of the finest
judges of livestock. The firm of Bennett & Fisher was established
over 60 years ago; Mr. Bennett severed his connexion with the firm
shortly before his death which occurred in 1895. He was a great
sportsman and well known among the racing circles of the day. Mr.
Bennett was secretary to the S.A.J.C.jin 1874, and acted for' many
years in the honorary capacity of a starter in many racing meetings
of this State. He is remembered among the old identities of Ade-
laide as an upright man of high moral principles. Although fallen
on evil days towards the end of his life, he succeeded in preserving
that integrity of character which made him one of the most re-
ispected men in the commercial and sporting life of this State. Mr.
Bennett was closely identified with the Jewish life in Adelaide.
It was during his tenure of office as president of the Hebrew con-
gregation that the foundation stone was laid on 7th July, 1870,
for the new Synagogue. He served on numerous occasions on the
committee of the Hebrew congregation —he held many executive
positions and was famed for his liberal donations toward Jewish
and other charitable institutions. His daughter, Mrs. J. Daniels,
an old and prominent member of the Ladies’ Jewish Benevolent
Society, died in this city in November last.”


JEWISH PIONEERS IN TRADE AND COMMERCE.
The pioneering activity in Trade and Commerce of the early
Jewish coloniists was most beneficial to the development of this
State. Mr. E. Solomon and his nephew, J. M. Solomon, were
well known in the business life of this State in the early 40’s
of this century. One of the most picturesque personalities, Mr.
E. Solomon as a man of many activities. Auctioneer and ship-
owner, theatre promoter, and general merchant, Mr. Solomon
proved everywhere to be the moving spirit by his sheer enter-
prising ability and great business acumen. Mr. Loyau in
“Representative Men of 5.A.,” speaks highly of Solomon as “one
of the early settlers who had expended their means in an en-
deavour to advance the call of civilization in the land of, their adop-
tion. Unlike many wealthy men, who keep their money locked up
in banks w'here the highest percentage is to be obtained, Mr. Solo-
mon invested his capital where it would do most good, not merely
to himself, but to his fellow-colonists.”
“Mr. Emanuel Solomon arrived in Adelaide from Sydney, in
the ship “Lady Wellington” in August, 1838.” (Mr. J. S. Solomon,
Emanuel Solomon’s surviving son, maintains that his father ar-
rived first in this State in 1836). He commenced business as a mer-
chant and auctioneer. There, is, as early as September sth for the
same year, an advertisement in the South Australian “Register”
and “Colonial Gazette,” reading as follows: —
“Sperm Oil
“To be had at the stores of V. & E. Solomon, Sydney House,
“Gilles Arcade, in small quantities, September 12th, 1838.”
Mr. Solomon was a merchant and shipowner, who for
many years entirely supported the trade between N.S.W. and
S.A. During the panic which existed between 1840 and 1842, he
was one of the few merchants who stood their ground in the
Colony and passed safely through the crisis. In 1840; the Theatre
which he had built in Gilles Arcade was opened, and Mr.
Solomon brought over a company from Sydney under the manage-
ment of Mr. Lazar, who performed there and for many years ex-
pended large sums of money without any adequate return in the
encouragement of the drama. He was one of the promoters of the
Burra mine. He continued his business Until 1870 when he retired.
We shall refer later to Mr. Solomon’s Parliamentary activities in
the Legislative Council, where he was elected Member for West
Adelaide, in February, 1863. Mr. Solomon had a great love for his
adopted country and displayed it in a very pleasing and truly


liberal manner by inviting in 1871, on the 35th anniversary of the
Province, the pioneers of the colony to a grand banquet in the Town
Hall, and a re-union which was attended by several hundreds, and
as a contemporary of E. Solomon, says: “We feel sure will long be
remembered by those who were privileged to take part in it.’’ The
papers pay a glowing tribute to him as “being benevolent without
being ostentatious and cosmopolitan without vacillating in his views
as to question of public policy or as affecting the best interest of
the country.” Mr. Loyau in the “Representative Men of South Aus-
tralia,” speaks in very high terms of Mr. Solomon as “a liberal sup-
porter of his own church, who was never backward in donations to
those of other denominations. Many a languishing charity was gal-
vanised into new life by his liberality.”
Mr. E. Solomon was the “pater familias” of the Jewish com-
munity. It was in his Temple Tavern that the first meeting took
place on Sunday, September 10th, 1848, for the purpose of forming
members of the Jewish persuasion into a body. For a period of 25
years he was closely connected with the Jewish congregation in an
executive capacity of some description or other.
It was thanks to Mr. E. Solomon that a portion of the public
cemetery was obtained for the purpose of burial of Jewish citizens.
Mr. Solomon died at the age of 73 years on October 9th, 1873. The
funeral is described as follows: —“There was a very large atten-
dance, including nearly the whole of the Hebrew community, be-
sides many citizens and old colonists of other denominations.”
It is not generally known that one of Emanuel Solomon’s sons
is still alive, Joseph S. Solomon.
JOSEPH S. SOLOMON.
We give below an outline of Joseph Solomon's life, which con-
tains many interesting glimpses of the early history of the State.
In spite of many vicissitudes, Mr. J. S. Solomon has managed
to retain well into his ninth decade much of the vigour and fresh-
ness of youth. Born in July, 1843, near the site of the Old Globe
Hotel, in Bundle Street, he can claim to be among the oldest of
native-born white Australians. His early education, beginning at
Mrs. Cawthorne’s school, was continued at Allen’s school, Gumer-
acha, where he had as fellow-pupil the late Hon. Charles Mann.
After some time at Mr. Webster’s school at Norwood, his educa-
tional career terminated at the establishment of the late Mr. E. L.
Grundy, who was for a time member for Barossa in 1856. Mr.
Solomon has 1 lively recollections of the escapades of the gold dig-
gers returning from Victoria flush with money and recklessly
lavish in expending it. A favourite resort of those gentry was the
Old Victoria Theatre, opened by his father, the late Mr. Emanuel
Solomon, where Gilles Arcade now stands. Many old-time cele-
brities appeared on its boards, including G. V. Brooks, Edward
Sefton, Sir Charles and Lady Hare, and Mr. and Mrs. Jackson. John
Lazar, another leading star of those days, was brought over by Mr.


Solomon from Sydney in the brig; Dorset. Mr. Lazar afterwards
became Mayor of Adelaide. The open elections of those days were
occasions of great excitement, the voters going to the poll armed
with stout sticks and wearing* coloured rosettes of blue, red, green
or yellow. Brass bands strove to idrown one another’s music by
competitive loudness, often ending in the bursting of the big drum.
“On leaving school in 1860, the youthful colonist was employed
by the late Mr. Philip Levi to help in driving the first mob of cattle
to the Peak station. The party were over five months on the road.
W hen the late John Macdouall Stuart made his famous journey
across Australia he called at the Peak station, and young Solomon,
with Jervis and Edwards accompanied the explorers for over 200
miles. On the return Mr. J. S. Solomon found that conditions with
the squatters were in such,a dreadful state that he decided to give
up all idea of that kind of life. He joined his father in a wholesale
business in Currie Street, and they used to supply the late Mr. Gil-
bert Wood and Messrs. D. & J. Fowler with groceries, and the
late Mr. E. T. Smith with sugar for his brewery. In 1864, as super
cargo in the ship “Emily Smith,” he travelled to Fremantle, then
a small village, and he relates how he saw the convicts fastened
with bullock, chains and driven to the jail. In 1866 Mr. Emanuel
Solomon started the Nimble Ninepence in King William Street,
near the site of the “Advertiser” Office.
“He recalls a marble fountain erected by the late Mr. H. O.
Gouge (contractor for waterworks), in the middle of King William
Street, opposite the place where the Imperial Hotel now stands.
Joining the Volunteer Cavalry in 1865, he had the honour of
joining in the escort of the Duke of Edinburgh’s carriage in 1861.
He recalls the sensation caused by the robberies during a ball at
Government House, in which the Duke’s orderly and a well-known
medico were implicated. The riot caused by the bad times follow-
ing the terrible drought broke out about the same time, and he re-
members the late Hon. John Colton (afterwards Sir John) chased
across King William Street to the Treasury Buildings, which the
crowd were threatening to attack.
“Mr. Solomon was foreman of the jury in the celebrated case,
dowler v. Rounsevell. The latter had the contract for the erection
of the telegraph poles on the overland telegraph line to Port Dar-
win, and sublet to the late Mr. Towler the contract to sink the
holes* After hundreds of these had been sunk one of those rare
monsoonal storms caused heavy floods, which filled the holes with
silt. Mr. Towler claimed several thousands, but was awarded
£1,500. The great boom in shares in Northern Territory gold mines
in the early seventies caused no little commotion in the city. These
shares rose in a few days from several shillings to £l4, and many
fortunes were made and lost on the Exchange. The collapse of the
boom seriously damaged the reputation of the Northern Territory
mines, and for many years thereafter no one would look at a pro-
position from that locality.


“In 1874. Mr. Solomon made a trip through Broken Hill to
the Bourke on the Darling. He broke stones for gold on the Hill
itself, little dreaming of the wealth beneath his feet. In 1884, at
the time of the scare created by the Russian advance on Mew,
Mr. Solomon was one of a group of cavalry camped at the Reed-
beds, which controlled the coast from Henley to Marino in expec-
tation of a hostile descent. In 1885 he joined 4n the mad rush to
Kimberley with 5,000 men from all parts of Australia and New
Zealand, and remembers many exciting episodes in connection
therewith. Returning from storekeeping in 1894, Mr. Solomon
purchased a seat on the Royal Exchange, and recounts many
stirring details of the great boom in Western Australia gold mines.
For 63 years he has been trustee of his father’s estate, which in-
cludes valuable properties in Rosetta Terrace, Dorsetta Terrace,
and Hindley Street. He married the late Miriam Solomon, daugh-
te of M. A. J. Solomon, at one time lessee of the Victoria Theatre.”
JUDAH MOSS SOLOMON
Mr. Judah Moss Solomon is referred to in “Representative
Men of S.A.” as among the most respectful and
influential of the South Australian colonists. He came
to S.A. from Sydney on the “Dorset,” in April, sth, 1840. In 1847
he joined his uncle, Emanuel Solomon, in business as auctioneers.
The '“Observer,” for Saturday, September 24th, 1880, says in his
obituary notice, that “Mr. Solomon was held in great estimation
as a Knight of the Hammer.” His reputation as such was second
to none in the city, and he carried on his very successful business
till 1854, when, his health somewhat failing, he went to London
with his family, remaining there until 1857, in which year he re-
turned to the colony. After the firm E. Solomon & Co. w'as dis-
solved Mr. J. M. Solomon was engaged in commercial pursuits on
his own account. He was for many years identifie-d with the
public affairs of the colony in political and municipal matters. “20
years ago” the paper tells us “there was no more popular man
than M. J. Solomon in the city, either in business' or politics, and
the same high and honorable principles which then characterised
him, and the same energy and ability for administration which he
then displayed attended his career to the last.” He was born m
London in 1818 and died in Adelaide in 1880 on August 29th.
From the minutes of the first meeting held in Temple Tavern,
we know that Mr. J. M. Solomon was elected the first Chairman
of the Committee, and the first President of the Jewish congrega
tion. It was thanks to Mr. Solomon’s great ability for leadership
that the Jewish community passed successfully during his tenure
of office, through its initial stages, and evolved into an influential
body of the communal life of this State. Mr. Solomon is closely
identified with some of the most important communal activities of
Jewish life. It was under his Chairmanship that the old Jewish
Synagogue was planned and built, the Sunday school eventually
opened, and a Rabbi invited from abroad. In general Mr. Solomon
was knowti amongst the Jewish people for his multifarious activi-


ties. The mantle of Mr. Solomon fell, upon his death, on
the shoulders of his son, Mr. M. J. Solomon, who was connected for
over 50 years with the Jewish communal life in this State.
Reference was made earlier to the great part which the Mon-
tefiores played in the commercial life of this State, and their
pioneering activity in the mining industry.
Several other prominent Jewish business men were connected
with the mining interest of this f State. We find thus Mr. Emanuel
Solomon a trustee of the Royal S«A. Mining Company, Mr., Philip
Levi and Mr. Elizer Montefiore Levi were directors of the Adelaide
Mining Company. The lastnamed person was a director of the
Paringa Mining Company in the late forties.
Ihe Mt. Remarkable Copper mine had amongst its directors
the abovementioned gentlemen. Messrs. E. and J. M. Solomon
were connected with the Royal Mining Co. in the years 1850-52.
Messrs. E. Solomon and E. Levi were closely connected with the
Burra Burra mine.
Because of their connexion with shipping and indenting, a
number of Jewish settlers were prominent in the commercial life
of Port Adelaide. Montague Phillipson, the father of N. E. Phil-
lipson, was one of the foremost shipping agents in his time. He
was one of the early settlers in this State. His brother, J. M.
Phillipson arrived, on board the “Eden/’ as early as June, 1838.
He is mentioned on the official list of landowners of the special
survey at Boston Bay in the S.A. Gazette and Colonial Register
for May 25th, 1839. Mr. J. M. Phillipson was a highly respected
citizen and closely connected with the interest of the Jewish com-
munity from its very inception in 1848. He was one of the original
members of the Adelaide Club which was founded in 1839- Mr. A.
T. Saunders in his article on the Adelaide Club in the “Register”
foi February 19th, 1921, mentions Mr. Phillipson who was present
at the first meeting of the Adelaide Club on 31st July, 1838.
Another prominent man in shipping was Mr. Solomon Mo-
catta. A member of a well-known London Jewish family, which
was by marriage related to the Montefiores,; he was one’of the
early Jewish settlers in this State. He established the shipbrokers
film of Mocatta and Gaffeney m Port Adelaide, where he resided
for over 30 years. Mr. Mocatta was a very prominent member of
the Adelaide Jewish congregation. He served on many occasions
on the committee of the synagogue and, in 1857, he and Mr. B.
Gollin were appointed officiating ministers to the Jewish com-
munity.
Mr. Benjamin Mendes Ha Costa was another prominent mem-
ber of the Jewish persuasion who was engaged in commerce in
this city. B. M. De Costa is mentioned as early as 1841 in the
Royal Almanac of S.A. as a merchant and his address is given
in Hindley Street. A later issue of the same almanac in 1843 gives
his address in Grenfell Street.
Mr. B. Da Costa’s magnificent bequest of considerable property
to St. Peters College will be related elsewhere.


One of the earliest firms and among the leading businesses
of this city was that of Charles Jacobs & Sons. Mr. Charles Jacobs
commenced business as a general merchant in Gawler in 1846. He
came to Adelaide in 1853 where the firm of Charles Jacobs and
Sons was established. The Aldine History of S.A. refers to Mr.
Charles Jacobs as “a very old and highly respected colonist’’ and
that “the firm has increased to a very great extent owing to the
enterprise and energy of Messrs. M .C. and N. C., J. and S. J.
Jacobs, the sons of Mr. Charles Jacobs. The above firm is the
largest importer of sugar in Australia, and also deals largely
in tea and coffee.” The firm had its head office in Mel-
bourne and branches in Adelaide, Mauritius, Durban, Capetown.
It was in this firm that Mr. S. J. Jacobs, a lawyer by training,
commenced his business career. Mr. S. J. Jacobs, an old and well-
known identity in the commercial, social and sporting life of this
State, is still with us and will be referred to at some length in the
later stages of this study.
No historical outline, short as it may be, can be .complete
without reference to the pioneering activity of the Jewish people in
the commercial life of the country towns of this State. We shall
refer, if only briefly, to the Victorsens in Clare and the Judells in
Orroroo. I am indebted to Mrs. Westland of Glenelg for the fol-
lowing information; —“My grandfather, Mr. Julius Victorsen,
arrived in Clare. S.A., in 1848, and started a drapery business there.
My father, Louis Victorsen, was born on the boat “Ocean” coming
from England- There were seven children. The business was
started by Mr. Julius and carried on by his son, Mr. Louis ‘ Vic-
torsen, and then Mr. Louis’ son Mr. Julius, ( who continued it until
last year.”
Of more recent date is the business career of Leopold Judell
of Orroroo. Mr. Judell was born in Altona, Holstein, Germany, in
1848. He came to S.A. in 1870. by/the shfp the “City of Adelaide ”
He began his* business with the firm of Alexander Kauffman, an-
other well-known Jewish business man of Truro. Mr. Judell
joined the firm of Levine and Judell of Jamestown, and what may
be termed the pioneer business of that town was established. The
“Cyclopedia of S.A.” speaks highly of the active part which Mr.
Judell took in fostering the interest of town and district in every
possible way. In 1880 Mr. Judell married the eldest daughter of
the Hon. Maurice Salom of Adelaide.
We have referred above to the great pioneering activity of
Nathaniel E'dmund Phillipson and Philip Levi in the pastoral in-
dustry of the Far North and Northern Territory. Equally important
was the commercial activity of some of the early Jewish settlers
in this State who had great interests in those parts. Mr. Alexander
Kauffman, who conducted a large wholesale importing business
in Adelaide and many country centres in the 50’s and 60’s o/f the
last century, opened a branch in Port Augusta to supply the
Northern districts. The Aldine History of S.A. tells us that “the


travellers of Mr. Kauffman’s firm went hundreds of miles into the
interior and delivered goods in all back parts of this and the neigh-
boring colonies.”
Mr. A. Kauffmann was a very prominent business man in this
State. He served, in the year 1888, on the Committee of the Ade-
laide Chamber of Commerce and took an active ipart in the com-
munal life of the Hebrew congregation of Adelaide. He was a
native of Germany and died in this city at the age of 74 years la
1901.
Mr. John Hains, a prominent early settler of Port Adelaide,
spent some years in the Far North in the early 70’s. He went to
Pt. Darwin in 1872 in the barque “Farningham.” The “Cyclopedia
of S.A.” recounts some exciting stories of his sojourn in the North-
where he spent two years. In 1874 he returned to Port Adelaide
and established a great business as a carrier and contractor.
Of a real pioneering nature arid of great benefit to the North-
ern Territory proved to be the stay of Mr. V. L. Solomon, who was
destined to play, in later years, a prominent part in the Parliamen-
tary life of S.A. and the Commonwealth. Mr. V. L. Solomon and
his brother, Moss Judah, who was connected for over 50 years with
the Hebrew congregation and died in 1933 at the ripe age of 89
years, spent many, years in Darwin as auctioneers and merchants.
Mr. V. L. Solomon, later the Honorable, lived in the Northern Ter-
ritory from 1873 to 1890.
The Hon. V. L. Solomon went for the first time to the North-
ern Territory, according to the “Observer” of October 24th, 1908,
at the time the boom occurred, which was largely promoted, from
Kapunda. “Inspired by visions of the possibilities which the coun-
try presented. Mr. Solomon joined a prospecting party 'and sailed
for Pt. Darwin. Like hundreds of others he was doomed to dis-
appointment and returned to Adelaide. Before long, however, he
went back to the Territory and undertook the management of a
business for his brother, Mr. M. J. Solomon. He later launched
out on his own account and for many years was oneiof the leading
men of Pt. Darwin. He became prominently identified with the
destinies of that part of the Province as proprietor and editor of
the Northern Territory Times and Gazette. As a journalist he
wielded a facile pen in the course of advancing the interests of
the North country. He took a pronounced stand against the whole-
sale immigration of Chinese and lectured throughout the colonies
on what at one time threatened to become an alarming evil.” Mr.
J. J. Pascoe in the “History of Adelaide and Vicinity,’ tells us
“that Mr. V. L. Solomon brought the question of independence
of the Northern Territory prominently before the
public, and it was a fitting tribute to his energetic labours
that he was returned as one of the first representatives of that
electorate, which he has continued to represent.” The Parliamen-
tary career of Mr. V. L. Solomon will be dealt with elsewhere in
this study.


JEWS IN MUNICIPAL AND PARLIAMENTARY LIFE OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The part played by Jewish people in the municipal and Par-
liamentary life of this State has been very marked indeed, hour
Mayors, six Members of Parliament, and a number of councillors
in the City Council and in various town councils throughout the
State have been of Hebrew persuasion and closely identified with
the communal affairs of the Hebrew congregation.
The first Adelaide Mayor of Hebrew faith was John Lazar,,
who came to Adelaide from Sydney in 1840. We are giving below
a record of Mr. Lazar’s civic activities in this State and in New
Zealand according to the Year Book of the, Adelaide City-Council
for 1923.
MR. JOHN LAZAR.
“ The fourth person to occupy the mayoral chair was Mr. John
Lazar, who was born at Edinburgh, Scotland, on Ist December,
1801. He was married in London on 2nd November, 1825, and left
England for Sydney, New South Wales, by the ship “Lady Mc-
Naughton,” in 1836. During the voyage fever broke out in the
vessel and 123 deaths resulted. Mr. Lazar lost three of his chil-
dren by the fever. Three others had died previously in England.
Four survived —Abraham, Samuel, Rachel and Victoria. On arrival
in Sydney he was engaged in the theatrical profession,, and from
1836 to 1851 leased and managed various theatres in Australia,
including the old Victoria theatre in Gilles Arcade, off Currie
Street. As an actor he played with the late Mr. George Coppin,
who afterw'ards became a member of the Melbourne City Council.
On leaving the stage he went into the jewellery business in'Hind-
ley Street in a shop situated where Messrs. Clutterbuck Bros.’
premises now stand. In 1853 he was elected an alderman in the
Adelaide City Council, and continued to hold that office until 1855,
when he was selected by his colleagues to occupy the Mayoral
Chair. He was again returned to the Chief Magistracy in 1856
and 1857, and in the following year became an Alderman once
more. His retirement from the City Council occurred in 1859-
After a residence in South Australia of 24 years Mr. Lazar left in
1863 for New Zealand and became Clerk of the Dunedin Town
Board on 4th November of that year. In 1865 the Provincial
Council dissolved the Town Board by ordinance and Commission-
ers were appointed in its stead on 17th April. Mr. Lazar received
the appointment of Clerk to the Commissioners. On the 18th
May following, the Provincial Council passed another ordinance


under which the inhabitants of the City of Dunedin were incor-
porated. The first meeting of the Dunedin Council took place
on sth August, 1865, and Mr. Lazar became Town Clerk. He
continued in the position until 30th April, 1866, when he retired.
The Council made him the recipient of a gratuity of £3OO. As
further evidence qf the esteem in which he was held, he received
a public presentation from the citizens before his departure from
Dunedin for Hokitika, a tow'n on the western coast of the South
island. There he was made Town Clerk shortly after his arrival
in 1866. In 1873 he was appointed County Treasurer and subse-
quently became Provincial Treasurer when the county gave way
to provincialism. Shortly after the latter appointment he retired
into private life. He was initiated as a Freemason in Sydney in
1838. and held the office of Provincial Deputy Grand Master of
South Australia.
“In 1871 he was installed as Provincial District Grand Master
of Westland, and held that office until his death on 7th June, 1879.
He was a prominent member of the Jewish congregations in South
Australia and New Zealand. Mr. Lazar’s remains were interred in
Hokitika cemetery, where a very handsome monument was erected
on his grave by the Freemasons of Westland.”
We have had . many occasions to refer to John Lazar’s con-
nexion with the Adelaide Hebrew congregation. He was a foun-
dation member of that congregation and was one among those who
convened the memorable meeting of September 10th, 1848, for the
purpose “of forming members of the Jewish persuasion into a
body.” He acted on many occasions as Reader to the congre-
gation and was honoured with the reading of the “Kol-Nidrey”
Prayer on the first occasion when the Day of Atonement was ob-
served collectively' by the newly formed members of the congre-
gation in 1848.
Mr. John Lazar, next only to Mr. Emanuel and J. M. Solomon,
was the most active member of the early Hebrew congregation,
and was most prominent in the building of the synagogue. He was
a member of the committee from its very formation and was Presi-
dent of the congregation in the years 1856/57. He was associated
with all the communal affairs 'till his departure from this State.
When he left, in 1863, for New Zealand, the Half-yearly General
Meeting for the same year placed on record his great services to
the community, and expressed its regret “because of the departure
of one of the most useful members of the Adelaide Hebrew con-
gregation.”
The Hon. Judah Moss Solomon, to whose commercial activi-
ties and part played in Jewish communal life we have referred,
above, was elected, in 1853, as Alderman for the city council. He
left for London in 1854, and returned in 1857 to Adelaide. In
December, 1869, he was elected Mayor of Adelaide and was re-
turned unopposed in the following year. The Victoria Bridge was
erected during his term of office. On the retirement of Mr. R.
Ingleby, he acted as Coroner. In March, 1877, he became Chair-


Rundle Street in 1H79, showing old Synagogue on right, and a new Synagogue then just
completed on left.




man of the Destitute Board, which position he held until his death
on 29th August, 1880- He was a great advocate of the boarding-
out system and no part of his duties gave him more pleasure than
seeing that the foster'parents had proper regard for the welfare of
the children. During his term of office as Mayor he originated the
conference composed of the Mayors of various municipalities and
Chairman of district councils who sat to consider the best means
of dealing with nuisances over which the municipalities had no
control. The outcome was the Public Health Act now in force.
He took an active part in the Parliamentary life of this State.
Mr. J. M. Solomon was returned, in September 1858, to the House
of Assembly for the City of Adelaide, which he represented till
the end of 1859. After an interval of rather more than a year Mr.
Solomon re-entered political life, this time in the Legislative Coun-
cil, of which he was a member from March 1861 till July 1866. He
was elected as one qf the representatives for West Adelaide at the
beginning of 1872 and sat there until the end of 1874.
Another prominent member in Parliament in the 60’s was Mr.
Emanuel Solomon who was elected in February, 1863, as a mem-
ber for West Adelaide in conjunction with' Mr. J. C. Verco, and
served until the dissolution of the House at the end of 1864.' In
August, 1867, Mr. Solomon was returned to the Legislative Coun-
cil but resigned his seat in 1871 in consequence of continued bad
health.
Mr. M. L. Marks, a prominent man in Jewish life, was a Mem-
ber of Parliament in 1857. He resigned at the
visiting Europe.
Mr. Saul Solomon was elected to Parliament on March 1887.
As a junior Member for East Torrens in the House/ of Assembly
the “Observer” for March, 1889, speaks of him “as one of the
prominent citizens of Adelaide. He was born'in 1836 at Knights-
bridge, England, and came to Victoria and resided at Bendigo and
Ballarat. He came to Adelaide in 1859 where he became the Chair-
man of the Adelaide Arcade Company since its formation. He
carried on an extensive photographic business in this city. Mr.
Saul Solomon was elected an Alderman of this City in 1885 on the
retirement of Mr. Holland.
The Hon. M. Salom, M.L.C., was one of the most prominent
members of the S.A. Legislative Council. He was born in London
in June, 1831. In 1846 he was articled to a London 1 stockbroker,
with whom he remained for three years. He then went to the
Cape of Good Hope. He arrived in S.A. in 1852. Soon after he
joined the auctioneering firm of Solomon and Company and later
took over the business and carried on successfully until 1882, when
he sold out to a syndicate of merchants. For many years he took an
active part in public matters and was a member of the committee of
the Chamber of Commerce and later acted as chairman of that body.
Mr. Salom wasa member of the first council for(education from its
inception until it was abolished. He was a Chairman of the House


Committee of the Adelaide Hospital and a member of the executive
of several societies- He was elected to the Legislative Council in
1882 —the election was under the old system when the whole colony
voted as one constituency. Six members were required and out
of fourteen candidates, and Mr. Salom was returned second on the
poll with 8,115 votes. On the formation of the Downer Ministry,
the Premier (later Sir J. W. Downer) asked Mr. Salom to accept
the Chief Secretaryship, but he declined. The Hon. M. Salom
has been president of the Hebrew Philanthropic Society for 20
years —he has also been president of the synagogue in the year
1874.
One of the most prominent Legislators* in this State was the
Hon. Vaiben Louis Solomon. He was born in Adelaide on 13th May,
1853, the son of Judah Moss Solomon. He was a member of Par-
liament of S.A., representing the Northern Territory from 1890
until 1901, when he was elected to the first Commonwealth Par-
liament, holding this seat until the election of 1903. He was a
member of the Convention which framed the Commonwealth Con-
stitution in 1897 and ’9B. In 1899 he led an attack which caused
the overthrow of the Kingston Government and for a week, from
November 30th to December 6th, he held the positions of Premier
and Treasurer. He was again representing the Northern Terri-
tory from May 7th, 1905, till his death in Adelaide 1 on October
20th, 1908. The “Observer” for October 21st, 1908, says that “Elo-
quent tributes were paid to Mr. Solomon’s memory in the Assembly
and Legislative Council and motions were carried adjourning both
Houses for two hours on Wednesday to enable members to attend
the funeral of the late Legislator.”
Of more recent date are the civic activities of the late Sir
Lewis Cohen and Alderman I. Isaacs. They both left a splendid
record in that sphere and are to be remembered among the most
outstanding Jews of the Adelaide community of later years.
Mr. Lewis Cohen, J.P. (later Sir Lewis), the son of the late
Mr. Henry Cohen, was born at Liverpool, England, on 23rd Decem-
ber, 1849, and arrived in Sydney, N.S.W., three years later. His
education began in Sydney, and, in 1863, his parents sent him to
London to complete it. Afterwards he spent some years in Fiji,
and came\ to Adelaide in 1876.
He entered the City Council in 1886 as Councillor for Mac-
Donnell Ward, served in that capacity for three years, and on Ist
December, 1889, was elected Mayor. This office he held for two
years, at the end of which time he retired from the Council. In
December, 1901, Mr. Cohen was again elected Mayor, and occu-
pied the position until December, 1904, when he became an aider-
man. After two years’ service in the latter office he retired from
the Council once more. Re-elected to the Mayoralty in December
1909, he served for two years. In December 1911, he was elected
an alderman, and continued in that position until December 1921,
when he became Lord Mayor, having been returned unopposed.
He was again elected civic head of the City without opposition in


December 1922. This was, therefore, Mr. Cohen’s ninth term as
Chief Magistrate.
In 1887 Mr. Cohen was returned to the House of Assembly for
North Adelaide, which he represented until 1893. From 1902 to
1906 he represented Adelaide. He refused ministerial office in the
Cockburn Government on the retirement of the late Hon. J. H.
Howe. He was also offered the position of Agent-General for
South Australia in London.
“In 1911 he was delegated by the Council to proceed to London
officially to represent the City at the Coronation of King George V.,
and at the same time to appeal to the Imperial Government to
grant a Lord Mayoralty for Adelaide. Although at the time un-
successful, the honour was subsequently conferred on the City.
Prior to Mr. Cohen's' departure for London, a representative. Com-
mittee selected by the citizens accorded him a public banquet in the
Town Hall, at which over 300 persons attended.
On the death of King Edward VIL, Mr. Cohen organised a
public subscription for the purpose of erecting a National Statue
to perpetuate the memory of the late Sovereign, and the most
pleasing feature in connection with the appeal was the splendid re-
sponse of the children of the State and private schools. The statue
was unveiled by H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, during/his visit to
South Australia in July, 1920.
During his long service as a civic representative, Mr. Cohen
took a prominent part in the establishment of many of the utilities
of the City, the most notable of which] w&s the woodblocking of
King William Street and the mineral as phalting of Rundle and
Hindley Streets. He was created Knight Bachelor in January, 1924,
and died in June, 1933.”
The Municipal Year Book for 1933 gives the following outline
of Alderman I. Isaacs’ life: —
“Alderman Isaac Isaacs was a native of Victoria, in which
State he was born on 'lst July, 1858. When he was a child his
parents moved to Dunedin, New Zealand. After about 25 years’
residence in New Zealand, he returned to Victoria, and was elected
Treasurer by the combined friendly societies and other associations
for the demonstration held to celebrate the late Queen Victoria’s
Jubilee in 1887.
“In 1889 he was elected Grand President for Australasia of the
United Ancient Order of Druids. On his retirement from office
he was presented with a Past Grand President’s Collar, a diamond
ring, a gold watch and chain, and a gold medal, in recognition of
his ten years’ continuous service on the Board of Directors. On
leaving to settle in Adelaide in July, 1899, he was presented with
an engrossed testimonial in acknowledgment of many services to
the Society.
“In March, 1902, he was elected President of the Adelaide
Branch of the A.N.A. and in March, 1906, he was re-elected Chief
President of the Association in this State, for the third time, un-
opposed. Mr. Isaacs was a member of several other friendly so-


cieties, and in every instance has rendered useful and practical ser-
vice. He was a Past President of the Adelaide Jewish Philanthropic
Society, and was a member of the executive of the Adelaide Jew-
ish Congregation. For a period of two years (1908-9) he was
President of the Justices’ Association of South Australia, an office
which he occupied again in 1931-2. Mr. Isaacs was a Justice of the
Peace for all States. Since 1913 he was Chairman of the Adelaide
Branch and Adelaide District Committee of the Liberal Federation,
which has lately become the Liberal and, Country League. In the
municipal life of Adelaide he established an excellent record.
Elected to the Council for Gawler Ward in 1902, he w'as returned
in 1907 unopposed as an Alderman. Mr. Isaacs retained this office
until December, 1915, when he was elected Mayor of Adelaide.
After two years in the chief magistracy of the City, he was elected
unopposed as an Alderman, an office he retained till his death.
“His labours as representative of the Council on the Municipal
Tram wavs Trust, and his official connexion with a wide circle of
public and semi-public organisations, make a lengthy catalogue,
and while it discloses a fine capacity for work —most of it of a
purely honorary character —it shows also a catholicity of taste and
tolerance of judgment that is altogether praiseworthy. He was
Chairman of the Finance Committee of the City 1 Council for the last
twelve years, and also occupied the same Chair previously to be-
coming Mayor.
“For a number of years he was representative of the City and
and Suburban Local Boards of Health on the Central Board of
Health, and has also been a representative of the Adelaide Local
Board of Health on the Metropolitan County Board under the
Food and Drugs Act, and on the Metropolitan Infectious Diseases
Hospital Board.
“It was in 1903 that Mr. Isaacs was initiated into Craft
Masonry, in St. Andrew’s Lodge, and in the year following was
elected a lodge steward. He filled various offices with success, and
in due course was installed worshipful master of the lodge. He
was also a foundation member and past master of Southern Cross
Masonic Lodge, in the progress of which he has taken a live in-
terest. He died on 16th January, 1935, and was buried in the
Jewish cemetery, West Terrace, Adelaide.”
Sir Lewis Cohen and Mr. Isaacs were both very a,ctive mem-
bers of the congregation. Sir Lewis was associated with the affairs
of the community for a period of 50 years. He was President of
the congregation in the years 1883/84. He was trustee to the syna-
gogue and treasurer to the congregation for a number of years.
The committee of the Hebrew congregation recorded their appre-
ciation of Sir Lewis’ services to the community on the occasion of
his death which occurred in 1933.
The late Mr. Isaacs, a native of Victoria, took a keen interest
in the local communal affairs. He was connected (with many of its
charitable institutions, and was President of the Jewish Philan-
thropic Society, the oldest Jewish institution in this State. Mr.
Isaacs served for many years on the executive of the Hebrew con-


gregation. His death which occurred only 'last } eai was greatly
deplored by the members of the Hebrew community.
Mr. Nathan Solomons, a prominent business man of Adelaide,
was connected for many years with the municipal activities of
Kensington and Norwood. He was councillor for Kent Ward for
two years, from December 1916 to December 1918. Mr. N. Solo-
mons was Mayor of Norwood in the years 1919/1920. He was ie-
sponsible for obtaining a loan of £3,500 from the Commonwealth
Government in 1920 for the employment of returned soldiers. This
money was used for the plantation extending along Osmond 1 er-
race, Norwood. He was Chairman of the Soldiers’ Memorial Sub-
committee from its inception until the completion and unveiling of
the memorial by His Excellency the Governor in June Mr.
Solomons was Alderman for seven years from Decembei 1920 till
his resignation in November 1927. Upon his resignation the fol-
lowing resolution was carried unanimously by the Council ;
“That the resignation be accepted with much regret and the
Council placed on record in the minutes its very high appieciation
of the unstinted effort and unswerving zeal with which Alderman
Solomons has served this towaas Mayor. Alderman and Councillor
during the past 11 years, and further that the Council expressed the
fervent hope that he may be spared for many years to enjoy good
health, happiness and prosperity.”
For many years Councillor Solomons was an enthusiastic
worker in the interests of the Justices’ Association Incorporated of
South Australia. Mr. Solomons was President of the Association
for the years 1917, 1929, 1930, and 1931. He attended as a delegate
the first Federal Conference which was held in April 1914; he was
delegate also to the subsequent conference. Mr. Solomons was ap-
pointed in 1916 a Justice of the Peace for South Australia, in 1917
for the states of Western Australia, Queensland and Victoria, and
in 1929 of New South Wales and Tasmania.'
On the 70th anniversary of his! birth. Mr. Solomons was pre-
sented with an illuminated address and a photographic group of
the members of the Justices’ Association; high tribute was paid to
him on his long association with the Council andjtd his; occupancy
of the Presidential Chair on several occasions.
Mr. N. Solomons, a leading business man in town, was ap-
pointed Chairman of Directors of The Greater Wondergraph Com-
pany Ltd. in 1921. In 1922 he was appointed Director of the Board
of Control of the, Adelaide Picture Theatres (operated by Union
Theatres Ltd. and Greater Wondergraph Co., Ltd.). In 1929 he
was appointed Director of the Union Theatres (South Australia)
Ltd. He became Associated Director of Greater Union Theatres
Ltd. in 1933. Mr. Solomons acted as Director of The Insurance
Office of Australia Ltd. from 1927 to 1930, and he has been Director
of the Yellow Cabs (S.A.) Ltd. from 1928.
A. C. Meyers, at present a Councillor of the Adelaide City
Council, represents the Grey Ward, which had been represented for
16 years by his father, the late Alfred Meyers since 1890.


THE COMMUNITY AND COMMUNAL AFFAIRS—IB7O-1900.
The history of the Hebrew congregation of Adelaide from 1870
is inseparably linked up with the name of the late Mr. Moss Judah
Solomon. Mr. M. J. Solomon, the son of the Hon. J. M. Solomon,
M.P., Mayor of Adelaide, was born in Brisbane in 1843. He first
became treasurer of the Hebrew congregatiomin 1867, which posi-
tion he occupied until 1869. He became President in the year 1870
and, up to the date of his death which occurred on 11th February,
1933, he occupied the office of President for a period totalling 35
years. Mr. M. J. Solomon was actively associated I with the con-
gregation for more than 60 years, as committee man, secretary,
treasurer and president. Mr. M. J. Solomon continued thus the
tradition of his father, the Hon. J. M. Solomon, who was amongst
the founders of the, Hebrew' congregation and its first President.
It was during Mr. M. J. Solomon’s tenure of office as President
of the Hebrew congregation that a Private Act was passed by Par-
liament in 1881, known as the Synagogue Act, whereby all lands
and hereditaments belonging to the/Synagogue were vested in
Trustees. We have mentioned earlier that the first Trustees of
the Hebrew Synagogue were the original four members who pur-
chased the land on which the synagogue was built from Mr. George
Morphett on 11th December, 1848, namely, Messrs.. Burnett
Nathan, Morris Marks, Louis Joseph and Samuel Hart. After the
deaths of Messrs. B. Nathan and S. Hart, and because of the fact
that Messrs. Marks and Joseph ceased to reside in this Province,
new trustees had to be appointed. Messrs. A. E. Cohen, Israel
Simmons, I. Solomon and M. J. Solomon were appointed trustees on
Ist July, 1868. The vacancy caused by the death,of Mr. A. E.
Cohen was filled by Mr. Solomon Saunders. In the Adelaide Syna-
gogue Act the following four gentlemen are mentioned as trustees:
Messrs. I. Simmons, I. Solomon, M. J. Solomon and S. Saunders.
All the abovementioned were active members of the Jewish com-
munity and prominent in the business life of this State.
, Mr. Israel Simmons was a well-known merchant engaged in the
drapery trade. He conducted his business for many years at the
corner of King William and Bundle Streets, /known -as the Bee-
hive corner. One can see numerous pictures of Mr. Simmons’
drapery shop occupying a prominent place in the albums of the
old Adelaide shopping centre in the latter half of the last century.
Mr. I. Solomon was closely connected with this great family of
Emmanuel and J. M. Solomon, prominent in the commercial life
of this city. Mr. Emmanuers surviving son, Mr. J. S. Solomon, in-
forms me that his father started in 1866 the Nimble Ninepence shop


in King William Street near the site of the Advertiser office. This
shop which, was the forerunner of our more recent departmental
stores, was conducted by Solomon Cousins with whom Mr. I. Solo-
mon was connected in business.
Mr. S. Saunders was first associated with the Hebrew community
as officiating minister to which position he was appointed in 1863,
and later as Master to the Hebrew Sabbath School. Upon relin-
quishing his duties as minister and teacher Mr. S. Solomon became
a business man. He was President of the Hebrew congregation in
the years 1878-79, in 1891-94 and from 1905 to 1913. Other promi-
nent members in the latter decades of the last century were
Messrs. A. Abrahams,,R. Raphael, B. Gollin, S. S. Henry, M. Bran-
don, Gabriel Bennett and the Hon. Maurice Salom.
Mr. A. Abrahams, a native of England, came out to Australia
in 1850. He was connected in business with several) insurance com-
panies, and as mentioned earlier was the founder of the Executor.
Trustee and Agency Company. Mr. Abrahams was one of the
most prominent figures in Adelaide and has been closely identified
with the cultural life of this city.,He resided for over 1 20 years in
the York hotel, and on the occasion of his death, which occurred
in 1892, the obituary notice referred to him as “one?of the most
distinctive figures in Adelaide and a man most courteous in’speech
and courtly in manner.” Mr. Abrahams was a very prominent
member of the Hebrew congregation. He acted as President in
the years 1857 and 1868 and 1 was for many years treasurer to the
congregation. A great Hebrew scholar, the late Mr. A. Abrahams
officiated on many occasions as Reader and Minister prior to the
arrival of Rabbi A. T. Boas. His memory is held in great esteem
by Jews and Gentile alike.
Mr. Gabriel Bennett to whom reference was made 'before, was
another old identity of the Adelaide Hebrew congregation. He
acted on many occasions as treasurer and president of the Hebrew
congregation. It was during Mr. G. Bennett’s tenure of office as
President that the new synagogue foundation stone was Maid on
July 7th, 1870.
Mr. Moses Brandon, a prominent business man of this city, en-
gaged for many years in the boot trade, was President of the con-
gregation as early as 1863, and later in 1875-76. He is still re-
membered among the older members of the community as a highly
esteemed identity.
Mr. B. Gollin was one of the earliest Jewish settlers in this
State. Mr. B. Gollin, together with Mr. S. Mocatta, were
appointed acting ministers to the Hebrew congregation in 1857.
Mr. Gollin’s sons established the well-known firm of Messrs. Gollin
and Company which has been in existence for over 60 years. Mr.
Walter Gollin, one of the original founders of this firm, acted for
some time as secretary to the Hebrew congregation, and was pre-
sident in 1889.


Mr. Ralph Raphael, a well-known identity in the commercial
civil life of this city, was President of the Hebrew congregation
in 1873.
The Hon. Maurice Salom to whose Parliamentary career refer-
ence was made earlier in this study, was one of the most prominent
members of this community. Pie belonged to one of the oldest
families of Sephardic Jews. His father was a merchant and planter
in the West Indies, and he was a great grandson of the venerable
Doctor of Divinity, Salomah Salom of Adrianople. and a descendant
of the late Rabbi Abraham Salom of Catalonia, a writer of several
dogmatic works, notably “The Habitation of Peace, written in
1430. Mr. M. Salom, later the Honorable, was born in London in
1831, and came out to Australia in 1852; he acted for many years
as Treasurer to the Hebrew congregation and he was President in
the year 1874.
Mr. L. P. Lawrence, who was one of the best-known business
men in this city, was a prominent member of the Hebrew congre-
gation. Mr. Lawrence was held in high esteem in the commercial
life of Adelaide, and was President of the Chamber of Commerce in
the years 1889-90. Apart from his duties as treasurer to the Hebrew
congregation, which post he filled for many years, Mr. L. P* Law-
rence was President in the years 1904-5. Mentioning of the late
Mr. L. P. Lawrence, whose death occured in 1923, bring the affairs
of the congregation up to recent times. Before passing, however,
to the history of the Hebrew congregation of more recent years,
reference must be made to several communal institutions and to
some important events in the life of the community in general*
We have mentioned earlier that the oldest institution in the
congregation is The Adelaide Hebrew Philanthropic Society which
was established on 12th June. 1852. for the purpose of relieving
distressed families. It was founded by the late Hon. Emmanuel
Solomon, R. Raphael, S. Lawrence and B. Nathan. Another ad-
mirable society with similar laudable but more extensive objects
is the Adelaide Hebrew Ladies’ Benevolent Society which was
(inaugurated in October, 1879. Mrs. S. H. Isaacs was its first
President, and the late Mrs. Charles Jacobs its first Treasurer. Its
purpose is to attend the sick, and it helps poor Jewish women
and their children in times of distress.
, The Adelaide Hebrew Benefit Society w'as established on 26th
February, 1877. This society was initiated ,by S. Saunders, J.P.,
and J. Hyams, the former being its first President, and Lewis
Cohen, M.P., later Sir Lewis, its first Treasurer.
The Adelaide Jewish Women’s Guild, founded by Mrs. M. J.
Solomon, was inaugurated in November, 1902. Its purpose being
to assist the poor irrespective of the'religious denominations, with
food and clothing.
The last decade of the 19th century proved to be most event-
ful in the history of the Adelaide Hebrew' congregation. From vital


ill • ill
llil •• ' • /: ’ f f ; :* •■•:•• . . v ’ : ’:H£llKvS#
: JjL Wllt y ;1^^yg : : - r '
d-'jljjf jHk m ; yyf \ I v .
I : I I /
I * ' .V. ■ .<■ I v!?!s»* .*■?'•:: ■
i / /_, } /
ar-
PAST PRESIDENTS.




statistics given elsewhere in this study we know that the Jewish
population reached its peak in the year 1891 when it numbered 810
souls, forming 0.26 per cent, of the total population.
Mr. Levi Isaacs, an active member of the committee of the
Synagogue, was responsible for a number of alterations which were
made in the Synagogue, and he proposed the building of shops in
Rundle Street which since then have proved to be a real benefit and
a great source of income to the community. We know from the min-
utes of the Committee meeting held on Sept. 2nd, 1891, “that Mr.
L. Isaacs propounded a scheme to get an amended Act for the
purpose of building shops on the property. .He produced plans
drawn by Mr- E. Davies, showing an estimated cost of £2,500 for
five shops, giving a profit of £375 per annum.” It w'as resolved at
the same meeting “that the proposal be placed on the agenda paper
for the special meeting as a second alternative scheme, and also
that power be asked to /purchase a certain piece of land.” The
proposal of Mr. Levi Isaacs was brought before a special meeting
held on Sunday, December 19th, 1895, of the trustees and the com-
mittee re building. Those present were Messrs. M. J. Solomon,
who acted as President; J. Asher, L. Cohen, A. Myers, J. Daniels,
and L. Isaacs, and the secretary, A. E. Solomon. The estimated
cost was £2,500 for shops, £7BO for alterations to the-school, £l5O
architects’s expenses, and £l2O bill costs-
It was proposed that a general meeting be called for the pur-
pose to empower to raise a mortgage on the Adelaide Synagogue
property to the extent of £4,000. The special general meeting was
held on the 19th day of January, 1896, when it was resolved: —
1. “That the trustees of the Adelaide Synagogue Property are
hereby empowered to raise by mortgage of all that piece or
parcel of land situated in Rundle Street, Adelaide, and known
as the Adelaide Synagogue property, the sum ofi £4,000 for the
following purposes, viz.:—
(a) “The payment of the cost, charges and expenses, of and inci-
dental to the obtaining said Amending Act.
“The building and erection upon the said parcel of land of
certain shops, buildings, and dwelling houses.
(c) “The addition to and alteration of the Synagogue and other
buildings now erected upon the said parcel of land.
2. “That the plans already prepared for the ; erection of such shops
buildings, and dwelling houses and for the addition to and
alteration of the synagogue and other building be and the same
are approved.
3. “That Isaac Asher be appointed as trustee in place of Solomon
Saunders, who has resigned.”
An inaugural meeting was held on Sunday, September 27th,
1896, to open -the new building. Mr. M. J. Solomon was in the
Chair and addresses were delivered by Mr- A. T. Boas and the
Chairman. Mr. L. Isaacs proposed a vote of thanks to the Chair-
man. About 130 people were present at this gathering.


The account given here of the alterations made to the syna-
gogue and the building of shops leaves no doubt that the credit is
due to Mr. Levi Isaacs for one of the most important schemes in
the history of the Adelaide Hebrew congregation. The community
would indeed have been in a sorry plight/hadi it not been for the
foresight of this enterprising gentleman.
Mr. L. Isaacs was closely identified with many other important
affairs of the community. One particular movement which he
sponsored has to be placed on record.
At a meeting held on July sth, 1896, Mr. L. Isaacs proposed
“that letters be sent to all the Australian congregations re inter-
change of pulpits:” This proposal was agreed to, after a discus-
sion- We shall give an extract from a letter which was. sent out
by the Secretary, Mr. A. E. Solomon, to the congregations'of Mel-
bourne (Bourke Street, Albert Street, and St. Kilda synagogues),
to Ballarat, Brisbane, Auckland, Christchurch, and Dunedin, as
well as to the “Sydney Hebrew Times” and to the “Jewish
Herald.” The letter reads as follows: —
“The direction of the Adelaide Hebrew community have to
ask your co-operation in bringing about an exchange of pulpits of
the ministers of the various Australasian Jewish congregations.
The advantages and benefits to be derived from this movement are
so numerous and self-evident, it is not necessary to enter into de-
tails except to say that it would be the means of/ causing a Jewish
religious revival that must have 1 a beneficial effect upon each com-
munity.”
The response from the various congregations was a warm one.
The movement initiated by Mr. L. Isaacs of the Adelaide congre- 1
gation was the forerunner of the Periodical Jewish Conference
which was convened first by Mr, J. G. Cohen of Sydney in April,
1901. This movement proved to be in years to come of vital im-
portance, not only to Adelaide Jewry, but to that of Australasia
in general-
Mr. L. Isaacs, who was a very prominent member of the com-
munity during the 90’s, became President of the congregation in
1898. He resigned this office in 1904 because of his departure from
the State. The committee of the congregation placed on record
his great services to the community, at a meeting held on Novem-
ber Ist, 1904. Mr. L. Isaacs, who left for Melbourne, made his
mark in the communal life of Victorian Jewry. Mr. Gustav Isaacs,
the surviving brother of the late Mr. L. Isaacs, who offered me his
assistance so generously in the latter stages of this w'ork, informs
me that his brother became President of the Bourke Street Syna-
gogue, in Melbourne, and was Chairman of the Hebrew Philan-
thropic Society there. As in his mother State, South Australia,
Mr. Isaacs became prominent in the Jewish communal affairs in
Victoria. His death, which occurred in October, 1913, in Mel-
bourne, was a great loss to Australian Jewry.


Another important event in the 90’s, was the passing of an
Amendment Act in 1895 by Parliament of the Synagogue Act of
1881. It may be of interest to add that the original Act of 1881
was drafted by our esteemed co-religionist, Mr. S. J. Jacobs, ,of
Glenelg, who was then a practising solicitor. According to the
Amendment of 1895, Messrs. Lewis Cohen (later Sir Lewis) and
Levi Isaacs were appointed trustees of the Synagogue in' place of
I. Simmons and Samuel Saunders. Mr. L. Isaacs resigned his
office when he left for Victoria in 1904.
On Sunday, 20th June, 1897, the Adelaide Hebrew congrega-
tion celebrated the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria. A Prayer-
Choral Thanksgiving service was well attended by the members
of the Jewish community.
Mr. M- Rosenthal, who was appointed second Reader and
Shochet (Ritual killer) in 1890, is recorded to have discharged his
duties to the entire satisfaction of the community.
No survey of the communal affairs of the last century could be
complete without reference to the Hebrew Sabba.th school. The
school was one of the most flourishing institutions in the commun-
ity. It is safe to say that the progress of the community could be
judged by the attendance of the scholars and the interest taken in
the school. The first reference to the Hebrew Sabbath school is
made in the report of the Half-yearly General Meeting held on
23rd March, 1863. It reads a,s follows:—“ The Committee believes
the progress of the Sabbath School founded by Mr. S. M. Myers,
the Reader, was such to be gratifying to every w'ellwisher of our
holy faith.” Mr. S. Myers was among the early ministers to the
Hebrew congregation. Mr. S- J. Jacobs, one of the oldest surviv-
ing members of the community, recollects attending the school in
the early 60’s, when Mr. S. Myers was his master.
From a special general meeting held on Bth October, 1865, we
read that a Board of Management was elected for the Sabbath
school. Those elected were Messrs. S. Myers, B. Gollin, and G.
Leon, Mr. S. Saunders, who acted from 1863 as minister to the
community, was appointed master to the Sabbath school at a salary
of i4O per annum.
The arrival of Rabbi A- T. Boas, in 1870, proved to be most
beneficial to the school. He took a keen interest in it and acted
on many occasions as headmaster and examiner. The late Rabbi
was indeed a teacher by nature, and perhaps one of his most im-
portant services rendered to the community was in his capacity as
master where he endeavoured to instil into the children the love
of the Hebrew creed, admiration for Jewish history and respect
for the customs and traditions. The Rev. A. T. Boas’ prize in
the Sabbath school commemorates his great activities in this field
and keeps the memory of a great ami loving teacher alive.
There are, unfortunately, no figures available as to the early
attendance of the school. Mr. Gustav Isaacs, who attended the
school in the early seventies recollects an attendance of something


in the vicinity of 70 to 80 scholars. Mr Isaacs becameMri later
years the secretary and then Chairman of the Sabbath School Board
From the committee meeting of the Sabbath school managemen
held in 1879 we know that the teaching staff of the school num-
bered five lady and six. men teachers, and that there Were 11 classes
which met on Saturdays and Sundays. The Management does no.
record the number of scholars; the Royal S.A- Almanac, however,
gives the number as 76, which closely agrees with the figure given
by Mr. Gustav Isaacs from memory. The first list of pupils is
given in the Roll Book for the year 1887-88, when it contains the
names of 136 children, attending 10 classes and 3 infant classes.
The Board of Management of the Hebrew Sabbath school had
among its members Mesdames S. Saunders and Schlank, and m
later years Mesdames M.J. Solomon and Schulitz. This shows the
great interest taken by the ladies in the progress of the school. It
was, indeed, thanks to their keen interest that the Hebrew Sab-
bath school flourished in the decades 1880 and 1900.
The mentioning of these names brings to mind some more
Jewish women prominent in the communal affairs in the last cen-
tury. Their I generous support and assistance in the building of the
first synagogue as early as 1850 was very great indeed. It was,
therefore, only fitting that, at the consecration of the synagogue,
the following eloquent tribute was paid to them: Search history,
both ancient and modern, look to public and domestic life, and
everywhere you will find that wherever the genuine spirit of women
presides, there will be peace, comfort and happiness. Individuals
and society alike must yield to their charming influence.” Two
ladies outstanding for their work in the life of the community were
Mesdames S. H- Isaacs and Charles Jacobs— they were the founda-
tion members of the Adelaide Hebrew Benevolent Society which
was inaugurated in October, 1879. Mrs. S. H. Isaacs was its first
President and Mrs. Charles Jacobs its first Treasurer. Mrs. Charles
Jacobs particularly was very prominent with her work for charitable
institutions. She acted for many years on the Board of the Chil-
dren’s Hospital.
Mrs. Fanny Solomon, wife of Mr. M. J. Solomon, who was for
many years President o*f the Hebrew congregation, was closely
associated with various communal institutions* She founded the
Jewish Ladies’ Guild in 1903, and on the occasion of her death,
which occurred in 1937, the annual report of the congregation
places on record her great services rendered to various societies
in the community. It is worth mentioning that the daughter of Mr.
M. J. Solomon, Miss S. Solomon, was among the first ladies to
take a degree in Science at the Adelaide University. The great
interest taken by the ladies in the communal affairs of last century
still goes on and to-day we have ladies taking an active part in
various institutions of the community.


lv.LLv.y..-.-J-X:
,• vQwOOOOOOwO<Vvvv%*** l »vwvvvvwwv'--.-• ■vvyvvvwvvw. ■ - - XX X . ( OOC N V ®W»X %
v»»>x»»>x.>x.>w^vw.y^NA^wo<<«xo>>>xj|gbo«*gogoccio^^
•"-■ <■ ••‘•\%
The Synagogue, showing Entrance from Synagogue Place.




JEWS IN SOCIAL AND CULTURAL LIFE OF THIS STATE.
It is perhaps fitting to commence this chapter on the part
played by the Jewish people in the social and cultural life of this
State with a quotation from The South Australian Register, for
Saturday, 11th March, 1843. It reads as follows: —
“Perhaps to no one private individual is South Australia so
much indebted as to Mr. Emmanuel Solomon. He has spent up-
ward of i 20,000 amongst us, and, on many occasions which we
could name, he has promoted the interests of the Colony to the
injury of his own private purse. It is to him that: we are indebted
tor the establishment of a regular communication with the sister-
Colony (maintained for many months at a great sacrifice), and
that too, at a time when, without such intercourse, we should have
stood in an unenviably isolated situation. He has been the patron
of all our literary and philanthropic institutions, his public and
private charities are notorious; and, if he has not built us a syna-
gogue, he has built us a theatre, which is always readily and
gratuitously offered for our public meetings and our Mechanics’
Institute.”
Mr- E. Solomon inscribed himself in the history of this State
amongst its greatest benefactors. It would be by far too much to
enumerate all his charitable deeds for the various religious denomi-
nations. The story of his benefaction for Solomontown, which is
named after him, was only recently brought under the notice of the
public by a correspondent of the Advertiser for November 21th,
1935. We know that Mr. Solomon reserved a section of land in the
centre of Solomontown, referred to as “Church Circle” for religious
purposes. Mr. Loyau, in “Representative Men of S.A.,’ speaks of
him as “a liberal supporter of his own church, who was never back-
ward in donations to other denominations.” , ,
Mr. E. Solomon gave to Adelaide in 1840 the first Theatre
which was the centre of Adelaide’s social activities in the earlv
forties.The S.A. Almanac for 1843 gives the following description
of the theatre :
“This is a large and neat pile of buildings in Gilles Arcade and
is the property of Messrs. V- and E. Solomon. The theatre is the
centre of the building, shops and dwelling houses surround it.
The fittings are exceedingly neat and speak much of the taste and
enterprise of the proprietors.”
Many old-time celebrities appeared on its boards, included G.
V. Brooks, Edward Sefton, Sir Charles and Lady Hare, Mr. and
Mrs. Jackson and others. John Lazar, another leading star of those


days was brought over by Mr. Solomon from Sydney in the brig
“Dorset.”
Mr. Loyau tells us in the abovementioned book “that E. Solo-
mon expended large sums of money without adequate return in the
encouragement of the drama.”
The story of the Old Colonists’ festival celebrated in the form
of a banquet at the Adelaide Town Hall on December 28th, 1871,
given by Mr. Emmanuel Solomon, to celebrate the 35th anniversary
of the colony, was told elsewhere in this study. We should like only
to add that according to the “Register” for December 29th, 1871,
amongst those present were “seated on the dais to the right and
left to the Chairman, Mr. Emmanuel Solomon, were Sir John Mor-
phett, Sir G. S. Kingston, Captain Hart, the Hon. Henry Ayers,
and many others whose names will be indissolubly associated with
the history of the early South Australian progress.” The paper
goes on to say “certainly never before have we seen gathered to-
gether in the colony so essentially representative an assembly. The
gathering was eminently successful, and reflected credit alike upon
its hospitable originator and upon those to whom he entrusted the
arrangement of the details.”
The name of this great benefactor is perpetuated in Solomon-
town, in Rosetta Terrace, named after his wife, and Dorsetta Ter-
race, named after the brig “Dorset,” one of Mr. E-, Solomon’s ves-
sels, which traded for many years between South Australia and
New South Wales.”
The mentioning of the Theatre Trings to mind some other
early Jewish settlers who were connected with it. Mr. Samuel
Lazar, a son of John Lazar (the famous actor and Mayor of Ade-
laide) held the lease of the Theatre Royal for many years and was
well-known in all the Australian colonies in the capacity of a
theatrical lessee. “The Observer” of November 17th, j 1883, tells
us on the occasion of Mr. Samuel Lazar’s death that'“the deceased
gentleman was of a very genial disposition and considered to be a
most capable amateur actor, his particular line being comedy in
which his strong humour found ample scope.”
Mr. Pollack was in the latter decades of the last century well
known as the Manager of the Theatre Royal.
Mr. J. M. Phillipson, a member of an old pioneering family,
was a prominent man in the social life of this State. He was one
of the founders of the old Adelaide Club. The well known writer
on Early Adelaide, Mr. A. T. Saunders, saysi in the “Register” of
February 19th, 1927, “that J. M. Phillipson was one of the original
61 members of the Adelaide Club which was founded on 4th August,
1838 at a meeting held on the Turf, now the Parkside hotel.” The
same authority continues “that the only surviving gentleman I
know who is a son of a member of the original 1838 Club is Mr.
Ernest Phillipson of Glenelg-”
When the Adelaide Club was re-organised in 1863, Philip Levi
was one of its three trustees. Mr. A. T. Saunders tells |us, in th^


same article, “the present Adelaide Club dates from the 2nd July,
1863. Mr. P. Levi, a well known old Adelaide identity was closely
connected with this club from the very beginning. Mr. Levi and
Mr. John Baker (later Sir John) took up £SOO each in debentures
out of a total of £2,150. The present site 70 x 130 feet on North
Terrace was, bought from Dr. Everard for £3O per foot. The first
trustees in 1863 were Philip Levi, John Baker and G. Young.
Philip Levi was a member of the committee for the same year.”
Mr. Levi took a very keen interest in sport and was known as
a patron of the turf.
Another man keenly interested in sport, notably racing, was
Mr. Gabriel Bennett, who acted as secretary to the S.A.J.C. in 1873.
The Henriques, a, family closely related to the Montefiores,
were prominent in the commercial and social life of the city in the
fifties. Mr. Moses Henriques was Chairman of the Chamber of
Commerce in . 1858, and acted for many years as Consul for Bel-
gium. It may be of interest to add that Moses Henriques married
Miss Emily' Barrow Montefiore, according to the Jewish rites, and
was entered in the Adelaide Hebrew community Register of Feb-
ruary 28th. 1856-
The first Jewish Medical Practitioner registered by the Medical
Board in S.A. was Dr. Daniel Baruh. He is first mentioned in
1851, and practised for many years in Inverackie, Yankalilla, and
later in Adelaide. He was a prominent member of the community
in the fifties and served for many years in the committee of the
Hebrew congregation. Dr. Solomon Iffla is first mentioned in
1862 and referred to as a graduate from Glasgow University in
1844. Miss Edith Phillipson informs me that Dr. S. Iffla married
a Miss Montefiore of Adelaide. He too, took a great part in the
Jewish communal affairs-
Another prominent member of the community was G. Leon
a chemist of Adelaide,'his address is given in Young’s Almanac
for 1856 as 59 Hindley Street. Mr. G. Leon was a member of the
first Board of Management of the Hebrew; Sabbath school. The
Register book for Deaths in the Hebrew community records the
death of Dr. Stainsey, who was born in Germany, and died in
Adelaide on November 12th, 1863. He was not, however, ( on the
Register of the Medical Board for S.A.*
Benjamin Mendes Da Costa was certainly one of the greatest
benefactors of this State.
I am greatly indebted to Mr. Hague for the following informa-
tion taken from the St. Peter’s College Book for 1869:
“OnfSth March, 1869, a letter from Mr. John Hance was read
informing the Governors of a bequest made by the late B. M.
Da Costa of valuable property in S.A. The Governor’s desire to
convey to Miss Da Costa through Mr. Hance their grateful sense


of the munificence of her brother the late B. M. Da Costa in be-
queathing to the school his property in S.A. after the decease ot
certain legatees. They believe that this noble legacy will enable
the Governors materially to promote a sound religious and liberal
education among the youth of that Province and secure a grateful
remembrance of the name of Da Costa among future generations.
Newspaper cutting reads:
“Further particulars re handsome legacy bequeathed to o .
Peter’s College by Mr. Da Costa, who was formerly engaged in
mercantile pursuits in Grenfell Street, and left the colony in 18-18
for England where he has since resided.
“The bequest is still more valuable than we are at first led
to understand, although some time will probably elapse before the
full benefits can be enjoyed by the college. Mr. Da Costa has bj
his will left the whole of his real and personal estate to an aged
sister for use during her lifetime, and after her the income
is to be divided among nine other relatives, most of whom are
advanced in years. The provision is, how'ever, made that all in-
terests in his South Australian property shall go .absolutely as
each life falls into St. Peter’s College Funds, and finally the free-
holds with all improvements shall become the positive property
of that institution. We may mention that, in addition to other
freehold properties, there are fifteen country sections, and equal
to six Adelaide Town Acres, some of which are now leased on
which Messrs. Simpson & Son’s Manufactory at the corner of
Gawler Place and Grenfell Street is situated, with the adjoining
allotment occupied by Messrs. Hunter, Stevenson & Co., and also
the extensive frontage of land occupied by the block of buildings
in Bundle Street from Mr. Debney’s to Messrs. Mayfield & Son’s
premises. Possibly ten to twenty years may elapse before the full
advantage of the ground rents and interest may be enjoyed by the
College, but prior to the expiration of that period there will doubt-
less be some revenue and it may safely be surmised on good data
that instead of the value of the bequest being what we formerly
stated, equal to £I,OOO per anum it will really be worth £20,000
in all.’ There are at least two reasons for congratulation in this
case —that an old colonist should have bequeathed to the colony in
which he resided a portion of the fortune there made; and that
the bequest should have been made to an institution which, al-
though mainly connected with the Church of England, has edu-
cated many of all creeds, and takes so important a position among
the educational institutions of the Province and will be thus en-
abled to greatly extend the spheres of its operations. It would
be a noble thing for some of our wealthy men of.the same and
other denominations to confer similar benefits during their life-
time but failing that, to make simple ample provision for perma-
nently effecting good by not forgetting in their wills those bene-
volent, educational and religious organisations now formed or
loudly called for, upon whose influence and working so much of
the future weal of this young empire so largely depends.”


Miss Louisa Da Costa, a sister of Benjamin Mendes, who died
in England in February, 1898, and who by all accounts has never
been out to S.A., left an estate valued at £1,624 for the benefit
of the Adelaide public hospital. The Press of that day refers to
her as “a member of these generous hearted persons, a sister of
Benjamin M. Da Costa, who bequeathed a considerable property
to St. Peter’s College.”
The Da Costa ward in the Adelaide Hospital perpetuates the
memory of this great benefactress.
Mr. Burnet Nathan, one of the founders of the Hebrew congre-
gation, was keenly interested in education. The Royal Almanac
for 1846 informs us of a society which was formed “with the aim
to offer a sound education to the children of individuals of every
religious denomination.” Mr. B. Nathan as one of the members
of this society.
I am informed by Miss E. Phillipson, that her father, the late
Mr. Montague Phillipson, was closely connected with St. Peter’s
College from its very foundation.
The association of Jewish people with matters , pertaining to
education in this State was very marked, indeed, in the person of
the Hon. Maurice Salom. He was a Member of the First Council
for Education from its very inception until it was abolished-
The history of the Adelaide Art /Gallery is closely linked up
with the name of Abraham Abrahms, one of the most prominent
members of the early Jewish community and a great Hebrew
scholar.
The “Observer” for April 9th, 1892, pays the following
tribute to> Mr. A. Abrahms for his great services rendered to the
Adelaide Art Gallery :
“In matters pertaining to art the citizens of Adelaide are
tinder a great obligation to the late Mr. Abrahms. He was one of
the original members of the Society of Arts and when the Public
Library was separated from the Circulating Library Mr. Abraham
Abrahms was elected by the S.A. Society of Arts to be a Member
of the Board of Governors of the Public Library, Art Gallery and
Museum to which office he was gazetted in July, 1884. He occu-
pied the Chairmanship of the Board from November, 1888, till
November, 1889, when Mr. J. M. Day succeeded him- The Board
recognising his great acquaintances with art practically, gave him
charge of the Art Gallery in which he took an absorbing interest.
He took a prominent part in the arrangement of the pictures in
connexion with the Jubilee Exhibition, and when the Art Gallery
was first established his knowledge of the old masters proved to
be of great service. In 1881 Mr. A. Abrahms presented to the
National Art Gallery the beautiful Marine picture “Sunset, Penarth,
North Wales,” and in 1886 “Haides,” a fine study of an Oriental
female. In recognition of his disinterested labours for many years
in the promotion of art in this colony he was in 1881 presented with
a portrait of himself painted by Mr. J. A. Upton. “This


the obituary notice tells us on the occasion of his death,” which
is an excellent likeness of the deceased .gentleman, hangs in the
Art Gallery where it still serve to remind future generations of
colonists of one who has in an unostentatious way done good
service to S-A.” Mr. Abrahms was known in business life as the
founder of the Executor, Trustee and Agency Co., S.A., on the lines
of Dutch companies in operation in South Africa. He retained
the!position of Manager of this Company till the year before his
death which occured in the year 1892. Mr. Abrahms is referred to
“As one ,of the most 'distinctive figures in Adelaide, a man most
courteous in speech and courtly in manner. He won the respect
of all with whom he was brought in contact by his integrity and
straightforwardness.”
The Adelaide Art Gallery had in later years some of its ablest
directors in the person of Mr. Henri Salman Van Raalte. Mr.
Van Raalte was born in England of Dutch Jewish parentage. His
father, was a native of the village of Raalte on the Zuyder Zee, and
was closely related to the great Dutch painter, Josef Israels. Mr.
Van Raalte first arrived in Western Australia in 1910, 'and he
acted as examiner for Western Australian Universitv and Technl-
cal schools. He was an associate member of the Royal Society of
Painters and Etchers, and had some of his exquisite work pur-
chased by various Australian Art Galleries. Mr. Van Raalte was
director of, the Adelaide Art Gallery in the years 1921-25.
Mr. S. J. Jacobs is remembered in the academic life of this
city for the great part which he played in establishing a Board for
Commercial studies. We give below an excerpt from the Sydney
Morning Herald, October sth, 190 d, in which the origin of this
Board is traced :
Higher Commercial Education.
*
“With the assistance of the Chamber of Commerce the Ade-
laide University has undertaken a most interesting and important
experiment, none other than the attempt to train captains of in-
dustry. It is not an entire new idea, but the scheme possesses
novel features in Australia,. About two years ago' Mr. S. J. Jacobs,
who was then President of the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce
became much impressed with the report of a lecture in connexion
with the courses arranged for the teaching of machinery business,
delivered by Sir Albert K- Rollitt, LL.D., D.C.L., M.P. (ex-Presi
dent of the London Chamber of Commerce, and Chairman of its
Commercial Education Committee). The subject of Sir Albert
Rollitt’s address, which was given in London on, June sth, 1902,
was. “Chambers of Commerce and their functions including Com-
mercial Education.”
“While the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce led by Mr. Jacobs
was considering the necessity for providing facilities for higher
commercial education, the subject was co-incidentally receiving
the attention of the University Council, which obtained from the
United Kingdom the latest available information. The Universitv


Council approached the Chamber of Commerce on the matter
and the Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Barlow, attended and addressed the
meeting of the latter body. As a result of the deliberation the
University Council formulated a scheme of commercial education;
and, in order to impart a better effect, the Council placed the Chair-
man and the Vice-Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce on the
Board of Commercial Studies which was composed as follows: —
“Mr. J. R. Fowler, M.A., Chairman.
Mr. S. J. Jacobs. Vice-Chairman.
The A T ice-Chancellor.
Professors: Bragg. Mitchell, Salmond-
Messrs. B. D. Colvin, M.A.
“W. H. Phillips,
J. Shiels,
J. A. Thomas,
W. Neill.”
Mr. S. J. Jacobs was,vice-president of the Board for Commer-
cial studies for a period of 12 years, from 1903 till 1915. He was
also prominently connected with the University, in the capacity
of the Chairman of the Finance Committee, an office he held with
distinction from 1905 till 1912.
The mention of Jewish association with the University life of
this city brings to mind the magnificent bequest of £20,000 provided
in the will of Mr. George Gollin of London, to be paid to the.Uni-
versity, as an endowment of the Chair of Economics. The “Adver-
tiser” of 30th April, 1930, informs us that “at the last meeting of the
Council of the University it /was reported that letters had been
received from Mr. George Gollin, a well-known merchant in Lon-
don, stating that he had made provision in his will for the sum of
£20,000 to be paid to the University for the abovementioned pur-
pose. The money will come into the possession of the University
after the death of Mrs. George Gollin.” From a short biographical
note in the “Advertiser,” December 12th, 1930, we know that Mr.
George Gollin was born in Adelaide on January 4th, 1860; he was
the son of the late Bezaliel Gollin, one of the founders of the Ade-
laide Hebrew congregation. The reader will recollect from an
early reference that the father of George Gollin acted as minister
to the Hebrew congregation from 1857. His father, Mr. B. Gollin,
died in 1874; his son W. J. Gollin, a brother of George, who founded
later with him the firm Gollin & Company, was closely connected
with the Jewish community in the seventies and eighties. Mr. W.
J. Gollin was President of the congregation in 1889. Mr. George
Gollin left for England, in 1902, where he still resides-
Several Jewish graduates of the University of Adelaide who
attained great fame in the academic life of Australia and abroad
deserve special mention. Mr. Isaac Herbert Boas,
the son of the late Rabbi Boas, who graduated in Science in 1899,
after a long career of teaching and lecturing in the University of


Perth, was appointed Chief of the Foreste Products Division of the
Commonwealth Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. Mr.
Boas, who is held in high esteem in the scientific spheres of Aus-
tralia, represented the Council on numerous conferences abroad.
The brothers Jona, Jacob and Judah Leon, are two prominent
graduates in science and medicine of the Adelaide University. They
made their home in Melbourne where they are known among the
leading medical practitioners of that city. Dr. J. L. Jona was lec-
turer in Physiology in the University of Melbourne and was Beit
Fellow for Medical Research. He has numerous scientific publi-
cations to his credit, and acts as Honorary Surgeon to the Women’s
Hospital- Dr. L. Jona is to be remembered as the founder of the
Students’ Loan Fund, which proved very valuable to many students
of Adelaide University. Another prominent graduate in medicine
is A. J. Lewis, who took his M.D. ! degree here in 1931. After
several years of research work in England and abroad he has been
appointed Consulting Psycho-therapist, Hammersmith, Post-
graduate Hospital.
In a series of articles published in the Adelaide press' some
years ago under the title “Captains of Industry,” the article dealing
with the distinguished commercial and social career of Mr. S.
J. Jacobs commences with the following words: —“In the realm of
South Australian commerce no man has attained higher altitudes
than Mr. Samuel Joshua Jacobs, Chairman of Directors of the S-A.
Brewing Co., Ltd. Business acumen and straightforward dealing
have combined to make him one of the most popular leaders in
commerce and sport that this State has had.” Mr. S. J. Jacobs,
the son of Charles and Elizabeth Jacobs, was born in Adelaide in
1853. We referred earlier to the fact that Mr. S I.
Jacobs’ parents, Mr- Charles Jacobs and Miss Elizabeth Joshua,
were the first married’Jewish couple recorded in the Register of
the local Hebrew community. Their wedding took place in May,
1846, in the private house of Mr. Michael Joshua in Hindley Street.
Mr. Jacobs’ parents arrived in this State from Sydney on board the
“Dorset” ron April sth, 1840. Mr. Charles Jacobs was the founder
of the well known pioneering firm of Charles Jacobs and Sons,
which was established in Gawler in 1846. Mr. S. J. Jacobs’ father
and his maternal grandfather, Mr. Michael Joshua, were among the
founders of the Adelaide Hebrew congregation in 1848-
Mr. S. J. Jacobs’ early educational studies were pursued in Ade-
laide, under the direction, of Mr. J. L. Young. In 1871, he went to
Geelong College, Victoria, and subsequently matriculated at the
Melbourne University. He then entered upon the study of law,
and five years later, having served his articles with a Melbourne
firm of solicitors, w'as called to the Victorian Bar. Returning to
Adelaide, in 1876, he was admitted to practise at the Bar of the
Supreme Court of South Australia, and was continuously engaged
at this professions until 1884, when he became associated with the
firm of his father.


v v ,V '•'•;-■■ ■■'■ ,• ■■■••■ > >,/. “■ .■.?•;■:■ .v • X-. :■.••'■ ■■%.■■'* . '• — •■_.•. ■ •.
. w
Sg|||a|app|ggaa88ag^^
•;:^vv^Mv V ■£.•; ■: ■
8 : :^- , %
' ;,, '' ; '^ : X :, -' : ''' ■■■■'■• A ' < /-v’ ■■■'v''X ' J ■'•' ■> ■• '■
Jsk
V ' #: # j|BMfBMgSS|ffi«^
' ' XMiXW
KwS®ffl^^^®i2Ml3®i’#W^^HBw , ' ,: ■ ■■ ..wobK.v <aMBiP^p¥Koo8&«^BW88a8HMpo8i8S8flS»QQQ8S888flS»pQ8888ggw&w8885mgpQQS88fl^M
w;: ■• s JP r
J|i j|i • ;■, ;
JH • . j;
c V ,o jw v : . *-v v
■“ BBBIBB>BBB “ —ilir,1BBr^ .flMHHMHMBbMMlF i———g———»r— ——mw———— ■ ■ i »^——P——
M. J. SOLOMON, Esq.




We shall refer, if only briefly, to some of Mr. S- J. Jacobs’
numerous activities. He is now Chairman and Managing Director
of the S.A. Brewing Co., Ltd., having been a director of that com-
pany since its establishment in 1887, and managing director since
1903. Mr. Jacobs is also Director of the Australian Salt Co.,
Ltd., which recently absorbed the Castle Salt Co-operative Co.,
Ltd- This was the pioneering company of the salt industry,
having been promoted by Mr. S. J. Jacobs and Messrs. G. S. Fow-
ler and Charles Warren upon their acquiring a patent for purifica-
tion of the salt from the immense area of salt lakes in this Stale.
He remained Chairman of Directors until its absorption by the
Australian Salt Co. The present Company supplies 60 per cent, of
the salt requirements of Australia. Mr. S. J. Jacobs is also Chair-
man of the local Board of Direction of the Sun Insurance Office,
and is Chairman of the local Board of Directors of the Great Boul-
der Pty. Ltd.
He was prominently connected with the Adelaide Chamber of
Commerce. He was ,President of that body in the years 1901-2.
Mr. Jacobs had the great honour paid to him of elevation to the
Presidential Chair of the Associated Chambers of Commerce of ! the
Commonwealth of Australia, which office he held in 1903.
It was during his tenure of office as president of the Chamber
of Commerce that he took steps towards the formation of a Board
for Commercial studies at the Adelaide University.
He assisted, in 1917, in organising the Retail Grocers’ Associa-
tion and acted as President for seven years. On his retirement
the Committee conferred on him the title of Honorary President
in perpetuity.
Mr. Jacobs’ great commercial ability proved invaluable on
many occasions to this State* He is now Chairman of the commer-
cial section of the State Advisory Council of Science and Agricul-
ture.
Equally prominent is Mr. Jacobs’ outstanding record in the
social and sporting life of this State.
For many years he, was vice-president and acted as Chairman
of the S.P.C.A. He is also Chairman'of the Advisory Board of the
Travellers’ Aid Society.
There are few' more popular sportsmen in South Australia to-
day than Mr. Jacobs. For 22 years, from 1906 to 1928, he was
President of the S.A- Bowling Association. He 'was for 25 years
Chairman of the Committee of the S.A. Tattersalls Club. Mr.
Jacobs is now acting Chairman of the S.A.J.C. and is also the
patron of the Amateur . Sports Club. In recognition of his great
social and sporting activities, this Iprominent citizen was appointed
by the Government as a member of the .Executive Committee to
arrange the Centenary celebrations of this State, which take place
this year.
It is a fitting tribute to a great citizen, the son of an early set-
tler, who has been closely identified with the commercial" and
social life of this State for over half a century.


Jewish Women in Social Life.
We referred earlier in our work to the great part played by
Jewish women in the social life of the community. Some of them
were prominently connected with,- the public activities of this city.
Mrs. S. J. Jacobs has been for a number of years connected with
the Queen’s Home Hospital, on the board of which she represents
the Jewish Ladies’ Guild. This important body made its presence
felt in the social life of the State. The Guild rendered great ser-
vice in times of distress during the War, and of recent years has
been connected with many charitable and philanthropic functions.
Mrs. H. Solomon, a prominent social worker, is the President
of the Jewish Ladies’ Guild-
Any worthy appeal finds its warm support and active workers
amongst the Adelaide Jewish women.
The Adelaide Branch of the National Council of Jewish women
is a representative body which participates wholeheartedly, not
only in Jewish social life, but, in that of the State in general. Mrs.
N. Solomon, its active President, ably supported by an energetic
committee of women, has been closely identified with the social life
of this city. Mrs. P. Moss is another indefatigable worker in
many social activities.
Mrs. H. J. Lipman is keenly interested in Child Welfare, and
has done much valuable work for the Free Kindergarten movement
in this city.


THE COMMUITY AND COMMUNAL AFFAIRS, 1900-14.
The turn of the century witnessed the passing away of many
of the old identities of the Adelaide Hebrew congregation. Mr.
M. J. Solomon, with a record of 30 years of communal activities be-
hind him, who was destined to play such an important part in the
history of the congregation in the new century is the link between
the old and new generations of workers, who were to make their
mark in communal life in years to come.
Mr- Herbert Solomon, 8.A., LL.B., was appointed secretary
to the Hebrew congregation in 1903, and held this office until 1912.
The annual report for that year placed on record the high apprecia-
tion of the services rendered by Mr. Solomon during his term of
office.
The years 1905-06 inscribed themselves tragically in the his-
tory of Russian Jewry, when a wave of pogroms and persecutions
swept over many Jewish communities. The sorry plight of the
persecuted Russian Jews reached the Adelaide community and
from the annual report of the congregation for 1906 we know that
a protest meeting was called and the fair amount of £284 was col-
lected and forwarded to Lord Rothschild, the treasurer of the
Russian Relief Fund. The references to the Russian outrages
reads as follows: —“In November, 1905, the public were notified
by cable of the intense and inhuman atrocities perpetrated on our
poor co-religionists in Russia. Every Jewish congregation in the
world as also all civilised nations were appalled at the outrages,
and stood aghast at the fiendish barbarities inflicted upon our
brethren. Your minister and President promptly moved in this
matter and with the assistance of Mr. L. Cohen, M.P., and S- J.
Jacobs, Esq., J.P., drew up, an appeal to the congregation in the
first instance and then to the public. This appeal was fairly re-
sponded! to by the congregation and our fellow citizens- Through
the intercession of the President His Worship, the Mayor of Ade-
laide (Theo. Bruce, Esq.), called a citizens’ meeting which was
largely representative of all denominations. Resolutions of indig-
nation and sympathy were unanimously passed, subscription lists
were opened and we are pleased to add that the Daily Press mate-
rially assisted us in this lamentable occurrence. The very fair
amount of £284/8/7 was collected and forwarded to Lord Roths-
child, the treasurer of the Russian Relief Fund.”
We should like to add that this is< not the first time that the
Adelaide community identified itself with the destinies of world
Jewry and responded warmly to any appeal made to them. In the
early fifties of last century, when the community was still in its
infancy, the committee of the Synagogue and the members re-


sponded warmly to an appeal made by the chief Rabbi on behalf of
the Jew's in Palestine.
Many other appeals for the Jewish people in many parts of
the world, like India, Damascus, Central Europe, notably Rumania
and Russia, were warmly attended to. Adelaide Jewry displayed
from its very inception a keen interest in Jewish national affairs.
We should like to mention that the movement for the colonisation
of Jews, known as 1.C.A., was dealt with during the nineties of
last century. We find a very interesting report by the illustrious
Rabbi, A. T. Boas, who kept in constant touch with world Jewry
on this matter.
The Executive Committee of this Colonisation movement
which was comprised of Messrs. Claude Montefiore, Herbert Lou-
sada, and A. Cohen, applied in 1900 to the congregation in Adelaide
for information concerning the posibilities of colonising a hundred
Jewish families from Central Europe in South Australia. The
committee of the congregation decided to communicate with the
Hon. V. L. Solomon, who was a prominent man in the political life
of this State, asking him his advice on this matter. The Hon. gen-
tleman replied in the negative. In view of the. unemployment which
prevailed in this State, and the matter was shelved.
It is important to add that the Adelaide Jewry responded
warmly not only to Jewish appeals but to all urgent calls made by
the community in general. In the very first years of the existence
of the Jewish congregation money came forth to the help of the
victims of bushfires, floods, earthquakes, famines and other disas-
ters. The warm response in a true Hebrew charitable manner to
the victims of the famine in China, in 1889, deserves special notice.
The “Chevra Kadusha,” or Holy Brotherhood, an excellent
institution, which fulfils praiseworthy duties towards the sick,
dying and the dead, was founded in December, 1907, by the Rev.
A. T. Boas and S. Saunders, J-P. Major J. Daniels as the honorary
secretary and treasurer to this institution.
On Sunday, September 20th, 1908, the Adelaide congregation
celebrated its Diamond Jubilee and Anniversary. The event was
solemnized by a special thanksgiving choral service which was
largely attended.
Rev. A. T. Boas completed 40 years’ service as minister to
this congregation on 13th February, 1910. The annual report for
this year informs us> “that the committee granted him two months’
leave of absence during which he visited the eastern States and
New Zealand. Prior to his leaving for this holiday a special thanks
giving service was held on Sunday, 13th February, which was
largely attended- After the service the congregation met in the
large schoolroom, where, after congratulatory speeches, Mr. Boas
was presented with an illuminated framed address and a purse of
sovereigns.”


THE WAR AND AFTER.
From the Annual Report of the Adelaide Hebrew congrega-
tion of 24th March, 1918, we know 1 that “the small community has
responded most liberally to the numerous calls and about sixty of
our youthful co-religionists have answered to the call of duty, re-
presenting* about 10 per cent, of our community, and we have some
consolation in the belief that we shall emerge from this furnace of
pain and sorrow with loftier ideals.” The terrible effects of the
war were being felt by the Jewish members of the community.
Upon news, being received of the death of Messrs. Morris Hains
and Elias Judell, who were killed in action, the following resolu-
tion was entered upon the minutes of the Annual Report for 1916:
“That we the Executive of the Adelaide Hebrew congregation, de-
sire to place ( on record a reverent tribute to the memory of our
Australian heroes who have fallen at the Dardenelles, and parti-
cularly to Morris Hains and Elias Judell.” The same c report in-
forms us of a Roll of Honour that was placed in the vestry upon
which is inscribed the namesl of the Jews in South Australia who
enlisted for service.
The terrible suffering and distress of the Jewish refugees from
Russia, Poland, and Palestine, was brought under the notice of
the committee of the Adelaide synagogue by a joint cable from
Lord Swaything, the Chief Rabbi, Leopold de Rothschild, and the
Haham, and immediate steps were taken to obtain funds to remit
on their behalf. The report for the same year informs us “that a
generous response followed from all sections of our community and
substantial amounts have been sent and gratefully acknowledged-”
The movement, which commenced in 1917 in the various Euro-
pean centres, for securing religious liberty and equal civil and
political rights*for Jews in every country where these rights were
denied, was warmly responded to in this community. We have
to place on record that the Adelaide congregation took the initia-
tive in this matter by inviting the co-operation of other Jewish
congregations in the Commonwealth. The Annual Report for 1917
informs us “that with the exception of the Sydney congregation
no notice was taken by any other congregation. Subsequently,
however, a letter was received from the Anglo-Jewish Association
in Melbourne, desiring this congregation to be represented on a
proposed deputation to the Prime Minister for the purpose of ob-
taining his asistance in bringing \ before any Peace Conference a
condition that religious liberty and equal civil and political rights
should be secured in every country where such rights are denied.”
The office of secretary to the Hebrew 1 congregation was filled


from 1915 by Mr. J. M. Senior. His predecessor, Mr. S. Abrahams,
B-A., came out from England in 1913 to act as secretary and head-
master to the Sabbath School. He had, however, to relinquish his
duties because of his severe illness.
The Rev. A. T. Boas was compelled to resign in 1918 owing to
continued illness. The Annual Report for 1918 placed on record
its profound regret that Mr. Boas had to resign, and the high ap-
preciation of his valued services performed in the interest of Juda-
ism and of this congregation extending over a period of nearly 50
years. The Rev. I. A- Bernstein, a native of Victoria, was appointed
to the position of second Reader, Schochet and Sabbath school
teacher in 1919. The most important event in the history of Ade-
laide Jewry soon after the war was the visit of the Very Rev. J. H.
Hertz, the Chief Rabbi of the British Jews. This was the first oc-
casion on which Australia 'has been visited by a Chief Rabbi. He
was welcomed by the members of the congregation as befitting his
high office, and the services at which he was present were attended
by many of the congregation. Another distinguished visitor for
the year 1920 was Mr. Israel Cohen, who came to this city repre-
senting the Jewish National movement —Zionism. This movement
which experienced a great revival soon after the war found many
adherents among the members of the community. A Zionist society
was founded in/this State and contact made , with the Jewish
National Fund, large sums of money collected for the purpose of
redeeming land in Palestine. Mr. Cohen’s mision was most suc-
cessful and the congregation donated £IOO to the Fund.
Air. M. J. Solomon, who has been acting as President of this
community continuously since 1914 expressed at the Annual Meet-
ing of 1922 his great anxiety at the lack of interest in Jewish com-
munal affairs. He made a special appeal to the meeting in the fol-
lowing words: —“I regret to think of the future when I may be
incapacitated, that there is no one ready and willing to preserve
that continuity of religious effort which in the past has raised our
community to its present proud and honoured position in the eyes
of our fellow citizens. I earnestly appeal to the gentlemen to whom
Prefer to prove their attachment to our holy faith :by identifying
themselves with the duties, devolving upon them as Jews and re-
lieving me in my declining years of the position of President which
I have held for a lengthy term-”
This apathy in Jewish communal affairs was a matter of great
concern to the late President and the members of the committee in
subsequent years. It was particularly reflected in the diminished
attendance of children in the Sabbath school when the number of
students dropped in 1921 to 33. This decline was unfortunately
still more accentuated in years to come, when there were only 25
scholars in the year 1933.
The death of Colonel Benjamin Solomon, which occurred in
1922, removed one of the oldest identities and one of the most in-
teresting personalities in Adelaide Jewry.


Colonel Benjamin Solomon was born in Brisbane in November,
1844. He was the son of the Hon. Judah Moss Solomon, M.I
Mayor of Adelaide. Col. Solomon came to Adelaide at an early
age, and finished his education at St. Peter’s .College. Leaving-
school he conducted a general agency and auctioneering business
and then joined the State Civil Service as an officer of the Adelaide
Local Court. Later he was transferred to the Land Tax Depart-
ment where he became assessor and valuator, being also the valua-
tor for the Probate Department and Government auctioneer. After
being in the service for 34 years he retired in 1915, having reached
the age of 75 years. Col. Solomon’s official duties took him to all
parts,of the State, and, in the course of his travels, he valued many
thousands otf acres of land for taxation purposes and also settled
thousands of appeals. He was also keenly interested in anything
pertaining,to the welfare of the Civil Service, 1 and was a vice-presi-
dent to the Civil Service Association, a founder of the Public Ser-
vice Provident /’Fund, of which body he was Chairman for two
years, and President of the Public Service Federal Council.
At the age of 16 years he began 'his long career as a military
officer. In 1860 Mr. Benjamin Solomon joined a Battery of the
Adelaide Field Artillery under Col. Torrens (the author of the
Real Property Act). He quickly rose from the ranks and in 1887
he was made a commissioned officer; in 1878 he became captain, in
1882 major, and in 1897 Lieutenant Colonel. He retired from the
Service in 1905 with the rank of Colonel. He held the volunteer
officer’s decoration, received from the hands of the King on his
visit to .Adelaide in 1900. For the greater part of the war, Col.
Solomon carried out the ; onerous duties of Chief Censor in South
Australia.. After his retirement from the Civil Service he retained
the position of Government Auctioneer. Col. Solomon took a great
interest in sport. He acted for many years as starter and judge
of the bicycle races, swimming meetings and other athletic gather-
ings. Col. Solomon was the organiser and Hon. Secretary of a
military display l , held on the Adelaide Oval on the birthday of the
Duke of Edinburgh, August 6th,1880.
Col. B. Solomon came of a family well known in this State
and prominent in the social and political life. The Hon. V. L.
Solomon, once Premier of this! State and a Member of the House
of Representatives, was a brother. Another brother was Mr. M. J.
Solomon, who was for 35 years President of the Adelaide Hebrew
congregation. Col. Solomon died in his 78th year.
The death of Rabbi A. T. Boas, which occurred in February,
1923, was greatly felt by the Adelaide community as a whole.
The Press of the day gave great prominence to the biography of
the late Rabbi. “The Rev. A. T. Boas” was born in Amsterdam in
November, 1844, and was a son of a Rabbi renowned for his learn-
ing. He studied in the Theological Seminary in Amsterdam and
at the age of 23 began his first work as a minister at South Hamp-
ton Synagogue. Three years later he was chosen by a committee


of London gentlemen acting under the authority of Dr. Nathan
Adler, the father of the celebrated Chief Rabbi, to take charge of
the Adelaide congregation. He arrived at the Semaphore by the
sailing ship “Tamesa,” after a passage of 86 days on February 13th,
1870, and had to walk to Port Adelaide to catch the train tor the
city. Rabbi Boas won the affection of his people and the esteem
of all his fellow citiens. Of all who were present at Pt. Adelaide
to receive him the only survivor states the Chronicle of February
24th, 1923, was the President of the Hebrew congregation, Mr. AI.
J. Solomon, since then deceased. Shortly after his arrival, Air. Boas
went to live with Mr. Gabriel Bennett, with whose family lie re-
mained until the time of his marriage. An exceedingly well read
and cultured i man, he was regarded as an authority in the study
of Shakespeare and frequently lectured on the works of the great
writer. Mr. Boas was frequently called on to lecture to the various
literary societies in Adelaide in which he always took a great in-
interest. Broad-minded and eager to help any denomination his
interpretations of the various stories of the Old Testament were
often used in the Christian Sunday schools. He was connected
with many literary societies and was vice-president of the Shake-
spearian society. Air. Boas married Aliss Elizabeth Solomon, a
daughter of Air. Isaac Solomon, a well-known Adelaide merchant.
In the obituary notice on the occasion of the Rabbi’s death, he was
described as a “valuable and public-spirited citizen and he enjoyed
wholehearted esteem of the general public. Urbane and kind-
hqarted, always ready to help in good causes, cheerful and full of
optimism, he won a prominent position in South Australia, and his
death will be looked upon as a public loss.”
It is recorded in the Alinute book of 1923 that “the loss to the
Jewish community is great, but the committee hopes that the
Rabbi’s life-long efforts will not have been in vain, and that they
will be an incentive to those who remain to carry on the noble
work by taking a greater interest in communal affairs.”
The following is an extract from an appreciation written by
Mr. G. Isaacs on the occasion of Rabbi Boas’ death in the Hebrew
Standard of Sydney on March 16th, 1923: —“In the passing of our
revered Minister Emeritus, Rev. A. T. Boas, Adelaide Jewry, nay,
Australian Jewry has lost one of its most noble representatives,
one of its most noble sons. Mr. Boas was the first duly ordained
minister of this Kehilah congregation. For just half a century he
laboured zealously and unceasingly to keep brightly burning the
lamp of Judaism in this State. The onerous duties of his office were
carried out in a manner, leaving little if anything to be desired. In
the general community he succeeded, by his ripe scholarship and
genial manner, in commanding respect and esteem in the best circles,
and, incidentally, did much to advance and improve the public es-
teem of our people.”
Upon the resignation of Mr. J. M. Senior from the office of
secretary to the congregation, Air./1. Golovsky was appointed in


1922 to fill the vacancy. One can hardly over-estimate the great
services which are being rendered by the Secretary who is closely
identified not only with the affairs of the synagogue but with those
of the community on the whole and its multifarious institutions.
The Rev. David Hirsch, 8.A., a son of the late Dr. Hirsch of
the London Jews College, was appointed in 1924 on the recom-
mendation of the Chief Rabbi to the office of Minister of this con-
gregation. The Reverend gentleman and his wife arrived in Ade-
laide on 9th September, 1923, and were officially welcomed in the
evening by one of the largest Jewish audiences that has ever gath-
ered within the presence of the synagogue. He was inducted into
his new office on Friday evening, 12th September, 1924, by the
President, Mr. M. J. Solomon and the Rev. I. A. Bernstein.
The arrival of the new minister proved to be most beneficial
to Adelaide Jewry, and served as a stimulus and' revival to Jewish
communal life. We know from the Report of the Congregation
for 1925 that “the work of the Sabbath school has been continued
under the direction of the Headmaster, the Rev. D. Hirsch, and it
is pleasing to know that even since the short time that! has elapsed
since his arrival the attendance has been doubled. An Advisory
Committee consisting of Herbert Solomon, Esq., 8.A., LL.B.,
Victor Cohen, Esq., H. J. Lipman, Esq., and R. E.
Jacobs, Esq., with the Rev. D. Hirsch as Chairman has been formed
for the purpose of supervising the Sabbath school. It is hoped that
this new departure will revive interest in the school and tend to
develop and improve the standard of Jewish education in this
State.”
Rev. I. A. Bernstein, who acted as second Reader to this'com-
munity since 1919 resigned his position in 1924. The' Rev. Elias
Belfer, of the South Brisbane congregation, was appointed to the
vacancy. He took up his new duties on 15th November for the
same year.
The Rev. D. Hirsch, a, conscientious teacher, who acted as
headmaster was gravely concerned as to the future of the school.
From his report on the Hebrew religious classes for 1927, we know
“that in close conjunction with the synagogue executive, the
School Education Committee made a personal canvas of the
parents with children of school age. The result was encouraging
in the extreme.” This state of affairs inspired the Reverend gen-
tleman to address the parents in the following words: —“I, there-
fore, appeal most earnestly to every father and mother in our con-
gregation to make the greatest sacrifice of comfort and convenience,
if necessary, and send or bring their children to the classes, so
that they may be taught Judaism. If our roll decreases by ten
each session, in three years there will be no school at all. This
is the greatest tragedy 'which can befall any community.” For-
tunately for the community, the gloomy prophecy did not mate-
rialise. The scholars, which numbered 33 for that year, are gradu-
ally diminishing and the school is a matter for great concern to all


those who are interested in the future of Hebrew education in this
State.
Mr. L. P. Lawrence, who died in 1923, was one of Adelaide >
best known and most popular business men. He retired from ac-
tive business in 190-1. The obituary notices referred to him as a
man whose name was held in high esteem throughout the Com-
monwealth. He was the most genial of men and had a wide circle
of friends who will deeply deplore his death.” Mr. Lawrence
was born in Dover and educated at Wanstall’s Academy, Chatham,
England. After leaving school he came to Australia with the view
of making his way in the world and, having experienced the vicis-
situdes which often fell to the lot of the new arrivals in the early
days, doing a little gold seeking without much success, he obtained
employment in Melbourne, and gradually but surely made his way
up the ladder of life. Mr. Lawrence came to Adelaide, in 1877, to
manage the business of Fel'dheim, Jacobs & Co. He took an active
interest not only in business matters, but also in charitable insti-
tutions and athletic sports associations. The prominence he
gained in the commercial world may be gauged from the fact that
in 1899, he was elected President to the Chamber of Commerce.
Among the public positions he held was that of Commissioner for
South Australia at the Centennial Exhibition in Melbourne, in
1880. He, was connected with the Chamber of Manufactures for
a considerable time, and was a member of the Committee for 23
years. He held the position of President from 1901 till 1903. He
was past President of the Commercial Travellers’ Association and
past President of the Justices’ Association, of which body he was
a foundation member. He also devoted much time in the interest
of philanthropic and sporting institutions. For over ,30 years he
was on the Board of Management of the Adelaide Children’s Hos-
pital and later he was a vice-president. Mr. Lawrence interested
himself in the work of the Adelaide Benevolent and Strangers’
Friend Society for many years, and since the death was the Honor-
ary Treasurer. He was a member of the Committee of the Minda
Home and of the St. John’s Ambulance Association. As a sup-
porter of athletics Mr. Lawrence occupied, among other positions,
those of President’of the S.A.Cyclists’ Union, the North Adelaide
Cricket Club, and the North Park Football Club, and the ( North
Adelaide Baseball Club. He was'a member of the Adelaide Bowl-
ing Club almost since its inception.
We referred early in our work to the late Mr. Lawrence’s con-
nexion with the Hebrew congregation. He was closely identified
with the affairs of the Hebrew congregation, in the capacity of
Honorary Treasurer. Mr. Lawrence was President of the Hebrew
congregation for the years 1904-5. He died at the ripe age of 85
years, and was buried in the Jewish cemetery at West Terrace.
The general depression which began in 1 1928 made itself felt
in the financial affairs of the Hebrew' community. The following
two years record great deficits in the Balance Sheet due to the


diminished returns from the rental of the shop property, and from
the poor income of the subscribing members. The Report for 1981
gives a review of the financial position and of the causes which
led to the resignation of the Rev. D. Hirsch in 1930. \\ e ai e
quoting below the report pertaining to this matter: —
“Soon after assuming office the financial position of the congre-
gation was carefully scrutinized by the Executive, and it was found
that the severe depression, which is prevalent throughout Austra-
lia, was having far from a salutory effect on the income of our
institution. Hopes had been entertained that, at the expiration of
the leases of the; Rundle Street Buildings last October, the rents
would be raised so as to increase our income; but owing to the
depression our hopes, did not materialise, and the shops were re-
leased at the same rental as previously. Expenditure was curtailed
wherever possible, but in spite of rigid/economy it was realised
that unless the Officers’ Salaries were reduced we would finish up
with a deficit. The Executive wrote to the minister, Rev. D.
Hirsch, asking him to accept a reduction in salary of iIOO p.a. We
regret that the Rev. gentleman could not see his way to do this,
and gave six months’ notice of the termination of his services. At
a special general meeting of the 1 congregation, held Sunday after-
noon, 17th August, 1930, Rev. Hirsch’s resignation was accepted
with regret. He left for England in the same year, no re-appoint-
ment of a First Minister is contemplated until we are in a better
financial position.”
Rev. A. T. Belfer, second Reader to the community, is still
filling the office of minister since the departure of Rev. Hirsch.
On going to press the appointment is announced of Rev. Louis
Rubin-Zacks, M.A., of London, to the position of First Minister. He
is a graduate of Jews College, London, and well recommended to
fill the position of chief spiritual representative for the Adelaide
Hebrew Congregation.
Mr. Fishel Phillips, who was a committeeman for many years
and treasurer for the last 13 years, died in the same year. The
report places on record his good work which the deceased treasurer
had performed for the community. Mr. A. Rosenberg, a prominent
member of the congregation was appointed to the position of
honorary treasurer. Mr. A. Rosenberg, after filling the office of
honorary treasurer for two years, became President of the congre-
gation in 1933, upon the death of Mr. M. J. Solomon, which occurred
on 11th February of that year.
The obituary notices of the day gave the following outline of
the late President’s life: —
“Mr. M. J. Solomon was born in Brisbane on June 15th, 1843.
He came to Adelaide at the age of three, having sailed from Bris-
bane )with his parents in his uncle’s (Emmanuel Solomons) brig
the “Dorset.” The family lived ! in Stevens Place on the site now
occupied by the warehouse of Messrs. Good, Toms & Co.; Mr. Solo-
mon’s father was the Hon. J. M. Solomon, once mayor of Adelaide;


the Hon. V. L. Solomon was a brother. In February, 1854, Mr.
Solomon went to England with his father in the boat “Australia.”
Fie returned to South Australia in 1858 and resumed his studies in
St. Peter’s College. At the age of 17 he entered his father’s auc-
tion business. He went to the Northern Territory in 1873 and
established an auction business in Darwin. Mr. Solomon was a
member of the first District Council established in the Northern
Territory. After 14 months in Darwin he went to Batavia and
Sourabaya to enquire into the possibility of establishing trade con-
nexions. Returning to Adelaide Mr. Solomon went into business
as an auctioneer and also traded largely in sugar and merchandise,
Mr. M. J. Solomon was for many years Chairman of North Ade-
laide Institute, having succeeded the late Sir Charles Goode.”
We have had many occasions to record through our work the
magnificent services rendered by the late President, Mr. M. J.
Solomon to the Adelaide Hebrew congregation for a period of over
50 years. The annual report of 1933 gives great prominence to his
name, and pays him high tribute in the following words: —
“It is with profound regret that the Executive records the
death of the President, the late Moss Judah Solomon, in his 89th
year. Saturday evening, 11th February, closed a phenominat
record which is possibly unique in the history of world Jewry. The
late Mr. Solomon first became the treasurer in 1867, which position
he occupied until 1869. He became President in the year 1870,
and up to the date of his death had occupied that office for periods
totalling 35 years, while for more than 50 years he was actively
associated with the Congregation as Committeeman, Secretary,
Treasurer or President. Fie took a very keen interest-in communal
affairs and right up to his death was a regular attendant to the
synagogue. He was a capable Chairman and from 1914 up to the
present day he guided the Jewish community through the trouble-
some times.of the war and its aftermath. The community is much
the poorer by the passing of this true and devout son of Israel.”
Upon the appointment of Mr. A. Rosenberg to the office of
President, Mr. N. Solomon became treasurer.
Mr. E. Belfer, who has been acting minister to the congrega-
tion since the departure of Rev. Hirsch, is ably assisted by Mr. L.
Saunders, an active member of the community. The committee
of the synagogue has recorded on many occasions its appreciation
of the valuable services rendered by Mr. Saunders to the com-
munity whenever required. Mr. Saunders’ keen interest and help
given to the Sabbath school deserves special notice. Since ,the
departure of Miss L. Boas, who had been acting as headmistress
and Miss.M. Rochlin, a teacher in the school, Rev. Belfer and Mr.
Saunders have been teaching there.
The lamentable shrinkage of the attendance at weekly Divine
Services is deplored time after time. The last general meeting of
the members of the congregation expressed its hope that the
incoming committee, with Dr. Leon Opit as President, “will re-


ceive the support and co-operation of members of the congre-
gation by their attendance at the synagogue as often as possible.”
Dr. Leon Opit, a graduate in medicine of Sydney University, is
the President of the Hebrew congregation. He has
been closely identified with the communal affairs ever since he
came to live in Adelaide, having practised on Yorke’s Peninsula
for three years prior to settling here at his profession. Dr. Opit
has served on the committee of the congregation for a number of
years and taken keen interest in all the communal activities. He is
ably assisted by a committee of energetic workers, comprised of
Messrs. S. Gild, M. Bloustein, G. Gould, S. Shirtock, J. Barnett, the
Treasurer, Mr. Rosenberg, and I. Golovsky, secretary, who enjoy
the full confidence of the congregation that they will uphold with
dignity the tradition of the Jewish community which inscribes itself
so gloriously in the history of this State.
It was thanks to the President and the Committee of the
Hebrew congregation that this work was written, in the hope that
it will prove worthy as a record of splendid citizenship, on the occa-
sion of the Centenary of this State, with which Jews have been
connected since its inception.


VITAL STATISTICS.
The growth of the Jewish community has been very marked
indeed. The ,first South Australian Statistical Returns for 1844
show that there were 25 professing Jews in the Colony. In March,
1846, they numbered 58; 48 of whom lived in South Adelaide. The
Returns for 1841 record the first Jewish marriage (it is most prob-
ably that which was recorded in the Adelaide Hebrew Register as
having taken place in May 1846).
The Returns for 1850 mention among the Places of Worship,
one Hebrew synagogue, adapted to contain 250 people. The same
for 1854 gives one synagogue containing 140 seats, with an average
attendance of 30 (this however is somewhat doubtful in view of
the fact that the Hebrew congregation had about 130 subscribing
members for the same year).
The Returns for 1860 give the number of Jews to be 360, when
they formed 0.30 per cent, of the total population. It is interesting
to note that the Jewish people of this State reached in the Census
of 1860 the highest percentage out of the total population. It
never exceeded 0.30 per cent, of the total population.
We shall give the following returns: —The Census of 1871
gives the number of Jews as 435, when they formed 0.23 per cent,
ol the total population; for 1881 —762 or 0.24 per cent. The decade
1871-1881 witnessed the greatest increase in the Jewish population,
when it grew from 435 to 762, or a gain of 327, which means an
increase of ,75.17 per cent, of the Jewish people.
The following decade of 1881-91 records a further increase
from 762 to 840 when they formed 0.26 per cent, of the total popula-
tion. This numerical increase of 78 souls represents 10.24 per cent,
in the total Jewish population. This figure of 840 souls was never
exceeded numerically in this State, although, as pointed out before,
the Returns for 1860, when there were 360 show that at that time
they formed 0.30 per cent, of the total population.
The subsequent .returns record a slow but steady decline. The
figures for the Census 1901 stand at 786 or 0.24 per cent. This
is a decrease of 54 souls, or a fall of 6.43 per cent, of the total
Jewish population.
Although the decrease for 1911 is numerically small, falling off
from 786 to 765, the Jewish population represented for that year
0.18 per cent, of the total. The drop of 21 represents a further loss
of 2.67 per cent, to the Jews.


The return for 1921 recorded 743, representing - 0.15 per cent, of
the total population, and was followed by an almost alarming de-
crease in the last Census for 1933, when the Jewish people recorded
declined to 528, forming 0.09 per cent, of the total population. This
decline of 215 represents a fall of almost one-third of the total
Jewish population previously recorded.


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
THORNQUEST PRESS
TWIN STREET, ADELAIDE.


' WS | i :
' :_ ' ' I
M Hfl Hii B Hb y Bb IMi -
=• >.
III ; . IM
j>0 v ' | c/«
;|: : fif|pm^,;:- ; ■ ■ :■ ■• _, : ; • .
;\ , jfr I
, :
; - i -: '
- ' • • :: f*iw| *r
wmmmmi«mm*: «££& •** '** < ;
HpP*"
m ■ -; 'v^
<;*> : ■ ® ■' . ■
■■$’ MS: 9h 1 I M r I
J*.mm msmmv <,-■ ■• .■;••■ - %■•■•, . ■ : -s;V
■■■ 1«8SP& :
.IHp
%h Jg/BP y \' '
RABBI A. T. BOAS














