

John Fauna Campbell |
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
Reprinted from Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society




John Fauna Campbell
Biographical Note.
Mr and Mrs Donald Campbell were on a visit to
Loch Leven, County Kinross, Scotland, during August of
1853. On the twenty-first day of that month the subject
of this sketch was born to them-—the second of five children.
The family belonged to the Breadalbane branch of the
Clan Campbell.
John (he assumed the name Fauna later for identifi-
cation purposes) received his early education in Perthshire
near the home of his ancestors. His first ambition was
to become an architect. At the age of sixteen years
he became duly apprenticed. Completing his apprentice-
ship, he found he was more interested in engineering and
surveying. So, moving to Edinburgh, he joined the
evening classes at the University in Surveying (the only
ones then available), and became a student demonstrator
in a very short time. Before completing the course, the
same restlessness that compelled so many Scotchmen to
leave their homeland and seek homes in the dominions
took possession of the young student.
Mr Campbell sailed from Greenock in the sailing ship
Auckland in September, 1879, arriving in Dunedin
eighty-eight days later. During the voyage he filled in
time by editing the ship’s journal. After eleven months’
engineering and surveying work in New Zealand, the same
roving spirit brought Mr Campbell to Sydney, where he
became a draughtsman in the New South Wales Lands
Department. Not possessing full qualifications for a
licensed surveyor under the Real Property Act of 1862,
Mr Campbell became articled to Mr W. F. Busby for one
year in the field. Mr. John Haydon Cardew gave him
the necessary theoretical instruction which enabled him to
pass the L.S. examination in December, 1883.
As a matter of historical interest, it may be noted that
Mr (later Professor) W. H. Warren was appointed to


The late John Fauna Campbell.
(Ashley Photo.)


establish the subject of Engineering at Sydney University
in March of 1883. In 1884 a number of civil servants
were invited to augment the class of three undergraduates.
Mr Campbell and the late Mr L. A. B. Wade were two
among seven who accepted this invitation. The former
was the only non-matriculated student who sat for the final
examinations. Having passed them successfully, Mr
Campbell duly received a certificate to that effect from
Professor Warren on March 24, 1885. As the three
matriculated students did not receive their degrees until
May 2, Mr Campbell became the first person to receive
the official recognition of the University of having com-
pleted a course in Engineering.
For the next five years Mr Campbell was engaged
in surveying in the city and country, chiefly on the begin-
ning of the Great Northern Railway and in the Orange
and Dubbo districts. His longest period in one district
began at the end of 1888, when Mr Campbell was
appointed to the Southern New England District, with
headquarters at Armidale. It may be of interest to
mention here that, on starting work at Walcha, he wit-
nessed the last aboriginal corroboree in that part of
Australia. In February, 1889, Mr Campbell married
Miss Althea Louisa Gissing, then having lately arrived
from England. He built their home in Walcha in 1891
to his own design.
The life of a surveyor in the vanguard of civilization
necessitated absence from home for long periods. Never-
theless, Mr Campbell found time to serve for some eight
years as an Alderman on the Walcha Town Council. He
never became Mayor because he acted as Crown represen-
tative on numerous official occasions. While an Alderman
he was responsible for the design and supervision of many
of the improvements in and around the township. His
chief service in this connexion was to modify the Apsley
River bed to prevent periodical flooding of the lower parts
of the town. He visited Sydney several times in a repre-
sentative capacity at agricultural and scientific conferences.
Because of his detailed knowledge of that part of the
country, he was invited to conduct scientific exploration
parties. Also, from time to time, he used to send new


botanical specimens* to the Botanical Gardens and the
Technological Museum, Sydney, for purposes of classifica-
tion or description. Mr Campbell always supplemented
his official reports with notes on the geological and
botanical features of the property under survey. These
were well-known and highly regarded in the Lands De-
partment, and some of the geological information has been
incorporated by the late Sir Edgeworth David in his
notable Geological Map of Australia, published shortly
before his death.
At the beginning of his work in the New England
District, Mr Campbell engaged as his assistant Mr Evans,
a grandson of the famous explorer. However, his wife
soon becoming proficient in the clerical work of an
assistant, Mr Campbell was able to dispense with the
services of Mr Evans. Mrs Campbell also became a well-
known hostess in the Walcha district at social functions,
and for many years organized its charitable relief work.
In 1903 Mr and Mrs Campbell took their children to
Sydney to be educated, and their Walcha home was eventu-
ally sold to the Presbyterian Church.
An appointment as Crown representative and Chair-
man of the Armidale Forestry Board followed in 1906
and 1907, during which years about 400,000 acres of virgin
forest land was reported on by Mr Campbell as to relative
suitability for agricultural and forestry purposes.
From 1909 till his retirement, Mr Campbell was
surveyor to the Closer Settlement Board under the
■chairmanship of Mr W. N. Sendall. This appointment
necessitated travelling to widely separated estates in New
South Wales, but mainly on the Riverina and Monaro
Plains. His duties included the valuing of land and
improvements, and suggesting the most economic sub-
division into living areas. Having a natural flair for this
kind of work and a wealth of experience behind him, his
advice was almost invariably accepted without modification.
On attaining the age of sixty in 1913, though pressed
by the Surveyor-General to undertake further responsible
work for the Lands Department, Mr Campbell felt that
*One of which —Pultenxa Campbelli —was named after him by
Messrs Maiden and Betche.


the rough life of the field was becoming too heavy for him.
He decided to withdraw altogether from surveying and
live a less strenuous life at his home, “Moorialda, ” 42
Cheltenham Road, Burwood.
Though he retired from the active pursuit of his
profession, it cannot be said that he retired from work,
lie never completely forsook his scientific studies, but
added to them the study of the French and Japanese
languages and the early history of Australia. He kept
himself physically fit by gardening and doing repair jobs
about the house, so that his twenty-five years of retire-
ment were packed full of interest and were not marred
by a single illness until the fatal one in his eighty-fifth
year. During the first few years he continued to write
articles of scientific interest for the Press, especially for
the “On the Land” column of the Sydney Morning Herald.
He was a member of the Farmers and Settlers’ Association
from 1915 to 1920, being President of the Metropolitan
Branch for three successive years from 1915. The chief
task that Mr Campbell set himself in those years was to
induce the Commonwealth and State Governments to
institute a scientific soil survey of the Australian continent
on similar lines to that which had already long been
carried out in the United States of America. In further-
ance of this idea he organized an appeal in 1916 to Mr
W. M. Hughes, the then Prime Minister, but it was not
until years afterwards that the State Governments realized
the necessity of this work in their respective areas of
control.
During the early Twenties of this century Mr
Campbell’s interests gradually turned to the history of
Australian settlement. His long association with land
matters (since 1881), in the technical surveying sense,
impressed him with the need to record his intimate know-
ledge'of rural development before the present era of
intensive settlement set in. He was the first to demarcate
boundaries between holdings in large tracts of country on
the New England tablelands. Recollection of this tempted
him to enquire why those boundaries should have been
just where he located them ; and so, back and back he
traced them through official records to the beginnings of
the colony. Thus he compiled his first historical paper,


‘‘The Discovery and Early Settlement of New England.”
This research work proved so interesting and so peculiarly
suited to his temperament that he continued writing
similar papers with unabated zeal until seven weeks before
his death. Illness prevented him from finishing the last
paper wherein he was setting out accurately to scale the
first three routes to Bathurst in continuation of two
previous papers in which he had described the explorers'
earliest routes from Penrith to Springwood and Spring-
wood to Leura. He undertook this paper at the instiga-
tion of His Honour Judge H. R. Curlewis. Mr Camp-
bell’s last completed paper was published in the form of
a pamphlet entitled “Springwood and District,” which he
compiled in association with the Hon Joseph Jackson,
M.L.A., who handed him the first printed issues in hospital.
Appended is a list (with references) of papers con-
tributed by Mr Campbell to the Journal of the Royal
Australian Historical Society, comprising 550 pages and
50 maps. He joined the Society in 1921. He was elected
a Fellow in 1925, acted on the Council of the Society for
a number of years, and assisted in editing the Journal.
Historical problems, difficult to solve, were occasionally
handed to him as one of the Society’s Honorary Research
Officers.
Mr Campbell was a member of the Highland Society
of New South Wales for twenty-three years, and con-
tributed an article on “The Scotch Thistle” in the Scottish
Australasian, Vol. VI., of January, 1915. He was the
subject of one of the editorial series of biographical
sketches under the title, “The Scot We Know,” in Vol.
VII., dated March, 1916. The Linnean Society of New
South Wales claimed his membership for fifteen years,
but he does not appear to have contributed to its Proceed-
ings. He joined the Institution of Surveyors, New South
Wales, in 1893, acting as a Councillor from 1909 to 1912.
In 1919 the Institution elected him a Life Member in
recognition of his long services. Sixteen papers and
articles from his pen are published in its journal, The
Surveyor.
A long and useful life drew to its close at the Masonic
Hospital, Ashfield, on January 25, 1938, after a seven


weeks’ illness. The following day saw the nation-wide
celebrations of the 150th Anniversary of Australia, whose
early history had been the constant pre-occnpation of Mr.
Campbell in his concluding years. At his express seqnest
a private funeral was arranged, and cremation took place
at the Rookwood Crematorium. In death, as all through
life, he shunned publicity. This reticence made him
refuse important public positions, including the Presidency
of the Royal Australian Historical Society, and prevented
him from delivering any of his papers before a meeting
of members. Nevertheless, these papers in their printed
form are bound to become a valuable source of information
for future writers of Australia’s story. Their wealth of
accurate detail, and the fact that the accompanying plans
were prepared with all the professional care of an ex-
perienced surveyor, long used to interpreting field notes
and picking up blazed trails of pioneers, combine to give
them unusual significance. Some day, perhaps, they may
be available in a single volume.
ALPHABETICAL, INDEX TO PAPERS PUBLISHED IN THE
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN HISTORICAL SOCIETY’S JOURNAL
Vol. Part Maps Pages of
Title. Journal.
Australian Agricultural Company,
1824-34, The First Decade of the IX. 111. 2 113-160
Blackheath, Blue Mountains, The
Genesis of, 1813.80 IX. IV. 2 205-219
Brush Farm, 1791-1800, Eural Set-
tlement about XIII. VI. 1 361-372
Cockatoo (Biloela) Island, Port
Jackson XVIII. VI. 1 338-343
COWPASTURES AND THE VILLAGE OF
Cawdor, The Wild Cattle of the XIV. I. 1 43-56
Dawn of Eural Settlement in
Australia, The XI. 11. 5 83-134
Domain, Sydney, Historical Notes
on Government House XVII. 11. 2 111-126
Glebe, Notes on the Early History
of the XV. V. 1 298.306
Government House, Sydney, Old XIV. IV. 1 212-218
Howe’s Journey, Windsor to
Hunter Eiver in 1819 XIV. IV. 1 232-241


Yol. Part Maps Pages of
Journal.
Title.
Hunter, The Genesis of Rural
Settlement on the . XII.
11. 2 73-112.
111. 1 203-207
Hyde Park Convict Barracks XXII.
Kunderang Ravines of New
England, The XVIII.
11. 1 63-73
Liberty Plains op the First Free
Settlers, 1793 XXII.
V. 1 317-329
Macquarie Street South, 1810-80,
Notes on the Historical De-
velopment op XXIII,
111. 3 194-204
Nepean River, Early Settlement
on the Lower XVIII.
V. 1 252-270
New England, Discovery and Early
Settlement op . VIII.
V. 2 225-288.
Pandora Pass and Darling Downs
(Allan Cunningham’s Routes) ... XVII.
111. 1 200-206
Phillip,” Notes on Prop. Wood’s
Paper on ‘ ‘ Explorations under
Governor XII.
I. 2 26-40
Redpern District, Historic Map op
the XIV.
11. 1 92
Rose Hill Government Farm XIII.
V. nil 288-291
Rose Hill Government Farm and
the Founding op Parramatta XII.
VI. 2 353-377
“Squatting” on Crown Lands in
New South Wales XV.
11. 1 93-120
“Squatting” on Crown Lands in
New South Wales XVII.
I. 1 43-86
11. 7 63-103
Tank Stream, The Valley op the X.
University Grounds, The Early
History op XVI.
IV. 3 274-292
Western Highway, Great —Penrith
to Springwood XXI.
V. 2 293-305
Western Highway, Great—Spring-
wood to Leura ...... XXII.
IV. 2 290-297
Footnote.- —A list of Mr Campbell’s articles and papers pub-
lished in The Surveyor (old name of Journal ) is given in The
Australian Surveyor, Vol. VII., No. 2, dated June, 1938. He also
wrote a pamphlet entitled “The Story of the Soil” in furtherance
of his national soil survey campaign in 1917 while President of the
Metropolitan Branch of the Farmers and Settlers’ Association.
8
John Fauna Campbell.




