

JU
'"**" jjm * f
Illliipi
A?? 3-2
<JLS jo


/ 088 Ifi^m
c °*sdn s ■ l/rd^^\W^i'
0 y ' Gh ost s / j L-^^i
■ 1 >


11 C° me with me, in prose and rhyme, II
111 To a Happier Land of Story-Time, II
11 Where people are known by one name .. r Friend! \ . IS
III Evil is vanquished in the end. If
\| Where, treading the wonderways of youth, 11
1 1 TTi-e Royal King Supreme is Truth, I !
11 W ith Honesty the sharpest tool, I I
11 And Wickedness . . a hunch-backed fool . . ft
•' tf u . , x ■ ■ " 1*


Guardians, Teachers I
In reply to the questions contained in many letters | Uk
received from all parts ot Australasia, and for your
John Mystery is a very real and most alive person.
He does live in Adventure Castle, standing high upon
a hill overlooking this great city and its beautiful
water-ways. All the original stories and characters
P|jl contained in the John Mystery children’s books are |||


i -
u / f \
n // 1
j-JifcrW I ' ' ; ||i
H // ( : )
JO j)
- ( '
/ 1 y
A I
■ ' /'>•>.>';•; V- • . v , . .


-v v l.;
AHEAD, in the early morning sun-
shine, the cliffs of Dover stood proud
and strong. ‘So this is England,’
said Nora softly. Her hand tightened
round that of Carol, as they stood watch-
ing the shores of England come nearer.
Far below, the waves surged as the big
ship went steadily on. To Nora, this was
a new country. For Carol, it was home.
A little sob made Nora turn swiftly to
her friend, and, at the sight of tears brim-
ming over in the brown eyes, she hugged
her friend’s shoulders impulsively. ‘Don’t
cry, darling,’ she said comfortingly. Carol
was silent for a little while, brushing away
her tears. ‘England,’ she said softly.
England.’
So many things had happened since she
last saw those white cliffs. So many
things—exciting, happy, grand to re-
member. When she had sailed away some
years before, the shadow of war hung
dark and heavy over her beloved land, but
now it was at peace. No threat of death
hovered in the clouds above, no bombs
came dropping to destroy the little homes.
Only the birds filled the sky above, as they
wheeled and circled over the on-coming
ship.
‘lt almost seems like Australian
weather,’ said Nora, looking hopefully at
the blue sky. ‘Not that any country could
have weather as good as Australia’s,
though,’ she added smugly.
Carol smiled. ‘Doesn’t it all seem a long
time ago since I came to Australia,’ she
said.
Nora nodded. A long time ago, indeed
. . . Nora’s thoughts flew back to the day
when she had stood shyly greeting the
little girl from England.
‘Hullo,’ said Nora.
‘Hullo,’ Carol had replied.
In the background, Nora’s mother and
father beamed happily on the two girls.
Mrs. Wills looked up into her husband’s
face and hugged his arm tightly. ‘l’m so
happy, John,’ she said softly. ‘We have
two daughters, now.’ John Wills nodded,
and there was a new light in his eyes. ‘I
never thought when we offered to give a
home to my old friend’s daughter that she
would turn out to be such a grand com-
panion for Nora. Mary, it couldn’t be
better.’
Then they went away together. The
two girls were left alone.
Nora gazed a little shyly at this girl who
was to be her adopted sister. Carol was
about her own age but, where Nora was
dark, Carol’s hair was fair, her eyes were
brown. But those eyes were filled with a
haunting sadness, as if she had seen horror
and witnessed scenes which would never
be forgotten.
Nora’s heart went out in quick sym-
pathy. She knew what Carol must have
experienced—knew that a single bomb
had destroyed her English home, and.
killed her mother and father. Carol had
been left an orphan—and Nora’s father,
whose best friend had been Carol’s father,
had heard about the tragedy in a letter
from a friend.
He had immediately cabled to England
asking that Carol be sent out to him and
his family, and offering to adopt her. This
offer had been accepted. Carol had only
distant relatives in England, and nobody
wanted to be bothered with a lonely, sad-
eyed girl.
So out to this strange new land came
Carol, a little afraid—wondering what her
new life would be like, her heart twisted
with the memory of the mother and father
she had loved so much.
What will they be like?’ had been her
constant thought, thinking of the family


whose adopted daughter she was to be-
come. I wonder if they really want me
1 wonder what Australia is like?’
She was soon to know. The hot Austra-
lian sun seemed to sink through to her
very bones, so that she glowed with new
life. The love which Nora and her parents
showered on the lonely stranger went to
her heart, so that it became warm again.
The ice of horror melted slowly away, and
in its place a wonderful happiness and an
affection for her new adopted country
came. The haunting sadness left her eyes
and, after a few months of the care-free
Australian life, Carol seemed a new per-
son —her shouts of laughter mingled with
Nora’s as they chased about the farm.
Mrs. Wills, hearing it, looked at her hus-
band and smiled. Everything was all
right.
Nora lived with her parents out of the
city, in a little country district. They had
a small farm with several sheep which
wandered idly about, munching at the
grass and a number* of cows. Carol soon
mastered the art of milking, and in the
early morning, she and Nora were busy
with their pails. Carol loved the early
morning. The sense of newness which
spread over the earth, the warmness of the
cows as they came ambling to be milked,
the early singing of the birds —all this
was new to her, and she loved it.
After some time had passed, Carol al-
most forgot that she had known any dif-
ferent life, whilst Nora and her parents
found it hard to remember what the farm
had been like before Carol arrived. They
were a happy family.
Nora and Carol sat on the fence-rail,
Nora idly chewing at a blade of grass,
banging her heels against the middle rail.
They had been riding and the horses
roamed nearby in search of greenness.
There was no wind at all, and the hot noon
sun beat down on their heads. Carol
yawned. ‘Gosh, this weather makes you
sleepy—thirsty, too. Let’s go home and
see if we can find a cool drink.’ They
swung themselves down from the rail,
caught their horses and rode lazily home.
‘You don’t get weather like this in Eng-
land, do you?’ asked Nora. Carol nodded.
Sometimes. I wish you could come to
England some day, Nora. You’d love it.’
Perhaps,’ Nora agreed. But—oh, I
don’t know. There’s something about
Australia you can’t help loving. I don’t
quite know what it is. But it seems so
young —and yet it isn’t, you know. It’s
ever so old. But the people are different
—less worried, somehow. Maybe it’s the
sunshine. No matter to which country I
went, I always feel I’d like to come back
here.’
Carol felt she understood. ‘My father
came from England,’ said Nora. ‘But you
know that. He loves it, too.’ They were
in sight of the farm by now and there was
a sudden shout from Carol. ‘Mail-day!’
she cried. Gosh, I’d forgotten all about
it. Race you home!’
Carol sent her horse cantering forward,
but Nora idled behind, laughing at her
friend’s enthusiasm. By the time she ar-
rived at the farm, Carol was already
inside, lying on the lounge, a long glass of
lemonade with ice clinking in it, clutched
in her hand. She looked very different to
the girl who had arrived from England
two years before as she lay there —her
cheeks flushed with health, eyes shining,
her legs, clad in neat jodphurs, stretched
out before her.
Your drink is on the table over there,’
said Carol. ‘Come and be lazy with me.’
Nora picked up her lemonade and
drank thirstily. ‘Any letters?’ she asked,
taking her nose from the glass, and giving
a deep breath of satisfaction.
Mrs. Wills looked up from her reading.
‘Umm! Two for me —one for Daddy. I
don’t know who his letter is from, he’s in-
side reading it now, I think.’
‘Anything interesting in your letters?’
Nora came and perched on the arm of her
mother’s chair. ‘Not a great deal—one is
from Aunty Joan, the other from your
cousin. Just family gossip.’ But Mrs.
Wills’ eyes read on eagerly. Letters were
always welcome at the farm.
They looked up at the sound of the door
opening, and Mr, Wills came in. There
was a letter held in one hand —and a
strange expression on his face, a look of
excitement, mixed with bewilderment.
‘What is it, darling?’ asked his wife, a


wfty ,._ Sw^^V^SKvT-' > > v■ '
w' :-J&|• 'S^ Wy "
little startled. John Wills did not reply but
thrust the letter into his wife’s hands. She
read it, puzzled—and then looked up at
him, a questioning look in her eyes.
‘ls this true, John? 1 mean —this letter’s
really for you, isn’t it? It is not meant for
somebody else?’
Mr. Wills laughed boyishly. ‘No,
darling, it’s for me, all right. What do you
think of it?’
His wife sank back in her chair and
gave a funny little laugh. ‘I can’t think at
all,’ she said. I’m so completely—well,
all the breath seems to have been knocked
out of me.’
Can we read the letter?’ asked Nora.
Her father nodded; Nora picked up the
paper which had fallen from her mother’s
fingers and sat down beside Carol. They
read eagerly. There was a minute or so
of silence—then an excited shout from
Nora. ‘Hoorah! Darling—does this mean
you’re going to be Lord what-do-you call
it? What does it say here? Lord Chilton?
Are you going to be a Lord? Really?’
John Wills nodded again. He, too,
seemed to have temporarily lost the
power of speech. Carol looked from one
to the other. John Wills, her adopted
father, was now Lord Chilton, and had in-
herited an English estate! Marvellous!
Almost too good to be true!
Let me see that letter again.’ Mrs.
Wills stretched out her hand, and Nora
gave her the letter. John —it says here
that all those in line for the title have been
killed whilst on active service, or as a re-
sult of enemy-action—and that now the
title passes to you. Very little money goes
with the title —although there is a beauti-
ful old home. . .’ Mrs. Wills was reading
aloud. But you must go to England and
live on the property or it will not pass into
your possession. In order to own it, ac-
cording to the will, you must live there.’
‘That’s right,’ said Mr. Wills. ‘What
do you think about it?’
So far into the night the excited dis-
cussion went on. . . until at last it was de-
cided that the whole family would go to
England to inspect the inheritance and to
see what could be done.
Nora and Carol found it difficult to sleep
that night. ‘Well —you were only saying
to-day you wished I could see England.
We didn’t know how soon we would both
be seeing it, did we?’ chuckled Nora.
Carol smiled into the darkness. England
again. . . England. . . now at peace. . .
So now they were almost there. . . the
excitement of the ship berthing. . . the
customs. . . finding a hotel for the night
. . . visiting the lawyers the next morning
. . . then away into the heart of England,
to the mansion which was John Wills
or rather, Lord Chilton now —inheritance.
The lawyer told me,’ said Nora’s father
as the taxi took them along from the little
railway station, ‘that there is practically
no money at all attached to the title. It
all dates back hundreds of years ago —
take too long to explain it all now. But
anyway, we ll look everything over and,
well—we ll see what we can do.’
Nora and Carol were gazing into' the
distance as the old taxi-cab chugged
along.
I wonder if we’re nearly there?’ asked
Nora. The taxi-driver in front chuckled.
There soon enough, Miss. Just over this
hill and up the next rise and you’ll see
it.’
So the little family fell silent —waiting
for the first view of their new home.


Over the hill. . . up the next rise. . . and
the old taxi-driver, understanding, halted
his ancient vehicle so that they could see
the house. It stood at the top of the next
hill, dreaming in the sunlight which
turned to gold the many windows. There
was an air of peace about it, as if those
huge stones had stood there for centuries,
recording history, acting in the pageant
of the years.
‘lt’s beautiful!’ said Carol in a hushed
voice, and the others nodded silent
agreement.
It was the kind of old home of which
everybody dreams —but rarely sees, let
alone possesses. And now it was theirs!
The car rumbled on again until they
were through the great iron gates, up the
gravelled path, before the doors of the
mansion itself. Nora’s father paid the old
man and they watched until his car had
turned and was out of the gates again.
Then they were free to inspect their
home.
From one room to another they wan-
dered, pausing here to admire something
of particular beauty, hastening sometimes
from one new wonder to the next. ‘Oh, I
love it!’ exclaimed Nora. Her father
smiled ruefully. So do I, dear. Ido hppe
that we can keep it. But don t forget it
takes a fair amount of money to upkeep
a home like this. And, at the moment, we
just haven’t got it. The only thing I can
think of doing is to turn the grounds into
a farm, like we had in Australia. We
might then just be able to scrape through.
I’d love to keep the old home, as much as
you would. All my ancestors were born
here —but, there were so many others in-
tween me and the title, well, I never
thought about it because I thought it
would never be mine. Now it is.’
He gazed around, and seemed to delight
anew in the rich furnishings, the wide,
spacious rooms. ‘Daddy, we’re going off
to explore,’ said Nora and, seizing Carol’s
hand, they darted off. ‘First of all, we
have to select our bedroom. Oh, this is go-
ing to be fun.’ And the two girls, laughing
and talking excitedly together, made a
grand tour of the old home.
The next weeks stretched themselves
into months. With the equipment that
was on the place, and the help of a few
labourers from the adjoining village, the
grounds of the mansion had been turned
into a farm. Vegetables were growing
there, cows roamed the fields nearby.
John Wills and his family had worked
hard —but little success was coming from
all his labour. The money he had brought
with him was rapidly disappearing.
It was with a disappointed* worried face
that he called his little family together to
discuss their finances. ‘We can’t go on
like this,' he said. I think the best thing
to do is to forget all about this —and,
whilst we still have some money left, to go
back to Australia. I’m sorry to have to
admit failure- —Tut, we’ve worked hard,
and the results haven’t been what we
expected.’
His wife was silent, but the girls could
see that she agreed.
Come with me,’ Carol whispered into
Nora’s ear. They crept out together. The
man and woman did not seem to notice
them disappear. “What’s the matter?’
asked Nora, as Carol led her towards the
library.
Carol shook her head in puzzled
fashion. ‘Well, it’s just an idea, really.
But there seems to be no reason for this
family to be poor. Surely, anybody who
owned such a wonderful home like this
must have had money. Where has it all
gone?’
1 don’t know,’ said Nora. ‘There is
some story attached to it —but, well,
we’re all so used to there being no money
in the family, that nobody has thought
much about it.’ By this time they were in
the book-lined library. Carol hunted
about until she found the book she sought,
then she called Nora to her side, ‘This
book will tell us all about it,’ sjie said. ‘lt
tells the histories of all the great families
of England. We might be able to find out
something.’
They sat there reading together until
the sunlight began to fade, then Nora gave
a sudden exclamation and pointed with
her finger at the page before them. ‘Here
we are. Turn on the light, Carol, we’ll be
able to see better then.’ The room was
brightened by the electric-light, and two
heads bent low over the big book.


It was a most interesting story they
read. The title of Lord Chilton had been
created in the days of the Roundheads and
Cavaliers. Lord Chilton, with his wife
and son, had been alone in the house—
with just one old faithful servant —when
news reached them that the Roundheads
were on their way to besiege the house and
attack the occupants. Lord Chilton and
his family had barely time to escape. His
money and jewels were hidden in the
house, and no trace of them has ever been
found again. Lord Chilton had not time
to confide the secret of the hiding-place to
his wife for, on the very evening of the
escape, he was seized with a heart-attack
and died immediately. No account of the
old servant has ever been traced. From
that time, the descendants of Lord Chilton
have searched for the treasure which is
said to be hidden in the old home, but
everybody believes by this time that it is
only a legend—such a one as often at-
taches itself to old homes. No trace of the
hidden treasure has ever been found.
When they had finished reading, Carol
and Nora looked at each other with wide-
open eyes.
Treasure! In this house!’ said Nora.
Carol nodded. ‘What did I tell you?
Now, all we have to do is to find it and all
our problems are solved.’
Nora dissolved into a sudden peal of
laughter. Oh, Carol,’ you’re priceless!’
she roared. ‘Doesn’t the book say that
people have been hunting for the treasure
for hundreds of years—and not even a
trace of it has been found? Why do you
think we’re going to be so lucky?’
Well, why not? declared Carol stoutly.
Anyway, there s no harm in looking.
Take it this way, Nora. There’s only a
certain number of rooms in this house.
Say that early to-morrow morning, we
start at the top of the house and work our
way down-Ward. We ll make a really
systematic search. That will be doing
something, anyway.’
‘All right,’ agreed Nora. ‘But I don’t
say we ll find anything.’
Early next morning found the girls
busy. Their wondering parents tried to
find out the reason for their search, but
they maintained a secret silence. ‘They’ll
probably only laugh at us if we tell them,’
Nora had said.
From the attic, through every room,
the girls searched tapping panelled
walls, rapping on the wooden floors, look-
ing inside cupboards. They found noth-
ing. Down the stairs they came to the
ground floor. Their search here was equ-
ally unsuccessful.
It’s no use,’ said Nora, dragging her
feet in discontent along the stone-flagged
hall-way. ‘What’s the use of looking any
further. It’s just a story. There’s no
treasure at all. We’ve just wasted almost
the whole day.’
Carol walked by her side. Nora was
quite right. She felt a bit silly that she’d
even suggested the treasure hunt.
’Oh, look out, silly,’ she said as Nora
tripped over one of the stone-flags. Nora
flung out a hand to save herself and fell
against the old grand-father clock which
stood in the hall.
She picked herself up and brushed her
knees. ‘Golly, I just saved myself,’ she
gasped—then she looked at Carol sud-
denly. Carol—did you hear something
funny when I fell against the clock?’
Carol shook her head. ‘No? What was
it?’
‘Something like a rattle—don’t know
what it could be,’ said Nora.
They examined the old clock -more
closely. It was a ponderous old thing, and
seemed as if it had stood there from the
beginning of time. ‘Open the front of it,’
suggested Carol. But there was no key to
fit into the big key-hole. There was rust
on the edges, as if no key had turned there
for longer than man could tell. Nora took
a few paces back. ‘Funny that old clock
never goes, isn’t it?’ she said thought-
fully. Carol shrugged. ‘Well, if there’s no
key to it, you can’t get there to fix the
pendulum weights—l suppose that’s why,’
she said.
But Nora was not satisfied.
She tried to push the clock away from
the wall, but it would not move. ‘Pouf!
It s too heavy for me,’ she panted. ‘Help
me, Carol.’ But even the united efforts of
the two girls did not move the clock an
inch.
Nora got down on her knees on the




stone-flagging and inspected the base of
the clock. She looked up with shining
eyes. "Carol! Look here!’ she whispere: 1 ..
Carol knelt beside her. 'Why—it’s em-
bedded into the stone flooring no
wonder it wouldn’t move, she said.
‘Yes. But don’t you think it’s rather
strange they would go to all that trouble
for an old clock,’ said Nora—almost
stuttering in her excitement. Carol looked
at her with wondering eyes. ‘Do you
think —?’ she asked doubtfully.
Nora nodded. ‘I do think so. Let’s try
it, anyway. But first of all, we have to get
the front of the clock opened. I don’t sup-
pose anybody has ever been interested in
this clock. It has never been going—and,
well, they have probably thought it is just
worn out and have let it remain here as an
ornament. Now, how are we going to
open it?’
‘We could smash it open,’ suggested
Carol—anxious to do something at once.
Nora did not like to do anything so
drastic. They might be wrong—and then,
what would happen when Dad saw they
had smashed the clock. And wouldn’t
their story sound silly if they found
nothing?
But still—‘All or nothing!’ said Nora
beneath her breath.
Luckily, Mr. and Mrs. Wills were out
in the grounds, inspecting the farm. They
did not hear the smashing of the axe as the
front of the clock splintered with the axe.
It was a stout old door, and took several
blows before the front case swung slowly
open.
Then there came a terrified shriek from
Nora and a cry from Carol. Both girls
stepped back, their eyes wide with horror.
Out of the open clock-case fell a
skeleton and crumbled at their feet! The
skull rolled down the passage and came
to rest some feet from them—the staring,
sightless eye-sockets seemed to stare at
them, challenging, hating them for having
invaded its privacy.
Nora held Carol tightly. ‘lt’s horrible,
horrible! she whispered.
But Carol, the first shock over, was
peering in the interior of the case. ‘There’s
steps leading down there!’ she said.
Nora followed the direction of her
pointing finger. Down into the darkness
wound a stair-case of stone leading from
the back of the clock, where it stood
against the wall. The inside of the clock
formed a small platform from which the
steps descended. It was on this platform
that the skeleton had been standing.
Carol shuddered. Who knew how it
had got there —who knew in what agony
it had hammered at the doors of the clock,
seeking for it to be opened—gasping for
life?
Nora disengaged herself from her
friend s hand. The staircase was luring
her. ‘Wait a moment,’ said Carol. ‘lt’s
too dark. We won’t be able to see a thing.
Wait till I get a lantern.’ She dashed away
and appeared several minutes later with
one of the old hurricane lamps from the
kitchen.
‘Come on.’ She led the way timidly
down into the gaping darkness, Nora close
on her heels. Down, down they went. . .
until it seemed they must be in the depths
of the earth itself. There was a terrible
smell of must and dampness, of long dis-
use there... as if everything had lain
undisturbed for centuries.
But soon the light showed them an end-
ing of the passage. Round a bend a small
room lay disclosed. The girls hesitated on
the threshold—then Carol darted forward
suddenly. ‘This must be it! Look!’ she
cried.
Nora was immediately at her side. On
the floor, in one corner of the small room,
lay a large chest, iron-bound. It
was rusted and difficult to open. They
strained together at the lid and at last, re-
luctantly, creakingly, it gave a little—and
then opened with protest.
The treasure of the Chilton’s lay
disclosed!
The treasure for which descendants had
searched for years—had been found!
Carol and Nora were timid at first, sfiy
to touch the treasure. It was covered with
layers of dust which had seeped in
through the centuries. But Nora at last
stretched out a hand and plunged it into
the chest. She lifted it, and a magnificent
rope of pearls dangled from her fingers.


‘lt’s real!’ she whispered. ‘lt’s the real
treasure!’
Then, almost choking with excitement
and suppressed emotion, the two girls
turned and ran up the stairs —out past the
grisly skeleton, guardian of the fabulous
wealth, out into the grounds of the
mansion.
Mr. and Mrs. Wills were astounded.
‘Darlings? Whatever is it?’ demanded
Nora’s mother, as the two girls, almost
crying in their eagerness, flung themselves
upon her. So the story was told, the trea-
sure was shown. . . amidst such a burst
of talking and chattering. Through it all,
the skull of the skeleton lay watching,
watching. . . At dinner that night, when,
still with excitement seething through
them, the girls demanded of their father
his version of the story, he gave it
quietly.
‘Of course the Treasure of the Chilton’s
has been a family legend for generations,
he explained. And, as you read in the
book, nobody had time to learn of its
hiding-place, because the old lord died
before he had time to reveal the secret.
But that left one other person who knew
the hiding-place of the treasure. The old
servant. Now, he’d been with the Chilton
family for many years—and his father
had been in service there before him. So
his loyalty to the family was unquestioned.
But it was always a mystery why he dis-
appeared. Some said that he had taken
the treasure for himself after the old lord’s
death and gone away with it. Others said
that he had been killed by the disappointed
Roundheads. But, whatever the mystery,
the old servant was never discovered.
The skeleton you found to-day seems
to solve the matter. The way I see it is
this—and 1 think this will be quite right.
The warning that the Roundheads were
coming did not give the old lord and his
family much time to escape. He had to act
quickly. He would not have had time to
secrete the treasure himself. He therefore
had to trust somebody to do it for him. As
there was nobody else in the house at that
time but his family and his old servant —
the loyal servant seems the logical choice.
It was the servant who hid the treasure
and made sure that it was safe, whilst the
old lord and his family escaped.
Now, the way I see it is this. After
hiding the treasure, the servant must have
come up through tha secret passage—and
could have only got to the platform at the
top of the stairway when the Roundheads
burst into the house. If he had come out
of the clock—they would probably have
seen him, and the treasure would have
been revealed. He thought there was only
one thing for him to do. He slammed the
front of the clock —and locked himself in.
You see, although you may open the key-
hole of the clock from the outside, it is
impossible to open it from the inside. The
old servant must have known this—but,
so loyal was he to his master and to the
interests of his master’s family—that he
chose death, rather than disclose the
treasure.
‘ln any case, he thought that, once the
Roundheads went, his master would re-
turn —it might only be a little while, and
if he could manage to remain alive until
his master came back, he would be
released.
His hopes, as we can guess them, were
in vain. His master died.
That must be the skeleton you found
to-day. Poor faithful soul. All these
centuries he has been hidden in that clock,
guardian of the treasure. 1
I wonder if he knows that it has now
been found?’
Carol and Nora have been back to
Australia since then. They missed the
sunshine and the youth that is Australia’s.
But, back in England, the fortune of
the Chilton’s is now secure.
The old clock in the hall-way ticks
steadily away now. There is no longer
any reason for it to be silent.
But the girls know it as the ‘Death
Clock —and, in the little churchyard of the
village is a grave which is always fragrant
with flowers.
They do not forget the guardian of the
treasure who now lies there, at peace at
last.


' * " * Cv


The story of Monte Cristo becomes more exciting each time you read it. This
is perhaps one of the most famous of all stories of buried treasure—-and tcho
icould not like to have accompanied Dantes to the island of Monte Cristo to
unearth the wealth that was hidden there? The story is by Alexandre Dumas —
probably the most popular novel to comeyfrom his prolific pen.
Edmond Dantes, a young sailor, is unjustly imprisoned in the terrible Chateau
D'lf. He is alone in a small cell for six years and, except for the jailer, sees no
other human. He becomes desperate for human companionship.
One night, lying despondent on his rough bed, he hears a knocking on the wall.
At first he takes no notice, thinking it to be a rat —but the knocking is repeated.
Dantes begins to hope—is it another prisoner striving to make contact with him?
He knocks on the stone in answer. He is overjoyed—and three days jyass with
this form of communication going on between him and the prisoner in the
next cell. One day the stones in the wall beneath Dantes' bed give way, and an
old man appears. During the ten years of his imprisonment, the old man has
tunnelled through the solid stone wall.
Dantes learns that he is the Abbe Faria.
He invites the young man to accompany him back to his cell . and they tell
each other their story.
Time passes, until Dantes has been imprisoned now for fourteen years. During
this time, the Abbe has become to him like a father, and the Abbe loves him like
a son. The Abbe has told him of a treasure—but Dantes thinks he must be mad.
and grieves because he thinks his old friend is losing his mind. One night, tchilst
the old man is visiting at Dantes' cell, he is seized by a fit. He is just able to
instruct the young sailor to give him some medicine which is concealed in his
bed —before he loses consciousness. He recovers. But. as a residt of the fit. his
right arm and his leg become paralysed.
Dantes comforts him as best he can, and returns to his own cell before the jailer
makes his rounds.
WHEN Dantes returned next morning
to the chamber of his companion in
captivity, he found Faria seated and
looking composed. In the ray of light
which entered by the narrow window of
his cell, he held open in his left hand, of
which alone, it will be recollected, he re-
tained the use, a sheet of paper, which,
from being constantly rolled into a small
compass, had the form of a cylinder, and
was not easily kept open. He did not
speak, but showed the paper to Dantes.
‘What is that?’ he inquired.—‘Look at
it,’ said the abbe with a smile.
‘I have looked at it with all possible at-
tention,’ said Dantes, and I only see a
half-burnt paper, on which are traces of
Gothic characters inscribed with a peculiar
kind of ink.’
‘This paper, my friend,’ said Faria, I
may avow to you, since I have the proof
of your fidelity—this paper is my trea-
sure, of which, from this- day forth, one-
half belongs to you.’
The sweat started forth on Dantes’
brov. Until this day—and for how long
a time! —he had refrained from talking of
the treasure, which had brought upon the
abbe the accusation of madness. With his
instinctive delicacy Edmond had pre-
ferred avoiding any touch on this painful
chord, and Faria had been equally silent.
He had taken the silence of the old man
for a return to reason; and now these few
words uttered by Faria, after so painful a
crisis, seemed to indicate a serious relapse
into mental alienation.
Your treasure?’ stammered Dantes.
Faria smiled. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘you have in-
deed a noble nature Edmond and I see by,
your paleness and agitation what is pass-
ing in your heart at this moment. No, be
assured, I am not mad. This treasure
exists, Dantes, and if I have not been al-
lowed to possess it, you will. Yes —you.
No one would listen or believe me, because
everyone thought me mad; but you, who
must know that I am not, listen to me, and
believe me so afterwards if you will.’
‘Alas,’ murmured Edmond to himself,
this is a terrible relapse! There was only
this blow wanting.’ Then he said aloud.


‘My dear friend, your attack has, perhaps,
fatigued you; had you not better repose
awhile? To-morrow, if you will, I will
hear your narrative; but to-day I wish to
nurse you carefully. Besides,’ he said, a
treasure is not a thing we need hurry
about."
‘On the contrary, it is a matter of the
utmost importance, Edmond!’ replied the
old man. ‘Who knows if to-morrow or the
next day after, the third attack may not
come on? and then must not all be over?
Yes, indeed, I have often thought with a
bitter joy that these riches, which would
make the wealth of a dozen families, will
be forever lost to those men who persecute
me. This idea was one of vengeance to
me, and I tasted it slowly in the night of
my dungeon and the despair of my cap-
tivity. But now I have forgiven the world
for the love of you; now that I see you,
young, and with a promising future —
now that I think of all that may result to
you in the good fortune of such a disclo-
sure, I shudder at any delay, and tremble
lest I should not assure to one as worthy
as yourself the possession of so vast an
amount of hidden wealth.’ Edmond
turned away his head with a sigh.
‘You persist in your incredulity, Ed-
mond,’ continued Faria. ‘My words have
not convinced you. I see you require
proofs. Well, then, read this paper, which
I have never shown to any one.’
To-morrow, my dear friend,’ said
Edmond, desirous of not yielding to the
old man’s madness. ‘I thought it was un-
derstood that we should not talk of that
until to-morrow.’
‘Then we will not talk of it until to-
morrow; but read this paper to-day.’
I will not irritate him,’ thought Ed-
mond* and taking the paper of which half
w T as wanting,—having been burnt, no
doubt, by some accident, —he read:
This treasure, which may amount to
two . . .
of Roman crowns in the most distant a
of the second opening wh . . .
declare to belong to him alo
heir,
‘2sth April. 149.’
‘Well!’ said Faria, when the young man
had finished reading it.
‘Why,’ replied Dantes, ‘I see nothing
but broken lines and unconnected words,
which are rendered illegible by fire.’
‘Yes, to you, my friend, who read them
for the first time; but not for me, who
have grown pale over them by many
nights’ study, and have reconstructed
every phase, completed every thought.’
And do you believe you have dis-
covered the hidden meaning?’
I am sure I have, and you shall judge
for yourself; but first listen to the history
of this paper.’
Silence!’ exclaimed Dantes. Steps ap-
proach—l go —adieu.’
And Dantes, happy to escape the history
and explanation which would be sure to
confirm his belief in his friend’s mental in-
stability, glided like a snake along the
narrow passage; while Faria, restored by
his alarm to a certain amount of activity,
pushed the stone into place with his foot,
and covered it with a mat in order the
more effectually to avoid discovery.
It was the governor, who, hearing of
Faria’s illness from the jailer, had come in
person to see him.
Faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all
gestures in order that he might conceal
from the governor the paralysis that had
already half stricken him with death. His
fear was lest the governor, pouched with
pity, might order him to be removed to
better quarters, and thus separate him
from his young companion. But unfor-
tunately this was not the case, and the
governor left him, convinced that the poor
madman, for whom in his heart he felt a
kind of affection, was only troubled with
a slight indisposition.
During this time, Edmond, seated on
his bed with his head in his hands, tried to
collect his scattered thoughts. Faria, since
their first acquaintance, had been on all
points so rational and logical, so wonder-
fully sagacious, in fact, that he could not
understand how so much wisdom on all
points could be allied with madness. Was
Faria deceived as to his treasure, or was
all the world deceived as to Faria?


Dantes remained in his cell all day, not
daring to return to his friend, thinking
thus to defer the moment when he should
be convinced, once for all, that the abbe
was mad—such a conviction would be so
terrible!
But, towards the evening after the hour
for the customary visit had gone by, Faria,
not seeing the young man appear, tried to
move and get over the distance which sep-
arated them. Edmond shuddered when he
heard the painful efforts which the old
man made to drag himself along; his leg
was inert, and he could no longer make
use of one arm. Edmond was obliged to
assist him, for otherwise he would not
have been able to enter by the small aper-
ture which led to Dantes’ chamber.
Here 1 am, pursuing you remorse-
lessly,’ he said with a benignant smile.
You thought to escape my munificence,
but it is in vain. Listen to me.’
Edmond saw there was no escape, and
placing the old man on his bed, he seated
himself on the stool beside him.
You know,’ said the abbe, ‘that I was
the secretary and intimate friend of Car-
dinal Spada, the last of the princes of that
name. I owe to this worthy lord all the
happiness I ever knew. He was not rich,
although the wealth of his family had
passed into a proverb, and I heard the
phrase very often, ‘As rich as a Spada,’
But he, like public rumour, lived on this
reputation for wealth; his palace was my
paradise. I was tutor to his nephews, who
are dead; and when he was alone in the
world, 1 tried by absolute devotion to his
will, to make up to him all he had done for
me during ten years of unremitting kind-
ness. The cardinal’s house had no secrets
for me. I had often seen my noble patron
annotating ancient volumes, and eagerly
searching amongst dusty family manu-
scripts. One day when I was reproaching
him for his unavailing searches, and de-
ploring the prostration of mind that fol-
lowed them, he looked at me, and, smiling
bitterly, opened a volume relating to the
History of the City of Rome. There, in
the twentieth chapter of the Life of Pope
Alexander VI, were the following lines,
which I can pever forget:
“The great wars of Romagna had
ended; Caesar Borgia, who had completed
his conquest, had need of money to pur-
chase all Italy. The pope had also need of
money to bring matters to an end with
Louis XII, King of France, who was for-
midable still in spite of his recent reverses;
and it was necessary, therefore, to have
recourse to some profitable scheme, which
was a matter of great difficulty in the im-
poverished condition of exhausted Italy.
His holiness had an idea. He determined
to make two cardinals.”
By choosing two of the greatest per-
sonages of Rome, especially rich men —
this was the return the holy father looked
for. In the first place, he could sell the
great appointments and splendid offices
which the cardinals already held; and then
he had two hats to sell besides. There was
a third point in view, which will appear
hereafter. The pope and Caesar Borgia
first found the two future cardinals; they
were Giovanni Rospigliosi, who held four
of the highest dignities of the Holy See,
and Caesar Spada, one of the noblest and
richest of the Roman nobility; both felt
the high honour of such a favour from the
pope. They were ambitious, and Caesar
Borgia soon found purchasers for their ap-
pointments. The result was, that Rospig-
liosi and Spada paid for being cardinals,
and eight other persons paid for the offices
the cardinals held before their elevation,
and thus eight hundred thousand crowns
entered into the coffers of the speculators.
It is time now to proceed to the last
part of the speculation. The pope heaped
attentions upon Rospigliosi and Spada,
conferred upon them the insignia of the
cardinalate, and induced them to arrange
their affairs and take up their residence in
Rome. Then the pope and Caesar Borgia
invited the two cardinals to dinner. This
was a matter of dispute between the holy
father and his son. Caesar thought they
could make use of one of the means which
he had ready for his friends, that
is to say, in the first place, the famous key
which was given to certain persons with
the request that they go and open a de-
signated cupboard. This key was fur-
nished with a small iron point—a negli


gence on the part of the locksmith. When
this i was pressed to effect the opening of
the cupboard, of which the lock was diffi-
cult, the person was pricked by this small
point, and died next day. Then there was
the ring with the lion’s head, which Caesar
wore when he wanted to greet his friends
with a clasp of the hand. The lion bit the
hand thus favoured, and at the end of
twenty-four hours, the bite w r as mortal.
Caesar proposed to his father, that they
should either ask the cardinals to open the
cupboard, or shake hands with them; but
Alexander VI replied: “Now as to the
worthy cardinals, Spada and Rospigliosi,
let us ask both of them to dinner. Some-
thing tells me that we shall get that money
back. Besides, you forget, Caesar, an in-
digestion declares itself immediately, while
a prick or a bite occasions a delay of a day
or two.’’ Caesar gave way before such
cogent reasoning, and the cardinals were
consequently invited to dinner.
The table was laid in a vineyard be-
longing to the pope, near San Pierdarena,
a charming retreat which the cardinals
knew very well by report. Rospigliosi,
quite set up with his new dignities, went
with a good appetite and his most ingrati-
ating manner. Spada, a prudent man, and
greatly attached to his only nephew, a
young captain of the highest promise,
took paper and pen, and made his will.
He then sent word to his nephew to wait
for him near the vineyard; but it appeared
the servant did not find him.
Spada knew what these invitations
meant; since Christianity, so eminently
civilising, had made progress in Rome, it
was no longer a centurion who came from
the tyrant with a message, “Caesar wills
that you die,” but it was a legate a latere,
who came with a smile on his lips to say
from the pope, “His holiness requests you
to dine with him.”
‘Spada set out about two o’clock to San
Pierdarena. The pope awaited him. The
first sight that attracted the eyes of Spada
was that of his nephew, in full costume,
and Caesar Borgia paying him. most
marked attentions. Spada turned pale, as
Caesar looked at him with an ironical air,
which proved that he had anticipated all,
and that the snare was well spread. They
began dinner, and Spada was only .able to
inquire of his nephew if he had received
his message. The nephew replied no; per-
fectly comprehending the meaning of the
question. It was too late, for he had al-
ready drunk a glass of excellent wine,
placed for him expressly by the pope’s
butler. Spada at the same moment saw
another bottle approach him, which he
was pressed to taste. An hour afterwards
a physician declared they were both
poisoned, through eating mushrooms.
Spada died on the threshold of the vine-
yard; the nephew expired at his own door,
making signs which his wife could not
comprehend.
Then Caesar and the pope hastened to
lay hands on the heritage, under pretence
of seeking for the papers of the dead man.
But the inheritance consisted in this only,
a scrap of paper on which Spada had writ-
ten; —“I bequeath to my beloved nephew
my coffers, my books, and, amongst
others, my breviary with the gold corners,
which I beg he will preserve in remem-
brance of his affectionate uncle.’’
The heirs sought everywhere, admired
the breviary, laid hands on the furniture,
and were greatly astonished that Spada,
the rich man, was really the most miser-
able of uncles —no treasures —unless they
were those of science, contained in the
library and laboratories. That was all.
Caesar and his father searched, examined,
scrutinized, but found nothing, or at least
very little; not exceeding a few thousand
crowns in plate, and about the same in
ready money; but the nephew had time to
say to his wife before he expired: “Look
well among my uncle’s papers; there is a
will.”
‘They sought even more thoroughly
than the august heirs had done, but it was
fruitless. There were two palaces and a
vineyard behind the Palatine Hill; but in
those days landed property had not much
value, and the two palaces and the vine-
yard remained to the family since they
were beneath the rapacity of the pope and
his son. Months and years rolled on.
Alexander VI died, poisoned,—you
know by what mistake, Caesar, poisoned


at the same time, escaped by shedding his
skin like a snake; but the new skin was
spotted by the poison till it looked like a
tiger’s. Then, compelled to quit Rome, he
went and got himself obscurely killed in a
night skirmish, scarcely noticed in history.
After the pope’s death, and his son’s
exile, it was supposed that the Spada
family would resume the splendid position
they had held before the cardinal’s time;
but this was not the case. The Spadas re-
mained in doubtful ease, a mystery hung
over this dark affair, and the public
rumour was, that Caesar, a better politi-
cian than his father, had carried off from
the pope the fortune of the two cardinals,
I say the two, because Cardinal Rospig-
liosi, who had not taken any precaution,
was completely despoiled.
‘Up to this point,’ said Faria, interrupt-
ing the thread of his narrative, ‘this seems
to you very meaningless, no doubt, eh?’
‘Oh, my friend,’ cried Dantes, ‘on the
contrary, it seems as if I were reading a
most interesting narrative; go on, I beg of
you.’—‘l will.’
‘The family began to get accustomed to
their obscurity. Years rolled on, and
amongst the descendants some were
soldiers, others diplomats; some church-
njen, some bankers; some grew rich and
some were ruined. I come now to the last
of the family whose secretary I was —the
Count of Spada. I had often heard him
complain of the disproportion of his rank
with his fortune; and I advised him to in-
vest all he had in an annuity. He did so,
and thus doubled his income. The cele-
brated breviary remained in the family,
and was in the count’s possession. It had
been handed down from father to son; for
the singular clause of the only will that
had been found, had caused it to be re-
garded as a genuine relic, preserved in the
family with superstitious veneration. It
was an illuminated book, with beautiful
Gothic characters and so weighty with
gold that a servant always carried it before
the cardinal on days of great solemnity.
‘At the sight of papers of all sorts —
titles, contracts, parchments, which were
kept in the archives of the family, all
descending from the poisoned cardinal, I
in my turn examined the immense bundles
of documents, like twenty servitors,
stewards, secretaries before me; but in
spite of the most exhaustive researches, I
found—nothing. Yet I had read, I had
even written a precise history of the
Borgia family, for the sole purpose of as-
suring myself whether any increase of
fortune had occurred to them on the death
of the cardinal Caesar Spada; but could
only trace the acquisition of the property
of the Cardinal Rospigliosi, his companion
in misfortune.
I was then almost assured that the in-
heritance had neither profited the Borgias
nor the family, but had remained un-
possessed like the treasures of the Arabian
Nights, which slept in the bosom of the
earth under the eyes of the genie. I
searched, ransacked, counted,
thousand and a thousand times the income
and expenditure of the family for three
hundred years. It was useless. I remained
in my ignorance, and the Count of Spada
in his poverty. My patron died. He had
reserved from his annuity his family
papers, his library, composed of five thou-
sand volumes, and his famous breviary.
All these he bequeathed to me, with a
thousand Roman crowns, which he had in
ready money, on condition that I would
have anniversary masses said for the re-
pose of his soul, and that I would draw up
a genealogical tree and history of his
house. All this I did scrupulously. Be
easy, my dear Edmond, we are near the
conclusion.
‘ln 1 807, a month before I was arrested,
and a fortnight after the death of the
Count of Spada, on the 23th December
(you will see presently how the date be-
came fixed in my memory), I was reading,
for the thousandth time, the papers I was
arranging, for the palace was sold to a
stranger, and I was going to leave Rome
and settle at Florence, intending to take
with me twelve thousand francs I pos-
sessed, my library, and the famous
breviary, when, tired with my constant
labour at the same thing, and overcome by
a heavy dinner I had eaten, my head
dropped on my hands, and I fell asleep


® •-■ * • ■ * v > ;•'•■' vi.:
m . : m * '%.
' »S lllli. ;'. |||^ v ■>;* : ’ . *1 w 1> ■
’
if.-. £ S; s-tf'jSg ■■: ' •
/■ 'St y t>_ s -■•■fc"t'j- -i • i •vw <• J^lfclBl^BTPI^^P^^Vi^BiVlTllft*i? t^
■* - - •'vS' v jES«raSi3n i I . A « v>*3RBiBk •&*■'■*'
j - y>• ?..r
>•-■>■ , ?j> : r t - ■ -J, _ '-^Hk * '• * ~ *y*fs *>« Vl v
si*-, «j^HT
f' %WSk aK^neP^^ > ’
1 ■ :?;•' X l ifi^&^.
jSjjwSffiji
'wlWilft'IrWi m'i1 1 r rl 1 ii i " i* \ ' , £3$*, o&sS!ag3BflBWMML3g$
vfc- ' ■ ■:! : __ i.innfti^'ijiAjilji'^^-IjiMil2ttll<£i^^i^^Llii^'''^r : Jl1 ' <- :■»■•■ '-•' -~- -j * -, -. '\t*$7§f~ ■-'^
t£*t .. • ; .iVffivj -.;-''.<*?*''':''•*■ ■=■''' .'■%*$’ •'fi''*--. > .-'
■?3?^ ■' *?. %- ■■■ >> *•■. ■•■;?■• x t. -. •? •. .- *f. ■ • - . ' y i 3F\t, •
i; r' C^:,B^p'1?^;>?' -#
. . ,; ■• - I . -.;< -- - ■ . i • ■■ _■ '■ - . ; •
.... - ' - }TW$&!m' «^fF
‘‘THIS TREASURE EXISTS , DANTES,” SAID FARIA


about three o’clock in the afternoon. I
awoke as the clock was striking six. 1
raised my head; I was in utter darkness.
I rang for a light, but as no one came, I
determined to find one for myself. It was
indeed but anticipating the simple
manners which I should soon be under
the necessity of adopting, I took a wax-
candle in one hand, and with the other
groped about for a piece of paper (my
match-box being empty), with which I
proposed to get a light from the small
flame still playing on the embers. Fear-
ing, however, to make use of any valuable
piece of paper, I hesitated for a moment,
then recollected that I had seen in the fa-
mous breviary, which was on the table
beside me, an old paper quite yellow with
age, and which had served as a marker for
centuries, kept there by the request of the
heirs. I felt for it, found it, twisted it up
together, and putting it into the expiring
flame, set light to it.
But beneath my fingers, as if by magic,
in proportion as the fire ascended, I saw
yellowish characters appear on the paper.
I grasped it in my hand, put out the flame
as quickly as I could, lighted my taper in
the fire itself, and opened the crumpled
paper with inexpressible emotion, recog-
nizing, when I had done so, that these
characters had been traced in mysterious
and sympatheric ink, only appearing
when exposed to the fire; nearly one-third
of the paper had been consumed by the
flame. It was that paper you read this
morning; read it again, Dantes, and then
I will complete for you the incomplete
words and unconnected sense.’
Faria, with an air of triumph, offered
the paper to Dantes, who this time read
the following words, traced with an ink of
a reddish color resembling rust:
This 23th day of April, 1498, be. . .
Alexander VI, and fearing that not. . .
he may desire to become my heir, and
and Bentivoglio, who were poisoned,
my sole heir, that I have bu. , .
and has visited with me, that is, in. . .
Island of Monte Cristo, all I poss. . .
jewels, diamonds, gems; that I alone.
may amount to nearly two mil. . .
will find on raising the twentieth ro. . .
creek to the east in a right line. Two
open
in these caves; the treasure is in the
furthest a. . .
which treasure I bequeath and leave en
as my sole heir.
23th April, 1 498, Caes
‘And now, said the abbe, ‘read this
other paper’; and he presented to Dantes
a second leaf with fragments of lines
written on it, which Edmond read as
follows:
. ing invited to dine by his Holiness,
content with making me pay for my
hat
serves for me the fate of Cardinals
Caprara
I declare to my nephew, Guido Spada
ried in a place he knows
the caves of the small
essed of ingots, gold, money,
know of the existence of this treasure,
which
lions of Roman crowns, and which he
ck from the small
ings have been made
ingle in the second;
tire to him
ar Spada.’
Faria followed him with an excited
look. ‘And now,’ he said, when he saw
that Dantes had read the last line, ‘put the
two fragments together, and judge for
yourself.’ Dantes obeyed, and the con-
joined pieces gave the following:
‘This 25th day of April, 1 498, be . . . ing
invited to dine by his Holiness Alexander
VI, and fearing that not. . .content with
making me pay for my hat, he may desire
to become my heir, and re. . . serves for
me the fate of Cardinals Caprara and
Bentivoglio, who were poisoned... I de-
clare to my nephew, Guido Spada, my
sole heir, that I have bu. . . ried in a place
he knows and has visited with me. that is,
in. . . the caves of the small Island of
Monte Cristo, all I poss. . .essed of ingots,
gold, money, iewels, diamonds, gems;
that I alone, . . know of the existence of
this treasure, which may amount to


nearly two mil. . .lions of Roman crowns,
and which he will find on raising the
twentieth ro. . .ck from the small creek to
the east in a right line. Two open. . .ings
have been made in these caves; the trea-
sure is in the furthest a. . .ngle in the
second; which treasure I bequeath and
leave en. . .tire to him as my sole heir.
‘23th April, 1498. ‘Caes. .ar/Spada.’
‘Well, do you comprehend now?’ in-
quired Faria.
‘lt is the declaration of Cardinal Spada,
and the will so long sought for,’ repfied
Edmond, still incredulous.
‘Yes; a thousand times, yes!’ And
who completed it as it now is?’
‘I did. Aided by the remaining frag-
ment, I guessed the rest; measuring the
length of the lines by those of the paper,
and divining the hidden meaning by
means of what was in part revealed, as we
are guided in a cavern by the small ray of
light above us.’
‘And what did you do when you arrived
at this conclusion?’
‘I resolved to set out, and did set out at
that very instant, carrying with me the
beginning of my great work, the unity of
the Italian kingdom; but for some time
the imperial police (who at this period,
quite contrary to what Napoleon desired
so soon as he had a son born to him,
wished for a partition of provinces) had
their eyes on me; and my hasty departure,
the cause of which they were unable to
guess, having aroused their suspicions, I
was arrested at the very moment I was
leaving Piombino.
‘Now,’ continued Faria, addressing
Dantes with an almost paternal expres-
sion, ‘now, my dear fellow, you know as
much as I do myself. If we ever escape
together, half this treasure is yours; if I
die here, and you escape alone, the whole
belongs to you.’
‘But,’ inquired Dantes hesitating, ‘has
this treasure no more legitimate possessor
in the world than ourselves?’
‘No, no, be easy on that score; the
family is extinct. The last Count of
Spada, moreover, made me his heir; be-
queathing to me this symbolic breviary, he
bequeathed to me all it contained; no, no,
make your mind satisfied on that point.
If we lay hands on this fortune, we may
enjoy it without remorse.’
‘And you say this treasure amounts
to... ’
‘Two millions of Roman crowns;
nearly thirteen millions of our money.’
‘lmpossible!’ said Dantes, staggered at
the enormous amount.
‘lmpossible? and why?’ asked the old
man. ‘The Spada family was one of the
oldest and most powerful families of the
fifteenth century; and in those times,
when other opportunities for investment
were wanting, such accumulations of
gold and jewels were by no means rare;
there are at this day Roman families
perishing of hunger though possessed of
nearly a million in diamonds and jewels,
handed down by entail, and which they
cannot touch.’ Edmond thought he was in
a dream—he wavered between incredulity
and joy.
‘I have only kept this secret so long
from* you,’ continued Faria, ‘that I might
test your character, and then surprise
you. Had we escaped before my attack of
catalepsy, I should have conducted you to
Monte Cristo; now,’ he added, with a
sigh, ‘it is you who will conduct me
thither. Well, Dantes you do not thank
me?’
‘This treasure belongs to you, my dear
friend,’ replied Dantes, ‘and to you only.
I have no right to it. I am no relation of
yours.’
‘You are my son, Dantes,’ exclaimed
the old man. ‘You are the child of my cap-
tivity. My profession condemns me to
celibacy. God has sent you to me to con-
sole, at one and the same time, the man
who could not be a father, and the
prisoner who could not get free.’ And
Faria extended the arm of which alone the
use remained to him to the young man
who threw himself upon his neck and
wept.


XIX.
Now that this treasure, which had so
long been the object of the abbe’s medi-
tations, could insure the future happiness
of him whom Faria really loved as a son,
it had doubled its value in his eyes, and
every day he expatiated on the amount,
explaining to Dantes all the good which,
with thirteen or fourteen millions of
francs, a man could do in these days to his
friends; and then Dantes’ countenance be-
came gloomy, for the oath of vengeance
he had taken recurred to his memory, and
he reflected how much ill, in these times, a
man with thirteen or fourteen millions
could do to his enemies.
The abbe did not know the Island of
Monte Cristo; but Dantes knew it, and
v
had often passed it, situated twenty-five
miles from Pianosa, between Corsica and
the Island of Elba, and had once touched
there. This island was, always had been,
and still is, completely deserted. It is a
rock of almost conical form, which looks
as though it had been thrust up by vol-
canic force from the depth to the surface
of the ocean. Dantes drew a plan of the
island for Faria, and Faria gave Dantes ad-
vice as to the means he should employ to
recover the treasure. But Dantes was far
from being as enthusiastic and confident as
the old man. It was a past question now
that Faria was not a lunatic, and the way
in which he had achieved the discovery,
which had given rise to the suspicion of
his madness, increased Edmond’s admira-
tion of him ; but at the same time Dantes
could not believe that the deposit, suppos-
ing it had ever existed, still existed; and
though he considered the treasure as by
no means chimerical, he yet believed it
was no longer there.
However, as if fate resolved on depriv-
ing the prisoners of their last chance, and
making them understand that they were
condemned to perpetual imprisonment, a
new misfortune befell them; the gallery
on the sea side, which had long been in
ruins, was rebuilt. They had repaired it
completely, and stopped up with vast
masses of stone the hole Dantes had partly
filled in. But for this precaution, which, it
will be remembered the abbe had made to
Edmond, the misfortune would have been
still greater, for their attempt to escape
would have been detected, and they would
undoubtedly have been separated. Thus a
new, a stronger, and more inexorable
barrier was interposed to cut off the
realization of their hopes.
You see,’ said the young man, with an
air of sorrowful resignation, to Faria, ‘that
God deems it right to take from me any
claim to merit for what you call my devo-
tion to you. 1 have promised to remain
forever with you, and now I could not
break my promise if 1 would. The trea-
sure will be no more mine than yours, and
neither of us will quit this prison. But my
real treasure is not that, my dear friend,
which awaits me beneath the sombre rocks
of Monte Cristo, it is your presence, our
living together five or six hours a day, in
spite of our jailers; it is the rays of intelli-
gence you have elicited from my brain, the
languages you have implanted in my
memory, and which have taken root there
with all their philological ramifications.
These different sciences that you have
made so easy to me by the depth of the
knowledge you possess of them, and the
clearness of the principles to which you
have reduced them —this is my treasure,
my beloved friend, and with this you have
made me rich and happy. Believe me, and
take comfort, this is better for me than
tons of gold and cases of diamonds, even
were they not as problematical as the
clouds we see in the morning floating over
the sea, which we take for terra firma, and
which evaporate and vanish as we draw
near to them. To have you as long as pos-
sible near me, to hear your eloquent
speech,—which embellishes my mind,
strengthens my soul, and makes my whole
frame capable of great and terrible things,
if I should ever be free, —so fills my whole
existence, that the despair to which I was
just on the point of yielding when I knew
you, has no longer any hold over me; and
this—this is my fortune—not chimerical,
but actual. I owe you my real good, my
present happiness; and all the sovereigns
of the earth, even Caesar Borgia himself,
could not deprive me of this.’
Thus, if not actually happy, yet the days


these two unfortunates passed iogethei*
went quickly. Faria, who for so long a
time had kept silence as to the treasure,
now perpetually talked of it. As he had
prophesied would be the case, he remained
paralysed in the right arm and the left leg,
and had given up all hope oh ever enjoying
it himself. But he was continually think-
ing over some means of escape for his
young companion, and anticipating the
pleasures he would enjoy. For fear the
letter might be some day lost or stolen, he
compelled Dantes to learn it by heart; and
Dantes knew it from the first to the last
word. Then he destroyed the second
portion, assured that if the first were
seized, no one would be able to discover
its real meaning. Whole hours sometimes
passed while Faria was giving instructions
to Dantes, —instructions which were to
serve him when he was at liberty. Then,
once free, from the day and hour and
moment when he was so, he could have
but one only thought, which was, to gain
Monte Cristo by some means, and remain
there alone under some pretext which
would arouse no suspicions, and once
there, to endeavour to find the wonderful
caverns, and search in the appointed spot,
—the appointed spot, be it remembered,
being the farthest angle in the second
opening.
In the meanwhile the hours passed, if
not rapidly, at least tolerably. Faria, as
we have said, without having recovered
the use of his hand and foot, had regained
all the clearness of his understanding, and
had gradually, besides the moral instruc-
tions we have detailed, taught his youth-
ful companion the patient and sublime
duty of a prisoner, who learns to make
something from nothing. They were thus
perpetually employed,—Faria, that he
might not see himself grow old; Dantes,
for fear of recalling the almost extinct past
which now only floated in his memory like
a distant light wandering in the night. So
life went on for them as it does for those
who are not victims of misfortune and
whose activities glide along mechanically
and tranquilly beneath the eye *of
providence.
But beneath this superficial calm there
were in the heart of the young man, and
perhaps in that of the old man, many re-
pressed desires, many stifled sighs, which
found vent when t aria was left alone, and
when Edmond returned to his cell. One
night Edmond awoke suddenly believing
that he heard some one calling him. He
opened his eyes upon utter darkness. His
name, or rather a plaintive voice which
essayed to pronounce his name, reached
him. He sat up in bed and a cold sweat
broke out upon his brow. Undoubtedly
the call came from Faria’s dungeon.
‘Alas,’ murmured Edmond; ‘can it be?’
He moved his bed, drew up the stone,
rushed into the passage, and reached the
opposite extremity; the secret entrance
was open. By the light of the wretched
and wavering lamp, of which we have
spoken, Dantes saw the old man, pale, but
yet erect, clinging to the bedstead. His
features were writhing with those horrible
symptoms which he already knew, and
which had so seriously alarmed him when
he saw them for the first time.
‘Alas, my dear friend,’ said Faria in a
resigned tone, ‘you understand, do you
not, and I need not attempt to explain to
you?’
Edmond uttered a cry of agony, and,
quite out of his senses, rushed towards the
door, exclaiming, ‘Help, help!’ Faria had
just sufficient strength to restrain him.
‘Silence,’ he said, ‘or you are lost. We
must now only think of you, my dear
friend, and so act as to render your cap-
tivity supportable or your flight possible.
It would require years to do again what I
have done here, and the results would be
instantly destroyed if our jailers knew we
had communicated with each other. Be-
sides, be assured, my dear Edmond, the
dungeon I am about to leave will not long
remain empty; some other unfortunate
being will soon take my place, and to him
you will appear like an angel of salvation.
Perhaps he will be young, strong, and en-
during, like yourself, and will aid you in
your escape, while I have been but a hin-
drance. You will no longer have half a
dead body tied to you as a drag to all your
movements. At length providence has
done something for you; he restores to
you more than he takes away, and it was
time I should die.’


Edmond could only clasp his hands and
exclaim, ‘Oh, my friend, my friend, speak
not thus!’ and then resuming all his pre-
sence of mind, which had for a moment
staggered under this blow, and his
strength, which had failed at the words of
the old man, he said, ‘Oh, I have saved you
once, and 1 will save you a second time!’
And raising the foot of the bed, he drew
out the phial, still a third filled with the
red liquor. ,
‘See,’ he exclaimed, ‘there remains still
some of the magic draught. Quick, quick!
tell me what I must do this time; are there
any fresh instructions? Speak, my
friend; I listen.’
‘There is not a hope,’ replied Faria,
shaking his head; but no matter; God
wills it that man whom he has created, and
in whose heart he has so profoundly rooted
the love of life, should do all in his power
to preserve that existence, which, how-
ever painful it may be, is yet always so
dear.’
‘Oh, yes, yes!’ exclaimed Dantes; ‘and
I tell you that I will save you yet.’
‘Well, then, try. The cold gains upon
me. I feel the blood flowing towards my
brain. These horrible chills, which make
my teeth chatter and seem to dislocate my
bones, begin to pervade my whole frame;
in five minutes the malady will reach its
heights, and in a quarter of an hour there
will be nothing left of me but a corpse.’
Oh!’ exclaimed Dantes, his heart
wrung with anguish.
Do as you did before, only do not wait
so long. All the springs of life are now
exhausted in me, and death,’ he continued,
looking at his paralysed arm and leg, ‘has
but half its work to do. If, after having
made me swallow twelve drops instead of
ten, you see that I do not recover, then
pour the rest down my throat. Now lift
me on my bed, for I can no longer support
myself.’
Edmond took the old man in his arms,
and laid him on the bed.
‘And now, my dear friend,’ said Faria,
sole consolation of my wretched existence
you whom heaven gave me somewhat
late, but still gave me, a priceless gift,
and for which I am most grateful— at the
moment of separating from you forever,
I wish you all the happiness and all the
prosperity you so well deserve. My son,
1 bless thee!’ The young man cast him-
self on his knees, leaning his head against
the old man’s bed.
‘Listen, now, to what I say in this my
dying moment. The treasure of the
Spadas exists. God grants me the boon
of vision unrestricted by time or space.' I
see it in the depths of the inner cavern.
My eyes pierce the inmost recesses of the
earth, and are dazzled at the sight of so
much riches. If you do escape, remember,
that the poor abbe, whom all the world
called mad, was not so. Hasten to Monte
Cristo—avail yourself of the fortune—for
you have indeed suffered long enough.’ A
violent convulsion attacked the old man.
Dantes raised his head and saw Faria’s
eyes injected with blood. It seemed as if
a flow of blood had ascended from the
chest to the head.
‘Adieu, adieu!’ murmured the old man,
clasping Edmond’s hand convulsively—
‘adieu!’
Oh, no —no, not yet,’ he cried; ‘do
not forsake me! Oh, succour him! Help
—help—help! *
‘Hush—hush!’ murmured the dying
man, ‘that they may not separate us if you
save me!’
a
‘You are right. Oh, yes,, yes; be assured
I shall save you! Besides, although you
suffer much, you do not seem to be in
such agony as you were before.’
‘Do not mistake. I suffer less because
there is in me less strength to endure. At
your age we have faith in life; it is the
privilege of youth to believe and hope, but
old men see death more clearly. Oh, ’tis
here—’tis over—my sight is gone—my
senses fail! Your hand, Dantes! Adieu—
adieu!’ And raising himself by a final
effort, in which he summoned all his facul-
ties, he said: ‘Monte Cristo, forget not
Monte Cristo!’ And he fell back on the
bed. The crisis was terrible, and a rigid
form with twisted limbs, swollen eyelids,
and lips flecked with bloody foam, lay on
the bed of torture, in place of the intellec-
tual being who so lately rested there.


Dantes took the lamp, placed it on a pro-
jecting stone above the bed, whence its
tremulous light fell with strange and fan-
tastic ray on the distorted countenance
and motionless, stiffened body. With
steady gaze he awaited confidently the
moment for administering the restorative.
When he believed that the right mo-
ment had arrived, he took the knife, prised
open the teeth, which offered less resist-
ance than before, counted one after the
other twelve drops, and watched; the phial
contained, perhaps, twice as much more.
He waited ten minutes, a quarter of an
hour, half an hour —no change took place.
Trembling, his hair erect, his brow bathed
with perspiration, he counted the seconds
by the beating of his heart. Then he
thought it was time to make the last trial,
and he put the phial to the purple lips of
Faria, and without having occasion to
force open his jaws, which had remained
extended, he poured the whole of the
liquid down his throat.
The draught produced af galvanic effect,
a violent trembling pervaded the old man’s
limbs, his eyes opened until it was fearful
to gaze upon them, he heaved a sigh which
resembled a shriek, and then his convulsed
body returned gradually to its former im-
mobility, the eyes remaining open.
Half an hour, an hour, an hour and a
half elapsed, and during this period of an-
guish, Edmond leaned over his friend, his
hand applied to his heart, and felt the body
gradually grow cold and the heart’s pulsa-
tion become more and more deep and dull,
until at length it stopped; the last move-
ment of the heart ceased, the face became
livid, the eyes remained open, but the eye-
balls were glazed. It was six o’clock in
the morning, the dawn was just breaking,
and its feeble ray came into the dungeon,
and paled the ineffectual light of the lamp.
Strange shadows passed over the counten-
ance of the dead man, and at times gave
it the appearance of life. While the strug-
gle between day and night lasted, Dantes
still doubted; but as soon as the daylight
gained the pre-eminence, he saw that he
was alone with a corpse. Then an invin-
cible and extreme terror seized upon him,
and he dared not again press the hand that
hung out of bed, he dared no longer to
gaze on those fixed and vacant eyes, which
he tried many times to close, but in vain—
they opened again as soon as shut. He
extinguished the lamp, carefully concealed
it, and then went away, closing as well as
he could the entrance to the secret pas-
sage by the large stone as he descended.
It was time, for the jailer was coming.
On this occasion he began his rounds at
Dantes’ cell, and on leaving him he went
on to "Faria’s taking thither
breakfast arid some linen. Nothing be-
tokened that the man knew anything of
what had occurred. He went on his way.
Dantes was then seized with an inde-
scribable desire to know what was going
on in the dungeon of his unfortunate
friend. He therefore returned by the sub-
terraneous gallery, and arrived in time to
hear the exclamations of the turnkey, who
called out for help. Other turnkeys came,
and then was heard the regular tramp of
soldiers. Last of all came the governor.
Edmond heard the creaking of the bed
as they moved the corpse, heard the voice
of the governor, who asked them to throw
water on the dead man’s face; and seeing
that, in spite of this application, the
prisoner did not recover, they sent for the
doctor. The governor then went out,
and words of pity fell on Dantes’ listening
ears, mingled with brutal laughter,
‘Well, well,’ said one, ‘the madman has
gone to look after his treasure. Good
journey to him!’
‘With all his millions, he will not have
enough to pay for his shroud!’ said an-
other. ‘Oh,’ added a third voice, ‘the
shrouds of the Chateau d’lf are not dear!’
‘Perhaps,’ said one of the previous
speakers, ‘as he was a churchman, they
may go to some expense in his behalf.’
‘They may give him the honors of the
sack.’
Edmond did not lose a word, but com-
prehended very little of what was said.
The voices soon ceased, and it seemed to
him as if every one had left the cell. Still
he dared not to enter, as they might have
left some turnkey to watch the dead. He
remained, therefore, mute and motionless,
hardly venturing to breathe. At the end of
an hour, he heard a faint noise, which in-
creased. It was the governor who re-


'■' '' W‘ &
,,-C; «■ - s ■; & X ■■ -i' xhHB''^' : .
? .V' r '.' ■• > !.%'?y : - .\ '
•■. <\ ••■...•• -?',X ■■■ . mSSsa&m* "\
• ! ‘? *''< v flKSHkxx ■_ '‘:> ,, * • ■ J..X • • %&&&.>
r VW* TT^ v . - M? 4*£ X? Vv* - ;Xv*->
v jjjgfc
XX X>; : ;- •.' * ’" 'XX •’■••
•-.. _X ■ ;X, |&f'' " v ; XX 'ft* X ftXftft"'-ft .
* ; WBk l®fc Sf *Brff
x *l*gi|&' ‘ |i|8BP'
Jp Ite # IP ' 8 * ■ x 7 ' -X
■> ■««•: ■•■<5Xs^
is# X v ? . i.t v^^ : -X / • i X x ; .^
;®SJ Xi ' 2 '* 'x,Jx . : *
DANTE PULLED TEE SACK ABOUT HIM


turned, followed by the doctor and other
attendants. There was a moment’s silence
—it was evident that the doctor was ex-
amining the dead body. The enquiries
soon commenced.
The doctor analysed the symptoms of
the malady to w T hich the prisoner had suc-
cumbed, and declared that he was dead.
Questions and answers followed in a non-
chalant manner that made Dantes indig-
nant, for he felt that all the world should
have for the poor abbe a love and respect
equal to his own.
I am very sorry for what you tell me,’
said the governor, replying to the assur-
ance of the doctor, ‘that the old man is
really dead; for he was a quiet, inoffensive
prisoner, happy in his folly, and required
no watching.’
‘Ah,’ added the turnkey, ‘there was no
occasion for watching him; he would have
stayed here fifty years, I’ll answer for it,
without any attempt to escape.’
‘Still,’ said the governor, ‘1 believe it
will be requisite, notwithstanding your
certainty, and not that I doubt your
science, but in discharge of my official
duty, that we should be perfectly assured
that the prisoner is dead.’ There was a
moment of complete silence, during which
Dantes, still listening, knew that the
doctor was examining the corpse a second
time.
‘You may make your mind easy,’ said
the doctor; ‘he is dead. I will answer for
that.’
‘You know, sir,’ said the governor, per-
sisting, ‘that we are not content in such
cases as this with such a simple examina-
tion. In spite of all appearances, be so
kind, therefore, as to finish your duty by
fulfilling the formalities prescribed by
law.’
‘Let the irons be heated,’ said the
doctor; ‘but really it is a useless precau-
tion.’ This order to heat the irons made
Dantes shudder. He heard hasty steps, the
creaking of a door, people going and com-
ing, and some minutes afterwards a turn-
key entered, saying,—
‘Here is the brazier, lighted.’ There was
a moment’s silence, and then was heard
the crackling of burning flesh, of which
the peculiar and nauseous smell pene-
trated even behind the wall where Dantes
was listening in horror. The perspiration
poured forth upon the young man’s brow,
and he felt as if he should faint.
‘You see, sir, he is really dead,’ said the
doctor; this burn in the heel is decisive.
The poor fool is cured of his folly, and
delivered from his captivity.’
‘Wasn’t his name Faria?’ inquired one
of the officers who accompanied the
governor. Yes, sir; and, as he said, it was
an ancient name. He was, too, very
learned, and rational enough on all points
which did not relate to his treasure; but
on that, indeed, he was intractable.’
‘lt i$ the sort of malady which we call
monomania,’ said the doctor.
‘You had never anything to complain
of?’ said the governor to the jailer who
had charge of the abbe.
‘Never, sir,’ replied the jailer, ‘never;
on the contrary he sometimes amused me
very much by telling me stories. One day,
too, when my wife was ill, he gave me a
prescription which cured her.’
‘Ah, ah!’ said the doctor, ‘I did not
know that I had a rival; but I hope, gov-
ernor, that you will show him all proper
respect.’
‘Yes, yes, make your mind easy; he
shall be decently interred in the newest
sack we can find. Will that satisfy you?
‘Must this last formality take place in
your presence, sir?’ inquired a turnkey.
‘Certainly. But make haste —I cannot
stay here all day.’ Other footsteps, going
and coming, were now heard, and a mo-
ment afterwards the noise of rustling
canvas reached Dantes ears, the bed
creaked, and the heavy footfall of a man
who lifts a weight sounded on the floor;
then the bed again creaked under the
weight deposited upon it.
‘This evening,’ said the governor.
‘Will there be any mass?’ asked one of
the attendants.
‘That is impossible,’ replied the gov-
ernor. ‘The chaplain of the chateau came


to me yesterday to beg for leave of ab-
sence in order to take a trip to Hyeres for
a week. I told him I would attend to the
prisoners in his absence. If the poor abbe
had not been in such a hurry, he might
have had his requiem.’
Pooh, pooh ; said the doctor, with the
impiety usual in persons of his profession;
he is a churchman. God will respect his
profession, and not give the devil the
wicked delight of sending him a priest.’ A
shout of laughter followed this brutal jest.
Meanwhile the operation of putting the
body in the sack was going on.
This evening, said the Governor,
when the task was ended.
At what hour?’ inquired a turnkey.—
Why, about ten or eleven o’clock.’
Shall we watch by the corpse?’—Of
what use would it be? Shut the dungeon
as if he were alive—that is all.’ Then the
steps retreated, and the voices died away
in the distance; the noise of the door, with
its creaking hinges and bolts ceased, and
a silence more sombre than that d soli-
tude ensued, the silence of death, which
was all-pervasive, and struck its icy chill
to the very soul of Dantes. Then he raised
the flagstone cautiously with his head, and
looked carefully around the chamber. It
was empty, and Dantes emerged from the
tunnel.
XX.
On the bed, at full length, and faintly
illuminated by the pale light that came
from the window, lay a sack of canvas,
and under its rude folds was stretched a
long and stiffened form; it was Faria’s last
winding-sheet,— a winding-sheet which,
as the turnkey said, cost so little. Every-
thing was in readiness. A barrier had been
placed between Dantes and his old friend.
No longer could Edmond look into those
wide-open eyes which had seemed to be
penetrating the mysteries of death; no
longer could he clasp the hand which had
done so much to make his existence
blessed. Faria, the beneficent and cheer-
ful companion, with whom he was accus-
to live so intimately, no longer
breathed. He seated himself on the edge
of that terrible bed, and fell into melan-
choly and gloomy reverie.
Alone—he was alone again—again
condemned to silence—again face to face
with nothingness! Alone!—never again
to see the face, never again to hear the
voice of the only human being who united
him to earth! Was not Faria’s fate the
better, after all—to solve the problem of
life at its source, even at the risk of
horrible suffering? The idea of suicide,
which his friend had driven away and kept
away by his cheerful presence, now
hovered like a phantom over the abbe’s
dead body.
■»
If I could die, he said, I should go
where he goes, and should assuredly find
him again. But how to die? It is very
easy, he went on with a smile; ‘I will re-
main here, rush on the first person that
opens that door, strangle him, and then
they will guillotine me. But excessive
grief is like a storm at sea, where the frail
bark is tossed from {he depths to the top
of the wave. Dantes recoiled from the
idea of so infamous a death, and passed
suddenly from despair to an ardent desire
for life and liberty.
Die? oh, no,’ he exclaimed—not die
now, after having lived and suffered so
long and so much! Die? yes, had I died
years ago; but now to die would be, in-
deed, to give way to the sarcasm of des-
tiny. No, I want to live; I shall struggle
to the very last; I will yet win back the
happiness of which I have been deprived.
Before I die I must not forget that I have
my executioners to punish, and perhaps,
too, who knows, some friends to reward.
Yet they will forget me here, and I shall
die in my dungeon like Faria.’ As he said
this, he became silent and gazed straight
before him like one overwhelmed with a
strange and amazing thought. Suddenly
he arose, lifted his hand to his brow as if
his brain were giddy, paced twice or thrice
round the dungeon, and then paused
abruptly by the bed.
Just God! he muttered, whence comes
this thought? Is it from thee? Since
none but the dead pass freely from this
dungeon, let me take the place of the


dead!’ Without giving himself time to re-
consider his decision, and, indeed, that he
might not allow his thoughts to be dis-
tracted from his desperate resolution, he
bent over the appalling shroud, opened it
with the knife Faria had made, drew the
corpse from the sack, and bore it along
the tunnel to his own chamber, laid it on
his couch, tied around its head the rag he
wore at night around his own, covered it
with his counterpane, once again kissed
the ice-cold brow, and tried vainly to close
the resisting eyes, which glared horribly,
turned the head toward the wall so that
the jailer might, when he brought the
evening meal, believe that he was asleep,
as was his frequent custom; entered the
tunnel again, drew the bed against the
wall, returned to the other cell, took from
the hiding-place the needle and thread,
flung off his rags, that they might feel only
naked flesh beneath the coarse canvas, and
getting inside the sack, placed himself in
the posture in which the dead body had
been laid, and sewed up the mouth of the
sack from the inside.
He would have been discovered by the
beating of his heart, if by any mischance
the jailers had entered at that moment.
Dantes might have waited until the even-
ing visit was over, but he was afraid that
the governor would change his mind, and
order the dead body to be removed earlier.
In that case his last hope would have been
destroyed. Now his plans were fully
made, and this is what he intended to do.
If while he was being carried out the
grave-diggers should discover that they
were bearing a live instead of a dead body,
Dantes did not intend to give them time
to recognize him, but with a sudden cut
of the knife, he meant to open the sack
from top to bottom, and, profiting by their
alarm, escape; if they tried to catch him,
he would use his knife to better purpose.
If they took him to the cemetery and
laid him in a grave, he would allow him-
self to be covered with earth, and then, as
it was night, the grave-diggers could
scarcely have turned their backs before he
would have worked his way through the
yielding soil and escaped. He hoped that
the weight of earth would not be so great
that he could not overcome it. If he was
detected in this, and the earth proved too
heavy, he would be stifled, and then, —so
much the better, all would be over.
Dantes had not eaten since the preceding
evening, but he had not thought of
hunger, nor did he think of it now. His
situation was too precarious to allow him
even time to reflect on any thought but
one.
The first risk that Dantes ran was, that
the jailer, when he brought him his supper
at seven o’clock, might perceive the
change that had been made; fortunately,
twenty times at least, from misanthropy
or fatigue, Dantes had received his jailer
in bed, and then the man placed his bread
and soup on the table, and went away
without saying a word. This time the
jailer might not be as silent as usual, but
speak to Dantes, and seeing that he re-
ceived no reply, go to the bed, and thus
discover all.
When seven o’clock came, Dantes
agony really began. His hand placed upon
his heart was unable to repress its throb-
bings, while, with the other he wiped the
perspiration from his temples. From time
to time chills ran through his whole body,
and clutched his heart in a grasp of ice.
Then he thought he was going to die. Yet
the hours passed on without any unusual
disturbance, and Dantes knew that he had
escaped the first peril. It was a good
augury. At length, about the hour the
governor had appointed, footsteps were
heard on the stairs. Edmond felt that the
moment had arrived, summoned up all his
courage, held his breath, and would have
been happy if at the same time he could
have repressed the throbbing of his veins.
The footsteps they were double
paused at the door—and Dante guessed
that the two grave-diggers had come to
seek him —this idea was soon converted
into certainty, when he heard the noise
they made in putting down the hand-bier.
The door opened, and a dim light reached
Dantes’ eyes through the c.oarse sack that
covered him; he saw two shadows ap-
proach his bed, a third remaining at the
door with a torch in his hand. The two
men, approaching the ends of the bed,
took the sack by its extremities.


‘He’s heavy though for an old and thin
man,’ said one, as he raised the head.
‘They say every year adds half a pound
to the weight of the bones,’ said another,
lifting the feet.
‘Have you tied the knot?’ inquired the
first speaker.
What would be the use of carrying so
much more weight?’ was the reply; ‘I can
do that when we get there.
‘Yes, you’re right,’ replied the com-
panion.
What’s the knot for?’ thought Dantes.
They deposited the supposed corpse on
the bier. Edmond stiffened himself in
order to play the part of a dead man, and
then the party, lighted by the man with the
torch, who went first, ascended the stairs.
Suddenly he felt the fresh and sharp night
air, and Dantes knew that the mistral was
blowing. It was a sensation in which plea-
sure and pain were strangely mingled. The
bearers went on for twenty paces, then
stopped, putting the bier down on the
ground. One of them went away, and
Dantes heard his shoes striking on the
pavement.
Where am I?’ he asked himself.
Really, he is by no mean a light load!’
said the other bearer, sitting on the edge
of the hand-barrow. Dantes first impulse
was to escape, but fortunately he did not
attempt it.
Give us a light,’ said the other bearer,
‘or I shall never find what I am looking
for.’ The man with the torch complied,
although not asked in the most polite
terms.
What can he be looking for?’ thought
Edmond. ‘The spade, perhaps.’ An excla-
mation of satisfaction indicated that the
grave-digger had found the object of his
search. ‘Here it is at last,’ he said, ‘not
without some trouble though.’
‘Yes,’ was the answer, ‘but it has lost
nothing by waiting.’
As he said this, the man came towards
Edmond, who heard a heavy metallic sub-
stance laid down beside him, and at the
same moment a cord was fastened round
his feet with sudden and painful violence.
‘Well, have you tied the knot?’ inquired
the grave-digger, who was looking on.
‘Yes, and pretty tight too, I can tell
you, was the answer.
Move on, then. And the bier was
lifted once more, and they proceeded.
They advanced fifty paces farther, and
then stopped to open a door, then went
forward again. The noise of the waves
dashing against the rocks on which the
Chateau is built, reached Dantes’ ear dis-
tinctly as they went forward.
Bad weather! observed one of the
bearers; not a pleasant night for a dip
in the sea.’
Why, yes, the abbe runs a chance of
being wet, said the other; and then there
was a burst of brutal laughter. Dantes did
not comprehend the jest, but his hair stood
erect on his head.
Well, here we are at last,’ said one of
them. A little farther—a little farther,’
said the other. You know very well that
the last was stopped on his way, dashed
on the rocks, and the governor told us
next day that we were careless fellows.’
They ascended five or six more steps,
and then Dantes felt that they took him,
one by the head and the other by the heels,
and swung him to and fro. ‘One!’ said the
grave-diggers, ‘two! three!’ And at the
same instant Dantes felt himself flung into
the air like a wounded bird, falling, falling
with a rapidity that made his blood curdle.
Although drawn downwards by the heavy
weight which hastened his rapid descent,
it seemed to him as if the fall lasted for a
century. At last, with a horrible splash,
he darted like an arrow into the ice-cold
water, and as he did so he uttered a shrill
cry, stifled in a moment by his immersion
beneath the waves.
Dantes had been flung into the sea, and
was dragged into its depths by a thirty-six
pound shot tied to his feet. The sea is the
cemetery of the Chateau d’if.


y'• : v: - ■•■- £& $ ,.' v : «fes.< ; '- ■ 'A,
■ ■> S -
• -v. ~ ilM 1 ,\Mfff m 11, "'
■i '•>"•>Jf ; ;••■i^' y s ; • : '^^p^^^-'’S;^j|^^4l«^¥: :: '-'' <r ' '- -:■• ■'■ - Ssr* •> V^:co^^^^^^^K88^^BBiB]jSj|lljBMl|SMfl|lwWw!^Sy
: : .-i&V'. - *“ .jHBk, •#»» ■
* *****.
■|lp ife; '^HSfei y^3R'
fT £» • . ,-/;^v,,, ’■;■_■» jBBKrS"
;-.& * , ■ ftjjlgnHP $$&£&
P a* %- - JmBbk. jMir ; - jaMB 3? Mg
JH^^I
.> SggS Wuraffift • ''SSSSbBS
P»*y='; -JBP M&?Ji *• W- ItV 5
v 7 % , ,P <
■ > : # ■ <; { - • i - . , ’
THE SEA IS THE CEMETERY OF THE CHAT EAC DTE


Dantes was picked up the next morning by a small sailing boat. At first they
regarded him with suspicion—and he did not take long to realise that they were
smugglers. However, so good a sailor did Dantes prove himself, that the captain
eagerly accepted him as part of the crew, and many were the voyages that Dantes
made. It was a pleasant time, and Dantes made good friends with one of the
young sailors t named Jacopo—who looked up to him with admiration, resecting
his greater knoicledge and authority.
But always at the back of Dantes' mind was the island of Monte Cristo—and of
how he could make his way there, to search, without arousing suspicion.
It was with delight, therefore, that he heard the plans of the captain.
'We are to go to Monte Cristo.’ said the captain. It is a small deserted island ,
visited by nobody, and we can safely make an exchange of goods there.' Dantes’
ship was to meet another at Monte Cristo, where cargoes of smuggled goods
would be exchanged. If the venture teas successful the profit would be enormous
and the crew would each receive a share.
But it teas the island of Monte Cristo, itself, which lured Datites.
XXIII.
Thus, at length, by one of the unex-
pected strokes of fortune which some-
times befall those who have for a long
time been the victims of an evil destiny,
Dantes was about to secure the oppor-
tunity he wished for, by simple and
natural means, and land on the island
without incurring any suspicion. One
night more and he would be on his way.
The night was one of feverish distrac-
tion, and in its progress visions good and
evil passed through Dantes’ mind. If he
closed his eyes, he saw Cardinal Spada’s
letter written on the wall in characters of
flame—if he slept for a moment the wild-
est dreams haunted his brain. He ascended
into grottos paved with emeralds, with
panels of rubies, and the roof glowing
with diamond stalactites. Pearls fell drop
by drop, as subterranean waters filter in
their caves. Edmond, amazed, wonder- *
struck, filled his pockets with the radiant
gems and then returned to daylight, when
he discovered that his prizes had all
changed into common pebbles. He then
endeavoured to re-enter the marvellous
grottos, but they had suddenly receded,
and now the path became a labyrinth, and
then the entrance vanished, and in vain
did he tax his memory for the magic and
mysterious Word which opened the splen-
did caverns of Ali Baba to the Arabian
fishermen. All was useless, the treasure
disappeared, and had again reverted to
the genii from whom for a moment he
had hoped to carry it off. The day came
at length, and was almost as feverish as
the night had been, but it brought reason
to the aid of imagination, and Dantes was
then enabled to arrange a plan which had
hitherto been vague and unsettled in his
brain. Night came, and with it the pre-
paration for departure, and these prepara-
tions served to conceal Dantes agitation.
He had by degrees assumed such authority
over his companions that he was almost
like a commander on board; and as his
orders were always clear, distinct, and
easy of execution, his comrades obeyed
him with celerity and pleasure.
The old patron did not interfere, for he
too had recognized the superiority of
Dantes over the crew and himself. He
saw in the young man his natural suc-
cessor, and regretted that he had not a
daughter, that he might have bound Ed-
mond to him by a more secure alliance. At
seven o clock in the evening all was
ready, and at ten minutes past seven they
doubled the lighthouse just as the beacon
was kindled. The sea was calm, and, with
a fresh breeze from the south-east, they
sailed beneath a bright blue sky, in which
God also lighted up in turn his beacon
lights, each of which is a world. Dantes
told them that all hands might turn in, and
he would take the helm. When the
Maltese (for so they called Dantes) had
said this, it was sufficient, and all went to
their bunks contentedly. This frequently
happened. Dantes, cast from solitude into
the world, frequently experienced an im-
perious desire for solitude; and what
solitude is more complete, or more poeti-
cal, than that of a ship floating in isolation
on the sea during the obscurity of the


night, in the silence of immensity, and W The island was familiar to the crew of
under the eye of heaven? > the Young Amelia, —it was one of her
Now this solitude w T as peopled with his t
thoughts, the night lighted up by his illu- 7
sions, and the silence animated by his
anticipations. When the patron awoke,
the vessel was hurrying on with every sail
set, and every sail full with the breeze.
They were making nearly ten knots an
hour. The Island of Monte Cristo loomed
large in the horizon. Edmond resigned the
lugger to the master’s care, and went and
lay down in his hammock; but, in spite
of a sleepless night, he could not close his
eyes for a moment. Two hours afterwards
he came on deck, as the boat was about to
double the Island of Elba. They were just
abreast of Mareciana, and beyond the flat
but verdant Island of La Pianosa. The
peak of Monte Cristo, reddened by the
burning sun, was seen against the azure
sky. Dantes ordered the helmsman to put
down his helm, in order to leave La
Pianosa to starboard, as he knew that he
should shorten his course by two or three
knots. About five o’clock in the evening
the island was distinct and everything on
it was plainly perceptible, owing to the
clearness of the atmosphere peculiar to the
light which the rays of the sun cast at its
setting.
Edmond gazed very earnestly at the
mass of rocks which gave out all the
variety of twilight colors, from the
brightest pink to the deepest blue; and
from time to time his cheeks flushed, his
brow darkened, and a mist passed over his
eyes. Never did gamester, whose whole
fortune is staked on one cast of the dice,
experience the anguish which Edmond
felt in his paroxysms of hope. Night came,
and at ten o’clock they anchored. The
Young Amelia was first at the rendezvous.
In spite of his usual -command over him-
self, Dantes could not restrain his impetu-
osity. He was the first to jump on shore;
and had he dared, he would, like Lucius
Brutus, have kissed his mother earth.’ It
was dark, but at eleven o’clock the moon
rose in the midst of the ocean, whose
every wave she silvered, and then,
‘ascending high,’ played in floods of pale
light on the rocky hills of this second
Pelion.
regular haunts. As to Dantes, he had
passed it on his voyage to and from the
Levant, but never touched at it. He ques-
tioned Jacopo. ‘Where shall we pass the
night?’ he inquired.
‘Why, on board the tartan,’ replied the
sailor.
Should we not do better in the grottos?’
What grottos?’
‘Why, the grottos —caves of the island.’
1 do not know of any grottos,’ replied
Jacopo. The cold sweat sprang forth on
Dantes’ brow.—‘What, are there no
grottos at Monte Cristo?’ he asked.—
None.’
For a moment Dantes was speechless;
then he remembered that these caves
might have been filled up by some acci-
dent, or even stopped up, for the sake of
greater security, by Cardinal Spada. The
point was, then, to discover the hidden en-
trance. It was useless to search at night,
and Dantes therefore delayed all investi-
gation until the morning. Besides, a signal
made half a league out at sea, and to
which The Young Amelia replied by a
similar signal, indicated that the moment
for business had come. The boat that now*
arrived, assured by the answering signal
that all was well, soon came in sight, white
and silent as a phantom, and cast anchor
within a cable’s length of shore.
Then the landing began. Dantes re-
flected, as he worked, on the shout of joy
which, with a single word, he could evoke
from all these men, if he gave utterance to
the one unchanging thought that pervaded
his heart; but, far from disclosing this
precious -secret, he almost feared that he
had already said too much, and by his
restlessness and continual questions, his
minute observations and evident pre-
occupation, aroused suspicions. Fortun-
ately, as regarded this circumstance at
least, his painful past gave his counten-
ance an indelible sadness, and the glim-
merings of gaiety seen beneath this cloud
were indeed but transitory.
No one had the slightest suspicion; and
when next day, taking a fowling-piece,
powder, and shot, Dantes declared his in-
tention to go and kill some of the wild


goats that were seen springing from rock
to rock, his wish was construed into a love
of sport, or a desire for solitude. How-
ever, Jacopo insisted on following him,
and Dantes did not oppose this, fearing if
he did so that he might incur distrust.
Scarcely, however, had they gone a quarter
of a league when, having killed a kid, he
begged Jacopo to take it to his comrades,
and request them to cook it, and when
ready to let him know by firing a gun.
This and some dried fruits and a flask of
Monte Pulciano, was the bill of fare.
Dantes went on, looking from time to
time behind and around about him. Hav-
ing reached the summit of a rock, he saw,
a thousand feet beneath him, his com-
panions, whom Jacopo had rejoined, and
who were all busy preparing the repast
which Edmond s skill as a marksman had
augmented with a capital dish.
Edmond looked at them for a moment
with the sad and gentle smile of a man
superior to his fellows. In two hours
time, said he, ‘these persons will depart
richer by fifty piastres each, to go and risk
their lives again by endeavouring to gain
fifty more; then they will return with a
fortune of six hundred francs, and waste
this treasure in some city with the pride
of sultans and the insolence of nabobs. At
this moment hope makes me despise their
riches, which seem to me contemptible.
Yet perchance to-morrow deception will
so act on me, that I shall, on compulsion,
consider such a contemptible possession as
the utmost happiness. Oh, no!’ exclaimed
Edmond, that will not be. The wise, un-
erring Faria could not be mistaken in this
one thing. Besides, it were better to die
than to continue to lead this low and
wretched life. Thus Dantes, who but
three months before had no desire but
liberty had now not liberty enough, and
panted for wealth. The cause was not in
Dantes, but in providence, who, while
limiting the power of man, has filled him
with boundless desires.
Meanwhile, by a cleft between two
walls of rock, following a path worn by a
torrent, and which, in all human proba-
bility, human foot had never before trod,
Dantes approached the spot where he sup-
posed the grottos must have existed.
Keeping along the shore, and examining
the smallest object with serious attention,
he thought be could trace, on certain
rocks, marks made by the hand of man.
Time, which encrusts all physical sub-
stances with its mossy mantle, as it invests
all things of the mind with forgetfulness,
seemed to have respected these signs,
which apparently had been made with
some degree of regularity, and probably
with a definite purpose. Occasionally the
marks were hidden under tufts of myrtle,
which spread into large bushes laden with
blossoms, or beneath parasitical lichen. So
Edmond had to separate the branches or
brush away the moss to know where the
guide-marks were. The sight of marks re-
newed Edmond’s fondest hopes. Might it
not have been the cardinal himself who
had first traced them, in order that they
might serve as a guide for his nephew in
the event of a catastrophe, which he could
not foresee would have been so complete.
1 his solitary place was precisely suited to
the requirements of a man desirous of
burying treasure. Only, might not these
betraying marks have attracted other eyes
than those for whom they were made? and
had the dark and wondrous island indeed
faithfully guarded its precious secret?
It seemed, however, to Edmond, who
was hidden from his comrades by the in-
equalities of the ground, that at sixty
paces from the harbour the marks ceased;
nor did they terminate at any grotto. A
large round rock, placed solidly on its
base, was the only spot to which they
seemed to lead. Edmond concluded that
perhaps instead of having reached the end
of the route he had only explored its be-
ginning, and he therefore turned round
and retraced his steps.
Meanwhile his comrades had prepared
the repast, had got some water from a
spring, spread out the fruit and bread, and
cooked the kid. Just at the moment when
they were taking the dainty animal from
the spit, they saw Edmond springing with
the boldness of a chamois from rock to
rock, and they fired the signal agreed
upon. The sportsman instantly changed
his direction, and ran quickly towards
them. But even while they watched his
daring progress, Edmond s foot slipped,


and they saw him stagger on the edge of
a rock and disappear. They all rushed to-
wards him, for all loved udmond in sp-.e
of his superiority; yet Jacopo reached him
first.
He found Edmond lying prone, bleed-
ing, and almost senseless. He had rolled
down a declivity of twelve or fifteen feet.
They poured a little rum down his throat,
and this remedy which had before been so
beneficial to him, produced the same ef-
fect as formerly. Edmond opened his
eyes, complained of great pain in his knee,
a feeling of heaviness in his head, and
severe pains in his loins. They wished to
carry him to the shore; but when they
touched him, although under Jacopo’s di-
rections, he declared, with heavy groans,
that he could not bear to be moved.
It may be supposed that Dantes did not
now think of his dinner, but he insisted
that his comrades who, had not his reason
for fasting, should have their meal. As for
himself, he declared that he had only need
of a little rest, and that when they re-
turned he should be easier. The sailors did
not require much urging. They were
hungry, and the smell of the roasted kid,
was very savoury and your tars are not
very ceremonious. An hour afterwards
they returned. All that Edmond had been
able to do was to drag himself about a
dozen paces forward to lean against a
moss-grown rock.
But, instead of growing easier, Dantes’
pains appeared to increase in violence.
The old patron, who was obliged to sail in
the morning in order to land his cargo on
the frontiers of Piedmont and France, be-
tween Nice and Frejus, urged Dantes to
try and rise. Edmond made great exer-
tions in order to comply; but at each ef-
fort he fell back, moaning and turning
pale.
‘He has broken, his ribs,’ said tl\e com-
mander, in a low voice. ‘No matter; he
is an excellent fellow, and we must not
leave him. We will try and carry him on
board the tartan.’ Dantes declared, how-
ever, that he would rather die where he
was than undergo the agony which the
slightest movement cost him. ‘Well,’ said
the patron, ‘let what may happen, it shall
never be said that we deserted a good
comrade like you. We will not go till
evening.’ This very much astonished the
sailors, although not one opposed it. The
patron was so strict that this was the first
time they had ever seen him give up an
enterprise, or even delay in its execution.
Dantes would not allow that any such in-
fraction of regular and proper rules should
be made in his favour. ‘ No, no,’ he said
to the patron, ‘I was awkward, and it is
just that I pay the penalty of my clumsi-
ness. Leave me a small supply of biscuit,
a gun, powder, and balls, to kill the kids
or defend myself at need, and a pickaxe,
so that I may build a shelter if you delay
in coming back for me.
‘But you’ll die of hunger,’ said the
patron.’—l would rather do so, was Ed-
mond’s reply, ‘than suffer the inexpressible
agonies which the slightest movement
causes me.’ The patron turned towards
his vessel, which was rolling on the swell
in the little harbor, and, with sails partly
set, would be ready for sea when her toilet
should be completed.
‘What are we to do, Maltese?’ asked the
captain. ‘We cannot leave you here so,
and yet we cannot stay. Go, go! ex-
claimed Dantes.
‘We shall be absent at least a week,’
said the patron, ‘and then we must run out
of our course to come here and take you
up again.’
‘Why,’ said Dantes, ‘if in two or three
days you hail any fishing-boat, desire
them to come here to me. I will pay
twenty-five piastres for my passage back
to Leghorn. If you do not come across
one, return for me.’ The patron shook his
head.
‘Listen, Captain Baldi; there s one
way of settling this,’ said Jacopo. ‘Do you
go, and I will stay and take care of the
wounded man.’
‘And give up your share of the venture,
said Edmond, ‘to remain with me?
‘Yes,’ said Jacopo, ‘and without any
hesitation.’
‘You are a good fellow and a kind-
hearted messmate,’ replied Edmond, ‘and
heaven will recompense you for your
generous intentions; but I do not wish
any one to stay with me. A day or two
of rest will set me up, and I hope I shall


find among the rocks certain herbs most
excellent for bruises.’
A peculiar smile passed over Dantes’
lips; he squeezed Jacopo’s hand warmly,
but nothing could shake his determination
to remain—and remain alone. The
smugglers left with Edmond what he had
requested and set sail, but not without
turning about several times, and each time
making signs of a cordial farewell, to
which Edmond replied with his hand only,
as if he could not move the rest of his
body. Then, when they had disappeared,
he said with a smile, —‘ Tis strange that it
should be among such men that we find
proofs of friendship and devotion. Then
he dragged himself cautiously to the top
of a rock, from which he had a full view
of the sea, and thence he saw the tartan
complete her preparations for sailing,
weigh anchor, and, balancing herself as
gracefully as a water-fowl ere it takes to
the wing set sail. At the end of an hour
she was completely out of sight; at least,
it was impossible for the wounded man to
see her any longer from the spot where he
was. Then Dantes rose more agile and
light than the kid among the myrtles and
shrubs of these wild rocks, took his gun in
one hand, his pickaxe in the other, and
hastened towards the rock on which the
marks he had noted terminated. ‘And
now.’ he exclaimed, remembering the tale
of the Arabian fisherman, which Faria
had related to him, now, open sesame!’
XXIV.
The sun had nearly reached the meri-
dian, and his scorching rays fell full on the
rocks, which seemed themselves sensible
of th e heat. Thousands of grasshoppers,
hidden in the bushes, chirped with a
monotonous and dull note; the leaves of
the myrtle and olive trees waved and
rustled in the wind. At every step that
Esmond took he disturbed the lizards
glittering with the hues of the emerald:
afar off he saw the wild goats bounding
from crag to crag. In a word, the island
was inhabited, yet Edmond felt himself
alone, guided by the hand of God. He
felt an indescribable sensation somewhat
akin to dread—that dread of the daylight
which even in the desert makes us fear we
are watched and observed. This feeling
was so strong, that at the moment when
Edmond was about to begin his labour, he
stopped, laid down his pickaxe, seized his
gun, mounted to the summit of the highest
rock, and from thence gazed round in
every direction.
But it was not upon Corsica, the very
houses of which he could distinguish; or
on Sardinia; or on the Island of Elba, with
its historical associations; or upon the al-
most imperceptible line that to the experi-
enced eye of a sailor alone revealed the
coast of Genoa the proud, and Leghorn
the commercial, that he gazed. It was at
the brigantine that had left in the morn-
ing, and the tartan that had just set sail,
that Edmond fixed his eyes. The first was
just disappearing in the straits of Boni-
facio; the other, following an opposite
direction, was about to round the Island
of Corsica. This sight reassured him. He
then looked at the objects near him. He
saw that he was on the highest point of
the island—a statue on this vast pedestal
of granite, nothing human appearing in
sight, while the blue ocean beat against
the base of the island, and covered it with
a fringe of foam. Then he descended with
cautious and slow step, for he dread lest an
accident similar to that he had so adroitly
feigned should happen in reality.
Dantes, as we have said, had traced the
marks along the rocks, and he had noticed
that they led to a small creek, which was
hidden like the bath of some ancient
nymph. This creek was sufficiently wide
at its mouth, and deep in the centre, to
admit of the entrance of a small vessel of
the lugger class, which would be perfectly
concealed from observation.
Then following the clew that, in the
hands of the Abbe Faria, had been so skil-
fully used to guide him through the
Daedalian labyrinth of probabilities, he
thought that the Cardinal Spada, anxious
not to be watched, had entered the creek,
concealed his little barque, followed the
line marked by the notches in the rock,
and at the end of it had buried his treasure.
It was this idea that had brought Dantes
back to the circular rock. One thing only
perplexed Edmond, and destroyed his
theory. How could this rock, which


weighed several tons, have been lifted to
this spot, without the aid of many men.
Suddenly an idea flashed across his mind.
Instead of raising it, thought he, they have
lowered it. And he sprang from the mck
in order to inspect the base on which it
had formerly stood. He soon perceived
that a slope had been formed, and the rock
had slid along this until it stopped at the
spot it now occupied. A large stone had
served as a wedge; flints and pebbles had
been inserted around it, so as to conceal
the orifice; this species of masonry had
been covered with earth, and grass and
weeds had grown there, moss had clung
to the stones, myrtle-bushes had taken
root, and the old rock seemed fixed to the
earth.
Dantes dug away the earth carefully,
and detected, or fancied he detected, the
ingenious artifice. He attacked this wall,
cemented by the hand of time, with his
pickaxe. After ten minutes’ labour the wall
gave way, and a hole large enough to in-
sert the arm was opened. Dantes went and
cut the strongest olive-tree he could find,
stripped off its branches, inserted it in the
hole, and used it as a lever. But the rock
was too heavy, and too firmly wedged, to
be moved by any one man, were he Her-
cules himself. Dantes saw that he must
attack the wedge. But how? He cast his
eyes around, and saw the horn full of
powder which his friend Jacopo had left
him. He smiled; the infernal invention
would serve him for this purpose. With
the aid of his pickaxe, Dantes, after the
manner of a labour-saving pioneer, dug a
mine beneath the upper rock and the one
that supported it, filled it with powder,
then made a match by rolling his hand-
kerchief in saltpetre. He lighted it and re-
tired. The explosion soon followed; the
upper rock was lifted from its base by the
terrific force of the powder; the lower
one flew into pieces; thousands of insects
escaped from the aperture Dantes had
previously formed, and a huge snake, like
the guardian demon of the treasure, rolled
himself along in darkening coils, and
disappeared.
Dantes approached the upper rock,
which now, without any support, leaned
towards the sea. The intrepid treasure-
seeker walked round it, and, selecting the
spot from whence it appeared most sus-
ceptible to attack, placed his lever in one
of the crevices and strained every nerve
to move the mass. The rock, already
shaken by the explosion, tottered on its
base. Dantes redoubled his efforts; he
seemed like one of the ancient Titans, who
uprooted the mountains to hurl against
the father of the gods. The rock yielded,
rolled over, bounded from point to point,
and finally disappeared in the ocean.
Ort the spot it had occupied was a cir-
cular space, exposing an iron ring let into
a square flag-stone. Dantes uttered a cry
of joy and surprise; never had a first at-
tempt been crowned with more perfect
success. He would fain have continued,
but his knees trembled, and his heart beat
so violently, and his sight became so dim,
that he was forced to pause. This feeling
lasted but a moment. Edmond inserted
his lever in the ring and exerted all his
strength; the flag-stone yielded, and dis-
closed steps that descended until they
were lost in the obscurity of a subter-
ranean grotto. Any one else would have
rushed on with a cry of joy. Dantes
turned pale, hesitated, and reflected.
‘Come,’ said he to himself, be a man. I
am accustomed to adversity. I must not
be cast down by the discovery that I have
been deceived. What, then, would be the
use of all I have suffered? The heart
breaks when, after having been elated by
flattering hopes, it sees all its illusions
destroyed. Faria has dreamed this; the
Cardinal Spada buried no treasure here;
perhaps he never came here, or if he did,
Caesar Borgia, the intrepid adventurer,
the stealthy and indefatigable plunderer,
has followed him. discovered his traces,
pursued them as I have done, raised the
stone, and descending before me, has left
me nothing.’ He remained motionless and
pensive, his eyes fixed on the gloomy
aperture that was open at his feet.
‘Now that I expect nothing, now that 1
no longer entertain the slightest hopes, the
end of this adventure becomes simply a
matter of curiosity.’ And he remained
again motionless and thoughtful.
‘Yes, yes; this is an adventure worthy
a place in the varied career of that royal


— -> /
.
i ■ f 5@f jfl8@5 1
., *tp| : ' • w'l
v ,-7^r
. <\ -. + *vr £ .-> P&M '* * - * &*£
■ ' . '' % * x % ; ' \- v * s jy ■' .<- - . ' V .> • T -- *
MM.RE lE4*S THE TREASURE OF, MONTE CRISTOI


bandit. This fabulous event formed but a
link in a long chain of marvels. i e s,
Borgia has been here, a torch in one hand,
a sword in the other, and within twenty
paces, at the foot of this rock, perhaps two
guards kept watch on land and sea, while
their master descended, as 1 am about to
descend, dispelling the darkness before
his awe-inspiring progress.
‘But what was the fate of the guards
who thus possessed his secret? asked
Dantes of himself. '
‘The fate,’ replied he, smiling, of those
who buried Alarie.
‘Yet, had he come,’ thought Dantes, he
would have found the treasure, and
Borgia, he who compared Italy to an arti-
choke, which he could devour leaf by leaf,
knew too well the value of time to waste
it in replacing this rock. I will go down.
Then he descended, a smile on his lips,
and murmuring that last word of human
philosophy, ‘Perhaps!’ But instead of the
darkness, and the thick and mephitic at
mosphere he had expected to find, Dantes
saw a dim and bluish light, which, as well
as the air, entered, not merely by the aper-
ture he had just formed, but by the inter-
stices and crevices of the rock which were
visible from without, and through which
he could distinguish the blue sky and the
waving branches of the evergreen oaks,
and the tendrils of the creepers that grew
from the rocks. After having stood a few
minutes in the cavern, the atmosphere of
which was rather warm than damp,
Dantes’ eyes, habituated as it was to dark-
ness, could pierce even to the remotest
angles of the cavern, which was of
granite that sparkled like diamonds.
‘Alas,’ said Edmond, smiling, ‘these are
the treasures the cardinal has left; and
the good abbe, seeing in a dream these
glittering walls, has indulged in fallacious
hopes.’
But he recalled to mind the words of the
will, which he knew by heart. In the
farthest angle of the second opening, said
the cardinal s will. He had only found the
first grotto; he had now to seek the
second. Dantes continued his search. He
reflected that this second grotto must
penetrate deeper into the island; he ex-
amined the stones, and sounded one part
of the wall where he fancied the opening
existed, masked for precaution s sake.
The pickaxe struck for a moment with a
dull sound that drew out on Dantes fore-
head large drops of perspiration. At last
it seemed to him that one part of the wall
gave forth a more hollow and deeper echo,
he eagerly advanced, and with the quick-
ness of perception that no one but a
prisoner possesses, saw that there, in al
probability, the opening must be.
However, he, like Caesar Borgia, knew
the value of time; and, in order to avoid
fruitless toil, he sounded all the other walls
with his pickaxe, struck the earth with the
butt of his gun, and finding nothing that
appeared suspicious, returned to that part
of the wall whence issued the consoling
sound he had before heard. He again
struck it, and with greater force. Then a
singular thing occurred. As he struck the
wall, pieces of stucco similar to that used
in the ground work of arabesques broke
off, and fell to the ground in flakes, expos-
ing a large white stone. The aperture of
the rock had been closed with stones, then
this stucco had been applied, and painte
to imitate granite. Dantes struck with the
sharp end of his pickaxe, which entered
some way between the interstices. It was
there he must dig. But by some strange
play of emotion, in proportion as the
proofs that Faria had not been deceived
became stronger, so did his heart give
way. and a feeling of discouragement
stole over him. This last proof, instead o
giving him fresh strength, deprived him of
it; the pickaxe descended, or rather fell;
he placed it on the ground, passed his hand
over his brow, and remounted the stairs,
alleging to himself, as an excuse a desire
to be assured that no one was watching
him, but in reality because he felt that he
was about to faint. The island was de-
serted, and the sun seemed to cover it with
its fiery glance—afar off a few small fish-
ing boats studded the bosom of the blue
ocean. ,
Dantes had tasted nothing, but he
thought not of hunger at such a moment;
he hastily swallowed a few drops of rum,
and again entered the cavern. The pick-
axe that had seemed so heavy, was now
like a feather in his grasp; he seized it, and


attacked the wall. After several blows he
perceived that the stones were not
cemented, but had been merely placed one
upon the other, and covered with stucco;
he inserted the point of his pickaxe, and
using the handle as a lever, with joy soon
saw the stone turn as if on hinges, and
fall at his feet. He had nothing more to
do now, but with the iron tooth of the
pickaxe to draw the stones towards him
one by one. The • aperture was already
sufficiently large for him to enter, but by
waiting, he could still cling to hope, and
retard the certainty of deception. At last,
after renewal hesitation, Dantes entered'
the second grotto. The second grotto was
lower and more gloomy than the first; the
air that could only enter by the newly
formed opening had the mephitic smell
Dantes was surprised not to find in the
outer cavern. He waited in order to allow 7
pure air to displace the foul atmosphere,
and then went on. At the left of the open-
ing was a dark and deep angle. But to
Dantes eye there was no darkness. He
glanced around this second grotto; was,
like the first, empty.
The treasure, if it existed, was buried in
this corner. The time had at length ar-
rived; two feet of earth removed, and
Dantes’ fate would be decided. He ad-
vanced towards the angle, and summoning
all his resolution, attacked the ground
with the pickaxe. At the fifth or sixth
blow the pickaxe struck against an iron
substance. Never did funeral knell, never
did alarm-bell, produce a greater effect on
the hearer. H.ad Dantes found nothing he
could not have become more ghastly pale.
He again struck his pickaxe into the earth,
and encountered the same resistance, but
not of the same sound. ‘lt is a casket of
wood bound with iron,’ thought he. At
this moment a shadow passed rapidly be-
fore the opening; Dantes seized his gun,
sprang through the opening, and mounted
the stair. A wild goat had passed before
the mouth of the cave, and was feeding
at a little distance. This would have been
a favorable occasion to secure his dinner;
but Dantes feared lest the report of his
gun should attract attention.
He thought a moment, cut a branch of
resinous tree, lighted it at the fire at which
the smugglers had prepared their break-
fast, and descended with this torch. He
wished to see everything. He approached
the hole he had dug, and now, with the
aid of the torch, saw that his pickaxe had
in reality struck against iron and wood.
He planted his torch in the ground and
resumed his labour. In an instant a space
three feet long by two feet broad was
cleared, and Dantes could see an oaken
coffer, bound with cut steel; in the middle
of the lid he saw engraved on a silver
plate, which was still untarnished, the
arms of the Spada family—viz., a sivord,
pale, on an oval shield, like all the Italian
armorial bearings, and surmounted by a
cardinals hat; Dantes easily recognized
them, Faria had so often drawn them for
him. There was no longer any doubt; the
treasure was there—no one would have
been at such pains •to conceal an empty
casket. In an instant he had cleared every
obstacle away, and he saw successively the
lock placed between two padlocks, and the
tvvo handles at each end, all carved as
things were carved at that epoch, when art
rendered the commonest metals precious.
Dantes seized the handles, and strove to
lift the coffer; it was impossible. He
sought to open it; lock and padlock were
fastened; these faithful guardians seemed
unwilling to surrender their trust. Dantes
inserted the sharp end of the pickaxe be-
tween the coffer and the lid, and pressing
with all his force on the handle, burst open
the fastenings. The hinges yielded in their
turn and fell, still holding in their grasp
fragments of the wood, and the chest was
open.
Edmond was seized with vertigo; he
cocked his gun and laid it beside him. He
then closed his eyes as children do in order
that they may see in the resplendent night
of their own imagination more stars than
are visible in the firmament; then he re-
opened them, and stood motionless with
amazement. Three compartments divided
the coffer. In the first, blazed piles of
go.den coin; in the second, were ranged
bars of unpolished gold, which possessed
nothing attractive save their value; in the
third Edmond grasped handfuls of dia-
monds, pearls, and rubies, which, as they
fell on one another, sounded like hail


i— the
H the
against glass. After having touched, felt,
examined these treasures, Edmond rushed
through the caverns like a man seized with
frenzy; he leaped on a rock, from whence
he could behold the sea. He was alone-
alone with these countless, these unheard
of treasures! he awake, or was it but
a dream?
He would fain have gazed upon his
gold, and yet he had not strength enough ;
for an instant he leaned his head in his
hands as if to prevent his senses from
leaving him, and then rushed madly about
the recks of Monte Cristo, terrifying the
wild goats and scaring the sea-fowls with
his wild cries and gestures; then he re-
turned, and, still unable to believe the evi-
dence of his senses, rushed into the grotto,
and found himself before this mine of gold
and jewels. This time he fell on his knees,
and, clasping his hands convulsively,
uttered a prayer intelligible to God alone.
He soon became calmer and more happy,
for only now did he begin to realise his
felicity. He then set himself to work to
count his fortune. There were a thousand
ingots of gold, each weighing from two to
three pounds; then he piled up twenty-five
thousand crowns, each worth about eighty
francs of our money, and bearing the
effigies of Alexander VI and his pre-
decessors; and he saw that the compart-
ment was not half empty. And he mea-
sured ten double handfuls of pearls, dia-
monds, and other gems,' many of which,
mounted by the most famous- workmen,
were valuable beyond their intrinsic
worth. Dantes saw the light gradually
disappear, and fearing to be surprised in
the cavern, left it, his gun in his hand. A
piece of biscuit and a small quantity of
rum formed his supper, and he snatched
a few hours’ sleep, lying over the mouth
of the cave.
It was a night of joy and terror, such
as this man of stupendous emotions had
already experienced twice or thrice in his
lifetime.
hr
si
of Blood
Showers
Long ago, there was a common superstition abroad in England
that, when it ‘rained blood’ evil of some kind was in store. A man
might be writing when, out of a cloud covered sky above him, drops
of red would fall to stain his clean white writing paper. He became
frightened and hurried indoors, wondering what dread thing might d
be in store for him. The drops would be bright crimson and would j
stain the paper. But a simple explanation has been found. The red
drops were caused by red earth from the roads being drawn up into \
the sky. When the rain fell, in the usual way, it was stained with | I
red earth —and looked like drops of blood falling from heaven.


"I
* „* t-" A ; "•*, ,
* ■ '■*'■ ‘ “ *' ■' *'***‘', ■•.',“ *• .«':•' ' v ’r
■ C A s • _-• . 4y s,'-«S&v . / ,'*■ •> .'?/ ' - ** E* - I
■ ■ I ■
li a * I Jr
■ nBzlw Vl S y s - \
* f j£ H « < 4 -|* 1 ii^
f ■ ' • w<4*M&


IN a great city in China lived a poor
woman and her son called Aladdin.
Aladdin would do no work, but plajed
in the streets all the day long. In vain his
mother pleaded with him to help her, but
he was too careless and would run away
and hide.
One day a strange man called at
Aladdin’s home and said to his mother,
Your poor dead husband was my brother.
I have been away from China for many
years but, now that I have returned, I
would like to take care of both you and
your son, for my brother’s sake.’ Now,
the poor widow did not know that her
husband had a brother, and she told this to
the stranger. But he was able to convince
her, and, when he bought new clothes for
both herself and Aladdin, she could doubt
him no longer. Instead, she thought he
must be a good man, and, indeed, the true
brother of her dear dead husband.
But, neither Aladdin or his mother
knew that the stranger was really a wicked
magician who was no relation at all to
Aladdin’s dead father. Instead, he thought
that he could make good use of Aladdin
for his own wicked ends, and therefore
pretended to be friendly.
One day, the stranger took Aladdin out
walking, and when they came to a spot
hidden between two mountains, the
magician said to Aladdin, ‘Gather some
sticks and I will make a fire. Then I will
show you many wonderful things.’
Aladdin did as the magician told him and
soon there was a bright fire blazing. The
magician threw some incense on to the
fire, and in a moment came a noise like
thunder and thick clouds of smoke.
When the smoke cleared away, Aladdin
could see that, where the fire had been,
there was now a large stone set in the
earth, with a ring through it. Aladdin be-
came very frightened and started to run
away, but the magician hit him with such
force, Aladdin was knocked to the ground.
Now,’ said the magician, ‘Beneath this
stone lies a treasure which will make you
the richest man in the world. Nobody but
you must touch the ring in the stone or
enter the cave. You must do everything
and, if you do just as 1 say, everything
will be well.’ The magician then com-
manded Aladdin to lift the stone, and,
when Aladdin had done this, he could see
a short flight of steps leading down to a
dark cave.
The magician took a ring from his
finger and gave it to Aladdin saying, ‘Take
this ring. As long as you obey me, it will
protect you from evil, and we shall be rich
beyond our wildest dreams.’ Then he told
Aladdin that, when he reached the cave,
he would pass through three long halls,
one of which would be filled with gold,
one with silver and one with jewels. But
Aladdin was not to touch any of these.
Instead, he was to go on until he came to
a garden there, in the garden, he
would find a lighted lamp. This he was to
bring to the magician.
So Aladdin went down the steps into
the darkness, and went on until he found
the lamp. Then he commenced to return
but, as he passed through the halls,
Aladdin saw some beautiful trees. They
were laden with fruit which he had never
before seen —large red fruit, green and
purple fruit and other beautiful colours.
Aladdin picked many of the fruit and
stuffed them into his pockets. These were
not really fruit, as Aladdin had thought,
but were precious stones —diamonds,
rubies and pearls, and were very valuable.
Soon Aladdin arrived at the mouth of
the cave and he could see the stranger
waiting for him. Help me out,’ called
Aladdin, but the magician would not dp
so —because, in order that the magic
would work, Aladdin had to do everything
for himself. So. when the magician re-
fused to help him, unless Aladdin gave
him the lamp first of all, Aladdin became
very annoyed and refused to give up the
lamp unless he was first helped out of the
cave.
Then the magician flew into a rage. He
flung more incense on to the stone, and in
a moment, the stone had moved into place
again, and Aladdin was a prisoner in the
strange, dark cave. Aladdin did not know
what to do. He put his hands together to
pray and, in dcfing so, accidently rubbed
the ring which the magician had given
him.


-. . wV* 'Y/’ff y „— 3iaM«flWaM& Sje
" -J_^~. *, # ’.
hS^B^B^BB65k5?^\'\ ,v * 1—t I f fZ// y «P^iiir^
’•ft '^^ttnoSSlBKBSSmittffiiAwi^'tit^vr^iL
?* ■- imp - ft- i t tLl a K | : i^g|ia|fME»
> * V * f ■
Jr.:' x V'JSb/t m. .
• ■!t'* Wi . ■*« Vi • v * -f Jf * 3K «®l^
f *°* * 8* ** ik "V'’ ’ J> v" ”
OMF 1 1 P||I P" W, ' 11 i n V 1 I «$$$ yf -
*i „-■■ J ,^’ , I >- / ' s
ALADDIN WAS A PRISONER IN THE DARK CAVE


f • • ’ ij
Immediately a most terrible-looking
genie appeared before Aladdin! lam the
slave of the ring,’ said the genie. What
is your command, master?
Aladdin was very frightened, but man-
aged to tell the genie that he wished to be
out of the cave, and, almost before the
'wish was out of his mouth, he found him-
self standing outside the cave, on the spot
where the magician had left him.
Aladdin ran home and, when he told his
mother, she Was very angry with the
wicked magician who had so deceived
them.
Next morning, Aladdin and his mother
had no money to buy food, so they de-
cided to sell the old lamp. Aladdin com-
menced to rub the lamp, to make it bright
and shiny and easier to sell, but, at the
first rub, an enormous genie appeared, and
cried, I am the slave of the Lamp! What
do you command? Of course, the widow
became very frightened, but Aladdin
stepped forward boldly, and said Bring us
food!’—-and, in an instant, the table was
covered with a costly feast
Aladdin’s mother could hardly believe
her eyes. She had never seen a genie be-
fore. This went on for some days, so that
Aladdin and his mother were never
hungry.
Now, it happened that the daughter of
the Emperor came riding by with her
handmaidens, and, although everybody
had been bidden by the Emperor, on pain
of death, to hide so that they would not see
the royal Princess, Aladdin peeped from
his window as the Princess passed by. She
was so really beautiful, Aladdin decided
that he would not be contented until he
had married her.
So Aladdin told his mother to take the
pieces of coloured glass which he had
found in the cave —he knew now from a
friend that the stones were precious jewels
—to the Emperor, and ask the hand of
his daughter in marriage.
His Mother thought Aladdin was mad.
‘How can a poor boy like you marry the
daughter of the Emperor?’ she cried. But,
nevertheless, she went to the palace with
the jewels and presented them to the


Emperor, who was delighted with his
gift.
When Aladdin s mother asked for the
hand of the princess in marriage to her
son, the Emperor replied, Such a gift as
you have made to me is well worthy of
my daughter.’ But he asked Aladdin’s
mother to leave the matter for - three
months, when he would make a decision.
Now, the Grand Vizier of the Emperor
hoped that, during the three months, he
would be able to persuade the Emperor to
allow his own son to marry the princess.
And he was able to do this. Two months
after the poor widow had seen the Em-
peror, Aladdin was horrified to learn that
the princess was to marry the son of the
Grand Vizier. He summoned the slave of
the lamp on the day of the princess’ wed-
ding. ‘Bring to me here to-night the Em-
peror’s daughter, who is to be married to-
day to the son of the Grand Vizier!’ he
commanded.
That night, after the wedding, the
Emperor’s daughter was brought by the
genie to Aladdin’s home, and Aladdin sat
and talked gently to her throughout the
night.
This went on for a month, and although
the new husband tried to tell the Emperor
what was happening—that each night his
bride was carri'ed from him—the Emperor
thought that the young couple were just
quarrelling, and dismissed the matter.
At the end of the three months —which
was the time that Aladdin’s mother had
been told to wait —the Emperor could see
that his daughter and her husband were
unhappy, and so he had the marriage
cancelled.
When Aladdin’s mother went again to
the Emperor, he said, ‘Before your son can
marry my daughter he must send me forty
white slaves and forty black slaves, all
beautifully dressed, and bearing gifts.
Then we will see!’
So the mother went home and told
Aladdin, who at once summoned the genie
of the lamp, and bade him send the slaves
bearing gifts, as the Emperor had desired.
All the people in the city stood amazed
as the slaves walked through the streets,
bearing upon their heads large dishes, on
which precious stones were heaped.
The Emperor was amazed at the gift,
and when Aladdin s mother advanced and
begged that the Emperor now consent to
the marriage of the princess to her son,
the Emperor said that he would do so
gladly.
So the mother ran joyfully home, and
when Aladdin heard the wonderful news,
he rubbed the lamp and commanded the
genie to bring the most wonderful gown
in the land to wear, and also rich clothing
for his mother. They were to have purses
of gold and silver, many beautiful horses
and handsome slaves.
All these the genie brought, and when
they arrived at the palace, the Emperor
was so delighted and pleased with Alad-
din, that the wedding feast was at once
prepared.
When the Emperor had granted Alad-
din some land just outside the palace,
Aladdin secretly rubbed the lamp and told
the genie to build him a palace richer than
the Sultan s of gold and precious stones.
Everybody in the city was astounded at
the marvellous palace which had sprung
up as if by magic during the day. That
night, Aladdin and the princess were mar-
ried, and for many years they lived hap-
pily together, for they loved each other
very much.
But one day, the old wicked magician
returned to the city, and great was his
rage to find that Aladdin, by the help of
the magic lamp, had become so wealthy
and so powerful. He disguised himself as
a poor man and went about the street cry-
ing ‘New Lamps for Old! New Lamps
for old! The people thought he was mad
—giving away good, new lamps for old
ones, but the Princess heard him and sud-
denly remembered the old lamp which
her husband kept in his bed-room. She
ran to get it and took it to the wicked
magician, who chuckled secretly to him-
self. She gave him the magic lamp and he
gave her an ordinary new cheap lamp.
Then, as fast as he could, the magician
made his way to a lonely spot and there he
rubbed the lamp. When the genie ap-
peared, the magician ordered him to take
Aladdin s castle, together with the prin-
cess and all the slaves, as well as the
magician himself, to Africa.


46 ALADDIN
"FEW. LAMPS FOR OLD /”


Sometimes we laugh at people whom
11* •• • i *
Wear something new on New Year’s
we call superstitious — but I think almost
all of us believe? the number 1 3 to be un-
lucky, and how many of us will walk
Day or you will not get many new things
during the year.
beneath a ladder—for fear of what might
To always have money in your pocket,
befall?
put small money-spiders into your poc-
But, in 1831, there were many inter-
esting superstitions— most of which have
ket.
In Berkshire, England, at that time, at
died out to-day. For instance;
each full moon, young girls would go into
If a cat sneezes, every person in the
the field and call to the moon:
4 IV I _ -
house will have colds.
INew moon, new moon, I hail thee!
It is unlucky to cut you finger nails on
Sunday.
By all the virtue in thy body.
Grant this night that I may see
He who my true love is to be,’
Bubbles upon tea denote kisses.
(Continued on page 74.)
When the Emperor awoke in the morn-
ing, he was amazed to find that the fine
palace of Aladdin, and his own daughter,
were no longer there!
. When Aladdin returned from his jour-
ney, he realised what must have happened.
But he did not despair. He rubbed the
magic ring which was still with him, and,
although the genie of the ring was not so
strong as the genie of the lamp, it was
strong enough to obey his command and
take him to his dear young wife.
This was done in a momenf and the
princess, looking sadly out of a window in
Africa, saw Aladdin standing beneath. He
pulled himself up through the window and
learned that the magician kept the lamp
always with him. So Aladdin gave some
powder to the princess and directed her to
put it in the magician s drink when next
he came to visit her. This she did and,
when the magician drank, he fell dead on
the floor.
Aladdin came quickly from his hiding
place and, taking up the lamp and rubbing
it, he commanded the genie to transport
the palace aqd everybody in it back to
China.
The following morning, when the Em-
peror awoke, he rubbed his eyes in dis-
belief when, through his window, he saw
Aladdin’s palace back again—just as if it
had never disappeared. He ran to em-
brace his daughter—and, now that the
magician was dead, they were all able to
live happily together for ever afterwards.
Superstitions of Olden Days


• — I
. ' ' "' ’ * j
/ £rj[*^
ft Ivfw*
— ' - —'
i llllii"
■
I
5 .•
j
v% - .
%■- ' ■ ife* : / ■- ■ - ■ '/',J\ f 1l
{*jfe . ; • ■
■ :
• *


NATHANIEL HAW THORNE, from whose story of Sunken Treasure the fol-
lowing tale has been taken, spent his childhood in a little town by the seaside.
His father died ivhen he was very small, so he teas brought up with only his
three sisters for companions. He had no boy friends of his own age, and he
teas lonely. But, to while away his loneliness, he loved to write stories —
and, when he reached manhood, he became one of the most famous American
writers of his day.
HERE is a handsome old-fashioned
room, with a large open cupboard at
one end, in which is displayed a
magnificent geld cup with some other
splendid articles of gold and silver plate.
In another part of the room, opposite to a
tall looking-glass, stands our beloved
chair, newly polished and adorned with a
gorgeous cushion of crimson velvet tufted
with gold.
In the chair sits a man of strong and
sturdy frame, whose face has been
roughened by northern tempests and
blackened by the burning sun of the West
Indies. He wears an immense wig flowing
down over his shoulders. His coat has a
wide embroidery of golden foliage, and his
waistcoat is flowered over with gold. His
red, rough hands, which have done many
a good day’s work with the hammer and
adze, afe half covered by the delicate lace
ruffles at his wrists. On a table lies his
silver-hilted sword, and in a corner of the
room stands his gold-headed cane, made
of a beautifully polished West India wood.
Such an aspect as this did Sir William
Phipps present when he sat in Grand-
father’s chair after the king had appointed
him governor of Massachusetts.
But Sir William Phipps had not always
worn a gold-embroidered coat, nor always
sat so much at his ease as he did in Grand-
father s chair. He was a poor man’s son,
and was born in the province of Maine,
where he used to tend sheep upon the hills
in his boyhood and youth. Until he had
grown to be a man he did not even know
how to read and write. Tired of tending
sheep, he next apprenticed himself to a
ship-carpenter, and spent about four years
in hewing the crooked limbs of oak trees
into knees for vessels. »
In 1 673, when he was twenty-two years
old, he came to Boston, and soon after-
ward was married to a widow who had
property enough to set him up in business.
It was not long, however, before he lost
all the money that he had acquired by his
marriage and became a poor man again.
Still he was not discouraged. He often
told his wife that some time or other he
should be very rich and would build a
fair brick house’ in the Green Lane of
Boston.
Several years passed away, and William
Phipps had not yet gained the riches which
he promised to himself. During this time
he had begun to follow the sea for a living.
In the year 1 684 he happened to hear of a
Spanish ship which had been cast away
near the Bahama Islands, and which was
supposed to contain a great deal of gold
and silver. Phipps went to the place in a
small vessel, hoping that he should be able
to recover some of the treasure from the
wreck. He did not succeed, however, in <
fishing up gold and silver enough to pay
the expenses of his voyage.
But before he returned he was told of
another Spanish ship or galleon which had
been cast away near Porto de la Plata. She
had now lain as much as fifty years be-
neath the waves. This old ship had been
laden with immense wealth, and hitherto
nobody had thought of the possibility of
recovering any part of it from the deep
sea which was rolling and tossing it about.
But, though it was now an old story, and
the most aged people had almost forgotten
that such a vessel had been wrecked,
William Phipps resolved that the sunken
treasure should again be brought to light.
He went to London and obtained ad-
mittance to King James, who had not yet
been driven from his throne. He told the
king of the vast wealth that was lying at
the bottom of the sea. King James listened
with attention, and thought this a fine
opportunity to fill his treasury with
Spanish gold. He appointed William
Phipps to be captain of a vessel called t 1
Rose Algier, carrying eighteen guns


ninety-five men. So now he was Captain
Phipps of the English navy.
Captain Phipps sailed from England in
the Rose Algier, and cruised for nearly
two years in the West Indies, endeavour-
ing to find the wreck of the Spanish ship.
But the sea is so wide and deep that it is
no easy matter to discover the exact spot
where a sunken vessel lies. The prospect
of success seemed very small, and most
people would have thought that Captain
Phipps was as far from having money
enough to build a ‘fair brick house’ as he
was while he tended sheep.
The seamen of the Rose Algier became
discouraged and gave up all hope of mak-
ing their fortunes by discovering the
Spanish wreck. They wanted to compel
a much better prospect, they thought, of
growing rich by plundering vessels which
still sailed in the sea than by seeking for
a ship that had lain beneath the waves full
half a century. They broke out in open
mutiny, but were finally mastered by
Phipps and compelled to obey his orders.
It would have been dangerous, however,
to continue much longer at sea with such
a crew of mutinous sailors, and, besides,
the Rose Algier was leaky and unsea-
worthy. So Captain Phipps judged it best
to return to England.
Before leaving the West Indies he met
with a Spaniard, an old man, who remem-
bered the wreck of the Spanish ship and
gave him directions how to find the very
spot. It was a reef of rocks a few leagues
from Porto de la Plata.
On his arrival in England, therefore,
Captain Phipps solicited the king to let him
have another vessel and send him back
again to the West Indies. But King James,
who had probably expected that the Rose
Algier would return laden with gold, re-
fused to have anything more to do with
the affair. Phipps might never have been
able to renew the search if the Duke oi
Albemarle and some other noblemen had
not lent their assistance. They fitted out a
ship and gave the command to Captain
°hipps. He sailed from England and
ived safely at Porto de la Plata, where
ssisted his men to build a large boat.
The boat was intended for the purpose
of going closer to the reef of rocks than a
large vessel could safely venture.. When
it was finished the captain sent several
men to it to examine the spot where the
Spanish ship was said to have been
wrecked. They were accompanied by
some Indians who were skilful divers and
could go down a great way into the depths
of the sea.
The boat’s crew proceeded to the reef
of rocks and rowed round and round it a
great many times. They gazed down into
the water, which was so transparent that
it seemed as if they could have seen the
gold and silver at the bottom had there
been any of those precious metals there.
Nothing, however, could they see —noth-
ing more valuable than a curious sea-
shrub which was growing beneath the
water in a crevice of the reef of rocks. It
flaunted to and fro with the swell and re-
flux of the waves, and looked as bright and
beautiful as if its leaves were gold.
‘We won’t go back empty-handed,’
cried an English sailor, and then he spoke
to one of the Indian divers: ‘Dive down
and bring me that pretty sea-shrub there.
That’s the only treasure we shall find.’
Down plunged the diver, and soon rose
dripping from the water, holding the sea-
shrub in his hand. But he had learned
some news at the bottom of the sea.


' r ~ y. ijj ''■£ i jk. * W
‘There are some ship’s guns,’ said he the
moment he had drawn breath, ‘some great
cannon, among the rocks near where the
shrub was growing.'
No sooner had he spoken than the
English sailors knew that they had found
the very spot where the Spanish galleon
had been wrecked so many years before.
The other Indian divers immediately
plunged over the boat s side and swam
headlong down, groping among the rocks
and sunken cannon. In a few moments
one of them rose above the water with a
heavy lump of silver in his arms. The
single lump was worth more than a
thousand dollars. The sailors took it into
the boat, and then rowed back as speedily
as they could, being in haste to inform
Captain Phipps of their good luck.
But, confidently as the captain had
hoped to find the Spanish wreck, yet, now
that it was really found, the news seemed
too good to be true. He could not believe
it till the sailors showed him the lump of
silver.
Thanks be to God!’ then cried Captain
Phipps.
We shall every man of us make our
fortunes!
Hereupon the captain and all the crew
set to work with iron rakes and great
hooks and lines fishing for gold and silver
at the bottom of the sea. Up came the
treasure in abundance. Now they beheld
a table of solid silver, once the property of
an old Spanish grandee. Now they drew
up a golden cup fit for the King of Spain
to drink his wine out of. Perhaps the bony
hand of its former owner had been grasp-
ing the precious cup and was drawn up
along with masses of silver bullion. There
were also precious stones among the trea-
sure, glittering and sparkling so that it is


a wonder how the radiance could have
been concealed.
There is something sad and terrible in
the idea of snatching all this wealth from
the devouring ocean, which had possessed
it for such a length of years. It seems as
if men had no right to make themselves
rich with it. It ought to have been left
with the skeletons of the ancient Spaniards
who had been drowned when the ship was
wrecked, and whose bones were * now
scattered among the gold and silver.
But Captain Phipps and his crew w r ere
troubled with no such thoughts as these.
After a day or two they lighted on another
part of the wreck, where they found a
great many bags of silver dollars. But no-
body could have guessed that these were
money-bags. By remaining so long in the
salt water they had become covered over
with a crust which had the appearance of
stone, so that it was necessary to break
them in pieces with hammers and axes.
When this was done a stream of silver
dollars gushed out upon the deck of the
vessel. »
The whole value of the recovered trea-
sure —plate, bullion, precious stones, and
all —was estimated at more than two
millions of dollars. It was dangerous even
to look at such a vast amount of wealth.
A sea-captain who had assisted Phipps in
the enterprise utterly lost his reason at the
sight of it. He died two years afterward,
still raving about the treasures that lie at
the bottom of the sea. It would have been
better for this man if he had left the
skeletons of the shipwrecked Spaniards in
quiet possession of their wealth.
Captain Phipps and his men continued
to fish up plate, bullion, and dollars as
plentifully as ever till their provisions
grew short. Then, as they could not feed
upon gold and silver any more than old
King Midas could, they found it necessary
to go in search of better sustenance.
Phipps resolved to return to England. He
arrived there in 1687, and was received
there with great joy by the Duke of Albe-
marle and other English lords who had
fitted out the vessel. Well they might re-
joice, for they took by far the greater part
of the treasure to themselves.
The captain’s share, however, was
enough to make him comfortable for the
rest of his days. It also enabled him to
fulfil his promise to his wife by building a
fair brick house’ in the green Lane of
Boston. The Duke of Albemarle sent Mrs.
Phipps a magnificent gold cup worth at
least five thousand dollars. Before Cap-
tain Phipps left London, King James
made him a knight, so that, instead of the
obscure ship-carpenter who had formerly
dwelt among them, the inhabitants of
Boston welcomed him on his return as the
rich and famous Sir William Phipps.
He was a man who dreamed, and who
made his dream come true.
What treasure of fabulous millions still
lies beneath the secret waters of the great
oceans of the world—waiting for young
adventurers, such as Phipps, to bring it to
life again?
Shall we ever know?


pH. MU. 1 ' . „ ■ «.
E-. ' 1
.. *■->•- : "■..?.■•■:
... • .... •• ■., \ .. • ■■■•. ■. . .... , . • ■-;. '■ •■•' . - . ■•
>*?/■£*' v , - , ■ - . .
' .
. ,
CS9HB
B . -*’ 11
®ii ; .
Sp;;l?#s# .'• ■; - ' :
® <•>


When the name of Edgar Allan Poe is mentioned, we think of his tales of
mystery or horror, and it is for these that he is best known. Be
written the first detective story, ‘Murders m the Kite Morgue, and that
'aUMetective stories written sin* then hare been modelled m one way or an.other
upon Poe’s tale. However. he liked adventure. too, and the story of the Gold
Bug., mired as it Is with mystery, is one of Ins most entertaining.
MANY years ago I became friendly
with a Mr. William Legrand. He
was of an ancient family, and had
once been wealthy; but a series of mis-
fortunes had reduced him to want. I °
avoid the pity of his friends, he left New
Orleans, the city of his forefathers, and
took up his residence at Sullivans Is-
land.
This island is a very unusual one. It
consists of little else than the sea sand,
and is about three miles long. Its breadth
at no point exceeds a quarter of a mile.
No trees of any magnitude are to be seen.
Not far from the eastern or more re-
mote end of the island, Legrand had built
himself a small hut, which he occupied
when I first, by mere accident, made his
acquaintance. This soon ripened into
friendship—for there was much in the
man to excite interest and esteem,
found him well educated, with unusual
powers of mind, but subject to moods o
alternate enthusiasm and melancholy. He
had with him many books, but rarely read
them. His chief amusements were gun-
ning and fishing, or sauntering along the
beach, in quest of shells or entomological
specimens;—his collection of the latter
might have been envied by a Swammer-
damm.
In these excursions he was usually ac-
companied by an old negro, called Jupi-
ter, but who could not be induced,- nei-
ther by threats nor by promises, to aban-
don what he considered his right of at-
tendance upon the footsteps of his young
‘Massa Will,’ in spite of his master’s pov-
erty.
The winters in the latitude of Sulli-
van’s Island are seldom very severe, and
in the fall of the year it is a rare event
indeed when a fire is considered neces-
sary. About the middle of October, there
occurred, however, a day of remarkable
chilliness. Just before sunset I scrambled
my way through the evergreens to the hut
of my friend, whom I had not visited for
several weeks —my residence being at
that time in Charleston, a distance of ninQ
miles from the island, while the facilities
of passage and re-passage were very far
behind those of the present day. Upon
reaching the hut I rapped, as was my cus-
tom, and getting no reply, sought for
the key where I knew it was secreted,
unlocked the door and went in. A fine
fire was blazing upon the hearth. It was
a novelty, and by no means an ungrate-
ful one. I threw off an overcoat, took an
armchair by the crackling logs, and await-
ed patiently the arrival of my hosts.
Soon after dark they arrived, and gave
me a most friendly welcome. Jupiter,
grinning from ear to ear, bustled about to
prepare some supper. Legrand was in one
of his fits —how else shall I term them?
—of enthusiasm. He had found a scara-
baeus beetle or bug, which he believed to
be totally new, but in respect to which he
wished to have my opinion on the mor-
row.
And why not to-night? I asked, rub-
bing my hands over the blaze.
‘Ah; if I had only known you were
here!’ said Legrand, ‘but it’s so long since
I saw you; and how could I know that
you would pay me a visit this very night
of all others? As I was coming home I
met a lieutenant from the fort, and, very
foolishly, I lent him the bug; so it will
be impossible for you to see it until the
morning. Stay here to-night, and I will
send Jup. down for it at sunrise. It is the
liveliest thing in creation!’
‘What! —sunrise ? ’
‘Nonsense! No—the bug. It is of a bril-
liant gold colour —with two jet black


spots near one end of the back, and an-
other, somewhat longer, at the other.
You never saw a more brilliant metal-
lic lustre than the scales emit—but of this
you cannot judge till to-morrow. In the
meantime I can give you some idea of
the shape.’ Saying this, he seated himself
at a small table, on which were a pen and
ink, but no paper.
He looked for some in a drawer, but
found none.
‘Never mind,’ said he at length, ‘this
will answer’; and he drew from his waist-
coat pocket a scrap of what I took to be
dirty foolscap, and made upon it a rough
drawing with the pen. While he did this,
1 kept my seat by the fire, for I was still
chilly. When the design was completed,
he handed it to me without rising. As I
received it, a loud growl was heard, suc-
ceeded by a scratching at the door. Jupi-
ter opened it, and, a large Newfoundland,
belonging to Legrand, rushed in, leaped
upon my shoulders, and loaded me with
caresses; for I had shown him much at-
tention during previous visits. When his
gambols were over, I looked at the paper,
and found myself not a little puzzled at
what my friend had depicted.
Well! I said, after contemplating it
for some minutes, ‘this is a strange bug,
1 must confess; new to me: never saw
anything like it before—unless it was a
skull, or a death s-head—w’hich it more
nearly resembles than anything else
that has come under my observation.’
A death s-head! echoed Legrand—
Oh—yes—well, it has something of that
appearance upon paper, no doubt. The
two upper black spots look like eyes,
eh? and the longer one at the bottom like
a mouth—and then the shape of the
whole is oval.’
Perhaps so, said I; but, Legrand, I
fear you are no artist. I must wait until
1 see the beetle itself, if I am to form an
idea of its personal appearance.’
‘Well, I don’t know,’ said he, a little
nettled, ‘I draw fairly well—should do it
* " ■«- ■
at least—have had good masters, and flat-
ter myself that I am not quite a block-
head.’
‘But, my dear fellow, you are joking
then,’ said I; ‘this is a very passable skull
—indeed, I may say that it is a very ex-
cellent skull, and your bug must be the
queerest bug in the world if it resembles
it. But where are the antennae?’
The antennae! said Legrand, who
seemed to be getting unaccountably
warm upon the subject; I am sure you
must see the antennae. I made them as
distinct as they are in the original insect,
and I presume that is sufficient.’
. ‘Well, well,’ I said, ‘perhaps you have
—still I don’t see them’; and I handed
him the paper without additional remark,
not wishing to ruffle his temper; but I
was much surprised at the turn affairs
had taken; his ill-humour puzzled me —
and, as for the drawing of the beetle,
there were positively no antennae visible
and the w'hole did bear a very close re-
semblance to a death’s-head.
He received the paper very peevishly,
and was about to crumple it, apparently
to throw it in the fire, when a casual
glance at the design seemed suddenly to
rivet his attention. In an instant his face
grew violently red—in another as ex-


Cfl Jp*
!#£ DO(jt LOADED ME WITH CARESSES


cessively pale. For some minutes he con-
tinued to examine the drawing closely
where he sat. At length he arose, and pro-
ceeded to seat himself upon a sea-chest
in the farthest corner of the room. Here
again he made an anxious examination of
the paper; turning it in all directions. He
said nothing, however, and his conduct
greatly astonished me; yet 1 thought it
wise not to disturb the growing moodi-
ness of his temper by any comment. Pre-
sently he took from his coat pocket a
wallet, placed the paper carefully in it,
and deposited both in a writing-desk,
which he locked. He now grew more
calm; but his original air of enthusiasm
had quite disappeared. Yet he seemed not
so much sulky as thoughtful. I had in-
tended to pass the night at the hut, as 1
had frequently done before, but, seeing
my host in this mood, I deemed it pro-
per to leave. He did not ask me to re-
main, but, as I departed, he shook my
hand with even more than his usual
friendliness.
It was about a month after this (and
during the interval I had seen nothing
of Legrand) when I received a visit, at
Charleston, from his man, Jupiter. I had
never seen the good old negro look so
dispirited, and I feared that some serious
disaster had befallen my friend.
‘Well, Jup.,’ said I, ‘what is the matter
now? —how is your master?’
‘Why, to speak de troof, massa, him
not so berry well as mought be.’
‘Not well! I am truly sorry to hear it.
What does he complain of?’
‘Dar! dat’s it! —nebber plain of notin
—but him berry sick for all dat,’
‘Very sick, Jupiter!—why didn’t you
say so at once? Is he confined to bed?’
‘No dat he ain’t! —he ain’t find nowhar
—dat’s just whar de shoe pinch—my
mind is got to be berry hebby bout poor
Massa Will.’,
Jupiter, I should like to understand
what it is you are talking about. You say
your master is sick. Hasn’t he told you
what ails him?’
‘Why, massa, ’tain’t worf while for
to get mad about de matter —Massa Will
say noffin at all ain’t de matter wid him
—but den what make him go about look-
ing dis here way, wid he head down and
he soldiers up, and as white as a gose?
And den he keep a syphon all de tim£.’
‘Keeps a-what, Jupiter?’
‘Keeps a syphon wid de figgurs on de
slate —de queerest figgurs I ebber did see.
I’se gettin’ to be skeered, I tell you. Hab
for to keep mighty tight eye pon him
noovers. Todder day he gib he slip fore
de sun up, and was gone de whole ob de
blessed day. When he did come he look
so berry poorly.’
Eh?—what?—ah yes! But can you
form no idea of what has occasioned
this illness, or rather this change of con-
duct? Has anything unpleasant happened
since I saw you?’
No, massa, day ain’t bin nofhn on-
pleasant since den—twas fore den I’m
feared —’twas de berry day you was
dare.’
How? What do you mean?’
Why, Massa, I mean de bug—dare
now.
The what?’
De bug—l’m berry sartain dat Massa
Will bin bit somewhere bout de head by
dat goole-bug.’
‘And what cause have you, Jupiter,
for such a supposition?’
‘Claws enuff, massa, and mouff too. I
nebber did see such a deuced bug—he
kick and he bite ebery thing what cum
near him. Massa Will cotch him fuss, but
had for to let him go gin mighty quick, I
tell you —den was de time he must ha
got de bite. I didn’t like de look ob de
bug mouff, myself, no how, so I wouldn’t
take hold ob him wid my finger, but I
cotch him wid a piece ob paper dat 1
found. I rap him up in de paper and
stuff piece ob it in he mouff—dat was de
way.
And you think, then, that your mas-
ter was really bitten by the beetle, and
that the bite made him sick?’
I don’t tink noffin about it —I nose it.
W hat make him dream bout de goole so


much, if tain’t cause he bit by the goole-
bug? Ise heard bout dem goole-bugs fore
dis.’ '
But how do you know he dreams
about gold?’
‘How I know? why, cause he talk
about it in he sleep—dat s how 1 nose.
‘Well, Jup., perhaps you are right; but
what do you want me to do?’
‘What de matter, massa?’
‘Did you bring any message from Mr.
Legrand?’
‘No, Massa, I bring dis here,’ and
Jupiter handed me a note which ran thus:
‘My Dear Friend,
‘Why have I not seen you for so long
a time? 1 hope you have not been so fool-
ish as to take offence at any little rude-
ness of mine; but no, that is improbable.
‘Since 1 saw you 1 have had great cause
for anxiety. I have something to tell you,
yet scarcely know how to tell it, or
whether 1 should tell it at all.
I have not been quite well for some
days past, and poor old Jup. annoys me,
almost beyond endurance, by his well-
meant attentions.
1 have made no addition to my cabinet
since we met.
‘lf you can, in any way, make it con-
venient, come over with Jupiter. Do
come. I wish to see you to-night, upon
business of importance. I assure you that
it is of the highest importance.
‘Ever yours,
‘William Legrand.
There was something in the tone of this
note which gave me great uneasiness. Its
whole style differed materially from that
of Legrand. What could he be dreaming
of? What new idea possessed his excit-
able brain? What ‘business of the high-
est importance’ could he possibily have to
transact? I dreaded lest the continued
pressure of misfortune had, at length,
fairly unsettled the reason of my friend.
Without a moment’s hesitation, there-
fore, I prepared to accompany the negro.
Upon reaching the wharf, I noticed a
scythe and three spades, all apparently
new, lying in the bottom of the beat in
which we were to embark.
‘What is the meaning of all this, Jup.?’
I inquired.
‘Him syfe, massa, and spade.’
‘Very true; but what are they doing
here?’
‘Him de syfe and de spade what Massa
Will sis pon my buying for him in de
town.
‘But what, in the name of all that is
mysterious, is your “Massa Will going
to do with scythes and spades?’
Dat’s more dan I know, and debbil
take me if I don’t believe ’tis more dan
he know too. But it’s all cum ob de bug.
Finding that no satisfaction was to be
obtained of Jupiter, whose intellect
seemed absorbed by ‘de bug,’ I now
stepped into the boat and made sail. With
a fair and strong breeze we soon ran into
the little cove, and a walk of some two
miles brought us to the hut. It was about
three in the afternoon when we arrived.
Legrand had been awaiting us in eager
expectation. He grasped my hand with
a nervousness which alarmed me and
strengthened the suspicions already en-
tertained. His countenance was pale even
to ghastliness, and his deep-set eyes
glared with unnatural lustre. After in-
quiring as to his health, I asked him,
not knowing what better to say, if he had
yet obtained the bug from the lieutenant.
‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, colouring vio-
lently, ‘I got it from him the next morn-
ing. Nothing would tempt me to part
with it.’
It is a bug of real gold.’ He said this
with an air of profound seriousness, and
1 felt inexpressibly shocked.
This bug is to make my fortune,’ he
continued, with a triumphant smile, to
reinstate me in my family possessions. Is
it any wonder, then, that I prize it? Since
Fortune has thought fit to bestow it upon
me, I have only to use it properly and 1
shall arrive at the gold of which it is the
index. Jupiter, bring me that beetle.’
‘What! de bug, massa? I’d rather not
go fer trubble dat bug—you must git him
for your own self.’ Hereupon Legrand
arose, with a grave and stately air, and
brought me the beetle from a glass case


♦ « - -•-
in which it was enclosed. It was a beauti-
ful scarabaeus, and, at that time, un-
known to naturalists —of course a great
prize in a scientific point of view. There
were two round black spots near one ex-
tremity of the back, and a lone one near
the other. The scales were exceedingly
hard and glossy, with all the appearance
of burnished gold. The weight of the in-
sect was very remarkable.
‘I sent for you,’ said Legrand, when 1
had completed my examination of the
beetle, ‘I sent for you, that I might have
your counsel and assistance in furthering
the views of Fate and of the bug—
‘My dear Legrand,’ I cried, interrupt-
ing him, ‘you are certainly unwell. You
shall go to bed, and I will remain with
you a few days, until you get over this.
You are feverish and —’
‘Feel my pulse,’ said he.
I felt it, and, to say the truth, found
not the slightest indication of fever.
But you may be ill and yet have no
fever. Allow me this once to prescribe
for you. In the first place, go to bed. In
the next —’
‘You are mistaken,’ he interposed; I
am as well as I can expect to be under
the excitement which I suffer. If you
really wish me well, you will relieve this
excitement.’
‘And how is this to be done?’
‘Very easily. Jupiter and myself are
going upon an expedition into the hills,
upon the mainland, and, in this expedi-
tion, we shall need the aid of some per-
son in whom we can confide. You are the
only one we can trust. Whether we suc-
ceed or fail, the excitement which you
now perceive in me will be calmed.’
‘I am anxious to oblige you in any
way’, I replied; ‘but do you r'ean to say
that this infernal beetle has any connec-
tion with your expedition into the hills?
‘lt has.’
‘Then, Legrand, I cannot become a
party to such an absurd proceeding.’
I am sorry —very sorry —for we shall
have to try it by ourselves.’
‘Try it by yourselves! The man is sure-
ly mad! —but—how long do you propose
to be absent?’
‘Probably all night. We shall start im-
mediately, and be back, at all events, by
sunrise.
‘And will you promise me upon your
honour, that when this freak of yours is
over, and the bug business settled to
your satisfaction, you will then return
home and follow my advice.’
‘Yes; I promise; and now let us be off,
for we have no time to lose.’
With a heavy heart I accompanied my
friend. We started about four o’clock,
Legrand, Jupiter, the dog, and myself.
Jupiter had with him the scythe and
spades—the whole of which he insisted
upon carrying—more through fear, it
seemed to me, of trusting either of the
implements within reach of his master,
than from any excess of industry. ‘Dat
deuced bug’ were the sole words which
escaped his lips during the journey. For
my own part, I had charge of a couple of
dark lanterns, while Legrand contented
himself with the bug, which he carried
attached to the end of a bit of whip-cord;
twirling it to and fro, with the air of a
conjurer, as he went. When I observed
this last plain evidence of my friend s
aberration of mind I could scarcely re-


frain from tears. I thought it best, how-
ever, to humor his fancy, at least for the
present, or until I could adopt some more
energetic measures with a chance of suc-
cess. In the meantime I endeavoured, but
all in vain, to sound him in regard to the
object of the expedition. Having succeed-
ed in inducing me to accompany him, he
seemed unwilling to hold conversation
upon any topic of minor importance, and
to all my questions gave no other reply
than ‘We shall see!’
We crossed the creek at the head of the
island by means of a skiff, and, ascend-
ing the high grounds on the shore of the
mainland, proceeded in a north-westerly
direction, through a tract of country wild
with decision; pausing only for an in-
stant, here and there, to consult what
appeared to be certain landmarks of his
own contrivance upon a former occasion.
In this manner we journeyed for about
two hours, and the sun was just setting
when we entered a region infinitely more
dreary than any yet seen. It was a species
of table-land, near the summit of an al-
most inaccessible hill, densely wooded
from base to top, and interspersed with
huge crags that appeared to lie loosely
upon the soil. Deep ravines, in various
directions, gave an air of still sterner
solemnity to the scene.
The natural platform to which we had
clambered was thickly overgrown with
brambles, through which we soon dis-
covered that it would have been impos-
sible to force our way but for the scythe;
and Jupiter, by direction of his master,
proceeded to clear for us a path to the
foot of an enormously tall tulip-tree,
which stood, with some eight or ten oaks,
upon the level, and far surpassed them
all, and all other trees which I had then
ever seen, in the beauty of its foliage and
form, in the wide spread of its branches,
and in the general majesty of its appear-
ance. When we reached this tree, Legrand
turned to Jupiter, and asked him if he
thought he could climb it. The old man
seemed a little staggered by the question,
and for some moments made no reply. At
length he approached the huge trunk,
walked slowly around it, and examined it
with minute attention. When he had com-
pleted his scrutiny, he merely said,
‘Yess, massa, Jup. climb any tree he
ebber see in he life.’
‘Then up with you as soon as possible
for it will soon be too dark to see what
we are about.’
‘How far mus go up, massa?’ inquired
Jupiter.
‘Get up the main trunk first, and then
I will tell you which way to go —and here
—stop! take this beetle with you.’
‘De bug, Massa Will! —de goole-bug!’
cried the negro, drawing back in dis-
may—‘what for mus tote de bug way up
do tree?—d—n if I do!’
If you are afraid, Jup., a great big
negro like you, to take hold of a harm-
less little dead beetle—why, you can
carry it up by this string—but if you do
not take it up with you in some way, I
shall be under the necessity of breaking
your head with this shovel.
‘What do matter now, massa?’ said
Jup., evidently ashamed iqto agreement;
‘always want for to raise fuss wid old
nigger. Me feered de bug! what I keer
for de bug?’ Here he took cautiously hold
of the extreme end of the string, and
maintaining the insect as far from his
person as circumstances would permit,
prepared to ascend the tree.
In youth, the tulip-tree, the most mag-
nificent of American foresters, has a
trunk peculiarly smooth, and often rises
to a great height; but, in its riper age,
the bark becomes gnarled and uneven,
while many short limbs make their ap-
pearance on the stem. Embracing the
huge cylinder, as closely as possible* with
his arms and knees, seizing with his hands
some proj<» tions, and resting his naked
toes upon others, Jupiter, after one or
two narrow escapes from falling, at
length wriggled himself into the first
great fork, and seemed to consider the
whole business as already accomplished.
The risk of the achievement was now
over, although the climber was some
sixty or seventy feet from the ground.


‘Which way must go now, Massa
Will?’ he asked.
‘Keep up the largest branch —the one
on this side,’ said Legrand. The negro
obeyed him promptly, and apparently
with but little trouble; ascending higher
and higher, until no glimpse of his squat
figure could be obtained through the
dense foliage which enveloped it. Pre-
sently his voice was heard in a sort of
halloo.
‘How much fudder is got for go?’
‘How high up are you?’ asked Le-
grand.
‘Ebber so fur,’ replied the negro; ‘can
see de sky fru de top ob de tree.’
‘Never mind the sky, but attend to
what I say. Look down the trunk and
count the limbs below you on this side.
How many limbs have you passed?’
‘One, two, three, four, fibe—l done
pass fibe limb, massa, pon dis side.’
‘Then go one limb higher.’
In a few minutes the. voice was heard
again, announcing that the seventh limb
was attained.
‘Now, Jup.,’ cried Legrand, evidently
much excited, ‘I want you to work your
way out upon that limb as far as you can.
If you see anything strange, let me
know.’
By this time what little doubt I might
have entertained of my poor friend’s in-
sanity was finally at rest. I thought him
mad, and I became seriously anxious to
get him home. While I was wondering
upon what to do, Jupiter’s voice was
again heard.
‘Mos feerd for to ventur pon dis limb
berry far —’tis dead putty much all de
way.’
‘Did you say it was a dead limb, Jupi-
ter?’ cried Legrand in a quavering voice.
‘Yes, massa, him dead as de door-nail
—done up for sartain—done departed dis
here life.’ •
‘What in the name of heaven shall I
do?’ asked Legrand, seemingly in the
greatest distress.
Do!’ said I, glad of an opportunity to
put in a word, ‘why come home and go
to bed. Come now!—that’s a fine fellow.
It’s getting late, and, besides, you remem-
ber your promise.’
‘Jupiter,’ cried he, without heeding
me in the least, ‘do you hear me?’
‘Yes, Massa Will, hear you ebber so
plain.’
‘Try the wood well, then, with your
knife, and see if you think it very rot-
ten.’
‘Him rotten, massa, sure nuff,’ replied
the negro in a few moments, ‘but not so
berry rotten as mought be. Mought ven-
tur out lettle way pon de limb by my-
self, dat’s true.’
‘By yourself!— What do you mean?’
‘Why, I mean de bug. ’Tis berry hebby
bug. Spose I drop him down fuss, and
den de limb won’t break wid just de
weight ob one nigger.’
‘You infernal scoundrel!’ cried Le-
grand, apparently much relieved, ‘what
do you mean by telling me such nonsense
as that? As sure as you drop that beetle
I’ll break your neck. Look here, Jupiter,
do you hear me?’
‘Yes, massa, needn’t hollo at poor nig-
ger dat style.’
‘Well! now listen! —if you venture out
on the limb as far as you think safe, and
not let go the beetle, I’ll make you a pre-
sent of a silver dollar as soon as you get
down.’
Tm gwine, Massa Will—deed I is,
replied the negro very promptly—‘most
out to the eend now.-’
‘Out to the end!’ here fairly screamed
Legrand, ‘do you say you are out to the
end of that limb?’
‘Soon be to de eend, massa —o-o-o-o-
-oh! Lorgol-a-marcy! what is dis here pon
de tree?’
‘Well,’ cried Legrand, highly delighted,
‘what is it?’ /
‘Why, ’tain t noffin but a skull some-
body bin left him head up de tree, and
de crows done gobble ebery bit ob de
meat off.’
‘A skull, you say!—very well!—how
is it fastened to the limb?—what holds
it on?’
‘Sure nuff, massa; mus look. Why dis
berry curous sarcumstance, pon my word


—dare’s a great big nail in de skull, what
fastens ob it on to de tree.’
‘Well now, Jupiter, do exactly as I tell
you—do you hear?
Yes, massa.’
Pay attention, then!—find the left eye
of the skull.’
‘Hum! hoo! dat’s good! why dare ain’t
no eye left at all.’
‘Curse your stupidity! Do you know
your right hand from your left?
‘Yes, I nose dat= —nose all bout dat—
’tis my lef hand what I chops de wood
wid.’
‘To be sure! you are left-handed; and
your left eye is on the same side as your
left hand. Now, I suppose, you can find
the left eye of the skull, or the place
where the left eye has been. Have you
found it?’
Here was a long pause. At length the
negro asked, ‘ls de lef eye of de skull pon
de same side as de left hand of de skull,
too? —cause de skull ain’t got not a bit
ob a hand at all —nebber mind! I got de
lef eye now —here de lef eye! what must
do wid it?’
‘Let the beetle drop through it, as far
as the string will reach —but be careful
and not let go your hold of the string.’
‘All dat done, Massa Will; mighty
easy ting to put de bug fru de hole —look
out for him dare below!’
During this colloquy no portion of
Jupiter’s person could be seen; but the
beetle, which he had suffered to descend,
was now visible at the end of the string,
and glistened, like a globe of burnished
gold, in the last rays of the setting sun.
The bug hung quite clear of any branch-
es, and, if allowed to fall, would have
fallen at our feet. Legrand immediately
took the scythe, and cleared with a cir-
cular space, three or four yards in dia-
meter, just beneath the insect, and, hav-
ing accomplished this, ordered Jupiter to
let go the string and come down from
the tree!
Driving a peg, with great nicety, into
the ground, at the precise spot where the
beetle fell, my friend now produced
from his pocket a tape-measure. Fasten-
ing one end of this at that point of the
trunk of the tree which was nearest the
peg, he unrolled it till it reached the peg,
and thence farther unrolled it, in the di-
rection already established by the two
points of the tree and the peg, for the dis-
tance of fifty feet —Jupiter clearing away
the brambles with the scythe. At the spot
thus attained a second peg was driven,
and about this, as a centre, a rude circle,
about four feet in diameter, described.
Taking now a spade himself, and giving
one to Jupiter, and one to me, Legrand
begged us to set about digging as quick-
ly as possible.
The lanterns having been lit, we all fell
to work with a zeal worthy of a better
cause; and, as the glare fell upon us, I
could not help thinking how picturesque
a group we composed, and how strange
and suspicious our labour must have ap-
peared to any stranger who, by chance,
might have stumbled upon our where-
abouts. .
We dug very steadily for two hours.
Little was said; and our chief embarrass-
ment lay in the yelpings of the dog, who
took great interest in our proceedings.
When the time mentioned had expired,
we had reached a depth of five feet, and
yet no signs of any treasure became
manifest. A general pause ensued, and
I began to hope that the farce was at an
end. Legrand, however, although evi-
dently much disconcerted, wiped his
brow thoughtfully and recommenced.
We had excavated the entire circle of
four feet diameter, and now we slightly
enlarged the limit, and went to the far-
ther depth of two feet. Still nothing ap-
peared. The gold-seeker, whom I sin-
cerely pitied, at length clambered from
the pit with the bitterest disappointment
imprinted upon every feature, and pro-
ceeded, sflowly and reluctantly, to put
on his coat, which he had thrown off at
the beginning of his labor. In the mean-
time, I made no remark. Jupiter, at a
signal from his master, began to gather
up his tools. This done, and dog having
been unmuzzled, we turned in profound
silence towards home.


. 1 [ . I .
5
- vi'.; ; ,:' ; -v,
WE UNEARTHED AN OBLONG CHEST OF WOOD


We had taken, perhaps, a dozen steps
in this direction, when, with a loud oath,
Legrand strode up to Jupiter and seized
him by the collar. The astonished negro
opened his eyes and mouth to the fullest
extent, let fall the spades, and fell upon
his knees.
‘You scoundrel,’ said Legrand, hissing
out the syllables from beneath his clench-
ed teeth—‘you infernal black villain! —
speak, I tell you! —answer me this in-
stant, without prevarication! —which is
your left eye?’
Oh, my golly, Massa Will; ain t dis
here my lef eye for sartain?’ roared the
terrified Jupiter, placing his hand upon
his right eye, and holding it there desper-
ately.
‘I thought so! —I knew it! hurrah!
cried Legrand, letting the negro go, and
executing a series of dance steps, much
to the astonishment of his valet, who,
arising from his knees, looked, mutely,
from his master to myself, and then from
myself to his master.
Come! we must go back, said Le-
grand, the game’s not up yet; and he
again led the way to the tulip-tree.
Jupiter,’ said he, when he had reached
its foot, come here! was the skull nailed
to the limb with the face outwards, or
with the face to the limb?’
De face was out, massa, so dat de
crows could get at de eyes, good, widout
any trouble.’
‘Well, then, was it this eye or that
through which you dropped the beetle?’
here Legrand touched each of Jupiter’s
eyes. . (
"Twas dis eye, massa —de lef eye—
just as you tell me,’ and here it was his
right eye that the negro indicated.
‘That will do—we must try it again.’
Here my friend, about whose madness
1 now saw, or fancied that I saw, certain
indications of method, removed the peg
which marked the spot where the beetle
fell, to a spot about three inches to the
westward of its former position. Taking,
now, the tape-measure from the nearest
point of the trunk to the peg, as before,
and continuing the extension in a straight
line to the distance of fifty feet, a spot
was indicated, removed by several yards
from the point at which we had been
digging.
Around the new position a circle,
somewhat larger than in the former in-
stance, was now described, and we again
set to work with the spades. I had become
interested, even excited. Perhaps there
was something about —some air of fore-
thought, or of deliberation, which im-
pressed me. I dug eagerly, and now and
then caught myself actually looking with
something that very much resembled ex-
expectation, for the fancied treasure, the
vision of which had apparently maddened
my unfortunate companion. When we
had been at work perhaps an hour and
a half, we were again interrupted by the
violent bowlings of the dog. His uneasi-
ness, in the first instance, had been, evi-
dently, but the result of playfulness, but
he now assumed a bitter and serious tone.
Upon Jupiter’s again attempting to
muzzle him he made furious resistance,
and leaping into the hole, tore up the
earth frantically with his claws. In a few
seconds he had uncovered a mass of hu-
man bones, forming, two complete skele-
tons, intermingled with several buttons
of metal, and what appeared to be the
dust of decayed woollen. One or two
strokes of a spade upturned the blade of
a large Spanish knife, and as we dug
farther, three or four loose pieces of gold
and silver coin came to light.
At the sight of these the joy of Jupiter
could scarcely be restrained, but the
countenance of his master wore an air
of extreme disappointment. He urged us,
however, to continue our exertions, and
the words were hardly uttered when I
stumbled and fell forward, having caught
the toe of my boot in a large ring of iron
that lay half buried in the loose earth.
We now worked in earnest, and never
did I pass ten minutes of more intense
excitement. During this interval we had
fairly unearthed an oblong chest of wood.
This bcx was three feet and a half long,
three feet broad, and two and a half feet
deep. It was firmly secured by bands of


wrought iron, riveted, and forming a
kind of open trellis-work over the whole.
On each side of the chest, near the top,
were three rings of iron—six in all—by
means of which a firm hold could be ob-
tained by six persons. Our utmost united
endeavours served only to disturb the
chest very slightly in its bed. We at once
saw the impossibility of removing so
great a weight. Luckily the sole fasten-
ings of the lid consisted of two sliding
bolts. These we drew back—trembling
and panting with anxiety. In an instant,
a treasure of incalculable value lay gleam-
ing before us. As the rays of the lantern
fell within the pit, there flashed upwards
a glow and a glare, from a confused heap
of gold and of jewels, that absolutely
dazzled our eyes.
I shall not pretend to describe the feel-
ings with which I gazed. Amazement
was, of course, predominant. Legrand
appeared exhausted with excitement, and
spoke very few words. Jupiter’s coun-
tenance wore, for some minutes, as dead-
ly a pallor as it is possible, in the nature
of things, for any negro s face to assume.
He seemed stupefied—thunderstricken
. . . Presently he fell upon his knees in
the pit, and, burying his naked arms up
to the elbows in gold, let them there re-
main, as if enjoying the luxury of a
bath. At length, with a deep sigh, he ex-
claimed, as if in a soliloquy.
And dis all cum ob de goole-bug! de
putty goole-bug! de poor little goole-
bug. Ain t you shamed ob yourself, nig-
ger?—answer me dat!’
It became necessary, at last, that I
should arouse both master and valet to
the necessity of removing the treasure. It
was difficult to say what should be done,
and much time was spent in deliberation
—so confused were the ideas of all. We,
finally, lightened the box by removing
two-thirds of its contents, when we were
enabled with some trouble to raise it from
the hole. The articles taken out were de-
posited among the brambles, and the dog
left to guard them, with strict orders from
Jupiter not to stir from the spot, nor to
open his mouth until our return. We then
hurriedly made for home, at one o’clock
in the morning. Worn out as we were, it
was not in human nature to do more im-
mediately. We rested until two, and had
supper; starting for the hills immediately
afterwards, armed with three stout sacks,
which, by good luck, were upon the pre-
mises. A little before four we arrived at
the pit, divided the remainder of the
booty, as equally as might be, among us,
and, leaving the holes unfilled, again set
out for the hut, at which, for the second
time, we deposited our golden burthens,
just as the first faint streaks of the dawn
gleamed from over the tree-tops in the
East.
We were now thoroughly broken
down; but the intense excitement of the
time denied us rest. After an unquiet
slumber of some three or four hours’ du-
ration, we arose, to make examination of
our treasure.
The chest had been full to the brim,
and we spent the whole day, and the
greater part of the next night, in a scru-
tiny of its contents. There had been no-
thing like order or arrangement. Every-
thing had been heaped in. Having as-
soited all with care, we found ourselves
possessed of even vaster wealth than we
had at first supposed. In coin there was
rather more than four hundred and
fifty thousand dollars—estimating the
value of the pieces, as accurately as we


could, by the tables of the period. There
was not a particle of silver. All was gold
of antique date and of great variety
French, Spanish, and German money,
with a few English guineas, and some
counters, of which we have never seen
specimens before. There were several
very large and heavy coins* so worn that
we could make nothing of their inscrip-
tions. The value of the jewels we found
more difficulty in estimating. There were
diamonds —some of them exceedingly
large and fine —a hundred and ten in all,
and ten emeralds, all very beautiful; and
twenty-one sapphires, with an opal.
These stones had all been broken off from
their settings and thrown loose in the
chest. The settings themselves, which we
picked out from among the other gold,
appeared to have been beaten up with
hammers, as if to prevent identification.
Besides all this, there was a vast quantity
of solid gold ornaments; nearly two
hundred massive finger and ear rings;
rich chains —thirty of these, if I remem-
ber; —eighty-three very large and heavy
crucifixes; huge golden punch-bowl, orna-
mented with richly chased vine-leaves
and Bacchanalian figures; with two
sword-handles exquisitely embossed, and
many other small articles which I cannot
recollect. The weight of these valuables
exceeded three hundred and fifty pounds;
and in this estimate I have not included
one hundred and ninety-seven superb
gold watches; three of the number being
worth each five hundred dollars. Many
of them were very old, and as time-keep-
ers valueless; the works having suffered,
more or less from corrosion—but all were
richly jewelled and in cases of great
worth. We estimated the entire contents
of the chest, that night, at a million and a
half dollars; and, upon the subsequent
disposal of the trinkets and jewels (a
few being retained for our own use), it
was found that we had greatly under-
valued the treasure.
When at length, we had concluded
our examination, and the intense ex-
citement of the time had in some measure
subsided, Legrand, who saw that I was


dying with impatience for a solution of
this most extraordinary riddle, entered
into a full detail of all the circumstances
connected with it.
’You remember,’ said he, ‘the night
when I handed you the rough sketch I
had made of the scarabaeus. You recol-
lect also, that I became quite vexed at you
for insisting that my drawing resembled a
death’s-head. When you first made this
assertion I thought you were jesting;
but afterwards I called to mind the pe-
culiar spots on the back of the insect, and
admitted to myself that your remark had
some little foundation in fact. Still, the
sneer at my graphic powers irritated me
—for I am considered a good artist —
and, therefore, when you handed me the
scrap of parchment, I was about to
crumple it up and throw it angrily into
the fire.
‘The scrap of paper, you mean,’ said I.
No; it had much of the appearance of
paper, and at first I supposed it to be
such, but when I came to draw upon it,
I discovered it, at once, to be a piece of
very thin parchment. It was quite dirty,
you remember. Well, as f was in the very
act of crumpling it up, my glance fell
upon the sketch at which you had been
looking, and you may imagine my as-
tonishment when I perceived, in fact,
the figure of a death’s-head just where it
seemed to me, I had made she drawing of
the beetle. For a moment I was too much
amazed to think with accuracy. I knew
that my design was very different in de-
tail from this —although there was a cer-
tain similarity in general outline. Pre-
sently I took a candle, and seating my-
self at the door of the room, proceeded to
examine the parchment more closely.
Upon turning it over, 1 saw my own
sketch upon the reverse, just as I had
made it. My first idea, now, was mere
surprise at the really remarkable simi-
larity of outline—at the singular coinci-
dence involved in the fact, that unknown
to me, there should have been a skull
upon the other side of the parchment, im-
mediately beneath my figure of the beetle,
and that this skull, not only in outline,
but in size, should so closely resemble my
drawing. I say the singularity of this
coincidence absolutely stupefied me for
a time. This is the usual effect of such
coincidences. The mind struggles to es-
tablish a connection —a sequence of
cause and effect —and, being unable to do
so, suffers a species of temporary
paralysis. But when I recovered from this
stupor, there dawned upon me gradually
a conviction which startled me even far
more than the coincidence. I began dis-
tinctly, positively, to remember that
there had been no drawing upon the
parchment when I made my sketch of the
gold bug. I became perfectly certain of
this; for I recollected turning up first one
side and then the other, in search of the
cleanest spot. Had the skull been there, of
course I could not have failed to notice
it. Here was indeed a mystery which I
felt it impossible to explain; but even at
that early moment, there seemed to glim-
mer, faintly, within the most remote and
secret chambers of my intellect, a glow-
worm-like conception of that truth which
last night’s adventure brought to so mag-
nificent a demonstration.
I arose at once, and putting the parch-
ment securely away, dismissed all further
reflection until I should be alone.
‘When you had gone, and when Jupi-
ter was fast asleep, I made a more metho-
dical investigation of the affair. In the
first place I considered the manner in
which the parchment had come into my
possession. The spot where we discovered
the beetle was on the coast of the main-
land, about a mile eastward of the island,
and but a short distance above high-
water mark. Upon my taking hold of it,
it gave me a sharp bite, which caused me
to let it drop. Jupiter, with his accus-
tomed caution, before seizing the insect,
which had flown towards him, looked
about him for a leaf, or something of
that nature, by which to take hold of it.
It was at this moment that his eyes, and
mine also, fell upon the scrap of parch-
ment, which I then supposed to be paper.
It was lying half buried in the sand, a
corner sticking up. Near the spot where


we found it, I saw the remnants of the
hull of what appeared to have been a
ship’s long boat. The wreck seemed to
have been there for a very great while;
for the resemblance to boat timbers
could scarcely be traced.
‘Well, Jupiter picked up the parch-
ment, wrapped the beetle in it, and gave
it to me. Soon afterwards we turned to
go home, and on the way met the Lieu-
tenant. I showed him the insect, and he
begged me to let him take it to the fort.
Upon my consenting, he thrust it forth-
with into his waistcoat pocket without the
parchment in which it had been wrap-
ped, and which I had continued to hold
in my hand during his inspection. Per-
haps he dreaded my changing my mind,
and thought it best to make sure of the
prize at ohce —you know how enthusias-
tic he is on all subjects connected with
Natural History. At the same time, with-
out being conscious of it, I must have put
the parchment in my own pocket.
‘You remember that when I went to
the table for the purpose of making a
sketch of the beetle, I found no paper
where it was usually kept. I looked in the
drawer, and found none there. I searched
my pockets, hoping to find an old letter,
when my hand fell upon the parchment.
‘No doubt you will think me fanciful —
but 1 had already established a kind of
connection. I had put together two links
of a great chain. There was a boat lying
upon a seacoast, and not far from the boat
was a parchment—not a paper —with a
skull depicted upon it. You will, of
course, ask “Where is the connection?
I reply that the skull, or death’s-head, is
the well known emblem of the pirate. The
flag of the death’s-head is hoisted in all
engagements.
‘I have said that the scrap was parch-
ment, and not paper. Parchment is dur-
able—almost imperishable.
‘I did not fail to observe, also, the form
of the parchment. Although one of its
corners had been, by some accident de-
stroyed, it could be seen that the original
form was oblong. It was just such a slip,
indeed, as might have been chosen for a
memorandum —for a record of something
to be long remembered and carefully
preserved.’
‘But,’ I interrupted, ‘you say that the
skull was not upon the parchment when
you made the drawing of the beetle. How
then do you trace any connection between
the boat and the skull —since the latter,
according to your own admission, must
have been designed at some time before
your sketching the bug?’
‘Ah, hereupon turns the whole mys-
tery; although the secret, at this point,
I had comparatively little difficulty in
solving. My steps were sure, and could
afford but a single result. I reasoned, for
example, thus: When I drew the beetle
there was no skull apparent upon the
parchment. When I had completed the
drawing I gave it to you, and observed
you narrowly until you returned it. You,
therefore, did not design the skull, and no
one else was present to do it. Then it was
not done by human agency. And never-
theless it was done.
‘At this stage of my reflections I tried
to remember, and did remember, dis-
tinctly every incident which occurred
about the pieriod in question. The weather
was chilly, and a fire was blazing upon
the hearth. I was heated with exercise and
sat near the table. You, however, had
drawn a chair close to the chimney. Just
as I placed the parchment in your hand,
and as you were in the act of inspecting
it, Wolf, the Newfoundland, entered and
leaped upon your shoulders. With your
left hand you caressed him and kept him
off, while your right, holding the parch-
ment, was permitted to fall listlessly be-
tween your knees, and in close proximity
to the fire. At one moment I thought the
blaze had caught it, and was about to cau-
tion you, but, before I could speak, you
had withdrawn it, and were engaged in
its examination. When I considered all
these particulars, I knew that the heat had
been the agent in bringing to light, upon
the parchment, the skull which I saw de-
signed upon it. You are well aware that
chemical preparations exist by means of
which it is possible to write upon either


paper or parchment, so that the letters
shall become visible only when subjected
to the action of fire.
‘I now examined the death’s-head with
care. Its outer edges—the edges of the
drawing nearest the edge of the parch-
ment —were far more distinct than the
others. I immediately kindled a fire, and
subjected every portion of the parchment
to a glowing heat. At first, the only effect
was the strengthening of the faint lines in
the skull; but, upon persevering in the
experiment, there became visible, at the
corner of the slip, diagonally opposite to
the spot in which the death’s-head was de-
lineated, the figure of what I at first sup-
posed to be a goat. A closer scrutiny,
however, satisfied me that it was intended
for a kid!’
‘Ha! ha!’ said I, ‘to be sure I have no
right to laugh at you—a million and a
half of money is too serious a matter for
mirth—but you are not about to estab-
lish a third link in your chain—you will
not find any special connection between
your pirates and a goat —pirates, you
know, have nothing to do with goats.’
‘But I have said that the figure was not
that of a goat.’
‘Well, a kid then—pretty much the
same thing.’
‘Pretty much, but not altogether,’
said Legrand. ‘You may have heard of
one Captain Kidd. I at once looked upon
the figure of the animal as a kind of
parchment signature. I say signature; be-
cause its position suggested this idea. The
death s-head at the opposite corner had,
in the* same manner, the air of a stamp,
or seal. But I was puzzled by the absence
of everything else.’
You expected to find a letter between
the stamp and the signature.’
‘Something of that kind. The fact is, I
felt impressed with a presentiment of
some vast good fortune impending. I can
scarcely say why. Perhaps, after all, it
was rather a desire than an actual belief.’
Well; you have heard, of course, the
many stories current —the thousand
vague rumors afloat about money buried,
somewhere upon the Atlantic coast, by
Kidd and his associates. These rumors
must have had some foundation in fact.
And that the rumors have existed so long
and so continuous, could have resulted,
it appeared to me, only from the circum-
stance of the buried treasure still remain-
ing entombed. Had Kidd concealed his
plunder for a time, and afterwards re-
claimed it, the rumors would scarcely
have reached us in their present unvary-
ing form. You will observe that the
stories told are all about money-seekers,
not about money-finders. Had the pirate
recovered his money, there the affair
would have dropped. It seemed to me that
some accident—say the loss of a memor-
andum indicating its locality—had de-
prived him of the means of recovering it,
and that this accident had become known
to his followers, wTio otherwise might
never have heard that treasure had been
concealed at all, and who, busying them-
selves in vain, because unguided attempts
to regain it, had given first birth, and
then universal currency, to the reports
which are now so common. Have you
ever heard of any important treasure
being unearthed along the coast?’
‘Never.’
‘But that Kidd’s accumulations were
immense is well known. I took it for
granted, therefore, that the earth still held
them; and you will scarcely be surprised
when I tell you that I felt a hope, nearly
amounting to certainty, that the parch-
ment so strangely found, involved a lost
record of the place of deposit.’
‘But how did you proceed?’
‘I held the parchment again to the fire,
after increasing the heat; but nothing ap-
peared. I now thought it possible that the
coating of dirt might have something to
do with the failure; so I carefully rinsed
the parchment by pouring warm water
over it, and, having done this, I placed
it in a tin pan, w r ith the skull downwards,
and put the pan upon a furnace of lighted
charcoal. In a few minutes, the pan hav-
ing become thoroughly heated, I removed
the slip, and, to my inexpressible joy,
found it spotted, in several places, with
what appeared to be figures arranged in


lines. Again I placed it in the pan, and
suffered it to remain another minute.
Upon taking it off, the whole was just as
you see it now.
Here Legrand, having reheated the
parchment, submitted it to my inspection.
The following characters were rudely
traced, in a red tint, between the death’s-
head and the goat;
53///303))6”;4826)4/.) 4/);806”48/8
;60) )83 ;1/);:/”8/83(88)5”/;46(;88”
96” ? ;8)”/(:485) ;5”/2.”/(;4956”2(5”
—4) 8:8”;4069285);6/8) 4//; 1 (/9;4
8081 ; 8:8/1;48/85;4)485/528806”81(
9;48;(88;4(/?34;48)4/;1 61;: 188;/?
‘But,’ said I returning him the slip, I
am as much in the dark as ever. What
does it all mean?
‘The solution is by no means so difficult
as you might think,’ said Legrand. These
characters as any one might readily guess,
form a cipher—that is to say, they con-
vey a meaning; but then, from what is
known of Kidd, I could not suppose him
capable of constructing any of the more
difficult codes. I made up my mind, at
once, that this was of a simple species—
such, however, as would appear, to the
crude intellect of the sailor, absolutely
insoluble without the key.’
And you really solved it?
‘Readily! In the present case —indeed
in all cases of secret writing—the first
question regards the language of the
cipher. But, with the cipher now before
us, all difficulty was removed by the sig-
nature.
The pun upon the word “Kidd” is ap-
preciable in no other language than the
English. But for this consideration I
should have begun my attempts with the
Spanish and French, as the tongues in
which a secret of this kind would most
naturally have been written by a pirate
of the Spanish main. As it was, I assumed
the cryptograph to be English.
You observe there are no divisions
between the words. Had there been divi-
sions, the task would have been compara-
tively easy.
‘But, there being no division, my first
step was to ascertain the predominant let-
ters, as well as the least frequent. Count-
ing all, I constructed a table thus:
Of the character 8 there are 33
; .. 26
/) 16
4. „ 19
3 „ 12
6 11.
Of the character 1 there are 8
0 .. 6
92 „ 3
:3 „ 4
? .. 3
Now, in English, the letter which most
frequently occurs is e. Afterwards, the
succession runs thus: aoidhnrstuy
cfglmwbkpqxz. E predominates
so remarkably that an individual sen-
tence of any length is rarely seen, in
which it is not the prevailing character.
‘Here, then, we have, in the very be-
ginning, the groundwork for something
more than a mere guess. As our predom-
inant character is 8, we will commence
by assuming it as the e of the natural
alphabet. To verify the supposition, let
us observe if the 8 be seen often in
couples—for e is doubled with great fre-
quency in English—in Such words, for
example, as “meet,” “fleet,” “speed,
“seen,” “been,” “agree,” etc. In the pre-
sent instance we see it doubled no less
than five times, although the cryptograph
is brief.
‘Let us assume 8 then, as e. Now, of
all words in the language, the is most
usual; let us see, therefore, whether there
are not repetitions of any three characters,
in the same order of collocation, the last
of them being 8. If we discover - repeti-
tions of such letters, so arranged, they
will most probably represent the word
“the.” Upon inspection, we find no less
than seven such arrangements, the char-
acters being ;48. We may, therefore,
assume that ; represents t, 4 represents


h, and 8 represents e —the last being now
well confirmed. Thus a great step has
been taken.
‘But, having established a single word,
we are enabled to establish a vastly im-
portant point; that is to say, several
commencements and terminations of
other words. Let us refer, for example,
to the last instance but one, in which the
combination ;48 occurs —not far from
the end of the cipher. We know that the
; immediately ensuing is the commence-
ment of a word, and, of the six characters
succeeding this “the,” we are cognizant
of no less than five. Let us set these char-
acters down, thus, by the letters we know
them to represent, leaving a space for the
unknown —
teeth.
‘Here we are enabled, at once, to dis-
card the “th,” as forming no portion of
the word commencing with the first t;
since, by experiment of the entire alpha-
bet for a letter adapted to the vacancy,, we
perceive that no word can be formed of
which this th can be a part. We are thus
narrowed into:
tee.
and, going through this alphabet, if ne-
cessary, as before, we arrive at the word
“tree,” as the sole possible reading. We
thus gain another r, represented by (,
with the words “the tree” in juxtaposi-
tion.
‘Looking beyond these words, for a
short distance, we again see the combina-
tion ;48, and employ it by way of ter-
mination to what immediately precedes.
We have thus this arrangement:
the tree ;4(/?34the.
or, substituting the natural letters,
where known, it reads thus:
the tree thr /?3h the,
Now, if, in place of the unknown
characters, we leave blank spaces, or sub-
stitute dots, we read thus:
the tree thr , . . h the,
when the word “through” makes itself
evident at once. But this discovery gives
us three new letters, o, u and g, repre-
sented by /? and 3.
‘Leaking now, narrowly, through the
cipher for combinations of known char-
acters, we find, not very far from the be-
ginning, this arrangement:
83 (88, or egree,
which, plainly, is the conclusion of the
word “degree,” and gives us another let-
ter, d, represented by /. Four letters be-
yond the word “degree,” we perceive the
combination:
;46 (; 88.
‘Translating the known characters, and
representing the unknown by dots, as be-
fore, we read thus:
th.rtee,
an arrangement immediately suggestive
of the word “thirteen,” and again furnish-
ing us with two new characters i and n,
represented by 6 and ”.
‘Referring, now, to the beginning of
the cryptograph, we find the combination
33///,
‘Translating, as before, we obtain
..good,
which assures us that the first letter is A,
and that the first two words are “A good.”
‘lt is now time that we arrange our
key, as far as discovered, in a tabular
form, to avoid confusion. It will stand
thus: x
5 represents a 6 represents i
/ ,» d >» »» n
8 ~ e / ,» o
3 , 9 g . ( .. r
4 „ h : „ t
‘We have, therefore, no less than ten
of the most important letters represented,
and it will be unnecessary to proceed with
the details of the solution. I have said
enough to convince you that ciphers of
this nature are readily soluble. But be
assured that the specimen before us ap-
pertains to the very simplest species of
cryptograph. It now only remains to give
you the full translation of the characters
upon the parchment, as unriddled. Here
it is:
* “A good glass in the bishop’s hostel
in the devil’s seat forty-one degrees and
thirteen minutes north-east and by north
main branch seventh limb east side shoot


from the left eye of the death’s-head a bee
line from the tree through the shot fifty
feet out.” ’
‘But,’ said I, ‘the enigma seems still in
as bad a condition as ever. How is it pos-
sible to extort a meaning from all this
jargon about ‘ devil’s seats, death s-
heads,” and ‘‘bishop’s hostels”?’
‘I confess,’ replied Legrand, ‘that the
matter still wears a serious aspect, when
regarded with a casual glance. My first
endeavour was to divide the sentence into
the natural divisions intended by the
cryptographist.’
‘You mean to punctuate it?’
‘Something of that kind.’
‘But how was it possible to effect
this?’
‘I reflected that it had been a point
with the writer to run his words together
without division, so as to increase the
difficulty of solution Now, a not over-
acute man, in pursuing such an object,
would be nearly certain to overdo the
matter. When, in the course of his com-
position, he arrived at a break in his sub-
ject which would naturally require a
pause, or a point, he would be exceeding-
ly apt to run his characters, at this place,
more than usually close together. If you
will observe the MS. in the present in-
stance you will easily detect five such
cases of unusual crowding. Acting upon
this hint, I made the division thus:
“A good glass in the bishop’s hostel
in the devil’s seat —forty-one degrees and
thirteen minutes —northeast and by north
—main branch seventh limb east side —
shoot from the left eye of the death’s head
—a bee line from the tree through the
shot fifty feet out.” ’
‘Even this division,’ said I, ‘leaves me
still in the dark.’
‘lt left me also in the dark,’ replied Le-
grand, ‘for a few days; during which I
made diligent inquiry, in the neighbour-
hood of Sullivan’s Island, for any build-
ing which went by the name of the
“Bishop’s Hotel”; for, of course, I drop-
ped the obsolete word “hostel.” Gaining
no information on the subject, I was on
the point of extending my sphere of
search, and proceeding in a more system-
atic manner, when, one morning, it en-
tered into my head, quite suddenly, that
this “Bishop’s Hostel” might have some
reference to an old family, of the name
of Bessop, which, time out of mind, had
held possession of an ancient manor-
house, about four miles to the northward
of the Island. I accordingly went over to
the plantation, and reinstituted my in-
quiries among the older negroes of the
place. At length one of the most aged of
the women said that she had heard of
such a place as Bessop’s Castle, and
thought that she could guide me to it, but
that it was not a castle, nor a tavern, but
a high rock.
‘I offered to pay her well for her
trouble, and, after some demur, she con-
sented to accompany me to the spot. We
found it without m,uch difficulty, when,
dismissing her, I proceeded to examine
the place. The “castle” consisted of an
irregular assemblage of cliffs and rocks—
one of the latter being quite remarkable
for its height as well as for its insulated
and artificial appearance. I clambered to
its apex, and then felt much at a loss as
to what should be next done.
‘While I was busied in reflection my
eyes fell upon a narrow ledge in the east-
ern face of the rock, perhaps a yard below
the summit upon which I stood. This
ledge projected about eighteen inches and
was not more than a foot wide, while a
niche in the cliff above it, gave it a rude
resemblance to one of the hollow-backed
chairs used by our ancestors. I made no
doubt that here was the “devil’s seat”
alluded to in the parchment, and now I
seemed to grasp the full secret of the
riddle.
The “good glass,” I knew, could have
reference to nothing but a telescope; for


the word “glass” is rarely employed in
any other sense by seamen. Now here, I
at once saw, was a telescope to be used,
and a definite point of view, admitting no
variation, from which to use it. Nor did I
hesitate to believe that the phrases,
“forty-one degrees and thirteen minutes,”
and “northeast and by north,” were in-
tended as directions for the levelling of
the glass. Greatly excited by these discov-
eries, 1 hurried home, procured a teles-
cope, and returned to the rock.
1 let myself down to the ledge, and
found that it was impossible to retain a
seat upon it except in one particular posi-
tion. This fact confirmed my precon-
ceived idea. I proceeded to use the glass.
Of course, the forty-one degrees and
thirteen minutes” could allude to noth-
ing but elevation above the visible
horizon, since the horizontal direction was
clearly indicated by the words, north-
east and by north. This latter direction
I at once established by means of a pocket
compass, then, pointing the glass as
nearly at an angle of forty-one degrees of
elevation as I could do it by guess, I mov-
ed it cautiously up or down, until my at-
tention was arrested by a circular rift or
opening in the foliage of a large tree that
overtopped its fellows in the distance. In
the centre of this rift I perceived a white
spot, but could not, at first, distinguish
what it was. Adjusting the focus of the
telescope, I again looked, and now made
it out to be a human skull.
Upon this discovery I was so sanguine
as to consider the enigma solved; for the
phrase main branch, seventh limb, east
side, could refer only to the position of
the skull upon the tree, while “shoot from
the left eye of the death’s-head,” admit-
ted also of but one interpretation, in re-
gard to a search for buried treasure. I
perceived that the design was to drop a
bullet from the left eye of the skull and
that a bee-line, or, in other words, a
straight line, drawn from the nearest
point of the trunk through “the shot” (or
the spot where the bullet fell), and hence
extended to a distance of fifty feet, would
indicate a definite point—and beneath
this point I thought it at least possible that
a deposit of value lay concealed.’
All this, I said, is exceedingly clear,
and, although ingenious, still simple and
explicit. When you left the Bishop’s
Hostel, what then?’
W hy, having carefully taken the bear-
ings of the tree, I turned homewards The
instant that I left the “devil’s nest,” how-
ever, the circular rift vanished; nor could
get a glimpse of it afterwards, turn as
1 would. What seems to me the chief in-
genuity in this whole business is the fact
(for repeated experiment has convinced
me it is a fact) that the circular opening
in question is visible from no other attain-
able point of view than that afforded by
the narrow ledge upon the face of the
rock.
‘ln this expedition to the “Bishop’s
Hostel 1 had been attended by Jupiter,
who had no doubt observed for some
weeks past my thoughtfulness, and who
took special care not to leave me alone.
But, on the next day getting up very
early, I managed to give him the slip,
and went into the hills in search of the
tree. After much toil I found it. With the
rest of the adventure I believe you are
as well acquainted as myself,’
I suppose, said I, you missed the
spot, in the first attempt at digging,
through Jupiter’s stupidity in letting the
bug fall through the right instead of
through the left eye of the skull.’ He
nodded.
But your conduct in swinging the
beetle—how excessively odd! I was sure
you were mad. And why did you insist
upon letting fall the bug, instead of a
bullet, from the skull?’
‘Why, to be frank, I felt somewhat an-
noyed by your evident suspicions touch-
ing my sanity, and so resolved to punish
you quietly, in my own way, by a little
bit of sober mystification. For thfs rea^


son 1 swung the beetle, and for this rea-
son I let it fall from the tree. An observa-
tion of yours about its great weight sug-
gested the latter idea.’
‘Yes, I perceive; and now there is only
one point which puzzles me. What are
we to make of the skeletons found in the
hole?’
That is a question I am no more able
to answer than yourself. There seems,
however, only one plausible way of ac-
counting for them —and yet it is dread-
ful to believe in such atrocity as my sug-
gestion would imply. It is clear that Kidd
—if Kidd indeed secreted this treasure,
which I doubt not —it is clear that he
must have had assistance in the labor.
But this labor concluded, he may have
thought it wise to remove all who shared
in his secret. Perhaps a couple of blows
were sufficient, while his fellow-pirates
were busy in the pit; perhaps it required
a dozen —who shall tell?’
Superstitions of Olden Days
(Continued from page 47.)
People of 1831 would not. have the
doctor on Friday, because they believed
that was unlucky. Friday figured a great
deal in the superstitions of those days,
and an old rhyme told:
‘Friday night’s dreams on the Saturday
told,
Are sure to come true be it never so old.
When your right eye itches, it is a
sign of good luck. When your cheeks
burn, people are talking about you.


' j * -' <> -V. r *, > v
"' 1 "■■•■ ~ ~r . — . - - -*-■ - ■ ,,,i.Til' iu . ~
* i'
pwiii
■BBBKB it—.w - ■ ,
THIEVES


IN a certain town of Persia there lived
two brothers, one of whom was named
Cassim and the other Ali Baba. Their
father at his death left them a very mod-
erate fortune, which they divided equally.
‘Cassim married a woman who very
soon after her nuptials inherited a well-
furnished shop, a warehouse filled with
good merchandise, and some considerable
property in land. Her husband thus found
himself suddenly quite a prosperous man,
and became one of the richest merchants
in the whole town.
‘Ali Baba, on the other hand, who had
taken to wife a woman no better off for
worldly goods than himself, lived in a very
poor house, and had no other means of
gaining his livelihood and supporting his
wife and children than by going to cut
wood in a neighbouring forest, and carry-
ing it about the town to sell, on three
asses, which were his only possession.
‘Ali Baba went one day to the forest,
and had very nearly finished cutting as
much wood as his asses could carry, when
he perceived a thick cloud of dust, which
rose very high into the air, and appeared
to corpe from a point to the right of the
spot where he stood. It was advancing
towards him. He was soon able to distin-
guish a numerous company of men on
horseback, who were approaching at a
quick pace.
‘Although that part of the country had
never been spoken of as being infested
with robbers, Ali Baba nevertheless con-
jectured that these horsemen were thieves.
Therefore without considering what might
become of his asses, his first and only care
was to save himself. He instantly climbed
up into a large tree, the branches of which
spread out so close and thick that only one
small opening was left. He hid himself
among the thick branches, with great hope
of safety, as he could see everything that
occurred without being observed. The tree
itself grew at the foot of a sort of isolated
rock, considerably higher than the tree,
and so steep that it could not be easily
ascended.
‘The men, who appeared stout, power-
ful, and well-mounted, came up to this
very rock and alighted at its foot. Ali
Baba counted forty of them, and was very
sure, from their appearance and mode of
equipment, that they were robbers. They
were, in fact, a band of robbers, who abs-
tained from committing any crimes
in the neighbourhood, but carried on their
system of plunder at a considerable dist-
ance, and only had their place of rendez-
vous at that spot. Presently each horse-
man took the bridle off his horse, and hung
over its head a bag filled with barley,
which he had brought with him; and when
all had fastened their horses to bushes
and trees, they took off their travelling
bags, which appeared so heavy that Ali
Baba thought they must be filled with
gold and silver.
‘The robber who was nearest to him,
and whom Ali Baba took for the captain
of the band, came with his bag on his
shoulder close to the rock, beside
the very tree in which Ali Baba had
concealed himself. After making his way
among some bushes and shrubs that grew
there, the robber very deliberately pro-
nounced these words. “Open, sesame!
which Ali Baba distinctly heard. The
captain of the band had no sooner spoken,
than the door opened; and after making
all his men pass before him, and go in
through the door, the chief entered also,
and the door closed.
‘The robbers remained within the rock
for a considerable time; and Ali Baba
was compelled to remain in the tree, and
wait with patience for their departure, as
he was afraid to leave his place of refuge
and endeavour to save himself by flight,
lest some of the horsemen should come
out and discover him.
‘At length the door opened, and the
forty robbers came out. The captain, con-
trary to his former proceeding, made his
appearance first. After he had seen all his
troops pass out before him, Ali Baba heard
him pronounce these words: Shut Se-
same!” Each man then returned to his
horse, put on its bridle, fastened his bag,
and mounted. When the captain saw
that they were all ready to proceed, he put
himself at their head, and they departed on
the road by which they had come.


- I I


‘Recovering from her alarm, his wife
began to rejoice with Ali Baba on the good
fortune which had befallen them, and was
about to count over the money that lay be-
fore her, piece by piece. “What are you
going to do?” said he. “You are very
foolish, O wife, you would never have
done counting this mass. I will imme-
diately dig a pit to bury it in—we have no
time to lose.” “But it is only right,” re-
‘Ali Baba followed them with his eyes
till he could see them no longer, and, in
order to be more secure, delayed his des-
cent till a considerable time after he had
lost sight of them. As he recollected the
words the captain of the robbers had used
to open and shut the door, he had the
curiosity to try if the same effect would
be produced by his pronouncing them.
He therefore made his way through the
bushes till he came to the door, which
they concealed. He went up to it, and
called: “Open sesame!” and the door in-
stantly flew wide open.
‘Ali Baba expected to find only a dark
and gloomy cave, and was much astonish-
ed at seeing a large, spacious, well-lighted
and vaulted room, dug out of the rock, and
so high that he could not touch the roof
with his hand. It received its light from
an opening at the top of the rock. He ob-
served in it a large quantity of provisions,
numerous bales of rich merchandise, a
store of silk stuffs and brocades, and be-
sides all this, great quantities of mbney,
both silver and gold, partly piled up in
heaps and partly stored in large leather
bags, placed one on another. At the sight
of all these things, it seemed to him that
this cave must have been used for cen-
turies, as a retreat for successive genera-
tions of robbers.
‘Ali Baba did not hesitate long as to the
plan he should pursue. He went into the
cave, and as soon as he was there the door
shut, but as he knew the secret by which
to open it, this circumstance gave him no
sort of uneasiness. He paid no attention
to the silver, but made directly for the gold
coin, and particularly that portion which
was in the bags. He took up in several
journeys as much as he could carry, ajid
when he had got together what he thought
sufficient for loading his three asses, he
went and collected them together, as they
had strayed to some distance. He then
brought them as close as he could to the
rock, and loaded them; and in order to
conceal the sacks, he so covered the whole
over with wood, that no one could per-
ceive that his beasts had any other load.
When he had finished his task he went
up to the door, and pronounced the words;
“Shut, sesame!’’ The portal instantly
closed; for although it shut of itself every
time he went in, it remained open on com-
ing out till he commanded.it to close.
‘Ali Baba now took the road to town;
and when he got to his own house he drove
his asses into a small courtyard, and shut
the gate with great care. He threw down
the faggots of brushwood that covered the
bags, and carried the latter into his house,
where he laid them down in a row before
his wife.
‘His wife felt the sacks to find out what
might be their contents; and when she
found them to be full of money, she sus-
pected her husband of having stolen them;
and when he laid them all before her, she
could not help saying: “Ali Baba, is it
possible that you should —?” He imme-
diately interrupted her. ‘‘Peace, my dear
wife,” he exclaimed, ‘‘do not alarm your-
self: I am not a thief, unless it be robbery
to deprive thieves of their plunder. You
will change your opinion of me when I
have told you my good fortune.” Here-
upon he emptied the sacks, the contents
of which formed a great heap of gold, that
quite dazzled his wife’s eyes; and when he
had done, he related his whole adventure,
and in conclusion he entreated her to keep/
it secret.
plied the wife, “that we should know
nearly what quantity there may be. I
will go and borrow a small measure from
one of our neighbours, and whilst you are
digging the pit I will ascertain how much
we have.” “What you want to do, wife,”
replied Ali Baba, “is of no use. However,
you shall have your own way; only re-
member not to betray the secret.”
‘Persisting in her design, the wife of Ali
Baba set off, and went to her brother-in-
law, Cassim, who lived at a short distance


from her house. Cassim was from home;
so she addressed herself to his wife, whom
she begged to lend her a measure for a fey
minutes. Cassims wife inquired if sffc
wanted a large or a small one, to which
Ali Baba’s wife replied that a small one
would suit her. “That I will lend you with
pleasure,” said the sister-in-law; “wait a
moment, and I will bring it you.” She
went to bring a measure; but, knowing the
poverty of Ali Baba, she was curious to
know what sort of grain his wife wanted
to measure; she bethought herself, there-
fore, of putting some tallow under the
measure, in such a way that it could not
be observed.
The wife pf Ali Baba returned home,
and placing the measure on the heap of
gold, filled and emptied it at a little dist-
ance on the sofa, till she had measured the
whole mass. Her husband having by this
time dug the pit for its reception, she in-
formed him how many measures there
were, and both rejoiced at the magnitude
of the treasure. While Ali Baba was
burying the gold, his wife carried back the
measure to her sister-in-law, without ob-
serving that a piece of gold had stuck to
the bottom of it. “Here, sister,” said she,
on returning it, “you see I have not kept
your measure long; lam much obliged to
you for lending it me.”
‘So soon as the wife of Ali Baba had
taken her departure, Cassim’s wife looked
at the bottom of the measure, and was in-
expressibly astonished to see a piece of
gold sticking to it. Envy instantly took
j&ssession of her breast. “What!” said
she to herself, has AH Baba such an
abundance of gold that he measures, in-
stead of counting it? can that mis-
erable wretch have got it?” Her husband
Cassim was from home: he had gone as
usual to his shop, from whence he would
not return till evening. The time of his
absence appeared an age to her, for she
was burning with impatience to acquaint
him with a circumstance which, she con-
cluded, would surprise him as much as
it had astonished her.
On Cassim s return home, his wife said
to him: Cassim, you think you are rich,
but you are deceived; Ali Baba has in-
finitely more wealth than you can boast:
he does not count his money as you do,
he measures it.” Cassim demanded an ex-
planation of this enigma, and his wife un-
ravelled it by acquainting him with the
expedient she had used to make this dis-
covery, and showing him the piece of
money she had found adhering to the bot-
tom of the measure.
‘Far from feeling any pleasure at the
good fortune which had rescued his bro-
ther from poverty, conceived an
implacable jealousy. The next morning,
before sunrise he went to Ali Baba. “O
Ali Baba,” said he, ‘you are very reserved
in your affairs: you pretend to be poor and
wretched and a beggar, and yet you have
so much money that you must measure
it. “O, my brother,” replied AH Baba,
I do not understand; pray explain your-
self.” “Do not pretend ignorance,” re-
sumed Cassim; and showing AH Baba the
piece of gold his wife had given him, he
continued: “how many pieces have you
like this that my wife found sticking to
the bottom of the measure which your
wife borrowed of her yesterday.”
‘From this speech AH Baba at once
understood that, in consequence of his
own wife s obstinacy, Cassim and his wife
were already acquainted with the fact he
was so anxious to conceal from them; but
the discovery was made, and nothing could
now be done to remedy the evil. Without
showing the slightest sign of surprise or
vexation, he frankly owned to his brother
by what chance he had found out the re-
treat of the thieves, and where it was situ-
ated; and he offered, if Cassim would
agree to keep the secret, to share the trea-
sure with him.
‘ “This I certainly expect you to do,”
replied Cassim in a haughty tone; and he
added: but I demand to know also the
precise spot where this treasure lies con-
cealed, and the signs which may enable me
to visit the place myself. If you refuse
this information I will go and inform the
police, and you will not only be deprived
of all hope of obtaining any more money,
but you will even lose that you have al-
ready taken; whereas I shall receive my
portion for having informed against you.”


‘Actuated more by his natural goodness
of heart, than intimidated by the insolent
menaces of this cruel brother, Ali Baba
gave him all the information he demanded,
and even told him the words he must pro-
nounce both on entering the cave and on
quitting it. Cassim made no further in-
quiries of Ali Baba: he left him with the
determination of being beforehand with
him in any further views he might have
on the treasure. Full of the hope of pos-
sessing himself of the whole mass, he set
off the next morning, before break of day,
with ten mules furnished with large ham-
pers which he proposed to fill. He took
the road which Ali Baba had pointed out,
and arrived at the rock and the tree, which,
from the description, he knew to be the
one that had concealed his brother. He
looked for the door, and soon discovered
it; and to cause it to open he pronounced
the words: “Open, sesame!” The door
obeyed, he entered, and it immediately
closed behind him. On examining the
cave, he felt the utmost astonishment on
seeing so much more wealth than the des-
cription of Ali Baba had left him to ex-
pect; and his admiration increased as he
examined each department separately.
Avaricious and fond of money as he was,
he could have passed the whole day in
feasting his eyes with the sight of so much
gold, but he reflected that he had come to
load his ten mules with as much treasure
as he could collect. He took up a number
of sacks, and coming to the door, his mind
distracted by a multitude of ideas, found
that 'he had forgotten the important
words, and instead of pronouncing “se-
same,” he said, “Open, barley.” He was
thunderstruck on perceiving that the door,
instead of flying open, remained closed.
He named the various other kinds of
grain, all but the right description, but the
door did not move.
Cassim was not prepared for an ad-
venture of this kind. Fear took entire
possession of his mind. The more he en-
deavoured to recollect the word sesame,
the more was his memory confused; and
he remained as far from any recollection
of it as if he had never heard of the word
mentioned. He threw to the ground the
sacks he had collected, and paced with
hasty steps backward and forward in the
cave. The riches which surrounded him
had no longer any charms for his imagina-
tion.
‘Towards noon the robbers returned to
their cave, and when they saw the mules
belonging to Cassim standing about the
rock laden with hampers, they were
greatly surprised. They immediately
drove away the ten mules, which Cassim
had neglected to fasten, and which, there-
fore, dispersed in the forest. The robbers
did not give themselves the trouble to run
after the mules, for their chief object was
to discover the owner of the beasts. While
some were employed in searching the ex-
terior recesses of the rock, the captain,
with the rest, alighted, and drawing their
sabres, the party went towards the door,
pronounced the magic words, and it
opened.
‘Cassim, who from the inside of the
cave had heard the noise of horses tramp-
ling on the ground, felt certain that the
robbers had arrived, and tfiat his death was
inevitable. Resolved, however, to make
one effort to escape, and reach some place
of safety, he posted himself near the door,
ready to run out as soon as it should open.
The word, “sesame,” which he had in vain
endeavoured to recall to his remembrance,
was scarcely pronounced when the portal
opened, and he rushed out with such vio-
lence that he threw the captain to the
ground. He could not, however, avoid
the other thieves, who cut him to pieces
on the spot.
‘The next proceeding of the robbers
after this execution was to enter the cave.
They found, near the door, the bags which
Cassim, after filling with gold, had re-
moved there for the convenience of
loading his mules; and they put them in
their places again without observing the
absence of those which Ali Baba had pre-
viously carried away. Conjecturing and
consulting upon this event, they could
easily account for Cassim’s inability to
effect his escape, but they could not in any
way imagine how he had been able to enter
the cave. They supposed that he might
have descended from the top of the cave,


but the opening which admitted the light
was so high, and the summit of the rock
so inaccessible on the outside, that they all
agreed such a feat was impossible. They
could not suppose he had entered by the
door, unless he had discovered the pass-
word which caused it to open, but they
felt quite secure that they alone were
possessed of this secret, for they were ig-
norant of having been overheard bv Ali
Baba.
But as the manner in which this entry
had been effected remained a mystery, and
then united riches were no longer in
safety, they agreed to cut the corpse of
Cassim into four quarters and place them
in the cave near the door, two quarters
on one side, and two on the other, to
frighten away any one who might have
the boldness to hazard a similar enterprise;
resolving, themselves, not to return to the
cave for some time. This determination
they put into immediate execution, and
when they had nothing further to detain
them, they left their place of retreat well
secured, mounted their horses, and set off
to scour the country, and, as before, to
infest the roads most frequented by cara-
vans, which afforded them favourable op-
portunities of plundering.
wife of Cassim in the meantime
began to feel very uneasy when she ob-
served night approach, and yet her hus-
band did not return. She went in the ut-
™°s? alarm to Ali Baba, and said to him:
O brother, I believe you are well aware
that Cassim is gone to the forest,' and for
what purpose. He has not yet come back,
fr * ear t^lat some accident may have
befallen him,’’
Ali Baba suspected his brother’s inten-
tion after the conversation he had held
with him, and for this reason he had abs-
tained from visiting the forest on that day,
that he might not offend Cassim. How-
ever, he replied that she need not yet feel
a ?y for that Cassim most prob-
ably thought it prudent not to return to
the city until the daylight had entirely van-
!shed. The wife of Cassim felt satisfied
with this reason, and was the more easily
persuaded of its truth when she considered
how important it was that her husband
should use the greatest secrecy for the
accomplishment of his purpose. She re-
turned to her house, and waited patiently
till midnight, but after that hour her fears
returned with twofold strength, and her
grief was the greater, as she could not pro-
claim it, nor even relieve it by cries, which
plight have caused suspicion and inquiry
m the neighbourhood. She then began to
repent of the silly curiosity which, height-
ened by envy, had induced her to endea-
vour to pry into the private affairs of
her brother and sister-in-law. She spent
the night in weeping, and at break of day
she ran to Ali Baba, and announced the
cause of her early visit less by her words
than by her tears.
Ali Baba did not wait till his sister en-
treated him to go and seek for Cassim.
After advising the disconsolate wife to
restrain her grief, he immediately set off
with his three asses, and went to the for-
est. As he drew near the rock, he was
much astonished on observing that blood
had been shed near the door, and not hav-
ing met in his way either his brother or
the ten mules, he looked on this as an un-
favourable omen. He reached the door,
and on his pronouncing the words, it
opened. He was struck with horror when
he discovered the body of his brother cut
into four quarters, yet notwithstanding
the small share of fraternal affection he
had received from Cassim during his life,
he did not hesitate on the course he was
to pursue in rendering the last act of duty
to his brother’s remains. He found ma-
terials in the cave wherein to wrap up the
body, and making two packets of the four
quarters, he placed them on one of his
asses, covering them with sticks to con-
ceal them. The other two asses he ex-
peditiously loaded with sacks of gold,
putting wood over them as on the preced-
ing occasion; and having finished all he
had to do, and commanded the door to
close, he took the road to the city, taking
care to wait at the entrance of the forest
until night had closed, that he might re-
turn without being observed. When he
got home he left the two asses that were
aden with gold, desiring his wife to take
care to unload them; and after telling her


in a few words what had happened to
Cassim, he led the third ass away to his
sister-in-law. . ,
AH Baba knocked at the door, which
was opened to him by a female slave
named Morgiana. This Morgiana was
crafty, cunning, and Ali Baba knew her
abilities well. AVhen he had entered the
courtyard, he unloaded the wood and the
two packages from the ass, and taking the
slave aside, he said: Morgiana, the first
thing I have to request of you is inviolable
secrecy. These two packets contain the
body of your master, and we must en-
deavour to bury him as if he had died a
natural death. Let me speak to your mis-
tress, and take good heed of what I shall
say to her.’
Morgiana went to acquaint her mis-
tress that Ali Baba had returned, and Ah
Baba followed her. “Well, brother, in-
quired his sister-in-law, in an impatient
tone, “what news do you bring of my hus-
band?’’ “O my sister,’’ replied Ali Baba,
“I cannot answer you, unless you first
promise to listen to me from the begin-
ning to the end of my story without in-
terruption. It is of no less importance to
you than to me, under the present circum-
stances, to preserve the greatest secrecy.
Discretion is absolutely necessary for your
repose and security. Ah, cried the
sister in a mournful voice, “this preamble
convinces me that my husband is no more;
but at the same time I feel the necessity
of the secrecy you require.
Ali Baba then related to her all that had
happened during his journey, until he had
brought away the body of Cassim. Sis-
ter,” added he, “here is a great and sud-
den affliction for you. The evil is with-
out remedy, but nevertheless, if my good
offices can acord you consolation, 1 offer
to join the small property Heaven has
granted me to yours, by marrying you. I
can assure you my wife will not be jealous,
and you will live comfortably together. If
this proposal meets your approbation, we
must contrive to bury my brother as if he
had died a natural death; and this is an
office which I think you may safely en-
trust to Morgiana. and I will, on my part,
contribute all in my power t a assist her.”
‘The widow of Cassim reflected that she
could not do better than consent to this
offer, for Ali Baba now possessed greater
riches than she could boast, and besides,
by the discovery of the treasure, might
increase them considerably. She did not,
therefore, refuse his proposal, but, on the
contrary, regarded it as a reasonable
source of consolation. She wiped away
her tears, and testified to Ali Baba that she
accepted his offer.
‘Ali Baba having strongly recommen-
ded to Morgiana to use the utmost
tion in the difficult part she was to per-
form, returned home with his ass.
Morgiana did not belie her character
for cunning. She went out witn Ali Baba,
and betook herself to an apothecary who
lived in the neighbourhood. She knocked
at the shop door, and when it was opened
asked for a particular kind of lozenge, sup-
posed to possess great efficacy in danger-
ous disorders. The apothecary gave her
as much as the money she offered would
pay for, asking who was ill in her master s
family. “Alas!” exclaimed she, with a
deep sigh, “it is my worthy master, Cas-
sim himself. No one can understand his
complaint: he can neither speak nor eat.
So saying, she carried off the lozenges,
which Cassim would never need more.
‘On the following day Morgiana again
went to the same apothecary, and with
tears in her eyes inquired for an essence
which it was customary only to administer
when the patient was reduced to the last
extremity, and when no other remedy had
been left untried. “Alas!” cried she, as
she received it from the hands of the apo-
thecary, “I fear this remedy will not be of
more use than the lozenges. ‘ I lose
my beloved master!”
‘Moreover, as Ali Baba and his wife
were seen going to and from the house of
CaSsim in the course of the day, no one
was surprised when, towards evening, the
piercing cry of the widow and Morgiana
announced the death of Cassim. At a
very early hour the next morning, Mor-
giana, knowing that a good old cobbler
lived some distance off who was one of
the first to open his shop, went out to visit
him. Coming up to him, she wished him


a good day, and put a piece of gold into
His hand.
Baba Mustapha, a man well known
through all the city was naturally of a gay
turn, and had always something laugh-
able to say. He examined the piece of
money, and seeing that it was gold, he
said; This is good wage; what is to be
done? lam ready to do your bidding.”
Baba Mustapha, said Morgiana to him,
take all your materials for sewing, and
come directly with me; but I insist on this
condition, that you let me put a bandage
over your eyes when we have got to a cer-
tain place. At these words Baba Mus-
tapha began to make objections. ‘‘Oh,
ho! said he, you- want me to do some-
thing against my conscience or my hon-
our. But Morgiana interrupted him by
putting another piece of gold into his hand.
“Allah forbid,” she said, “that I should
require you to do anything that would
stain your honour; only come with me
and fear nothing.”
Baba Mustapha suffered himself to
be led by the slave, who bound a hand-
kerchief over his eyes, and brought him
to her deceased master s house; nor did
she remove the bandage until he was in
the chamber where the body was de-
posited, the severed quarters having been
put together. Taking off the covering,
she said: Baba Mustapha, I have brought
you hither that you might sew these pieces
together. Lose no time; and when you
have done I will give you another piece
of gold.”
‘When Baba Mustapha had finished his
work, Morgiana bound his eyes again be-
fore he left the chamber, and after giving
him the third piece of money, according
to her promise, and earnestly recommend-
mg him to keep her secret, she conduc-
ted him to the place where she had first
put on the handkerchief. Here she took
the bandage from his eyes, and left him
to return to his house, watching, however,
until he was out of sight, lest he should
have the curiosity to return and notice her
movements.
Morgiana had heated some water to
wash the body of Cassim; and Ali Baba,
who entered just as she returned, washed
it, perfumed it with incense, and wrap-
ped it in the burying-clothes with the cus-
tomary ceremonies. The joiner also
brought the coffin which Ali Baba had
taken care to order. In order that he
might not observe anything particular,
Morgiana received the coffin at the door,
and having paid the man and sent him
away, she assisted Ali Baba to put the
body into it. When he had nailed down
the lid of thd coffin, she went to the
mosque to give notice that everything
was ready for the funeral.
Morgiana had scarcely returned before
the Iman and the other ministers of the
mosque arrived. Four of the neighbours
took the coffin on their shoulders, and car-
ried it to the cemetery, following the Iman,
who repeated prayers as he went along.
Morgiana, as slave to the deceased, walked
next, with her head uncovered. She was
bathed in tears, and uttered the most pite-
ous cries from time to time. Ali Baba
closed the procession, accompanied by
some of the neighbours.
‘As for the widow of Cassim, she re-
mained at home to lament and weep with
the women of the neighbourhood, who,
according to the usual custom, had re-
paired to her house during the ceremony
of the burial. In this manner the fatal
end of Cassim was so well dissembled and
concealed by Ali Baba and the rest, that
no one in the city had the least suspicion
of the manner in which he had come by
his death.
Three or four days after the interment
of Cassim, Ali Baba removed the few
goods he possessed, together with the
money he had taken from the robbers’
store, which he conveyed by night into
the house of the widow of Cassim, in
order to establish himself there, and thus
announce his marriage with his sister-in-
law; and as such matches are by no means
extraordinary in that religion, no one
showed any marks of surprise on the occa-
sion.
Ali Baba had a son who had passed a
certain time with a merchant of consider-
able repute, who had always bestowed the
highest commendations on his conduct. To
this son he gave the shop of Cassim, with


a further promise that if the young man
continued to behave with prudence, he
would, ere long, marry him advantage-
ously.
Leaving Ali Baba to enjoy his newly-
acquired fortune, we will now return to
the forty thieves. They came back to
their retreat in the forest when the time
they had agreed to be absent had expired;
but their astonishment was indescribable
when they found the body of Cassim gone,
and it was greatly increased on perceiving
a visible diminution of their treasure. “We
are discovered,” said the captain, “and en-
tirely ruined if we are not very careful, or
neglect to take immediate measures to
remedy the evil; we shall by degrees lose
all these riches which our ancestors, as well
as we, have amassed with so much trouble
and fatigue. All that we can at present
judge concerning the loss we have sus-
tained is, that the thief whom we surprised
at the fortunate moment, when he was
going to make his escape, knew the secret
of opening the door. But he was not the
only one who possessed that secret: an-
other must have the same knowledge. The
removal of his body and the diminution
of our treasure are incontestable proofs of
the fact. And, as we have no reason to
suppose that more than two people are
acquainted with the secret, having de-
stroyed one, we must not suffer the other
to escape. What say you, my brave com-
rades? Are you not of my opinion?”
‘This proposal of the captain’s was
thought so reasonable that the whole troop
approved it, and agreed that it would be
advisable to relinquish every other enter-
prise, and occupy themselves solely with
this affair, which they should not abandon
until they had succeeded in detecting the
thief.
‘ “I expected this decision, from your
own courage and bravery,” resumed the
captain; ‘‘but the first thing to be done is,
that one of you who is bold, courageous,
and cunning, should go to the city un-
armed and in the dress of a traveller and
employ all his art to discover if the sin-
gular death we inflicted on the culprit
whom we destroyed is the common topic
of conversation. Then he must find out
who this man was, and where he lived. It
is absolutely necessary we should be ac-
quainted with this, that we may not do
anything of which we may have to repent,
by making ourselves known in a country
where we have been so long forgotten, and
where it is so much to interests to remain
undisturbed. But in order to inspire with
ardour him who shall undertake this com-
mission, and to prevent his bringing us a
false report, which might occasion our
total ruin, I propose that he should consent
to submit to the penalty of death in case
of failure.”
‘Without waiting till his companions
should speak, one of the robbers said; ‘‘l
willingly agree to these terms, and glory
in exposing my life in the execution of
such a commission. If I should fail, you
will at least remember that I have dis-
played both courage and readiness in my
offer to serve the whole troop.”
‘Amid the commendations of the cap-,
tain and his companions, the robber dis-
guised himself in such a way that no one
could have suspected him of belonging to
the nefarious trade he followed. He set
off at night, and entered the city just as
day was beginning to appeefr. He went
towards the public bazaar, where he saw
only one shop open, and that was the shop
of Baba Mustapha.
‘The jovial cobbler was seated on his
stool ready to begin work. The robber
went up to him, and wished him good
morning, saying, ‘‘My good man, you rise
betimes to your work; how is it possible
that an old man like you can see clearly at
this early hour? Even if it were broad
day, I doubt whether your eyes are good
enough to see the stitches you make.”
‘ ‘‘Whoever you are,’ replied Baba Mus-
tapha, ‘‘you do not know much about me.
Notwithstanding my age, I have excellent
eyes; and you would have confessed as
much, had you known that not long since
I sewed up a dead body in a place where
there was not more light than we have
here.”
‘The robber felt greatly elated at hav-
ing on his arrival addressed himself to a
man who of his own accord entered upon
the very subject on which he ardently


Should I feel inclined to grant your
request, replied Baba Mustapha, holding
the piece of money in his hand as if ready
to return it, “I assure you that I could not
do it. And I will tell you why I must re-
fuse. My employers took me to a par-
ticular place, and there they bound my
eyes; and from thence I suffered myself to
be led to the house; and when I had fin-
ished what 1 had to do I was brought back
to my own house in th«$ame manner. You
see, therefore, how impossible it is that I
should ser*e you in this matter.” “But
wished to gain information. “A dead
body!” replied he with feigned astonish-
ment, to induce the other to proceed.
“Why should you want to sew up a dead
body? I suppose you mean that you
sewed the shroud in which he was buried.”
No, no, said Baba Mustapha, I know
what 1 mean: you want me to tell you
more about it, but you shall not hear
another syllable. ”
The robber required no further proof
to be fully convinced that he was on the
right road to discover what he wished to
know. He produced a piece of gold, and
Putting it into Baba Mustapha’s hand, he
said: I have no desire to cheat you of
your secret, although I can assure you I
should not divulge it even if you entrusted
me with it. The only favour I beg is that
you will have the goodness to direct me to
the house where you sewed up the dead
body or that you will come with me, and
show me the way.”
at least,” resumed the robber, “you must
nearly remember the way you went after
your eyes were bound. Pray come with
me, I will put a bandage over your eyes
at the place where you were blindfolded,
and we will walk together along the same
streets, and follow the same turning,
which you will probably recollect to have
taken, and as all labour deserves a reward,
here is another piece of gold. Come, grant
me this favour.” And as he spoke he. put
another piece of money into the cobbler’s
hand.
The two pieces of gold were a sore
temptation to Baba Mustapha. At length
he drew his purse from his bosom, and
putting the gold into it, replied: ‘‘l can-
not positively assure you that I remember
exactly the way they took me; but since
you will have it so, come along; I will do
my best to satisfy you.”
To the great satisfaction of the robber,
Baba Mustapha conducted the robber to
the spot where Morgiana had put the ban-
dage over his eyes. ‘This is the place,”
said he, “where my eyes were bound; and
then my face was turned in this direction.”
The robber, who had his handkerchief
ready, tied it over Mustapha’s eyes, and
walked by his side, partly leading him,
and partly led by him, till Baba Mustapha
stopped.
I think, said he, ‘ I did not go farther
than this ; and he was in fact exactly be-
fore the house which had once belonged
to Cassim, and where Ali Baba now re-
sided. Before taking the bandage from
the cobbler’s eyes, the robber quickly
made a mark on the door with some chalk
he had brought for the purpose; and when
he had taken the handkerchief off, he asked
Baba Mustapha if he knew to whom the
house belonged. The cobbler replied that
he did not live in that quarter of the town,
therefore could not tell. As the rob-
ber found that he could gain no further
intelligence from Baba Mustapha, he
thanked him for the trouble he had taken;
and when he had seen the cobbler turn
away to go to his shop, he'took the road
to the forest, where he felt certain he
should be well received.
Soon after the robber and Baba Mus-
tapha had separated, Morgiana had occa-
sion to go out on some errand; and when
she returned she observed the mark which
the robber had made on the door of Ali
Baba s house. She stopped to examine it.
What can this mark signify?” thought
she. Has any one a spite against my
master, or has it been made only for diver-
sion? Be the motive what it may, 1 may
as well use precautions against the worst
that may happen. She therefore took
some chalk; and as several of the doors
on each side of her master’s house were of
the same appearance, she marked them in
the same manner, and then went in, with-


out saying anything of what she had done
either to her master or mistress.
‘ln the meantime, the thief made the
best of his way back into the forest, where
he rejoined his companions. He related
the success of his journey. They all lis-
tened to him with great satisfaction, and
the captain, after praising his diligence,
thus addressed the rest: “Comrades,’’ said
he, “we have no time to lose: let us arm
ourselves and depart; and when we have
entered the city (whither we had best go
separately, not to create suspicion), let
us all assemble in the great square', some
on one side of it, some on the other; and
I will go and find out the house with our
companion who has brought us this good
news, and then I shall be able to judge
what method will be most advantageous
to pursue.”
‘The robbers all applauded their cap-
tain’s proposal, and they were very soon
equipped for their departure. They went
in small parties of two or three together ;
and, walking at a certain distance from
each other, they entered the city without
occasioning any suspicion. The captain
and the robber who had been there in the
morning were the last to enter it; and the
latter conducted the captain to the street
in which he had marked the house of Ali
Baba. When they reached the first door
that had been marked by Morgiana, the
thief pointed it out, saying that was the
one he had marked. But as they contin-
ued walking, the captain perceived that the
next door was marked in the same manner,
and pointed out this circumstance to his
guide, inquiring whether this was the
house, or the one they had passed? His
guide was quite confused, and knew not
what to answer; and his embarrassment
increased, when, on proceeding with the
captain, he found that four or five doors
successively had the same mark. He as-
sured the captain, with an oath, that he
had marked but one. “I cannot conceive,”
added he, “who can have imitated my
mark with so much exactness; but I can-
not now distinguish my mark from the
others.”
The captain, who found that his design
was frustrated, returned to the great
square, where he told the first of his people
whom he met to inform the rest that they
had made a fruitless expedition, and that
now there was nothing to be done but
to return to their place of retreat. He set
the example, and they all followed.
‘When the troop had reassembled in the
forest, the captain explained to them the
reason why he had ordered them to re-
turn. The spy was unanimously declared
deserving of death, and he acquiesced in
his condemnation, owning that he should
have been more cautious in taking his
measures: and advancing with a serene
countenance, he submitted to the stroke
of a companion who was ordered to strike
his head from his body.
‘As it was necessary, for the safety and
preservation of the whole band, that the
great injury they had suffered should not
pass unavenged, another robber, who flat-
tered himself with the hopes of better suc-
cess than had attended the first, presented
himself, and requested the preference. It
was granted him. He went to the city,
corrupted Baba Mustapha by the same ar-
tifice that the first robber had used, and the
cobbler led him to th§ house of Ali Baba
with his eyes bound.
The thief marked the door with red
chalk in a place where it would be less
noticed; thinking that would be a sure
method of distinguishing it from those that
were marked with white. But a short
time afterwards Morgiana went out as on
the preceding day, and on her return the
red mark did not escape her piercing eye.
She immediately made a similar red mark
on the neighbouring doors.
‘When he returned to his companions
in the forest, the thief boasted of the pre-
cautions he had taken, which he declared
to be infallible, to distinguish the house
of Ali Baba from the others. The captain
and the rest agreed with him, and all
thought themselves sure of success. They
repaired to the city in the same order and
with as much care as before, armed also in
the same way, ready to execute the blow
they had meditated. The captain and the
robber went immediately to the street
where Ali Baba resided, but the same diffi-
culty occurred as on the former occasion.


The captain was irritated, and the thief as
utterly confounded as he who had pre-
ceded him in the same business.
Thus was the captain obliged to return
a second time with his comrades, as little
satisfied with his expedition as he had been
on the preceding day. The robber who
was the author of the disappointment un-
derwent the punishment which he had
agreed to suffer as the penalty of non-
success.
The captain, seeing his troop dimin-
ished by two brave associates, feared it
might decrease still more if he continued
to trust to others the discovery of the
house where AH Baba resided; Experi-
ence convinced him that his companions
did not excel in affairs that depended on
cunning, as in those in which strength
of arm only was required. He therefore
undertook the business himself. He went
to the city, and with the assistance of Baba
Mustapha, who was ready to perform the
same service for him which he had ren-
dered to the other two, he found the house
of Ali Baba; but, not choosing to trust
to the stratagem of making marks on it,
which had hitherto proved so fallacious, he
imprinted it so thoroughly on his memory,
by looking at it attentively, that at last he
was certain he could not mistake it.
The captain returned to the forest, and
when he reached the cave where the rest
of the robbers were waiting his return, he
said, Comrades, nothing now can prevent
our taking full revenge of the injury that
has been done us. I know with certainty
the house of the culprit who is to experi-
ence our wrath, and on the road I have
meditated a way of quitting scores with
him so privately, that no one shall be able
to discover the place of our retreat any
more than the refuge where our treasure
is deposited. I have hit upon a plan to ob-
tain. this end, and when I have explained
the plan to you, if any one can propose
a better expedient, let him speak.’ He
then told them in what manner he in-
tended to conduct the affair, and as they
all gave their approbation, he charged
them to divide into small parties, and go
into the neighbouring towns and villages,
and to buy nineteen mules and thirty-
eight large leathern jars for carrying oil,
one of which jars must be full, and all the
others empty.
‘ln the course of two or three days the
thieves had completed their purchases, and
as the empty jars were rather too narrow
at the mouth for the purpose to which
he intended to apply them, the captain
had them enlarged. Then he made one
of the men, thoroughly armed enter each
jar. He closed the jars, so that they ap-
peared to be full of oil, leaving, however,
tnat part open which had been unsewed,
to admit air for the men to breathe; and
the better to carry on the deception, he
rubbed the outside of each jar with oil
which he took from the full one.
Things being thus prepared, the mules
were laden with the thirty-seven robbers,
each concealed in a jar, and with the jar
that was filled with oil. Then the captain,
as conductor, took the road to the city, at
the hour that had been agreed upon, and
arrived about an hour after sunset, as he
proposed. He went straight to the house
of Ali Baba, intending to knock and re-
quest shelter for the night for himself and
His mules. He was, however, spared the
trouble of knocking, for he found Ali
Raba at the door, enjoying the fresh air
after supper. He stopped his mules, and
addressing himself to Ali Baba, said: “My
good friend. I have brought the oil which
you see here from a great distance, to sell
to-morrow in the market, and at this late
hour I do not know where to obtain shel-
ier for the night. If it would not occasion
you much inconvenience, do me the fa-
vour to take me in, and you will confer
a great obligation on me!”
Although in the forest Ali Baba had
seen the man who now spoke to him, and
had even heard his.voice, yet he had no
idea that this was the captain of the forty
robbers, disguised as an oil merchant.
T ou are welcome,” he said, and imme-
diately made room for the visitor and his
mules to go in. At the same time Ali
Baba called a slave, and ordered him,
when the mules were unladen, not only
to put them under cover in the stable but
to give them some hay and corn. He also
took the trouble of going into the kitchen


to desire Morgiana to get supper quickly
for a guest who had just arrived, and to
prepare him a chamber and a bed.
‘Ali Baba went still further in his desire
to receive his guest with all possible civil-
ity. Observing that, after he had unladen
his mules, and they had been taken into
the stables as he had wished, the newcomer
seemed making preparations to pass the
night with them, he went to him to beg
him to come into the room where he re-
ceived company. The captain of the rob-
bers endeavoured to excuse himself from
accepting the invitation, alleging that he
was loth to be troublesome, but in reality
that he might have an opportunity of exe-
cuting his meditated project with more
ease; and it was not until Ali Baba had
used the most urgent persuasions that he
complied with his request.
‘Ali Baba remained with his perfidious
guest, who sought his life in return for his
hospitality, till he had finished the repast
provided for him. He then said: You
are at liberty to do as you please; you
have only to ask for whatever you may
want, and all I have is at your service.”
‘The captain of the robbers rose at the
same time as Ali Baba, and accom-
panied him to the door; and while Ali
Baba went into the kitchen to speak to
Morgiana, he went into the court, under
the pretext of going to the stable to see
after his mules.
‘Ali Baba having aga*a enjoined Morgi-
ana to lie attentive to his guest, added:
“To-morrow before daybreak I shall go
to the bath. Take care that my bathing
linen is ready, and give it to Abdalla” —
this was the name of his slave —“and
make me some good broth to take when
I return.” After giving these orders he
went to bed.
‘The captain of the robbers in the mean-
time, on leaving the stable, went to give
his people the necessary orders for what
they were to do. Beginning at the first
jar, and going through the whole num-
ber, he said to the man in each: “When I
throw some pebbles from the chamber
where I am to be lodged to-night, do not
fail to rip open the jar from top to bottom
with the knife you are furnished with, and
come out: I shall be with you immediately
afterwards.’ The knife he spoke of was
pointed and sharpened for the purpose of
cutting the leathern jars. After giving
these directions, he returned, and when he
got to the kitchen door, Morgiana took
a light and conducted him to the chamber
she had prepared for him, and there left
him. Not to create any suspicion, he put
out the light a short time after, and lay
down in his clothes, to be ready to rise as
soon as he had taken his first sleep.
Morgiana did not forget Ali Baba s or-
ders. She prepared her master’s linen for
the bath, and gave it to Abdalla, who was
not yet gone to bed. Then she put the pot
on the fire to make the broth; but while
she was skimming it the lamp went out.
There was no more oil in the house, and
she had not any candle, so she knew not
what to do. She wanted a light to see to
skim the pot, and mentioned her dilemma
to Abdalla. “Why are you so much dis-
turbed at this?” said he; “go and take
some oil out of one of the jars in the
court.”
‘Morgiana thanked Abdalla for the
hint; and while he retired to bed she took
the oil-can, and went into the court. As
she drew near to the jar that stood first
in the row, the thief who was concealed
within said in a low voice: “Is it time?
‘Any other slave but Morgiana would,
in the first moment of surprise at finding
a man in the jar instead of the oil she ex-
pected, have made a great uproar, which
might have produced terrible conse-
quences. But Morgiana was superior to
the position she held. She was instantly
aware of the importance of secrecy and
caution, and understood the extreme dan-
ger in which Ali Baba and his family as
well as herself, were placed, she also saw
the urgent necessity of devising a speedy
remedy that should be silently executed.
She collected her thoughts, and without
showing any emotion, assumed the man-
ner of the captain, and answered: “Not
yet, but presently.” She approached the
next jar, and the same question was asked


\\ hen Morgiana had thus silently, and
without disturbing any one, performed
us act exactly as shehad con^
her. She went on to all the vessels in suc-
cession, making the same answer to the
same question, till she came to the last jar,
which was full of oil.
Morgiana by this means discovered
that her master, who supposed he was giv-
ing a night s lodging to an oil merchant,
had afforded shelter to thirty-eight robbers,
and that the pretended merchant was their
captain. She quickly filled her oil-can
from the last jar, and returned into the kit-
chen; and after having put some oil in her
lamp, and lighted it, she took a large kettle
and went again into the court to fill it with
oil from the jar. This kettle she immedi-
ately put upon the fire, and made a great
blaze under it with a quantity of wood-
for the sooner the oil boiled, the sooner
her plan for the preservation of the whole
family would be executed, and it required
the utmost dispatch. At length the oil
boiled. She took the kettle and poured
into each jar. from the first to the last,
sufficient boiling oil to scald the robbers to
death, a purpose she effectually carried
out.
ceived it, she returned to the kitchen with
the empty kettle, and shut the door. She
then blew out the lamp, and remained per-
fectly silent; determined not to go to bed
until, from a window of the kitchen which
overlooked the court, she had observed
what would ensue.
Morgiana had scarcely waited a quar-
ter of an hour, when the captain of the
robbers awoke. He got up, opened the
':>• ' -
—S*


desired; and perceiving a man in the jar,
he hastily drew back, and uttered a cry of
surprise. * Do not be afraid, said she,
“the man you see there will not do you
any harm; he will never hurt either you
or any else again, for he is now a corpse.
“Morgiana!’ exclaimed Ali Baba “what
does all this mean? I command you to ex-
plain this mystery. I will explain it,
window, and looked out. All was dark,
and a profound silence reigned around:
he gave the signal by throwing the
pebbles, many of which struck the jars, as
the sound plainly proved. He listened,
but heard nothing that could lead him to
suppose his men obeyed the summons. He
became uneasy at this delay, and threw
some pebbles a second, and even a third
time. They all struck the jars, yet noth-
ing appeared to indicate that the signal
was answered. In the utmost alarm, he
descended into the court, and approaching
the first jar, intending to ask if the robber
contained in it, and whom he supposed
still living, was asleep, he smelt a strong
scent of nut and burning oil issuing from
the jar. Then he began to suspect that
his enterprise against Ali Baba, to destroy
him, pillage his house, and carry off, if
possible, all the money which he had taken
from him and the community, had failed.
He proceeded to the next jar, and to all
in succession, and discovered that all his
men had shared the same fate; and by the
diminution of the oil in the vessel which
he had brought full, he guessed the means
that had been used to deprive him of the
assistance he expected. Mortified at hav-
ing thus missed his aim, he jumped over
the garden gate, which led out of the
court; and going from one garden to
another by getting over the walls, he made
his escape.
‘When Morgiana perceived that all was
silent and still, and that the captain of the
thieves did not return, she suspected the
truth; namely, that he had decamped by
the gardens, instead of attempting to es-
cape by the house door, which was fast-
ened with double bolts. Fully satisfied he
was gone, and overjoyed at having suc-
ceeded in securing the safety of the whole
family, she at length retired to bed, and
soon fell asleep.
‘Ali Baba went out before daybreak,
and repaired to the bath, followed by his
slave, totally ignorant of the surprising
event which had taken place in his house
during the night; for Morgiana had not
thought it necessary to wake him.
‘When he returned from the bath, the
sun had risen. Ali Baba was surprised
to see the jars of oil still in their places,
and to find that the merchant had not
taken them to the market, with his mules.
He inquired the reason of Morgiana, who
let him in, and who had left everything in
its original state, that she might impress
him with the greatest sense of the effort
she had made for his preservation.
‘ “My good master,” said Morgiana to
Ali Baba, “may Heaven preserve you and
ail your family. You will be better in-
formed of what you wish to know when
you have seen what I am going to show
you.” Ali Baba followed Morgiana; and
when she had shut the door, she took him
to the first jar, and bade him look into it
and see if it contained oil. He did as she
replied Morgiana; “but moderate your as-
tonishment, and do not awaken the curios-
ity of your neighbours, or let them hear
what is of the utmost importance that you
should keep secret and concealed. Look
first at all the other ars.”
‘Ali Baba examined the jars, one after
the other, from the first till he came to the
last, which contained the oil; and he re-
marked that its contents were consider-
ably diminished. When his survey was
completed, he stood motionless with as-
tonishment, sometimes casting his eyes
on Morgiana, then looking at the jars, but
without speaking a word, so great was his
surprise. At lepgth he said: And what
has become of the merchant?”
‘ “The merchant,” replied Morgiana, “is
no more a merchant than 1 am. 1 can tell
you who he is and what is become of him.
‘ln obedience to Ali Baba s request,
Morgiana told him of all the events of the
preceding night, of how she discovered
and killed the thirty-seven thieves and of
the escape of the captain of the band.
‘When she had finished her narrative,
Morgiana added: “1 am convinced that


this is the conclusion of a scheme of which
I observed the beginning two or three days
ago, but with the particulars of which 1 did
not think necessary to trouble you. One
morning, as 1 returned from the city at an
early hour, I perceived the street door
marked with white, and on the following
day there was a red mark near the white
one; each time, without knowing for what
purpose these marks were made, I made
the same kind of mark, and in the same
part, on the doors of three or four of our
neighbours on each side of this house. If
you connect that fact with, what has hap-
pened, you will find that the whole is a
scheme, contrived by the thieves of the
forest, whose troop, I know now where-
fore, seems to be diminished by two. But
be that as it may, the band is now reduced
to three at most. This proves that the
robbers had determined on your death,
and you will do right to be on your guard
against them so long as you are certain
that one still remains. On my part, I
will do all in my power towards your
safety.
When Morgiana ceased speaking, Ali
Baba, filled with gratitude for the great
obligation he owed her, replied: “I will
recompense you as you deserve before I
die. I owe my life to you; and to give
you an immediate proof of my feelings,
I give you your liberty from this moment,
and will soon reward you in a more ample
manner. lam as thoroughly convinced
as you are, that the forty robbers laid this
snare for me. Through your means Allah
has delivered me from the danger. What
we have now to do is to use the utmost
despatch in buryipg the bodies of this pest
of the human race. Vet we must do so
with so much secrecy, that no one can
entertain the slightest suspicion of their
fate, and for this purpose I will instantly-
go to work with Abdalla.
Ali Baba s garden was of considerable
size, and terminated in a clump of large
trees. He went, without delay, with his
slave, to dig under these trees a ditch or
grave, of sufficient length and breadth
to contain the bodies he had to inter. The
ground was soft, and easy to remove, so
that they w y ere not long in completing their
work. They took the bodies out of the
jars, and removed the weapons with which
the robbers had furnished themselves.
They then carried the bodies to the bot-
tom of the garden, and placed them in the
grave, and after having covered them with
the earth they had previously removed,
they spread what remained to make the
surface of the ground appear even, as it
was before. Ali Baba carefully concealed
the oil jars and the arms; as for the mules,
he sent them to the market at different
times, and disposed of them by means of
his slave.
Whilst Ali Baba was taking these pre-
cautions to prevent it being publicly
known by what means he had become
rich in so short a space of time, the cap-
tain of the forty thieves had returned to
the forest mortified beyond measure; and
in the agitation and confusion which he
experienced at having met with such a
disaster, he reached the cavern without
coming to any resolution on what he
should or should not do respecting Ali
Baba.
The dismal solitude of this gloomy
habitation appeared to him insupportable.
O ye brave companions,” cried he, “ye
partners of my labours and my pains,
where are you ? What can I accomplish
without your assistance? IVIy regret for
your loss would not have been so great
had you died with your sabres in your
hands, like valiant men.”
The next morning the captain awoke
early; and after disguising himself re-
paired to the city, and took a lodging, ffe
next provided himself with a horse to con-
vey to his lodging several kinds of rich
stuffs and fine linens, bringing them from
the forest at various times. In order to
dispose of this merchandise, he hired a
shop, stocked it with his goods, and es-
tablished himself in it. The shop exactly
opposite to his had belonged to Cassim,
and was now occupied by the son of Ali
Baba.
The captain of the robbers, who had
assumed the name of Cogia Houssain,
took an early opportunity of offering those
civilities to the merchants his neighbours
which newcomers were expected to show.


Ali Baba. “Might I take the liberty of
asking you?’ “I do not refuse to tell it,
said Cogia Houssain. “It is this: I never
eat of any dish that has salt in it; judge
then what a strange figure I should make
at your table.” “If this is your only rea-
not eat salt? Your supper will be spoiled
if I delay longer.” ‘‘Do not be angry,”
The son of Ali Baba being young and of
a pleasing address, and the captain having
more frequent occasion to converse with
him than with the others, the two soon
formed an intimacy, and Cogia Houssain
loaded the young man with presents, and
invited him to his table, where he regaled
him handsomely.
‘The son of Ali Baba did not choose
to receive so many attentions without re-
turning them; but his lodging was small,
and he had no convenience for regaling
a guest. He mentioned his intention to his
father, and Ali Baba willingly undertook
to provide an entertainment. “My son, ’
said he, “to-morrow is Friday; and as it is
a day on which most merchants keep their
shops shut, invite him to walk with you
after dinner. On your return, contrive
that you pass my house, and then beg
him to come in. It will be better thus
than to invite him in a formal way. I will
give orders to Morgiana to prepare sppper
by the time you come.”
‘On their return from their walk, Ali
Baba’s son, accordingly led Cogia Hous-
sain through the street in which his father
lived, and knocked at the door. “This,’
said he, “is my father's house. He has de-
sired me to procure him the honour of
your acquaintance. I entreat you to add
this favour to the many I have received
from you.”
Ali Baba gave Cogia Houssain as
hearty a welcome as he could desire.
After a short conversation, "Cogia
Houssain was going to take his leave, but
Ali Baba stopped him. “Where are you
going?” said he. “O, my friend, I entreat
you to do me the honour of staying to sup
with me.”
“O my master,” replied Cogia’ Hous-
sain, “I am fully sensible of your kind-
ness; and although I beg you to excuse
me, if I take my leave without accepting
your invitation, yet I entreat you to be-
lieve that I refuse you, not from incivility
or pride, but because I have a very strong
reason, and one which I am sure you
would approve, were it known to you.”
What can this reason me?” resumed
son,” replied Ali Baba, “it need not de-
prive me of the honour of your company
at supper. In the first place, the bread
which is eaten in my house, does not con-
tain salt; and as for the meat and other
dishes, I promise you there shall be none
in those which sue placed before you. I
v/ill now go to give orders to that effect.
Therefore do me the favour to remain, and
I will be with you again in an instant.”
‘Ali Baba went into the kitchen, and de-
sired Morgiana not to put any salt to the
meat she was going to serve for supper.
He also told her to prepare, without any
salt, two or three of those dishes he had
ordered.
‘Morgiana could not refrain from ex-
pressing some disapprobation. “Who,”
said she, “ is this fastidious man that can-
replied Ali Baba; “he is a good man: do
as I desire.”
‘Morgiana obeyed, much against her
will. She felt some curiosity to see this
man who did not eat salt. When Ab-
dalla had prepared the table, she assisted
him in carrying in the dishes. On looking
at Cogia Houssain, she instantly recog-
nised him, notwithstanding his disguise,
as the captain of the robbers, and she per-
ceived that he had a dagger concealed
under his dress. “I am no longer sur-
prised,” said she to herself, “that this vil-
lain will not eat salt with my master. He
is his bitterest enemy, and means to mur-
der him; but I will prevent him.”
‘Morgiana availed herself of the time
while her masters and their guest were at
supper to make the necessary prepara-
tions; and she had just completed them,
when Abdalla came to acquaint her that
it was time to serve the fruit. She carried


it in and placed it on the table. Then she
put a small table near Ali Baba, with the
wine and three cups, and left the room.
Cogia Houssain, or rather the captain
of the forty thieves, now thought he had
a favourable opportunity for revenging
himself. ‘‘l will make them both drunk,”
thought he, “and then the son will be un-
able to prevent my plunging my dagger in
the heart of his father; I shall escape by
the garden as I did before, while the cook
and the slave are at their supper, or per-
haps asleep in the kitchen.”
But instead of going to supper, Mor-
giana dressed herself like a dancing girl,
and wore a girdle of silver gilt, to which
she fastened a dagger. Her face was cov-
ered by a mask. When she had thus dis-
guised herself, she said to Abdalla: “Take
your tabor, and let us go and entertain our
master’s guest, and the friend of his son,
by the music and dance we sometimes
practise together.”
Abdalla took his tabor and began to
play as he entered the room, walking be-
fore Morgiana. The wily slave followed
him, making a low curtsy, as if to request
permission to show her skill in dancing
Come in, Morgiana,” cried Ali Baba:
Cogia Houssain will judge of your skill,
and tell us his opinion. Do not think,
however, O my friend, that I have been
at any expense to procure you this enter-
tainment. We have all the skill in the
household, and it is only my slave and
my cook whom you see. I hope you will
find their efforts amusing.”
Cogia Houssain pretended to be ob-
liged to his host, and added, “that
whatever gave Ali Baba pleasure could
not fail of being agreeable to him.”
After she had performed several
dances with equal grace and agility, Mor-
gmna drew out the dagger, and dancing
with it in her hand, surpassed all she had
yet done, sometimes presenting the dag-
ger as if ready to strike, at others holding
it to her own bosom, pretending to stab
herself.
‘At length, apparently out of breath,
she took the tabor from Abdalla with her
left hand, and holding the dagger in her
right, presented the tabor with the hollow
upwards to Ali Baba, in imitation of pro-
fessional dancers, who in this way appeal
to the liberality of spectators.
Ali Baba threw a piece of gold into the
tabor. Morgiana then presented it to his
son, who followed his father’s example.
Cogia Houssain, who saw that she was
advancing towards him for the same pur-
pose, had already taken his purse from
his bosom to contribute his present, and
was taking out a piece of money, when
Morgiana, with a courage and promptness
equal to the resolution she had displayed, .
plunged the dagger in his heart.
Ali Baba and his son, terrified at this
action, uttered a loud cry. “Wretch!”
exclaimed Ali Baba, “what hast thou
done? Thou hast ruined me and mv fam-
ily for ever.”
What I have done,” replied Mor
giana, is not for your ruin, but for your
safety.”


years. in the clty/
•O.V- -X *V- AM l V vV-/' ''V, - :
‘Then opening Cogia Houssain s robe
to show Ali Baba the poniard which was
concealed under it, she continued. Be-
hold the cruel enemy you had to deal with!
Examine his countenance, and you will
recognise the pretended oil merchant and
the captain of the forty robbers. Do you
not recollect that he refused to eat salt
with you? Before I even saw him, from
the moment you told me of this peculiarity
I suspected his design.
‘AH Baba, who now understood the
fresh obligation he owed to Morgiana for
having preserved his life a second time,
embraced her, and said; “Morgiana, I gave
you your liberty, and at the same time pro-
mised to show you stronger proofs of my
gratitude at some future period. This
period has now arrived. I present you to
my son as his wife. Then addressing his
son, he continued; “I believe you to be
too dutiful a son to take it amiss if I bestow
Morgiana upon you without previously
consulting your inclinations. Your obli-
gation to her is not less than mine.
‘Ali Baba s son replied that he willingly
consented to the marriage, not only be-
cause he was desirous of proving his ready
obedience to his father’s wishes, but be-
cause his own inclination strongly urged
him to the union. They then resolved to
inter the captain of the robbers by the side
of his former companions; and this duty
was performed with such secrecy that the
circumstance was not known for many
‘A few days after Ali Baba caused the
nuptials of his son and Morgiana to be
celebrated with great solemnity. He gave
a sumptuous feast accompanied by dances,
and he had the satisfaction of observing
that his friends and neighbours, who were
not unacquainted with the good qualities
of Morgiana, admired his generosity and
applauded his discrimination.
‘At the expiration of a year, Ali Baba
had the curiosity to make a journey to the
cave, taking all necessary precautions for
his safety. When he approached and saw
no traces of either men or horses,'he con-
ceived this to be a favourable omen. He
dismounted, and, fastening his horse, went
up to the door and repeated the words:
“Open sesame.” The door opened, and
he entered. The state in which everything
appeared in the cave led him to judge that
no one had been in it from the time when
the pretended Cogia Houssain had opened
his shop in the city; and therefore he con-
cluded that the whole troop of robbers was
dispersed or exterminated. He had pro-
vided himself with a bag, and he filled it
with as much gold as his horse could carry,
with which he returned to the city.
'From that time Ali Baba and his son,
whom he took to the cave and taught the
secret of entering, and after them their
posterity, lived in splendour, enjoying
their riches with moderation, and hon-
oured with the most dignified situations


I A FEW OP THE OTHER ~ ~“]
FOR CHILDREN OF ALL AGES
Eenie Weenie Winnie Scries
1 Has a Party
2 Silver Book of Sunshine
3 Lovely Book of Laughter
4 Helps Mother
Stories of the only doll in the world that came
alive.
Leisure Hour Series
1 Animal Tales
2 My Pets' Tales
3 Farmyard Tales
4 The Zoo Book
5 Picture Book Tales '
6 Big Engine Tales
7 Cuddley Bear Tales
S Big Ship Tales
9 Holiday Tales
10 Scarecrow Tales
1 1 Cock Robin Tales
12 Kangaroo Tales
The adventures of my animals, and other stories.
Dimple Family Series
1 Dolly Dimple's After-Tea Tales
2 Dicky Dimple's Supper Stories
3 Baby Dimple's Nursery Rhymes
4 Doggy Dimple's Rag and Bone Rhymes
5 The Dimple Family's Funny Book
6 The Dimple Family's Fairy Book
7 Dolly Dimple's Picture Book
8 Baby Dimple's Bedtime Tales
Tales of the happy Dimple Family _ Dolly,
Dicky, Doggy and Baby.
Tinker Tim Series
1 How the Rain Falls
2 How the Sun Shines
3 How the Wind Blows
4 How the Stars Shine
The funny adventures of Tinker Tim the little
hoy who must always know 1 How?’.
My N ice Book Series
1 My Big Book of Dogs
2 My Big Book of Pussies
3 My Trains
4 My Motor Cars
Novelty animal and train hooks for little people.
Fireside Series
1 Our First Book
2 Teddy Koala's Book
3 Round the World Fairy Tales
4 Puppies and Pussies
Favourite fairy tales, rhymes and pictures for
the younger folk.
Sleepy Bye Bye Series
1 And the Forty Winks
2 And the Parcel Post
3 And the Big Ship
4 And the Big Engine
Strange adventures of Everybody's little hoy
with his friends, the famous Forty Winks.
Rosie and Bookie Worm Series
1 Why Lambs Baa
2 Why Cats Meow
3 Why Koalas Cry
4 Why a Kookaburra Laughs
5 Why Cows Moo
6 Why Frogs Croak
7 Why Horses Neigh
8 Why Roosters Crow
9 Why Birds Sing
1 0 Why Ducks Quack
Fabulous tales told to Rosie by that wonderful
little elf, Bookie Worm.
Judy Book Series
1 Found Under a Gooseberry Bush
2 What Judy Did in a Year
3 What Judy Did at the Party
4 What Judy Did at School
5 What Judy Did on a Boat
6 What Judy Did at the Show
The adventures of Judy, with her new-found
fnend. Poppy Pie the world’s richest orphan.
Three Wise Monkeys Series
1 What They Thought
2 What They Heard
3 What They Said
4 What They Did
These talking monkeys tell tall tales.


I A PEW OF THE OTHER
FOR CHILDREN OF ALL AGES
Wooliy Sisters Series
1 Adventures of Pearl and Plain
2 Blue Sunshine
3 Green Waters
4 Yellow Dreams
5 Red Moonlight
6 Purple Rain
The famous Australian twins Pearl and Plain,
with Dr. Platypus, adventure again and again.
Tell Tale Series
1 Pilgrim's Progress
2 Romantic Hour
3 Thrill Time
4 Camp Fire Hour
Stories for thoughtful readers romantic,
serious and gay.
Story Time Series
1 Baby Bunting's Big Book
2 Adventure Tales
3 Captain Kidd's Good Book
4 Sweetheart's Good Book
From Mother Goose to Captain Kidd All
they said, and all they did.
Gift Book Series
1 Toddler's Gift Book
2 Good Story Gift Book
3 Girl's Story Time
4 Boy's Story Time
5 My Favourite Story Book
6 Everybody's Big Book
Beautifully bound and printed gift books, con-
taining stories for children of all ages.
Exciting Tales Series
1 Wonder Tales
2 Exciting Tales
3 Lovely Tales
4 Mother Gpose Rhyme Land
Weird and wonderful the beautiful and the
grotesque favourite stories for all.
Gipsy Boy Series
1 Ghost Island
2 Torture Town
Every hoy’s brother every girl’s sweet-heart.
Thrilling adventures in many lands.
Famous Series
1 Famous Giants
2 Famous Fairies
3 Famous Pirates
4 Famous Adventures
5 Famous Romance
6 Famous Robbers
Famous people of legend and history, their
thrilling stories re-told.
Blinkyland Series
1 Blinkyland with Grimm
2 Blinkyland with Andersen
3 Blinkyland with Mother Goose
4 Blinkyland with Fairy Beauty
The land of ‘Blinkyland’ where the rainbow
begins and all the great authors live.
Get Well Series
1 Tiny Tot's Get Well
2 Boy's Get Well
3 Girl's Get Well
4 Woolly Sisters' Get Well
Books which help you to get better, when you
have been ill.
Prize Book Series
1 Cobbers' Annual
2 Girls' Bumper Book
3 Boys' Bumper Book
4 Big Mother Goose Book
Tales of adventure and romance, for boys and
girls of all ages.
JOHN MYSTERY'S 'BIG PARADE'
Strongly-bound, 320 pages, an
Omnibus containing all new
stories of the John Mystery
family of famous characters.
'if
ASO3' 7
N COPf r
id io


K1 *“ five years now
\ sb ' s W^ s
1 * iS y Tto share it rt iouUr **’ ' V=>£
ml • w?-—• w ‘ Ir w
vflWl -Whit® the shies go ing in th a {rieud- 1 /jT S
tfSH But the things *at_ Aat a feilo Uce £or « I N,
M23 you tor £ - ®£ • W
1“ “I*S'W" r.“«»^". , «“"" 1 '“’'” 1 ' ■%. ;
m& 1 „«..«■» F’J»
I '-Ty I have asked. 1 y0U ge en \ to have a W
) J John My steTy “ cobbers . 1 d ’ 1 uld D > t forget to
< *$3 \ And my scd envelope, V Beanstaft_
1 Mnte a stamped, aa° to t in my « eans Jroffl da' 9 sai a they tk j
1 enclose j yon, too, Q { tbe l jUC y. mV Castle. 1 «*£/
>vi I photograph d you b ve vo. ray n$y % t
witt^a beio ° wngfotyoM You ”rv \
y John


# | . Aim *Jm I 1 I
