

JOHN VANE
BUSHRANGER
BY CHARLES
WHITE.


The Selector,
By James Green.
With 12 full-page illustrations by
A. J, Fjsciiick.
Full Cloth, 2/6 (postage, Sd ).
This story is an ofiort to
portray the life of the settlers
in tile North and North-western
wheat districts. It presents
some types and some impres-
sions which may help readers to
understand and appreciate the
pioneering settlement now going on in the interior of
the Mother State. It ajijum4a_jn incident—humorous,
pathetic and added merit of
being true. To t>(?Mfcw^--a*^ i going on
the land, we ‘ ‘ Bend ‘ Th&<S6ltector.' It will
bo money well BrjfcvC ’ ’
The Sydney MSims Eer^^^g
“In ‘The SoleelVfjHlqMitlSSPlfts wf oSt/J book which is
genuinely true in lift tM backhlooks
‘Dummying 1 also corth®. « for Mali trrtflmdnt, and so does the
way in which holders ofChmtl tlirr particularly want were
able to arrange matters desired that land.”
The Town and Country Journal: —
“The book is vigorously and graphically written, and the descrip-
tions am obviously taken from life by one who is not only familiar
with the various phases of the ‘out-back,’ but has a warm'sympathy
for nil who are engaged in the pioneering settlement of the interior
of the .Mother State.”
The Daily Mail (Brisbane); —
"Altogether, the book is a capital one, and while faithfully
delineating bush life, avoids portrayal of the unlovely characters to
he found in the hack tracks ‘The Selector’ is a clean and
patriotic Australian hook, and makes out of prosaic bush life a
pleasant romance.”
The Australasian :—
“‘The Selector’ is an interesting story.”
f
3ST.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 George Street, Sydney,
AND ALL BRANCHES’


COPYRIGHT.
A C. Rowlandson, “Montana,” Harbour Street,
Mosman, Sydney, New South Wales.


I surrender to the Priest.


John Vane,
Bushranger.
Being a true narrative of his career —illustrative of
varied phases of country life fifty years ago —in which
his experiences as bush boy, gold- seeker, cattle
stealer, and a member of the notorious gang of
bushrangers led by Ben Hall, which terrorised the
countryside in the early sixties, are faithfully
depicted.
EDITED BY
CHARLES WHITE,
AUTHOR OF
'‘Australian Bitshranging ”“Old Convict Days,"
&c.
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO.,
476 George St., Sydney.


BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
HISTORY OF
AUSTRALIAN BUSHRANGING.
By CHAS. WHITE.
In 4 Parts, Illustrated, 1/- each.
CONTENTS:
No. i.—THE EARLY DAYS—Howe, Brady, Brit-
ton, Cash, Kavanagh, Jones, Donohoe, Under-
wood, Webber, Sullivan, The Insurrection at
Bathurst, Armstrong, Chamberlain, Dignuin,
Comerford, McKewin, Davis, “ Scotchey,’ ’
Witton, Williams, Flanagan, Day, etc.
No. 2. —1850-1862 Gardiner, Piesley, Gilbert,
O’Meally, McGuinness, Fordyce, Bow,
Manns, Alexander Ross, Charles Ross,
O’Connor.
No. 3. —1863-1865 —Ben Hall, Dunn, Lowry, The
Mudgee Mail Robbery, Heather, Daniel
Morgan, “Thunderbolt,” The Clarkes, etc.
No. 4. —1869-1878 —The Kelly Gang, etc.


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page.
I Surrender to the Priest .. .. .. Frontispiece.
John Vane in 1861 22
John Vane in 1904 .. .. .. .. •• •• 2 3
Johnny Gilbert .. .. .. .. ■■ •• 55
Ben Hall, Leader of the Gang- . . .. •. ■. 77
Sir Frederick Pottinger • ■ 8t
Street in Bathurst visited by the Gang- 127
The Weddin Mountains .. .. ■ • • ■ ■ • '39
Mr. and Mrs. Keightley 17°
Fac-Simile of Reward Placard .. .. ..185
Ben Hall’s Grave at Forbes .. •• • • 'B9
Sergeant Sutton . . .. .. .. • • *97
Frank Gardiner, “King of the Road” .. .. -. 215
Eugowra Rocks .. .. .. -. .. ..22!


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER PAGE.
I. Early Years 11
11. First Lapse into Crime 17
111. The Budding- Bushranger 21
IV. An Exciting Adventure 26
V. A Cattle Chase with my Charmer 31
VI. The Cave Party and the Police 33
VII. Another Narrow Squeak 35
VIII. Chasing and being Chased 30
IX. An Adventure in the Mountains 43
X. Captured and Released 40
XL How I Joined Ben Hall’s Gang S 3
XII. Attack upon the Carcoar Bank 58
XIII. Robbing the Caloola Store 66
XIV. Highway Robbery in Earnest 72
XV. We Capture three Policemen 76
XVI. We Join Ben Hall 79
XVII. Replenishing Stores ~ 86
XVIII. More Brushes with the Police 89
XIX. Wholesale Sticking Up. 97
XX. A Kind Woman’s Concern 99
XXL In a Tight Corner 103
XXII. The First Murder 10G
XXIII. Stores on the Diggings 113
XXIV. We Discover a “Plant.” 119
XXV. The Raid upon Bathurst 123
XXVI. Out West Ag-ain 135
• XXVII. The Money in a Tub 142
.XXVIII. A Fortnight’s Rest 147
XXIX. The Vale Road Robberies 151
XXX. Attempt to Leave the Country 157
XXXI. We fear Treachery and Return 162
XXXII. The Fight at Keightley’s—Death of Mick
Burke 167
XXXIII. How I Leave the Gang 180
XXXIV. Nearly Trapped 183
XXXV. I Surrender to a Priest ISB
XXXVI. Under Lock and Key in Bathurst 194
XXXVII. Fifteen Years’ Hard Labor 198
XXXVIII. Across the Mountains on a Chain 202
XXXIX. Life in Darlinghurst Gaol 205
XL. Chums with Frank Gardiner 212
-XLI. On Cockatoo Island 224
XLII. Free Once More 228


PREFACE.
There is nothing fictitious, nothing overdrawn,
in the life story embodied in the chapters following.
It is a true narrative of actual occurrences during
the wildly exciting bushranging days, in which the
man who tells it played a very prominent part. No
attempt has been made to embellish the story, and
in the work of transcribing very little alteration has
been made in the order in which the recorded events
occurred, while, for the most part, even the language
in which they were presented has been preserved.
In a few instances the names of persons who were
innocently mixed up in certain of the transactions
have been, for obvious reasons, withheld, but with
this exception there has been no departure from the
original text.
The writer was in direct touch with Vane for
many years. He knew him as a young man; was
aware: of his first serious lapse into' crime; saw him
after his surrender to the authorities; was present
at his trial; heard sentence passed upon him; wit-
nessed his departure from Bathurst for Darlinghurst
Gaol, chained to other long-sentenced prisoners;
and was mainly instrumental, after he had regained
his freedom, in inducing him to tell the story of his
life, taking down the main parts of that story as
they fell from his lips.
Vane was a typical Australian bushman—tall,
straight, active, wiry; a splendid horseman; of
pleasant countenance and kindly disposition; his
appearance and manner being the very opposite of


what one might expect to find in a bushranger.
After his release from prison he naturally turned his
face towards the bush, crowded city or bustling
town having very little charm for him, and during
later years he earned a livelihood by mining on the
goldfields, or doing farm work, chiefly in the west-
ern districts of this State, with which he was per-
fectly familiar. He was engaged at Cowra as late as
February, 1906, when be was stricken with a malig-
nant fever, and in the Cowra Hospital he breathed
his last, aged 64 years.
Of all the members of the bushranging gang
with which he had been associated, he was the only
one to escape a violent death. Ben Hall (the leader
of the gang), John Gilbert, John O’Meally, and
Michael Burke, were all shot dead when in the pur-
suit of their nefarious calling, and a later member —
John Dunn, who joined after Vane had given himself
up, and who was undoubted!}' the most bloodthirsty
of the gang—was captured, convicted, and hanged.
Although the shadow of the past always hung
over him, Vane pursued a course of honest industry
during the later years of his life. It was in no boast-
ful spirit that he spoke of the misdeeds which had
led to his undoing, and more than once during the
narration of his life's story he expressed the hope
that those who might read it would learn the lesson
it conveyed—that there is neither real pleasure nor
solid profit in criminal courses, but much personal
pain and loss, the sense of which is ever abiding,
growing keener with the lapse of years.
CHARLES WHITE.
Randwick, N.S.W., June, 1908.


JOHN VANE, BUSH-
RANGER.
CHAPTER I.
EARLY YEARS.
AT the earnest solicitation of many of the old friends
amongst whom I have been peacefully residing for
several years, I have (somewhat reluctantly, I must
confess), consented to give a “clear, unvarnished
narrative” of my experiences during the years when
I was “on the road” helping to make that dark page
of Australian history on the top of which is written
“The Bushranging Era.” And at the very com-
mencement, I must ask the indulgence of the reader
towards whatever faults and failings may appear,
for what little education I possess was gained rather
late in life, and under circumstances that certainly
were not conducive to anything like literary bril-
liancy.
I was a Government scholar—not in any free
public school, but in a place where locked doors and
scaleless stone walls restricted voluntary move-
ment ; and the reader can take my word for it that
enforced confinement in such an establishment, the


admission ticket to which bore the words “Fifteen
Years’ Hard Labor,” was not calculated to sharpen
the wits or open the mind to receive learning of
more than the commonest order.
Nevertheless, I have had reason for thankful-
ness that the opportunity for gathering a little book-
learning was furnished me during the period when
I was "doing time” in Darlinghurst Gaol for crimes
committed when I was a bushranger, and a price
was set upon my head. Otherwise, this story,
crude as it is, would never have been written, and
occurrences now known only to myself and the
friend in whom I am confiding (all other parties con-
cerned therein being dead), would not have been
recorded.
I am reminded that I should, before entering
upon the narrative of my bushranging exploits, give
a short sketch of my early days, and that I will
now do.
I was born at Jerry’s Plains, Hunter River,
New South Wales, on June 16th, 1842. When about
six years of age I crossed the mountains westward
with my parents, and lived with them for a. time in
the parish of Kelso (adjoining Bathurst), thence re-
moving with them to Teasdale, between 'what is now
called Newbridge and the Abercrombie. In 1850, I
went to Hanrahan’s Station, at the Weddin Monti-
tains, near Forbes, a locality which subsequently
became famous as one of the hiding places of (the
bushrangers.
Here I received my first practical lesson in rid-
ing a “buckjumper.” I had been sent out to the
bush to water the horses, when I saw two “dingoes,”
or native dogs, and became frightened, remembering


some of the stories I had heard bushmen tell of the
savage character of those animals when hungry.
Running to - one of the horses-—which happened to
be a very tricky . mare, given to buckjumping, if
rushed—l"'hurriedly climbed on 'her back; intending
to "ride quickly; to' the station out of danger. 'But
the'mare resented my hustling action, and I had
scarcely gof seated on' her back 1 when I -felt a
hump rise up under me, and before I' had time ter
make'other arrangements, I was lying in aheap
on the ground, the sudden bump driving the wind
out of my body, and fear of the dogs out of my
mind, simultaneously.
When my elder brother, who was one of the
best rough-riders in the country, heard what had
happened, he set about the task of teaching me to
ride, actually tying me on the same buckjumper for
the first few lessons. It was not long before I be-
came a fearless rider, and would not hesitate to
mount the wildest colt. The education here com-
menced—practical in the best sense of the term—
stood me in good stead in after life in my brushes
with the police and in the numerous hurried excur-
sions, taken sometimes under pressure, over the
roughest country that horsemen anywhere would
care to negotiate.
In 1851 we returned to the Trunkey district, and
resided at Kempfield for about five years, my occu-
pation during the' major portion of the time being
that .of shepherding for residents in the locality."
This 'ytas before the days of fenced runs, arid, every
flock of sheep had its shepherd—generally an old
nda'n -pr.a young''boy.' '.it" was - out -of the'’\yagd§'T
tbtis e'a'rri'ed that tny father was enabled to pay the


deposit on his first piece of purchased land in that
locality.
In 1856, having reached the age of fourteen
years, I was sent to Bathurst and apprenticed to a
blacksmith and wheelwright, named McDonald; but
I grew tired of confinement and monotonous work
on low pay, and after two years of the shop life I
“cleared out” for the Turon gold-diggings, about
thirty miles from Bathurst, where 'I easily ob-
tained work at good wages. Here I stayed for
eighteen months, at the end of which time I had
accumulated a nice little sum, having been careful
and saving.
With six others, all older than myself, I then
went to Hill End (Tambaroora), from which dig-
ging centre reports of rich gold reefs had been freely
circulated. I was the only one of the party with
money, and my “mates” drew so freely upon ray
store that in a few weeks I discovered it had been
reduced from £7g to £7. Thus, from being a banker
I became a “broker,” and had some painful reflec-
tions concerning the simplicity and foolish trustful-
ness of one young man and the unscrupulous selfish-
ness of the .five older men, whom he had joined as
"mates” in the expectation of speedily making a for-
tune. The party broke up. I returned to Bathurst with
one of the “mates,” who, on the very day of our
arrival, managed to get hold of all my remaining
cash, and then decamped, compelling me to “hump
my swag” and look for work without delay.
I started in the direction of Orange, and at
nightfall came to a carrier’s camp on the road, re-
maining there all night, and resuming my tramp at
daybreak next morning. I had not proceeded far


when I came across a dray with store loading
bogged in the centre of the road (there was no “blue
metal” or any other metal on the country roads in
those days), and having assisted the pwner in
"punching” the bullocks until they had drawn the
dray out of. the bog, I agreed with him to serve as
bullock driver a,t per week and rations, to drive
the team to Wellington.
Everything went well until we reached Orange
(previously known as “Blackman’s Swamp”), when
a serious mishap occurred. There were ten bullocks
in the team, and these were turned out when heated
into the swamp. During the night there was a
heavy snow-storm, and in the morning the snow lay
six or eight inches deep on the ground. When I
went to round up the bullocks I found that five only
were alive,, the remaining five having been killed by
the cold. The “boss” started drinking to drown his
sorrow, and when he had got over his “spree,” which
fortunately was a short one, we arranged to store
half the loading in Orange and try to get the other
half to Wellington. But it was not to be. We had
not gone far before the dray became bogged, and
finding that we should not be able to cover the
whole distance, the “boss” decided to ride to the
Frying Pan, about twelve miles on the Sydney side
of Bathurst, and try and borrow some bullocks
from a friend. Fie was away three weeks, and re-
turned to report that he had been unsuccessful.
During roy weary wait in camp I partly arranged
with Mr. Murray, of Orange, to go to his station
on the Lachlan, and when the “boss” came back
without money or bullocks I decided to close with
Mr. Murray’s offer, and all I got for my labor with


the ill-fated bullock team was a saddle and bridle,
the owner of the team having no money to give me. ■
I worked for three years for Mr. Murray and
his partner,' carrying goods between Orange and
their 'Lachlan station, T was only then a young-
"nipper”—very‘young to have full charge of a buL'
lock'team—and had to stand on a gin-case ‘in‘order
to fasten the yokes on the bullocks’ necks, -During-
myikst year there I took the first load of'ch’eese to
Lambing Flat, then a flourishing gold-field,-out of-
which the present town of Young has grown; and
well do I remember how the diggers "joeyed” the
"kiddy” wielding the fifteen feet bullock whip as
he drove his team through the main streets of can-
vas town.
Having contracted with the late Mr. Lee, sent.,
of Bathurst, to drive a mob of 123 fat bullocks from
his Lachlan station to Bathurst, I delivered my
charges safe and sound, the trip Having taken just
nineteen days; and then I took a run out to see my
parents, who still resided near Trunkey. I engaged
with my father sawing and splitting timber in the
bush, but after a time I again left home in hopes
of bettering my position.


CHAPTER II.
MY FIRST LAPSE INTO CRIME.—CATTLE
DUFFING ON A LARGE SCALE.
THIS wandering life was not conducive to stability
of character, and I began to do what other hush-
men in those days, old and young, rich and poor,
were fond of doing. I "lifted”* horses and “moved”*
cattle, sometimes working alone and sometimes in
conjunction with kindred spirits, whose motto was
“Do the thing neatly without being caught.” Thus
I made my first essay in crime.
The first “crooked” affair of any magnitude in
which I engaged was in company with three others'
—Jim B , another young fellow whom I shall
here call Andy, and Mick Burke, who subsequently
became a member with me of Ben Hall’s bushrang-
ing gang. Each of the party was intimately ac-
quainted with the bush between Neville (then called
Number One) and Cowra, and knowing that there
were many cattle belonging to the different squat-
ters in that district running in the ranges, we de-
termined to proceed thither and make a good “haul.”
Mick and Andy went on in advance, the arrange-
ment being that we were all to meet near Mount
Macdonald. Jim and I started from Neville early
*ln common parlance—stole.


and reached North Pule, Mount Macdonald, where
we camped all night, Mick and Andy joining us
shortly after sunrise next morning. We at once set
to work mustering, there being a large number of
cattle in the ranges, Mick and Andy collecting on
one side and Jim and I on the other.
We had gathered a small mob, most of the
cattle being tolerably wild, and I was endeavouring
to head them down the ridge when my horse fell
over some rocks and broke his neck, although I
fortunately escaped with a shaking only.
Without delay the saddle was shifted from the
dead horse arid placed on the animal which Jim
was riding, and the two of us mounted, I having
the back seat. The cattle were by this time, how-
ever, well in hand, and they ran in a straight line
for Spring Creek, we following them quietly the
whole distance of seven miles. Here we met the
other two hunters, who had also managed to collect
a tidy mob, the whole number gathered being over
one hundred head.
Leaving Mick and Andy to Lake charge, Jim and I
started for James' station, almost two miles off,
to look for a fresh horse, but the only one we could
find handy was an old white mare, and I at once
appropriated her, saddling up and mounting with-
out delay. On the way back we decided to give the
custodians of the cattle a scare, and for this purpose
I turned the pea-jacket I was wearing, which had
a red lining, inside out, and my hat also. Jim held
back while I rode up to the camp at a smart pace.
There was at once a scare, sure enough. Mick and
Andy rushed for their horses and cleared out hot
foot, leaving the cattle as the) 7 were. They evi


dently thought that one of the owners had “sprung
their plant.”
Next morning Jim and I cut out thirty-two of
the best from the mob and started with them back
to Long Swamp. In the mob were five fine fat cows
belonging to Mr. John Louden, of Grubbenbong, and
our consternation may be imagined when, as we
drove the mob slowly through the bush, we saw old
Louden ride up with his black boy and critically ex-
amine the cattle as they went along. But, mar-
vellous to relate, he did not recognise his own
beasts, and after Jim had informed him, in answer
to his inquiry, that we were the owners of the
cattle, he and the boy passed on, much to our
relief.
Having reached Millpost Creek, a selection
about six miles farther on, and not being satisfied
with the old white mare, while Jim minded the cattle
I yarded several wild horses that were running
about the place and caught a lively-looking mare
that carried marks as if she had been broken in.
Having saddled her I took down the slip rails and let
the others out of the yard and mounted, but only
to discover that the mare was unbroken and a ter-
rific buckjumper. She plunged round the yard two
or three times and then took the bit in her mouth
and followed the others, “hell for leather,” into the
bush. Heading for a belt of stringy-bark scrub, I
was soon pulled off her back by a sapling, and
away she went with my saddle and bridle, leaving
me to rub my bruised limbs and mourn over my
loss. I was afraid to go near the cattle, as they
would certainly have stampeded had I approached
on foot, so I decided to walk to Neville, while Jim


drove ■ them on .by himself. They were safely yarded
that night—where I do not feel inclined to say;—and
it was not,long before we had disposed of them to
different parties in the district, it being easy, to sell
in those days without having inconvenient questions
put to you. The cattle averaged £5 per head,
which gave us a piece, for we divided fairly
with Mick and Andy, although we twitted them a
good deal with their cowardice in clearing out al-
together when only a “lark” was being played upon
them.


CHAPTER III.
THE BUDDING BUSHRANGER.
And now I come to a period in which I had my first
experience in a line of criminal business which was
destined to bring me into great notoriety and also
great trouble—a business that proved most disas-
trous to me and several other youngsters in the
bush who desired and were determined to have an
exciting life.
Shortly after the sale of the cattle Jim and I
went to Long Swamp and were drinking and other-
wise amusing ourselves in Cheshire’s public house
there with others, when we espied a chinaman rid-
ing along the road towards Bathurst, apparently
having come from the Trunkey diggings. One of
the men present said that if he had a revolver he
would “bail up” the Chinaman and rob him, and I
told him there was a revolver in the bar which he
might have for the asking. He wanted me to ask
for it, but when the landlord's back was turned I
took it without asking, together with a box of caps;
but there was no ammunition, and with, the unloaded
weapon Jim and I rode down the road after the
Chinaman and stopped him by presenting the re-
volver at him, at the same time demanding his
money.


“Me have no money-—me velly poor,” protested
“John,” turning out his pockets to show that he was
speaking the truth. But this was one of the “tricks
that are vain” of the Heathen Chinee. I noticed
John Vane in 1861.
something peculiar about the horse’s tail, and sug-
gested to Jim that he should examine it closely. He
did, and. there found a small chamois leather bag
neatly fastened among the hair, and in which there
was a £$ note, and also about two ounces of gold.


John Vane in 1904.


I had previously heard of this little hiding trick
adopted by Chinamen when travelling from the dig-
gings after bushrangers had commenced operations
on the road, and poor "John” appeared greatly as-
tonished at our discovery of his plant. He begged
hard for us to return him some of the money to carry
him to Bathurst, and I gave him ten shillings, after
which we returned to the hotel and handed over all
that we had taken to the man who had suggested
the robbery, for we had plenty in our pockets at the
time, and were as liberal as we were “flash.”
Shortly after this wc heard that Lowry and
Foley,* who had taken to the bush some months
before and were committing depredations in the
neighbourhood of the Fish River, had visited
Cheshire’s and stolen some saddles and bridles
which were intended as prizes for horse-races
shortly to be held, and we thought it would be good
fun to startle another publican, named Boyce, living
about a mile further along the road. Jim and I
therefore blackened each other’s faces with burnt
cork, and one night rode up to Boyce’s and “bailed
up” the inmates,
Boyce and another were engaged playing cards
at the time in a room off the bar, and, although
they at first took us for veritable bushrangers, they
soon saw that we did not mean anything serious,
as we had no firearms, and they invited us to join
in a game of cards, which invitation we accepted,
*Two notorious bushrangers who operated in tlie Muclgec,
Bathurst, and Abercrombie districts, at this time. Lowry was
subsequently shot dead when resisting arrest, and Foley surren-
dered and served a long sentence in Darlinghurst Gaol. —Sec
White’s “Australian Bushranging.’’


and between us “dropped” about £1 to Boyce and
his partner.
A little before midnight we rode away with
three other young fellows—two of them being rela-
tives of mine—who had come to the house during
the evening, but who had taken no part in our fun;
but we had no sooner left the house than Boyce rode
into Bathurst and laid an information against the
five of us for bushranging. This we learned after-
wards, when the police came out from Bathurst.
Next morning two of the three innocent men were
arrested by the police at their homes and the third
gave himself up, but Jim and I "cleared” as soon
as we heard the police were in the neighbourhood,
and kept out of the way until they had returned to
Bathurst.


CHAPTER IV.
AN EXCITING ADVENTURE.
The knowledge that a warrant was out for our ar-
rest tended to keep us very quiet for some time, and
for the next couple ■o£,months Jim and I were seen
very little in public, either together or alone. Just
at this point, however, something occurred which
led us to relax caution; and one simple visit to a
public resort brought about a most exciting adven-
ture, in which we and a party of Bathurst police
played the most active part.
Both Jim and I were very fond of cricket; we
both belonged to the Teasdale Cricket Club, and
as a most important match had been arranged be-
tween that club and a combined team from Caloola
and Number One, we decided to run the risk and
take part in the match. All went well during the
day, but one of the Caloola players who knew me
and was aware that a warrant was out against me
rode into Bathurst the same evening and informed
the police where I was to be found. It was known
that Jim and I, with two j'oung lady companions,
intended to stay to the dance which invariably fol-
lowed such gatherings at the local "pub,” and which
generally extended through the night.
About 3 o’clock next morning, when there had
had been a cessation of dancing, preparatory to a
final break up, I went into the kitchen for two cups


of tea and was returning to the dance room with
the two full cups in my hands when I was startled
by hearing a strange voice asking where I was go-
ing. lat once turned and saw Sergeant Grainger,
of Bathurst, who presented a revolver and ordered
me into the bar. Thither I meekly went, still carry-
ing the cups of tea, and entering saw that the bar
was full of people, amongst the company being five
or six policemen. I pressed forward to the counter
and was reaching over with the cups when one of the
policemen who knew me caught me by the shoulder
and said “This is one of them, Sergeant.” At the
same moment I received a slight kick in the shin,
which I took as a hint, and there was a sudden
bustle in which the policeman was separated from
me. lat once dropped- on my hands and knees to
the floor and wriggled through the crowd of legs to
the front door, the dim light from the solitary bar
lamp not admitting of my movements being seen.
To my dismay I found the door closed, but one of the
women standing near it at once took in the situa-
tion and hurriedly drew the bolt, when I literally
dived out into the darkness.
Once outside, there was no hanging about the
door. I made a bee line for cover, of which there
was abundance a short distance from the house, in
the shape of scrub and trees; and when running
along a three-rail split fence leading from the house
I saw fliat several horses were tied up at the slip
rails.
“Here’s my chance,” thought I, as I at once
determined to appropriate one of the animals to my
own use. I rightly concluded they were police
horses, and had approached very near when I was


startled by the challenge "Who’s there?” The voice
came from the aboriginal black tracker who had
been left in charge of the horses (the police gen-
erally took a black tracker with them when on such
excursions), and whose sharp ears had caught the
sounds of my approach. Without replying, I doubled
back, and had only time to get behind a scrubby tree
stump when the police came, running towards the
horses, passing within a few yards of the stump be-
hind which I had squatted.
But what had became of Jim during this time?
The police knew that we were both at the dance,
and having found me, they were not likely to over-
look my “mate.” As I learned afterwards, they
missed his capture also, and very simply, too.
Almost an 'hour before they appeared at the
house Jim had retired to one of the rooms off the
kitchen and thrown himself on a bed for a sleep,
of which he was remarkably fond, and he was
sleeping soundly when the police mustered the
others in the bar and sought to make me prisoner.
Taking advantage of the excitement caused by my
escape the landlord slipped out to this room to give
Jim warning, but finding that he could not be easily
roused from his slumbers, for he was a heavy
sleeper, he lifted him bodily across his shoulders,
carried him outside, and dropped him over the back
garden paling fence, effectually awakening him in
the process, and acquainting him with the state of
affairs. As luck would have it Jim’s horse, ready
saddled, was tied up in the garden,, having been
placed there beyond public view, as it happened to
be a stolen horse, a black racer, belonging to Mr.
J. Grant, of Mount Macquarie. To lead it through


the back gate, mount and gallop away was the work
of but a few moments. He foolishly took the main
road to Blayney, however, instead of keeping to the
bush, and the police heard the galloping hoofs
ringing on the hard road as soon as he had started.
Some of them at once gave chase, but he easily dis-
tanced them, and turning into the bush got clean
away, riding fourteen miles to a sawyer’s camp
called Black Hill, where he resumed his interrupted
slumbers.
Meanwhile, the other members of the police
party continued their search for me. They told
the tracker that I had escaped from the house, and
he at once excitedly informed the Sergeant “Me
been hear um just afore you came. He yan along
fence like um kangaroo, and me been think um took
the Neville road.” I was much amused at hearing
them say as they rode off in the direction indicated
how easily they would catch me, as I was sure to
make for a certain place which I was in the habit of
visiting. After they had passed I ran back to the
“pub” to get my horse, and having secured him I
made out through the lane which Jim had previously
taken; but as it turned out, that way danger lay.
I had only gone about quarter of a mile when
I came face to face with the very party of police who
had started out to look for me in the opposite di-
rection. In the scant moonlight they had mistaken
the racing track for the road and had followed it
round until within sight of the house. As soon as
they saw me they gave chase, and I turned straight
into the bush, where they could neither see, hear
nor follow me. Unfortunately, however, I rode in
my haste amongst some fallen timber, and my horse


was staked just above the chest. Before he could
proceed I had to pull the stake out, and I then rode
him slowly to Black Hill, where I found Jim in the
sawyer’s hut, fast asleep.
A few days afterwards Jim was captured—■
sound asleep in a hut at Number One. He was
taken to Bathurst, committed, and tried for the af-
fair at Boyce’s, but the jury, doubtless thinking
that his imprisonment between the commitment
and the trial was sufficient punishment for the
“lark” in which lie was engaged, discharged him.


CHAPTER V.
A CATTLE CHASE WITH MY CHARMER.
I STILL kept out of the way of the police, and was
greatly assisted by a young woman of whom I was
enamoured, named Kate —She was a splendid
horsewoman and thoroughly acquainted with the
bush about the Abercrombie, and as she was not
tightly trammelled by domestic ties, after Jim’s
capture she became my pretty frequent companion.
On one occasion she joined me in an excursion
among the Abercrombie ranges and assisted me to
run in some wild cattle. These cattle, which, as
most bushmen know, are called “Mickeys,”
were as wild as you could make them, herded to-
gether in most inaccessible places, and when once
fairly started would gallop over anything and every-
thing, heads down and tails erect.
We started early in the morning and reached
the cattle haunts about 2 o’clock p.m., the day being
oppressively hot. Having started our quarry, which
proved more than ordinarily troublesome, Kate took
one side of the mountain spur down which we pur-
posed driving them and I the other, to prevent any
of them from breaking away. One old bull, how-
ever, took it into his gnarled noddle to try the side
slope on which Kate was riding, and she at once
galloped after him. Going down the hill, which was


very steep, the old bull had the advantage, but as
he commenced a rather sharp rise his fair pursuer
managed to get close to him, just as a deep creek
which skirted the hill was reached. Just here, how-
ever, bully arrived at the conclusion that the pace
was too hot, and instead of continuing his run he
suddenly turned and, without ceremony, lowered his
head and lifted both horse and rider clean over the
steep bank into the creek—a fall of eight or nine
feet. Here I subsequently found them, Kate en-
deavouring vainly to catch the horse, which was.
bleeding copiously from a wound in the thigh,
caused by the bull’s horns.


CHAPTER VI.
THE CAVE PARTY AND THE POLICE.
ABOUT a week after the cattle hunt a party of six
(pairs)'arranged for a picnic to the Abercrombie
caves, Grove Creek, which were then, and are now,
an attraction to sight-seers, and I arranged to con-
duct them thither through the bush and bring them
safely, back. We reached the caves about 4 p.m., and
after doing a little exploration work we gave our-
selves up to general jollification, amusing ourselves
to the full. Next morning I started the rest of the
party up the one track for home, from which they
could not diverge, and took one known to myself
only in another direction, involving a very steep
climb up the precipitous mountain side, telling the
others that I would meet them again at some old
sheep yards, three miles distant, to which their path
would lead them. The place was so steep that I
had to dismount and lead my horse by the bridle,
and while so engaged I was suddenly hailed by two
mounted troopers on the ridge above me.
There was no time or opportunity for flight, so I
put the best face on the matter, hoping that I would
not be recognised. The troopers had evidently seen
me ascending the steep and waited behind a knoll
until I had almost reached their level. At once I
was challenged and asked my name, where I was
going, etc., and I answered coolly enough that my


name was Henry Green, and that I was looking for
a horse that had gone astray. They then asked
where the caves were, but I was too innocent to
know, and said I had not heard of or seen any caves
in that locality, being a stranger to the place. They
then passed on and left me to finish my climb. In-
formation had evidently been given to the police that
I was with the cave party, and I congratulated my-
self that I had escaped capture by being alone and
not known to the troopers who had been sent in
search of me.
I had only covered an additional 300 yards
when to my surprise I met another horseman whom
I knew was not a policeman, but having a pretty
good suspicion that he had given information to the
police about my being with the cave party, I de-
termined to make him pay toll. He was riding a
fine, upstanding horse, and I made no scruple about
taking it, telling him he could have mine in ex-
change, although it was a stolen one. Having by
this time reached better ground for - travelling I
hurried on and met the remainder of the party at the
spot agreed upon. Here we picniced again for a
time, but as provisions were found to be short, I
rode to a small store at Trunkey, only a few miles
distant, and purchased some bread and sundries. I
was just leaving the place with my purchases when
the police rode up. They called on me to stop, but
as I saw that their horses were knocked up I did
not obey their challenge, and putting spurs to my
horse was soon out of their sight. Subsequently I
guided the party safely back to Black Hill through
the bush and then rode away to my camp in the
mountains.


CHAPTER VII.
ANOTHER NARROW SQUEAK—MY BOY
“TELEGRAPH.”
FOR three weeks I was kept dodging about keeping
out of the way of the police. I had a camp at
Pound Creek, in the Abercrombie Mountains, where
I kept seven good saddle horses, which;, needless to
say, bore different brands, and had not been pur-
chased by me from the owners. To this camp
friends came frequently, keeping me supplied with
provisions and information.
One day I had taken a ride' to a place called
Plum Pudding Creek, about ten. miles distant from
my camp, and there I met a widow of my acquaint-
ance, named Emma —■ —. We were engaged in a
confidential “yarn” while seated on the bank of a
creek, when to our astonishment no less than nTt.e
policemen appeared in view, making towards us. I
immediately ran to my horse, which was standing
saddled near by cropping the grass, but before I
could mount I was surrounded and being subjected
to the usual fire of questions concerning my name,
my business there, and my destination. I was
ready with answers. My name was Morrison—was
looking for bullocks which had strayed—had come
from Cowra and was afraid I would have to return
without the bullocks—and had to run to my horse
when I saw the party approaching, not with any in-
tention of galloping away, for I bad no occasion


for flight, but simply to prevent my horse from going
off without me, as he would most assuredly have
done in fright at their sudden appearance and noise.
As a matter of fact this little army of troopers
were not looking for me particularly, but were
searching for Lowry and Foley, who had been “hold-
ing up” some people on the Fish River side, and who,
it was thought, had come to the Abercrombie for the
purpose of hiding. The notorious Frank Gardiner*
was also thought to be in that neighbourhood. They
accepted my readily-told story as true, and shortly
afterwards rode off and left me. They had evi-
dently not noticed my companion, who had quietly
slipped away home through the bush while they.were
engaged with me.
As soon as they were gone a.plan for: a little
surprise presented itself to me, and I was not slow
to act upon it, I cantered off sharply in the direc-
tion opposite to that taken by the police, and riding
round the ridge got in front of them. They were
making for Tea Tea Springs, where I concluded
th'Sy would camp that night, and seeing this 1
galloped through the bush to the residence of my
former mate Jim, told him my story and unfolded
my plan, which was to steal the whole of the police
horses during the night.
Jim was ready enough for the adventure, and
we started together on the tracks of the police, find-
ing them safely housed at the Springs, and their
horses in a paddock close at hand. Awaiting our
opportunity we set to work to catch the horses, but
*The King of Western bushrangers, who led the Eugowra
gold escort robbers several of whom were hanged and who was
many years afterwards deported to America. —See White's “Aus-
tralian Bushranging.”


to our dismay we found they each had a lock hobble
and chain on, and we knew at once that we had had
our trip for nothing, for we could not get the hobbles
off without the keys, and to attempt to drive the ani-
mals away with the hobbles on was a folly which no
bushman would be guilty of. It was a sad disap-
pointment to us, for we had reckoned upon taking
a very big "rise” out of the riders of the crown-
branded steeds. This was our only object, for the
animals were not good enough for our use, and they
would- have been unsaleable with that brand on.
On the following day a rather sensational affair
occurred. Emma had a young son named Dick,
whom we found very useful as a go-between and
messenger, for he was a good little bushman and
had all his wits about him. Having ascertained that
the police had not taken me, and being anxious to
convey to me a little bit of information, she made
Dick the messenger and started him for my camp,
mounted on a highly-bred horse named Hollyhock,
which I had stolen from the Temora district not
long previously. To reach my camp Dick had to
cross some very boggy ground, the winter being a
very wet one, and just before he reached the
“spewey” land he caught sight of the police, who
were out again, and simultaneously they caught
sight of him. They called upon him to stop, con-
cluding that he was a bush “telegraph.”*' But the
boy had no desire to make any closer acquaintance
with those whom he looked upon as the enemies of
a male or female light rider, who worked in the
interests of the bushrangers, conveying information as to the
movements of police, carrying provisions to their mountain
camps, and keeping communication open between the bush-
rangers and their friends and sympathisers.— Ed.


his friend, and knowing the mettle and speed of his
horse, as soon as they called upon him to stop
he set off at a gallop. He would have got away
easily in a fair run; but suddenly Hollyhock’s feet
touched boggy ground. A heavy plunge, a sprawl,
Dick was unseated, the horse galloped away rider-
less, and brave little Dick tried to dodge his pur-
suers on foot among the trees. The fighting in-
stinct must have been strong in the breast of one of
the police, for although they must have seen that the
boy could not possibly get away, a revolver
“barked,” and Dick was shot in the arm. Fortu-
nately the wound was not a dangerous one, and
shortly after his arrest Dick was taken to Carcoar
and brought before the magistrate, but as nothing
could be proved against him lie was discharged.


CHAPTER VIII.
CHASING AND BEING CHASED.
Not wishing again to meet the police, who doubtless
imagined that I (Morrison) had returned to Cowra
after my unsuccessful search for the lost bullocks, I
remained quietly for several days among the hills,
where I had a little adventure worth recording. I
had undertaken to “break in” a young horse for a
friend, and after riding him during the day had
turned him out hobbled in the bush near Millpost
Creek. In the morning, however, he was nowhere
to be found, and I was compelled to search for him
on foot. I was tracking him on the road when I met
a Chinaman and put the question “Did you see
horsey go this way?” “Yes,” answered “John;” “Me
see him go down Mount Brown, near river,” and I
at once resumed my march along the road, but
chancing to turn after I had gone a short distance
I saw the horse standing under some trees near
the top of the ridge.
Naturally, trouble followed, for I wasn’t in the
humour to stand any of that sort of nonsense from a
Chinaman, and I made back intending to give “John”
a hammering for trying to mislead me. As I got
near him I cut a good stout stick for a “waddy” and
called on him to stop, but instead of stopping he
took to his heels. I overtook him quickly and


tripped him as he ran, expediting his fall with a tap
from the stick. Having got him down, I thought
I might as well search his pockets, and putting the
thought into practice I was greatly surprised to
fmo a nice little packet of notes, pfii in all. I had
no scruple in transferring the notes to my own poc-
ket, and with a parting injunction not to tell any
more lies, I left him, caught the horse, and made
haste to clear from that neighbourhood, as I knr
the police would be out as soon as the Chinaman had
told his story. And next day there were whips of
them out, sure enough. As usual, Gardiner was
credited with this robbery, the Bathurst papers tak-
ing the opportunity to “slate” the police for their
inability to catch the bushrangers.
Some time after the affair with the Chinaman,
Emma paid me a visit, and together we had another
rather sensational experience. It was in the depth
of winter and snow was on the ground, but it was
not deep enough to deter us from taking a ride in
the bush, both being well mounted. During our
trip I caught sight of a dingo, or wild dog, on the
point of the hill above us. We at once gave chase
and ran the dingo so closely that he darted into a
big hollow log for safety (in all probability, this was
his lair), and as we could not get him out, I re-
turned to my camp for an axe to split the log, leav-
ing Emma to keep watch that he did not sneak out
during my absence.
Tire camp, which was made of sheets of stringy
bark, was no great distance away, and I was can-
tering towards it when I saw that a small party of
police had taken possession and had rounded and
tied up five of my horses, rightly concluding that


they had "struck a plant,” although they may not
have known whose it was. They did not see me,
and I hurried back to tell Emma the trouble. I
wasn’t long in thinking of a way out of it, and at
once made known my plan to Emma, who agreed
to help me carry it out. She was to go round a bit-
while I rode near enough to the camp for the police
to see me, upon which I was to turn and gallop off,
and they would all take after me, thus giving her
an opportunity to release the horses and drive them
into the bush.
The ruse succeeded. The police chased me for
over a mile when they saw me turn and gallop away;
but I had all the advantage in a good fresh horse
and knowledge of the country, and I soon gave them
the slip, doubling back to relieve Emma of her
charge and allow her to make for home while I
dodged about with the horses until I made another
of ray camps, some distance away. Fortunately
rain followed the snow and the tracks were obliter-
ated, otherwise the police might have followed me
up; but they did not go away empty handed, as they
took my rug and blankets from the “humpy”—a
clear case of official robbery!
Shortly after the boy Dick had been released
from custody I went over to Number One and ar-
ranged with him to come over and help me to run
in a favourite horse that had got away into the
ranges and taken up with a mob of wild horses, or
"brumbies,” as they were called. We had run the
horses into my father’s place and were going to din-
ner when I heard the old watch-dog growl, and
looking out espied a couple of police coming from
where the ho'rses were along the fence towards the


house. I at once called out to Dick and we
clambered over a paling fence and ran to where our
saddle horses were tied up, mounted and rode off.
We had an advantage, for although the police had
seen us they had to take down some heavy
slip-panels before they could get through to follow
us, and while they were doing this we had galloped
across a cultivation paddock, jumped our horses
over the boundary fence and plunged into a thick
scrub, the police being in full pursuit. Here I lost
Dick, but knowing that he was well able to look
after himself I put my horse to full speed and was
soon out of sight and hearing of my pursuers.
Two days afterwards I saw Dick again. He told
me that he had ridden his old horse (one of my
stolen ones) for ten miles through the bush, and
after “planting” him there had walked back home.
Shortly after this my old companion Bill and I
(we had kept up a close acquaintance since the
cattle haul previously described) decided on taking
a trip to the Weddin Mountains, and arrived there
only to find the place swarming with police in search
of Gardiner and his gang. At Tygong Creek we
met a man named O’Meally and arranged with him
to get us two fresh horses, but when he was bring-
ing the horses next day the police saw him and
gave chase, and he was compelled to let the horses
go. That night the police visited O’Mealley’s place,
but they did not find us, as we had taken the pre-
caution of camping in a hollow log near, instead of
in the house. Next day we started back to Number
One—such a “hot corner” was not to our liking.


CHAPTER IX.
AN ADVENTURE IN THE MOUNTAINS.
“I AM going to muster cattle in the Gulf,” said old
, of near Number One, to me one day, “and
I want a couple of good men to help me. We will
make yards and have a lot of 'tailing’ cattle (quiet
animals to serve as decoys), and I will have a good
camp; but if you bring your own horses we will
‘whack the mickies’ (divide the captured cattle). I
will have two boys with me to tail the cattle, but
you must bring a good mate and take the running,
for I am too old for that now.”
“That job will suit me down to the ground,”
said I, "and I will try and get Bill as mate,
for he is good in the bush—you can’t beat him
as a runner in. When do you think of starting?”
“Next week,” replied the old man.
"And what about the fats?”
“Oh, we will turn them into money, although we
mustn’t let the two kiddies know anything about
it. And the branding part of the business will be
alright, too. I claim the clean skins (unbranded
cattle) as my own, but will give you your part.
You will require some good horses and a rifle, for
we will kill our own beef.”
“Very well,” said I. “We will be at your place
on Sunday next with the nags. So good-bye.”


Next day I arranged with a resident of Number
One to take over from him to ride and break-in a
horse which he could not master—a beautiful roan,
a terrible buckjumper, but just the horse for the
sort of work I contemplated. He brought the horse
to me on the Sunday morning, and I mounted him
on the Flat, when we both “set to”—the horse buck-
ing and I spurring. After a few rounds he fell
with me and got away, but I caught him again and
remounted, determined to conquer him. He re-
sumed his capers and bucked clean into a water-
hole, where he pretty well satisfied himself. After
he had settled down I dismounted and had dinner.
But he was far from conquered, and when I again
got upon his back he began to buck more vigorously
and viciously than ever; but he failed to get rid of
me, and as a last resource he backed towards a
tree and amused himself by kicking off the bark !
The reader may think this is fiction, but I can as-
sure him it is solid fact, and two witnesses still
living can corroborate what I say.
After the last “burst” the horse gave in, and I
rode him nine miles to the meeting-place, and next
morning rode him to the mountains, where it was
arranged we should build the rough yards for the
cattle. This work finished, we returned to old
’s place, where we mustered a few quiet cattle,
and drove them leisurely into the ranges. Finding
that the roan horse was not quite suitable for the
work in such rough, rocky country, I left him to
spell, and took to my old favorite Billy Grey—the
champion in that part of the country—and with him
I did some splendid running; for I could run the
wildest cattle down while he kept strong.


We had a smart bushman in the camp who fan-
cied himself on a buckjumper, and he one day of-
fered to ride the roan. The horse went all right
with him in a preliminary canter on the flat, and
it was then arranged that he should go on the cattle
hunt with me on the following morning. The quiet
cattle had been yarded during the night, and at
an early hour we let them out and placed them on
the grass to feed before we started. Having rid-
den up the mountain called Brummy’s Range we
soon found a mob of about twenty “Mickeys,” who
scampered off when they caught sight of us. We
followed at a hard gallop, my companion taking
one side and I the other. After about a mile of
hard riding through rocks, scrub and dust I-turned
the mob down a long spur towards the quiet cattle,
and then found that I had them all to myself. The
drive down, sing'e-handed, I found somewhat dif-
ficult; but using my big stockwhip as a warning
to the toilers with the quiet cattle on the flat, on I
■went, plunging through scrub that tore my pants
nearly off, until I had the mob mixed with the quiet
cattle and settled down. Some time afterwards my
companion came back at a quiet canter, to answer
as best he could my reproaches for not having ren-
dered more assistance.
The next mob we drove in consisted of about
a dozen clean-skins, and we had to yard the wild
ones and keep them starving for a longer or shorter
time, according to their temper—several days, some
of them—until they tamed down, and then they
were allowed out with the mob.
We continued gathering the cattle for several
days, when heavy rain set in and compelled us to


spell for a time. While waiting for the weather to
clearj Bill and another of the men rode with me to
a small store on the Abercrombie River to get some
tobacco. Here we were informed that the police
were somewhere in the neighbourhood, and, sure
enough, they were. We had not gone far before we
discovered they were on our tracks, and not wish-
ing to come to close quarters with them we turned
up the river, that being the safest for a get-away.
As we rode one of the men suggested that we should
cross the stream, which was just then wide and
strong and deep. I told my mates that it would
mean a swim—and a swim it was. We had got
fairly into the stream when suddenly we were
startled at the report of firearms, and Bill, who was
in advance, sang out “By jove, the traps are on us!”
Another crack and whiz, and Bill roared out “We’ll
be shot!” But we held on and crossed in safety, and
were soon speeding up the ridge on the other side,
the “crushers” either not caring or not daring to
follow us. Then we rode on quietly by a round-
about way to the camp.
Wild bull-hunting is even more exciting than
ordinary cattle "duffing,” and the day following, Bill
and I decided to have a turn at it, being anxious for
a little fun. It is the usual thing for old bulls to
keep away from the other cattle when they are being
disturbed, and on this occasion there were seven
old monarchs together in the roughest part of the
mountain. We got upon the tracks and followed
them down a long spur which was very narrow—a
regular razor-back, terminating at a spot on Forest
Creek which was impassable. The bulls had run
to this spot, and as we pressed upon them they were


forced to charge us. The old man, seeing them
coming, endeavoured to get his horse off the track,
but they were too quick for him, and in order to
save himself he had to slip off among the rocks,
while I just missed them.
“A narrow squeak, young ’un,” said Bill, as he
rejoined me; “now after them,” and after them we
went up the spur. Unfortunately, the gun I had
was a heavy old muzzle-loader, and I could not do
much with it. We continued the chase, however,
and were closing in on the bulls when one old joker
reckoned on battle and turned on us; but I managed
to knock him over with a well-directed shot, and
thus secured his hide, which was worth a guinea at
that time. Of course, his carcass was valueless as
beef, and, although we did a lot more riding among
the hills, we did not get anything in the shape of
good meat, and returned to the camp.
Our camp was situated on what was called
Pound Creek, which had been cut very deep by
flood waters, being about fifteen feet from surface
to bottom, with perpendicular walls on either side,
and only a narrow track for the cattle traffic. About
half way down the bank there stood a large white
box tree, and as the “pad” (the track made by the
cattle), ran close by it, and the wild cattle used to
pass this way down to lick and eat the dirt in the
creek, on account of its salty nature, I thought the
tree would be a good place from which to get a
shot at them, “Buck,” Bill, and I watched the cat-
tle go down in the moonlight, and when I thought
they had settled down to work, I started to “do a
sneak” to the tree. I had only just managed to
reach it, however, when the cattle made a rush


back for' the “pad,” and my only chance to evade
being run over was to stand close to the tree. This
I did, and as a white bullock was rushing past I
fired and shot him in the shoulder. He struggled
on for about a hundred yards before falling, and
when the rest of the mob had cleared away, “Buck”
came running down, expecting to find me trampled
to death. In answer to his inquiry what I had shot,
I replied, “A white bullock; he is up in that scrub—
I can hear him—and we must go and do the slaught-
ering business." ■ We soon found the wounded bul-
lock) and having finished him off, we managed to get
some beef off him, and then made back to -the
camp, - . .
-Next 'day' we tried the mustering again, but
found that the cattle had left the neighbourhood.
Then we decided to leave, also, and having packed
up, returned to Number One with our spoils.


CHAPTER X.
CAPTURED AND RELEASED.
MY next adventure furnished a splendid instance
of police obtuseness and gullibility. My girl frend and
I had gone for a ride to a place called Galley Swamp,
where resided an old man known by the name of
"Old Dick.” Dick was an “old hand,” having “done
time” at both Norfolk Island and Port Arthur, the
convict stations connected with this colony (New
South Wales) and Tasmania. From Tasmania
(everybody knew it then by the the name Van Die-
men’s Land), Dick had come over to this part and
earned a living by following the old Port Arthur
game as a sawyer. He was comfortably fixed up
with a wife and couple of youngsters. We stayed
at the place that night, and Dick entertained us
with tales of the convict days, until a late hour,
when we were suddenly startled by a knock at the
door of the hut.
The door having been opened, in walked two
policemen, who started to question all hands. I
had to take my share in answering, but as I did
not come up to the mark in their estimation, they
handcuffed me, and for the first time in my life I
was properly “hobbled.” They persisted that I must
be Johnny Vane, for whom a warrant was out, and
nothing that I could say would convince them other-
wise.


Without much ceremony, my captors led me
outside and chained me to a big log, the chain used
belonging to a bullock driver who had been carting
the sawn timber for Dick to Bathurst, and who had
gone to his home at King’s Plains to spend the Sun-
day, leaving his dray and gear near the hut. Hav-
ing placed the bullock chain round the log, the
police used a second pair of handcuffs to connect
me with it, locking one handcuff to the chain and
the other to the pair which encircled my wrists.
They then proceeded to build up a roaring fire, for
the night was cold, and altogether we were not
badly off, although, as may be imagined, I did not
feel very comfortable. I felt convinced, however,
that the police were not positive of my identity,
and 1 assumed the role of the injured innocent.
I claimed the chain as my own property, and
wanted to know what they had chained me up for.
“Ain’t you Johnny Vane, from Number One?”
asked the oldest "bobby,” who appeared to be in
command.
“Johnny Vane!” cried I, indignantly. “No, I am
not. I have a bullock team here, and you can hear
the bells on the bullocks down the creek, now, if you
listen.”
The old chap then questioned me further, and
I told him my name was Mills, and that I lived on
the Vale Creek, near Bathurst.
He made reply that he would soon find out all
about me when he got me to Carcoar, the nearest
township; but that was just what I was afraid of,
and I still hung on to my tale, until daybreak, pro-
fessing to be greatly distressed at my position; and
as Old Dick, when appealed to, stuck to me, de


daring that I was the timber carrier, the police
eventually let me go, saying I did not look dark
enough in daylight for the man they had at first
taken me for. lat once hurried away down the
creek, telling them I was going for the bullocks,
but really to catch the two horses, and they went
into the hut to have breakfast.
Having finished their meal, one of the police-
men, evidently not satisfied, turned and, asked Mrs.
"Dick” if she knew my name. She replied, “I think
his name is Costellow,” whereupon one of the
bright youngsters at the table jerked out, "Oh, no,
mother, it is Johnny Vane.”
As soon as this exposure had been made by the
lips of juvenile innocence, the police made a sudden
run for their horses, to give me chase, their eyes
now fully opened to the ruse I had adopted; but
in the meantime I had caught my horses, and on
seeing that the police had come out, and were
making for me in a rather hurried manner, I sprang
on one of the animals, and, leading the other,
slipped away through some thick scrub, and cau-
tiously made my way round to the opposite side of
the dwelling. Having secured the horses in some
scrub where they could not be seen, I then crept
close enough to the hut to attract old Dick's at-
tention. The old man came up and said, “It’s all
right now—they have gone, and you had better
come in and have some breakfast.” I declined the
invitation, saying the two policemen had been after
me again, and he then told me how one of the
youngsters had disclosed my name.
It was then arranged that Dick should carry
the saddles to the spot where the horses were hid


den, and that my companion, who had been greatly
concerned at the events happening, should rejoin
me down the creek, bringing with her some bread
and meat for my breakfast. This arrangement was
carried out without mishap, and the two of us
shortly afterwards rode off.
The two “bobbies” did not report this occur-
rence at headquarters, and stoutly denied the truth
of the story after we had circulated it in the dis-
trict. The names of the two constables were B
and H , and I always retained pleasing recol-
lections of their innocent leniency.


CHAPTER XI.
HOW I JOINED BEN HALL’S GANG. —FIRST
MEETING WITH GILBERT AND O’MEALLY.
All the events that I have narrated were “small
potatoes” to what followed, for shortly after my
encounter with the constables named above, I fell
in with two of the “gentlemen of the road”—mem-
bers of Ben Hall’s gang—and the connection thus
formed brought trouble to not a few people besides
myself.
I wanted some fresh horses, and having learned
that several might be obtained without much risk
or trouble in the neighbourhood of Cowra, I went
to that township. With a little assistance I secured
five good horses the first night, without going to
the paddocks, and I straightway started back with
them to Number One. Next morning, when making
a pot of tea on the road, a former acquaintance
came up and informed me that there was a race-
horse belonging to Mr. T. West, of Cudgelo, Lach-
lan River spelling in a paddock. He undertook to
get him and bring him to me, and I stayed on the
road until he returned with the racer the following
morning, when I resumed my journey to Number
One, and placed my six nags in safety.
At this time the country was ringing with re-
ports of the exploits of the bushrangers, Gardiner,


Hall, Gilbert, and O’Meally, who had been chiefly
operating in the Forbes and Cowra districts. Johnny
O’Meally was known to me personally, I having
occasionally met him when droving cattle, and
when residing near the Weddin Mountains.
On the day of my return with the six horses,
Gilbert and O’Meally paid a visit to Milpost Creek,
about ten miles from Number One, and made in-
quiries concerning my whereabouts. Upon ascer-
taining that I had just returned from Cowra,
O’Meally sent a message by a boy, asking me to
meet them at the Creek. I obeyed the summons, as
I was anxious to see Gilbert, of whom I had heard a
great deal.
O’Meally introduced me to his companion, and
in the course of conversation I learned that they
intended doing,a little bushranging on that side of
the country on their own account. In answer to their
Inquiries I gave them full information about the
Mountain Run and Trunkey Creek Diggings, and
they then asked me to join them, promising to give
me a share of all “takings.” Having gone so far in
the cattle and horse stealing line, and being “want-
ed” by the police, I had no scruple about casting in
my lot with them.
WE COMMENCE OPERATIONS,
Our first visit was paid to a store kept by a
man named Alec, the Greek, at the Mountain Run,
on the Abercrombie River, about twenty miles dis-
tant. The Greek and his wife were the only occu-
pants of the place, and the two were standing at
the door and saw us coming. I stayed at the creek,


a short distance from the store, while Gilbert and
O’Meally rode forward, and at once told the Greek
that they wanted his money.
“You vant my monish!” cried he, in broken Eng-
Johnny Gilbert.
lish; “Veil, then, you von’t get him. A nice ting this
is—Who are you?”
“Then,” said Gilbert, “I’ll take it from you—
Bail up!” with the words presenting a revolver at
the old Greek’s head.
; But the words were no sooner uttered than the


Greek started off, running among the diggers’ holes,
which were numerous about the place, and where
a horse could not follow him—dodging as he ran to
escape any shot that might be fired. And O’Meally
did fire, but more to frighten the old man than to
hurt him, and then all at once Alec, disappeared. He
had jumped into a. digger’s hole. lat once left the
horses and ran up, expecting to find a man with
legs or neck broken at the bottom of the shaft;
but when O’Meally joined me we discovered that
the old schemer had crawled into an old drive, or
tunnel, which had been cut By the diggers when
taking out the washdirt, and had made his way out
through it into the creek.
Meanwhile, Gilbert had entered and ransacked
the store, while the old lady stood by roundly curs-
ing him as a robber. When Gilbert rejoined us he
reported that he had only found fifteen shillings
in the place, and that he had to rip up the bed
tick to get that.
Knowing that the Greek would lose no time in
spreading the news that he had been “stuck up,”
we made quick tracks for Trunkey, a digging town-
ship about two miles distant, having arranged to
rob Stapleton’s publichouse and store. Before en-
tering the township I took them to the tent of a
man named J , who had a reputation as a horse-
lifter, and who I knew would sympathise with, if
not help us. Hearing from me our mission, he ask-
ed us to bring him a pair of blankets from the store,
which we promised to do.
Arrived at Stapleton’s, we found about thirty
diggers assembled there, and all simultaneously


put up their hands when Gilbert flashed his revolver
and uttered the magic words; “Bail up!”
1 stood outside holding the horses, and
O’Meally went inside and had a good look through
the store, while Gilbert stood guard over the men
in the verandah. At one time a slight attempt at
resistance was made, but that was soon settled by
Gilbert firing a single shot into the ground, and
threatening to put a bullet through the first man
that moved. Among the other articles taken from
the store were a pair of new blankets for J -,
and they were shortly afterwards handed over to
him.
On the following morning, as we subsequently
learned, J took the blankets back to the pub.,
and told Stapleton that one of the three bushrang-
ers who had stuck him up was Johnny Vane.
Shortly after this J- went to Bathurst and join-
ed the police, and I shall have something more to
say about him farther on. Gilbert and O’Meally
both declared that they had not obtained a penny
piece from the crowd, and I, of course, believed
them. But I was young then, and “green” at the
business. Anyhow, my share of the nothing was
nil.
Leaving Trunkey, we made fast tracks back
towards Hobby’s Yards, camping in the bush that
night, and riding next day through the scrub all
the way to' Millpost Creek, which we reached the
same evening.


CHAPTER XII.
ATTACK UPON THE CARCOAR BANK.
The next event to be recorded was a stirring
one, and it caused immense excitement, not only
in the district where it occurred, but throughout
the colony.
Two or three days after we had returned to
Millpost Creek, O’Meally and I were riding in the
bush looking up some horses, when he began to
question me concerning the township of Carcoar,
He knew there was a bank, as well as a police sta-
tion, there, and he was anxious to learn if we could
reach the former without passing the latter. I
told him we could if we entered the town from the
Blayney side, and proceeded to give him full par-
ticulars concerning the situation of the bank, which
was a branch of either the Commercial or lire City
Bank —I forget which. He then told me that he
and Gilbert intended to stick up the bank, and he
promised that if they got sufficient money from it
they would give me enough to pay my way out of
the country to America, where I would be all right.
He further said they did not wish me to go with
them, as I was too well known in the town, and if
I were seen it would spoil the whole thing on them.
But that arrangement did not suit me at all—
I didn’t relish being made a "back number,” after


this fashion, especially as I began to have doubts
concerning their fairness in dividing the spoils; so
I protested, with some heat: “It looks as if you want
to shunt me, or as if you think I’m likely to show
the white feather; but if I’m to be in it with you
at all, I must be all in, and besides, three will be
better than two for that job.”
“Oh, don’t get your hair off, old man,” said
O’Meally; “we’ll act straight with you, never fear.
But the Carcoar people know you, and don’t know
us, and if you come and they ‘spot’ you, it will make
things ugly for all of us.”
“Why,” rejoined I, “you wouldn’t know the
bank if you saw it, as it is simply a cottage, and
ten to one you would go fooling round the wrong
place if I wasn’t with you.”
"All right, then,” O’Meally replied, “we’ll see
what Gilbert has to say about it when we get back
to camp.”
As soon as we had settled down in camp
O’Meally told Gilbert what had taken place on the
road, and, laughingly, repeated my words about
shunting and “showing the white feather.”
Gilbert took the matter seriously enough, "how-
ever, and said at once, “If that’s the way you take
it, Vane, old man, there is nothing more to be said,
You must come along with us, of course.”
We then proceeded to discuss other matters,
and having won my point, I was satisfied.
On the following morning we started for Num-
ber One, and Gilbert said when we were on the road
that I ought to have a better horse for a job of that
kind, as he did not think the one I was riding had


“go” enough in him in case the police followed us
up quickly after the robbery, as was likely to be
the case. I then told him that about two miles
from Number One I had the racehorse Jonathan
Wild, which I had taken some time before from
Mr. Tom West’s Cudgelo station, on the Lachlan
River, and that I could easily get him.
“Well, then,” said he, “you had better go and
get him, and we will start for Carcoar early to-mor-
row morning.”
I fell in with that arrangement, and after in-
troducing Gilbert and O’Meally to several friends
at Number One, and fixing on a camp, I went off
to the spot where I had the racehorse in hiding,
This was in, a thick scrub, where I had made a
stable of green boughs, near the residence of Dick’s
mother, who used to feed the horse twice a day and
ride him for exercise and to water.
When I told her that I had come for the horse
she became very inquisitive, and at last I had
to tell her all about Gilbert and O'Meally, and the
arrangement for robbing the bank. She offered no
objection, and was pleased with the prospect of
flight with me to America after the robbery. I
left with her the horse I was riding, mounted Jona-
than Wild, and rode back to the camp—only to find,
to my great chagrin, that Gilbert and O’Meally had
left without me.
I tracked their horses for a considerable distance
in the direction of Carcoar, and then returned to the
camp, not a little put out that they had given me
the slip. I knew that they would return that night,
however, whatever happened, and shortly after
dark I raised a large fire and went some distance


off to watch. Sure enough, at about eleven o’clock
they rode up to the fire, and after giving a signal-
ing whistle, I went down to the fire and joined
them.
Their excuse for leaving me in the lurch was
a plausible one. They said they had been to Car-
coar, and had missed a good thing; that shortly
after I had left, a man had come to the camp and
proffered to show them to the bank, arranging to
ride before them into the township and lift his hat
when passing the bank, as an indication that that
was the place; hence they did not wait for me.
Their story of what took place in Carcoar may
be briefly told. The man had done what he had
promised, and passed on down the street, after
which they rode up to the bank, and having tied
their horses to the post, in front of the building,
they entered the bank together, as though they
were ordinary customers. Going to the counter,
Gilbert handed a bogus cheque to the man in
charge—who was the only man in the bank at the
time—and while he was looking at it, presented a
revolver at his head, telling him to throw up his
hands; while O’Meally stepped into the next room,
expecting to find a second man, as they had heard
that two men did the business of the bank. But
there was no second man on the premises, although
he wasn't far away. He had gone out just pre-
viously, and re-entered the street door just as his
assistant had glanced up to find himself looking
down the shining barrel of the revolver. Upon
hearing the entering foosteps, Gilbert lamed
round, and the man, seeing the revolver, ran hur-
riedly backwards- out again, and fell into a cellar


that had been dug near the street for a new hotel.
As soon as Gilbert had lowered his revolver to see
who was entering the bank, the assistant, who had
been covered at the counter, dodged down, seized
a revolver that was on a shelf under the counter,
and fired a shot towards the ceiling. This gave a
further alarm, and, fearing that they would be
caught in the bank, Gilbert and O’Meally made a
run for it, jumped on their horses, and galloped
away, much disappointed at the failure of their first
expedition in the bank sticking-up line.
This was the story as told to me by them, and
in the main it was no doubt correct, although in
some of the details it differed from the account
published in the Bathurst papers at the time. In
one important detail, however, the press writers
were in error. They said Hall was with Gilbert;
but at that time Hall was in the Young district.
With this one exception, the account given in
White’s “Australian Bushranging” corresponded
with their story, as the reader will see by the fol-
lowing extract from that work:—
“Under ordinary circumstances, the mere fact
of two horsemen riding up to the Commercial Bank,
which was situated in the main thoroughfare of the
town, and after alighting and throwing the bridle
reins over the post there placed for the purpose,
entering the bank, would not have excited sus-
picion; but there was something extraordinary in
the appearance of both men and horses on this
occasion. The former were dressed, not like ordin-
ary customers of the bank, but as “flash” bushmen,
and the latter were animals of a superior class, with,
suspicious-looking pouches attached to their sad


dies. The door of the bank was invitingly open,
and everything favored the transaction of business,
such as that upon which Hall and Gilbert (for these
were the visitors) had come. There were no cus-
tomers on the public side of the counter, and only
one of the bank officials was in his place on the
business side. That official was Mr. J. Parker, who,
in his capacity as chief clerk, had full control of
the institution for the time being. The manager,
Mr. McDonald, was not far away, however. He
had crossed the street to ‘see a friend,’ and hap-
pened to look towards the bank just as the two
men entered the door. A suspicion at once crossed
his mind that his presence at the bank might be
required. It was required, as the sequel shows,
and it was, perhaps, fortunate for him, and for the
bank of which he was manager, that he happened
to be on the wrong side of the door when he made
his presence known.
“Having entered the bank, Hall and Gilbert
strode up to the counter, and one of them handed
to Mr. Parker a rather dirty-looking piece of paper,
in form like a cheque, at the same time asking him
to cash it. Mr. Parker took the document, but he
had no sooner begun to inspect it than he was
startled by having a revolver presented at each side
of his head, the action being accompanied by the
assurance that if he made the least noise or resist-
ance he would find his brains on the floor. It was at
this moment that Mr. McDonald, the manager,
made his appearance at the door, and the noise
made by him in approaching caused both the bush-
rangers to turn their heads, although they kept
their revolvers presented at Parker’s head. One of


the men, no doubt thinking that the visitor was one
of the customers of the bank, at once called out
'Come in, mate!’ but McDonald had taken in the
situation at a glance, and in a moment had turned
on his heels and sped down the street to give the
alarm at the police station.
“The momentary distraction of the would-be
robbers was not lost upon Parker, who, although
much alarmed at the situation, had not lost his
presence of mind in anticipation of a visit of this
kind, the bank authorities had sought to make pro-
vision for defending their treasure, and loaded re-
volvers had become part of the bank furniture in
every country branch. There was a revolver beneath
the counter, within reach of the startled clerk on
this occasion, and as the bushrangers turned their
heads to the door, Parker dropped behind the coun-
ter, seized the revolver, and fired —not at the in-
truders, for the counter intervened, but into the
air, for the purpose of at once creating an alarm,
and scaring the robbers. Both ends were accom-
plished. A Mr. Harrison and his daughter, living
on the opposite side of the street, at once ran over,
the latter calling loudly for assistance, and attract-
ing the attention of a number of the townspeople,
who also began running to the bank. At the same
time, Miss Harrison attempted to let the horses
loose from the post to which they had been hitch-
ed; but the bushrangers rushed from the bank, hav-
ing realised the danger of remaining longer on the
spot, and warning those who displayed an inclina-
tion to intercept that if they did not keep back
they would be shot, they hurriedly remounted and
galloped away.


r “By this time the whole town was astir, and
the majority pressed round the bank to con-
gratulate Mr. Parker on his escape, and the bank
upon its safety—the only property in the establish-
ment disturbed was an ink-bottle, which had been
shattered by the bullet from Mr. Parker’s revolver
—a few of the more enterprising spirits ran for
horses and firearms, intent upon following the re-
treating bushrangers with the police. But Hall*
and Gilbert were miles away before the chase be-
gan, and neither police nor civilians were privileged
with a sight of them, their tracks even being lost
shortly after the well-mounted rangers had left the
highway and struck across country.
‘The townspeople returned to Carcoar to talk
over the exciting affair, while the police continued
the search under the guidance of Inspector Morris-
sett, from Bathurst, and Sub-Inspector Davidson,
who happened To be in' the locality at the time. It
is almost needless to say that their search was un-
successful; and while they were hunting in one
direction an unfortunate wood carter entered Car-
coar from the opposite, and proceeded to the bar-
racks to report that he had been stopped by two
men and robbed of £2 and a silver watch.”
Neither Gilbert nor O’Meally said a word about
having robbed a wood carter, when telling me the
story, but I have no reason to doubt the correctness
of this portion of the 1 report. I did not know till long
afterwards that Hall had been credited with a share
in the attempted Carcoar bank robbery.
[Note. —Until Vane explained this matter, I, in common
with all Western residents, believed Hall to have been one of the
men.— Editor.]


CHAPTER XIII.
ROBBING THE CALOOLA STORE.—FIRST
MEETING WITH MICHAEL BURKE.
After keeping quiet for a few days, Gilbert and
O’Meally arranged that we should pay a visit to the
store at Caloola, a hamlet on the main road, mid-
way between Bathurst and Trunkey, which was
kept by a man named Hosie. For several reasons
I did not accompany them, but they came back with
very little. Hosie afterwards declared that they
had robbed him of £lO in money and a quantity of
store goods, but they always said that story was
untrue, and threatened to make liosie pay for it,
as they would go to the store again and take some-
thing that would make him remember the visit. If
they did take money they kept it to themselves; I
did not see any of it.
At this time winter had set in, and as rain and
snow were frequent, we made a good camp, and
kept quiet for a time. We had plenty of good blank-
ets, some of which were used to make tents, and
abundance of good “tucker” was supplied us by
friends. When fair weather permitted we visited
one or other of the farms in the neighbourhood and
joined in an occasional kangaroo hunt with some of


the young fellows and their dogs, at the same time
getting full information concerning the movements
of the police.
On one of these excursions we fell in with
young Michael Burke, then a mere lad, who was
afterwards shot down in the attack upon Mr. Keight-
-ley’s house at Dunn’s Plains, to be hereafter des-
cribed. During our ride together, Gilbert and
O’Meally said they would give a couple of pounds
each for two good horses in good condition, and
Burke promised to get them two from the stables
at Coombing, Mr. T. R. Icely’s estate, near Carcoar;
but said that as the groom in charge kept a gun in
the harness-room, he ought to have a revolver when
he went to the place. O’Meally let him have a re-
volver and he left, promising to meet us next morn-
ing. at that spot. On the following morning lie
rode up with another lad, each leading a fine grey
horse.
"By Jove! Mick,” said I, "You’ve got two
beauties! How did you manage it?”
“1 managed it badly, Jack,” he replied, as he
dismounted. “I’ve made a bad job of it,”
“How’s that?” I asked, as the others gathered
round, and his answer fell like a bombshell amongst
us.
"I got to the stables,” said Burke, “and was
leading out the horses, when the groom came down
from the house, and I could see as he passed the
window, through which a light was shining, that
he was carrying his gun. As soon as he came near
and saw me with the horses, he fired, but the shot
went high, and did no harm, and before I knew


what i was at I had raised the revolver and pulled
the trigger. He cried out, and fell, and I had hardly
got into the saddle before I saw several men com-
ing out of the house, some of them policemen. I
galloped back with the horses, to where I had left
the boy, and we got away with the horses before
they could see the way we took. And now that I’ve
got you the horses and shot a man, I’ll have to
stop with you."
To this I relpied: “No, no, Burke; you musn’t
join us until you are sure you are known.”
But to that he replied that the groom knew him
too well to make any mistake; when O’Meally in-
terposed: “But, my lad, if the groom is dead the
others won’t know who was there.”
To this Burke replied: “I hope to God he’s not
dead; but I won’t take any chance, and you must let
me stay."
We did our best to persuade him to go home,
but he would not go, and the boy who was with
him having been sent back, Burke cast in his lot
with us for good or evil. Needless to say, poor fel-
low, it turned out to be all evil.
As to what really took place at Coombing,
Burke did not tell us, for the simple reason, I sup-
pose, that he did not know. What he did not tell,
however, can be found in the published story, from
which I have already quoted, and I here give the
extract concerning the affair;—
“On the night of the attack, Mr. Icely had a
distinguished visitor, in the person of Inspector
Morrissett, who had turned in at Coombing for the


night, after a day’s weary ride through the bush
after the bushrangers. It appears that the Inspec-
tor and his men had come across the tracks of Hall
anjl his mates, heading towards Caloola, and they
had followed these until they came across fresher
tracks of the same horses, making towards Car-
coar. These they followed until within three miles
of the town, when darkness set in, and the Inspec-
tor sent his men back to the barracks at Carcoar,
himself deciding to accept shelter under the hos-
pitable roof of Squire Icely. Sub-Inspector David-
son had previously called in at Coombing, and left
his horse to recuperate at the homestead, the
animal having been well ridden about the bush in
the search for the bushrangers, after the attempted
robbery at the Carcoar bank.
“The stables were about 150 yards from the
house, and were in charge of a man named Charley
the German, one of Mr, Icely’s employees. This
man happened to observe some movement at the
stables, while the host was entertaining the Inspec-
tor and other visitors in the house, and suspecting
that something was wrong, he went towards the
stables, carrying a gun with him. As he neared
the building he saw two of the horses being led out,
and at once discharged his piece, but without doing
any damage. The fire was returned by one of the
bushrangers, and with truer aim, for Charley was
struck in the mouth. The alarm having been raised,
Mr. Icely and his visitors rushed out, but only in
time to see the robbers making off.
“A glance at the stalls showed that a favorite
grey horse of Mr. Icely’s had been taken, and also


Sub-Inspector Davidson’s animal, which happened
to be one of the few good horses bearing the Crown
brand.
“Morrissett then proceeded with others ,to
Carcoar, and set the town in a ferment of excite-
ment by the news of the robbery and shooting. The
townsfolk did not know what next to expect, and
they determined to make provision for the worst
that might happen. It was clearly the duty of the
police to follow the bushrangers, and if the town
were left unprotected the gang might at any mom-
ent suddenly swoop down upon it and make a clean
sweep of all its portable treasure. To guard against
a surprise, therefore, twenty-two of the residents
presented themselves before a Justice of the Peace
and were sworn in as special constables to protect
the town, taking two hours’ watch about, in com-
panies. This arrangement having been perfected,
the police were free to take saddle and scour the
bush, which they did without delay—and, as usual,
without success.
“The wounded man was taken into Carcoar and
placed under the care of the local surgeon, Dr.
Rowlands. If was found that the revolver bullet had
lodged in Charley’s neck, and some days elapsed
before it was considered safe to operate for its ex-
traction. The wounded man slowly recovered, and
thus for the present the bushrangers were free from
any charge of actual murder.”
I may mention here that Mr. Icely caused the
following notice to be published in the newspapers
and placarded through the bush in conspicuous
places;—^


“£lOO REWARD.
“WHEREAS the stables at Coombing Park, Carcoar,
were robbed on the night of the 2nd August, in-
stant, by two or more men, unknown, and the man
in charge was fired at and dangerously wounded;
I hereby offer a
Reward of £ioo
to any person who will give such information as
will lead to the conviction of the guilty parties.
"T. R. ICELY,
"Coombing Park,
"August 6th, 1863,”


CHAPTER XIV.
HIGHWAY ROBBERY IN EARNEST.—WORKING
IN TWO DIVISIONS.—A BRUSH WITH
THE POLICE.
A FEW days after Burke had joined us we had
some serious talk about leaving the district, but
Burke said he must get some money first, as the
lad who was with him at the Coombing stables was
in hiding, and wished to get over to Queensland,
but had not sufficient money to pay his way,
O’Meally suggested that we might get a fair sum
from the Carcoar to Bathurst coach, but Gilbert
said there was nothing certain about coaches car-
rying money while the bushrangers were about, and
he advised that we should separate and work “on
the roads” in different places simultaneously. So
it was arranged that Burke and I should go into
the Cowra district, while Gilbert and O’Meally re-
mained in camp and paid attention to the Carcoar-
Bathurst coach.
Burke and I first went down the Abercrombie
River, where we stuck up some Chinese diggers in
their camp and got a little gold dust, but no money.
We then made across country to the road between
Carcoar and Cowra, and camped near it, intending
to hold up the mail coach, which we knew would


pass that day. I left Burke in camp while I rode
some distance on a little personal business, in-
tending to return before the coach reached the
spot; but I was delayed, and when I got back I
found that Burke had stopped the coach single-
handed, only getting £3 from the passengers for
his trouble.
Seven days elapsed before we rejoined Gilbert
and O’Meally, and then they told us they had
stopped the Carcoar-Bathurst coach near the Five-
Mile Water Holes,-and to their surprise discovered
that it only contained prisoners, who were being
taken to Bathurst for trial, and their escort of three
police. They attacked the coach, and in the firing
that ensued one of the policemen was shot in the
arm. O’Meally’s story of the occurrence—told over
the camp fire, ran as follows;—“There were three
of us, (a resident of the locality, but whose
name, for good reasons, I refrain from giving here)
having joined us after you left the camp. We first
stuck-up some teamsters, and Gilbert stayed with
them while I and rode forward to meet the
coach as it came along the road from Carcoar. To
our surprise there were policemen in it, and as soon
as we called on the coachman to stop, two of them
jumped out and commenced blazing away at us.
Hearing the firing, Gilbert left the teamsters and
galloped up, and just as he arrived, another police-
man, who was on horseback some distance behind
the coach dashed up. Gilbert at once made off up
the side of the ridge, with the mounted policeman
after him. At the same time a bullet fired from
beneath the coach, where one of the foot police had
sought cover, struck my left breast pocket, break


mg my watch, passed through a thick body belt,
and the waistbands of two pairs of tweed trous-
ers, and then dropped between my knee and the
pad of the saddle. Close shave, wasn’t it? I then
followed Gilbert and called out to him to turn, or
he would be shot in the back, and as he did so the
pursuing policeman started back for the coach,
upon which I fired and shot him in the arm, causing
the revolver which he had in his hand to fall on the
road. I secured that revolver, and we then retired,
not caring to molest the coach further, for fear of
injuring the prisoners on board."
O’Meally afterwards showed me the bullet that
struck him, and that very nearly found its billet in
his body; and I believe the policeman’s revolver
was in Gilbert’s possession when, some time after-
wards, he was shot at Kelly’s.
Burke said they ought to have taken the poor
devils of prisoners from the “traps,” but O’Meally
replied that it might have done them harm instead
of good, as they might have taken to the bush, if
released. Gilbert told us later that O’Meally had
called him a coward for running awav up the
ridge, and that he had replied if he had not done
so he would not have got the “Bobby’s” revolver.
At this O’Meally growled, and said to Gilbert:
"If I hadn’t followed you the ‘trap’ would have shot
you in the back, and that is the way you will be
shot yet.”
More than once after this Burke and I had to
act as peacemakers, for the two used often to have
little growls, and we had to step in when they were
getting too hot on the job. But Gilbert was cer


tainly too fond of “turning tail,” and we all occa-
sionally had a peg at him for “dodging” in that
fashion. One thing I wish to say right here, in
contradiction of certain evidence that was given at
my trial—l wasn’t at this fight at all.*
*The story current at the time varied somewhat from that
here given. Three prisoners in the coach had been arrested for
aiding and abetting the bushrangers, and it was generally be-
lieved that Gilbert and O'Meally really made the attack to res-
cue them. There were three policemen on the coach—Superin-
tendent Morrissett, Sergeant Grainger, and Senior-Constable
Merrin. The constable who was shot in the arm was named
Sutton, and he remained at one of the roadside inns until the
late Dr. Machatiie was brought from Bathurst to extract the
bullet. The three prisoners (all young men) were taken to Bath-
urst, but as no definite charge could be brought home to them,
they were, after several remands, released. —See trial and com-
ments, —Ed,


CHAPTER XV.
WE CAPTURE THREE POLICE MEN.
SOME days after this, while we were in camp, one
of our “telegraphs” rode up and told us that a party
of three police had just gone along the road to-
wards Carcoar, and we at once decided to become
hunters instead of hunted, and make the police
prisoners. Getting upon their tracks, we followed
them for a distance of about six miles, when we
lost them, and concluding that they must have
called at a farm-house belonging to a man named
Marsh, some distance off the road, we doubled
back round a small ridge to the left, in order to
reach the place without being seen.
O'Meally and I were in advance of Gilbert and
Burke as we rode along, and when nearing the farm
Gilbert called to O’Meally and said: “Jack ought to
have the gun which Mike has got”—meaning that
I should carry the gun, and not Burke, for I had no
gun at that time. The remark seemed innocent
enough, but I believe it was the starting point of
trouble between those two, which at a later date
found its culmination in Burke’s violent death.
Riding on quickly, but quietly, we came to the
slip-rails which served the purpose of a gate, and
lowering these, we entered the paddock near the
dwelling. As we did so, the three policemen came


out of the house with Marsh, the former having
their rifles in their hands. There were four to four,
but we had the advantage of being the surprise
party, and calling upon them to stand, we each
made for a man. Marsh was armed with a revol-
ver, and I went for him, and we had the whole party
disarmed and secured before they had a chance to
use their weapons. The policeman that O’Meally
tackled, however, came near losing his life, when
attempting to use his rifle upon Gilbert, and it was
only when he heard O’Meally threaten to shoot him
and saw the point of the revolver near his head that
he dropped his rifle.
The police had not the slightest chance of
fighting, being so completely taken by surprise, and
after we had made them secure we went to the
house and discussed the dinner which Mrs. Marsh
had prepared for them, and then departed, taking
with us, of course, the Government firearms and
handcuffs.
This event furnished a pleasing diversion for us,
and formed the subject of many a hearty laugh
afterwards, although we knew it had made the
police more bitter against us, and more anxious
than ever to capture us. The newspapers naturally
made a great deal of this exploit, and the poor
“bobbies” upon whom the tables were thus turned
came in for a good deal of ridicule.


CHAPTER XVI.
WE JOIN BEN HALL.—AN ADVENTURE WITH
SIR FREDERICK POTTINGER.
" Now, boys,” said O’Meally, one morning,
about a week after the exploit at Marsh’s, which we
had spent at the camp resting ourselves and feed-
ing up our horses, “it’s time we made a move out of
this quarter, for, as you know, every road is being
watched closely by the police, and it is becoming
more dangerous every day.”
“Better stop where we’re among friends for a
while longer,” replied Burke.
“No, I vote for a move,” said I, “for we must
think of our friends, some of whom are already
under suspicion, and they will get into trouble on
our account, if we and they are not careful. Why,
I believe every policeman in the district must be in
the bush between here and Carcoar. C says
so, and he’s our most reliable scout.”
“I’m not afraid of the police,” said Gilbert, "it’s
those black hell-hounds of trackers that we
have to fear—they pick up trades and follow them
so devilish quick. But I think with Jack that we
ought to make a move soon, and give this quarter a
rest.”


“Well,” rejoined O’Meally, “what do you say to
a quick run to the Lachlan? Ben (Hall) is keeping
his end up over there, although the bloomin’ police
and papers say that he is over here with us. I only
wish he was. My oath! Wouldn’t he make things
lively if he was here now?”
So it was eventually decided —although Burke
grew a bit sulky over it—that we should make an
excursion into the Young district, some 60 or 70
miles distant, and which was then known as Lamb-
ing Flat, where gold was being got in galore.
Before leaving, however, we gave Mr, Hosie
another turn at his store at Caloola-, but got very
little for our pains, although our appearance there
had the effect of drawing the police towards that
centre; and while they were hunting for us in the
Carcoar and Abercrombie districts, we crossed the
Lachlan and kept quiet for a time, certain of our
friends paying us occasional visits, and keeping us
well posted in all the movements of the police.
Having learned that most of the Young police had
been brought over, we made a start for the back
country, moving very cautiously, and keeping to the
wildest and more sparsely populated places.
Our custom was to make tea before nightfall,
then travel on for an hour or two, leaving easily
discerned tracks, and afterwards double back and
camp a little off the course we had followed. Our
object in doing this was, of course, to mislead the
police. If we found they were on our tracks we
would let them pass -on, and at once change our
course. It goes without saying, that we made no
fire when camping, and in winter it was all we could
do sometimes to keep our blood in circulation.


Sleeping under a simple break-wind (a few boughs
leaned against a fence or a sapling), with feet fro-
zen, and limbs stiff with cold, wasn’t very enjoy-
able, I can assure you.
In due course, and without mishap, we reached
a place called Mimmegong sheep station, beyond
Young, and it was while at this place that we met
Ben Hall, who from that out became our leader.
The five of us camped together on Mimme-
gong Creek, where we formed two camps—one for
the day and one for the night.
One morning Ben Hall asked me to accompany
him to a place some miles distant, where he had
left some shirts to be washed, and we rode there
together, returning early in the afternoon, As we
neared the camp on our return, we noticed the fresh
tracks of shod horses, and concluding that the
police were about, we followed the tracks quickly
but quietly, and soon discovered that they were
making in the direction of our night camp, which
was about a mile distant from tire one we used in
the day.
“Steady, Vane,” said Ben Hall, in a whisper,
“We might drop on the ‘traps’ at any minute, for
it is evident that they know we’re in this corner.
Some one must have given them the ‘office,’ ”
“Yes,” replied I, “there’s no mistaking those
tracks. Shod horses, everyone of them; and going
at a pace that shows they know where they’re mak-
ing for. Is it safe to go nearer the camp?”
We had pulled up at this time, and drawn off
the track into the scrub, and noticing that Hall
was looking to his revolvers to see that they were
all ready for use, I did the same,


Ben Hall wasn’t long in replying. “Safe?” said
he. “By , I believe we’re right in the middle of
them now, and the quicker we get back to the day
camp the better. I hope to they don’t catch
sight of us before we join the others.”
With that we turned and made for the da>
camp, where we found two of our mates, the third
(Burke) being absent, planted among some large
rocks a mile distant. They said Burke’s horse had
gone lame, and he could not get a fresh one, as the
police had surrounded the night camp, where the
spare horses had been left. I was terribly put out
on hearing this, as the racehorse Jonathan Wild was
among the spare horses, and I said I would have a
hard try to get him if the others would accompany
me. To this they agreed, and we started on our
perilous undertaking.
We approached the camp very cautiously, Hall
and O'Meally taking one side and Gilbert and I
the other, but when we got near the horses Gilbert
was for abandoning the attempt, saying that we
had no chance of getting them.
I was determined to have a try, nevertheless,
and leaving the others watching I quietly rode up
to where Jonathan Wild was standing, and, having
dismounted, proceeded to secure him, as though I
had no suspicion of anyone else being near.
I was in the act of putting a bridle on him when
I heard a voice calling on me to “Stand!” The voice
was that of Sir Frederick Pottinger, who was in
charge of the police in that district, and as soon
as he heard it Gilbert fired, he having discovered,
while I was approaching the racehorse, where Sir
Frederick and his men were hiding, awaiting our


return to camp. Immediately there was a fusilade
from both sides, and leaving Jonathan Wild 1
rushed towards the horse ! had been ridmg, and was
in the act of springing into the saddle when Sir
Frederick fired at me with his revolver, the bullet
lodging in the calf of my right leg. I fell but im-
mediately rose again, and grasping the stirrup
managed to scramble into the saddle as the horse
plunged forward.
The firing still continued, but no further dam-
age was done, and Gilbert and 1 were soon gallop-
ing side by side down a steep hill and into a thick
scrub, making round to where Burke had been
planted. As we neared the spot we saw Burke had
left his hiding place, having obtained a fresh horse,
and was riding in the direction of the camp, evid-
ently with the intention of taking part in the fight,
the sound of which he must have heard. At the
same time, we saw that one of the police, who had
caught sight of him, was hiding in a deep creek
which Burke would have to cross, and was waiting
for him to come up. But Burke must have had a
suspicion of danger, and changed his course, and
the policeman got up and followed him. Then
O’Meally, who had come round from the other di-
rection, suddenly galloped down and fired. The
policeman emptied his revolver at Burke, but with-
out doing any damage, and just then Gilbert and I
galloped up, with the whole of the police, headed
by Sir Frederick, hot foot, after us.
Getting together, however, we soon outdis-
tanced our pursuers, and, crossing a flat, we turned
and kept them at bay with our rifles, which had a
longer range than their revolvers. O’Meally had


Ben Hall, Leader of the Gang.


secured one of the horses on the other side of the
camp, and Burke having changed the saddle to the
fresh horse, we all easily got away from the police,
who then returned and with their two black track-
ers set themselves to rifling our night camp,
removing everything they could carry away
and not leaving even a blanket behind them. But
they could not catch the loose horses, and that
night we returned and shifted them, and then rode
in towards the township of Lambing Flat.


CHAPTER XVII.
REPLENISHING STORES.—EXTRACTING THE
BULLET.—FINDING A HUMAN SKELE-
TON IN THE SCRUB.
The same night O’Meally, Gilbert, and Burke, tak-
ing two spare horses with them as “packs,” started
for the township to get a new fit out, Hall staying
behind with me to look after the horses. The
three excursionists returned about 4 o’clock next
morning fully equipped with abundance of blankets,
clothing, groceries, gunpowder and caps, and a
new revolver, which they had taken from one of
the stores in the township. They had made a suc-
cessful raid without molestation, as the police
were still in the bush trying to pick up our tracks.
Gilbert handed me the new revolver, and also seven
£1 notes, which he said was my share of the pre-
vious night’s spoils. So they must have taken at
least £35 in cash in addition to the stores, although
I didn’t ask for particulars, feeling too sick with
that bit of lead in my body.
My wounded leg caused me a good deal of pain,
and was greatly swollen, and as I was unable to
stand or move about they shifted me to a dense
scrub near a place called the Bald Hills, and here I
remained in hiding for about fourteen days.


My hiding place was about two miles from the
camp proper, so that if the latter had chanced to
be discovered by the police I would not hamper my
mates in their flight, and would myself be safe,
O’Meally, who was best acquainted with the scrub,
visited me daily, bringing me ready-made tea, roast
calf, tinned fish and bread; but all the others kept
close watch over my camp.
On the tenth day I was bathing my leg with some
of the hot tea which O’Meally had brought, when I
noticed a small round black spot about an inch be-
low the wound. Judging that it was the bullet from
Sir Frederick’s revolver, I probed the lump with the
small blade of my pocket knife, and, sure enough,
out came the bullet. It was slightly flattened
through contact with the bone of my leg, but I did
not follow O’Meally’s advice to keep it as a curi-
osity, as I thought I had kept it long enough. I
was confined to my camp for five days longer, and
then decided that I was fit for work again. I have
the mark of the bullet on my leg to-day.
During the few days preceding my departure
from this solitary camp I took regular but gentle
exercise in the scrub, for the purpose of gradually
working off the stiffness in my wounded leg, I can-
not say that my solitary rambles within the narrow
circle surrounding my camp were very pleasurable,
and my reflections were certainly not happy ones
at the best of times. And these were made more
than usually gloomy one afternoon by a gruesome
discovery I made, as I limped along, in a spot
where the scrub was very dense.
Quick to notice anything peculiar at all times,
for wits are sharpened in the atmosphere of con


stant suspicion and fear, on this occasion I was at-
tracted by something out of the common lying in
a small clear space right in the heart of the scrub.
On walking towards it I was horrified and startled
at seeing, grinning up at me from the ground, a hu-
man skull, bleached to ivory whiteness.
The skinless face and empty eye-sockets told of
long exposure to sun and wind and rain; as also did
the perished clothing which had rotted away from
the form it had once covered, exposing to sight the
perfect skeleton of a man. Marvellous to relate,
arms, legs, trunk, and head had been untouched
by dingoes or other animals, which generally make
their lairs in rough corners such as this was; and
as the poor wretch had died, so he lav.
The first shock over, I calmly and sorrowfully
reflected, speculating as to who he was and how he
had come there; and I concluded that the remains
were those of some poor unfortunate who had lost
his way in the bush when walking from one gold-
field to another, and had perished from thirst, lying
calmly down to die when hope had fled and strength
had failed. Strange to say, there was no “swag.”
near the body, and I suppose the unfortunate man
must have abandoned that during his wanderings in
some other part of the bush. Before leaving, I
carefully gathered the bleached bones together
and placed them in a lame hollow log, where,
doubtless, they still remain, if they have not gone
to dust or been consumed in one of the hush fires
that have since swept over that locality.


CHAPTER XVIII.
MORE BRUSHES WITH THE POLICE.—NEARLY
TRAPPED BY A DECOY.
A FEW days after I had rejoined the other mem-
bers of the gang, O’Meally invited me to take a ride
with him to a store on the Bland, kept by a man
named McGregor, and as I wanted a change I read-
ily agreed, and we started through the bush. We
had given up the ordinary roads to the police, who
religiously kept to them, as they could not find their
way through the rough country —a fact which gave
us a great advantage over them.
On the way we saw a mob of horses on the flat,
and O’Meally noticed among them a fine grey horse,
which he said he had promised to catch for the
owner, a friend of his, and who would be glad to
have him ridden. We drove the horses to Bunda-
bulla Station (which afterwards belonged to the
late Mr. Oakes, of Bathurst), and having caught
the grey I saddled him and mounted. He went
very quietly with me, although before he was
caught O’Meally said that he was a demon to buck,
The owner lived in the Weddin Mountains, and we
decided to go there before visiting the Bland store.
We had ridden about four miles through forest
country—we were on a cattle “pad,” timbered in
patches, with small plains between—when we no-
ticed, about half a mile farther on, a party of fou r


horsemen coming in our direction. After closely
watching them for some time, I distinguished one of
the horses as a grey belonging to Mr. Jones, of the
Three Brothers, in the Carcoar district, and I told
O’Meally, who then said that the men were police,
the rider of the Jones’ horse being Inspector
Roberts. One of the party was a black tracker,
We at once decided to make for the nearest
scrub, and as we turned the police saw us and gave
chase. But just at this critical moment the grey
horse I was riding justified the character O’Meally
had given him. He refused to start, and set to
bucking instead of racing away, and O’Meally had
to come back twice before I could get him going.
By this time the police had come to within a hun-
dred yards of us, and when they saw that we were
making for the scrub, through which a deep creek
ran, called the Red Creek, they tried to cut us off;
but we were too fleet for them, and got away, mak-
ing for the mountains where the owner of the grey
horse that I was riding lived.
And here we had an adventure which is worth
describing at length. When we got near the place
(called Sandy Creek), O’Meally rode up to the fence
of a cultivation paddock and knocked on one of the
rails with a piece of wood, after which we rode off
some distance and waited and watched. Presently
a man came out and walked in our direction, and
when he got near he made answering signals by
also striking a log with a piece of stick, giving cer-
tain raps. O’Meally answered by similar raps on
another log, and then the man joined us. After
consulting for some time with us, he promised to
bring me a horse instead of the bucking grey, and


also some “tucker,” of which we were badly in
need.
During the conversation he told us something
that caused me a good deal of surprise. Said he;
“There’s a bloke planted down the creek who says
he wants to see you chaps. He says he knows
Vane and Burke, and that the police are after him
for stealing blankets at the Trunkey Diggings, al-
though you gave him the blankets. When he heard
they were after him he walked to Cowra, 60 miles
distant, and stole a saddle from a stable and then
lifted a horse from the police paddock to fit it. He
says you know him by the name of J ..”
Well, I now stood looking at the farmer with
eyes wide open in astonishment, and noticing that
O’Meally was looking at me with an amused and
curious expression on his face, I said: “Look here,
Jack, I don’t like this a bit. I don’t feel inclined to
trust J . Don’t you remember what C .
told us after the visit to Trunkey—that J ,
had given us away to the police after inducing us
to bring him the blankets from the store?”
“Yes,” replied O’Meally. “I thought it was a
dirty trick at the time. But he can’t do us any
harm, and may be of use to us if the police are
hunting him. Anyhow, it can do no harm to go
and see what he wants.”
"I don’t know so much about that,” I rejoined.
“Sneak once, sneak always, I say; and having sold
us once he may sell us again if we trust him.”
“Oh, I said nothing about trusting him,” replied
O’Meally, laughing. “Let him try on any capers of
that kind and see how I’ll deal with him,’ that’s all.”


“Very well, then, we’ll go and see what he has
got to say for himself,” said I.
I told the farmer, however, that he must not
bring J to us, and O’Meally arranged with him
to take him to the Bald Hill Flat next day, and we
would meet him there. The farmer then left, but
returned in about an hour with the fresh horse and
provisions, giving the knocking signals as he ap-
proached, and after we had had supper together he
left.
Next morning, heedless of the rain, which fell
in torrents, we went over to the Bald Hill Flat,
where the other members of our party wer camped,
and at about 4 o’clock in the afternoon the farmer
brought up J , and then returned home.
J pitched us a yarn which appeared true
enough on the face of it. After we had left Trun-
key, he said, Stapleton saw the new blankets in his
hut, and gave information to the police, who cam'*
out after him; but he ran away, and getting to Cow-
ra stole a horse, saddle and bridle, the horse bear-
ing the police brand—a crown. The only thing he
wanted, he said, now he was with us, was a shoot-
ing stick.
Our horses were secured about a hundred yards
from the camp, and as I went with J to put
his horse with them, he asked me to give him one
of my revolvers, and to show him that my confi-
dence had been restored I made him a present of a
small one. It wasn’t much good, but he said it
would answer until he got a better. Then he sur-
prised me by saying confidentially, “I am not going
to stay with those chaps. I have seen your father,
and he wished me to find you and ask you to go


with me to Twofold Bay, where we could take a
boat and go to America, where we will be safe. We
can go across country to the bay, and I will get my
brother to secure a passage for us on one of the
steamers for ’Frisco,”
I didn’t say yes nor no to this proposal, not
knowing quite what to make of it, and ac he asked
me not to say anything to my mates, I kept quiet
until the next day.
J had no blankets with him, and had to
sleep with Burke and me. The rain poured down
all night, saturating everything, including our sad-
dles and saddle-cloths; so as soon as it was light
next morning we caught the horses and saddled
them without the cloths, leaving the latter drying
by the fire, I buckling the girths of my saddle very
loosely, waiting for my saddle to dry.
We were gathered round the fire shortly after,
having breakfast, when we were disturbed by the
sound of horses galloping, and Gilbert jumped up to
look, calling out immediately that the police were
coming across the Flat, headed by two black track-
ers.
There was quite a crowd of them, but I didn’t
stop to count them, although I was afterwards
told there were twelve of fourteen in the party, and
they were only about half a mile distant when we
caught sight of them. We at once rushed for our
horses, but when I placed my foot in the stirrup to
mount, forgetting that I had not girthed up pro-
perly, the saddle slipped round under the horse’s
belly. lat once pushed it up again and threw my-
self across it, but the horse started bucking, and
the saddle coming round again the horse broke


away from me and bolted. By this time the police
were quite near, and while the black trackers took
after the bolting horse one of the police, whom I
recognised as Sir Frederick Pottinger, rode quite
close up to me. He was wearing a poncho (a sort
of round cloak with a hole in the centre for slipping
over the head), and I could hear him swearing be-
cause he could not get at his revolvers. He then
tried to get his poncho off, by throwing it back
over his head, but in doing so he knocked his hat
off, and in the meantime I had run to a large tree
where our rifles and carbines were stacked.
Seizing one of these, I called out to Sir Freder-
ick: "Go back, or I’ll shoot you," and at the same
time Gilbert galloped back and told me to jump up
behind him, which I did, and we then galloped off at
top speed, whilst the bullets from the police fire
whistled around us very uncomfortably.
Gilbert was troubled a little about the speed at
which we were going, for the horse was a rattler
from the stables of Mr. T. R. Icely, of Coombing
(the animal that Burke had stolen when he shot the
groom), and he cautioned me not to touch him on
the flanks with my spurs, lest he might overreach
and fall. We pulled along until we reached the top
of the Bald Hill, which was very steep on the oppo-
site side, with a thick scrub just under it.
As we topped the hill, I said to Gilbert: “Make
for the scrub, and I will take the horse that J
is riding.”
"All right,” said he, and added another caution
not to touch the horse with the spurs going down
the steep.


But as soon as we commenced to descend I
“jobbed” the horse in both flanks with the spurs,
and he flew along at double pace. The police evi-
dently saw that we were making for the scrub, and
they circled round to cut us off. But we allowed
them to get to the scrub, and then doubled behind
them and crossed their tracks.
When we made the bolt from the camp, J ;
accompanied us, riding with his hat in his mouth
and the revolver held out in his right hand. When
we afterwards came to think of his actions we
could see plainly enough that his object was to
show the police which man they were not to fire
at. He kept with us until we doubled behind
the police, and then I told him to get down
off his horse and put his revolver on the ground.
He obeyed at once, without a demur, and then I
picked up his revolver and mounted the police horse
which he had been riding. He at once “speared”
into a clump of thorn bushes, and said: “They won’t
find me here; you come back for me when they are
gone”—still wanting us to believe that he was on
our side, instead of the spy he was.
Gilbert wanted me to shoot him there and then,
but Ben Hall said ho, as the police would hear the
shot and our position would be revealed. So we
left him there with a whole skin, and after we had
gone some distance we heard him calling to the
police, and then knew for certain that he had been
sent among us as a decoy. The horse came in
useful to me just then, and J must have
thanked his stars that we didn’t deprive him of
something more valuable, when he saw that we
had dropped to his little game,


Sir Frederick Pottinger.


After making a wide circle, we rode back to
the camp another way, caught the rest of the
horses, gathered up all our belongings, together
with Sir Frederick’s cabbage tree hat and poncho
and started off again, just as we saw the police
coming back, J being with them on foot,
We did not see any more of our pursuers that day.


CHAPTER XIX.
WHOLESALE STICKING UP.
We camped that night at the head of Bald Hill Flat,
in a very thick scrub, taking every precaution
against a surprise, for we knew that the police
would be more active than ever after their recent
disappointments.
Next day we went on to the road between
Lambing Flat and the Ten Mile Diggings, as we
had received information that some gold-buyers
would be passing that way. When we reached the
spot we found the road alive with diggers on the
way from Ten Mile to a new field where gold had
been discovered. The “rush” had fairly set in, and
we determined to take every advantage of it; so we
stopped every man and woman that came along the
road. These we “bailed up” together until the gold-
buyers should come along, the total number of our
prisoners being between sixty and seventy, and
when, the gold-buyers hove in sight Ben Hall warned
the crowd that he would shoot any one of them that
gave warning or raised an alarm.
But the buyers must have had their suspicions
aroused by the sight of the crowd on the roadside,
and they immediately diverged from the road.
When we went over to them we were greatly disap-
pointed to find that they had no gold with them.
All that we got from them was a gold watch and


chain and a revolver. I took the former from the
man who was wearing it, but at his earnest request
I returned them to him, when he said, 11 1 hank you;
the watch is worth £70." Upon hearing this, Gil-
bert at once stepped forward and said: “Well, if it
is worth £7O to you it is worth the same to me,”
and took the watch from him again, after which we
allowed the whole of the prisoners to go on their
way.
Before leaving, two of the women said they
were widows and we ought to give them something,
whereupon Hall immediately took off his hat and
said, “Now, boys, chuck in five bob each.” This we
did, and after receiving their thanks we mounted
our horses and returned to the camp.
On the following day Ben Hall and I rode out
to see two shepherd girls, who told us that their
father was on the Ten Mile Diggings when the
gold-buyers got to the township, and that he had
heard them say they had dropped their firearms in
the long grass when they saw the crowd on the
road-side, and before we came up. The girls also
told us they had seen J- watching them in dif-
ferent places in the bush, knowing that Hall was in
the habit of visiting them; but although we kept a
look-out we did not catch sight of him, We heard
afterwards that he was planted among some large
rocks in the neighbourhood for quite a fortnight.


CHAPTER XX.
A KIND WOMAN’S CONCERN.
The exciting experiences through which we had
passed satisfied us for a time, and we remained
quiet for a whole week, about a place called Mil-
long, some twelve miles from Lambing Flat, after
which we made a fresh start.
I heard O’Meally say he would go across to a
small town not far distant to call on a storekeeper
named , who lived near that place, and who,
he said, had received some gold from him to sell
on the halves and had stuck to the whole of it. He
said he would have revenge and strip the store for
him. So we broke up camp one morning, and start-
ed for the Black Range, calling at Mr. W. Roberts’
station on our way and taking from his stables a
supply of fat horses, which he was getting broken
in for the police.
We stayed together for several days on the
Black Range, and then parted, Gilbert, Burke and
Hall starting for Burrowa, on the Yass side, and
G’Meally and I remaining at James O’Meally’s
place at Black Range, the arrangement being that
we were all to meet again at Demondrille Station,
near Murrumburrah.
O’Meally and 1 stayed at his relative’s place a
couple of days, and then started for the meeting
place. On the way there O’Meally said that he


knew an overseer at a station not far off who car-
ried a revolver with him and had boasted that he
would shoot us if he happened to fall in with us.
He suggested that he should make a friendly call
upon the overseer and take tea with him if he were
at home, and we therefore went up to the station,
leaving the horses outside the paddock fence and
walking up to the house. Without ceremony we
marched straight into the dining-room, and found
the “boss” and his wife and a strange man seated
at the table.
"Good night!” said O’Meally, on entering, and
the overseer replied at once, asking, "What do you
want, O’Meally?”—for he knew him first glance.
O’Meally replied: "I want your firearms.”
"I have no firearms,” said the overseer.
“Oh, 3ms, you have,” rejoined O'Mealhc “You
have got a revolver which you said you were going
to shoot some of us coves with.”
The overseer again denied, and O’Meally
turned to me and said: “Jack, see what is in those
drawers,” and upon opening a nest of drawers on
the other side of the room I found a Colt’s revolver
and a quantity of bullets, powder and caps. As I
produced these articles, O’Meally turned to the
overseer and said: "I knew you were lying, and I
am a good mind to give you a taste of the medicine
you intended for us.” Then turning to me he told
me to go into the other room and search, as there
might be something there worth taking away.
Taking a lighted candle with me I entered the
bedroom, and the first thing I saw on the table was
a small watch and ch.ain. These I had just placed
in my pocket when the overseer’s wife entered the


room, and said: “My baby is in the bed—don’t hurt
it!”
I assured her that I would not touch the baby,
and was looking into a box when she came forward
and said: “All those trinkets are mine, and I know
you will not take them from me, as they are mostly
presents.”
She had a very winning way with her, and,
shutting the box, I said; “Very well, I’ll leave them
where they are.”
For this she thanked me, and together we left
the bedroom.
The first thing she did upon entering the dining
room was to call O’Meally by name, and on his re-
plying, she said; “I know you, but not this lad.
What is his name?”
O’Meally turned to me laughing, and said,
“Shall I tell her, Jack?"
“No,” I answered, "it will do no good.”
But she looked up at me, and said: “Why not?
I will do you no harm. Surely you are not fright-
ened of the ladies?”
Upon this the stranger interjected; “I don’t
think they are afraid of the gentlemen, either.”
But without noticing the remark the good
woman turned to O’Meally and said: “You are a
man, and you ought to take this lad and leave him
with his mother.”
Without replying, O’Meally changed the subject
by telling me to go to the kitchen and order the
cook to prepare tea for us. This I did, and while
the cook was getting the meal ready I paid a visit
to the stable, secured two horses and saddles and
some feed for our own horses, and then returned to


the dining-room, where I stood guard while
O’Meally had Iris tea, and he afterwards did ditto
while I had mine.
When leaving the place, O’Meally took four
bottles of pale brandy away with him, but I re-
turned the watch to the good woman who had taken
such an interest in me. Her few kind words
touched me under the waistcoat, for I wasn’t used
to hearing many, either then or in my younger
days.


CHAPTER XXI.
IN A TIGHT CORNER.—HOW WE ESCAPED.
OUR next place of call was at a bark hut near
Wombat, the occupants of which were an old man
and woman, a girl and a boy—their children—and
a carrier whose name I afterwards learned was
Slater. The visit was a friendly one, and the
brandy was brought into requisition—so much so
that O’Meally got pretty nearly drunk, and I warned
him not to drink any more.
He replied: “Oh, I’m all right. We have not
far to go, for the boys are just over the hill, and
we’ll start directly.”
We were seated by the fire, quietly talking,
shortly after this, when we were startled by a sud-
den rush, followed by the command, which we knew
came from the police, to come out, a threat being
made that if we did not they would set fire to the
hut.
To throw ashes on the fire and put the candle
out was the work of a moment, and then the place
was in total darkness. The old man and woman
went into the back room, the girl crawled under
a bunk in one corner, and the boy and Slater sought
cover in some other place.
The police still called on us to come out, and
as we made no sign they poured a regular storm


of bullets into the slab walls, fortunately, however,
without doing any damage.
We were in a tight corner, sure enough, but it
did not take us long to make up our minds what to
do. We must either surrender or make a sudden
dash for liberty; and choosing the latter course
O’Meally and I took a revolver in each hand and
suddenly throwing the door open we sent out a
blaze of fire, discharging our revolvers almost sim-
ultaneously, and rushed out while the smoke filled
the doorway.
I heard one of the policemen, named Lockie,
call out, “I’m shot, but look after their horses!” At
the same time our assailants rode away beyond
range, but we followed them up the hill, and got
pretty close to one man who was leaning back on
his horse and firing as he retreated.
There was pretty thick timber about this spot,
chiefly white box, and right before the man’s horse
were two small trees which had grown from the
one root and were not wide enough apart to admit
of a horse passing through. The policeman’s
horse ran his head into this “bail” and there stuck,
and while he was in this position O’Meally fired and
shot him near the girth of the saddle. The police-
man managed to get away, however, with a whole
skin; but every time we attempted to reach the spot
where our horses stood our assailants would rush
us.
At last O’Meally managed to get hold of our
two horses. Mounting his own he led mine towards
the spot where I was standing under cover, still
blazing away at the police whenever any of them
showed out.


Before O’Meally reached me he sang out, “Run
to the fence” (a small cultivation paddock was be-
tween us and the outlet) “and throw the top rail
down,” and I did so, whereupon O’Meally galloped
up and jumped both horses over. I then raced
across the paddock, which was only a few yards
wide, and lowered the fence on the other side by
wrenching out a top rail, but when he tried to take
the horses over this my horse refused the jump and
broke away, leaving me without a mount.
Meanwhile the police had been closing in on
us, keeping up a hot fire, and one shot struck
O’Meally in the back, near the hip, but without in-
flicting a very serious wound. Another shot struck,
me on the wrist, but did not go more than ski!i
deep, as it hit me sideways.
“Clear for the big rocks,” called out O’Meally to
me, and I started in the direction indicated, jump-
ing into a deep creek and following its course up-
wards until the rocks were reached, the police being
unable in the darkness to see the course I took.
O’Meally meanwhile rode round, the police los-
ing him also in the darkness, and later on he went
to find our mates, I remaining in hiding until a
horse could be brought for me.


CHAPTER XXII.
TEE FIRST MURDER.—A TEMPORARY SEVER-
ANCE.—YOUNG LADY SYMPATHISERS.
AS it happened, none of the spare horses of the
gang were within easy reach at this time, and
O’Meally and Gilbert rode over to Demondrille sta-
tion, a few miles distant, to pick one up for me,
Hall and Burke riding over to the rocks where I was
hiding. .
The mission undertaken by O’Meally and Gil-
bert involved them in a crime more serious, than
any committed since my connection with, the gang,
and resulted in the death at O’Meally’s hands of
a man named , a well-known resident of that
locality.
I judged from their manner on their return
some hours later that something out of the common
had happened, and going forward to inspect the
horse they had secured for me I noticed that there
was blood on the saddle and on his near shoulder.
Both Gilbert and O’Meally had looked very solemn
and kept remarkably quiet when dismounting, and
Hall and Burke were walking towards them, when
I cried out: “Good God! O’Meally, what does this
mean? The horse is covered with blood!”
Then the story came out. There had been
shooting to the death, and the horse that had been
brought for me belonged to the man who was dead!


Piece by piece we learned the whole of the ter-
rible details. As Gilbert and O’Meally rode along
the road they saw a horseman ahead of them, and
as they drew near O’Meally recognised him as
his share of the proceeds of the Engowra gold es-
cort robbery to sell, keeping half the money for
himself in return for the trouble and risk, but who
had stuck to the whole. How true his story was,
if it was true at all, I had no means of ascertaining;
but O’Meally gave it as the reason for doing what
he did. It wasn’t a case of ordinary “bailing up,”
but of downright, deliberate murder, as far as I
could make out, although O’Meally attempted to
justify his act of violence by saying that
had not only cheated him, but had laughed and
jeered when the fact was mentioned. After some
angry words had passed, O'Meally demanded the
horse that was riding, but instead of dis-
mounting clapped in the spurs and galloped
away. Ide had not gone far, however, before
O’Meally fired, and fell to the road mortally
wounded.
It was a horrible bit of business, and I told
O’Meally so, at the same time intimating that I had
a good mind to clear away altogether, as I had no
taste for such bloody work.
Ben Plall did not say much in my hearing, but
I could see that he was greatly put out, and I saw
him afterwards talking very seriously with O’Meally
when I had gone to tether the stolen horse near
where the others were feeding.
Shortly after this occurrence our party divided
for a time. After we had returned to Memagong


and rested there a couple of days. Hall, Gilberf and
Burke wanted to make back for the Bathurst dis-
trict but O’Meally and I were not agreeable, so they
left us at Memagong and we did not know where
they were for several weeks. But we kept the
game going on our side all the same.
We first paid a visit to McGregor’s store on the
Bland Creek, and took a full supply of everything
we thought would be useful to us. Mr. Campbell,
the Police Magistrate of Burrowa, was there on a
visit, and I took his horse and saddle. We then
started for Lambing Flat, and when at a place
called Sandy Creek we met a man walking through
the bush, who told us the police were after him and
that he was on the look out for a horse and sad-
dle. He said there were about fifty Chinamen
camped up the creek, and that they had some
horses; so we paid them a visit, sticking up two
carriers on the road and taking a quantity of goods
from the drays, which we planted in the bush for
use in the future.
The Chinamen, we very soon discovered,
were on their way to Forbes and had made a camp
on the creek. We let them know what was wanted,
but they said, “No savee” to everything except the
revolvers, and when they saw these they scattered
in every direction—all but a dozen, who remained
in the camp. From these we took a horse and sad-
dle, which we gave to the man who was trying to
evade the police; also giving him a couple of pounds
and sending him off through the bush. We then re-
turned to the spot where we had left the goods
taken from the carriers, and planted them in a thick
scrub for future use,


A couple of days after this we went to a road
leading from the Twelve Mile Diggings to Grenfell,
and took up a position commanding a sight of the
road for a good distance on either end. Travellers,
most of whom carried a little gold or money, were
numerous on those roads at that time, and we
wanted to make a “haul” before leaving that part.
We had been waiting and watching for about half
an hour when I caught sight of two young women
walking through the bush in the direction of Gren-
fell. We speculated for a while as to what point
they were making for, and at last I determined to
ride over and question them. Mounting my horse
I cantered across the bush, and pulling up before
them wished them “Good morning.”
“Good morning,” responded the elder of the
two, “What are you looking for?”
“Oh,” said I, “I'm looking for the bushrangers
—are you two of them?”
This appeared to afford them some amusement,
and the reply came: “No; we are looking for some
cows; did you see any in the bush?”
Upon my replying in the negative, one of the
girls said; “I think you are a bushranger-—what
have you got that gun on your saddle for?”
Laughing, I replied that I carried the gun to
keep bushrangers off, and I then showed them the
five revolvers I had in my belt.
“Ah,” said the girl, “if the bushrangers catch
you they’ll soon take them from you.”
But I told her I was not frightened in the least,
and as I made a remark about having my mate be-
hind the rocks they said they knew we must "be
bushrangers, and they would like to see and talk


with my mate, adding that they had a liking f o f
bushrangers, because they were always so good
to the women.
We all then went over to O’Meally, and after
having a short conversation they left, promising to
return next day with provisions in the shape of
bread and tinned fish, to purchase which I gave
them five shillings. We arranged that they should
meet us in a thick scrub about half a mile distant
on the following morning. We did not care to trust
them too much, however, and in order to make sure
they brought no one with them, shortly before the
time fixed for their visit we rode 'to a point over-
looking a gully through which they would have to
pass to reach the meeting place, and from which
point we could observe their approach.
They came along alone alright, but we remain-
ed watching for some time after they had passed,
and when we saw no, one was following them we
cantered across to the scrub and met them on their
arrival there. We then took them to another spot
about a mile distant, to make assurance doubly sure,
and there together we spent the remainder of the
day, enjoying a fairly good picnic. They assured us
that their absence would not be noticed—that their
people kept a milk-yard and it was their duty to
look after the cows, which often strayed long dis-
tances searching for feed, which was scarce that|
season. Before separating it was arranged that
we should look up the cattle next morning for the
girls, and that they should bring us a fresh supply
of bread and tinned fish. This arrangement was
faithfully carried out, and we had another picnic.


Next day was Sunday, and the girls said they
could not come, but they promised to let the cattle
stray again on the Monday and thus make an ex-
cuse for coming. This they did, and during the
visit they told us that there had been a great row
on the diggings (the Twelve Mile) on the Saturday
night, through the visit of a young man named Pat
O’Meally, from the Weddin mountains, the diggers
having threatened to kill him because he was the
brother of Jack O’Meally, the bushranger, and must
be in league with the gang. The girls did not know
that they were talking to Jack O’Meally himself,
for we had given fictitious names, although they
understood we were bushrangers.
It was then arranged that we should pay a
visit to the digging township, and that the girls
should meet us there that night and point put the
best stores. This arrangement also was duly car-
ried out, and that night we took a walk together
through the township, having left our horses in a
convenient spot near at hand. The girls also
showed us the best road to take to escape obser-
vation and evade the numerous diggers’ holes when
clearing away.


CHAPTER XXIII.
STORES ON THE DIGGINGS.—HOW WE STUCK
THEM UP AND GOT AWAY.
SHORTLY after dusk the next night we again en-
tered the town —this time on plunder bent. We
walked quietly into the store which we had pre-
viously fixed upon, and were met by the usual in-
quiry from the storekeeper—“ What can I do for
you?”
“Have you got any trousers?” asked O’Meally.
“Yes,” said the storekeeper. “What sort?
Moles?”
“Of course,” replied O’Meally. "Do you think
bushmen like us want black broadcloth? Show us
some strong and good."
Upon this the storekeeper smiled, and at once
turned to the shelves to get the required articles
down. When he turned round to the counter again
he found a revolver pointed at his face, and heard
O’Meally saying, “Keep quiet, or I’ll fire.”
But the storekeeper suddenly dropped down be-
hind the counter and called out in a loud voice:
“Shoot! Tom.”
O’Meally fired his revolver at the same mo-
ment, and the flash extinguished the candle that
was on the counter, plunging the shop into dark-
ness.


Being curious to learn who Tom was, and
noticing a room at the rear of the shop, I vaulted
over the counter and ran into it, to find Tom in the
act of taking down a revolver from the mantlepiece.
"Put that down!” I roared out, and Tom put
down his hand as if he had been shot.
I at once picked up the weapon, and hearing
O’Meally call out, “Come on, Jack,” I ran back into
the store.
Meanwhile, the storekeeper, who was certainly
not deficient in pluck, had crawled round the end of
the counter, and as I was in the act of vaulting
back over it he fired a revolver or pistol at me, and
the bullet passed between my arm and body, but
did not touch me. We lost no time in getting out
of the store, and at once made for our horses,
which were tied up to a grindstone at one end of
the building, and rode away from the premises as
the diggers, attracted by the noise of the firing,
began to assemble in numbers.
Having got clear of the crowd, O’Meally said:
“We may as well make a job of it now; let us go to
the Ten Mile”—another digging township two miles
distant. We therefore cantered along the road un-
til we caught sight of the lights in the township,
and then went more quietly, pulling up at the first
store we came to. Here we dismounted, and tying
our horses up to a paling fence in a dark spot near
the store we walked in.
There were two men and a woman in the store,
the latter being behind the counter. O’Meally pre-
sented his revolver, and told the woman quietly
that we would help ourselves if she would come
from behind the counter.


She called out, “Oh, I know you now,” and at
once came forward. At the same moment one of
the men made for the door, but I ordered him back
and directed the two men and the woman to sit
down on a long seat at one end of the store. When
they were quietly seated, O’Meally went behind (he
counter to collect ah assortment of store goods,
and while he was thus engaged I heard the dogs
bark and went to the door to ascertain the cause,
I then heard a man running along the road which
we had travelled, and as I stepped on one side he.
rushed past me into the store, breathing fast and
heavily, and cried, “Look out! The bushrangers are
at the Twelve Mile, and are sure to come here.
They have shot a man!”
Then O’Meally quietly turned and said: “You
are telling lies, whether you know it or not, for it
was the candle I shot, and not the man.”
The look of amazement on the newcomer’s face
when he discovered into whose presence he had
rushed was amusing to behold, and, before he had
recovered from his astonishment, O’Meally called
out to me to search his pockets.
Then I turned to the man and said: “Hand out
s'our cash!” but he protested that he hadn’t any,
whereupon I searched his pockets for myself and
found in one of them a chamois leather bag, tied
across the centre with red tape, one end containing
gold dust and the other notes.
"I didn’t think you chaps would take a work-
ing man’s money,” cried the man, as I transferred
the bag from his pocket to mine.
O'Meally made answer: “You shouldn’t have


troubled yourself about us and we would not have
molested you.”
Before the man could reply, the storewoman
interposed: “I didn’t interfere with you, yet you
come here and rob me.”
“Ah,” replied O’Meally, “but you’re not a work-
ing man! ’
Having got all we required we re-mounted and
returned to our camp in the scrub, and there divid-
ed the spoil. In the bag I found twelve £5 notes
and seven ounces of gold—in all about £BO. The
gold was sold for us in Orange about two months
later on.
On the following day our girls paid us another
visit and informed us that the police were tracking
us along the southern road, and believed that there
were five or six of us together; so we decided to
remain for a time where we were.
Three days afterwards we learned that three
butchers were going together from the township
to the Lachlan River to purchase cattle, and we
went to the road to look out for them, anticipating
that they would not go to market without some
cash. Shortly after we had taken up our positions
some travellers came along the road and we stop-
ped them, only to find that we had got the wrong
parties; but we detained them until the butchers
put in an appearance. Then we bailed up all to-
gether, and while O'Meally kept guard I went
through their pockets one by one, but only found
£3 in the pocket of the smallest man of the lot.
Having finished the search we left them on the
road and walked a short distance off, and I told
O’Meally how much I had got.


Then, to my surprise, O’Meally said he would
like to return the money to the little man, as he
knew him to be a good sort and not very well off.
As we had made a good haul from the man at the
store, and were not in want of money, I agreed,
and said I would make a pretence of searching him
again and while doing so would put the money back
in his pocket.
Accordingly I returned to the men, and said to
the little fellow; “I believe you must have some
more money —stand up till I try.”
He stood up, and I, while apparently searching
his pockets, replaced the notes. Then a sudden
thought struck me, and I told him to take off the
half Wellington boots he was wearing, which he
reluctantly did, and turning one of them upside
down out fell a nice little pad of bank notes. These
I at once appropriated, and after telling the men
they could go on their way we returned to the
camp.
Once more the girls came to visit us, and as
we learned from them that the police were looking
for us along the Lambing Flat road we decided to
remain at the camp until they returned to the
Twelve Mile, which we concluded they would do
when they heard about the sticking up of the but-
chers. As soon as they returned we left the camp,
taking a last fond farewell of the girls who had
proved such good friends to us, and took the road
which the police had just left, after their unsuccess-
ful search for us.
Four or five days after leaving the camp near
Twelve Mile, we made a start back for the Carcoar
district, first loading up two pack horses with the


store goods, chiefly drapery, intended as presents
for certain lady friends, which we had accumulated.
Necessarily, we did not travel very fast.
One night we stopped near a station called
Bumbaldry, and having made tea in camp we went
on another six miles, so that we should have a fair
start if we were being tracked. We reached the
Lachlan River at a place called Sandy Fall, but
found it full to the banks with flood waters. To
test its depth we unpacked one of the horses and
drove him into the river. We could see that he had
to swim nearly the whole distance across, and as
both packs and riders would have had a “ducking”
if we had followed him, we decided to go up to
Cowra, where there was a boat.
When we reached the boating place we found
the boatman was on the Cowra side of the river,
and it was fully half an hour before we could con-
vey a message to him. The boatman demurred to
taking horses over behind the boat, but I beat
down his scruples by offering him £\ to take us
across. He had to make three trips—first with
myself, leading my saddle horse so that he could
swim behind the boat; second, with the pack and
the horse following; and, third, with O’Meally and
his horse.
Having replaced the pack on the horse after
crossing, we saddled up and rode through the main
street of Cowra, passing in front of the police sta-,
tion. We did not, however, see any of the police,
who were doubtless in the bush somewhere, hoping
to meet some of the gang, and we kept the road
for about two miles, when we came to an inn kept
by a man named George Lockyer, who, I believe,


still resides in that neighbourhood. After having
tea there and feeding the horses we set out again,
travelled in the dark for about eight miles, and then
camped for the night at a place called Spring
Creek.


CHAPTER XXIV.
WE DISCOVER A “PLANT.”
LEAVING Spring Creek early in the morning we
made for the mountain called Black Hill and there
stayed for a day and a night, receiving shelter in
the sawyer’s hut.
We here made inquiries concerning Ben Hall,
Gilbert and Burke, but the sawyer had not seen
them, although he had heard of the Carcoar-Bath-
urst coach having been recently stuck up, and a
policeman’s firearms taken from him; so we conclud-
ed they had not left the district which we were en-
tering. We therefore pushed on for Teasdale Park,
about six miles from Number One, and reaching
there after nightfall decided to make our camp at
the back of a cultivation paddock. But there we
met with a surprise which caused us to alter our
plans and hurriedly make tracks back again to
Black Hill.
As was my custom, I was feeling among the
bushes of the chock and log fence for a place to put
my saddle, when to my astonishment I came across
a rifle and a revolver, and close beside them a
policeman’s ammunition belt. I at once called
O’Meally’s attention to the find, and he put into
words the very thought that had struck me.


“This is a police camp, and they are about thai,
house lying in wait for us or our mates.”
“That’s just what I think,” said I; adding, “By
George, it is fortunate for us that I felt among the
bushes before we made camp. What had we bet-
ter do?”
“There’s only one thing to be done,” answered
O’Meally. “We must leave here at once, but we will
take all we can find in the fence as soon as we shift
our horses.”
“Better take all we can at once,” said I; “for
the police may return before we get back, and we’ll
fall into a trap.”
So we made further search and discovered five
saddles and bridles, two overcoats and some blan-
ket's. These we gathered up and had started to
carry off as best we could, when a revolver shot
rang out, and feeling that we had been discovered
we made off as fast as possible to our horses.
Having planted the spoil and saddled up,
O’Meally suggested that he should walk back
and give the camp party a surprise, and take
their horses if we could find them. So we went
back, but there were neither men nor horses at the
spot. We then hurried back to Black Hill and
reached the sawyer’s hut just before daybreak.
Not caring to show ourselves until we had as-
certained the movements of the police party, whose
“kit” we had discovered and taken, we stayed
quietly with the sawyer for two days, for we con-
cluded the police would scour the bush for us as
soon as they discovered their loss. But the two
days having passed without our hearing anything,


we sent a messenger to Teasdale to make a few in-
quiries, not only about the police, but about Hall,
Gilbert and Burke, who we felt sure were some-
where in that locality. The news he brought back
afforded us not a little amusement as well as satis-
faction.
This was the messenger’s report:—Our mates
were in Teasdale, lying low, for the police had dis-
covered their day camp and had taken their saddles,
coats and blankets, together with a rifle, revolver
and amunition, and were doubtless now quietly
keeping watch, expecting them to show themselves.
This was a double mistake. We had raided
the camp of our mates, believing it to be a police
camp. They concluded that the police were the
raiders and had received a great fright, believing
the police were close upon their tracks and were
now watching for them, after having removed their
saddles, etc., from the place where they were hid-
den. We were not long in coming together, and
full explanations followed as soon as we met, each
laughing at the other; but O’Meally and I claimed
that we had the best of it.
Once more together, the five members of the
gang went into camp for a rest and to compare
notes. We made our camp near Number One,
knowing that friends would soon give warning if
our common enemy in uniform made their appear-
ance in the neighbourhood.
After the lapse of a few days Ben Hall and I
paid a visit to the public house at Long Swamp,
and finding that there were no visitors we stayed
there one night, enjoying ourselves quietly, taking


the precaution, however, in case of surprise, to
plant our saddles in the fence (our usual custom)
and our horses in a safe corner, where we knew the
police, with all their black trackers, would not be
likely to find them.


CHAPTER XXV.
THE RAID UPON BATHURST.—A CHALLENGE
AND WHAT CAME OF IT.
LEAVING Long Swamp early next morning, Hall
and I decided to take a short run in the
direction of the Trunkey Diggings, for gold
always had an attraction for us, although we didn’t
trouble to search for it as the diggers searched.
Evading the main road we were quietly jogging
along a gully when we met two young surveyors
on their way to Bathurst—“Dosh” Machattie, son
of the late Dr. Machattie, and young Battye,
son of the then well-known Captain Battye, of the
Western police.
Without much ceremony we bailed them up, but
neither of them was burdened with riches, and we
didn’t get much. Battye wanted to run me a foot-
race (he was a good sprinter), but I was “not on,”
and there was some light talk about an engage-
ment with fists; but this came to nothing.
Before leaving, Machattie said, “Why don’t you
come to Bathurst? I suppose you are not game?”
Hall replied that we would show him whether
we were game or not, and that we would pay the
big town a visit during the following week. They
took this as a big joke, and a piece of boasting
and bluff on our part; but, as the result proved,


they had put a thought into our heads which led
to a determination that was fully and faithfully
carried out.
Hall and I then returned to the camp at
Number One instead of going to Trunkey, and in-
formed our mates of what had transpired.
O’Meally at once said; “We’ll show the beggars
whether we’re game or not! It’s a pity one of you
didn’t take on the cove that talked fight; either
of you could have flattened him out.”
"Oh, that’s nonsense,” said Hall. “We’ve got
something better to do than fight with bragging
school boys, and neither of them was much better.
But, I’ll tell you what; if you are all agreeable we will
take up their challenge in earnest and go to
Bathurst.”
“Yes,” said I. “We want one or two of those
revolving rifles which there has been some talk
about, and there’s a gunsmith named Pedrotta in
William-street who very likely keeps them.”
O’Meally then said, “Well, I’m agreeable to
make the trip to Bathurst the next ‘go,’ and as the
police are all out from the head station we could
have a free run in and out, and the affair will make
a big sensation; besides which we ought to make
a good haul from one of the jewellers. If we go
at night the banks will be closed, or we might
‘touch’ one of them.”
Gilbert and Burke also expressed their willing-
ness, the former saying that we might be able to
“lift” old “Pasha” —a well-known racehorse—from
Ins owner, Mr. De Clouet.


We had some more serious talk over the mat-
er, and then decided to go right into the jaws of
(he lion.
Being well acquainted with the district, which
[ had travelled over frequently when a lad, I was
appointed pilot, and after a couple of days spent in
fixing up our best horses—and we had some good
ones, you may be sure, chiefly thoroughbreds—we
■made a start for the town.
Bathurst was then the most important and
populous town on the Western side of the Blue
Mountains, and was the head-centre of the Western
police force. It was about thirty-five miles distant
from our camp, but the distance was nothing to
us, and we started in high glee at the prospect of
the big sensation which our visit would create.
Starting early in the morning and evading all
the public roads, we passed through Stringy Bark
(now called Newbridge) and down by Wimbledon to
Black Horse Square, near George’s Plains. From
this point we crossed in the direction of Evans’
Plains until we reached the Bald Hills, which over-
look the town of Bathurst. Here we halted till
nightfall, and then we made another start, riding
down the hill quietly and passing through what is
now called Milltown, a suburb of the town. We
rode singly and some distance apart, so as not to
attract attention, and entered the town proper by
one of the main thoroughfares—William-street.
Here we rode together, keeping our horses well in
hand and ready for any emergency that might arise.
The night was bright and clear and calm, but
as the hour was early there were not many people
in the streets, although it was the recognised mar


ket night—Saturday—generally the busiest night
in the week. And it was doubtless owing to this
fact that the presence of five horsemen together in
the street did not attract undue attention, for the
young men from the surrounding farms and villages
were in the habit of riding into the town on that
night on courting or marketing bent.
Our first visit was to the shop of Pedrotta, the
gunsmith. Having pulled up in front of the place,
Hall, Gilbert and I dismounted and entered, first
handing our horses to O’Meally and Burke to hold,
they remaining on their horses near the footpath.
Walking into the shop we asked to be shown
some of the best revolvers and revolving rifles, and
were somewhat disappointed when the shopman
told us that he had no good ones in stock, although
he expected a consignment from Sydney during the
following week. Promising to call again we left the
shop, and having remounted, rode a short distance
farther down the street.
Hall, O’Meally and Burke now rode in advance,
Gilbert and I following, the horses going at a walk-
ing pace.
We had not gone far before Gilbert saw a
fruiterer's shop, and saying “Look at the oranges—
we must have some of them,” he quickly dis-
mounted, gave me his horse’s reins to hold, entered
the shop and called for two dozen oranges, some
of which he proceeded to throw to me as the woman
in the shop counted them.
So far nothing sensational had occurred, but
I kept my eyes and ears wide open for anything that
might happen.


Street in Bathurst visited by the Gang.


While this was going on our mates had pro-
ceeded down the street and reached McMinn’s
jeweller’s shop, a few doors away, and Hall had
dismounted and entered. Then O’Meally from the
front of the shop called back to Gilbert to “come
on quick” and he immediately ran off on foot, leav-
ing me to settle for the oranges; but instead of
paying for them I threw them back into the fruit
stall, and hurried down to where O’Meally and
Burke were standing with the other horses.
And now the excitement commenced.
Hall had ordered the jeweller and two ladies
into the room next the shop, telling them to keep
quiet and they would be alright, when Gilbert sud-
denly rushed in with a revolver in each hand and
declared that if they either moved or spoke he
would blow their brains out.
This was enough for the ladies. Believing that
their last hour had come they began to scream;
which in turn proved enough for the invaders, for
Hall and Gilbert beat a hasty retreat to the shop
door, only to find that a crowd of persons had
already began to gather in the street, attracted by
the noise.
To vault into the saddles was the work of a mo-
ment; and it was not a moment too soon, for an ex-
cited crowd was gathering around us, their excite-
ment increasing as the women continued to scream,
while McMinn, who had rushed to the door with
them, was yelling with all his might “Police! Bush-
rangers! Bushrangers! Police!”
That we were bushrangers must have become
very apparent to all present as we began to move
off, for we each held a revolver in one hand, and


Hall fired a shot as a warning that the crowd must
not block our passage.
The Hue and cry having now been fairly raised
we rode off at a smart pace down the street as far
as Howick-street corner, thence across into George-
street, and headed up that thoroughfare in the di-
rection of the Bald Hills again, quietly laughing at
the scare we had created, for we could see people
running from all directions towards William-street.
But we had not quite finished with Bathurst
yet, and to tell the truth we were all somewhat
disappointed at the failure which had attended the
effort at McMinn’s. Cantering quietly up George-
street we came to its intersection with Piper-street,
where Mr. De Clouet, familiarly called '‘Dublin
Jack,” and who was a well-known sporting man and
owner of racehorses, kept a public house.
Turning into an empty allotment at the rear
of the stables, Gilbert said “We must go in here,
for I want the racehorse Pasha, which De Clouet
has in his loose box,”
I tried to dissuade him, saying that he was well
enough suited with horse-flesh, but he was deter-
mined; so leaving Hall and Burke to mind the
horses, Gilbert, O’Meally and I climbed over the
fence and got into the yard.
The first man we met was the groom, and he
declared that the stable was locked and that Mrs.
De Clouet kept the key. We then proceeded to the
house and entered by the back door, bailing up the
inmates, who had not yet heard the happenings
in the centre of the town, and getting from them a
couple of pounds and an old-fashioned watch, which
I took from the “boss,” as a curiosity.


But I quietly advised Mrs. De Clouet not to
give the key of the horse-box to Gilbert, and his
persuasions and threats did not move her.
I then went out to Hall and Burke, who were
rather impatient and restless, the former telling
me that the police had just passed up George-
street at a gallop. Hearing this lat once ran back
to the hotel and told Gilbert and U’Meally, who im-
mediately left the place with me, and we all re-
mounted and rode quietly farther up George-street,
turning at the top to follow a cross street leading
towards Mill town.
Just as we got to the corner, however, we met
a body of police, and hoping they might pass with-
out noticing us we pulled up; but they stopped also,
having caught sight of us, and knowing that we
were discovered we lay town upon our horses’ necks,
clapped the spurs in, and started off down a steep
fall at full gallop.
The police fired, but though we heard the
bullets whistle inconveniently close, none of us were
hit. Getting into the gully at the foot of the rise
we turned short round to the right, and thinking
we had gone straight on, the police passed us, and
we rode up the hill, congratulating ourselves that
we had escaped so easily.
But our troubles were not all over yet. We
were talking and laughing as we rode, Hall and I
being almost twenty yards behind the other three,
when suddenly one of the police galloped past us,
and when near O’Meally, Gilbert and Burke he com-
menced firing. The three at once scattered, but
as Hall and I followed the policeman pretty closely
he had to abandon the chase.


Lying down on my horse’s neck, I rode hard
towards him and drove him faster; but while so en-
gaged a riderless horse passed me which I be-
lieved to be Gilbert’s, and as I saw something
hanging down from the saddle to the ground I be-
came puzzled and alarmed and turned to follow the
horse. Hall came just behind me and we went at
a great pace down the hill, at the foot of which was
a deep creek. The riderless horse cleared the creek
at a bound, and I came next, but the horse I was
riding—old Black Billy—took off a little too soon,
and tipping the opposite bank turned a complete
somersault.
Fortunately I was not hurt in the fall, although
I lost my hat, and was not long in gathering my-
self up. Hall came up just at this moment and
after assuring him that I was not injured I began to
search for my hat, striking matches for the pur-
pose. While thus engaged we were startled at the
sound of a revolver shot, and as the bullet whizzed
rather close we cleared away without the hat, rid-
ing a short distance into the scrub, where we found
O’Meally and Burke. The latter said he saw Gil-
bert fall from his horse while the police were firing,
but he was sure he was not captured, as he had
seen him running away. We then left the horses
with Burke and returned on foot to look for Gilbert,
but we could not find him, and after getting back
to the horses we mounted and rode out across the
Bald Hills to a spot near Evans’ Plains, where we
camped till daybreak.
As soon as it was light enough to see we
started back to our camp in the mountains, keeping
to the bush all the way, and there to our surprise


we found the missing man. Gilbert said he had
jumped off the horse because he was afraid of the
creeks, but O’Meally jeeringly said—“ You were
afraid of the bullets which were flying about; and
I believe you will be shot yet when running away,
for you have no fight in you.”
This led to hot words between them, and for
ten minutes some very sultry word-exchanges
passed.
For two solid days after that Gilbert sulked
like a spoiled child, and at last declared that he
wouldn’t stay with O’Meally, and asked which of us
would go away with him. Neither Hall, Burke nor
I took his side, however, and as he saw that none
of us would join him he settled down again, and
peace in the camp was renewed.
Meanwhile we learned what a solid sensation
our trip to Bathurst had caused, and we gathered
from friends a few particulars concerning the move-
ments of the police. Within a few minutes of the
alarm reaching the police station, every available
mounted trooper was in the saddle. In a body they
galloped up George-street, following the course we
were known to have taken, and believing that we
had made tracks for the bush by one of the main
roads at the top of the town, they actually passed
the spot where our horses were standing, and when
remounted after leaving De Clouet’s, we followed
their tracks without knowing it, and came into col-
lision with them at the edge of the town, as I have
stated.
But what of the civilians? They were properly
scared, you may believe, and very little business
was done that night. Some of the shopkeepers


actually put up their shutters, while those who had
no shops to attend to gathered in knots at the street
corners and elsewhere speculating as to what would
happen next. On the Sunday very little else was
talked about, in church or out of church, and dur-
ing the day the police magistrate, old Dr. Palmer,
issued circulars to the leading inhabitants, request-
ing them to attend a meeting next morning at the
court house to consider “what steps should be taken
to protect the town in the present emergency.”
That meeting was duly held, and in opening it the
police magistrate expressed a hope that all who
could arm themselves would do so, as, although
there were twelve or fourteen police stationed in the
town they were liable to be called to duty in the
bush at any time, and the town would thus be left
without protection.
Resolutions were then passed for the swear-
ing in of special constables to patrol the
town, 'and the enrolment of mounted volunteers,
to be sworn in and equipped by the government,
and placed under the control of the police magis-
trate and magistrates. All these arrangements
were duly carried out, and Bathurst for some time
was quite prepared for any second raid. But we
were too busily engaged beyond its boundaries to
pay a second visit, and were quite content with that
one diversion, which, while it did not fill our poc-
kets, furnished us with not a little amusement.
Before leaving that locality, however, we
visited several public houses and stores on the
Vale-road, and right in the teeth of the police, who
were hot foot after us all the time, sometimes ac-
tually passing us on the road, without knowing it.


At the stores and hotels we gathered together
both money and store goods, the latter being loaded
in bags as a pack on one of the spare horses we
always had with us.


CHAPTER XXVI.
OUT WEST AGAIN.—SOME VARIED EX-
PERIENCES.
OUR operations in the Bathurst centre had, of
course, drawn the police from the other districts
again, and knowing that they would be increasingly
active around the neighbourhood we decided to take
a run up Eugowra way. We were not long getting
ready, and on the road there we called at three
places where we were not expected.
The first place of call was Mr. Louden’s Grub-
benbong station, near Carcoar. Leaving our
horses at the gate we walked quietly up to the
house and entered by the back door, surprising two
servant girls and a man in the first room. Mr. and
Mrs. Louden were in another room and refused to
open the door when they learned who the visitors
were, until some bullet holes had been made in it,
when Mr. Louden promised to open it if no more
shots were fired.
The promise was given and at once the door
was opened, as was also Mrs. Louden’s mouth.
She scolded us to her heart’s content, and when
Burke laughed at her she turned on him very
fiercely with —“Stop yer grinnin’; yer like a laughin’
jackass; yer jest like a little black Chinaman; yer
no like a white man, yer nasty little thing. If I had


one of the pistols yer have hung to yer nasty black
body I would stop yer flashness—yer little black
dog!” It was just a treat to hear her run all this
off in one breath.
As soon as she had finished I ordered the two
servants to cook some supper for us, and the old
lady burst out again, saying if she was the cook
she would see us starve rather than give us a feed.
After we had had a good meal—during which
one or other of us kept a close watch upon the in-
mates, two other men having in the meantime been
brought in from the yard—l went into one of the
other rooms where there was a piano, which I opened
and made some sort of a noise ( I couldn’t play for
sour apples); and this set the old lady off again.
She sent one of the servant girls to “make that
feller leave off playin’,” and the girl came in laugh-
ing to order me to stop; but at the same time she
told me that the instrument belonged to a niece and
the old lady would not let her have it because she
had got married against her wishes. So I banged
away louder than ever till I was tired.
Shortly afterwards we left, taking very little
from the place, as we considered they had given us
very good entertainment during our visit.
Our next place of call was Rothery’s Cliefden
Station, but we didn’t find much worth taking either
in the dwelling or the store, except a pair of knee
boots which fitted Burke to a nicety. We intended
taking the firearms, but could not find them. Hall
and Gilbert rode down the paddock and ran the
station horses up to the yard, but there were only
two that suited our taste, and I took one and Hall
the other. Then we took dinner in the kitchen and


had quite a friendly chat with Mrs. and Miss Roth-
ery. As we were leaving, one of the girls told Hall
that the horse he had taken was hers, and she asked
him to take care of her favorite and leave it where
she could get it again after he had done with it,
which Hall promised to do.
From Cliefden we made all haste to Canowindra
township. Our first work after entering was to
secure the solitary policeman stationed there and
take him to Robinson’s hotel, to which place we also
took most of the other inhabitants of the place.
O’Meally and Burke stayed at the hotel in charge,
while Hall, Gilbert and I went on a foraging ex-
pedition. We first entered a store on the opposite
side of the street, but did not find much money,
the reason for which was made plain some time
afterwards, when we were informed that the store-
keeper had planted it in a flour bag on seeing us
bring the policeman to the hotel. Having taken
every precaution against surprise from without and
against word being sent from the township, we
made a night of it at the hotel, keeping the dance
going in lively measure the whole night through.
We left the town next morning, first giving the
policeman a strict caution not to attempt to give
information to headquarters at either Forbes or
Bathurst, of the sticking up until the following
day. Gilbert and O’Meally stayed behind for some
time to watch that the policeman did not start for
Forbes to tell his story, while Hall, Burke and I rode
down the river to Bangaroo station, hoping to get
some fresh horses; but there were no horses in
the paddock, and we returned up the river again,
only to find it in full flood.


Shortly after we had reached the river, Gilbert
rode up on the other side of the stream and said
there were a lot of police higher up at the top
crossing, waiting for the flood waters to subside
and that they were camped just opposite the town;
so we made up our minds to swim the river without
delay.
First stripping our clothes off we each folded
our revolvers and ammunition inside, rolling them
up securely, and strapping the bundle to the saddle.
Hall was first in the water and I followed close be-
hind; but my horse would not swim, and when he
reached the strong part of the current he turned
turtle and sank, rising only to be carried down the
stream until he came near the bank on the side from
which he had started, while I made for the opposite
bank, which I reached in safety. When he reached
the bank the horse got his head between two sap-
lings that were growing close together and became
fast, while his hind-quarters remained in the stream.
He remained in this position until Burke, who had
not started across, ran down and pushed his head
back, when the stream caught him again and car-
ried him into the branches of an old oak tree that
had fallen into the river. Here he sank once more
and remained so long under water that I thought
he was drowned; but he rose again, this time with-
out the saddle, and made for the opposite bank,
where I was standing, when I caught the bridle
and assisted him out.
With the saddle I lost my clothes and firearms,
and £ig in money; but I was thankful to get my
horse, and speedily made up a suit from the spare
things the others carried. Burke did not cross the


The Weddin Mountains.


river till next morning, by which time the water had
fallen; but Hall, Gilbert, O’Meally and I rode away
from the river and camped for the night on a hill
overlooking the town. We paddocked our horses
there and re-saddled at daybreak next morning,
when Burke rejoined us.
Burke told us that just before he reached the
camp he had met the Canowindra policeman
on an open flat on his way to Forbes, and as soon
as the latter saw him he turned and galloped back
to the town, to report, I suppose, that we had
not yet gone. By this time, however, other police
who had been patrolling the bush in search of
us, crossed the river and entered the town,
and they at once started down the river after us;
but we had then disappeared in the mountains and
their search was fruitless. That night we camped
in very rough country, and on the following morn-
ing started for the Orange-Forbes road, which we
reached about ten o’clock.
Having heard that it was escort day, when the
coach from Forbes would most likely be carrying
a good sum in gold under police protection, we de-
termined to vary the proceedings by sticking up the
mail. So we rode in the direction of Forbes, with
the object of meeting the escort.
The day proved full of adventures, some amus-
ing, some disappointing. Our first occured about
four miles along the road, when we came to a bridge
over which an old man was trying to drive a flock
of sheep. The sheep had just got on one end of
the bridge as we reached the other, and the old
man frantically waved us back, shouting out orders
for us to wait until his sheep had crossed. But we


still kept on, O’Meally leading, until the old man
confronted us. He had a bush walking stick in his
hand, and with this he commenced to belabour
O’Meally’s horse. O’Meally took the assault in
good part and sought to pacify his assailant by say-
ing he was a constable. “I don’t care a who
ye are,” yelled the old shepherd; "if ye were the
Governor himself ye shan’t stop my sheep! So, back
wid ye and let me get over.” But we pushed past
them both while the altercation was going on, and
when he saw that we had crossed without disturb-
ing his sheep the old man let Jack go, and we
pressed on.


CHAPTER XXVII.
THE MONEY IN A TUB.—AN INTERRUPTED
SWIM.—PUGILISM IN THE CAMP.
About a mile farther along the road we met a horse
with hobbles on and Hall caught him and rode him
on to Murga township, giving his other animal a
rest. There were two public houses and one gen-
eral store there, and as we dismounted in front of
one of the hotels a man came out and said to Hall,
"Why are you riding my horse?” to which Hall made
reply, "It is my horse now and don’t you touch him.”
The man opened his eyes at what he, no doubt, con-
sidered a cool piece of impudence, but he speedily
realised that we were out for more than a single
horse.
Gilbert and I went over to the other pub., and
found an old woman in charge. When we had made
known our mission she said, "There is no money
here, boys; but you can have all those youngsters
if you like”—pointing to a number of children of
varied ages that surrounded her. Not being in
want of such spoil we passed on to the store, to find
that this also was in charge of a woman. As we
approached she ran out at the back door, and I
followed her in time to see her throw something
into a tub of dirty water. I at once picked up a
broom that was handy and stirred the water, fish


ing up a pickle bottle containing twenty-two £1
notes. We were more fortunate than our mates,
who got no money, and after Hall had returned
the horse to its owner we proceeded along the road
to meet the coach. But here we met with a great
disappointment. The coach was empty, not having
a single passenger or mail-bag aboard.
We then turned back in the direction of Cano-
windra again, and camped that night at a place
called Nyrang Creek, passing Canowindra on the
following day and camping on a big flat near the
river. As 'the weather was comfortably warm we
let the horses feed on the flat until the next day,
and amused ourselves with swimming. We were all
stripped, and had left our guns and revolvers on
the bank of the river with our clothes, and while we
were in the water Hall called out that he could
hear the sound of horses coming through the bush.
We at once ran to our clothes, but before we could
dress we saw seven policemen riding up the flat. I
grabbed my gun and ran to my horse, which was
near at Hand, but before I could mount the police
had turned and headed off towards the town. We
concluded that they had not seen us, although we
were not more than 800 yards distant. Soon after
they had gone we started off up the river, and com-
ing to a farm house we purchased some bread and
bacon, from which we made a hearty supper in a
camp six miles farther on.
Next morning when packing up I asked Gilbert
if he wasn’t going to carry his share of the bacon,
but he said he would have nothing to do with
"the greasy stuff,” seeing that it was too salt for
his taste. So when we rode away he left his portion


on the log where I had placed it. After travelling
over some very rough hills until about midday we
halted to have a “snack.” Burke and I acted as
cooks on the occasion, grilling slices of the bacon
on the hot coals; but there was none for Gilbert
and when he saw this he coolly stepped over and
took a slice of mine. I told him to put it down, but
he commenced to laugh, and I at once struck him
a blow in the mouth with my fist, and the row com-
menced in earnest. But before we could get fairly
going Hall and O’Meally seized Gilbert, while Burke
stood before me.
Then Hall asked Gilbert if he was determined
to fight, and he replied “yes.” “Very well, then,"
said Hall, “give me your firearms;” and we at once
handed over our revolvers to Hall and O’Meally, who
took charge of them while we tested the soundness
of each other’s heads and ribs. I, being the taller,
gave Gilbert the higher ground and for a time he
laid it on to me fairly well, but I suddenly caught
him one in the throat, and from that time could do
pretty well what I liked with him until he gave in.
But we were not allowed the firearms until we be-
came friends again.
Finding our course up the river barred by huge
rocks we turned and made our way up a steep
mountain in the direction of Orange until we came
opposite the “Old Man Canoblas,” south-east of
that township. Then we ran the top of a main
range eastward till the country became broken and
more level, and we continued in that direction till
we reached Mr. Lawson's station on Flyer’s Creek.
We had been told some time previously that Mr.
Lawson kept a revolving rifle, a weapon which Hall


desired greatly to possess, so we rode up to the
station in hopes of securing it. But there
were only two servant men at the place,
and they told us the station people had all
gone on a visit to Sydney, and that Mr. Lawson
had lent his revolving rifle to Inspector Davidson,
who was after us. Finding Mr. Lawson’s favorite
saddle horse in the stable I appropriated it, and
also a shot-gun which I found in the house. But
Gilbert appeared very dissatisfied, and before long
his dissatisfaction found vent in very strong lan-
guage.
“I don’t care what you say,” he declared, ad-
dressing us all, his language being liberally punctu-
ated with oaths; “you are too easy-going with the
wretches who are so fond of helping the police.
Here’s Lawson gives Davidson, one of the smartest
men out after us, one of the best rifles in use, and
the like of which we can’t get, and yet you let him
off. I say burn the station! and give them
something to remember us by.”
Burke was the first to speak up: “You’re a fool,
Johnny,” said he. “If we start burning, the country
will get too hot to hold us, and we’ll be roasted in the
very fires we raise. I won’t be a party to using
the fire-stick against anyone, and certainly not
against Lawson, who I know is a good sort.”
Hall and I also denounced his proposal, and
shortly afterwards we left. That night we arrived
under Mount Macquarie, near Carcoar, and camped
at a waterfall. While we were lying down, Gilbert
again opened the subject of burning, arguing that
we should destroy the property of everyone who
assisted the police.


Then Hall, who was generally very quiet
spoke up. ‘
Leaning up on his elbow he called out: “Now
look here, Gilbert, you had better stop that talk
at once. Once for all, I tell you I won’t have any
of that sort of work, and if I hear any more of it
you will have to reckon with me in a way you won’t
like. Even if we were inclined for that game and
started it, we would come off second best, and we
wouldn’t last long, for every settler would turn
out and help to hunt us down. I don’t want to
quarrel with you, but by , if I hear you say
anything more about burning, I’ll bore a hole
through you!”
Then Gilbert, who seemed in a terribly surly
mood, growled out; “I don’t care what you do, but
I mean to shoot every man I find helping the police
against me.”
Hall then replied in a quieter tone: "You had bet-
ter not try shooting either. lam determined not
to shoot anyone unless I am compelled to do so
in defence of my own life. I mean to hold out until
I am shot if I can’t get away, but I won’t take the
life of another man who doesn’t try to take mine,’
The discussion dropped at that, and quietness
reigned during the remainder of the night.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
A FORTNIGHT’S REST AND REFLECTION.
WE had kept going a pretty good stretch up to this
time, and felt we were entitled to a spell. We
therefore started for the Abercrombie Mountains,
and made a good camp in a deep gully under Black
Hill, where we knew the police were not likely to
come looking for us. Burke and I were foragers
and ration carriers, as we were known to a good
many people in the district, most of them being
our sturdy friends. There was good grass
and water everywhere, and a good many saddle
horses grazing about, so that if our horses happen-
ed to be seen they would not attract special atten-
tion.
There was only one man in the police force
whom we thought should be closely watched, and
that was “J ,” our old acquaintance with the
blankets at Trunkey. He knew every yard of that
part of the country just as well as I did, was a good
bushman, and as keen a rifleshot as any man in
the district; so our “telegraphs” received special in-
structions to closely watch his movements and re-
port. I have known him to stay two whole days
and nights without food in the mountains when
out wild-cattle shooting, for the sake of their hides,
which at that time were worth nearly £1 apiece.


and he would do and dare anything he set his mind
upon; so we had him watched very closely.
On the whole we spent a very pleasant time,
feeling safer by night as well as day than we had
done in distant districts where friends were scarce,
and where we had to sleep with one eye open, keep-
ing guard constantly to prevent surprise. Burke
and I would frequently spend a day shooting along
a creek where wild duck were plentiful, leaving the
game to be cooked at a house where particular
friends resided, and who brought it to our camp
next day.
A LITTLE GOOD ADVICE,
There were many women in that neighbourhood
who could ride any horse, and could defy any of
the police of those days to follow them in the scrub-
by, rocky, mountains, and amongst them were two
particular friends of mine and Burke’s. After we
had been about a fortnight in the camp, Burke and
I went to meet these two, and we spent a very
pleasant time together. While riding along with
one of them, she asked me what I thought the end
of this sort of life would be, and I laughingly said
I really didn’t know.
“Oh,” she rejoined, "I don’t think you really
care, Johnny. It will be a terrible end. Why don’t you
give up the dangerous game? You could leave the
country if you tried.”
I pointed out to her that if I went to Sydney
trying to get away and anyone recognised me, I
would have no chance of escape, like I had in the
bush, where I was at home,


“But you are not known in any place but here,”
she said, “and I think you would have a good
chance, while you have none by staying. You had
better make an effort to leave the country. Just
say that you will, and I will go to your mother to-
morrow and tell her that you are giving this game
up. I know she will be overjoyed.”
This appeal touched me rather strongly and I
said I would think the matter over, and if she met
me on the following Sunday, I would tell her my
decision. She tried hard to get from me what she
called a more substantial promise, but I said I was
ignorant of boats or foreign countries, and did not
know how to go about that sort of job,
“But I know,” she replied, “and I will go to
Sydney and do all that is required for you. I
think I can take you to England, for you know I
came from there, and you would be all right in the
old country, for you are young and would grow out
of the knowledge of the people here, and could
come back an Englishman after a while. Now, do
say you will go! Your father will give you money,
I am sure.”
But I could not do more than renew my promise
to think over it and tell her my decision on the
following Sunday; and with that she had to be con-
tent.
On my way back to camp with Burke, I told
him of the conversation that had passed, and he
said: "I think I will try to leave the country, too.
You have not shot anyone yet, but I think you soon
will if you stay here. You know the track across
to Twofold Bay, and we might away from the coun-
try through that place. I can get £SO from my


old man, and I know your father would give you
more than that if you give up this game and leave
the country.”
So we made up our minds to try, deciding not
to say a word about it to our mates. But when
we reached our camp Gilbert said to us: “You chaps
had better give your horses all the rest you can
for we want to go to Bathurst again to-morrow
and we must have all the horses good for that trip ”
During the afternoon, Burke and I talked over
the matter, and as I hinted that if we didn’t go with
the others, Gilbert would say we were afraid of go-
ing to the township again, Burke said: “Very well,
I’ll go with them for the last time.”
So we started for Bathurst the next day.


CHAPTER XXIX.
THE VALE ROAD ROBBERIES.— BAFFLING
THE POLICE.
OUE trip was not a very profitable one, for after
all we did not enter Bathurst, and had to content
ourselves with again sticking up two or three places
on the main road—the Vale Road—adjacent thereto.
We took the same route as on the previous oc-
casion, passing through Newbridge and Wimbledon,
and keeping to the range of hills which terminates
in the Bald Hills, overlooking the town of Bathurst.
But we stayed on the road and made tea, and while
we were resting, two friends who were out looking
for horses came to us, and we stayed yarning so
long that when we started I said we would not be
able to reach Bathurst until late.
So when we got to the first Bald Hill we turned
down on to the Vale Road and paid a visit to
Mutton’s store, where Hall said we might get a
little money. The only person in the store when
we entered was old Mrs. Mutton, and there wasn’t
anything in the whole place that would be of any
use to us. Gilbert then asked Mrs. Mutton for
money, and she said she handn’t got any, where-
upon he said he would look for some; and taking
a candle he went into the bedroom to make search.


While he was tossing the things about the bed-cur-
tains caught fire, and as they were flaring U p
O’Meally rushed in and rated Gilbert for trying to
burn the place down. Gilbert protested that it was
a pure accident. I rushed in at the same time, and
got my hands well burnt when putting out the
flames. The old lady was very kind when she saw
what had happened, and got me some Holloway’s
ointment to dress the burns, at the same time
remonstrating with us for pursuing such evil
courses. We took her little sermon in good part,
and shortly afterwards took the road leading away
from Bathurst. Before we had gone far Gilbert
suggested that we should go back to the store and
get a long rope and stretch it across the road,
so that when the police came after us—as we knew
they would when the news was taken into the town,
only about a mile off—they would be tripped up;
but we did not fall in with that idea, and rode
steadily on, knowing that we would hear the police
before they came near us, as the horses must make
a good noise galloping on the hard road.
Our next place of call was at Walker’s public
house, about a mile farther on, and we stayed there
for fully half an hour, but got nothing except an old
horse-pistol which the landlady said belonged to a
black-tracker, and a couple of notes and some
silver.
Then we passed on to a store kept by a man
named McDairmid, and here we loaded up with
groceries, draperies, etc., which we placed in pil-
low slips for convenience of carriage.
A mile further on we came to the Hen and
Chickens Hotel, kept by the late Mr. Henry Butler,


but we only got a couple of £1 notes from one of
the visitors in the house, and a horse to carry the
swag.
Then we made a start for home, and reached
a place called the Rock Pond, where we camped till
daybreak, laughing quietly with each other as we
heard the police clatter along the road past our
camping place. Shortly before dawn, rain set in
and continued during the whole day, but we left the
road and kept to the bush till we came to the “Big
Brother” mountain at the back of Caloola.
Suspecting that the police were still ahead of
us, we decided to make for the mountains after
darkness set in, the office of pilot being given to
me. We started a little after dark, keeping off the
road, and at the foot of the range we came across
some fresh tracks of shod horses, which, we con-
cluded, had been made by the party of Bathurst
police who were out after us.
We followed the tracks for some distance, and
I then said to Flail: “They are going in the direction
of Teasdale, and will probably stay at the pub.
there all night, as it is raining; let us push on and
pass them there.”
We therefore pushed on, but had not gone more
than four miles through the bush when the dark-
ness became so intense that we could not see the
trees. We then dismounted and tried walking,
but kept stumbling over roots and logs, and Ben.
Hall stepped into a stump hole and hurt his back.
He then advised waiting for daylight, but I said
there was a small paddock not far ahead in which
we could camp, although we would have to keep
our horses in hand all night as the police were in


the neighbourhood. After a time we reached the
paddock, and each man picked out a stout gum-
tree and crouched by its butt all night, holding the
reins of our horses in our hands. There wasn’t
much poetry in that sort of camping out, but we
were well used to roughing it by this time and didn’t
feel much concerned.
The paddock was not far from the public house,
and when we left it at daybreak O’Meally, who was
the only drinker of spirits in the gang, said he
would go down and get a drink of rum. Burke
suggested that he should also bring some “tucker"
back with him, and O'Meally replied that if he went
with him' they could bring enough “tucker’’ back
for all hands. They then started together, but had
not been gone many minutes when Hall called out to
me to say that they were coming back. This was
correct, and when they returned O'Meally said:
“There’s a lot of traps just come to the pub., and
I believe they must have been in the horse paddock
all night, too.”
This we afterwards discovered was actually the
case. Thinking that we might call at the pub.
during the night, they had camped in the paddock,'
lighting no fire and making no noise; while we were
doing the same thing in another gully, not more
than three hundred yards away.
“To think we should have the beggars so near
us, and not know it!” ejaculated Gilbert. "Why, we
could easily have sneaked on them and captured
the lot!”
“That’s all very well,” replied Hall; “but they
might have done the same to us if they had


known we were here. Anyhow, we had better keep
quiet now until they leave.”
And this we did. While the others remained
on the hill watching for the police to leave, so that
we should know the road they took, I rode down
to a farm-house I knew on the other side of the
range, in search of “tucker.” The farmer
had just turned out of bed when I got
there, and when I told him what I wanted
he told me to go to the public-house horse pad-
dock and he would bring us some breakfast as
soon as it could be got ready. I told him the police
had been in the paddock all night, and he replied,
“All the better; they won’t go there again to-day;
but I’ll send the old woman to the pub. to find out
which way they are going.”
Shortly afterwards the farmer came to the pad-
dock with a good supply of ham and eggs, and
while we were discussing these he brought some
oats for our horses, which we gave them on our
ponchos, or capes.
While we were at breakfast, the farmer’s wife
returned from the pub., but all she had been able to
learn was that “the bushrangers had been near
Bathurst and had burned a store down.” She told
us, however, that our old enemy J was with the
police, and that they had all got a real good soak-
ing during the night.
From the hilltop we still kept watch upon the
pub., and at last saw the police come out of the
house and stand together talking in the road.
They were facing us, and we thought they must
have seen us, especially when one singled out from
the rest and fired a shot in our direction. But


it proved to be practice shooting only, and they
kept that game up for fully half an hour, after
which they brought their horses round and started
off in the direction of Number One.
It is more than likely that there would have
been some very lively rifle and revolver practice
on both sides had they known we were so near at
hand, for we were just in the mood for engaging
them, although being in the minority we didn’t care
to open the ball.
Shortly after this we left the paddock and
met our farmer friend again. He had brought the
rum for O’Meally, and told us that the police had
received word that some horsemen had been seen
heading for Number One on the previous evening,
and concluding that it must be the bushrangers
they really did not Enow our identity, although they
guessed pretty closely—they followed that road;
while we went with the farmer kangaroo hunting,
for he had brought' two fine dogs with him. After
a couple of exciting runs we made for the moun-
tains and reached our old camp before sunset.


CHAPTER XXX.
BURKE AND I TRY TO LEAVE THE COUNTRY.—
A PATHETIC PARTING.
NEXT morning O’Meally said we must spell in camp
for a couple of weeks, and then take another trip to
the Bland, This set Burke and I again talking about
getting out of the country by way of Twofold Bay,
and we decided to tell Hall and O’Meally. Both of
them seemed rather pleased at our project, for we
were the “boys” of the gang, and they said we
ought to stand a good chance of getting away, as
we were not known in that part of the country. Hall
advised us to leave our horses before reaching the
Bay, and “hump our swags,” for the purpose of
blinding suspicion.
So it was decided that we should start, and on
the following morning Hall went with Burke to see
the latter’s father, while O’Meally accompanied me
to see mine. When we neared Number One I sent
a message to my father’s place, and he met us after
nightfall. I told him what our arrangements were,
and he was greatly pleased to find I had at last de-
cided to give up bushranging and try to get right
away. He promised to meet us again the following
night, and bring with him £6O for my passage
money. O’Meally and I then returned to camp,


Burke having also returned, and he told us his
father had promised to bring him £6O on the fol-
lowing night, also. We both had a little money of
our own, and decided that we would have plenty
for all purposes with that given us by the old gen-
tlemen. For several reasons, which I need not ex-
plain, we kept our intentions from Gilbert, although
from the surly looks he cast at us when we were
talking together, he must have thought that we
were plotting some secret movement.
On the following morning we left the camp,
taking our blankets and a pack-horse to carry
them. We told Gilbert that we were going to the
Abercrombie for fresh horses, and would be absent
about a week, and he requested us to bring a good
horse for him, which we promised to do. Hall and
O’Meally rode some distance with us, and when
wishing us good-bye, and good luck, they said if
we succeeded in getting through safely they would
soon follow us.
When they had turned back we decided to pay
the farewell visit to our homes, leaving our pack-
horse with a friend while we did so. How Burke
passed the day I cannot say; but I sent word for
father to meet me once more after nightfall, and
then took up my station in a thick scrub on the top
of a high hill, so that if I were disturbed during the
day I would have down hill riding.
Everything was quiet until sunset, and then I
heard the sound of a horse cantering through the
bush. lat once mounted my horse, and having
neared the meeting place arranged, I gave two
knocks on a tree trunk with a piece of wood, which
was the signal fixed upon between us. The answer


—three knocks —was not long in coming, and I then
rode forward and met my father.
It was a trying time for both of us.
Side by side we sat upon a dry log, in eloquent
silence for a time, and at last, with tears in his
voice, my father said: “Johnny, my dear boy, we are
going to part for life, for you musn’t come back
here when once you get safely away. But before
you go, you ought to come and see your poor
mother.”
“No, I think it better not,” replied I, “for she
takes it very hard every time I see her.”
“Yes, indeed,” said he, “she does take it hard.
She can’t sleep at nights, and frets greatly. But
she is glad you’re going.”
Some more conversation followed, and I pro-
mised to write to them through a friend if we got
away. Then he handed me the saying that if
I wanted more he would get it for me, but I assured
him it would be quite sufficient with what I had.
Then, all at once, he broke down. Clasping
me round the neck, he sobbed bitterly, and again
spoke of the great sorrow of my mother.
I begged him not to tell her I had gone until
three months had passed, saying that if he did
not hear from me, or of me, in that time, he could
be sure that I was on the water. Once more he
embraced me, and then walked away sobbing, leav-
ing me feeling more miserable than I had ever felt
in my life before.
I kept my horse in hand until the dawn began
to appear over the eastern ridge, and then rode
back to meet Burke at the appointed place.


Burke was already there with the pack-horse,
and without delay, we started for the Abercrombie
River, which we reached about sunset. When we
had' made a camp, Burke showed me that his sad-
dle was branded MB (over 5), and said his father
had done it with some ink, and a feather, in order
that he could claim the saddle if he (Mick) hap-
pened to be shot or captured. He also told me he
was going to put his money in the lining of the sad-
dle, so that his father could get that, also, in case
of accident. At the same time he produced a feather
and some ink and told me to brand my saddle. I
then branded the saddle WV (over S), which was
my father’s cattle brand, and having cut the
stitches of the lining, I poked the notes into the slit
with a pointed stick, and re-stitched the slit, Burke
doing the same with his saddle. This done, we
camped behind some huge rocks at a spot where
nothing could pass up or down without our seeing
or hearing.
We did not sleep much, and at first sign of
dawn we packed up and saddled, and, having had
breakfast, we crossed the river and faced up a
very steep, stony ridge, where our tracks could not
be followed. We soon found, however, that the
rough road was telling upon our horses’ feet; but
even if we could have shod them, we would not have
done so, as we were afraid of making our tracks
too plain. We therefore travelled very slowly till
near night, when we selected a camp in a thick
wattle scrub in the corner of a paddock. Although
I did not know the names of places in that locality,
I had a slight knowledge of the bush track, having
on two occasions years before assisted J— through


with stolen horses, travelling chiefly by night. He
it was who gave me first instructions in that game.
Nothing worthy of mention occurred until we
got down on the coast side of the Dividing Range,
and here we began to be afraid of riding into dan-
ger. We had been travelling nine days and had
not accomplished more than half the journey, for
the horses were very sore-footed and we could not
hope to get fresh ones. So we made up our minds for
a spell, and having looked out a nice spot on a creek
for the horses to feed we left them there and made
our camp about half a mile away in case of a sur-
prise.


CHAPTER XXXI.
WE FEAR TREACHERY AND RETURN.
On the second morning we were walking down to
look at the horses, when we saw an old man going
towards them. He was leading his horse and carrying
a gun, and as there were some hides rolled upon;his
saddle we concluded that he was a bull shooter.
Fearing that he would take the hobbles off our
horses— an old game then in the bush—J called to
him and he came over, and explained that he was
going to the horses to see their brands, in case
he might hear of someone looking for them, as he
thought they must have strayed away.
Both Burke and I recognised the old chap when
he came near, and after a time he recognised us,
as we learned when he asked about our mates. We
told him how we had left them, and he said “A good
job, too, my boys, for you can both get clean away
by taking a boat at the Bay, and leave the country.
Take my advice,” he added, ‘'and do no more stick-
ing up. If you like I can get you both safely away
from here.”
1 asked him the distance to the Bay, and he
replied: “It will take you four days’ fast travelling
yet, and you will have to be very careful, as the
people about here are very suspicious. You had
better let me pilot you if you are determined to go.”


“Well,” I replied, “that’s what we are here for
to try and leave the country.”
"All right,” he rejoined. “If you like I will
show you a safe camp and leave you plenty of tuck-
er, while I go to the Bay and find out about the
time you can catch a boat; and you can leave
me the horses when you go as payment. What do
you think about it?”
We agreed that his plan was a very good one,
and having caught our horses we followed him to
the spot about five miles distant, where there was
good feed and water for the horses and shelter for
ourselves among some big rocks on the side of a
mountain. He then left us, promising to return in
the morning with a supply of "tucker,” as our pro-
visions had run out.
When he had gone Burke turned and asked me
what I thought of it all?
I replied that I didn’t like to trust him, although
he talked so fair, for there was a price upon our
heads —(the Government at this time were offering
a reward of £SOO for the capture of each of us), —
and the offer of the reward might prove too strong
a temptation for him.
“That’s just how I feel,” said Burke, “and 1
won't trust him.”
We then talked over what was best to be done.
Burke was for starting off back at once, but I
pointed out that that would not do, as the police
would easily track us from the camp if the old
man gave information. So we decided to take the
horses up to the top of the mountain and watch to
see if the old man brought the police. But when
the old man returned next day with about a fort


night’s supply of “tucker” he was alone. We then
went down and listened patiently to his scheme for
our escape; but when he had left us with the de-
clared intention of starting for the Bay and return-
ing in about eight days, at the same time cautioning
us to lie low until his return, we at once began to
make preparations for returning to the Abercrombie
Mountains.
We were greatly disappointed at thus having
to abandon our attempt at escape just when we
thought we could get away safely, but after close
consideration we felt it would not be safe to trust
the man, for if he laid a snare for us we would
have had no possible chance of escape. Better
that we should deceive him when he would lose noth-
ing, than that he should deceive us, who would lose
all.
Nothing remarkable transpired on the journey
back until we had re-crossed the Abercrombie River
and had left it about four miles behind us. Then
we met a man whom I was pretty well acquainted
with, and his first remark was, “By Jove! your
horses are in bad trim.” I assented to this remark
and asked if he could "lay us on” to a couple of good
horses, and he replied that he thought he knew
where we could get two “slashers.” I told him that
if he would get them for us we would give him a
couple of “funt”—pound notes were not called
"quids” in those days. He promised to bring them
to us the following morning if we went back a
couple of miles on the side of a range where there
was a thick scrub, and according to appointment
he did meet us there, bringing with him a couple of


well-conditioned horses, for which we paid him, and
then resumed our journey.
As the country was very rough for travelling
we took the direction of Bathurst till we were out
of the steep hills, passing by way of Burraga and
Rockley, and here, about four o’clock in the after-
noon, we fell in with an acquaintance and pulled
off the road for a yarn.
During the course of our conversation he told
us that he had seen Mr. Keightley duck-shooting
on the creek a day or two before, and he had ex-
pressed a desire to fall in with the bushrangers
when he had his gun with him.
“Why, what could you do against five armed
men?” asked our friend; and he replied. “Well, I
could turn a couple of them over with this gun.”
This Keightley lived at a place called Dunn’s
Plains, near Rockley, and was a noted shot. He
was in the Government service, I think—Gold Com-
ipissioner, or something of that kind,
After we had parted from our friend, Burke
me where Keightley lived, and said we ought
to go and take his gun from him because of his
boasting. I told him the place was about six miles
distant, and he then said we could get there before
dark, and if we watched for Keightley he would
probably come out before bedtime without his gun,
when we could keep him out and then get the gun
from inside without much trouble. I agreed to the
proposal, and we turned towards Dunn’s Plains,
reaching the paddock fence just as darkness set
in.
Leaving our horses in the bush we walked to
the garden at the south side of the house, Burke


concealing himself near the front and I sneaking
round to the end of the stable in the yard at the
back. We could see persons walking about in the
house, but none of them came out, and we remain-
ed watching until all lights were extinguished and
we concluded everybody had gone to bed. Burke
wanted to stay until morning, but I said Keightley
might be late turning out, and we then decided to
leave and have a go at him another time.
Little did we think as we left that before a
week had passed, one of us would be carried away
from that very place a corpse.
We reached our old camp at the Black Range
on the morning of the following day and found our
mates still there. We had been absent three weeks,
and they were all anxious to learn where we had
been and what we had been doing, Gilbert being es-
pecially inquisitive, for, as the reader will remember,
we did not when leaving tell him our destination or
mission. When the latter hoard where we had been
he suggested that as the country in that locality
was rough and scrubby we should all go there and
try to get away; but Hall said he would rather be
in the country that he knew, where we didn’t have
to trust to strangers. Then we told them about
Keightley, and it was decided that as he had ex-
pressed a desire to meet us we would give him the
opportunity by paying him a visit.


CHAPTER XXXII.
THE FIGHT AT KEIGHTLEY’S.—DEATH OF
MICK BURKE.
ON the following morning, therefore, we started for
Dunn’s Plains and reached the place between 5 and
6 o’clock in the afternoon, Gilbert and O’Meally
were riding in advance as we got near to the pad-
dock fence, when suddenly Burke trotted forward.
“Now, then, Jack,” he called out as he reached
Gilbert’s side, “this man will shoot, and we will soon
see who are the game men in the gang.”
“What the do you mean?” growled Gil-
bert as he half turned to look at Burke. “Look
out for your own skin, and don’t be trying to throw
anything out about me, for I won’t have it.”
“All right, old boy,” said Burke, as he laughing-
ly fell back again; “you’ll see what I mean if the
‘boss’ is at home and has his gun on hand!”
Gilbert made no reply to this, but rode sullenly
on. He knew we all looked upon him as a bit of a
coward, and he evidently resented Burke’s little bit
of pleasantry.
I have often wondered since that we were not
seen when a mile away from the homestead, for the
paddock was old cultivation ground and clear of
timber. We ran the paddock fence along to a cor-
ner leading into a narrow lane which passed close by


the house. This lane we followed until we had
passed the house and were opposite the back yard,
between the house and the stable.
Up to this time we had not seen a soul about
the place, but all at once we saw two men running
top speed from the stable to the back door of the
dwelling. These proved to be Mr. Keightley and
Dr. Pechey, a gentleman who was staying with him
on a visit.
In a moment we had jumped from our horses
and made a rush to intercept them, Burke being
the first to get through the fence and I the second;
and at the same time a couple of shots rang out,
I think fired by O’Meally and Gilbert.
Burke made a dart for the door, but was too
late, as it was slammed in his face just as he reached
it. Then he rushed to a window further along the
wall and I heard him call out as he looked through
it, "If you bring that gun out I will shoot you,”
from which I concluded that he saw someone inside
with a gun.
There was no set plan of siege on our part, but
we each instinctively took up a position, forming a
semi-circle, which commanded full view of the
doors, while we were partially hidden. Several
shots had been fired at the door, through which
Keightley and Pechey had entered, when suddenly
I saw the door partially opened, and a gun-barrel
thrust out, from which one or two shots were fired,
immediately after which I heard a voice say: “Now
for the roof!” Within a few seconds the door
through which the shot had been fired was pretty
well peppered, for we kept firing at it until our at


tention was drawn in another direction—to the roof
of the house.
Immediately after the shots had been fired
through the partially opened door, I saw Burke turn
and run from the end of the house along a paling
fence and suddenly lie down. As I soon afterwards
discovered, he had fallen to rise no more, for he
was carried from that spot a bleeding corpse.
At this time I was standing exposed in another
part of the yard, and hearing a noise on the roof
of the house I looked up and saw Keightley levelling
his gun at me from a place in the roof, his head be-
ing just above the shingles. I at once fired, and saw
the shingles fly up from the battens and the head
disappear. Then I watched for the hat to show
again, and as soon as it appeared above the roof I
fired another shot, and I felt confident that I had
pretty nearly, if not quite, touched the mark at
which I aimed, for it immediately disappeared, and
no answering shot was fired. We were surprised
that there was not more firing from the roof, but
we afterwards learned that the other guns and am-
munition were in a detached room, and the occu-
pants of the house could not get at them without
being exposed to our fire.
I cannot describe my feelings as I thus for the
first time fired at a man with the intention to kill
him, but I felt that it was either his life or mine for
it, and I instinctively tried to preserve mine by tak-
ing his.
We then called on Keightley to surrender, tell-
ing him that if he put down his arms and came out
we would not do him any injury. Of course, we did
not at tms time know that Burke had been wounded.


Mr. and Mrs. Keiglitley.


Keightley replied that he would surrender on those
conditions, and having thrown his gun out on to the
main roof, down which it slid to the skillion roof,
where it rested, he walked out and sufrendered to
Hall, O’Meally, and Gilbert, who were in front of the
house.
Having seen Keightley and Dr. Pechey come out
I went to look for Burke, and to my sorrow found
him lying down suffering from three bullet wounds—
one in the stomach and two in the head. He was
not dead, but I could see that death was very near.
Either of the wounds would have proved fatal, and
two of them had been inflicted by himself, for after
he got to where he lay down he had placed his re-
volver under his chin and fired one shot, which came
out of the top of his head, and then another shot,
which entered just in front of his right ear and
came out a little behind his left ear. Yet, marvel-
lous to say, he lived fully half an hour after receiving
the last shot.
The poor fellow lost consciousness shortly after
I found him, and seeing that he could not possibly
live I took his four revolvers and his belt—the latter
Rad been taken from the police—and called to Ben
Hall, who was still in front of the house with the
others.
Hall came over at once, and was surprised and
horrified to find poor Burke in that condition, say-
ing this was the first he knew of anyone being shot.
He then called the others, who came over, bringing
Keightley and Dr. Pechey with them.
As soon as Keightley come up I went to him
and accused him of having shot Burke, but he said
“Nonsense, man! lam sure I didn’t shpof anyone,


I could not see any of you till I went up to the
skylight, and then I saw you in the yard, and you
put a shot through my hat. Look where it went
through! You would have got me next time if I
had not surrendered. But I did not shoot Burke,
that I swear.”
As soon as Dr. Pechey saw Burke he volun-
teered to ride to Rockley for his instruments and
try if he could do anything for him; and we allowed
him to go, on his giving us a promise that he would
not say a word about the occurrence. But poor
Burke breathed his last before the doctor returned.
As soon as we knew he was dead Hall and I
placed the body in a cart belonging to the place,
and gave two men who had been locked in the stable
while the fight was going on, two £\ notes to drive
the cart with the remains to Burke’s father’s place.
They started, but we learned afterwards that the
police met them on the road and took the body to
Carcoar, where in due course an inquest was held,
and a verdict of “died from gunshot wounds” was
returned.
Meanwhile Keightley had been kept under close
guard by O’Meally, and we discussed what should
be done with him. Eventually it was decided that
as he would be entitled to the £5OO placed upon
Burke’s head we should demand from him as a
condition of his release.*
This decision having been communicated to our
prisoner, he said we must tell Mrs. Keightley to go
to Bathurst at once and procure the ransom money.
*A reward of £5OO for the capture of either Hall, O’Meally.
Gilbert, Vane, or Burke, had been offered by the Government
some time before the occurrence at Dunn’s Plains. —Ed,


Then Hall and 1 went to the house and saw Mrs.
Keightley and the servant woman talking with Gil-
bert.
As soon as she saw me, Mrs. Keightley said,
'■Ah, Johnny Vane, I did not think you would come
to us in this way ; and as I turned to leave the
room again she asked if we would have a glass of
wine.
We were all agreeable, and she then went into
a small room and returned with four bottles of wine
two of sherry and two of port. She opened the bot-
tles and drank a little from each to show that the
wine was all right. After we had a drink and some
of the wine had been sent out to O’Meally and
Mr. Keightley, we told Mrs. Keightley what had been
decided on, and she at once said she would go to
Bathurst if Dr. Pechey would accompany her. This
the doctor agreed to do, and shortly afterwards she
came out ready dressed for the journey.
While she was putting on her gloves she asked
me, "Did Mr. Keightley really shoot that man?”
I replied briefly “I don’t know who shot him.”
“Well,” said she, “there were nine shots fired,
for I counted them.—Who fired them all?”
I replied that I had fired three from a gun and
that Burke had fired four from a revolver; and I
showed her that four of the chambers of one of the
revolvers I had taken from Burke were empty.
“Then," said she, “perhaps some of your mates
shot him by accident?”
To which I replied, “Well, all I can say is that
I didn’t shoot him”; and as I did so I looked fair into
Gilbert’s eyes.


"Where were your mates,” she asked, "while
the shooting was going on ?”
“I suppose they were in the garden,” I replied.
“What will you do with Mr. Keightley if the
police come when we are away?” was her next ques-
tion.
To this I replied, "He will be shot.”
“Will you shoot him?” she asked.
“Some of us will shoot him,” I replied, and then
added; “But you mustn’t bring or send the police;
for if you do he will certainly be shot. Neither must
you tell any person anything of what has taken place
till Mr. Keightley is released.”
She then asked me to call in the man with the
long beard (that was Hall), as she wanted to make
sure. Hall then came from the yard, to which he
had returned, and confirmed what I had said, name-
ly, that her husband would be spared if the police
did not come.
“Then,” said she, ‘Til go to my father in Bath-
urst and get the money, for that is my only chance
of getting it. What will you have it in—sovereigns?”
This query was to Hall, and he answered, “No,
bring notes; they will be lighter for us to carry,”
After this Mrs. Keightley and the doctor started
for Bathurst, and I did not see her again, although
in after years I was amused to read that her “sen-
sational ride” was made the sensation in a drama
in which she herself was a performer. There was
no riding about it, for she and Dr. Pechey drove into
Bathurst, and she stayed there.
After they had started we took Keightley away
from the homestead to a place about a mile distant,
called the Dog Rocks—a small hill with numbers of


rocks upon it; and here we kept watch over him,
each of us acting sentry in turn, during the night.
I was put on third watch, and Keightley tried
hard to persuade me to let him escape, saying that
he had known my father many years, and he was
sure he would never allow me to keep him prisoner
if he were present. On several occasions he made
as if he were coming towards me, but I warned him
back, as I did not know what might happen if he
got to close quarters with me.
O’Meally took next watch, but I had not been
lying down long when he called me up and said we
must keep a sharp look-out, as sufficient time had
elapsed for the police to reach the spot from Bath-
urst if information had been given, adding that they
might even then be all around us.
Then Hall asked me which would be the safest
direction to go if the police did happen to come in
sight, and I pointed out a range to the south-west
where there was a thick scrub, the nearest to the
spot.
“That’s all right,” said Gilbert, “but as soon as
the police do appear in sight I’ll shoot this man!”
It was an anxious waiting-time for us; for be-
sides being saddened at the loss of poor Burke, we
did not know one moment from another that we
might not ourselves be popped off, or be compelled
to shoot our prisoner.
As daylight made its appearance over the east-
ern hills our anxieties increased, for as yet there was
no appearance of the messenger with the ransom
money. Perhaps I felt the position worse than the
others, for poor Micky was my particular chum, and
I felt Dame Fortune had been very unkind to him.


However, our anxieties were all dispelled shortly
after sunrise, when we saw a man coming towards
us on horseback from the direction of Dunn’s Plains
house.
“Thank God!” cried out Keightley, as soon as
he caught sight of the horseman. “That’s the doc-
tor!”
Whereupon Gilbert turned to him and said, "So
it may be; but if he hasn’t got the money you know
what will happen to you!”
But Keightley only laughed and said he wasn’t
a bit afraid, as he was sure the doctor would have
the money for us.
A minute after Dr. Pechey rode up, his first
words being, “I suppose you thought I was a long
time getting here?”
Keightley replied, “Oh, that’s all right; you’re
in plenty of time —did you get what you went for?”
“Yes,” said the doctor, “I got the money from
Mr. Rotton*, and here it is.”
With that he turned to Ben Hall, who had been
keeping remarkably quiet, doubtless pondering over
the seriousness of the situation, and handed him a
bundle containing one hundred £$ notes.
O’Meally turned to Keightley and told him he
was a very lucky man, and added that he had had
a very narrow escape, adding, “You may go now.”
But Keightley wasn’t quite content, and said,
“Give me back my gun and I’ll fight any one of
you!”
To this Gilbert replied, “Don’t be a fool, but go
and be satisfied”; and as he began to move off, walk-
*Mrs. Keightley’s father, who lived at Blackdown, near
Bathurst.


ing by the side of Dr. Pechey’s horse, we mounted
our animals and started off through the bush, rid-
ing hard, and reaching our camp in the mountains
quite early in the afternoon of the same day.
Naturally, we talked a good deal about poor
Burke, and O’Meally said that everything belonging
to him ought to be handed over to his people. But
I said I did not think we ought to let them have his
firearms.
"No,” said O’Meally; "perhaps you are right,
and you had better keep the firearms.”
I told him that I couldn’t carry two guns, and
then Gilbert spoke up and said he would take the
gun and the saddle also; whereupon some hot words
passed between him and O’Meally, as the latter de-
clared the saddle must be given up to Burke’s
father.
Hall then interposed and told them to stop
growling at each other, and then O’Meally heatedly
said that Gilbert was the cause of Burke’s death.
What he meant by this the reader may
guess if he can. I don’t feel inclined to
make any assertion or venture any
opinion concerning it. One thing I may say, how-
ever, and that is, that Keighiley could not have shot
Burke from the doorway in the position in which he
was standing, as he was at an angle from which he
could not possibly be seen from the door.*
♦ln White’s ‘'Australian Bushranging,” a full account is
given of Mrs. Keightley’s hurried trip to Bathurst, and of how
the ransom ‘ money was obtained from the bank by her father.
Mr. Keightley’s story of the attack is also given in his own words,
as followsAs I appeared at the door several shots were fired;
the men were in a semi-circle around me, at varied distances;
at the time I took up my gun, I fancied it was loaded in both
barrels—one with snipe shot and the other with buck shot; when


Shortly after this, Hall divided the ransom
money equally between us, and I then asked O’Meal-
ly to go with me to Burke’s father’s place and hand
over the saddle and other of our dead mate’s belong-
I went to the door I noticed a man near me_ on my left, who
was firing very rapidly; lie fired several shots; he appeared (o
draw out from a cask, behind which he was concealed, with the
view of firing at the door; the last time he came out I slung up
my gun and fired the right barrel, which I thought had the snipe
shot in it; I could not see the effect of the shot, otherwise thai
the man put his hand on his stomach and fell back. I then said
to Dr. Pechey, ‘Now for the roof 1’ which I had had barricaded
for some time. When on the roof I saw Vane for the first time;
he was going across the yard, and when the party saw me on
the roof they commenced firing again, but I cannot say how
many shots. When I had fired I looked for my powder horn, but
could not find it; I concluded that Dr. Pechey had got the arms
and ammunition I had sent him for previously. I left the house
open when I went on the roof, and Mrs. Keightley and children
were below. When on the roof I asked the doctor for the other
gun and loading material, and he said he had been intercepted
and could not get at the arms. I then looked at my own gun,
and found that the other barrel was discharged. The shooting at
this time was very close —one ball went close to my face, I think
it was Hall’s; and another through my hat. They called upon
me to surrender, or they would burn the house down, and as f
had no arms or ammunition, I thought it best to do so. Two
of the voices called out: 'lf you lay down your arms and come
down, we’ll not touch you.” I said ‘Honor bright?’ and they
replied ‘Honor bright.’ I said ‘Very well, we will come down,’
and I came down the ladder into the garden in front of the
house. 1 concluded that the party knew at the time that one of
the party was hit. When we came down they made a rush at
us. Vane accused me of having shot his mate, but I denied it,
saying ‘I never killed your mate.’ I did not then know the re-
sult of my shot. They then brought me to the spot where Burke
was lying, and they held a consultation, the result of which was
that I was to be shot. I was told to go into the paddock. From
their statement I learnt that Burke had, after he was shot, fired
at himself and shot himself through the head. I was then told
that I should be shot, and to say good-bye to my wife, and come
up the hill. As I had been ensnared in iny position, and had no
means of defence, I begged them for God’s sake, not to shoot
me, and commit murder. It was then arranged that Dr. Pechey
should proceed to Rocidey for his instruments, with a view of
affording assistance to Burke, and while he was away Gilbert
came to the foot of the hill and called out, ‘Mickey is dead,' or
words to that effect. One of the party remarked; ‘He (meaning
me) had better be shot at once, and waste no more time.’ ”


in'gs- He consented and we started. On our way
to old Burke’s place we had some very serious talk,
and O’Meally suggested that I should leave Hall and
Gilbert and go with him “on our own hook,” as
we two would be better together and away from the
others. I promised to think over the matter and
let him know on the following day. When we ar-
rived at Burke’s place the old man was away from
home, and we left the saddle and other things with
his daughter, and then started back for the camp.


CHAPTER XXXIII.
HOW I LEAVE THE GANG.—HIDING IN THE
BUSH.
Now that blood had been spilt I felt that I had had
enough of the game, and when on the way back I
suddenly told O’Meally that I wished to go to my
father’s place that night, promising to return to the
camp on the following day. He offered no objec-
tion and we parted.
That was the last I saw of my mates, for I did
not return to the camp and they did not come to
look for me. I had fully made up my mind before
I left O’Meally that I would take no more risks
with the mates with whom I had been associated
so long, wtyo had been my companions by night and
day, and who must, sooner or later, come to a vio-
lent end, either by a bullet or on the gallows. I
did not deceive myself about my own position, for
I knew that it was bad enough, but I was deter-
mined that it should not be made worse if I could
help it, and worse it must become if we continued
working together as bushrangers.
Having parted from O’Meally I made my way
to the hut of some people who were friendly to me,
reaching the place at about midnight. I told them
that I had left the gang and did not intend to rejoin
it, and they cheerfully made room for me to stay
with them for a time. I kept quiet for
several days, until I heard that Hall, O’Meally


and Gilbert had left the old camp and gone
towards Forbes, and then I began to move
about alone, but always taking the precaution
to carry my firearms—a gun at my saddle bow
and several revolvers in my waist-belt. But this
was more for protection that anything else, for I
had given up all idea of any further sticking-up.
One day when riding through the bush a very
peculiar thing occurred. I had been out all that
day, going in the direction of Bathurst, without any
definite purpose, when, just at nightfall, I discov-
ered that I had dropped one of my revolvers. I
went back a considerable distance, but could not
find it, and darkness setting in I camped near the
tracks of my horse and fell asleep. The night was
clear later on, the moon being at the full, and at
about midnight I awoke and heard what I took to
be the footsteps of a man coming in my direction
through the bush.
I was camped by the side of a big log, and I at
once rose to a kneeling position and kept my gun at
the ready. With sight and hearing at full tension
I waited and watched, the sounds still drawing near-
er, but no one appeared in view. Suddenly, how-
ever, I was startled at the sound of a shot, fired at a
distance of about twenty yards, and I saw a figure
spring up and make towards me at a fast pace.
Without a moment’s hesitation I sprang up and
fired as I rose, when the man bounded away into the
thick scrub at the side of the road. Then I
realised that I had been alarmed without
cause, for to my great relief I saw that
my disturber was not a man of the human species,
but an “old man” kangaroo! My alarm gave


place to amazed amusement; but I was altogether
at a loss to account for the shot that had been
fixed so near at hand.
As soon as day broke, however, the riddle was
solved. Going towards the spot I found my revol-
ver, with one barrel empty and scratches upon the
stock where the inquisitive kangaroo had handled it
or kicked it and caused the discharge. The “old
man” himself must have been more scared than if
someone had fired at him. It was one of the most
comical and extraordinary adventures that I ever
met with, and I am inclined to think that no one has
ever met with a similar.
My next business was to get my horse, and I
found that he had gone about half a mile from the
camp during the night, crossing a sort of old cart
track on the way. In following him I came across
the fresh tracks of a number of shod horses, and I
at once concluded that they had been made by a
party of police, who could not be very far away.
Having caught my horse and saddled him at the
camp, I returned and followed the tracks of the shod
horses till I reached the high peak of the mountain
range, from which point it had a clear view of the
surrounding country. And then I saw something
which proved that I had concluded aright, for in a
gully on the other side of the range were a number
of policemen standing about a fire as though they
were having breakfast. Taking care not to be seen
myself I sat down on a log and watched the party
until they made a start in the direction of Trunkey
township, after which I turned down the range
again, and began to consider Kow I might next ob-
tain a fresh supply of "tucker,” for I had run short.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
NEARLY TRAPPED.
I DID not care to call at the farmhouses in the local-
ity, and was at a loss to know how I should re-
plenish my bag, when I suddenly remembered that
two young women of my acquaintance, whom I had
previously supplied with ribbons and silks from our
“takings” at different stores, were shepherding ewes
and lambs in the bush not far distant, and I decided
to interview them. I therefore looked them up and
asked one of them to go to my father’s place, about
two miles distant, and tell my sister to bring some
food. She agreed to take the message, and on her
return she told me that my sister would meet me
on the flat below at twelve o’clock and we would all
have dinner together. At the appointed hour I
went down and found my sister and the other two
women there, with hot tea, a roasted fowl and a
small pudding. That meal didn’t go abegging, I
can assure you.
I kept my horse in hand while I was eating, in
case of surprise, and it was fortunate that I did so;
for I had not fmishedT my meal when one of the
women said quietly, “You had better get on your
horse, Johnny, and go away.”
I looked up quickly and asked “What for ?” but
she did not reply, and as I looked towards the flat
where the sheep were feeding T saw two policemen
riding leisurely straight towards us.


It did not take me long to mount, and as I rode
quietly away I looked Back and saw the policemen
yarning with the women, and after a time they rode
back along the road they had come. Later in the day
I saw one of the women and asked her if the police
knew who I was.
“They didn’t say a word about you,” she re-
plied.
"But they must have seen me,” said I, “and
they were not such ‘gumps’ as you want to make
out.”
She said, “Yes, I’m sure they saw you—they
couldn’t miss seeing you, and they kept looking
after you until you were hidden by the trees.”
She then asked me to come to the same place
on the following day, and I promised to do so; after
which I rode back to my camp.
£l,ooo ON MY HEAD.
Friendly towards me though the women seemed,
yet I could not get rid of the impression that they
were not to be trusted implicitly, and so strong did
my suspicion become that I moved my camp to an-
other spot that night. I had told them where my
camp was, and if they intended to act treacherously
they could have led the police to the camp and
caught me in a trap. And it was necessary that I
should now be increasingly cautious, for I had dis-
covered that after the attack on Dunns’ Plains the
Government Had increased the reward for the cap-
ture of the gang to £4,000 —that was, £l,OOO for
each of us. I afterwards discovered that placards
and advertisements were circulated throughout the
country reading as follows;


OOLOWAL SECRETARY'S OFFIOK,
REWARD
ron tub afpbbizbiisiok op
JOHN GILBERT, JOHN O’MEALLEY, BEN -
JAMIN HALL and JOHN VANE.
WHEREAS tho above named persons are charged with
the commission of numerous and serious offences, and
have hitherto eluded the efforts to apprehend them. It is
hereby notified that the Government will pay a Reward of
£lOOO for such information as will lead to the apprehension
of each of tho offenders named,
Tho Government will also pay a Reward of One Hundred
Pounds for such information as may lead to tho Conviction of
any person or persons for harbouring, assisting or maintain-
ing any of tho above named offenders.
All such information communicated by any person
charged with the commission of an offence, will en-
title his case to favorable consideration by the Crown,
and will in all cases be regarded by the Police
Authorities as confidential, and in event of payment
of any of the Rewards above offered, the name of the
recipient will not be disclosed.
Tho above Rewards are offered In lieu of all others pre-
viously payable by tho Government for the apprehension or
conviction of the offenders above named.
WILLIAM FORSTER.
OCTOBER. 26th. 1863. .*


It will thus be seen that extra caution on my
part was necessary. I was not adding to my offen-
ces, but was simply trying to keep out of the way,
hoping against hope for a chance of fleeing the coun-
try, and yet being afraid to venture out of the dis-
trict, every part of which was familiar to me, and
in which many real friends resided.
I pretended a confidence I did not feel in the
few with whom I kept up acquaintance, the better
to learn their designs, if they had any against me.
So I kept faith with my lady friend who had asked
me to return next day, and who did not know that
I had shifted my camp.
I had neared the meeting place, and was oppo-
site my deserted camp, which lay about five hun-
dred yards distant in a deep gully, when an “old
man” kangaroo crossed my track. The old hunt-
ing instinct proved too strong for me, and I fired,
but did not bring him down, and as he bounded
away I tried another shot. My gun (a double-barrel
muzzle-loader) missed fire, however, and I at once
set to work to put it in going order, feeding the
nipple with gun powder, and at last got it righted
and fired at a tree.
While I was reloading the gun I noticed my
horse looking towards my old camp, with his ears
pricked as though he saw or heard something, and
so, after listening a while, I heard the sound of
horses’ hoofs. I mounted ready for flight. My
horse still kept looking in that direction, and pre-
sently, through a small opening in the timber, I
noticed several horsemen coming towards me.
I at once moved farther up the range, and hav-
ing got into more open country I pulled up to see


who the parties were, and to my astonishment the
first to appear in the open space was my old police
acquaintance, J . Without waiting for a sec-
ond thought I dashed off at a fast pace, and he took
after me, uttering a shout as he started, and firing
as he rode; but he was too far off to do any dam-
age.
Turning as I rode, I saw that he was at the
head of a strong party of police-eight or nine in
a nd that they were well mounted. But I had
confidence in my old horse, and keeping to the top
of the range I went ahead at full speed. The chase
was not a very long one, although it was a stern
one while it lasted. The range terminated in a
very steep point and was intersected by a gully, in
the centre of which was a creek quite ten feet deep,
with clean-cut banks on either side. This was
called Scot’s Creek, and was only about three miles
distant from the township of Number One. I knew
that there was only one possible crossing for a
horse, and I at once made for that point, going full
gallop down the steep declivity, and soon losing
sight of my pursuers, who evidently didn’t care to
risk their necks by following me down the precipi-
tous side of the mountain.


CHAPTER XXXV.
I SURRENDER TO A PRIEST.
AFTER this adventure I became more and more rest-
less, and kept constantly moving, without allowing
anyone to know of my movements. I would not
camp at the same place twice, and would trust one
person only during one visit. I was miserable
enough, I can assure you; and while anxious to
break away from the life I could see no way of do-
ing it but by surrendering to the police, which I
did not care to do. I almost began to wish to be
captured, and yet I couldn’t resist leading the police
a chase after me wherever they chanced to come
near; and it was always so easy to get away in a
locality with every nook and corner of which I was
familiar. At last the crisis came, and in a way
altogether unexpected.
I had met a lady friend who had more than
once done me a good turn, and together we went
to a convenient retreat, where she helped me to
make some bullets for my rifle and revolvers. Each
member of the gang had always carried a bullet
mould and the material for making bullets, and I
had retained mine. First gathering some charcoal
from burnt logs in the bush, I made a smokeless
fire, upon which I melted the lead in a large iron
ladle, and having moulded about twenty bullets I


Ben Hall’s Grave at Forbes.


set to cooling them and cutting the nibs off, while
my companion continued the melting process for an-
other batch.
We were thus busily engaged when I heard the
sound of a horse cantering towards us, and I im-
mediately grasped my gun and ran to my horse;
while my lady friend disappeared in the bush.
The visitor proved to be a Roman Catholic priest
—Father McCarthy I afterwards discovered was his
name —and his first words as he rode up and saw
me with my gun in hand were, “Don’t shoot, Vane!
I’m not a policeman.”
I then lowered my gun, and he approached and
entered into conversation.
- H;s first question to me was, “Where are your
companions ?”
I replied, ‘That’s more than I can tell you, Sir,
for I left them some time ago, and I believe they
have left this part.”
“I am very glad,” said he, “that you have left
them, for there is now some chance for you. It
was only yesterday that I saw your mother, and she
begged me to try and find you and persuade you to
give yourself up. Will you do so? I promise if you
do that you will not be hanged. If you come with
me to Bathurst you will be saved. You are young
and can become a good man yet if you only make
up your mind. Come now, my boy, will you take
your mother’s advice and mine? Don’t be afraid.
You will be all right, and after a time you can come
back here. Now, then, do say that you will give up
this life at once.”
This and much more of the same sort the good
man said to me, and I was touched by his earnest


ness and kindness. I had no desire to die by a bul-
let, as my poor mate, Mickey Burke, had done, and
still less did I like the prospect of being captured
and ending my life on the gallows. I was hoping
against hope of one day escaping to some place
where I was not known; but, to tell the truth, I was
afraid to make away alone for strange parts.
“You say I will not be hanged if I give myself
up?” said I. “Are you sure of that?”
Father McCarthy replied: “I pledge you my word
—will take an oath on it if you like. I know you
are tired of this kind of life, and your only chance
of saving your life is to give yourself up.”
I considered a moment or two, walking back-
wards and forwards with my gun in the hollow of
my arm, and then suddenly turned and said: "Very
well, Sir, I’ll chance it!”
“You’ll never regret the action,” said the
priest, as he took my hand and looked me more
kindly than ever in the face. “Now, you must come
to my place at Malagrove (between Five Islands) and
Carcoar) to-night, but don’t come until late, so that
you won’t be seen, and then we can ride quietly into
Bathurst.”
"Very well,” I replied. “I won’t come until
about ten o’clock.”
And with that he rode away, leaving me to my
own thoughts, which were none too pleasant, al-
though having at last cofne to the point I was not
nearly so much troubled, and felt happier than I had
done for many a day.
I rode about the bush the whole of that after-
noon, seeing a few friends and distributing what few


possessions I had, and when darkness had set in
I started for Malagrove.
On the way I called at a friend's house and re-
quested that a message might be sent to my parents
the following day to the effect that I was going to
surrender to the authorities, although I did not tell
them that I was going first to Malagrove. I did
not even indicate which of the three tracks to Bath-
urst I intended to take, for I did not wish a soul to
know until the thing was actually done.
My friends at the farm house were delighted
that I had at last determined to abandon bushrang-
ing, and the farmer promised to let my people know
at once.
My feelings were very mixed as I rode through
the darkness in the direction of the priest’s house. I
knew that I had done sufficient to place me in the
dock on a capital charge—that of shooting with
intent—and that I had little chance of escape from
conviction; for Keightley knew me personally, and
men had been hanged for no worse crime than that
of which I had been guilty; and although I had not
actually taken life, I knew that the death penalty
attached to my offence. As may be imagined,
therefore, my reflections were not of the pleasantest
kind as I rode in solitary silence towards Mala-
grove.
I arrived at the place about g o’clock that night,
and when I reached the house paddock I made a
breach in the fence and reached the dwelling by the
back way through the garden.
Father McCarthy met me at a small gate near
the house and extended a hearty welcome to me,
saying he was half afraid that I had changed my


mind and would not come. He then said we must
go to Carcoar before starting for Bathurst, and in-
terview Mr. N. Connolly, the leading magistrate in
that township. At first I demurred, but the good
priest assured me that it was the safest course to
follow; so without delay we mounted our horses—
for he had his already saddled—and cantered to the
township, distant about two miles.
Mr. Connolly, after hearing Father McCarthy’s
story, wrote out a statement and gave it to me, say-
ing that it would protect me on the road should
we meet the police, and telling me to give it to the
Inspector of Police when we reached Bathurst.
We then returned to Malagrove, as Father Mc-
Carthy had a bucking horse in his stable which he
wished me to ride to Bathurst, saying the journey
would take the flashness out of him. I said I
thought I could ride him, for it was not likely that
he would buck much at night; so I transferred the
saddle from my horse to the young one, and after
partaking of some slight refreshment we started
on our way, cutting across the paddock and taking
a bush track which led to Blayney.
After leaving Blayney we kept the main road
until we arrived in Bathurst, which we did just as
the sun was rising over the Blue Mountains.
I need not give details of the conversation that
took place Between us on the journey through the
night, although some of it is fresh in my memory
to-day, notwithstanding the lapse of nearly forty
years. The advice and good counsel then given me
by Father McCarthy sank into my mind and heart
and had a marked influence upon my future life,
both while I was in prison and after my release.


CHAPTER XXXVI.
UNDER LOCK AND KEY IN BATHURST,
Entering the town by way of George-street, we
pulled up at Mrs. Walsh’s hotel, where we stabled
the horses and had breakfast, and just as we had
finished eating, an escort of seven policemen, who
rode with the mail coach between Bathurst and
Forbes, entered to have a drink before starting on
their journey. I was sitting on a stool in the bar
when they came in, but none of them took any
notice of me, and when they had left, Mrs, Walsh
took a message from Father McCarthy to Inspector
Morrissett, who was in charge of the police. She
returned, saying the inspector would soon be up,
and shortly afterwards he put in an appearance.
He and Father McCarthy held a short conversa-
tion, and then the latter called me into the room,
saying as I entered, “Give that paper to the Inspec-
tor.”
I handed to him the paper I had received from
Mr. Connolly, and after reading it Inspector Mor-
rissett turned to me and said, “When can you see
Vane?’’
I saw that he had made some mistake, but en-
tering into the humor of the thing, I replied, “I can
see him to-morrow!”
"Very well, then,” said he, “you can tell him that
he need not be afraid to meet me in the bush and


come with me to Bathurst, and you can tell me
afterwards where we can meet.’’
I could see that Father McCarthy was a good
deal amused at this conversation, and at last he
turned to the Inspector and asked, “Do you think
you will know Vane when you see him?”
“Know him?” said Morrissett, “I should think I
would know him, for haven’t I been chasing him
for months?”
“Do you think the lad you are talking to is
Vane?” asked the priest.
The Inspector looked at me and then at Father
McCarthy, and then at me again, before he replied,
“No, I’m sure he is not Vane."
Father McCarthy then turned to me laughing
and asked me if I was Vane, and upon my replying
in the affirmative, also laughing, the Inspector said:
“Well, if you are I don’t know you, and don’t think
I ever saw you before. And if you are Vane, one
thing is certain, and that is, we have made a mis-
take about you being present at the sticking-up
of the Carcoar coach, when Constable Sutton was
shot.”
Fie then told me I had done well to give myself
up, and having arranged for us to go down to the
Court Flouse, he left the hotel, and the priest and I
shortly afterwards walked down the street to the
Court House, where Dr. Palmer, the Police Magis-
trate, was present to receive us. Here a few pre-
liminaries were gone through, and I was formally
remanded to gaol for seven days.
Oh, what a difference was here! To be cooped
up within four bare walls after so long enjoying the
freedom of the bush! I felt the confinement se


verely, although I had resigned myself to the inev-
itable.
During the waiting period, I was more than
once brought into the yard with other prisoners in
order that persons who had to appear as witnesses
could see if they could identify me.
Amongst those who saw me was Constable
Sutton, and although on the first occasion he de-
clared that he did not know me, subsequently at the
trial he said that he identified me as one of the men
who stuck up the Carcoar mail coach when he was
shot in the arm. A man named McGeorge, a team-
ster, also swore than I was present; but they were
wrong, as was shown later on, when Inspector Mor-
rissett and Constable Merrin, who were two of the
escorting police at the time of the sticking-up, and
who had a better opportunity than the others of see-
ing who were present on the occasion, both swore
that I was not with the other bushrangers. And
that was the truth.*
McCarthy was entitled to the reward of .£l,OOO,
which the Government had offered for the capture of Vane. It
is almost needless to say that he did not accept that reward. In
his ministerial capacity he had effectively preached repentance to
the sinner, and the consciousness of having done his duty was
counted by him as reward sufficient. In another case, in which
a bushranger not connected with Hall’s gang was concerned, he
was instrumental in recovering for one of the banks some £2,000
in notes which had been stolen from one of the Western mails.
The bank had offered £lOO reward for the recovery of the notes,
but Father McCarthy refused to accept that reward, also. The
act was characteristic of the man, who, in his priestly office,
laboured for something more precious and more enduring than
earthly treasure.” —White’s “Australian Bushranging.”


Sergeant Sutton.


CHAPTER XXXVII.
FIFTEEN YEARS’ HARD LABOR.
In due course I was brought before the local Bench
of Magistrates, when three charges of robbery under
arms were preferred against me, and two charges
of shooting with intent to kill. I made no defence
and was committed to take my trial at the next
Court of Assize.
When that Court opened—April, 1864 —I had
already spent five months in gaol, and although the
waiting time was weary, I was really happier and
more contented in mind than I had been at any time
during my bushranging career.
The Court was held before the late Chief Justice
Stephen, and the authorities would not have had
the trouble of trying me, but for the fact that they
charged me with an offence of which I was perfectly
innocent—that was the shooting of Constable Sut-
ton, when the Carcoar mail was bailed up and the
bushrangers and the police fought a battle in the
road.
There were five charges brought against me al-
together, namely—(l) Robbing Hosie’s store at
Caloola, on 23rd September, 1863; (2) Robbery at
Louden’s, Grubbenbong station, near Carcoar, on
26th September, 1863; (3) Robbery at Canowindra
on the same date; (4) The attack on Keightley’s
house at Dunn's Plains, on 24th October, and


shooting at Keightley; and (5) Firing at and wound-
ing with intent to kill Constable Sutton, at Five
Mile Water Holes, near Carcoar, on 6th August,
1863.
To the first four charges I pleaded Guilty, but
to the last I pleaded Not Guilty, and my friends
engaged the clever barrister, W. B, Dailey, to de-
fend me. In each of the indictments I was charged
with having committed the offence when in company
with others, all being armed, and the Crown Prose-
cutor in the last case, when delivering his opening
address, pointed out that an attempt to murder was
equivalent to the actual commission of murder, and
that if only wounding ensued the capital crime
would, in the eyes of the law, be accomplished.
The first witness called was a bullock-driver
named John McGeorge, and he deposed that three
men attacked the coach, swearing positively that I
was one of the three. He said he had known me
intimately for twelve years, having lived near my
father’s place. But he gave himself away by say-
ing that he had frequently seen me at home at the
very time that I was living at Tambaroora and up
the Lachlan, before joining Hall’s gang.
Superintendent Morrissett was the next wit-
ness, and he described exactly what had taken place
when the bushrangers fired on him and the other
police when the coach was bailed up; but in ans-
wer to Mr. Dailey he said he could not identfy me
as one of the men, although he had quite 1 as good
an opportunity of seeing all the bushrangers as any
of the others.
Senior-Sergeant Grainger and Sergeant Merrin,
the two other policemen who were on the coach, also


said they could not identify me, the latter declar-
ing that from what Constable Sutton had told him he
understood that he did not know who I was.
Then Constable Sutton gave evidence, declar-
ing most positively that I was with the other two
bushrangers, and that I had spoken to him, but
did not fire at him, although I had a revolver in my
hand. He stated that the wound he had received
had caused him to be laid up for four months.
No evidence was called in my defence, but Mr.
Dailey delivered an eloquent address to the jury.
He entreated the jury, while they waded through
the discrepancies and contradictions of the evi-
dence, to consider well the awful responsibilities of
their position, and say whether they could possibly
convict in the face of such contradictions.
The learned judge summed up with great care,
telling the jury that if they considered that the
evidence of my connection with the affair was not
conclusive they should aquit me.
And without much hesitation they did aquit me,
after which I was remanded for sentence on the
charges to which I had pleaded guilty, the Chief Jus-
tice announcing, before I was removed from the
dock, in order to ease the minds of those of my
friends who were in the Court, that he would not
pass sentence of death upon me.
That night in the cell —shall I ever forget it!
I knew the sentence that would be passed upon me
would be a very heavy one, and I dreaded to look
forward to the future, and didn’t appear to derive
much consolation from the knowledge that I was
not to be hanged. However, the night passed and
the next day dawned, and when the Court opened


I was conducted from the cell and called up for sen-
tence.
That sentence seemed to me to be a long time
coming, for the Chief Justice delivered a very long
address on the evils of bushranging, and read from
his notebook an epitome of the evidence taken at
the Police Court on the four separate charges.
Then he passed sentence, as follows:—For the out-
rage at Dunn’s Plains fifteen years’ hard labor on
the roads or other public works of the colony, and
for each of the other three offences ten years’ hard
labor —the sentences to be concurrent.
In my ignorance of legal forms I thought at
first that the sentence meant forty-five years , and
that I would have to serve that term; and my relief
was great when I learned that all the other senten-
ces were swallowed up in the first, and that I should
only have to serve fifteen years altogether—and
even not all that if I behaved myself in prison.
Then back to gaol I was taken to await removal
to Sydney, where all long-sentenced prisoners were
taken in those days.
At the time of which I write the train did not
run on the Western line farther from Sydney than
Penrith, and prisoners had to be conveyed over the
mountains by coach. My journey from Bathurst
to Sydney was made by coach, but I did not go
alone.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.
ACROSS THE MOUNTAINS ON A CHAIN.
ONE morning shortly after the court business was
finished I was called out into the prison yard with
six other prisoners who had been entenced to long
terms of imprisonment, with a view to our removal
to Sydney.
These were—James Fitzgibbons, sentenced to
fifteen years; Henry Harmond, sentenced to twelve
years; John Benson, twelve years; James Henley,
ten years; Charles Peterson, five years; and John
Plummer, five years.
Leg-irons were placed upon the four first-named
prisoners, but Plummer, Peterson and I were only
handcuffed to. each other. Then a long chain was
placed full length upon the pathway near the gaol
gate, and we were marched along in pairs, one on
each side of the chain, and one handcuff on each pair
was locked to a loop in the chain,
and I were the leading pair; then came
Harmond., and Benson and Henley and Peterson;
leaving;, to carry the tail end of the
chain.'
as we were thus connected the gaol
gates were thrown open, and we were marched out
to where a large coach was awaiting us.


A great crowd of people had assembled to see
us off, amongst whom were many of my personal
friends, who had come to bid farewell to me. My
disengaged hand was kept btisy all the time we
waited, shaking those of my friends, and when we
did start the police were compelled to walk in front
of the leading horses till the coach got clear of the
crowd, so great was the press.
Three or four of the policemen got into the
coach with us, while several mounted troopers rode
by the side or followed. A number of horsemen
from the country, our friends and relatives, were
allowed to accompany us as far as Woodside, about
seven miles on the Sydney road, at which point
they left us, as did also the troopers, who returned
to town with them.
The coach travelled on till we reached Diamond
Swamp, where we rested for the night, the police
guarding us all night in an old hut, for there was
no lock-up there.
Our journey was resumed at sunrise the fol-
lowing morning, and we reached Hartley, at the
foot of Mount Victoria, about 5 o’clock in the after-
noon, being accommodated for the night there in
the old lock-up cells, as was also the case at Eigh-
teen' Mile Hollow.
Eventually we reached Penrith, and remained
in the lock-up there till the train was ready to leave
for Sydney. This was my first sight of a railway
train and my first experience as a traveller in a
railway carriage. For preference, Pwould sooner
have done the journey on one of my old bush
horses, but the authorities didn’t offer me any
choice, and although they did not bind me as se


curdy as some of my fellow prisoners were bound,
it is just possible that, if the thought of letting me
have a horse entered their minds (which I doubt),
they would have concluded that I was much safer
in the train.
When the train steamed into Sydney we
found a large crowd of people on the station, and
I was evidently the object of their curiosity.
As they jostled each other to get a glimpse of
us as we left the carriage for the van, one asked
the other: “Which is Johnny Vane?” and the reply
was made: “There he is—that tall, young-looking
chap in front.”
When seated in the van that was to convey us
to Darlinghurst Gaol, the old man Henley turned
to me and said: “Well, Jack, you’ll soon be home
now. This is Black Bess which they run all the
prisoners about in here. Did you ever ride in a
carriage before?” Hammond also turned to me
and said; “He appears to know all about it, Jack.”
“Yes, so I ought,” replied Henley; “for I have
been over forty years in ‘quod,’ off and on, and am
now starting another ten. Don’t you follow my ex-
ample, young fellow. If you keep yourself quiet
you will be let out before me, although you have
got fifteen years against your name in the books
and I’ve only got ten. All you’ve got to do is to
keep from getting into fresh trouble inside, and
then you’ll be all right.”
This advice was, no doubt, very good; but I
had made up my mind that they should have no
fault to find with me during the term of my im-
prisonment; and I was fortunately able to keep that
resolution.


CHAPTER XXXIX.
LIFE IN DARLINGHURST GAOL.
PRESENTLY the van stopped, and I heard the sound
of a whistle, then the rattle of locks and iron
bars, and then the door of the van was thrown open
and we were marched into a large building called
No. I wing, where we were locked up in small com-
partments —three in one and four in another—re-
maining there for the night.
On the following morning we were brought be-
fore the gaoler and each was questioned as to his
age, birthplace, religion and trade.
Harmond created a little diversion when his
turn came. He was a Londoner, he said, and ar-
rived in a certain year and a certain ship (the date
and name I disremember).
The gaoler said; “I don’t believe you, for that
ship did not come to Australia for some years
after that.”
Harmond replied: "Oh, didn’t it? Then I must
have made a mistake.”
Whereupon a very stern-looking old warder,
named John Callaghan, who really did the examin-
ing, said: “You musn’t make any mistakes here,
my man; you had better tell the truth, or it will
be worse for you.”
Then came the question; "What trade are you?”


“Protestant!” said Harmond, without moving a
muscle of his face, which could not be said of any
one of those listening to the catechising.
“What religion?”
“Bullock driver,” was the reply, and then he
was told to stand aside to be dealt with after-
wards. He wasn’t punished, however, although he
was cautioned not to try that sort of ridiculous
game again. From that time during the whole
of ray stay there, Harmond was very quiet and re-
spectful, and gave me many a good word of advice.
Mr. Read, the Governor of the gaol, was very
kind to me from the start of my service. He ad-
vised me to choose my company among the prison-
ers, and named several of the quietest and best-be-
haved, particularly mentioning John Bow, one of the
Eugowra escort robbers in Gardiner’s bushranging
gang, who had been sentenced to death, but whose
sentence had been commuted to imprisonment for
life, the first three years in irons.
I discovered that Bow was one of the gaol
stone-cutters, and as each stone-cutter was allowed
an assistant, (or “bullock,” as he was called in the
yard), I applied to Mr. Telfor, the overseer of the
stone works, for permission to serve as Bow’s "bul-
lock,” which request he readily granted.
When the “bullock” himself became handy with
the mason’s tools he was given a box of tools, and
had a “bullock” under him in turn; and I wasn’t
long at the work before I gained promotion.
There were many small boys in Darlinghurst
during my stay there, and I am' quite sure the im-
prisonment did not improve them. On the con-
trary, as there was no proper classification of pri


soners, and they could not be kept separate from
the older and experienced criminals, they were of-
ten run by the latter to do that which was
against the regulations, and would therefore receive
gaol punishment. On being discharged they would
convey verbal messages from their older “pals” in
gaol to persons in the city or country, and after
receiving a reply would commit some small offence
for the purpose of getting back to gaol again, when
they would give the return message, and by this
means communication between the prisoners and
their friends outside was kept up.
Some of the boys were really good scholars, and
could write better letters than most of the men. I
knew one little fellow who was sent to China on
board ship when released from gaol for the pur-
pose of getting him away from old associates in
Sydney, but the ship which he had sailed in was
hardly back in Sydney before he was again a pri-
soner in Darlinghurst. He told me he could not
live away from Sydney, and had got a return pas-
sage back to that city before he had been in China
two days.
One can hardly imagine that robberies would
be committed in the gaol, yet I have known the
store in which the prisoners’ free clothing was
kept to be broken into and the clothing taken from
it; and, stranger still, the articles were not found
again by the gaol authorities.
A good deal of gambling was also indulged
in within the prison walls at that time. I have
seen eight packs of cards in play at the same time,
the play being for tobacco and matches. Every
man had sufficient tobacco for smoking allowed


him, and I was allowed an extra “stick” per week
for helping to mind lunatic prisoners at night—
a not very pleasant job, I can tell you.
There was a padded cell in the gaol lined with
strong leather for the unruly “ratty” men, and I
remember one case in particular of a man placed
there which caused not a little amusement. A
prisoner had been brought in under a five years’
sentence for horse-stealing near Blayney, and
shortly after being admitted he went “off his head,”
and as he became a little too rough he was put into
the padded cell. We used to call this man “Pat
the Rager,” and one night Pat started raving so
badly that the straight-jacket had to be placed on
him, and he was afterwards run into the cell and the
jacket was removed. Plere it was thought he
would be safe, as he was alone and could not do
any damage to others or injure himself. After
a while, however, he began making a great noise
and kept crying out at the top of his voice—“ Look
at them! There goes another!” and uttering other
wild ejaculations. At last the warder on duty un-
locked the door and found that Pat had actually
torn the leather from the walls, and was on his
knees among the wool and hair stuffing, declaring
that he was catching snakes and eating them by
the dozen. Shortly after this, as it was seen that
he could not recover, poor Pat was sent off to the
Parramatta Lunatic Asylum, and that was the last
we saw or heard of him.
Pugilistic encounters were not uncommon oc-
currences in the gaol, and the fights generally came
off on the Saturday or the Sunday. Everything
would be got ready through the week, and after


church hours on the bunday the contest would take
place. The prisoners would form a ring and stand
all round the combatants under the mess shed, and
if a warder came into the yard one of the company
would be found telling a yarn or giving a lecture,
while the others stood around as innocent auditors.
But the men were nearly always discovered and
punished for the transgression. On one occasion
I saw no less that thirty-six good, hard “rounds”
fought on a Sunday, and each man received strong
punishment at the hands of the other. They were
brought before the visiting justice next day, but he
considered that they had both been sufficiently pun-
ished in the fight, and on their giving promise not to
offend again, he let them off.
I was not much for fighting myself, but generally
tried to prevent it, although I could use my hands
pretty freely if called upon to do so—as one, at
least, of my former “mates” in the bush could have
testified if he had been alive. I did have one short
bout one morning, however. There was a big
American negro in the yard and he struck me witn
a mop he was using. He was off his balance very
quickly after that, I can tell you, for I caught
him a half-swing blow fair under the jaw, and he
went down like a log. He didn’t ask for any more
either then or afterwards.
The “lady” class at Darlinghurst were at times
very troublesome, but I didn’t see much of them
The only time the men were permitted to see them
was during church hours; but, of course, we were
not allowed to speak to them or communicate with
them in any way. Hence, I cannot give any ac-
count of that side of the prison life.


On several occasions during my term prisoners
tried to escape from Darlinghurst. I was only once an
eye-witness to an affair of that kind, but I did not
have anything to do with the attempt. The men
who tried on that game generally got the worst of
it. Some of them were flogged; others were sent
to Berrima gaol for separate treatment. On one
occasion, when the prisoners who had plotted the
escape found they could not succeed in their at-
tempt to get out, some excitement was caused by
their destroying useful articles in the schoolroom.
One of them was shot through the shoulder by a
warder while thus engaged, but even then they did
not desist. Eventually, having done all the damage
they possibly could, they surrendered and were
placed in solitary confinement.
During my stay in Darlinghurst a batch of
ten or twelve prisoners (I think that was the num-
ber) were being conveyed under escort from Ber-
rima to Darlinghurst in a coach, and when
the coach was travelling through a piece
of rough country called Bargo Brush, the
prisoners made a concerted attempt to escape.
One man, named Crookwell, who was under a sen-
tence of fifteen years, his hands being in the cuffs,
threw his arms round the neck of one of the police-
men in the coach and choked him breathless, while
Michael • ———, who was serving a sentence of
five years, and was, I believe, near the end of his
“time,” rushed the other policeman. Crookwell
dragged his man to the side of the coach and let
him slip down, and then shot him with a revolver
which he had snatched from the man w r ho was
pinioned by Michael . In the meantime the


other policeman managed to get away, and secured
the whole gang before they could free themselves.
I subsequently heard that Crookwell was hanged
some time afterwards, while the others who had
taken part in the attempt to escape were sentenced
to terms of imprisonment of from two to twenty
years.
My education had been altogether neglected
in my younger days—it will be remembered that
there were no schools in the bush then, and very
few in the country towns —and when I entered
Darlinghurst Gaol I could neither read nor write,
so lat once became a gaol schoolboy. The school-
master was a Mr. W , who had been a Pres-
byterian Minister, but who had broken the law,
and was serving a sentence of five years’ imprison-
ment, and I had the privilege of sitting under him
to learn for two hours each day. I made rapid pro-
gress with my studies, in which I took a very keen
interest, and I was soon pretty well forward in the
first reading and writing lessons and sums.
From the stone work I went to the black-
smithing, of which I knew something, and remain-
ed in the shop for two years and six months, be-
coming fairly proficient under the instruction of
Mr. Howarth, the overseer. After this I was sent
for a few weeks to Cockatoo Island, and on my re-
turn I resumed work in the stone-cutting yard,
from which I was promoted to the building depart-
ment, where I remained until my release from gaol.


CHAPTER XL.
CHUMS WITH FRANK GARDINER.
The father of bushrangers, Frank Gardiner,
alias Christie—“ King of the Road” he was called—
was brought to Darlinghurst under committal while
I was serving my sentence, and we came together
frequently after his conviction; in fact, I was his
yard mate for some time. It will be remembered
that he was the leader of the gang concerned in the
Eugowra gold escort robbery, in which O’Meally
and Gilbert were also engaged; that shortly after
the robbery he suddenly disappeared with Mrs
Brown; and that several years elapsed before he
was discovered, keeping a roadside store on the
Queensland border.
He was a quiet, easy-spoken man, and didn’t
care to talk to everyone about his former exploits.
He had evidently closely watched (from a distance)
the movements of Ben Hall and the others after his
disappearance, for even in the out-of-the-way place
on the Queensland border, where he had been ac-
cidentally discovered, the papers would keep him
informed of the movements of the gang. When
he heard my name he knew who I was, and we
soon became “chummy." He told me a lot of his
experiences, but some of them I cannot repeat, as
the persons who were concerned with him therein


are still living, and they would object to have what
he told me made public.
I found that Gardiner was not a stranger to
gaol, having been convicted in the “fifties” of horse-
stealing in Victoria, and sentenced to five years in
Pentridge gaol. After serving five weeks he made
his escape and crossed the border into New South
Wales, quietly returning to the Goulburn district,
where he was born, and living there unmolested
until he again began to “lift” horses and was ar-
rested and sent to Cockatoo Island for seven years.
After serving about half that sentence he was re-
leased on a ticket-of-leave for the Carcoar district,
where he once again indulged in old habits, steal-
ing horses and cattle. Having illegally left his dis-
trict a warrant was issued for his arrest, but for a
long time the police could not trace him, and with
a boldness characteristic of the man he engaged in
the butchering business at the Lambing Flat
(Young) with a former acquaintance named Fogg,
who had a farm on the Abercrombie; but the firm
was broken up by Gardiner’s arrest upon another
charge of cattle stealing, and being released on
bail, against the protest of the police, he disappear-
ed once more, and shortly afterwards began his
bushranging career. Knowing that he had been
very intimate with Fogg, who had returned to his
farm, the police naturally turned their eyes in the
direction of the Abercrombie, and "shadowed” Fogg
for the purpose of catching Gardiner.
In July, 1861, troopers Middleton and Hosie,
who were stationed at Tuena, the police station
nearest to Fogg’s, made a sudden descent upon
Fogg’s farm, having received information that Gar


diner was there. Mrs. Fogg happened to go to
the door as they rode up and she immediately
turned round and gave the alarm, upon which Gar-
diner ran into another room which had a calico
screen for a door, drawing his revolver as he ran.
He was hardly quick enough, however, for Middle-
ton rushed into the hut while the screen was still
shaking and made a dash to enter; but when he
was in the act of pulling aside the screen Gardiner
fired, and Middleton at once dropped the screen
and jumped back a couple of paces, startled, but
unhurt. The firing seemed to reveal Gardiner’s
position in the room, and once more Middleton sud-
denly lifted the curtain and fired as he did so, Gar-
diner also firing at the same moment. Middleton’s
fire was harmless, but Gardiner’s shot struck the
sergeant fair in the mouth, knocking out some of
his teeth and fracturing his lower jaw; a second
shot, fired rapidly after the first, passed through
Middleton’s left hand. Then Middleton called upon
Hosie to go round the hut and see if he could enter
from the rear, but there was no entrance from the
back, and then Hosie was told to “come into the
hut and take your chance with me.” That chance
proved a poor one, for as he rushed for the inner
room calling upon Gardiner to surrender, at the
same time firing through the curtain, two answer-
ing shots from within rang out and Hosie fell,
wounded and stunned, to the floor.
Seeing Hosie fall and knowing that Middleton
was also wounded, Gardiner determined to make
a rush for liberty, without waiting to reload. Seiz-
ing his revolver by the muzzle, he ran towards
Middleton and made a blow at him with the butt


Gardiner before his conviction.
Gardiner after his conviction.


end of the weapon, but the sergeant, who had
dropped his pistol when he found he could not re-
load it, and held his heavy-handled riding whip
parried the blows, and a fierce hand-to-hand con-
flict ensued, each man giving the other some heavy
hits. Gardiner was getting the upper hand of his
wounded opponent when Hosie suddenly recovered,
and rushing up seized Gardiner from behind. While
the two men were struggling, Middleton kept
striking Gardiner on the head with his whip-handle,
getting in some heavy blows. And now Fogg, who
had re-entered the room when the firing ceased,
called out to Middleton: “Don’t kill the man,” say-
ing to Gardiner in almost the same breath: “You
had better give in, Gardiner.”
Up to this point the police did not know for cer-
tain that the man they were fighting was Gardiner;
but Fogg’s call made them sure, and then Hosie
redoubled his exertions to overcome him. The two
men fell, locked in close embrace, and continued
the struggle on the mud floor of the hut, Fogg
meanwhile preventing Middleton from interfering,
and advising Gardiner to surrender so that murder
would not be done. But the men continued to
struggle until Gardiner fainted, and after having
snapped on his wrists a pair of handcuffs that Mid-
dleton handed to him, Flosie rolled from over against
the wall thoroughly exhausted and unable to
move. Then it was found that Gardiner was ter-
ribly cut about the head, and that he had also been
wounded in the firing.
Having secured their man, the police were at a
loss what to do with him. Fogg declared that
there was no horse about the place for Gardiner


to ride and he was too weak to walk—in fact,
Middleton said he thought he was dying, and that
they would never get him away alive. At last
it was decided that the only thing to be done was
for Middleton to go to Bigga—about an hour and
a half ride —and get help. Middleton therefore
started for Bigga, giving Hosie instructions to fol-
low with the prisoner as soon as he recovered suffi-
ciently to walk.
And now something peculiar happened, con-
cerning which two very different stories have been
told. Hosie subsequently gave his version before
Carcoar court, when Fogg was being tried for ob-
structing the police and harboring bushrangers.
He said: “In about an hour and a half after Middle-
ton started for Bigga, I felt myself getting faint
and called upon Fogg to take Gardiner in charge,
which he did, and when I recovered I found Gar-
diner in the same place as when I fainted. Ido
not know whether he made any attempt to get away
from Fogg, but shortly after I recovered he tried to
get away from me. Fie attempted to throw me
down, and we struggled together for a quarter of
an hour, when he got away and rushed towards the
river, but it was flooded, and he then turned and
rushed at me with a sapling. I fired at him and
overcame him, and Fogg assisted me to take him
back to the house, where we gave him refresh-
ments. As Middleton did not return with assist-
ance, I thought he must have died on the road, so
I asked Fogg to help me take Gardiner to Bigga,
which he did, first getting two horses, one for him-
self and one for Gardiner. Fogg led Gardiner’s
horse, while I rode my own horse behind them,


When we had gone about three miles on the road,
we were attacked by two bushrangers, one of whom
I believe to be Piesley, who told Fogg to release
Gardiner’s horse or they would shoot him. This he
did, and then the men fired at me, and I returned
the fire with the only shot I had. They then rush-
ed up and covered me with their revolvers, but Fogg
begged them not to shoot me, and I believe they
would have shot me but for his interference. They
then left, taking Gardiner with them, and Fogg ac-
companied me some distance further on the road
for protection.”
Ths was Hosie’s version, and for a time he
was looked upon as a hero. But another version
was published within, two months after the occur-
rence, and that by Piesley himself, whom I knew to
be a bushranger working occasionally with Gar-
diner, although I was not acquainted with him.
He wrote a letter to one of the Bathurst papers con-
tradicting the statement that he had assisted to
rescue Gardiner and had hred at Hosie. The fact
was, he said, that Gardiner was allowed to go by
Hosie after the passing of certain money in Fogg’s
house during Middleton’s absence. Within a year
after this Piesley killed a farmer named Benyon, a
few miles from Bigga, and was captured, tried in
Bathurst, convicted and hanged. When on the scaf-
fold waiting for the drop to fall he addressed the
spectators, and after asserting that he had not in-
tended to kill Benyon, and that he had not committed
half the robberies that had been charged
against him, he solemnly asserted that he
was perfectly innocent in the matter of Gar-
diner’s alleged rescue. “I call God to wit


ness,” he said, “that the charge made against
me by Hosie is groundless, as I was not near the
spot on the occasion. But I know that Fogg pro-
mised Hosie £SO if he would let Gardiner go, and
Fogg did give him £SO and 10s. over, because there
was a cheque for £2 10s. in the money that was
made up.”
The story that Gardiner told me in the gaol
years afterwards was similar to this, tie said that
after the second fight with Hosie in the yard, Hosie
fainted and was at his (Gardiner’s) mercy. As
he was lying helpless near him he threatened that
if he moved he would kill him, and then Hosie said
he had had enough of it and that Gardiner could
go free if he liked. This, Gardiner said, he did
without delay, but he first borrowed some money—
he didn’t say how much—and made Hosie a present.
Gardiner also said he made his way as quickly as
he was able to the house of a friend, and while the
police were scouring the bush for him he was safely
hiding in a cave near Teasdale, where he stayed
until his wounds were healed and he was able to
take to the road again.
Concerning the sticking-up of the gold escort at
Eugowra, near Forbes, when between £14,000 and
£15,000 worth of gold and notes were secured by
Gardiner and his companions—Gilbert, O’Meally,
Fordyce, Manns, and Charteris —after a fight with
the police, Gardiner wouldn’t say much. He told
me, however, that very few of the gang benefited
at all from the robbery. Shortly after the gold and
notes had been divided the police from Forbes sud-
denly surprised one portion of the gang (the mem-
bers had parted and ridden "crooked” through the


bush to deceive the black trackers) and a pack-
horse with one lot of the “loot” had to be abandoned
and was speedily captured by the police. Later
on O’Meally lost his share in a very simple manner.
He and Gardiner and Gilbert had gone to a hut
on the Billabong, where they knew they could get
some tea, and while there O’Meally placed his swag
of gold on the table with one of his revolvers beside
it and braggingly said: “The man who takes
the one will get the contents of the other.”
There were other men (whose names I do
not care to mention) in the hut at the
time, and one of them seizing a favorable
opportunity, suddenly snatched the parcel from the
table, and cleared from the hut, mounted his horse
and galloped off before you could say “Jack Robin-
son.” O’Meally and D rushed out after him,
and mounting their horses followed him for some
miles through the bush: but although they fired at
the runaway they could neither hit nor catch him,
and he escaped with the gold. Gardiner said that
he had heard some time after that the man was
keeping a public house in Victoria.
Charteris was also, Gardiner said, robbed of
his share. Bow and Charteris had each “planted”
their gold in a bag with other things, and told each
other their hiding places. Subsequently Charteris
discovered that his bag had been cut open and the
gold abstracted, the knife which made the cut being
left inside the bag. That knife happened to be his
own, and as he had some time previous to the dis-
covery of his loss lent it to Bow, he accused Bow
of the theft; but Bow declared that he had handed
the knife to N , who had left the place, and


Eugowra Rocks.


that the gold must have been taken by him. This
did not satisfy Charteris. He said that either Bow
or Manns had taken the “swag,” and if they didn’t
give him £4OO, so that he could clear out of the
country as he had intended, he would “give the whole
show away.” They laughed at him and said he
wasn’t game to do that, as he was as deep in it as
themselves; but not long after this Charteris did
what he had threatened and “peached”—turned in-
former—-and was the principal Crown witness
against the others after their arrest.
Another of the robbers, said Gardiner, handed
his share of the spoils to a female relative, who
subsequently entered into business in the south.
Gilbert gave his share to a dealer to dispose of,
the dealer to keep half for his trouble and risk,
but the dealer kept the whole and paid the penalty
with his life.
Gardiner’s own share, he said, was on the pack-
horse which was captured by the police under In-
spector Sanderson; but he didn’t feel the loss very
much, as he had saved a good deal from the pro-
ceeds of other robberies, and this formed the capital
which enabled him to start store-keeping in Queens-
land after his elopement with Mrs. Brown.
After he had recovered from the shock of the
heavy sentence —thirty-two years—passed upon
him, and settled down to prison life, he gave no
trouble to the gaol authorities, and in time came
to be the “white-headed boy” of Darlinghurst. Al-
though he didn’t say much about it, I know that he
was always looking forward to a shortening of his
sentence, as he had influential friends at work for
him outside; and I wasn’t surprised to learn, some


years after my own release, that the efforts of those
friends had proved successful. After serving four-
teen years he was allowed to leave the gaol on con-
dition that he also left the colony. I believe he
went to San Francisco and there kept a saloon
for some years before he died.


CHAPTER XLI.
ON COCKATOO ISLAND.
While I was in Darlinghurst Gaol, the penal
establishment of Cockatoo Island was in full swing;
and, take my word for it, it was a rough shop.
There were about 500 hard-labor prisoners on
me Island, and they were as filthy a lot of beasts as
were ever caged. By some error I was sent over
from Darlinghurst to work in the stone quarry,
getting stone for building and excavating the pre-
sent shipping dock.
Work started at 8 a.m., after breakfast, and
continued till 5 p.m., with a break for dinner be-
tween. 12 and 1 o’clock. When we got back to the
yard the prisoners would have tea, followed by a
game of handball in the long days, after which they
would be locked up in the large sleeping compart-
ment, which had hammocks around the wall on each
side. For the “solitaries” there were special deep
cells cut out of solid rock.
Some of the prisoners worked in chains, but
as a rule chains were only used when the prisoners
were on escort to and from the Island. The chains
for workers were heavy or light according to the
degree of punishment awarded. An iron ring with


a leather rim encircled each ankle, upon which it
was firmly riveted with a round-headed bolt, and
connecting the two rings was a chain about three
feet long. Each prisoner had a leather strap for a
belt, and those wearing the irons would also have a
second strap running from the waist to the centre
loop of the chain between the ankles, thus relieving
the legs of the weights attached, and permitting a
little ease in walking. The cold chisel had to be
brought into play for the irons to be taken off, the
head of the bolts being cut and the bolts punched
out. Fortunately, I never had to wear the irons.
The sight of them on the legs of the other poor
devils was quite sufficient for me.
I didn’t do much work in the quarry, for a man
whom I had previously known was engaged m
driving the horses, and by a little innocent manoeu-
vring on his part, I was transferred to the black-
smith’s shop, where I was quite at home. Fie work-
ed the dodge very nicely. One day he induced the
smith to sham sickness, and having pulled a shoe
from the foot of one of the horses he reported that a
shoe was wanted, at the same time saying that he
knew a prisoner who could put one on in the smith’s
absence. I was then sent for, and having done
that job well and quickly, I was placed in charge of
the forge, and had a pretty good time of it.
But I was in great danger of getting into
trouble in the shop over one affair. One of the
officers used to keep fowls, and the prisoners were
always on the look-out to snap up an occasional-
stray “chook” on the quiet. They would bring the
stolen fowls to the shop and ask leave to cook them
on the forge, and although I objected at first, they


insisted, and I was compelled to give way. I was
between two fires, for if I had held out against the
men I would have made enemies of them, and if the
roasting process had been discovered by any of the
officers, most of the blame would have fallen on me.
Fortunately, however, I was shortly afterwards re-
moved from the Island.
Sir Alfred Stephen, the Chief Justice, who had
always been kindly disposed towards me, from the
time of my trial before him, happened to hear that I
had been transferred to the Island, and he at once
sent word to the gaol authorities that I ought not
to be there. That was sufficient. I was at once re-
turned to Darlinghurst Gaol, after having been two
months on the Island, a warder rowing me over
to the steps in a small boat, and allowing me to
walk by his side through Sydney streets without the
handcuffs on—an act of kindness on his part which
I never forgot.
I remember how one attempt to escape from
Darlinghurst Gaol was frustrated. When tne addi-
tions were being made to the gaol, some stone-cut-
ters were working in the new wings, and three of
them arranged to make a way of escape for the
other prisoners through the old wall. Two of these
men were due for discharge, and it was arranged
that after their release they should purchase a new
stone-mason’s mallet, hollow it out, place powder
and fuse in fhe hole, close up the opening, and then
throw it over the wall at a particular spot. They
purchased the mallet, scooped out a hole and filled
it with the explosives for use, screwed on the top
again and pitched it over the wall during tne night.
But the warders were on the look-out for it. One


.of the prisoners who had been let into the secret
“turned dog,” as his companions said, and revealed
the plot to the warders, who secured the mallet,
emptied out the contents and replaced them with
some light' combustible (saltpetre, I thirik), and
then put the mallet back in the place where the
prisoners expected to find it. Next morning a pri-
soner named W picked it up and carried it into
the carpenter’s shop, and the plotters got all ready
for flight when the proper time arrived. The in-
tention was to place the explosives in holes which
they had already drilled in the old wall, Are the
charges simultaneously, and make a sudden dash
for liberty as soon as a hole had been blown
through the wall, and before the warders had re-
covered from the surprise caused by the explosion.
To their surprise the charges did not go off when
they were fired. There was a bit of a fizzle—that
was all, and the wall remained intact. The two
discharged prisoners were re-arrested and the whole
of the plotters within the prison—fen or twelve in all
—were sent away to Berrima gaol, while the two
who had worked outside the wall each received a
sentence of two years' imprisonment.


CHAPTER XLII.
FREE ONCE MORE.
MY release came upon me quite unexpectedly, I
had only entered upon the sixth year of my sen-
tence, when, upon the roll being called, as usual, at
6 o’clock one evening, I was told to fall out from the
other prisoners, and stand behind the warders. This
I did, anxiously speculating concerning the reason
of my detention. But I was not long left in doubt.
After the other prisoners had all filed out, and been
marched off to their cells, I was brought before the
Governor of the Gaol, who told me that he had
received orders to discharge me, which he was now
going to do, and he hoped that I would do well as a
free man. A warder was then sent off to the store
to get me a suit of clothes, and the gaoler gave me
thirty shillings to pay my way until I could earn
something; after which he accompanied me to the
gate, which was thrown open, and once more I
breathed the fresh air of Heaven as a free man!
Only those who have been in a similar position can
imagine my feelings as I left the prison gates, the-
prison dress, the prison air, behind me!
I obtained comfortable board and lodging at a
quiet place in York-street, Sydney, and three days
after my release I got employment at St. Mary’s.
Cathedral building, through the recommendation of


Mr. Telfor, the gaol overseer; but I did not stay
very long on that job, as the season was a wet one,
and there was too much lost time to suit me.
Leaving Sydney, I made my way back to the
old locality in the West, and started digging for
gold, with, however, only moderate success; and
I then began doing carpenter’s work, shearing, or
anything else that came to hand, to earn an honest
living.
1 have always regretted the course of life I took
in my younger days, and in closing this crude sketch
of my career, I say to every young man—avoid
crime as you would the devil, for the two are closely
associated, and nothing but evil can come from
association with either one or the other.
Every other member of the gang with which I
was associated came to a violent end. Burke’s
death, and the manner of it, at Dunn’s Plains, I
have already described, O’Meally was shot dead
by Mr. Campbell, at Goimbla; Gilbert was shot by
the police at Binabong; Hall was shot —literally rid-
dled with bullets —by the police, near Forbes; and
Dunn (who joined the gang after I had left them)
was wounded and captured near Dubbo, and brought
to Sydney, where he was tried, convicted, and
hanged. That death by shooting or hanging would
have been my fate, also, is undoubted, if I had not,
in the way described, broken away from the gang
and been prevailed upon to give myself up to jus-
tice.
How bitterly I regretted in after life the mad
folly that led me to join the gang, and pursue un-
lawful courses, no one but myself can know; and to


the young men in tne bush I specially appeal most
solemnly and earnestly to guard against the first
false step. It was tne love of excitement and
change that first led me into wrong paths, and I
have no one but myself to blame for the trouble'and
pain and sorrow that overshadowed my life. Let
young men —and old men, too, for that matter—
taxe warning from my experience. They may find-
excitement in wrongdoing, but no satisfaction; and
sooner or later their sins must find them out, and
the punishment which is inevitable will fall upon
them.
The End.


Selected List of Boohs
Published by the
N.B.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
m GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


The Lock of
the Native
Born,
By Arthur John Barry,
A nlhor of “ Steve Brown' .s Bmiyip,’
“ In the Great Deep," die.
Illustrated Paper Cover, Is.
(postage 3d.)
Captain Barry’s latest story is well worth a careful
perusal, for the adventures of his hero, hy sea and land,
are full of incident, and, moreover, the hook is doubly
interesting on account of tho side lights it throws on
things Australian.
There is abundance of character sketching which
always bears tho imprint of tho master baud, and,
altogether, “The Luck of tho Native Born” is well
worth its money.
Author of " The. Itoarinq Fifties," “ The Golden Shanty,"
“ The Gold Stealers," die.
Jllustrateil by W. J. 1 Veston.
Illustrated Paper Cover, Is. (postage 3d.)
This ia tho story of a deadbeat who engages himself
to a travelling showman as Darwin’s Missing Link.
Ilia experiences are novel and decidedly funny; his
adventures are exciting in tho extreme, and his tight
corners particularly awkward.
Edward Dyson has written amusing hooks before,
but hero ho excels himself. Readers will find tho
modest shilling a good investment.
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
The Missing Link,
By Edward Dyson,
476 George Street, Sydney.
.AND ALL BRANCHES.


the Never Never,
On the Fringe of
A plain, unvarnished tale of
the back blocks during the early
forties. A tale whose characters
live and move in such a way
as to bring conviction to the
By H. K. Bloxham.
With frontispiece.
(Crown 8vo„ Cloth 1/. postage 4d.)
reader. And the secret of it all is that the principals
in tho story did actually enact the parts allotted to
them, for most of them aro well known to many an old
resident. But life in those days was not wanting in its
dash of daring, and accordingly we have an exciting
race for land, a scrimmage with the blacks, and a
4 ‘Bail-up” by a noted bushranger, who in turn is out-
witted and captured by tho heroine. Send a copy up
to tho pater at tho old homestead—he’ll enjoy it, and
thank you for remembering him.
Sydney Morning Herald: —
“A vivid etory of stirring times, well told.”
Daily Telegraph ;—
"A capital Inmk fur those who cure about the romance of the old
pioneering*
Melbourne Age :—
"Written liy 11 man who knows his subject thoroughly, and can
use his experiences to some purpose in tile Hold of fiction.”
The Leader (Mtdb.) „• —
"A bright and readable story, which will bo read with pleasure.”
Town and Country Journal: —
“A moat graphic account of the early pioneering days.”
The Bulletin :
“Congratulation to tile author The kind of Australian
fiction we have been wanting tor a long time.”
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 George Street, Sydney.
AND AtiJj BRANCHES.


Seafarers,
By Ghas D. Websdale.
With illustrations hy J. Mum Adld.
Crown Bvo, Cloth 2/- (postage sd]
New Popular Edition Paper, 1/-
(postage 3d)
Most old sailors have the knack
of spinning yarns that smell o’
the sea, but few of them come up
to the “Seafarers’” standard.
Our Members of Parliament who
wish to encourage the formation
of an Australian Navy should
present their hoy friends with a Copy of “Seafarers,” and wo venture
to say that nine out of every ten of the youthful readers would decide
to go to sea, especially if jthey could be guaranteed such wonderful
luclc as befell the hero in tliia yarn. But although wo can’t all afford
to go to sea, wo can at least afford the modest sum asked for this
book.
The Bulletin: —
“An excellent boy’s yarn This is the book to encourage-
an Australian Naval spirit.”
mm-
u-
*£'■
Three Years with
Thunderbolt.
Edited by Ambrose Pratt.
With illustrations by Peiiut F. S. Spkncr.
Crown Bvo, Cloth, 2/-(postage sd)
Paper, Is. (postage 3d)
Rushranging stories, like far-off
fields, are ever green, and when the
bushranger has a noted personality
and is not 'h mere robber, there is
an added charm attached to the tale.
fhmfeitbi) IsSlffifi?
:r. ■'
* ■!
The World's News: —
“The publishers tire to bo congratulated on this essentially Aus-
tralian work, which cannot fail to meet the success it deserves.”
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 George Street, Sydney.
AND ALL BRANCHES.


Situ
1
i.C'W
;f--v\>.^
JW
4|-\'%- fk'j
3Lf
FOR LIFE
For Life AND
Dad In Politics
By Steele Rudd,
Author of "The Poor Parson," "On Our
Selection," ‘* Our N etc Set action, " "Sunih/t
Selection,' " Back at Uw Selection .’’'
Each Book has 12 Full-png-o Illustration*
Illustrated Paper Cover.
PRICE i/- each ( Post Free 1/3
Or combined in Full Cloth, 3/6;
Post Free, 3/10.
Is the story of a suspect accused of a triple murder,
who is required to prove his alibi under police
escort. The Law has made up its mind that the
man under arrest is guilty, mid his Right for Life,
against overwhelming odds, makes one of the most
interesting tales imaginable.
DAD IN POLITICS
Is the same good old Dad
that wo mot so long ago On
Our Selection, with this
difference, that, in his now
surroundings, he is infinitely
funnier than before, and his
antics in “The House”
make you laugh till you
cry.
The illustrations are nil by that
well-known artist, H. J. Wbstoh,
and form a feature of the Books.
Nearly the whole of the first
edition was subscribed by the
trade before publication.
i
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 George Street, Sydney.
AND ALL BRANCHES,


The Surprising
Adventures of
Bridget
McSweeney,
By Thos. E. Spencer,
Author of lt Jlow McDougalL Topped
the Score."
PRICE, Is. (postage 3d.)
Those who have ali’eacty made the acquaintance of Mrs. McSwceney
and know how entertaining she is will be pleased to meet her again.
She is more charming than ever. Order early.
The Harbour Guide.
With Coloured Folding Maps of Sydney Harbour and
Tramway Systcnij and numerous illustrations.
Cnoum Bvo, Papetf cover, 6d.
(postage, 2d.).
AVe are ail proud of Our Harbour,
and justly so, and yet, strange to
say, many of those who talk a
good deal about it, don’t know much
about it. Well, here in the best
guide that has been published to
date. It will enable yon to go all
round the Harbour, from Parramatta
to the Heads, without a guide,
chiefly because it is arranged on an
intelligent plan, and the informa-
tion regarding the various beauty
spots is thoroughly reliable. Illus-
trations abound, and everything you
ought to know is there.
J nAUratP i S f CO« C, -*
$
m
* _ CADBURV& t COCOA
aSmjffl
ft?
Surprising
\m'entires ;
SifeSs
t'S: r
m
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 George Street, Sydney.
AND Atth BRANCHES.


SYDNEY ILLUSTRATED.
A Panoramic View, showing the whole of
Sydney Harbour and the Principal Features
of the Queen City of the South at a glance.
The reproduction is from a photograph supplied by the N.S.W.
Government, and is the best bit of work seen this side the Hue.
It is printed on perfection plate paper,
Measures nearly nine feet in length,
Folds up into 12in, x 9in.,
And is neatly bound in art board, blocked in gold.
A better present for posting to the Old Country could not be found.
Sunday Times (Sydney).—" The best thing of its kind ever produced
in Australia.’'
PRICE 2/-.
SCENIC SYDNEY
and HARBOUR
A Panoramic View of Sydney, taken front
North Shore.
Length six feet, folding up into lain, x 9in. p
bound in limp art frieze, blocked in gold.
A really fine piece of photographic reproduction, printed on plate
paper, and showing the Harbour from the Heads to the Parramatta
River. The detail is wonderful and the whole picture forms a
splendid memento of Sydney.
PRICE i/-.
N.S.W. Boolksta.il Gomisany
476 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
AND ALL BRANCHES.


NEW EDITION.
The Spring
Cleaning,
By Mrs. Bridget McSweeney
(Thomas E. Spencer)
Author of '‘How HlcDonyalL Topped
the. Score.”
With 6 full-page illustrations
by Cotton.
Paper Cover, Price I/- Post free, 1/3.
Mr. Spender’s versatility is one of his chief charms, and
Mrs, McSwcenuy is his happy medium. ' Her experience,
told in her own inimitable way, keep you rippling with
laughter from cover to cover, and although the book contains
174 pages, one is inclined to ask for more. Each sketch is
complete in itself and admirably fitted for reading or
recitation.
Sydney Morning Herald.— “ Mrs. Bridget MoSwoeuey is a
delightful old lady, and her surprising adventures are told
with much dramatic power.”
Daily Telegraph. —“ The breezy humour is always
appreciated.”
Note. -The Spring Cleaning ” and “ How MeDongall Topped
the Score ” may be had in a combined volume, bound
in full cloth, for 3s. 6d.
Suitable for presentation.
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 George Street, Sydney.
AND ALE BRANCHES.
I
ii
,r“-5 iv.ijiyjiccl*


THIRD EDITION.
“The Bulletin Reciter”
Price, 1/- j Post Free, 1/5.
This volume contains the cream of the recitations
■that have appeared in the columns of “ The Bulletin ” for
the past 20 years.
Originally published at 5/-, this book commanded a
very large sale. By arrangement with the proprietors we
.are enabled to place before our clients this book at the
popular price of
ONE SHILLING.
Note some of the Authors:
Will H. Ogilvie
Thos. E. Spencer
Edward Dyson
E. J. DEMPSEY
G. Essex Evans
Victor J. Daley
E. J. Brady
Arthur H. Adams
W. T. Goodge
John Farrell
Hugh McCrae
A. B. Patterson
Henry Lawson
And Hundreds of others.
The whole illustrated by the leading artists of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 Qeorge Street, Sydney,
AND ALL BRANCHES AND BOOKSELLERS.


TON’life
rm.
NKW EDITION.
How McDougall
Topped the Score
and Other Verses,
By Thomas E, Spencer.
With 6 full-page illustrations by
Lionet, Lindsay.
Paper Cover, Price I/-. Post Free, 1/3.
This scries of roc
popular collection tin
majority of tbe pi
specially adapted fo
The firsb edition was
cheap edition should
word The Australian in praise of
“MoDougali,” and ho is to bo found in splendid company.
JfJglion, the moat
Valia. The
and
tation
wewe
6
gpi'
illy
Ure
plat
the
athenng
amo
yJ/SBua of this
r a Irouschold
World'* News.— “This admirable work is of a very high
standard-”
Sydney Morning Herald. —“ A fine collection of first-class
recitations.”
Daily Telegraph. —“ Sure to he popular.”
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY,
476 George Street, Sydney.
and all branches.


SELLING LIKE ‘RIPE CHERRIES.
Att&trebliam Book®
PRINTED, WRITTEN, and ILLUSTRATED in AUSTRALIA.
Published at a cheap rate to enable the multitude to buy them.
Steel Rudd's.. The Poor Parson .. .. Cloth 3/6, post free 3/11
N B S a W # Bookstall Go,,
476 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
And All Branches and Booksellers.
