

J|VP p
John McDouall Stuart’s
Transcontinental Expedition
JUBILEE CELEBRATION BANQUET.
Reprinted from the Pfpceedings of the Royal Geographical Society
of AnSlralasia, South Australian Branch (Vol. XIV.)


John McDouall Stuart’s Transcontinental
Expedition.
JUBILEE CELEBRATION BANQUET.
On July 25, 1912, a public banquet was held in the
bauquetiug-room, Town Hall, Adelaide, in celebration of
the fiftieth anniversary of the day on which John McDouall
Stuart planted his flag on the shore of the Indian Ocean,
having conducted his expedition across the continent of
Australia.
His Excellency the Governor (Admiral Sir
Day Hort Bosanquet, G.C.V10., K.C.8.) presided.
Messrs. W. P. Auld, Stephen King, Heath Nash, and J.
McGorrery, four members of the expedition, were present
as guests, Mr. J. W. Billiatt, the only other surviving mem-
ber, being in England. There were also present the Right
Hon. Sir S. J. Way, Bart. (Chief Justice), the State Premier
(Hon. A. H. Peake), and four other Ministers (Hons. R.
Butler, J. G. Bice, F. W. Young, and T. Pascoe), Mr.
Acting Justice Buchanan, the Mayor of Adelaide (Mr,
Lavington Bonython), Sir E. T. Smith, K.C.M.G.. Sir John
J, Duncan, M.L.C., Hons. J. Lewis, M.L.C., F. S. Wallis,
M.L.C., and J. P. Wilson, M.L.C., the President of the
Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, S.A. branch
(Mr A. W. Piper, K.C.) ; and Messrs. W. H. Tietkens.
David Lindsay, W. Carr-Boyd, and C. Price Conigrave
(later Australian explorers), and about 200 other gentle-
men.
Upon the wall of the banquet-room opposite the Chair-
man was displayed a large may of Central Australia, with
the routes of Stuart’s journeys clearly outlined, and a
number of relics of Stuart and his expeditions were
exhibited.
The toast of ‘ * The King ’ ’ was honored at the instance
.of the Governor. i


The Mayor read apologies for absence and congratu-
lations from the Federal Prime Minister (Right
Hon. A. Fisher), the Federal Minister for Ex-
ternal Affairs (Hon. Josiah Thomas), the State
Attorney-General (Hon. H. Homburg), the Right
Hon. , Sir John Forrest, G.C.M.G. (Australian ex-
plorer), Mr. J. Panton (the President of the Victorian
branch of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia)
Mr. E. H. Newman (a former Secretary of the S.A. branch
of the Geographical Society), and the Secretary of the
Committee (Mr. W. Chambers), on whose behalf Mr. W.
B. Wilkinson wrote: —Mr. Chambers is confined to his bed
with a severe attack of rheumatism, and not only is he
unable to rise, but he cannot hold a pen, otherwise he would
have written to you himself. He desires me to express tc
you how greatly disappointed he feels at being compelled
to forego the opportunity of doing honor to the memory
of the great explorer and the pleasure of meeting the gallant
survivors of the expedition at this historic gathering, and
to ask that you will kindly convey to them his sincere con-
gratulations on their having lived to see the fiftieth anni-
versary of the planting of the Union Jack on the northern
shores of Australia; also to express on his behalf the hope
that they will long be spared to attend the annual celebra-
tions for many years to come.”
The following addresses were delivered: —-
The Mayor (proposing the health of His Excellency
the Governor) —This toast needs no words to commend it
to you. To mention it is to secure for it an enthusiastic
reception. Still, there is a special appropriateness in pro-
posing the toast on an occasion connected with exploration.
His Excellency may not have done any actual exploratory
work in South Australia, but he has been a great traveller,
He knows the State from Mount Gambier on the east to
Fowler’s Bay on the west, and from the Southern Ocean
in the south to Oodnadatta in the north. There are few
people in South Australia who are as familiar with its vary-
ing characteristics as their Governor, and even Flinders, the
great navigator who explored these waters, knew much less
than his Excellency knows about our coastline. And in
proportion to the miles travelled has grown the popularity
of his Excellency, until to-day it can be said with absolute
truth that never was in South Australia a Governor held in
higher regard than Sir Day Bosanquet, who has made our


concerns liis concerns, and who has identified himself with
the interest of this State so completely that we fairly regard
him as one of onr ourselves. Such a representative of
Royalty helps to bind the State to the Throne, and deserves
and has onr enthusiastic esteem.
His Excellency the Governor (responding
to the toast) —I thank the Mayor with all my heart for
the kind words he has used in proposing my health. I
wish that I could think I deserve them, but if I have
done something to help in strengthening the ties between
this State and Great Britain I shall be well satisfied. That
is chiefly, I think, what a Governor is here for. We are
assembled this evening to commemorate the jubilee anni-
versary of that historic day when Stuart and his band of
heroes, having crossed the continent from south to north,
and finally triumphed over all the difficulties and dangers,
had hoisted the Union Jack on the top of the highest tree
in close proximity to the Indian Ocean at a spot which the
explorer named Chambers Bay. That was a spot on the
shore of Van Diemen’s Gulf. The great feat was accom-
plished exactly, nine months after the expedition had left
North Adelaide, nine months of hardship, endurance, and
devotion to duty, which has never been surpassed in the
annals of exploration. The lofty nature of the spirit which
animated the soul of Stuart, and which carried him on
through almost insuperable difficulties and sustained him
in desperate struggle with adverse circumstances, may be
gauged by his own account of his condition shortly after
the successful issue of his efforts when no longer sustained
by the excitement in the completion of his task. At Mount
Hay he wrote in his journal: —“So much exhausted and
so completely done up that I could not speak a word, the
power of speech has completely left me. I was lifted from
the saddle and placed under the shade of a mulga bush. I
can no longer sit on horseback. I gave orders for some of
the party to make a sort of reclining seat, to be carried
between two horses. ’ ’ Further on he wrote: — £ £ On Tuesday
night I certainly was in the grasp of death. A cold, clammy
perspiration with a tremulous motion kept creeping slowly
over my body during the night, and everything near me
had the smell of decaying mortality. I sincerely thank the
Almighty Disposer of events that He in His infinite
mercy gave me strength and courage.. My right hand”—
the one he had injured in starting from Adelaide, when his


horse had trodden on him—“is nearly useless to me.” Total
blindness after sundown, nearly blind all day, my limbs
so weak and painful that I am obliged to be carried about,
my body reduced to that of a living skeleton, and my
strength that of infantile weakness.” Endurance and per-
severance marked every moment of the daring life of this
remarkable man. Eventually the party reached Adelaide,
where an ovation awaited it. Wednesday, January 21, 1863,
was a day to be remembered in the city. It was a universal
holiday, people poured from every quarter. A triumphal
-arch graced the entrance to the assembly rooms where the
banquet was held. Along the line which the procession was
to take banners, hags, and evergreens were displayed, and
various inscriptions were unfurled, “Welcome to Stuart and
party,” “Here the conquering heroes come,” “Welcome
home,” “Honour to the South Australian pioneers.”
The streets were crowded with cheering multitudes,
who had assembled to do honor to Stuart and his
party, those men who had successfully passed through the
hitherto unknown wilds of the Australian interior. The
party appeared in their bush costume, the pack-horses, 41
in number, being led by the members of the expedition.
Addressing the leader, the then Governor, Sir Dominick
Daly, said: —-“I feel, and your fellow-colonists feel, great
pride at the successful completion of what appeared not
only a difficult, but an almost impossible, task; you have
been successful, and it must be confessed that you stand
now the foremost, the very prince of explorers. You have
crossed the great continent and have traced a path which
renders the repetition of the task a mere question of the
purse.” The Mayor of Adelaide (Mr. Thomas-English)
gave an address, in the course of which he said:—“Allow
me to take the opportunity to express my admiration of
the skill, bravery, and perseverance which you have exhi-
bited in carrying your great undertaking to a successful
issue. You have traversed the continent at its greatest
width from south to north. You have planted the flag of
our Empire upon the shores of the Indian Ocean. You have
recrossed the continent, and, thanks to the Almighty Dis-
poser of events, you now stand safe with all your party in
good health before us. ” The South Australian Government
in a very practical way, showed its appreciation of Stuart’s
labors. Parliament voted him £2,000 and allowed him the
use of 1,000 square miles in the interior for a number of
years free of charge. It also gave gratuities to his men.


The Eoyal Geographical Society of London awarded Stuart
its gold medal and presented him with a watch. At this
jubilee celebration, 50 years after the event, although their
leader has passed away, five of his heroic band remain with
us still—William P. Auld, Stephen King, John W. Billiatt,
(in England), Heath Nash, and John McGorrery. The
qualities of a leader were strongly developed in the charac-
ter of McDouall Stuart; even when suffering so severely
from scurvy and from bad eyes as to be incapable of move-
ment during the daytime and of sight after sundown, there
was never at any time the slightest trace of doubt or inde-
cision recorded in his journal as to the next direction of his
journey or the next orders of his party. Extreme caution
consonant with the determined prosecution of the object of
the expedition marked his every order and movement; nevei
sparing himself, ungrudging and unwearying in his efforts
for the safety and comfort of his men, his sense of duty
was profound and was strongly indicated in every page of
his writing. His journal was always written up daily, and
must, therefore, have been a faithful reflex of what at
the moment was passing in his mind. And this great leader
was well served by everyone of his party, who gave unques-
tioned and unquestioning obedience, trust, confidence; these
were the signs of a complete understanding, based upon
mutual esteem and mutual sympathy. Anxiety and respon-
sibility weighed very heavily upon the shoulders of the
leader of such an expedition. It was not only the anxiety
for the selection of the best means for attaining the object.,
for fulfilling the task entrusted to him, but also the heavy
responsibility of the lives of the men committed to his
charge. It was not himself that he had to consider; his
care and thoughtfulness for his men outweighed all other
considerations, and when his own bodily infirmities affected,
his mental power the weight of this responsibility became
well nigh unbearable. And what of the men themselves..
In the journal there was found frequent mention by the
leader of the good qualities of the different members of
the expedition in terms of high commendation and approval.
Hills, wells, and creeks were named after W. P. Auld,
Stephen King, John W. Billiatt, Heath Nash, and John
McGorrery ;in fact, every individual of the party. A leader
who, through such adverse circumstances as these men expe-
rienced, retained his hold upon their confidence, and support
must have not only won, but retained their admiration and
affection, as well as their trust and their obedience. In


•conclusion, I wish long life and many happy returns of the
•day to you, gentlemen, on my right.
Mr. A. W. Piper, K.C. (proposing “The memory of
the late John McDouall Stuart and, the deceased members
•of the party, Messrs. W. D. Kekwick, F. W. Thring, J.
Frew, and F. G. Waterhouse”) —I feel greatly the honor
of having, as President of the Geographical Society, been
-asked to carry on the memory of those brave men on this
jubilee anniversary of their great journey.- I realise the
•encouragement of your sympathy and our common purpose
when I attempt to deal with a great theme. I rejoice in
the presence of so many who took part in the great deed
we are celebrating. While many of us are proudly rejoicing
in the history of great deeds and the memory of great men
as a part of our national inheritance, there are some present
to whom the names represent those who have been living
friends, and whose death they personally mourn. If they
hear to-night a note of joy and exultation in what is said,
it will not be for want of sympathy, but while we mourn
their friend’s death we rejoice for the life they
lived. The central figure is that of McDouall
Stuart, He arrived in South Australia in 1838
-or 1839 —a Scotchman 23 years of age. He had
■not been in the province many years before his name
was coupled with that of that great and gentle man
Captain Charles Sturt. Still under 30 years of age, he
accompanied Sturt on the memorable expedition of 1844-5,
.and served as draftsman. Sturt was the first in history to
bear his tribute to the honesty, industry, and thoroughness
which characterised McDouall Stuart in his work. In 1860,
when the Patron’s medal of the Royal Geographical Society
•of London was awarded to Stuart, Sir Roderick Murchison,
the President of the society, said:—“Sturt taught one of
his subordinates while braving such difficulties and endur-
ing such perils of an exhausting journey to lay down
the precise position of every mountain, valley, and river,
and every remarkable landmark or scrub which separates
those oases which were fertilised by fresh water springs.”
I think Stuart learned from Sturt a great deal more than
that. Stuart had responsibility in the charge of Fort Grey,
and he could never have forgotten the beneficence of over-
ruling Providence in connection with Depot Glen, where
for five months in 1845 Sturt and his party were imprisoned
-during the hot summer in what, compared with the country
surrounding it, might be looked upon as a veritable Para-


dise. Sturt wrote of it: —“Providence had in its all-wise
purposes guided us to the only spot in that widespread
desert where our wants could have been permanently sup-
plied, but had there stayed our further progress into a
region that almost appears to be forbidden ground. ’’ In his
life of travel Stuart was undaunted by hunger, thirst, the
hostility of the natives, bad sight, serious illness, or the
magnitude of his undertakings, and displayed all the
patience necessary to make his operations successful. He
seems never to have been depressed by difficulties, but to
have had the quality of irrepressible determination. Diffi-
culties of the past were forgotten except in remembering
that he had conquered them. For close upon five years—
from May, 1858, to December, 1862 —he may be said to
have continuously applied himself to the task of making
known the mysteries of this great continent. If he was not
always in the field during that time, the intermissions were
only such as would enable him to make plans after one
expedition before he entered upon the next. His irrepres-
sible disposition made him a masterful man, but the qualities
that made him masterful enabled him not only to succeed
for himself, but to carry through all his expeditions in such
a manner that he never lost the life of a follower. He had
been near to death’s door himself, but in his first expedition
he had had to learn the art of holding up his party, because
that party consisted of only one white man. Three days
before reaching Streaky Bay the pair had only three meals
left and 100 miles to travel. Stuart’s work was charac-
terised by prudence and thoroughness. We can never recall
the annals of exploration without recollecting the forbear-
ance which he and so many Australian explorers have shown
with respect to the aborigines. Though Stuart may have
sometimes appeared a hard taskmaster, he was only neces-
sarily strict, and was always most sympathetic with his
men. It is a tribute to his leadership that 50 years after
the successful accomplishment of his mission and 46 years
after his death, his memory is so dear to those sitting near
me who were associated with him in that memorable journey
—Stuart was not unfeeling or unsentimental. His affec-
tionate regard for Captain Sturt was lasting. On reaching
the centre of the continent Stuart remembered his former
leader’s ambition to gain that point. He had shared in
Sturt’s last futile endeavor, and when in 1860 Stuart was
the first white man to place his foot on the central mount
he selflessly named it, not as it is now known, but ‘ ‘ Central


Mount Sturt,” “after,” as he recorded, “my excellent and
esteemed commander of the expedition of 1844-5, Captain
Sturt, as a mark of gratitude for the great kindness I re-
ceived from him during that journey.” When a year later
he reached the ‘ ‘ farthest north ’ ’ of his new endeavor, again
he named the place he attained to ‘ ‘ Sturt’s Plains, ” “ after ’ ’
(again Stuart’s words) “the venerable father of Australian
exploration and my esteemed commander.” In naming the
centre of the continent Stuart remembered Sturt’s own
recorded ambition, “to have left the flag of my native
country flying over it.” It was a beautiful and self-denying
tribute to Sturt, who wrote in 1846:—“Let any man lay
the map of Australia before him and regard the blank left
upon its surface, and then let me ask him if it would not
be an honorable achievement to be the first to place foot:
in its centre.” The relations between Sturt and Stuart
form a noble passage in our history. Stuart was actuated
by great and noble purposes. At the end of his second
journey, 1859, when Stuart recorded his “long-cherished
desire to explore the interior of the province,” he
remarked, “should I, from my friends’ (Messrs.
Chambers and Finke’s) kindness and liberality be
again entrusted as leader of the contemplated ex-
pedition to the northwest coast, I hope I shall
be enabled, by the assistance of Divine Providence,
to realise all their expectations and confer the benefit on
my fellow-men of opening up a line for rail and telegraphic
communication with England.” It was this self-denying
and noble purpose, the good of others, that Stuart kept
constantly before him. But it is noteworthy that the pro-
posal by Captain Sturt to cross Australia had been abso-
lutely prohibited by Lord Stanley, the Secretary of State
for the Colonies, in 1843. The difficulties were enormous
for, according to Captain Sturt, “the journeys of Mr. Eyre
had proved the impracticability of a direct northerly course
from Mount Arden.” If you will look at the map sus-
pended on the wall, however, you will observe that Stuart’s
successful route was practically that direct northerly course
from Mount Arden. In June, 1861, he went out again and
got still farther north to Sturt’s Plains, and thus was
further north than the southern part of the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, which Burke had reached in the previous Feb-
ruary, and which McKinlay reached at the beginning of
1862. Stuart arrived back in Adelaide in September, and
by the end of October a new expedition was in the field,


with their friends, the present survivors, as members. And
50 years ago, on July 24, Stuart was able to dip his fingers
in the tidal waters of the Indian Ocean at the completion
of his journey. He wished to reach the mouth of the Ade-
laide River, but found the way hard and cruel for the
horses. So it was that on July 25 he, with his band of ten
men, celebrated the successful completion of what must be
regarded as one of the greatest events in the history of die
last century. They could imagine the scene at the foot of
the tree as they hoisted the flag and gave three cheers, and
Mr. Kekwick congratulated the leader on his success. Stuart
wrote: —“Thus have I, through the instrumentality of Pro-
vidence, been led to accomplish the great object of the
expedition.” Stuart’s object was not to accomplish a deed
for the perpetuation of his name, but to give to his fellow-
citizens in Australia the benefit of communication by tele-
graph and rail with the mother country. I wonder some-
times whether we have not, through the very successes of
our predecessors, lost the perspective of the things they
did; whether Australia to-day can fully realise the greatness
of Sturt’s or of Stuart’s undertakings. We have cable-
grams and telegrams coming across Australia every moment.
We know that one can ride, drive, motor, or cycle from one
end of the continent to the other, and never be a day with-
out water, and perhaps not a day without food. It was
not so when Stuart went out, and the hazard of his ventures
was then realised by everyone more completely than we of
to-day can realise it. If we examine the great journeys of
history we shall find that Stuart’s was one of the longest.
Great were its difficulties —the forbidding country, the need
to be able to fall back on the last camp, the need to provide
for water and forage, and Australia was a continent where
the natives, even when not hostile, were people from whom
no aid could be expected. The greatness of Stuart’s under-
takings was recognised by the Royal Geographical Society
of London, which usually bestowed only two medals each
year. That society gave Stuart a gold watch—an extra
award —in 1858 and the Patron’s gold medal in 1860,
together a meed of recognition that had only previously been
accorded in one other instance —to David Livingstone, the
great African explorer. I have naturally dwelt upon the
work and character of the leader, we do not honor less
the memory of Stuart’s companions and assistants. Kekwick
had been closely associated with Stuart on four expeditions.
Thring had accompanied him on one previous occasion.


Frew and Waterhouse were making their first expedition.
All, however, took on themselves the burdens of the last
triumphant journey, and all shared in the honor. After
his success, having gone back to England, Stuart was still
determined to work out the calculations necessary to secure
the construction of the overland telegraph line, a work it
took ten years to complete. The citizens of to-day are the
inheritors of the fruit of the labors of the explorers, and
upon us rests the duty of sustaining the inspiration which
the knowledge of that great work imparts. I ask those
present who are of a younger generation than the survivors
of the party, those who, like myself, were unborn when
they were already making history, to pledge themselves that
in drinking this toast they will pass on undiminished, and
will help to develop, the advantages and resources of
nature’s gifts, which Stuart and his followers have unfolded
to our knowledge. I ask you to drink tne toast as a pledge
to the lasting memory in Australia of Stuart and his party
and if that memory live in Australia it will live throughout
the world.
The Toast was drunk in silence.
The Premier, Hon. A. H. Peake (proposing
“The Survivors”) —There is a time-honored saying, “That
peace hath her victories as well as war.” That is full of
meaning. No one would wish to disparage the valiant feats
that have been performed by the armies and navies of
Britain by which the Empire has been built and maintained,
and glory won for the flag of which we are so proud. Think
of the men who sailed the Spanish Main intent on adventure
and discovery—the seamen from the banks of the Thames,
the Plym, and Dart, of whom it has been said “they went
self-taught and self-directed, with no impulse but what was
beating in their own royal hearts, went out across the
unknown seas, fighting, discovering, colonising, and graved
•out channels, paving them with their bones, through which
the commerce and enterprise of England has flowed out all
over the world.” These men were the roadmakers of the
world, establishing highways in unknown regions and path;
through the wilderness. But we are proud to know that
Australia has been the scene of exploits which for bravery
and endurance have been rarely surpassed. The roll of
honor is great indeed. The names of Dampier, Cook, and
Flinders come to one’s mind, and Shackleton and Mawson
might be mentioned. They, with Sturt, Mitchell, Eyre,


Leichhardt, Burke and Wills, John Forrest, and John
McDouall Stuart and his brave companions, make a glorious
constellation. Stuart’s explorations and discoveries formed
a really great achievement, and of him we feel particularly
proud, because to great degree he was a South Australian,
for he spent many years in the State. Stuart’s work cleared
the track and paved the way for a great work, the overland
telegraph, which links us up with the old world. Thrilling
tales might be told of his earlier explorations and dis-
coveries. In connection with one expedition he remembered
a tale told by Ben Head. The food supplies had been
reduced to two or three parrots, and Head, feeling the pangs
of hunger very keenly, surreptitiously took one of the
parrots and ate it. This was discovered, and Head was
court-martialled, because it was a very serious offence to
make inroads upon the commissariat of the famine-stricken
party. Head was found guilty, and Stuart, when
calling him up for sentence, asked him if he knew
the penalty was death. “I know it,” said Head, “but if
you sentence me for that, may the Lord have mercy on your
soul.” The year 1861 was that in which Stuart set out
intrepid and undismayed with the band of men who were
to share the honors of the success with him. Fifty years ago
this very day they planted the Union Jack —which had
been given to them by Miss Chambers —on the northern
coast of the immense continent. The great attempt had been-
achieved, the desert had been conquered, Australia had been
crossed, and Stuart’s high place is amongst Australia’s
heroes fixed. In that dreadful return, when for hundreds
of miles the sick leader had to be carried in a litter, we may
catch a glimpse of the man’s companions—and among them,
were the survivors whom we have with us to-night. They
had nursed and attended him with deep affection and devo-
tion. In all Stuart’s honor of paving the way for the over-
land telegraph that was to link South Australia with the
old world, Stuart’s companions are entitled to share. What
could he have done without them ? Stuart was always ready
to acknowledge his indebtedness. They were truly a band
of brothers, and to-day their names are familiar in the
mouths of the people as household words. In token of his
approbation of his men for their care he had named land-
marks after his followers. Practically all the members of
the party had had their names indissolubly associated with
the chief places upon the overland route —a tribute from
their own leader. Stuart has said of them —“My party had


conducted themselves throughout this long and trying jour-
ney to my entire satisfaction. During my severe illness
every attention and sympathy were shown to me by everyone
in the party.” Five of the intrepid company, viz., Stuart.
Kekwiek, Thring, Waterhouse, and Frew have crossed the
bar, but they could tell us nothing of the “Sweet fields
beyond the swelling flood,” for from that happy bourne no
traveller returns. Happily, five remain to celebrate the
jubilee, and we can enter into their feelings as they strip
their sleeves and show the scars and remember what
feats they did that day.' W. P. Auld, Stephen King, and
Heath Nash live with us in Adelaide, John McGorrery dwells,
on the West Coast, and J. W. Billiatt is in England. We
honor them for their noble deeds—deeds which helped to
make the State, the Commonwealth, and the Empire, and
we trust that the last years of the survivors may be full of
comfort and happiness. The statue in Victoria-square
stands as a monument to commemorate a great and noble
achievement. There are in South Australia certain hundreds
named after Stuart, Waterhouse, King, and Nash. The
Government intends that new hundreds east of the Murray,
shortly to be thrown open, shall be named in honor of the
remaining members of the party. The Government con-
siders that it will be interpreting the feelings of South Aus-
tralians aright when in this jubilee year it places on the
Estimates —as it intends to do —a sum of money for still
further recognising the splendid services of the survivors
The previous toast was drunk in silence. But I will ask
you to drink with the greatest enthusiasm to the health
of the survivors. I hope they will long be associated with
this important celebration.
His Excellency the Governor— lt is my
privilege to hand to each of the survivors present to-night a
gold medal, which has been provided by citizens in honor
of this auspicious occasion. Stuart had a wonderful power
of transmitting his own characteristics to his followers, but
that power would have been useless unless those men had
great minds capable of appreciating the qualities exhibited
by their leader, and of showing they had learnt how to use
those qualities to the advantage of the expedition.
His Excellency presented the medals amid loud and
prolonged cheers.
Messrs. Auld, King, Nash, and McGorrery, who were
deeply moved, bowed their acknowledgments.


The Hon. J. Lewis, M.L.C., (proposing “Other Aus-
tralian explorers”)—The duty has been assigned to me of
proposing “Other Australian explorers.” Whilst I fully
participate in the admiration with which explorers’ merits
are universally acknowledged, I confess that I shrink from
the task now imposed upon me from a sense of my inability
to do justice to it in language commensurate with the occa-
.sion. Before submitting the toast I wish to thank your
Excellency for your kindness in presiding this evening. I
think I am echoing the sentiments, of the survivors, and of
all who are present to-night, in stating that we are very
grateful to your Excellency for assisting us in the way in
which you have done. I also thank the citizens who have
•come forward on this occasion to commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of John McDouall Stuart’s crossing the con-
tinent of Australia. None but those who know the country
can realise the arduous task which he performed. John
McDouall Stuart was not only an explorer, but he was also
a very accurate surveyor. There was no difficulty on open-
ing his diary in locating the various places from the descrip
tions given by him. Mr. W. Harvey, one of the surveyors
of the overland constructing party, whom I met north of
Attack Greek, told me that, although they were 1y 2 miles
■ out at Daly Waters, he was not sure that Stuart was wrong.
He thought it very probable that he was wrong and that
Stuart was right. This speaks wonders for a man who made
a flying survey through the country that he should lay his
positions down so accurately. In 1844 Stuart gained his
first experiences under the guidance of Captain Sturt, whose
expedition he accompanied in the capacity of draughtsman.
The first of his own expeditions was made in the year 1858,
from May to September, when he explored in the north-west.
He made his second expedition in 1859, from April to July,
in the vicinity of Lake Torrens. In November, 1859, he
made another expedition in the vicinity of Lake Torrens,
returning in January, 1860. Stuart’s fourth expedition
when he reached the centre of the continent, occupied from
March to September, 1860. He went out to Mount Denison
•on the other side on the McDonnell Ranges, with Kekwick
and Ben Head. They left Stuart’s Creek with half rations
for four months. The trip occupied six months, so one can
imagine the hardships they had to endure. Ben Head, at
the start, was a man of nearly sixteen stone in weight, but
when he returned he was only a little over eight stone. I
iknew him very well, and I don’t think he ever regained his


weight. From November, 1860, to September, 1861, Stuart
was again away exploring. In December, 1861, Stuart
started on his successful expedition across the continent of
Australia, which took him just over a year, including the
return journey. He was a man of real true grit, and, al-
though he got very ill after crossing the continent, he was
always the first to travel in search of water, and the last to-
consider himself as far as food and comfort were concerned..
Never before has an explorer travelled the distance that h
did in unknown country without making a mistake or losing
some of his followers. Of course, Livingstone, Stanley, and
V. L. Cameron had perilous journeys through Africa, but
in that country they had plenty of food and water at easy
distances, and always natives to carry their stores. In Aus-
tralia, especially on the track which Stuart took from Ade-
laide to Van Dieman’s Gulf, there were long stretches of
exceptionally dry country, with little food to be got en
route, and no assistance from the natives. Nowadays it is
so much easier to travel over dry belts of country, because
with a well-trained camel it is possible to traverse from two
to three hundred miles without water. I think, if I remem-
ber rightly, Ernest Giles travelled 321 miles in 20 days
without water. Had Stuart had the advantage of camels
he would have made the trip across the continent many
years before he did. It may be a coincidence, but it is never-
theless a fact, that he struck nearly all the main waters
going through from Stuart’s Creek to Van Diemen’s Gulf.
Well may it be said of John McDouall Stuart, without dis-
paragement to his brother explorers, that he was the prince
of explorers, and I am exceedingly pleased to be present
this evening to commemorate this fiftieth anniversary and
do honor to such a great explorer. Captain Charles
Sturt commenced his career as an explorer in the year
1828, when he started on an expedition down the Macquarie
River and into the far west country of New South Wales.
He was absent four months and two weeks and explored
1,272 miles. Sturt left Sydney on the 3rd November, 1829.
on an expedition down the Murrumbidgee and Murray
Rivers. He travelled down the river in canvas boats, and
explored a distance of 1,950 miles. Sturt surveyed the
Murray as he went down, and marked it on a plan, which
has been recognised as correct by more recent surveyors. He
was away nearly six months, and it was a most arduous
task for anyone to undertake in a new and unexplored land.
In 1844 Captain Sturt went from Adelaide to Menindie and


through the Barrier (only four miles to the north-east of:
the Broken Hill Mines). Piesse’s Knob was erected by
Sturt, and in his journal, when travelling through this
country, he describes it as highly mineralised. Sturt took
a boat with him on this expedition, as he thought there was
an inland sea. This boat was left at Flood’s Creek, just
north of the Barrier, and was there for many years until
carried away by flood water and broken up. The party was
stuck up at Depot Glen for between seven and eight months.
The weather was so hot that the nails dropped out of the
boxes, combs and toothbrushes were split with the heat,
finger and toe nails became brittle and dropped off to the
quick, and it was impossible to write above ground, so they
excavated a hole and covered it with boughs and earth, and
there Captain Sturt did his writing. lie made many trips
from Depot Glen to the north, across the stony plains, and
struck Cooper’s Creek. His rations were not sufficient to
allow him to continue his journey, and therefore he had to
beat a retreat. Edward John Eyre started from Adelaide
-on the 18th June, 1840, on his overland journey to King
George’s Sound. He started with three men and two black
boys. Two of the men returned from Fowler’s Bay, and
■one (his overseer) went on with him. The party consisted,
after they left Fowler’s Bay, of one native boy belonging
to AVestern Australia, two native boys from this side, his
overseer, and himself. The two native boys he took from
South Australia killed his only companion and robbed the
camp of rations. Eyre was left with the one native boy from
AVestern Australia. They struggled along for very many
miles, when they were picked up by a whaler, who attended
to Eyre’s wants, clothed and fed him and the black boy
and kept him for some week or two, and then equipped him,
and he started away on foot again and made King
George’s Sound on the 7th July, 1841, after travelling a
■distance of about 1,300 miles. George Grey made a won-
derful trip along the west coast of Australia. I think, if
I remember rightly, he travelled thirty days on foot, gather-
ing what little native food he could, and he arrived at
Perth in a very exhausted condition. Dr. Leichhardt made
the celebrated trip from Moreton Bay to Port Essingtou,
leaving Brisbane in September, 1844, and arriving at Port
Essington in December, 1845, covering a distance of 3,000
miles in one year and three months. I now propose ‘ ‘ Other
Australian Explorers,” those men who have undertaken
perilous journeys through hitherto untrodden -wilds of Aus-


tralia, who have had an enthusiasm unabated by every dis-
-couragement, a perseverance unextinguished by trials and
hardships which ordinary minds would have despaired
of surmounting, and a talent which guided and led on to
the full and final achievement, coupling with the name of
John McDouall Stuart those of Captain Charles Sturt,
Edward John Eyre, Dr. L, Leichhardt, Ernest Giles, David
Oarnegie, Sir John Forrest, L. A. Wells, David Lindsay,
W. H. Tietkens, Sir George Grey and P. E. Warburton.
Mr. W. H. Tietkens (responding)—Other Aus-
tralian Explorers” comprise a small band, of which I am
a humble member, and which has gone forth at various
times into the wilds of the waterless deserts of the interior
and has opened up New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland,
and Western Australia, and has crossed this State from
south to north, from sea to sea. I thank you on behalf of
them all. Of those who have gone out and have not re-
turned it might well be said, in the words of Chesterton—
‘ ‘ These men may light the mystery
Of mastery or victory.
And these ride high in history,
But these shall not return.”
For those silent ones I thank you. Again, for those
who have at various times achieved success for their
country in smaller, yet none the less important endeavors,
I thank you.
Mr. David Lindsay (also responding)“On this
iaistoric occasion I esteem it a great honor to be asked to
respond, with my fellow-explorer, Mr. Tietkens, to the
toast of “Other Explorers,” so ably put before you by the
Hon. Mr. Lewis, one who knows from experience the diffi-
culties and hardships that attend the exploration of the
drier regions of Australia. I desire to add my tribute to
the great work accomplished by Stuart and the gallant
members of his party—heroes every one of them —in whose
honor we are assembled to-night. I had not the pleasure
of meeting Stuart, being too young at the time of his re-
turn, but some members of his party have been lifelong
friends, especially Steve King, with whom in my youth I
was associated in survey work, and for whom as a man and
a bushman I had and have the greatest admiration. Having
crossed and recrossed the routes followed by Stuart T have
always been impressed with the accuracy of his locations


and descriptions of the country. The trees marked
J.M.D.S. in many places across the continent were sure
marks, and were considered almost sacred by hush men and
others. I well remember a tree that was marked at Daly
Waters. The Inspector of Telegraphs, the late Mr. J. A..
G. Little, had so much regard for this tree that, finding
that a Telegraph employe had cut his own initials on the
same tree, he immediately discharged the man. There were
some who could hardly believe that Stuart had really
reached the sea, but those who knew Stuart and his men
were quite satisfied, and we in Port Darwin were ever on the
look-out for evidence to support their report. My chief,
Mr. Gr. R. McMinn, sent me out in 1879 to search for traces.
I went east to the Mary River and followed that stream
down until it lost itself in the great swamps that gave
Stuart so much trouble. Unfortunately it was late in the
season, October, and the rains had set in. Not desiring to
share the experiences of McKinlay by being hemmed in by
uncrossable swamps, I returned, having formed the opinion
that Stuart had not touched the Adelaide River, and must
have touched the coast further east than had been supposed.
This was eventually proved correct, as, at the end of 1883, a
native reported having found the tree, and conducted a
volunteer party, which sailed from Darwin to it. It was
afterwards visited and photographed by Mr. Foelsche, the
letters showing plainly. That Stuart had good seasons does
not detract in the slightest from the merits of his great work,
and no praise is too great for the dogged, persistent determi-
nation, not only on his part, but also of his loyal comrades,
in the difficult task of travelling right across the continent
and back to Adelaide. It speaks volumes for the ability of
the leader to hold his party together during all those
wearying months of semi-starvation and sickness. And also
for the character of the men who so manfully stuck to him
and obeyed his every wish—all honor to them. It may be
interesting to note that as Stuart had found the only direct
central route south to north, so did John Forrest find the
only west to east route that could be negotiated with horses.
These two main lines left great spaces on the map, some
found by later explorers to be waterless wastes, which even
with camels it was difficult to cross. Remember Warbur-
ton’s eventful trip and Ernest Giles’ great dash in the
attempt to cross north of Forrest’s track with horses. No-
man could have shown greater pluck and determination
than did Giles on that journey. You will remember that


when his companion, Gibson, set out to return to tne camp
with the horses that Giles was 30 miles from “The Kegs.”
Gibson left two gallons of water in one keg. Giles had
only one pint of water during that 30-mile walk and no
food. Shouldering the keg, which with the other things he
was carrying weighed about 50 lb., for six days he
struggled on in a half-unconscious condition with only 1 lb.
of dried horseflesh. For the last 20 miles he had no water.
This feat of endurance has never, I think, been surpassed,
not even by Eyre on his long march around the Great Aus-
tralian Bight. Gibson was lost. The records of Australian
exploration are singularly free from loss of life, for if we
except Leichhardt’s Expedition, which was totally lost and
whose last resting-place is unknown, and Kennedy’s disas-
trous trip in North Queensland, but few exploring parties
have lost any or more than one member of the party. This
may be attributed to the fine class of men and the wise
judgment of their leaders. Reference has been made to
the easy work with camels as compared with horses. May
I venture the opinion that Stuart could not have accom-
plished his last great work with camels. Certainly camels
would have been better than horses as far north as Powell’s
Creek, but not beyond that, owing to the absence of suitable
feed for camels and the prevalence of poison bushes. It is
certain they could not have traversed the swampy country
between the Mary River and the coast. The explorations
of more recent explorers could not have been done with
horses. Many of you gathered here to-night can scarcely
realise the great strain on a leader, and the perseverance
and determination required to overcome the obstacles pre-
sented by Nature in her worst moods; but occasions like this
make us feci our work in wresting from Nature her secrets
has been appreciated, and compensate us for our many
trials and hardships. Truly we are all proud to see our
names written across the map of Australia, and to know
that we have done our best as pathfinders in this, our great
country. Yet sometimes we feel that we are forgotten. For
instance, a certain school atlas, purporting to show the
routes of explorers, does not show any of the tracks of
those of us who have been out since 1879. And you will
admit that much good work has been done since then, and
our children should not be allowed to forget the names of
Winnecke, Favenc, Tietkens, Wells, Carnegie, and others.
I think it will not be out of place to-night if I ask you to
remember the name of that generous colonist, tba late Sir


Thomas Elder, whose munificence enabled Giles and myself
to do much to explore the dark places of the continent.
One direct result of his last expedition in 1891, the leader-
ship of which was entrusted to me, was the discovery of
the famous West Australian Goldfields of Coolgardie,
Kalgurli, and the East Murchison. May I for a
moment contrast the works of explorers in Africa and
Australia .? Africa, with its immense forests, mountain
ranges, great rivers, numerous people, and wild animals,
enabled the great explorers of that continent to write fas-
cinating books of travel and adventure, and become popu-
lar heroes to their own pecuniary benefit. Australia, on the
other hand, in some of the interior regions has none of
these. Our journals therefore have often been but a daily
record of work done and distances thrown behind us, mak-
ing but dry and uninteresting reading. South Australia
can claim the credit of having sent a goodly number of
pxplorers out into the unknown —Babbage, Horrocks, Mc-
Kinlay, Ross, Harvey, Delisser, Giles, Gosse, Warburton,
Lewis, Tietkens, McMinn, Winnecke, J. W. Jones, Cornish,
and Wells. For them and other explorers I desire to join
with Mr. Tietkens in thanking you for the honor you have
conferred upon us on this never-to-be-forgotten occasion.
Mr. C. P. Conigrave (also responding)—As a
native of Adelaide I counted it a great privilege to respond
to the toast and to be placed amongst those whose names
were associated with Australian exploration. When I was
quite a small lad my father introduced me to Mr. Auld,
and I little thought then that later in life I should be iden-
tified in some way with work of a similar character to that
done by the members of the Stuart Expedition. lam
proud to be accepted here to-night as an explorer, and I
heartily thank you.
At the instance of Mr. - John Barker, His Ex-
cellency was warmly thanked for having presided over the
gathering.
The banquet was arranged by a Committee of Ade-
laide citizens, of whom the Mayor of Adelaide was Chair-
man. and Messrs. W. Chambers and J. A. Riley Hon. Sec-
retaries. The money for the purchase of the medals was
collected by Mr. F. E. Benda, formerly Secretary for the
Northern Territory. The dies for the medals were en-
graved by Messrs. Niehuus & Lucy, of Adelaide, and the
medals struck by them.
