

Si.’,
JOHN AND GREGORY
BLAXLAND
J. K. 5. HOUISON
A.C.A. (Aust.). F.5.A.G,, F.R.A.H.S.
Paper read before the Royal Australian Historical
Society, October 29, 1935


, >•:
7a : #'M . , :


John and Gregory Blaxland
J. K. S. HOUISON
A.C.A. (Aust.), F.S.A.G., F.R.A.H.S.
The family of Blaxland is of great antiquity, and it
is said that it was in possession of the Isle of Thanet
before the Norman Conquest.* A John Blaxland, or Do
Blockisland, was present at the christening of King
Ethelbert and Queen Bertha, the first Christian King and
Queen of England, on Whitsunday, June 2, 597, and in
their presence presented St. Augustine with a grant of
land for the future Abbey of St. Augustine. One
ancestor went crusading with Richard Coeur de Lion,
another was captain of the guard under Queen Elizabeth,
but the tracing of the genealogy of the family is, however,
outside the scope of this paper.
In the course of time we reach the reign of George 11.,
when a John Blaxland, a lawyer, married Elizabeth
Monkton.
In 1730, John took steps to obtain a grant of Arms
from the College of Heralds —the Coat of Arms “vert a
Fess between three falcons’ heads erased erminois,” and
for a crest “on a wreath of the colours an eagle displayed
with two heads proper gutte de sang. ”f
*Burke’s Colonial Gentry, Vol. 1., p. 287.
tFamily Records.


John and Elizabeth lived in expensive style, and
eventually were forced to mortgage the Luddenham
property, which passed out of their hands in 1742.
This John Blaxland died in 1750 leaving a son, John,
who was born in 1729. He was educated for the medical
profession, and had a practice at Wordsworth.
In 1765 his uncle, Rev. David Turner, died and left
him the lease of the Newington Parsonage, and also the
property in Fordwick. Thus John was reinstated in the
position which his father had lost.
At about this time John married Mary, the daughter
of Captain Parker, R.N. Their first child, Elizabeth, was
born at Wordsworth on April 12, 1767. They then
moved to Fordwick, where John was Mayor from 1767-
1774; and there John, the subject of this paper, was born
on January 4, 1769, and Gregory, the youngest child, on
June 27, 1778; their father dying on September 9, 1780.
Mrs. Blaxland and her family removed to Canterbury.
John and Gregory both attended the King’s School, Canter-
bury, John leaving in his eighteenth year. He entered
the Army, and rose to the rank of Captain in the Duke
of York’s Cavalry.
In the course of time he inherited his father’s property
and took up residence at Newington, which necessitated his
retirement from the Army.
About 1794 John married Sarah, daughter of Mr.
Joseph Davies, but she died at the birth of their first child,
which died also, in 1795, and both were buried in the
Chancel of Newington Church.
In 1797 he married a second time, his wife being
Harriet de Marquet, grand-daughter of Count John Louis
de Marquet, who was formerly an officer of the Guard da
Corps of Louis XVI., but was later a merchant in India
and friend of Warren Hastings, who was also the god-
father of Harriet.
Gregory married, in 1798, Elizabeth, daughter of John
Spurden, of Mersea Hall, in Essex.
After long consideration, and upon the advice of Lord
Castlereagh, Lord Sydney, and Sir Joseph Banks, John
and Gregory decided to emigrate to New South Wales.


John Blaxland, aged 28.
(From a miniature by Pollock, from the original in the Mitchell Library.)
Permission to settle in the colony was applied for and
granted, and Viscount Castlereagh, in commending John
and Gregory to Governor King, said: —
It is deemed expedient to encourage a certain number of settlers
in New South Wales of responsibility and capital, who may set


useful examples of Industry and Cultivation and from their property
and education be fit persons to whose authority the convicts may be
properly entrusted.*
Writing to Under-Secretary Cooke from London on
October 24, 1804, Gregory said:—
London, 24th October, 1804.
Sir,
Agreeable to your instructions I transmit you in writing for
my brother and myself the encouragement we request and expect
from Government, on our agreeing to become permanent settlers at
New South Wales. To dwell on the hazard and uncertainty of the
undertaking and adequate compensation will be useless; and as we
are likely to settle our families there forever, to make demands
contrary to the future interest of the colony would be improper, as
the settlement is in its infancy. What encouragement we may
receive in regard to grants of land may become a precedent in
some measure to regulate the grants of future adventurers. Con-
vinced nothing is more prejudicial to the interest of a rising colony
than large tracts of land held by individuals, unoccupied, to ensure
the future greatness of their family, we make the following request :
To have grants to each of us immediately six thousand acres of
land in what situation we may choose, not interfering with land
already granted (we consider we shall be better judges for ourselves
than persons less skilled in agriculture and breeding), and on our
having clear’d and crop’d two-thirds of any given quantity of land,
not less than five hundred acres, by grazing it with five sheep or
goats, or two head of young cattle, or one head of full-sized cattle,
or one horse to every three acres, to receive a fresh grant of another
tract of land equal in quantity to the land so occupied, choosing
for ourselves as before, and to be allowed fresh grants of land in
this manner so long as we choose to demand them—one-tenth part
of the land, if we please, to remain in wood and be consider’d as
occupied. By thus having a fresh grant before the other is quite
cultivated or stocked will give time to prepare, and prevent delay
in bringing the country into cultivation. To be allowed for each
free servant we may induce to go with us a grant of two hundred
acres.
To be allowed to purchase, each of us, if we please, from the
stock of Government, not less than eighty cows,, five bulls, fifty
calves, two hundred ewes, and six rams. By Collins’s statement, if
correct, I think more might be allowed, and some of all sorts of
useful plants and vegetables, and, if possible, before we go, to be
allow’d to purchase from the King’s stock, each of us, four Spanish
ram lambs and six ewes. If respecting the price of either, any
dispute should arise, the whole to be taken by appraisement.
To be allow’d, each of us, thirty male convicts, on our taking
possession, for eighteen months, victual!’d by Government, which
request it appears to be the only one attended with any great
*Historical Records of New South Wales, Yol. V., p. 490,


oxpence to Government, for which reason we request so few, and
hope by our exertions the colony will in a short period become
proportionately less expensive, and after we have erected sufficient
part of our premises, about which we shall employ the convicts
requested, we hope to have as many more as we can employ and
keep ourselves that are not employ’d by other individuals; to be
always allow’d our choice out of those employed by Government.
To be allow’d free passage, provisions for ourselves and families,
and twenty-five tons of stowage each, and before we sail to be
allow’d to select from what prisons we please, ten male convicts
to sail with us, and to be considered part of the number before
requested, and three female and one male convict as menial servants
during our passage and afterwards.
AVe also request to be made civil magistrates on our arrival.
It is not probable both of us can dispose of our property so as to
be able to sail in the spring; if possible, one of us will. Either
my brother or myself will in a short time call to know how far this
meets your approbation, as the sooner we receive information on
that subject, the better we shall be able to regulate our affairs, as
we are not quite so unencumbered as some of the settlers have been
who have gone before us.
With the greatest respect,
Gregory Blaxland. t
John then entered into an agreement with the Home
Government which stipulated that, provided he
engages a capital of £6,000 in the Colony of New South Wales ho
is to have his passage out for himself, his wife, four or five children
and two or three servants in the same manner as his brother Gregory
is now going out; that he is to be allowed 15 tons to take out
necessarys for himself and family; when he arrives there, that he
is to have a grant of land given him of eight thousand acres, with
one convict for every hundred acres to clear and cultivate it; to
be cloathed and victual’d for eighteen months according to the
custom of the colony; but provided he should not be possessed of
so large a sum he is then to have land and convicts in proportion
to the capital advanced.*
It was decided that Gregory should proceed as soon
as possible to New South Wales, John being compelled to
remain until the family estates had been disposed of.
On March 1, 1805, Gregory wrote that he “ shall prefer
going out in the ship with the female convicts. ”§ This
was the William Pitt, which had on board 417 female
convicts.
t Historical Records of New South Wales, Vol. V., p. 479.
*Historical Records of New South Wales, Vol. V., p. 678.
§lbid, p. 568,


4 sheep and 2 shepherd’s dogs
Wire bottom for a kiln, and 4
4 bulls, water for sheep
grind-stones
500 cwt. compressed hay
A tent
500 cwt oilcake powder
4 cases of hams, pickles &c.,
1 case of shoes, soles, shoemaker’s
2 cases of plants, hops, &c., in
cabin
and saddler’s tools
A swarm of bees in cabin, with
1 cask of vinegar
wire cage over hive
1 case of bedding
2 eases of field and garden seeds
5 cases of bot’d wine, beer, cider
1 butt of best English grass
&c.,
seeds, now packed
4 ton iron hoops, bars, rods,
1 case of books, paper, pens, &c.,
1 case of lead, powder, flint, &c.,
1 case of glass for window-
steel, &C;,
Sheet copper for two coppers
2 sets of carpenter’s tools
sheets; tin, solder, &c.,
2 sets of blacksmith’s tools
12 trunks for cloth, haberdashery,
2 sets of cooper’s tools
hats
2 sets of wheelwright’s tools
1 case (small) for cutlery, sheep-
1 large case of felling axes and
shears, &c.,
saws
1 case of nails
1 case of grocery
1 case of pewter plates, mugs,
1 butt of spirits for men
locks, &c.,
4 cases for things forgot
10 iron vats, 3 steel corn mills
1 case of medicine for self and
cattle
A plough
On April 24 he sought permission to take out “twelve
Spanish sheep instead of four, ”$ and offering to leave
some of the other things behind in order to make room
for the provision of water for the extra sheep.
Gregory and his wife and three children, with two
female servants and one overseer, embarked on the William
Pitt and sailed on September 1, 1805. Other passengers
were Mr. Charles Grimes, Surveyor-General; Mr. Neale
Chapman, Deputy Commissionary; Mr. Robert Fritz,
Deputy Commissionary, his wife and two children; Mr.
John Townson, late a Captain in the New South Wales
Corps; James Thompson, his wife and four children; Mrs.
R and her four children, to join her husband, a
convict; and 417 female convicts.
Gregory submitted a list of articles he proposed taking
with him, which was as follows§: —-
After calling at Madeira for three days, St. Salvador*
tIbid, p. 593.
§Historical Records of New South Wales, Yol. V., p. 569.
6
John and Gregory Blaxland.


for three weeks, and the Cape of Good Hope for five weeks,
the William Pitt arrived at Sydney on April 11, 1806.
Governor King provided space in the Government
Stores for storing Gregory’s effects, and he hired a houje
from an officer who was in England.
In May, 1806, he purchased 40 head of cattle, 37
heifers, two bullocks, and one bull from the Government
herd for £ll2O, and on July 20 he purchased a further
38 cows and two bulls at the rate of £2B per head*
Amongst the goods brought out by Gregory were seeds
of various kinds, which were planted in the Government
garden at Parramatta soon after his arrival, but unfor-
tunately these did not vegetate owing to the heat of the
ship’s hold in which they were stowed.t
In his survey of the present state of New South Wales
of August 12, 1806, Governor King stated:—
Respecting tlxe free settlers from England it is an experienced
fact that their general industry falls very short of the professions
they made in England In speaking of this class, an
exception must be made of the liberal encouragement given to
Mr. Gregory Blaxland of 4,000 acres of land, with the labour of
40 convicts’ and such cattle as he can pay for. He appears to
understand his business as an English Farmer.
John, having now disposed of the family estates for
some £30,000, was ready to proceed to Sydney. Before
leaving he informed Sir Joseph Banks, who took a deep
interest in him, that he had obtained permission to pay
for the stock to be purchased in New South Wales by
means of “instalments of produce.”s The interpretation
of the word “produce” afterwards led to much unpleasant-
ness between John and Bligh.
On the eve of John’s departure, Sir Joseph Banks
wrote that he desired “most seriously to wish you all . . .
prosperity in your undertaking.” He also promised to
give John a “letter to the Governor,” and to do him any
service in his power. Having heard from Gregory that
* 4 the master of the transport behaved very unpleasantly to
him and his family during their voyage,” John decided to
*j Historical Records of New South Wales, VI., p. 147.
t Historical Records of Australia, Vol. V., p. 748.
XHistorical Records of New South Wales, Vol. VI., p. 188.


travel in The Brothers, a vessel in which he had a joint
ownership with the firm of Hulletts Brothers, of London.
John was accompanied by Mrs. Blaxland, fonr
daughters, one governess, two female servants, a baliff,
a carpenter, and a man for agricultural purposes, and he
took goods valued at £3951/19/11. Amongst this was
household furniture from his property at Newington and
one piano, and various goods for trading.
The Brothers also had on board two Otaheite boys, who
John had undertaken to bring to Sydney, where they were
to stay until an opportunity .occurred of forwarding them
to Otaheite.§
The Brothers left England on October 17, 1806, and
arrived at Sydney on April 3, 1807. On arrival at Sydney,
Captain Putland went on board with a written invitation
for the Blaxlands to stay at Government House.* Gover-
nor Bligh gave a public dinner “to introduce Mrs. Blaxland
to all the ladies of the colony.”
Gregory had taken over the farm and house belonging
to the late Captain Waterhouse called The Vineyard. It
is probable that John went to this farm soon after his
arrival. They then moved to a large upper roomed house
in the centre of an orangery belonging to Dr. Wentworth.
Here domestic trouble began, by the governess marrying
the saltmaker, Mr. Rutter. It must have been the orange
blossom, for the next governess ended up by marrying the
tutor! John then received the grant at Newington, of
which more will be said later.
One of John’s daughters, Harriet (who was a child
of six in 1806), in describing her first impressions of the
colony, wrote: —
My earliest memory of the Colony . . . commenced with a
journey of fifteen miles from Sydney to Parramatta in the only
carriage of those days, a gig lent as a particular favour. Seated
as I was on a cushion between my father’s knees, not a bridge
had been built with three rivers to cross which could only be effected
at low tide by getting out of the gig and stepping from stone to
stone. The road —a cart track only the width of the wheels, the
wild natural forest almost closing overhead, chill and silent as it
was, can never be forgotten.
§Historical Records of Australia, Yol. VI., p. 25.
*Mudie’s Felonry : Historical Records of New South Wales, Vol.
VI., p. 379.


The two brothers decided to join their capital and to
carry on as partners, and in 1807 they purchased the
balance of the two leaseholds, which had eleven years to
run, from John Fleming for £900.t Reference to Meehan’s
Plan of Sydney dated October 31, 1807, shows one (No. 39)
of John Fleming’s leaseholds as being on the western side
of High Street (now the modern George Street), where
the Queen Victoria Markets now stand. This was used
by John as a stockyard, and was afterwards used by
Macquarie as a Public Market; while on the eastern side
of the street the other leasehold, No. 37, stood where
Farmer’s Blaxland Galleries and Gowing’s now stand, at
the corner of George and Market Streets. The purchase
included a house, in which John lived, and a shop. Here
they opened Sydney’s first large dairy, and John, writing
on October 16, 1807, says:■ —-
We milked 29 cows and sell the milk to the inhabitants, which
is very eagerly sought after, particularly by the poorer class; and
to secure the whole of the return from our stock, we have opened a
butchers shop, and sell meat 3d p’r lb lower than any other person’s.
This statement of John’s rather refutes Bligh’s assertion
that he “buys cheap and sells dear.” Butter and cheese
were also made. Stock dealing was carried on exten-
sively, John attending to matters in Sydney, “while his
brother remains in the country purchasing live stock from
those who can be tempted to sell it.”
A considerable sum was expended in enlarging the
milk house, sheds and slaughter house, which were situated
at Cockle Bay. These areas eventually passed into the
hands of Simeon Lord, and were advertised for sale by
public auction by the Provost-Marshal under a writ of
fieri facias on April 30, 1814. %
As soon as Bligh heard of the purchase of Fleming’s
leasehold, “he rode up and was very angry and several
times repeated we should never hold them after the lease
expired.” When John “remonstrated with the Governor
and told him he had not fulfilled the engagements entered
into by the Government ..... he (the Governor) onlw
laughed and said, ‘What did a Secretary of State know
about cattle; he should act as he pleased. ’ ’ ’
jHistorical Records of New South Wales, Vol. VI., p. 311.
tSydney Gazette, April 23, 1814.


Relations between Bligh and the Blaxlands naturaliy
became strained. Bligh complained to Sir Joseph Banks
that John was “involved very deeply in Mercantile con-
cerns and appeared to be a very speculative man and was
proposing to enter the sealing trade.” He also said that
John was an intimate of a very nefarious party called
Lord, a pardoned convict.
But the real reason for Bligh’s antagonism is contained
in the letter from Bligh to Sir Joseph Banks of April 9,
1808, wherein it was stated that “he (Blaxland) was so
indiscreet some time since as to unite with his brother and
write to me for permission to carry on a distilling. ’ ’ Such
a proposal was, of course, rather amazing to Bligh, and, to
make matters infinitely worse, Bligh wrote that John ‘ ‘ had
offered me a part of the firm as he was pleased to term it. ’ ’
Bligh accused them of becoming “so speculative as to care
for nothing but making money ... of buying as cheap o’,
they can and selling dear. ”§
John wrote that “the Governor is behaving so vem
arbitrary that I do not consider either my person or
property safe a single hour; indeed, I think it will not be
long before I am sent to gaol. ”||
Gregory said, “I expect he was not guided by truth
in his representations as T found him not a man of his
word, ”!} regarding the carrying out of the provisions of
his agreement with the Home Government.
The treatment of the Blaxlands by Bligh were not
isolated cases, for other settlers complained of the same
treatment. Dr. Townson, writing to Viscount Castlereagh
from Sydney on September 5, 1808, said: —
It is not easy to account for Governor Bligh’s conduct. If
he dreaded the power of the military ought he not have encouraged
the few respectable settlers and cultivated their good will.*
Instead of this, however, he antagonised them.
Townson attributed this “opposition at every step”
“to the fact that his bad heart, his malicious disposition,
•can alone account for his apposite conduct.”
§Historical Records of Australia, Vol. VI., p. 149.
II Historical Records of New South Wales, Vol. VI., p. 312.
Übid, p. 303.
*IUd, Vol. VI., p. 738.


John complained that he never had more than 23
convicts, whereas he should have had 80. f He said,
concerning the first three received : “One man was an
aged man with one eye and one arm; another was an aged
man with an Asthma, who appeared to be about 60 and
incapable of work, and the third was an idiot.”
Gregory was treated in the same manner, for as soon
as it was discovered that he had a useful mechanic as one
of his prisoners, he was taken for use by the Government.^
Besides having to contend, on the one hand, with a
Governor who “openly dammed the law and said there
should be no law but his will, reviled His Majesty’s
Ministers by calling them clerks in office, and gave free
indulgence to the worst of passions, and said that they
governed at home as they liked, and he would govern there
as he liked, ”§ the settlers soon found, on the other hand,
that
Captain McArthur, Major Johnston and their friends have long
had nearly the whole of the stock, wealth, and influence of the
colony in their hands, and every person of respectability, by his
talents, education or fortune, sent here by His Majesty’s Ministers
is considered as a rival, whom it is the common interest to oppose;
and as settlers at first have to receive every thing from Government,
their land, stock, labourers, stores, etc. these may be refused or
delayed given with a liberal or sparing hand, and under such
circumstances as not to be worth accepting. ||
The settlers were between the “devil and the deep
sea,” and it is little wonder that John and Gregory Blax-
land threw in their lot with the insurrectionists and sup-
ported the deposition of Governor Bligh. It was purely
their private grievances which led them to take the step
they did, and not any love for John Macarthur, who was
opposed to them.jl
Rev. Henry Fulton, in a letter dated Sydney, July 20,
1808, gives some of the reasons for the discontent at Bligh’s
actions:—
On Governor Bligh’s arrival, in August, 1806, the colony was
in a very distressed situation. The River Hawkesbury had over-
jTrial of Lieutenant-Colonel Johnston, p. 288.
tHistorical Becords of New South Wales, Vol. VI., p. 303.
UUd, Vol. VII., p. 235.
ll lbid, Vol. VI., p. 738.
TlLang : History of New South Wales, Vol. 1., p. 115.


flowed its banks, and swept away the greater part of our grain.
The settlers were involvel in debt, chiefly by their lust of spirituous
liquors, and the great quantity of that noxious beverage which had
oeen imported, as it was disposed of to them chiefly by barter.
This practice, which had continued from the foundation of the
colony, became very pernicious, for it destroyed the health and
industry of the people, it cramped their exertions and dejected their
spirits by keeping them in poverty, want and misery. Some people
got spirits by permission of former Governors, and in such quantities
as those Governors chose, at from eight to ten shillings per gallon,
and paid it away at two, three, or four pounds per gallon in barter
to workmen, settlers, shopkeepers, butchers, etc. Sometimes they
sold it privately by their agents, when scarce, at an enormous price.
Therefore, Governor Bligh was determined to put a stop to it, and
issued General Orders accordingly. As John Macarthur, formerly
a Captain in the New South Wales Corps; Thomas Jamison, Principal
Surgeon; and other officers, civil and military, either acquired con-
siderable —some of them great —properties for such an infant colony
as this, or were enabled to live in a style much superior to what
they could have otherwise expected, by the means of bartering spirits,
these General Orders were very disagreeable to them. Doctor Eobert
Townson, Gregory Blaxland and John Blaxland, who lately arrived
here, were rendered discontented by those who had been long in the
colony, so that all their minds were in a state of preparation to be
worked upon by any factious and discontented leader who had
address enough to deceive them and manage them for his own
ambitious purposes. Such a person was not wanting while John
McArthur lived here, assisted by Nicholas Bayly.*
The position is well summed up by Dr. George
Mackaness in his Life of Bligh, who writes
Macarthur (then) became a thorn in the side of all the Governors
from Phillip to Darling. He set himself to fight all local ordinances
which conflicted with his own interests, and, until he met Bligh, he
usually won. He led the rum-traders, he monopolised imported
goods, he battened on the farmer and settler who had fallen upon
evil days. One wonders how he continued to escape so long without
having his whiskers singed, for the whole course of his life, at any
rate up to the deposition of Bligh, was one long series of broils,
battles, duels, and almost deadly feuds.t
Macarthur was determined to force a crisis with Bligh,
but there is no need here to go further into the details of
the various daily happenings leading up to the actual
arrest of Bligh, except to give briefly the main facts.s
*Eistorical Becords of New South Wales, Vol. VI., p. 696,
fLife of Bligh, p. 135.
tEistorical Becords of Australia, Vol, VI., p. xxi. et seq.


In June, 1807, a convict, John Hoare, had escaped in
the schooner Parramatta, belonging to John Macarthur and
Hulletts, of London. Macarthur and his partner, Blax-
cell, as bondsmen, were sued for the amount of the bond,
and the bond was forfeited, but the verdict was appealed
against. Macarthur then abandoned the schooner. I
cannot do better than quote Dr. Watson in his introduction
to Yol. VI. of Historical Records of Australia]] :■ —-
Acting under instructions from Bligli, Judge-advocate Atkins
wrote on tlxe same day (14th December) to summon Macarthur to
appear on the following day and answer for his conduct. Macarthur
somewhat contemptuously declined to appear. This was an error
of judgment on the part of Macarthur, though strictly within his
legal rights. The letter was virtually a command from the repre-
sentative of the King, and certainly should not have been resented
by him. On the 15th December Atkins issued a warrant for the
arrest of Macarthur, and according to Atkins ’ evidence, Bligh
approved of his action.
In issuing this warrant, Atkins was wrong. The letter to
Macarthur was not a summons, and, until a legal summons had been
served and ignored, no warrant for Macarthur’s arrest should have
been issued. Bligh had the misfortune of having a man as his
legal adviser who was untrained in the law and addicted to alcoholic
excess. The warrant was served by a constable. Macarthur
spurned the constable, told him that he would never submit until
he was forced, and added that Bligh and his friends would soon
make a rope to hang themselves. This action was an open defiance
of the civil power. On the following day a bench of magistrates,
which included Major Johnston, decided that a second warrant should
be issued for his arrest. This was executed, and Macarthur was
brought before Atkins and admitted to bail. On December 17, he
was again brought before a bench of magistrates, consisting of the
Judge-advocate, John Palmer, and two of the military party, George
Johnston and Edward Abbott. By this bench he was committed
to take his trial before the criminal court, and was admitted to bail. II
The court of criminal jurisdiction did not meet until the 25th
of January, 1808, but in the interval Macarthur was not idle. Four
days after his committal he called upon Atkins for payment of a
bill drawn in 1793. When payment was not made, he applied to
Bligh for relief in a memorial, dated 29th December, and in reply
was informed “that a Court of Civil Jurisdiction is open to take
cognizance of all Civil Actions. ’ ’ He repeated his applications to
the Governor without success on the Ist and 12th January.
Wide Introduction to Historical Records of Australia, Vol. VI.,
p. xxi., by Watson.
ll Historical Records of Australia, Vol. VI., p. 21.


On the eve of January 25, 1808, the day for the
Criminal Court to meet to try John Maearthnr, a mess
dinner of the officers of the New South Wales Corps was
held at the Barracks, and besides the military officers,
amongst others, John and Gregory Blaxland were present.
On the morning of the 26th, Maearthnr was arrested
and lodged in gaol.* Johnston, after 4 p.m., arrived at
the Barracks (which then stood on the site of Wynyard
Square), picking up Lieutenant Minchin, who was dining
with Surgeon Harris at Ultimo. Johnston then “com-
mitted the first open act of rebellion” when he liberated
Maearthnr, who immediately went to the Barracks and
drew up the famous or rather infamous Requisition to
Johnston, and shortly after 7 o’clock the soldiers with
Major Johnston at their head and the band playing ‘The
British Grenadiers,’ marched to Government House which
was immediately surrounded. John and Gregory were
apparently not far behind the soldiers, as they were both
present when Bligh came downstairs.
Bligh says that John, in company with Dr. Townson,
Mr. Grimes, Surgeon Jamieson, and Mr. Blaxcell, “rum-
maged all the rooms upstairs for my Public and Private
papers. ’ ’$
The Requisition to Johnston is one of the most re-
markable documents in Australian history. Although
John’s name appears second on the list of signatures,
immediately after John Maearthnr, and Gregory’s fifth,
there is very grave doubt that either of these signatures
were placed there before the arrest of Bligh. John
Blaxland, at the trial of Johnston, swore that he signed
before the arrest, but Johnston swore that they did not
arrive until some time later. P. M. Bladen says that
Maearthnr and John Blaxland, for certain, signed before
Johnston acted. I **Mackaness thinks that Maearthnr was
the only one to sign before the arrest. The evidence given
at the trial of Johnston was so conflicting that, unless
some additional data is unearthed, the real truth as to
*Historical Records of New South Wales, Yol. VI., p. 613.
t lbid, p. 431.
I Historical Records of New South Wales, Yol. VI., p. Ixv.
**William Bligh, Vol. 11., p. 182.


whether the Blaxlands signed before or after will never
be known. The best analysis of the whole position is set
ont as lucidly as possible by Mackaness in his Life of
William Bligh.
In summing up the position, the English counsel, V.
Gibbs, and Thomas Plummer said:—
that the evidence to be collected from the correspondence principally
affects John Macarthur, Nicholas Bayley, Doctor Townson, John
Blaxland, Garnham Blaxcell and Thomas Jamieson, as having previ-
ously concerted together with Major Johnston the arrest and im-
prisonment of Governor Bligh, and having afterwards bourne a part
in the assumed Government.il
On the next day, January 27, John Blaxland was
appointed a Magistrate by Johnston, and on the 31st was
appointed a member of the Committee of Survey of Public
Stores. John and Gregory were both appointed members
of the Vice-Admiralty Court.
On February 8, a public meeting was held in St.
Philip’s Church for the purpose of selecting a delegate to
send to England to state the grievances of the inhabitants
of New South Wales* “Those present included Mr.
Blaxcell, Mr. Bayley, Mr. John Macarthur, Mr. Went-
worth, Mr. Minchin, and numerous other gents of the
present establishment.” It was proposed to present a
sword not under the value of one hundred guineas to
Lieutenant-Governor Johnston, and an address of thanks
was voted to him and the officers, non-commissioned officers
and privates of the New South Wales Corps, and which
is rather significant to John Macarthur. Macarthur was
elected as the delegate to proceed to England, and a sub-
scription list was opened to defray his expenses, to which
John and Gregory Blaxland contributed the sum of £2OO.
John Blaxland also proposed that a service of plate should
be presented by the inhabitants to the officers of the New
South Wales Corps. However, nothing came of the meet-
ing, and no subscriptions were paid in.
There now followed an episode which caused a certain
amount of coolness between the Blaxlands and Johnston.
When John Blaxland, in conjunction with Hulletts Bros.,
ll Historical Becords of New South Wales, Yol. VII., p. 229.
*lbid, Yol. VI., p. 512.


had brought out the ship The Brothers , he had intended
to enter the sealing trade. The Brothers went sealing
from Sydney and, having landed a gang on the Bounty
Islands, brought back to Sydney 38,000 fine salted fur
seal skins, valued at more than £30,000, and with his chief
officer, Frederick Hasselburg, under arrest, whereupon
John Blaxland suspended Oliver Russell, the master, and
laid a charge of barratory against him.f This was the
first case of its kind in Australia. It was suggested that
the charge was trivial, so John sent Major Johnston a copy
of Park’s Marine Insurance with the different references
marked, and, in order to settle Johnston’s doubts, pointed
out that “the Captain’s deviations from his instructions
is Barratory. ”$ The charge was heard before the Bench
of Magistrates on March 5, 1808, and Russell was dis-
charged^
On March 19, John and Gregory, accompanied by
Simeon Lord and a carpenter, went on board the
John informed the captain that he had brought his
carpenter on board to view the accommodation he was to
have on his passage to England. Captain Russell wanted
£2OO for giving up his sleeping place and half the cabin. ||
An argument ensued. Russell advised John “to go home
and sell his pigs and sell his milk and butter and cabbages
and he wished he had a billy goat to beat him.”** The
result was that Russell charged John Blaxland with having
“in a daring tempestuous manner laid violent hands on
the astonished Prosecutor, while Simeon Lord, like the
renowned Bobadil, danced round him with a brandished
Cane.” Russell said that Gregory, who first commenced
the affray, accosted him in the most opprobrious language
and then “collared” him, telling him that he “would knock
his teeth down his throat”ft; and John also “collared”
him,*s aided, abetted and assisted by Simeon Lord, who
t Historical Records of Australia, Yol. VI., p. 458.
tlhid, p. 388.
§7 bid, p. 387.
117 bid, Vol. VI., p. 4(11.
Wliid, p. 480.
**lbid, p. 467.
t tlbid, p. 479.
itliid, p. 473.


shook a stick over his head to the great damage of the said
Oliver Russell. §§
The Court convicted Oliver Russell and Robert Davies
(the acting chief mate) of perjury, sentencing them to
seven years The Court were also t>f
opinion that Gregory “had acted very incorrect(ly), but
that he was provoked to it by the ill language of Captain
Russell, but fined him £5 lawful money of Great Britain ’’;
John and Simeon Lord were acquitted. However,
neither Russell nor Davies had been indicted in due form,
and Johnston annulled the sentence of transportation.*
A charge of perjury was then made against Russell
by John Blaxland and Simeon Lord.f The trial was never
held, and Russell was permitted to sail for England on
giving his own bond for £2OOO to surrender himself to the
Secretary of State.
Feelings with Johnston after the Russell case were
rather strained, and Johnston wrote*: —
The two Mr. Blaxlands were amongst the forwardest and most
troublesome of my opposers. These gentlemen have unhappily for
themselves formed a connection with an inhabitant by the name of
Simeon Lord who was once a convict, but now possesses a very
extensive fortune or at least the appearance of it. These gentlemen
were no sooner relieved from the terror they had felt in consequence
of the threats of violence and oppression of Governor Bligh, than
they became troublesomely importunate to divert my attention from
the most urgent Public business to the immediate consideration of
their private affairs. §
John had petitioned for the fulfilment of
his and Gregory’s agreement on the part of the Govern-
ment, which Johnston admitted “had not been fulfilled by
Governor Bligh,” and he promised to rectify.||
John, dissatisfied with the arrangements made on Iris
behalf by Major Johnston, resigned his appointment of
magistrate, and returned to England in the Rose in
Hlbid, p. 461.
Ilf Ibid, p. 484.
*lbid, p. 277.
t lbid, p. 516.
t lbid, p. 219.
§lbid, p. 453.
I Ibid, p. 419
ll lbid, p. 454.


September, 1808, despite the protests of Bligh to
Foveaux.**
Bligh wrote to Lord Caledon, the Governor at the
Cape of Good Hope, requesting him to arrest Blaxland,
which he did, and he was confined for one month in a
Dutch prison, where he contracted jail fever.tt Whilst
still ill with the fever, Blaxland was then taken on board
H.M.S. Powerful, where he was kept for three months, in
confinement
in the degraded situation of a prisoner, and then sent under the
charge of a Lieutenant of the Royal Navy from the Downs, through
his native country and under the eyes of the people he had formerly
associated with to the Secretary of State’s office.
He was granted his freedom on parole, but still he had
not been informed of the charges under which he had been
arrested and confined.
John’s troubles were not yet over, for John Macarthur,
on arrival in England in October, 1809, caused him to be
arrested for the non-payment of a draft which Gregory
had apparently forgotten to meet.||
As John was required as a witness at the Court-
Martial of Lieutenant-Colonel Johnston for mutiny, he was
compelled to remain in England for the next three years.
The trial did not commence until May 7, 1811, at Chelsea
Hospital, and lasted for thirteen days. During the en-
forced wait for the trial, John made good use of his time,
and convinced the Earl of Liverpool that he had been
wrongly treated, and he returned to New South Wales in
1812 armed with Liverpool’s orders for the original agree-
ment with the Home Government to be carried out by
Governor Macquarie.§§ He also sought permission to
bring out with him a servant and a shepherd, with ‘ ‘ fifteen
tons for his goods, seeds and necessaries, with places for
six Spanish sheep and storage for hay and water. ”*
Macquarie, however, did not intend to carry out
Liverpool’s instructions if he could help it. Shortly
before Macquarie’s arrival, two serious floods on the
**lUd, pp. 276, 643, 654.
tt Historical Records of New South Wales, Vol. VII., p. 228.
ttlUd, Vol. VII., p. 396.
?§Historical Records of Australia, Vol. VII., p. 368.
*lbid, Vol. VII., p. 369.


Hawkesbury and other causes had resulted in a great
scarcity of wheat, and Macquarie was compelled to pur-
chase supplies from India and America.! He therefore
had not much sympathy with those he termed “ Gentlemen
Settlers,” who, despite “extraordinary concessions in their
favour,” he asserted, had not contributed to the advance-
ment of agriculture in this colony.J
Macquarie expected John and Gregory
to apply their personal and great acquired means of husbandry to
the cultivation of grain whereby the quantity required by
Government would have been the more easily supplied, the general
price in the market reduced, and the risk of scarcity materially
guarded against, t
Macquarie complained that they had “turned their whole
attention to the lazy object of rearing cattle,” and that
in consequence he considered them as “lazy discontented
Drones. ”H
Macquarie failed to appreciate the fact that “within
the space of two years and nine months between December
23, 1809, and September 30, 1812, “John and Gregory put
into the Government Stores the enormous amount of 88,390
lbs. of fresh meat for which they received £33267.”**
Macquarie said they were the most discontented, unreason-
able, and troublesome persons in the whole country simply
because they did not put one single bushel of grain of any
kind whatever into the Public Store. A more unreason-
able attitude can hardly be imagined, especially when it
was directed towards men who were endeavouring to place
the cattle industry on a sure and sound footing. He lost
sight of the fact that the brothers, by reducing the price
of meat from 2/6 in 1807 to 1/- in 1809, to 9d. in 1811
and 7d. in 1813, had rendered a public service instead of
deserving censure.ft
By 1824 John had raised the cattle industry to such
a state that his tender to deliver 40,000 lbs. of fresh meat
to Parramatta was accepted at 3|d. per lb.
t lbid, Vol. VII., p. 526.
tIUd, Vol. VII., p. 560.
Übid, Vol. VII., p. 559.
ll lbid, Vol. VIII., p. 427.
**lUd, Vol. VII., p. 559.
ft Jose : Builders and Pioneers of Australia, p. 149.


Another source of friction with Governor Macquarie
was the fact that on July 19, 1809, John received a grant
of one acre on the east side of the town of Sydney, bounded
on the west side by an intended street (the present Mac-
quarie Street), for the purpose of erecting substantial
buildings thereon.** While John was detained in England
for the Johnston trial, Mrs. Blaxland was induced (on
promise of compensation) to give up the land to Governor
Macquarie, who was desirous of erecting the famous Rum
Hospital on the site.§§ After many protests, this promise
was not redeemed, until the regime of Governor Darling,
by a payment of £4OO.
John and Gregory continued in partnership until the
year 1813, when the following notice appeared in the
Sydney Gazette : —
July 17th, 1813.
The public are hereby informed that the partnership between
Messrs John and Gregory Blaxland will expire on the 31st August
next and that after that period each party will do business on their
separate account.
Parramatta, 12th July, 1813.
J. Blaxland.
G. Blaxland.
Finally Macquarie granted to John 6710 acres on
November 30, 1813, situated between the Nepean River
and a branch of South Creek, the grant being known as
Luddenham (after the family estate in England).
Gregory had, on January 1, 1810, been granted by
Macquarie, in the same district, 2000 acres known as
Mersey Farm, 2000 acres known as Lee Home, and 280
acres called Yilliers Farm. Here stock raising was
carried on extensively, and John at Luddenham also breed-
ing horses. His horses were constantly straying over the
Nepean, and Governor Macquarie prohibited him from
recovering them.*
NEWINGTON
On April 24, 1807, John was granted 1290 acres, which
was officially described as being bounded on the north by
ttlhid, Vol. XIII., p. 580.
§§ Watson : History of Sydney Hospital, p. 16.
*IUd, Yol. XIII., p. 576.


the Parramatta River, on the east by the flats and Hackings
Creek, on the sonth by the road leading from Sydney to
Parramatta, and on the north-west by Dnck River, reserv-
ing the grants of Waterhouse, Shortland, Archer, and
Haslem, also reserving one chain wide for a road from
Shortland and other farms to the Sydney and Parramatta
Road.f This grant he called “Newington,” and on June
12, 1807, John advertised in the Sydney Gazette that*
Whereas His Excellency the Governor having granted to John
Blaxland a certain tract of land, known by the name of Newington
Farm, bounded by the road leading to Parramatta, Duck Eiver,
Hacking’s Creek, and the river leading to Parramatta.
All persons are hereby required not to trespass, as they will
be prosecuted as the law directs.
John Blaxland,
Parramatta
12th June 1807,
The land was considered of no value, portion of d
being low-lying and subject to the overflowing of the river.
John made an embankment, and enclosed about 100 acres.
Here he erected a “pretty cottage,” and laid out the
grounds in gardens, orchards, and ornamental plots.§ He
also erected a boiling house for the making of salt, the
works for which occupied about eight acres. He had
brought out from England a Mr. Rutter, an experienced
salt maker, who said that the reason the salt made in the
colony would not keep meat was that the bitter was not
extracted from it.ft
John advertised that he would sell at his stores, New-
ington, salt at £5 per ton or 7/- for 112 lbs.,|| and that:—
For the convenience of land carriage salt will be stored at the
lodge on the Parramatta Road, as well as at the works at the
waterside.
In 1827, eight tons of salt were being sent to Sydney
per week. Remains of the salt works can still be plainly
seen. In 1831, a Board of Survey reported that the
colonial salt was of the best kind.*
II Sydney Gazette, November 8, 1822.
tßegistrar of Grants, Lands Department.
tHistorical Becords of New South Wales, Yol. VI., p. 310.
SCunningham : Two Years in New South Wales, Vol. 1., p. 87.
t Historical Becords of New South Wales, Yol. VI., p. 310.
* Australian, April 22, 1831.
21
John and Gregory Blaxland.


John Blaxland in late life.
(From an oil painting by Maurice Felton in the possession of Miss Alice O. Walker,
of Rhodes, only surviving grand-daughter of John Blaxland.)
In 1816-17, a factory for the manufacture of blankets
and tweed was commenced.t
In 1819, John was prepared to grind grain for 1/-
per bushel at his mill, then recently erected. It was
stated in a notice in the Sydney Gazette of July 5, 1819,
that the stones of the mill were the production of the
colony, and, as an afterthought, the notice added : “Any
person found taking stones from his Luddenham estate
will be prosecuted.”
t Journal, Parramatta Historical Society, Vol. 1., p. 8.1.


John also erected a bone-crushing mill and lime works,
and sowed hemp and flax, and at one time had as many
as 300 hands employed in his various concerns. He
employed the best means for tilling the ground. In 1812
he imported two ploughs of an improved principle, which
were said “to perform as much as one man and two horses
as the common plough was capable of with two men and
four horses.”
John brought his cattle from his Luddenham estate to
Newington, where it was slaughtered in his abattoirs and
converted into corned meat.
In 1824, John was awarded a prize of twenty Spanish
dollars by the Agricultural Society of New South Wales!
(of which John was a subscriber and member of the first
Committee§) at the quarterly meeting at Walker’s Inn,
Parramatta, for the best team of four bullocks. In 1836
we find him exporting 37 bales of wool by the Lady
Rowena.
About the year 1832 the present Newington House
was erected, a typical type of old colonial mansion, with
its beautiful portico, somewhat now hidden by creepers,
supported by fourteen perfectly cut pillars; each pillar
is one solid piece of stone, said to have been obtained from
a quarry at Pyrmont. Here in this old colonial mansion
the Squire of Newington entertained lavishly all the best
people in the land, in which he was ably assisted by his
beautiful wife and handsome sons and lovely daughters.
In 1838, John erected the small chapel to which he
gave the name of St. Augustine. Here every morning
the tutor read the prayers to the members of the household.
One of John’s daughters led the singing, which was accom-
panied on the harp. The old chapel still stands, but is
now used for baser purposes, having been a dairy and is
now a store.
The story of Newington would be incomplete without
mention of a bushranging One Tuesday evening
in April, 1830, John was driving home from the races, and
when about half way down the avenue from the road to
tSydney Gazette, October 14, 1824.
§Royal Australian Historical Society Journal, Vol. IX., p. 311;
Journal, Royal Society, Vol. LIT., p. 225.
April 24, 1830.


Chapel erected by John Blaxland at Newington in 1838.
[Photo, by C. Price Conigrave.
the house, two ruffians arrived with muskets, and two others
with pistols made their appearance. They seized the
coachman and demanded John’s cash, but fortunately he
had only a few shillings. The bushrangers threatened to
blow out John’s brains, and ordered him to strip. He
naturally objected and remonstrated with them, saying
that in his infirm state the consequences might be fatal.
While this was going on two of John’s daughters came
riding down the avenue, and as soon as they saw what was
happening, immediately rode back to the house for help.
The bushrangers then made off.
John’s second daughter, Anna, as a hobby reared silk-
worms. Both Mrs. Macquarie and Lady Brisbane sent


her mulberry leaves for the pets.|| Her brother George
took the skeins of silk to China and had it made into a
beautiful scarf, which Anna wore at her wedding to
Thomas Walker, at St. John’s Church, Parramatta, on
January 4, 1823. She was probably the first person to
begin silk culture in Australia.
Two lodges at entrance to drive to Newington House.
At the corner of Sutherland Street and Parramatta
Road stands an old quaint octagonal-shaped building.
This was one of the lodges which stood at the entrance to
the avenue leading to Newington from Parramatta Road.
There were two originally, one on each side of the avenue.
These were erected probably in the ’twenties, and one was
demolished some years ago. The salt was stored in this
lodge.
One day the convicts working on the road saw Mr.
Blaxland drive off in his carriage, and, anticipating that
he would return at night with the money to pay the weekly
wages of the employees of Newington, four convicts took
possession of one of the lodges. When the carriage
arrived it was held up, but Mr. Blaxland was not there,
and the only thing of any value in the carriage was a
small jar of rum. They tied the coachman and footman
up and locked them in the lodge, and, putting on their
prisoners’ top hats and overcoats, drove to the Governor
Burke Hotel at Parramatta, where they purchased more
ll Lone Sand, July 1, 1920; Eoyal Australian Historical Society
Journal, Vol. V., p. 271.


rum and then set out for a joy ride, the carriage eventually
being found disbanded near Campbelltown.
In January, 1841, the Australian Mining Company
proposed to enter into negotiations with John Blaxland
for the purpose of sinking a shaft to mine for coal. It
was pointed out that Mr. Blaxland had struck coal at a
depth of twenty feet when he sunk a shaft some years
previously. It was reported to be a good bitumous coal.
However, nothing further came of the project.
On January 13, 1829, John Blaxland was appointed
to a seat in the Legislative Council, which he retained
until the dissolution on January 5, 1843. He was ap-
pointed as a nominee member to the new Council in July,
1843. He distinguished himself by registering protests
in the Estimates for 1833* against (1) the payment of a
yearly pension of £750 out of the colonial revenue to the
Colonial Secretary, Macleay, in consideration of his
services as an officer of the Imperial Governmentf; (2)
the payment of the salary of £5OO a year proposed to be
paid to James Busby, resident of New Zealand. John
objected to saddling the colonial revenue with charges
which the Imperial Government ought to meet.J He also
registered protests against the inclusion of the charges for
police and gaols in the Estimates.
On April 4, 1844, John was one of the meeting of
stockholders who met at the Royal Hotel to protest against
the proposed “Squatting Regulations.”§
The fact that John uniformly opposed Government
measures in the new Council led Governor Gipps to com-
ment that he did not regret having appointed him because
his very opposition prevented the nominee of the Crown
from appearing in the Council, as a distinct body, opposed
to the majority of the representatives of the people, and
had a tendency to lessen the dislike which was at first
exhibited to the presence of nominees in the Council.
John resigned his seat in the Council on September 13,
1844. It was decided to present him with an address
signed by three hundred of his fellow-colonists in grateful
*Historical Records of Australia, Vol. XVI., p. 775.
tFlannigan : History of New South Wales, Vol. 1., p. 382.
tßoyal Australian. Historical Society Journal, Vol. XVI., p. 208.
§ll>id, p. 214.


appreciation of his unshaken determination to uphold their
constitutional rights. The colonists decided also to present
John with a piece of plate, but he, having died before the
arrangements were complete, it was handed over to his son
Edward.
Newington House during its occupation by Newington College.
The following obituary notice appeared in the Sydney
Morning Herald on August 6, 1845;
On the sth instant, at half past seven o’clock in the morning
in the 78th year of his age, after a severe but prolonged illness
John Blaxland of Newington, many years a member of the old
Legislative and late member of the present Legislative Council.
By his family and his friends he was universally beloved; by the
public he was highly respected and admired for the uniform good
sense, consistency and firmness which marked his political career.
John was buried in the vault attached to the Chapel
of St. Augustine. The remains of his wife were also laid
to rest there on her death on May 31, 1852, aged 77 years.
Both remains were later removed to St. John’s Cemetery,
Parramatta.


GOVERNOR MACQUARIE’S GRAND TOUR OF THE
INTERIOR.
Governor Macquarie, having decided to make his first
inspection of the interior of the colony, set out on his
grand tour on November 6, 1810, making Parramatta his
base. On Tuesday, the 6th, he christened the township
of Liverpool. On Saturday, the 10th, accompanied by
“Rev. Mr. Marsden and Mr. Blaxland,” he visited the
farms between One Tree Hill and Kissing Point. Mac-
quarie wrote in his journal^;—
I went with the latter gentleman to see his farm the Brush
which is a very snug, good farm and very like an English one in
point of comfort and convenience; —We returned home to dinner
between 5 and G o ’clock and Mr. Blaxland dined with us.
Sunday 11th went to church [(St. John’s) Macquarie observing
that] there was a numerous and respectable congregation at church
and Mr. Marsden gave a very good sermon.
On Monday, the 12th, Macquarie rode out before break-
fast to inspect “the new road lately begun between Parra-
matta and the Hawkesbury.” After breakfast he visited
“Mr. Blaxland’s Salt Pans near the flats,” and returned
to dinner with him, Mr. and Mrs. Marsden. On the 4th
he visited the farms in the districts of Field of Mars,
Northern Boundary, Dundas, and Baulkham Hills, accom-
panied by Mrs. Macquarie and Mrs. Bent, Secretary
Campbell, Hassell, Dr. Redfern, Captain Antill, and Mr.
Blaxland; and on Friday, the 16th, he set out for the Cow-
pastures, accompanied by Mr. Blaxland and the rest of
the party, eight of them all told.
Macquarie records that on the following day:—
Mr Blaxland and Warbly went out early and shot a wild bull.
They caught five calves, three of which w T ere ‘ ‘ sent home to be
served for veal for their table and one each was given to John
Warbly, the guide, and to Wm Cosgrove, a free man servant to
Mr Blaxland. ’ ’
Some excitement was caused by Mr. Meehan being
thrown from his horse and dislocating his arm, but Dr.
Redfern, one of the party, immediately set it.
On Wednesday, the 28th, Macquarie again set out,
accompanied by Gregory Blaxland, at “whose farm hut”
TIMS. Journal, Mitchell Library.


they halted for breakfast, and then inspected the farm,
the Governor commenting that:-—-
This is entirely as yet a grazing farm with only a miserable
hut for the stock keepers and stockyards for the cattle The land
in some parts is tolerably good and pretty well watered, but it is
better adapted to grazing than tillage.
The party then visited Gregory’s second large farm.
On Thursday, the 29th, Macquarie, accompanied by
Gregory, decided to explore “a new or Western River
some time since discovered by Mr. Evans.” Setting out
from Thomas Jamieson’s farm, the Governor and Mrs.
Macquarie were in one boat, and Antill, Cleaveland,
Maclaine, Redfern, Meehan, G. W. Evans and G. Blaxland
in another. They reached the basin in four hours, and
ascended the Warragamba River as far as the first fall A
On Friday, the 30th, Gregory left the party, and
Macquarie recorded his departure in these words:—
Our pleasant facetious travelling companion Mr Gregory Blax-
land took his leave of us this morning and returned home to attend
his own concerns.
THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
For twenty-five years the secret of the Blue Mountains
had remained unsolved. Various attempts had been made
to find out what lay beyond, and all had failed. As stated
previously, Gregory accompanied Governor Macquarie on
the trip up the Warragamba; he made another expedition
with three European servants and two natives and one
horse with provisions, setting out to explore “the bank of
the low pasture.” He had to return sooner than he ex-
pected owing to one of his men becoming ill ; unknown to
Gregory, he had been ill when he set out, and died soon
after their return.
Gregory then formed the idea that if he could get on
the high land on the right hand side or north bank of the
Western River, and pursue the same plan of travelling as
he had done before, he must inevitably get into the interior
* (C Governor Macquarie” : Eoyal Australian Historical Society
Journal, Vol. VII., p. 821.


of the country, f He found a man who had been accus-
tomed to hunt kangaroos in the mountains who agreed to
guide the horses to the top of the first ridge. He men-
tioned the plan to Governor Macquarie, who thought it
reasonable, and expressed the wish that he should make
the attempt, but offered no assistance.
Gregory invited W. C. Wentworth and Lieutenant
William Lawson to accompany him. Lie also asked Mac-
quarie for the loan of a false horizon, but was refused.
A few days before setting out Gregory called on Macquarie
and had dinner with him, but although Macquarie wished
him success, there was a reservedness in his manner for
which Gregory could not account.
The party, consisting of Gregory, W. C. Wentworth,
and W. Lawson, with four servants —one was named James
Burns—and four horses loaded with provisions, etc., and
five dogs, set out from Blaxland’s farm on the South Creek
on Tuesday, May 11, 1813. The Nepean was crossed at
Chapman’s farm, and the first camp was pitched at the
foot of the mountains. The story of their progress across
the Blue Mountains is too well known to need repetition
here.
On the 28th they crossed Mount York at about 5
o’clock, “when they took up their station on the edge of
a precipice. ’ ’ Wentworth was impressed with the ‘ ‘ Mighty
Ridge that, from thy azure brow, survey’st these fertile
plains, that stretch below.”
How mute, how desolate, thy stunted woods,
How dread thy chasms, where many an eagle broods;
How dark thy caves, how lone thy torrents roar
As down thy cliff's precipitous they pour —
Broke on our hearts, when first with venturous tread
We dared to rouse thee from thy mountain bed;
Till, gained with toilsome step thy rocky heath,
We spied the cheering smokes ascend beneath ....
Till, nearer seen, the beauteous landscape grew,
Opening like Canaan on rapt Israel’s view.
Descending from Mount York, “they camped on the
Monday night by the side of a fine stream of water, at a
short distance from a high hill in the shape of a sugar
tLetter of Gregory Blaxland to Sir Joseph Banks, November 10,
1816 : British Museum, MS. 8958.


‘ ■ ■" . • , ' \
' :
JL . ; £\
■ ; : .. ■ ;
\0 ' ■
■> fay. <4^,' /' 'tjr'n***'
' v£*u*.„'■<*&* $***. f Ms /ftcKtxfaUt. *ft*i
Arndt*- >$£*/*«/<✓ (*!*.'. yn*..*-«} - /%<«***< &«
Gregory Blaxland.
(From sketch by unknown artist, from the original in the Mitchell Library.)
loaf” (named later by Evans, Mount Blaxland), “In
the afternoon they ascended its summit from whence they
descried all round, forest, or grass land, sufficient in extent
. ... to support the stock of the colony for the next thirty
years. ’’* Blaxland saw the new country through the eyes
of a pastoralist, whilst the military mind of Lawson im-
mediately turned to the expected French raid on Port
Jackson, when he wrote : —-
*Blaxland’s Journal.


The best watered country of any I have seen in this colony
. . . . and no difficulty in making a good road to it; and take it in a
Political point of view, if in case of an invasion it will be a safe
retreat for the inhabitants with their families and stock. For this
part of the country is so formed by Nature that a few men would
be able to defend the passes against a large body.t
On June 1 they commenced the return journey, arriv-
ing back on Sunday, June 6, “in good health after an
absence of 26 days and having accomplished what no other
white man had hitherto done.”
Gregory called on the Governor to inform him of their
success, but he appeared dissatisfied, as if he neither ex-
pected nor wished them to succeed.
It was not until February 12, 1814, that a General
Order was issued, and then most of the praise was given
to G. W. Evans. Macquarie grandiloquently concluded
the General Order by saying that he
is happy to embrace this opportunity of conveying his acknowledge-
ments to Gregory Blaxland, and William Charles Wentworth Esquires,
and Lieutenant William Lawson .... for their enterprising and
arduous exertions on the Tour of Discovery when they effected a
passage over the Blue Mountains and proceeded to the Extremity
of the First Valley. The Governor desirous to confer on these
gentlemen substantial marks of his sense of their Meritorious Exer-
tions on this occasion means to present each of them with a grant
of 1000 acres of land in this newly discovered country.
Lawson was the only one of the explorers who obtained
a grant of 1000 acres in the newly discovered country.
Gregory sold his “order” for 1000 acres to John Connell
for £250.
Gregory never received the recognition to which he
was entitled. From Brush Farm to Sir Joseph Banks on
November 10, 1816, he wrote: —
Sir, —From some conversation I have had with Mr Vickery,
surgeon of the Elizabeth transport, I find that the business of our
having passed the mountains and opened the interior of the country
has either been misrepresented or not been fully explained in England.
As it was by your recommendation that I was sent out to settle
in the colony, it may be pleasing to you to hear how far by my
exertions I have been able to remunerate the British Government
for the expense occurred in my first establishment, which I always
considered myself bound to attempt the first opportunity that might
offer.
The object of attempting a passage over the Western ur Blue
tLawson’s Journal.


Mountains I always considered in a favourable point of view, and
about two years and a half before I set out on the expedition, in
which we succeeded, I went with three European servants, two
natives, and one horse to carry provisions and necessaries to explore
the back of the low pasture, in which I found I could travel with
ease by keeping at the heads of the runs of water which emptied
themselves into some river in the interior —to the westward, as I
supposed—but at the same time I found myself turned evidently
every day to the coast eastward, directly contrary to the course I
wished to proceed. I had a man in this expedition taken ill, who
died on his return. I did not know it, but afterwards found he
was unwell when he set out. I was by this accident, forced to
return back many days sooner than I at first intended, although I
had, for a day or two before I did return, considered it impossible
to penetrate the interior from the low pasture, either with horses or
cattle.
Some time after which expedition I went up the Western Eiver
with a party as far as we could get with a boat. I then found
that the river ran in the same direction I had before travelled, and
that the different runs of water I had before headed in the low
pasture emptied themselves into that river.
I then first formed the idea that if I could get on the high
land on the righthand side or north bank of the Western Eiver, and
pursue the same plan of travelling as I had done before, that 1
must inevitably be carried into the interior of the country, which
idea I mentioned afterwards to his Excellency. He thought it
reasonable, and wished me to attempt it, but offered me no assistance.
I made up my mind to attempt it, and requested two other
gentlemen to accompany me, and explained to them the plan of
travelling I proposed, in -which they acquiesced, and agreed to go
with me, and at the same time it was proposed by one of them that
i should apply to his Excellency to lend us a false horizon, for which
1 did apply but was refused. I also called on him a few days
before we were ready to set out. I could not see him in the
morning, but was asked to dinner. I did not mention the subject
to him, nor did he mention it himself, which I expected he would
have done. When I took leave in the evening I informed him we
intended setting out immediately. He wished us success, but there
was a reservedness in his manner, which I could not account for.
In a few days after my dining with his Excellency we set out
on our expedition, with four European servants, four horses, and
some dogs. In about three weeks we penetrated nearly eight miles
beyond the mountains by keeping the runs of water which emptied
themselves into the Western Eiver on our left hand, and the runs
of water which emptied themselves into the Eiver Grosse on our
right hand, until we came to the top of the mountains, when we
were forced to go about twenty-five miles along their western side
along a steep precipice round the foot of Mount Banks to the
northward, before we could find a passage between the rocks to get
our horses through on to the earth that laid against the side of
the mountain. For further information respecting our journey I
beg leave to refer you to the copy of my journal, which I have
enclosed. ! '


When I returned I called on the Governor, and informed him
of our success. He did not doubt my statement, but appeared
dissatisfied, since which I have had reason to suppose he neither
expected or wished us to succeed. That must remain in doubt.
His conduct to me ever since has been perfectly inexplicable. He
has endeavoured to give to others as much of the merit due to us
as possible. He has named the pass down the mountains with
another person’s name, who only followed our steps, and also a river
at the foot of the mountains we discovered with the same person’s
name, which may leave it in doubt to posterity who were the real
discoverers.
May I request, Sir, that you will have the goodness to explain
to his Majesties’ Ministers how far I have endeavoured to be of
service to the colony since I have been in it, and how far in your
opinion I have succeeded, and how far it may be considered I have
been able to make a return on my part for the expense incurred by
Government in the first instance. I have memorialed Lord Bathurst
on the subject, and offered to explore the interior of the country
further in any direction possible that might be required, but I have
heard nothing further respecting it, nor have I received an answer.
I remain, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
G. Blaxland.
GREGORY BLAXLAND AND THE WINE INDUSTRY.
Gregory Blaxland, soon after his arrival in 1806,
purchased from D’arcy Wentworth the Brush Farm, which
had previously been the property of William Cox. The
farm had an area of about 455 acres.* He secured some
vine cuttings at the Cape of Good Hope on his voyage to
New South Wales, and immediately planted them on
arrival. He wrote that
the vines in general are subject to two different diseases of blight
in the colony; one destroys the young shoots and leaves in the early
part of the season, which stops their growth and destroys their
blossom; they appear as if burnt or scalded; the other affects the
grapes as soon as they are grown to the size of small peas; it
appears as a black speck on the berry with a small puncture in the
centre after which they remain hard and sour and never fill with
juice, nor ripen, and if the speck extends far the berry entirely
dries up and perishes.t
Gregory experimented with every kind of vine he could
obtain, and found that there were eight kinds which were
the least susceptible to the disease.
*Royal Australian Historical Society Journal, Vol. XIII., p. 371.
t Transactions of Society of Arts, etc., Vol. XLI., p. 285.


In September, 1816, he prepared some land at Brush
Farm by trenching for planting a vineyard, which he
planted with the Black Constantia grape from the Cape.
At last, by continual experimenting, he found a type that
appeared to be immune from the blight. He says that,
although some of the new type were planted alongside badly diseased
vines the new variety was unaffected and ‘ ‘ flourished the whole season
and made vigorous shoots many feet long. ’ ’
Brush Farm House.
[Photo, by J. K. S. Houison.
He also decided to change the situation of the vine-
yard, and soon had 40 rods planted with the new variety,
which lie thought to be the Claret grape. He raised mote
than 200 young plants from seeds, as he thought they
would be “much more assimilated to the nature of the
climate.” Writing from Brush Farm on November 28,
1819, he stated that the variety he had decided upon was
still flourishing.
The Royal Society of Arts had offered a medal for
‘ ‘ the finest wine of not less than 20 gallons of good market-
able quality made from the produce of Vineyards in New
South Wales.”
In March, 1822, one quarter of a pipe of red wine was
shipped from Sydney by Gregory. About ten per cent, of
brandy had been added to it to enable it to stand the
voyage. This was the first export of wine from Australia.


The exhibit was awarded the large silver medal by the
Royal Society of Arts for 1823. The judges stated that
it appeared to be a light but sound wine with much of the odour
and flavour of ordinary claret, or rather holding an intermediate
place between that wine and the red wine of Nice. The general
opinion seemed to be that although the present sample from the
inexpertness of the manufacturer and the youth of the wine, is by
Large Silver Medal of Royal Society of Arts (1823) and Gold Ceres Medal (1828)
awarded to Gregory Blaxland.
(These medals are now in the custody of the Mitchell Library, Sydney.)
no means of superior quality, yet it affords a reasonable ground of
expectation that by care and time it may become a valuable article
of export.
In 1827, when Gregory was selected to take home the
petition soliciting Trial by Jury and Taxation by Repre-
sentation, he took with him a pipe of wine, regarding which
the judges of the Royal Society of Arts stated:—
On tasting the samples it was the general opinion that both
of them are decidedly better than the wine for which in 1823 Mr
Blaxland obtained the large Silver Medal of the Society and that
they were wholly free from the earthy flavour which unhappily
characterises most of the Cape wines.
Gregory was awarded the Gold Ceres Medal for 1827-8,
which was presented to him by His Royal Highness the
Duke of Both these medals are now in the
custody of the Mitchell Library.
tßobart Town Gazette.


During the years preceding 1827 popular movements
such as Representative Government, Trial by Jury and
Taxation by Representation sprang up. These movements
culminated in a requisition to the Sheriff, John Mackaness,
to call a public meeting on January 26, 1827.' * The
requisition was signed by D’arcy Wentworth, Sir John
Jamieson, J. T. Campbell, G. and J. Blaxland, A. McLeod,
W. Lawson, G. Druitt, J. Machenry, T. Raine, William
Cox, A. Bell, R. Waddell, S. Lord, R. Campbell, junr.,
S. Terry, William Hutchinson, John Dickson, J. Connell,
T. Moore, W. Redfern, R. and D. Cooper, and W. C.
Wentworth. At the meeting representatives of all the
prominent families, with the exception of the family of
John Macarthur, attended, and the petition praying for
“Trial by Jury and Taxation by Representation and an
Elective Assembly was unanimously carried by the voice
of Australia.”
Sir John Jamieson, Gregory Blaxland, and John
Mackaness were deputed to wait on the Governor, Sir
Ralph Darling, and present him with the petition, and
Gregory Blaxland was to be entrusted with copies to take
to England to present to the House of Lords and House
of Commons.t
While in England, Gregory had his Journal of the
Tour of Discovery across the Blue Mountains published,
and dedicated it to John Oxley Parker.
In the latter Twenties Gregory established a salt
works at Newcastle, but they were not successful, and he
closed them down in 1828. During the same year he
successfully appealed against the heavy duty on brandies
used in the manufacture of wine, and was allowed a draw-
back of duty on the amount actually used.| This year he
also secured a “reduction in the duty on oil of Rape Seed
from £39/18/- to £1 per Tun.”§
He also became interested in the culture of tobacco
in New South Wales. He was particularly interested in
sheep and cattle fodders, and carried on experiments with
*Eistorical Records of Australia, Yol. XIII., pp. 836 and 50;
and Sydney Gazette, January, 1827.
t Sydney Gazette.
t Historical Records of Australia, Yol. XIV., p. 322.
§7 bid, Yol. XVI., p. 371.


several kinds of fodder grasses. He introduced the buffalo
grass and the cultivation of oats for hay, but all his work
in this direction seems now to be forgotten.
Gregory died at the Vineyard Estate, near Parra-
matta, on January 1, 1853, and his remains were laid to
rest in All Saints’ Churchyard at Parramatta. His wife,
Elizabeth, predeceased him, having died on December 28,
1820, aged 47 years, and was buried in the old Sand Hills
Cemetery. 11l Ail life'
In conclusion, I think we must consider the conditions
in New South Wales before summing up the characters of
John and Gregory. The colony at the time of their
arrival was nothing more than a prison settlement, ruled
over by a Governor who was either a naval or military
despot. The currency of the colony was rum, and, when
Bligh attempted to stop the rum traffic, the officers of the
New South Wales Corps, who had the monopoly of trade,
deposed him.
Macquarie considered that New South AVales was “a
penitentiary or asylum on a large scale,” over which he
was to reign as a wise and benevolent Gaoler, and he hoped
that by treating these ‘ ‘ children of misfortune, ’ ’ as he was
pleased to term the convicts, “as men not altogether with-
out hope,” some at least of them would make their way
back to their original rank in society and would, as emanci-
pists, become small farmers, etcA There was no place
for the wealthy free settler in his plan.
Such was the environment of the colony when John
and Gregory arrived. The military officers resented any
intrusion in the colony by free settlers who might tend to
break their stranglehold on trade, especially the rum traffic.
The Governor, in receiving well-to-do free settlers in
his dominion, resented the consequent loss of autocratic
power, which their freedom necessarily limited. So John
and Gregory, as the forerunners of many pioneers of the
land, had to run the gauntlet of the displeasure and
opposition of both the Governors and military officers.
The situation is well summed up by Jose;—
He left England a minor magnate, about to confer on a raw
community the gifts of breeding and experience. He found himself
* Historical Itecords of Australia, Vol. IX., p. 442.


in Sydney regarded by the Governor as a horse-leech, by the petty
military bureaucracy as an interloper; anxious only to do the work
he had been selected for, he was refused the land, limited as regarded
labour, dragged unwillingly into local political squabbles of which
he knew little and cared less, snubbed when he suggested the fulfil-
ment of promises made to him by the authorities in England. Bligh
and Macarthur between them made his return to England a purga-
tory; when he reached Sydney again, he was confronted with the
solemn and not very intelligent disapproval of Macquarie. There
was a good deal in all this to sour any man’s temper.t
John was anxious to have his agreement fulfilled,' so
that he might get on uninterrupted with the business in
which he had set his hopes—cattle raising. He was not
anxious to enter the petty quarrels and intrigues that were
constantly going on around him. I think Macquarie
realised this, because when he sent his “private and con-
fidential” despatch to Earl Bathurst in 1817 concerning
his “secret though not avowed enemies,” he only charac-
terised John and Gregory as “discontented,” whereas he
said that Rev. Samuel Marsden was both “discontented,
intriguing and vindictive”; Mr. W. H. Moore, solicitor,
was “seditious, intriguing and discontented.” He even
accused John Oxley of being “intriguing and discon-
tented.” Surely this was an acknowledgment that John
and Gregory were not so bad after all.
After reading the various Governors’ Despatches, some
persons might be inclined to believe that the Blaxland
brothers were discontented and lazy drones, and that was
the worst charge that the Governors could bring against
them; but let us look at the other side of the question.
The most serious crime they committed was that they asked
for the fulfilment of their agreement, which for one excuse
or another was continually put off, and to be allowed to
breed cattle instead of raise wheat.
There is no doubt that New South Wales, and indeed
Australia, owes a great deal to both John and Gregory
Blaxland. John was the real founder of the cattle
industry, which he endeavoured to place on a sound
footing. He did for the cattle industry what Macarthur
and Marsden did for the sheep and wool industry. He
led the way in the manufacture of salt, and pioneered the
salt meat trade. In his parliamentary career he did not
t ßuilders and Pioneers of Australia, p. 153.
John a7id Gregory Blaxland.,


take an active part in debate, but when any matter arose
which John thought was detrimental to the colony, i.e.,
the charging of Imperial pensions to colonial revenue, he
vigorously opposed it. He thereby earned the title of
“Protector of the Public Purse.”
Gregory, being the junior partner, was, in consequence,
perhaps less conspicuous, but no less deserving of praise
for his share in establishing the cattle industry. But
Gregory’s chief claim to fame —and in the achievement ot
which he certainly eclipsed his brother —lies in his historic
journey across the Blue Mountains. The name of Blax
land has been made famous by this exploit. While every-
thing else that they did seems to have unfortunately been
forgotten, this episode has always been remembered.
Few people seem to realise that Gregory was the real
founder of the wine industry. Invariably the credit
seems to have been given to others, but undoubtedly when
others failed Gregory persevered and persisted, until lie
was in a position to export the first wine from tins
continent.
It needed some courage for men and women of refine-
ment and education, such as the Blaxlands and their wives
were, to leave the comfort of their homes in England,
where they had an assured social standing, to_ face and
endure the rough hardships of the early colonial life in
New South Wales.
Despite the unfair oppression to their rights and
ambitions, they continued “the even tenor of their way,”
and it is a tribute to their dogged perseverance and intrepid
determination that, in the face of all difficulties and
hindrances placed in their way, they eventually won
through. Justly may it be said that, of all the pioneers
of this fair land of ours, John and Gregory Blaxland are
two of the greatest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
I desire to express my thanks to the Trustees and Staff of the
Mitchell Library; to Miss Alice Walker and Messrs. Guy Blaxland
and H. C. Blaxland for kindly making available family papers,
documents, etc.; and to Dr. Falkiner Blaxland, Miss E. Betts, Miss
A. Pollock, and Messrs W. H. Deane, Creagh, Tighe, and Dr. Norrie
for help kindly given.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by D. S. Ford, 44-50 Reservoir Street, Sydney




V, ■ ' > ■ / " J . V ; ';••• -1 ;■ i
f « * v - ' • , . *
■ ' ■ -- i ,. ' t \ ,2*. ‘ *■ ■■ > \ : ■ i
■ r - - * t *' . •-. * ■> ■■■'.■, ' *
.
- : *. V • VJ- ‘ ■ r\ * y , ■'
, ’ ■ 1 ; ' r? i ■ : ■ - 1 - * - -
■
.
'
1 . ~ . ft *-> *■ ‘ " -v * - r* \ - >
.
■ -A r -■ ■ J? , r- -;-'v V ,*?■?%; - *.-•;> ' - ‘ -
,
