

Presbyterian Church of Bnstralia. „ T _
v ; ;
John G. Raton, d.d‘'°
MISSIONARY TO THE NEW HEBRIDES.
A MEMORIAL LIFE FOR OUR CHILDREN
By REV. T. WATT LEGGATT,
J. CLERK NEW HEBRIDES SYNOD
And REV. W. M. M. ALEXANDER,
J. CLERK S. A. OF VICTORIA.
issued by the State Assembly of Victoria.
PRICE - ONE PENNY.
Arbuckle, Waddell & Fawckner, Printers, 20 McKillop St., Melbourne.




Jntrofcuction.
■
This little book is issued by our Assembly as a slight memorial
of a great and good man. It is hoped that every child in our homes,
schools and colleges may from it learn to love and follow Dr. Paton.
The story of his life is interesting to Australians, for no man did
more to make the name of Australia known and respected through-
out Christendom and among the leaders of men.
It will help every Christian to see how a man of humble origin
became saintly in character and apostolic in fervour. Look at him,
so mighty in winning men to Jesus that he is still remembered with
deep affection in the city slums where he worked, and in the sunny
isles of the Southern Seas, where he sowed the good seed of the
Word, and in the great Missionary Societies, where he awoke men
to new aims and new ideals.
But ; t is in the Sabbath Schools of our island-continent that Dr.
Paton should be held in undying esteem, because he made the scholars
there his partners in the great work of winning the New Hebrides
for Christ. The “ Dayspring ” was the children’s ship; for many
years they raised thousands of pounds to keep her afloat, as the
bearer of help and hope. The desire of our Church is that to the
generations following his name shall be known in our Sabbath
Schools and his work carried on to completion.
A “ John G. Paton ” Memorial Hospital is to be built at Vila, in
Efate, the commercial capital of the New Hebrides, and the head-
quarters of the British Resident. The children of our Church are
asked to show their respect for Dr. Paton’s memory by giving or
collecting one shilling each to help in building this hospital for
whites and blacks. But our Church desires still more that our
children will continue the good work to which Dr. Paton gave his
life, and send the gospel of light and love to those who are still
sitting in the darkness of heathenism.


IRcv. 3. (5. paton, 2).D
Bom /Ibap 24tb, 1824: 2)ieo January 28tb, 1907.
John Gibson Paton was the eldest of a family of five sons and six
daughters, and was born on the farm of Braehead, in Kirkmahoe,
Dumfriesshire, Scotland, in 1824, on the late Queen Victoria s
fifth birthday. His father, James Paton, was a stocking manu-
facturer in a small way—a man of high character and holy am-
bitions. Five years later he removed with his family to the village
Rev. J. G. Paton in 1864
of Torthorwald, about four miles from the town of Dumfries, to
which town they went every Lord’s Day to attend the Cameronian
Kirk, as became a family in whose veins ran the blood of the
Covenanters. John G. Paton received his education in the parish
school—at least, the sure foundations of it—but at the age of 12 he
had to begin and learn his father’s trade. But the love of learn-
ing had been implanted in his breast, and the key of knowledge
put into his hand, and he not only made a godd use of his oppor-
tunities, but he made opportunities to use. From six in the mom-


mg till ten at night were his working hours, with only two hours
off for meals, yet he made time to master the elements of Latin and
Greek. Thus, even at this early age, the prayers of his parents
were being answered, and their desire that their family might send
some of its members to the holy ministry was ultimately consum-
mated when Rev. J. G. Paton, D.D., Rev. Walter Paton (who
died a few years ago in Londonderry), and Dr. James Paton, D.D.,
of St. Paul’s Established Church, Glasgow, who died on the 22nd
December last, all entered the service of the Church.
By hard saving he was able to attend the Dumfries Academy for
a few weeks, after which he was employed in the Ordnance Survey
of the district, which would have given him a permanent appoint-
ment had not his heart been set upon higher things. He could not
bind himself in any way that would interfere with his preparation
for the ministry. Harvest time came, and he laboured diligently
in the fields at that toilsome work, and as the last of the crops were
gathered in, he received a reply to an application he had made for
Home Mission work in Glasgow. Two days later, with his not
bulky belongings tied up in a handkerchief, he started to walk 40
miles, on his way to Glasgow. By mission work and teaching he
maintained himself throughout the whole of his student career at
preparatory school, University and Divinity Hall.
Like many another Scottish student, he found college life a hard
battle, and while the cultivation of the intellect on oatmeal puts
iron into the will of the survivors, alas! how many brave and
even gifted souls have broken down in the struggle, or gone out
weakened for life! Indeed, but for a timely retreat to the fresh
country air, and the rich, warm milk of his country home, he would
have succumbed very early in his student curriculum. Soon he
became an agent of the Glasgow City Mission, in Green Street,
Calton, in connection with the Great Hamilton St. Church, be-
longing to the Reformed Presbyterians, Dr. Wm. Symmington
being then the minister. The district was a hard one to work, but
his personal influence soon made an impression, and services were
begun in a hay-loft over a cow-house, and afterwards continued in
a pile of buildings, which had been erected as an educational ex-
periment. Suitable quarters had no sooner been found than the
work grew apace, the nucleus of a congregation was gathered, and
eventually placed under the care of his brother Walter, since de-
ceased, and later on under the pastorate of Rev. J. Edgar, M.A.,
removing further East to a church in Bridgeton. In this Home
Mission work, Mr. Paton seemed to have found his proper sphere.
Singing classes, Mutual Improvement classes, and, above
all, Bible classes for young people, drew large numbers
both of young and old. The writer, who had the privilege of fol-
lowing him many years later as a missionary in that district, re-
members well the affectionate way in which he was spoken of by the
old residents, one of whom was never weary of telling of an address
given on the morning of a Communion Sabbath from the text:
"" With joy shall ye draw water from the wells of salvation.”


He was on the most brotherly and affectionate terms with the
young people of his charge; nor did he forget the old. When Dr.
Symmington, of Paisley, “ The Professor,” as the Cameronians
proudly termed him, died, the whole congregation of Great Hamil-
ton Street walked many miles to Paisley and back to hear the
funeral sermons. Many had forgotten to take food, but Home
Missionary Paton, with his usual forethought, had provided an
ample supply of scones and biscuits, so that none fainted by the
way, while by example and precept he encouraged the younger lads
to help the aged and infirm.
The work in Green Street was not all smooth sailing, for a num-
ber of low Roman Catholic Irish lived in the district, and many a
time a bucket of hot water or dirty ashes was accidentally thrown
down the dark stairs he was ascending. On one occasion an organ-
ised attempt—incited by the publicans around—was made to break
up his open-air meetings. The police, however, came to the rescue,
and the appearance beside him on the stair-head of a stalwart
Wesleyan police captain, who feared God, but did not regard with
favour evil men, frustrated all evil designs.
On one occasion, when visiting at night, he requested from a
woman a light to show him down the dark stairway, and she
thoughtlessly folded and lit the tract he had just left. A keen but
just rebuke informed her that it was light of another kind the
tract was meant to provide.
But studies were by no means neglected, and as his course drew
to a close the cry of the perishing heathen began to be persistent
and personal. Dr. Duff, from India, had aroused the attention
of Dr. Symmington, and he awoke his denomination to mission work
among the Jews in London and the Maoris in New Zealand, but
finding the latter field preoccupied, that Church sent out Dr. Inglis
as missionary to the New Hebrides, from which field both he and
Dr. J. Geddie, who was the pioneer missionary of Aneityum, sent
home urgent call for help. Doubtful of his own qualifications,
Mr. Paton for a time held back, but finding that no one else re-
sponded, he was constrained to offer himself. Remembering his
success in the home field, it is not surprising to find that very many
strongly opposed his proposal, and endeavoured to keep him at
home. One dear old Christian thought he had found a successful
argument when he said, “ You will be eaten by the cannibals ” ;
but Mr. Paton’s prompt reply was: " You will soon be laid in the
grave and be eaten by worms, but if I live and die serving the Lord
Jesus, it will make no difference whether I am eaten by cannibals
or by worms; and in the Great Day my resurrection body will
arise as fair as yours.”
It was very hard to leave his mission charge, and many a time
he was driven to prayer that he might be rightly guided, and his
parents helped him to a decision when they informed him that he
had been dedicated in infancy, their first-born, to be a missionary
of the Cross. It is interesting to remember that this devotion led
Mr. Copeland, a companion and fellow-student, also to offer him-


self for this work, and in after years he was associated with Dr.
Paton on Tanna, and then took charge of Futuna, which he held
till ill-health drove him from the Islands, and he became Editor
of the “ Presbyterian ” in Sydney.
On 23rd March, 1858, Messrs. Paton and Copeland were or-
dained missionaries, and on 16th April they sailed in the “ Clutha ”
for Melbourne, where they were warmly welcomed, especially by the
Heathen Native of Tanna.
Reformed Presbyterians. Not long after, they took passage in an
American ship for Aneityum, which, after a short but disagree-
able passage, they reached, and finally got on shore, after many
difficulties and dangers.
They were appointed to Tanna, where, 20 years before, the Rev.
John Williams had placed some Raratongan teachers, just the day
before he met his tragic death on Erromanga. Drs. Turner and
Nisbet, of the London Missionary Society, had settled there in
1843, but the determined hostility of the natives compelled their
retreat, after seven months’ residence. Port Resolution has had an
evil distinction in its resistance of the Gospel. As we have said,


they drove away Turner and Nisbet; they compelled Dr. Paton
to leave; they wore put the health of the Rev. T. Neilson, now
of Rochester, Victoria; they 'broke Mrs. Watt’s heart, and have
done their very best to weary out the patience of her husband, who
still holds the fort, and whose labours have at length been crowned
with success. Two elders were ordained there at the beginning of
the present year.
On the arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Paton and Mr. Copeland, with
their goods, the Tannese allowed them to land, but they would
make no greater promise than Samson’s tribesmen did to him, that
they would not themselves lay hands upon them, which, of course,
did not prevent them and natives elsewhere hiring “ man bush ”
(other natives from inland) to fall on them and destroy them if
possible.
The natives were found to be in a state of excitement over tribal
wars, which, indeed, was the normal condition of things with
‘man Tanna.” The missionaries had sometimes to stop work to
avoid the bullets from the combatants which were whistling over
their heads, and the Aneityum boy who had come with them as
cook complained with truth : “Missi, this is a dark land. At the boil-
ing springs they have cooked and feasted upon the slain. They have
washed the blood into the stream ; the waters are red; I cannot
get water to make your tea.”
Under such difficult and depressing circumstances the work began
in 1858, and strenuous efforts were made to acquire the language,
so as to teach the saving truth. Very chequered was the life •
gleams of hope, followed 'by weary days of gloom; seeming progress
cheered them, only to be blotted out by months of bitter opposition
and persecution. The young wife died on March 3, 1859, and her
infant son followed a few weeks later, and even their graves had
to be watched to save them from nameless desecration. Mr. Cope-
land was removed to Aneityum. Mr. Johnstone, who had come
from Nova Scotia to take up the work oil the other side of Tanna
(since the scene of the fruitful labours of Frank, Dr. Paton's third
son), died of fever and shock.
Hurricanes, epidemics of disease, and the bitter opposition of
godless traders, all increased the growing hostility of the heathen.
Dr. Paton held on manfully, almost single-handed, removing the
mission-house to a higher and healthier site, and refusing the offer
of a man-o -war captain and others to remove him to a safer sphere
of labour. The old chief, Nowar, whu had done his best according
to his lights to defend the missionary, at last urged him to leave.
Hoping against hope. Dr. Paton remained at his post till the
heathen attacked not only Nowar and his people, but the mission
itself, and further delay being madness, the native teachers gath-
ered up a few clothes and manuscript translations, and blankets,
and took refuge in Nowar’s village, from which they went on to the
Mathiesons, whom they found in the same plight as themselves.
Repeated attempts were made to murder them; on one occasion


their premises were set on fire, but a heavy tropical shower became
God’s minister to deliver them from an awful death. Finally, from
this perilous position they were rescued by a vessel sent by Dr.
Geddie from Aneityum, and after a weary voyage, they reached
that island in safety.
After careful consideration of the whole situation, the mission-
aries resolved that Dr. Paton should go up to Australia, and en-
deavour to procure a small vessel for the service of the mission. Sc
completely had he been stripped of his worldly goods, that on the
voyage up he had to make a shirt to provide a needful change.
Having arrived in Sydney, for a time every door seemed closed
to missionary appeal, but at last the thrilling story of the struggle
with the powers of evil in Tanna awoke a response, and by the time
the round of the southern colonies had been made, £5,000 had been
collected, of which £3,000 was set apart for a ship, to be built in
Nova Scotia, and as it seemed too large a ship for so few mission-
aries, it was resolved, with the concurrence of the Melbourne com-
mittee, that Dr. Paton should go to Scotland to secure more men.
This visit evoked great enthusiasm ; he was elected Moderator of
the Reformed Presbyterian Synod, and the support of the new mis-
sion ship was heartily undertaken by the children of the Church.
The year 1865 saw him back to the Islands with his wife, so well
known in our Mission alike for her charm and her culture, and
whose death two years ago left such a blank, not only in the heart
and home of our venerable friend and father, but in the religious
and philanthropic circles of Melbourne.
Another visit had to be paid to Australia to put the support of
the mission vessel on a satisfactory basis, but in 1866 he returned,
and now as the first foreign missionary of the Victorian Church.
He and his wife were very anxious to take up work on Tanna; but
Synod felt that the risk was still too great, and appointed them to
Aniwa. The beneficial results of the Union of 1859 and the moving
appeals of Dr. Paton led to wider and deeper interest in the New
Hebrides, and men and money were forthcoming for advance move-
ments.
The story of the Mission on Aniwa must be read at length in the
" Autobiography of Dr. Paton,” and the unique letters of his de-
voted wife; but the state of Mrs. Paton’s health compelled her
withdrawal, and led her husband into his great work as missionary
advocate and collector.
To leave the work in the Islands was to him a bitter trial, and
many times did he plead to be allowed to return there, and live and
die among these people whom he loved so well, and for whom he had
been able to do so much. But the Church showed its wisdom in
keeping her devoted son to a work which no one but himself could
do, believing that the good that he could accomplish shut “ within a
single reef ” was not to be compared with the benefits that accrued
to many beyond themselves by the interest and enthusiasm for mis-


sionary work that his presence, his appeals, and his writings excited
throughout Christendom.
We have not space to follow him in these travels and deputations,
which carried such impulse to the Christian Church, and brought
back such munificent contributions for the work of God in the New
Hebrides. Suffice it to say that he did what no other man had
done, and which it will be long before another man will do.
Nor can we enumerate the honours which were heaped upon him,
each one of which he would have declined, and which he only valued
as being of use to him in the great cause he had at heart, the ad-
vancement of God’s kingdom, especially in the islands of the
Southern Seas.
We stand too near to this great man to do full justice to him
or to his eventful career and noble character. He felt intensely
on all subjects connected with his beloved Islands, and was bound
to provoke opposition, not only among interested opponents, but
even among his brethren who did not agree with him : but this is
certain, that though they might oppose his plans, they had nothing
for himself but love and admiration. He has been called a man of
one idea, but it was not the narrowness of prejudice, but of con-
centration on a woi'k to which he felt to be specially called by God.
To picture the man to those who had not the privilege of his
personal acquaintance, let us speak of his abounding liberality and
unfailing generosity. The great profits of his autobiography, which
were in every sense his own, were devoted to the service of the mis-
sion in some point where it was specially needy, large sums to the
Paton Hall for the training of native teachers at Tangoa, for the
hospital at Ambrim, and the mission funds of needy Churches.
He was generous to every one but himself; he lunched upon a
penny bun and a glass of water, that he might give to others; he
invariably travelled second class in the train, walked many a weary
mile, rather than spend money in travelling expenses ; and made no-
claim upon his committee for many a legitimate expense. Yet he
and his dear wife were full of tenderest thoughts for others. Prac-
tically they kept open house, and many a poor student who came to
see him went away with much more than kindly counsel and loving
blessing.
Notice him as he comes into a room where there are children; he
is interested in every one of them. It brings a lump into the throat
of many a parent in many a home, to remember how tenderly he
spoke to the “ wee lambs,” “ the little darlings,” and there was
never a child in the house but found his way by the unerring
instinct of love and trust, to Dr. Paton s side or knee. It is no
exaggeration to say that in thousands of homes in Australia,
Britain and America, Dr. Paton is at once the saint and the here-
of the little ones.
Observe him in a meeting where he is to speak, and realise his-
power over his audience, without any of the arts of the orator,
without any winsomeness of manner or excellence of voice, by sweet
simplicity, by sheer earnestness, by intense conviction, and by un-


adorned truth, he moved men to tears and liberality. It is a fact
that a distinguished mission secretary, decidedly opposed to his plan
of building a new mission ship, was so moved by his appeal that he
emptied his pocket into the plate when it went round for that very
object.
You see that he wears the “ blue ribbon ” ? His experiences of
student life taught him the value of total abstinence, his work
among the poor and lapsing masses confirmed his belief that the use
The Late Mrs. J. G. Paton.
of stimulants was the foe to every virtue, the friend of every vice,
while the havoc wrought by the drink-seller among the natives of
the New Hebrides filled his righteous soul with sorrow for the de-
luded victims, and shame that so-called Christian men should thus
do the work of the destroyer of souls.
While associating freely with all in any of the denominations
who loved the Lord Jesus, and were faithful to His word and will,
he was intensely loyal to his own Church, and, better than that,
absolutely faithful to his Master. He pled for missions to the


heathen, but never did he miss the opportunity of pressing the
claims of Christ upon every one of his hearers. It was a good
success to gather £BO,OOO for mission work in the New Hebrides;
it was better to win many a savage to the love and liberty which
Christ gives; but it was best of all to touch the consciences of
Christians everywhere, and win many a worker for the white mis-
sion fields of the world.
Now his labours on earth are finished. God gave him the desire
of his heart, and he worked on almost to the end. Returning
from a toilsome mission tour, he had to lie down, and after a few
weeks’ painful suffering, he passed to his eternal rest and reward.
THE FUNERAL.
On Tuesday, Jan. 29, prior to the removal of the casket con-
taining the remains from the residence of Mrs. Brown (mother-in-
law of Rev. Robert R. Paton), at Cross Street, Canterbury, where
Dr. Paton died, to the Presbyterian Church at Kew, a short ser-
vice was held, in which Bishop Langley, of Bendigo, and the Revs.
D. S. McEachran, H. M. Burns, H. G. Nicholls, and Pastor Heyer
took part.
When the cortege drew up at the gate of the Kew Church, there
were many ministers and elders in waiting. Mr. Barnaby, the
pastor, accompanied by Dr. Cairns and others, walked in front,
and the body was followed by Rev. Frank Paton and Mrs. Paton,
and Rev. Mr. Heyer (father of Mrs. Frank Paton), Rev. T. Watt
Leggatt, Junior Clerk of New Hebrides Synod, Dr, Macdonald, of
New Hebrides, Rev. G. Engel, of Korea, and Rev. T. Neilson,
who succeeded Dr. Paton on Tanna. The Foreign Missions Commit-
tee was represented by the Moderator and Revs. A. Stewart and
W. Fraser. As the mourners filed slowly into the church, the
chastened and beautiful strains of Chopin’s Funeral March were
heard throbbing through the building. The assemblage included
representatives from almost every Presbytery, and certainly from
every denomination. The Anglican Church sent Archdeacon Hind-
ley; the Methodist Church was represented by Dr. Fitchett; and
the Congregational Church by one of its Secretaries, Rev. A. H.
Wallace. The presence of these and other brethren testified to the
honour in which they held Dr. Paton, and once more showed that
Christianity is something nobler than all our interpretations of it.
After prayer by Rev. A. Stewart, Rev. J. Barnaby gave out the
hymn, “ O God, our help in ages past.” Then came the reading of
the 90th Psalm by Rev. T. Watt Leggatt, and of various New
Testament portions by Rev. G. Engel. The second prayer was then
offered by Rev. T. Neilson, and the hymn, “ Now the labourer’s
task is o’er,” was followed by the benediction, pronounced by the
Rev. Dr. Macdonald. During the brief but impressive service the
coffin, which was covered with wreaths, amid which lay the de-


ceased doctor’s hood, was placed in front of the pulpit. Slowly
and reverently the congregation filed out to the strains of the
“ Dead March.”
A walk of five minutes brought us to the cemetery, where a few
weeks ago we laid Dr. Rainy. The pall-bearers were Rev. D. S.
Maxwell, Rev. W. S. Rolland, Rev. A. Yule, Mr James Balfour,
M.L.C., Mr. A. Wilson, Mr. J .M. Campbell, Dr. Macfarland, and
Judge Eagleson.
The service at the grave was most impressively conducted by the
Moderator, and Revs. Cameron, Fraser and Alexander. Dr. Cairns
announced that he had received a telegram from the Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth, deeply regretting his inability to be present,
and expressive of his profound admiration for Dr. Paton. It was
further intimated that no address would be given that day, as
arrangements had been made to have it elsewhere. So, on the
sunny slope of the Boroondara Cemetery, with the bright blue Aus-
tralian sky overhead, we laid to rest the most venerable and beloved
missionary in the southern hemisphere. It was not the time for
mourning. Had he not done his work, and done it well ? And had
not his Master called him to his rest? We left him with thanks-
giving to God for the rich measure of grace imparted to Dr. Paton,
and with the comforting refrain in our hearts:
“ Father, in Thy gracious keeping,
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.”
{Tributes to Ibis flbemon?.
FROM MELANESIAN MISSION.
“ Southern Cross Log.’
“Dr. Paton, the most famous and most honoured of all Presbyterian
missionaries, the friend of Selwyn and Patteson, entered into his rest on
January 28. . . . We give thanks for a long life nobly spent, a course
finished with honour, a fight fought to the end. His name will long be
remembered when tales of brave soldiers of the Cross in heathen lands are
told, and the story of his life will continue to inspire men to devoted and
life long service for their Lord.”
FROM THE HOME LAND.
“ British Weekly.”
“Dr. Paton seemed to be the ideal missionary—hero and saint. His
venerable appearance—and he looked venerable long before he was old—his
musical voice, his glowing fervour, and his unstudied and untaught felicities
of speech won for him all hearts, and enabled him to raise sums of money
for the work to which he had devoted his life. But it is by his auto-
biography that he will live. It was most carefully and lovingly edited by
his younger brother, Dr. James Paton, of Glasgow, who died only three
weeks ago. The affection between the two brothers was singularly deep,
and Dr. Paton was able to understand and interpret the missionary’s rough.


jottings with a skill that was almost uncanny. Between them they produced
a classic, for we cannot imagine the time when believing hearts will not
glow over the .story of Baton’s work in the New Hebrides. The book has
signal literary merit. Dr. John Baton was one of the very few men who
did not need to acquire the power of expi'ession by toil and painstaking.
Whenever he set his pen to work, the result was fresh, spontaneous, vivid
and arresting. The emotion that pulses through every page, the noble pas-
sion for Christ and the souls for whom Christ died, set the heart on fire.
Long ago, before Dr. Baton was known in this country, the late Brofessor
Bruce, of Glasgow, said to us : ‘ What we need in the Church above every-
thing is a heroic missionary.’ There are many heroic missionaries, who
have not the power of touching men’s hearts, but John Baton had it, and he
never lost it. His life had more than its share of perils, and at least its
own share of sorrows and disappointments, but he rejoiced in the Lord
always, and he has completed his cpurse amidst such universal reverence
and affection as are accorded to very few.”
FROM AMERICA.
“ Missionary Review of the World.”
“ The patriarchs in modern missionary history are rapidly passing away.
Very few, if any, among them have been more conspicuous than the vener-
able missionary and apostle of the New Hebrides, whose patriarchal face
and apostolic career, whose vigorous addresses on missionary topics, and
whose splendid record of missionai’y service and heroism have attracted to
him both the attention and the affection of so many of God’s people through-
out the whole of the world.
“We have long counted his book as deservedly ranking among the twenty
greatest missionary stories of modern times, and we believe that Dr. Baton’s
name will stand among the foremost of the fifty great foreign missionaries
who belong to the Victorian age of missions.”
MINUTE OF ASSEMBLY, STATE OF VICTORIA.
“ The Assembly is constrained to place on its permanent record its pro-
found gratitude to Almighty God, the alone source of every good gift, that
He gave and continued so long the life of this eminent man, not only to the
Foreign Missions of the Bresbyterian Church of Victoria, but also to the
furtherance of the kingdom and work of Christ throughout the world. For
it may be truly said that while Dr. Baton was distinctively a Bresbyterian
missionary, his influence and his praise have been widespread in all the
Evangelical Churches of Christendom. The Assembly recalls with special
thankfulness his unaffected simplicity of character and singleness of aim,
his ready sympathy with every good work, his loyalty to the simple heroic
faith of our fathers, his courage, steadfastness and self-sacrificing devotion
in his own field of Christian enterprise through all vicissitudes, and the
splendid influence which he wielded over uncivilised men in the New
Hebrides Islands, and over Christians of both the northern and southern
hemispheres, being greatly used of God for the promotion of Christlike zeal,
and the progress of the evangelising of the world. In all its aspects his life
commands and will continue to command tributes of unfeigned admiration.
As an advocate of native rights, his local knowledge and his transparent
honesty gave him weight in the counsels of the nations, and evoked the
encomiums of statesmen. As a minister of the gospel, at home and abroad,
alike in youth and age, he was signally honoured in the persuasive efficacy
of his pathetic eloquence. As a missionary on the field, he won an entire
island population to the profession of Christianity. As a pleader for his


Master among the Churches, he moved not a few able and devoted men to
consecrate their lives in the winning of the heathen, and kindled enthusiasm
for the maintenance of missions. As an author, his autobiography has
currency wherever missions are owned, as part of Christian duty, and wher-
ever missionaries labour, being a graceful and gracious aid in the great
cause, by which he ‘ being dead, yet speaketh.’ As a man, and Christian,
his winsome, gentle courtesy and kindness endeared him not less to the
young than to the more advanced in life. He created the place for mission
work in the Sabbath Schools of Victoria. And the entire Church shares to-
day the sense of bereavement that has fallen on his family. To them the
Assembly sends heartfelt condolences, and prays with them that God will
speedily manifest Himself in raising up other apostolic men to continue and
complete the beneficent, world-blessing enterprises so nobly originated and
carried on in the life of their father and his contemporaries.”
NEW HEBRIDES MISSION SYNOD MINUTES.
“ Though Synod deeply feels and sorrows over the great loss sustained in
the death of the venerable Dr. John G. Paton, one of the fathers and early
pioneers of the mission, it cannot but rejoice that to him was granted the
privilege of accomplishing so much for the advancement of the gospel in the
New Hebrides. His life-work is so well known, that it is only necessary to
refer to his brief labours on Tanna, in much tribulation and -sorrow, and his
work on Aniwa, which, by the grace of God, he was enabled to win for
Christ. But his influence was felt far beyond Aniwa and the New Hebrides,
and his pleadings in Christian lands were used of God in advancing the
kingdom through his unique gift of arousing interest and enthusiasm in the
cause so dear to himself. Many a heart was touched to give, to give largely,
and in many cases to give personal service to the Redeemer’s work. His
name is also closely linked with that of the ‘ Dayspring,’ for it was chiefly
due to his unflagging zeal that funds were raised for the purchase of the
three mission vessels of that name. . . .”
“ Having learned that the Victorian Church has decided to make the
hospital at Vila a memorial to the late Dr. John G. Paton, Synod approves
in terms of its minute of last year, and recommends that in the hospital
contemplated, attention should be given to providing a really lasting memorial,
and one with all necessary equipment for coping with serious cases
such as occasionally arise.”
We close with a few words of our venerable friend : —‘‘When pleading the
cause of the heathen and the claims of Jesus on His followers, I have often
been taunted with being ‘a man of one idea.’ Sometimes I have thought
that this came from the lips of those who had not even one idea—unless it
were how to kill time or save their own skin. But, is it not better to have
one good idea, and to live for that, and -succeed in it, than to scatter one’s
life away on many things, and leave a mark on none ? Here, as I lay down
my pen, let me record my immovable conviction that this is the noblest service
in which any human being could spend or be spent; and that, if God gave
me back my life to be lived over again, I would without one quiver of hesi-
tation lay it on the altar of Christ, that He might use it, as before, in
similar ministries of love, especially amongst those who have never yet heard
the name of Jesus.”


Daawm or WT C VNt*, Amini/m Y Futuna
