

XTh-Fp
1 O Price eo
' *\V 1
3n QUmomm.
JOHN BALLANCE
PREMIER OF NEW ZEALAND.
Born Glenavy, Antrim, March 27,1839; died Wellington, N.Z., April 27,1893.
ENGRAVED BY M KEE & GAMBLE, WELLINGTON.
THE STORY OF HIS ILLNESS, DEATH,
AND BURIAL.
t:‘ ; V
ERNEST D. HOBEN.
Printed at Evening Post Office,
V ,v J ■ ■ V




@ Qtofe anli an <Bq;pfanafton.
' event in the history of New Zealand ever roused its
«re|i] people to so universal a feeling of sympathy and regret
as fhe death of Mr. John Ballance in the ripeness and
maturity of his mental powers, and at a time when he should
have been enjoying the full vigor of manhood, with many years
to devote to the service of the country which had conferred upon
him the highest distinction in its gift. From Stewart’s Island to
the North Cape a wave of sorrow passed over the land when the
news that the Premier was no more was flashed over the tele-
graph wires. In shepherd’s hut and plutocrat’s mansion, in
Radical meeting and Tory conclave, all thought of political and
social antagonism, of the contending strife of parties and the
war of sects, was driven forth by all-mastering grief, a grief
which was deepened and intensified when the story of those last
sad months and days was given to the world. Ihe words of
political animosity remained unuttered on the lips of the most
ardent partisan—the workman laid down his tools to read with
tear-filled eyes the heroic story of suffering bravely met, of the
heroism and self-immolation of the sick-chamber, greater than the
headlong gallantry born of the heat and strife and physical
intoxication of the battlefield. Then it was that the sorrow of
the nation found voice and took tangible shape in the solemn
ceremonies of the State funeral—no mere official function, but
the practical embodiment of a people’s love. Then it was that
the waves of sorrow flowing through the land became a mighty
flood, sweeping down all artificial barriers and carrying with it
an ocean of sympathy—taking tangible shape in touching
messages of condolence, in one universal psalm of sorrow from
press and people, in messages of sympathy from wharepuni and
public hall, from raupo whare by forest primeval to the house
wherein the Representative of Her Majesty holds state. So ab-
sorbing did the interest in these details prove that the largely
increased newspaper editions were altogether inadequate for the
demand made upon them. It is in consonance with repeated
requests that I sit down to-day to write the story of that fatal ill-
ness and of the death and burial of the Chief Officer of the State,
introducing much matter not yet published. For the apprecia-
tive and sympathetic editorial comment upon the event which let
loose the flood-gates of the nation’s sorrow, I am indebted, to the
courtesy of the Editor of the Evening Post, who, though fre-
quently opposed to Mr. Ballance in politics, had for him genuine
regard and sympathy as a man. Its reproduction is also by
kind permission of Messrs. Blundell Brothers, the proprietors of
the Fast, in which paper much of the matter first appeared.
E. D. lIOBEN.
Wellington, May 7, 1893.


($, Q&feran JjoMrMfiet + 0 £ri6ute.
(From the Evening Post of Friday, 28th April, 1893.)
worst fears entertained regarding Mr. Ballance have
gJIP unfortunately been realised, and yesterday evening he
passed away, after a long and severe illness, borne with
quiet heroism. His death has naturally created a profound
sensation of grief throughout the colony. Undoubtedly it has
been hastened by his devotion to public duty, and he died in
harness, being engaged in official work up to the very eve of
the operation under which he ultimately sank. The council-
chamber, the office, and the House proved more fatal to him
than the perils of war, which in his earlier career as a New
Zealand colonist he had not shirked to encounter at the call of
duty. Mr. Ballance was in every sense a good colonist, and he
had passed through many vicissitudes incidental to colonial life.
In all he bore his part honourably and manfully. Without
adventitious aid, but by the sheer force of his ability and strength
of character, he raised himself from a humble position to that of
Premier of the colony. As a journalist he soon distinguished
himself when the opportunity offered itself, and his fellow-
townsmen at Wanganui were quick to recognise his ability, his
earnestness, his eloquence, his originalit3 r , and, above all, his
frank, kindly, and manly character in all relations of life. These
qualities have since become more widely known, and as fully
recognised, throughout the colony. History may not, probably
will not, regard Mr. Ballance in the light of a great statesman,
but if it be truthful it will record his name as that of a man who
had earned and fully enjoyed the respect and admiration of his
fellow-colonists —as one who had served the colony well, and
whose honest and earnest desire to do good to all around him,
and to advance the interests of his adopted country, no man
doubted. Such an epitaph is one worth living to gain. The
loss of such a man as Mr. Ballance, cut off in the prime of life
and usefulness, would be a serious one in any community,
however vast. In a small community like that of New Zealand,
it is a public calamity. The number of men in this colony able
and entitled to take their place in the front rank of public life is
small. Mr. Ballance’s death, following so closely on that of his
predecessor, Sir Harry Atkinson, makes a gap not easily supplied.
Before the great leveller Death, all questions of Party sink into
insignificance, and Mr. Ballance’s death will be mourned as
sincerely by those who were unable to agree with his political
views or to approve of his administration as by his most devoted
political adherents and admirers. His motives no one questioned,
oven when compelled to sometimes disapprove of his methods.


For Mm personally, all who knew him entertained not only
respect, but a degree of affection which became the deeper the
better he was known. His early death will be mourned from
one end of the colony to the other by all who can appreciate the
high qualities, intellectual and moral, by which John Ballance
was honourably distinguished in every relation of public and
private life. To Mrs. Ballance the most respectful sympathy is
due in the terrible affliction which has fallen on her. We are
not violating the sanctities of the domestic hearth when we say
that it was no ordinary bond of affection which united Mr. and
Mrs. Ballance. Theirs was indeed “ a marriage of true minds,”
and in the very fullest sense did his wife prove a helpmate, in
times of adversity as well as of prosperity, in failure and success,
in public and in private life, and above all, in the last sad scenes
which preceded the final and fatal separation. It is, perhaps,
vain to speak of consolation at the present moment, but even the
deepest grief may be in some measure assuaged by sincere
sympathy, and Mrs. Ballance may be assured that her husband’s
death is to-day mourned in deepest truth from one end to the
other of the colony of which he was Premier, and in other lands
there will also be many who will hear of his death with feelings
of the keenest regret.


(prmkre Career,
This is distinctly not a biography of Mr. Ballance. It is
not even a biographical sketch. History will record the various
measures which he originated, and with which his name has
become associated, and history will record their effects, be they
for good or ill. Suffice it to say that however much those who
come after him in the government of the country, and in the
direction of its legislation, may differ from his views and from
his methods, there will be no drawing back. Every outpost in
tne march of progress has been entrenched, every frontier fully
occupied, and the reformer of to-morrow will recognise the
position of to-day, and will not seek to drive back the forces of
reform, but rather to direct their further advance in consonance
with his own ideas and his experience. What is achieved has been
conquered, and the army of occupation is in possession. But
though there is not here any attempt at biography, it is necessary
to an appreciation of the man to give some bald details of the
various stages by which the son of an Antrim tenant-farmer, and
the apprentice of a Birmingham ironmonger, advanced by the
sheer force of his own character and ability, without extraneous
aids —and in spite, too, of views in some respects entirely
antagonistic to the feeling of the nation—to the proud position
of ruler and law-maker to the most prosperous colony in the
British Empire. The record is necessarily confined to what is
but a procession of dates, but the dates serve as milestones along
the road of progress ; and some record is necessary as an object-
lesson to every young colonist as to what persistency of effort,
purity of motive, absolute fidelity to ideals, and overmasteiing
industry, may accomplish without the adventitious aids of wealth,
position, and influence.
Mr. Ballance was one of the many distinguished Irishmen
who have taken a prominent part in the government of
the colonies. He was born at Glenavy, County Antrim,
on 27th March, 1839, and was therefore just over 54 years
of age. His father, Samuel Ballance, was a tenant on Lord
Hertford’s estate. His primary education was obtained at
a National School. On leaving school he was apprenticed to an
ironmonger, and removed to Birmingham, spending eight years
in that centre of Radicalism and home of self-culture. Here he
took advantage to the full of the opportunities which the
progressive movement, then seething in the great manufacturing
town, afforded young men for self-improvement. He attended
the evening classes of the Midland Institute, took an active part
in debating societies, and contributed to the press, gaining
thereby those powers of concentration and direct expression,


that facility of marshalling thought, and ability to most happily
express it, which so many of our foremost novelists, orators, and
public men have gained by passing through the crucible of
journalism. But his culture at this time was not merely mental;
it was also vigorously physical. A few short weeks ago there
came to the Premier’s residence at Wellington a gentleman who
asked that he might be admitted to see Mr. Ballance. That was
before the last journey to Wanganui. He was met by the
Private Secretary, Mr. A. M. Smith, who told him that Mr.
Ballance was then too ill to see anyone. The visitor expressed
great regret, said he was but recently from Birmingham, where
he had been a friend of the Premier’s youth, and it was an
especial desire that he should see him. The Secretary was
interested, asked for particulars, and discovered that not only
had the future Premier been foremost in the Debating Club, but
foremost, too, in the gymnasium, where he was known as a
boxer of exceptional power, ability, and endurance. The lessons
of force, tenacity, and good temper which boxing teaches he
carried into after-life. Had he continued also the habits of physi-
cal exercise which were then associated with these qualities, the
end might not have been yet. The Birmingham visitor ultimately
saw his friend, who greeted him as cordially as in the days when
they were youths together.
Moved by the yearning which his full life had produced,
anxious to find in a new country scope for the aspirations and
energies which were cramped in the old, Mr. Ballance left
Birmingham at the age of 27, and sailed round the Cape to
Melbuorne, whence he came to Wellington, intending to
commence sheep-farming at Wanganui. This he found difficult
of accomplishment without experience or capital, and so he started
instead a jeweller’s shop of a good class; but finding this was
too advanced for the then stage of Wanganui civilisation, he
abandoned it, and started the Wanganui Herald, to mould the
destinies of the young community. The struggles incidental to
the establishment of a newspaper were overcome at last, and its
proprietor-editor gained a reputation throughout the colony as a
powerful and incisive writer, and presently opportunity came for
a more direct personal interference in public affairs, and the
exercise of the readiness of debate learned in the mimic forums
of Birmingham.
But it was not alone in the petty strife of local politics that
the young settler showed himself ready to share the trials
and bear the responsibilities of his brother-colonists. When
Titokowaru and his tribesmen threatened the young community
in 1868, Mr. Ballance called a meeting of his fellow-citizens, and
at that meeting was formed the Wanganui Cavalry, which its
promoter joined as plain Trooper Ballance, soon to rise to
Corporal for his action at Nukumaru, and later to the rank of
Cornet, when a summary stop was put to Ixis military career.


He had been contributing to his paper, from the front,
descriptions of the campaign and its operations, and in one of these
so strongly criticised the manner in which the war was being
conducted as to grossly offend the powers that were, and Cornet
Ballance was informed that Her Majesty no longer required his
services. Years later, Her Majesty was pleased to call him to
the Government of one of her brightest possessions, and would,
had he accepted it, have conferred upon the cashiered Cornet the
distinguished order of Knighthood as a mark of her especial
favour.
By 1873 Mr. Ballance had so far advanced in the political
life of the community that he stood against the late Mr. W. S.
Moorhouse and Sir Harry Atkinson for the Egmont seat, hut
retired, when his return was considered safe, in favour of the
then Major Atkinson. In 1875, however, he entered Parliament
for Eangitikei, and sat for that district until 1880, when he was
returned for Wanganui.
The rest of the story is familiar to every diligent reader of
those contemporary histories, the newspapers. The new
member began at once to assume a notable part in the House,
and showed especial interest in matters of local government. In
January, 1878, he accepted office as Minister for Education in
the Grey Ministry, changing this to Colonial Treasurer in July.
In June, 1879, he resigned his office, owing to differences with
the Premier. He sat for Wanganui until 1881, when he was
defeated by Mr. W. H. Watt by the narrow majority of four,
but at the general election of 1884 he was again returned, by a
two-to-one majority over Messrs. Watt and George Hutchison.
In 1884 he joined the Stout-Yogel Ministry as Native Minister
and Minister for Defence and Lands, retaining office till October,
1887. In the next year he became Leader of the Opposition,
and in 1891 he was called to office as Premier and Colonial
Treasurer —portfolios which he held till his death.
Mr. Ballance was twice married. His first wife was a Miss
Taylor, sister of Mr. H. S. Taylor, of Wanganui. After her
death Mr. Ballance married Ellen, daughter of the late David
Anderson, of Wellington, in 1870. Throughout his political life
she was in the fullest sense his helpmate and confidant, the
partner of his triumphs and the sharer of his disappointments.
Throughout his career she sustained him by her counsel and
affection against every rebuff of fortune, and throughout those
cruelly bitter months of his last trial she soothed every sorrow
and assuaged every pain, nursing him with a single-hearted
devotion and self-sacrifice which must ever remain as an example
of wifely fidelity to duty. There were no children of either
marriage, but there is an adopted daughter, Kathleen Anderson,
a niece of Mrs. Ballance and a typical little Celt, who had
entwined herself into the affections of her new father.


J lae( ©age.
THE BEGINNING OE THE END.
fatal illness dates from the early days of last session.
Then it was called gastric spasms. From the Press Gal-
lery of the House it was pitiful to watch the progress of
the disease. Night after night it could he seen that the Liberal
leader was fighting with deadly pain. The man who had gained
immeasurably in the estimation of the House and the public
during the Parliament, and who had successfully battled with
the political forces arrayed against him, triumphing by his own
indomitable will, was fighting with all the power which ’that
will gave to thrust down the physical weakness which threatened
to overcome him. Time after time he would be observed lying
back in his place, ashen pale, waiting to reply to some threatened
attack from the Opposition benches, forced to get up every little
while and retire to his room, there to writhe in agony. Back to
the House he would come, and when the expected attack
was being delivered, he would take notes in a bold hand upon
the foolscap before him, while stimulating his flagging energies
with powerful restorative salts. Then, when it came his turn to
reply, casting off all signs of weakness, he would, with the
fluency of the ready debater, seek to rout his accuser.
This sort of thing was more than human flesh could bear,
and so at last he was compelled to give way, and leave the Hon.
W. P. Peeves to lead the House. During that gentleman’s
leadership there was a memorable scene produced by an aside
addressed by him to Mr. George Hutchison, and Sir George
Grey’s question respecting the Legislative Council appointments
requiring to be answered soon after, the Premier felt himself
compelled to return to the House before he had sufficiently
recovered, and once more that heroic but suicidal struggle with
pain and weakness was resumed. Night after night the Leader
stood by his Electoral Bill, piloting its main principles through
the shoals of Committee, visibly suffering agony unspeakable.
At last he had to give in, and leave the Bill to his colleagues,
while trusting the Minister for Public Works to lead the House.
What happened then everyone knows, but the struggle had
killed the Premier. He had offered himself up as a sacrifice
upon the altar of Party. The struggle had been a struggle to
the death, and, singularly enough, during the course of that
struggle there was an ominous token. The man who was
killing himself for his Party paid eloquent tribute to the memory
of his predecessor in office, whose end had been so dramatically
in keeping with his career. He, too, had fallen a victim to
Party Government, and, as Mr. Ballance delivered his panegyric,


it was felt by those who had watched closely the progress of
events that he was also delivering what might serve as his own
funeral oration. It was long before he could be moved from
Wellington, but when this was possible be went to Taranaki in
search of the strength which had left him. While at New
Plymouth he suffered a severe relapse, and was brought back to
Wellington by special train, Dr. o’Carroll coming with him.
His case had by this time become desperate, and as his medical
advisers practically considered it hopeless, it was decided by his
friends and himself that he should permit Mr. Heiden, an old
mine manager who had effected some remarkable cures by
MASSAGE AND ANIMAL MAGNETISM,
to try what he could do. For a long time the serious aspect of
the case was the continual suppression of natural functions, but
these the new treatment restored for the time, and for some time
such remarkably good results -were produced that hopes of
speedy recovery were freely entertained, and on all hands
congratulations poured in upon Mrs. Ballance, who had so nobly
nursed her husband in his dire distress. The relief was so great
that the Premier was able to return to his home at Wanganui,
Mr. Heiden going with him, and, from being a bed-ridden
invalid, was able to walk about his garden, take drives, conduct
the business of his office, and take his share in the government
of the country.
This new glimpse of the pleasures of life, this relief from
the gnawing agonies with which he had been so long afflicted,
gave the Premier fresh hope and fresh vitality. He revolved
schemes for the utilisation of the expected Treasury surplus, and
studied social problems anew with a view to availing himself of
the power of his Party to attempt their solution. Especially
interested was he in the experiment of which the State Farm was
to be the first embodiment, and he frequently discussed its
possible extension. His idea was that the State Farm should be
not only a home for the aged, where their sense of independence
would be preserved by their being able to make some return in
labour for their keep, but that it should be a training-ground
on which the waifs of humanity and the unfortunate poor should
be taught self-respect and the nobility of labour, with a view to
the establishment of a community of which the Government was
to be the patriarchal head and centre. The idea which was
floating in his brain was to procure from the Natives some
200,000 or 300,000 acres of land, upon which those who had
passed their probation and gained the necessary knowledge and
experience on the State Farm should be assisted to settle, and
make homes for themselves on some such system as the lease in
perpetuity. This was a favourite theme with him, and he hoped,
after the State Farm experiment had proved a success, to then
8


give practical effect to ideas upon somewhat similar lines
to those upon which General Booth had proposed to work in
England. In this model communal settlement dairy factories
were to be established, fruit-evaporating plants erected, and
fruit-raising encouraged, silk-culture engaged in, and a variety
of cognate industries established by the co-operation of the
settlers under the fostering care of the State. While this was
being done for settlers inland, he hoped to be able to establish
settlements on the coast to promote oyster-culture and develop
the fishing industry. An idealist this, but an idealist who gave
to his idealism a practical bent.
The cares of office ocmipied him as long as he could
bear the strain, and then he would lay down State papers
and seek solace and relief in Milton or Tennyson or Shake-
speare, or xipon the chess-board, which was always at hand,
throwing his whole mind into the solution of some intricate
problem. Such pursuits he would alternate with dips into works
upon gardening and poultry-raising. These things were his
recreation.
His love for animals was very great, and it was abun-
dantly shown at this time; and his love for inanimate
nature was just as great as for the animate. It was a favourite
proposition of his, embodying his philosophy, that the mystery
of the natural laws was so profound, and so little comprehended,
that he was content to wait until he had gained some little
knowledge upon them before essaying to comprehend the super-
natural—the philosophy, this, of so ancient a sage as Confucius.
His love of nature led him to watch with the keenest interest
every shrub and tree which he had planted or caused to be
planted at his Wanganui home. As he felt life once more
coursing through his veins, it gave him infinite delight to go
round his orchard, watching every tree with solicitous regard
for its welfare and thorough knowledge of its nature and habits.
One day, when he was feeling exceptionally well, he wished to
ascertain particulars respecting some apples in his orchard which
he had an idea were not true to kind. Loading his pockets with
specimen fruit, he tramped two miles to the establishment of a
friendly orchardist, where he entered with animation into the
comparison of the fruit which he had brought with that at
the orchard, sampling it freely, and afterwards walked back to
his own home. That was his last tramp. An official from
Wellington, who had come up to see him in reference to depart-
mental trouble, found him at the orchard, and walked back with
him; and all that evening, tired as he was with his unwonted
exercise, he was unable to take the rest which was absolutely
necessary, and had to remain while the details of the depart-
mental worry were poured into his ears. The matter gave him
much concern, and with the fatigue induced by his outing and
its conclusion, he suffered, a few days later, a severe relapse.


Dr. Saunders was called in, and brought with him Professor
Holden, ex-President of the Eoyal College of Surgeons, England,
who happened to be in the colony at the time. There was a
consultation and examination, as a result of which the English
surgeon gave it as his opinion that there was no organic
derangement, but that, as it were, the engine had been too
powerful for the ship—that, in fact, Mr. Ballance’s resolute will
had driven on his mental powers and kept them at high pressure
until there had come physical collapse. He advised that an
operation would be necessary, and that the Premier
MUST EETIEE EEOM POLITICS,
and take complete rest, and possibly a long voyage of at least
six months. This last decision was communicated to Mrs.
Ballance, and by her communicated to her husband. The reply
was characteristic. It was that he was a soldier in the service
of his country, engaged in battling for its welfare, and it would
be as much an act of cowardice for him to leave his post of
duty as for a soldier to desert his comrades upon the battlefield.
He would rather, as his duty lay,
DIE AT HIS POST
than lay down the reins of office while the people of the country
and the men of his Party desired that he should retain them.
His colleagues urged him to remain away still longer and
give himself a further chance, but he was anxious to be about
the work of preparing for the session, and after a short time he
came down to Wellington and presided over various Cabinet
meetings held at, his own house, showing mental grasp and
vigour strangely out of keeping with his physical weakness.
Erom all his departments at this time were coming anticipations
of a surplus, soon to be realised, and when on Easter Saturday
he asked me to come up and see him, he w r as pardonably
proud of the results which were then assured. But how changed
was the man in the short space of a few weeks! His intellect
was as bright as ever, and his greeting as cordial, but he had
fallen away until what had been sturdy limbs could now have
been spanned by the hand. The idea of a sea voyage possessed
him, and after talking of his surplus, comparing figures, filling in
details of departments —which, it being a holiday, I had brought
him—and finally reckoning up the substantial whole, he spoke
with eagerness of a trip he promised himself in the Hinemoa.
But he had taken remedial measures too late. Even as he
expressed to me his confidence in his ultimate recovery, I felt
that
THE HAND OE DEATH
was upon him, even as I had felt as I met him day by day
during the session that he was a doomed man for whom there


was but one hope of recovery —that rest and change and freedom
from care which he refused to allow himself.
About this time the treatment by massage and magnetism
ceased, and soon after came a message that Mr. Ballance had had
to abandon his proposed trip, as his medical attendant (Dr. Henry)
had pronounced against it. He could not, however, wholly
relinquish the idea, and so set was his heart on getting on the
sea that he arranged for a trip round the harbour in the Ellen
Ballance. Fine weather had been experienced up to that very
day, but that day was the first of the wet spell which set in
and lasted till the day of his funeral. Nevertheless, accompanied
by his friend and colleague the Hon. John M'Kenzie, Minister
of Lands, he went out in the Government launch, and, the rain
coming on, had to be taken below, where the closeness of the
little cabin did not improve matters. Next day he was bad.
The next, worse. Then better, then worse, but always bad.
There was a complete stoppage of the natural functions. A
consultation was held, Drs. Anson and James acting with Dr.
Henry and with Dr. MacGregor, who had watched the case
throughout as a friend.
As a result of this consultation, it was decided to send at
once for Dr. Cleghorn, of Blenheim, and on his arrival a further
consultation was held, on Thursday, 20th April, and that evening
it was decided that there was only one thing which offered any
hope of saving the patient’s life. The bowels must be laid bare,
opened, cleansed, and the obstruction removed. For more than
ten days there had been a cessation of the functions, and
THE DANGER WAS IMMINENT.
Up to this time Mr. Ballance had been perfectly sanguine,
and confident of his ultimate recovery, and any suggestion to
the contrary produced upon him a most serious effect.
I had been fully cognisant of every stage in his illness, and
of all the hopes and fears of his colleagues; but knowing this,
and knowing that the Premier always insisted on reading the
papers, and acting also at the express request of his colleagues,
refrained from publishing anything of an unpleasant or alarmist
character, or any comment which would cause the sufferer
concern. An instance of his intense feeling regarding any
suggestion as to the hopelessness of his case was supplied a
week before his death, when he got possession of a Westland
paper containing a telegram from Wellington suggesting that
he could not recover, and speculating as to his successor. The
telegram gave him intense annoyance, and he insisted upon a
contradiction being sent. Again, when he came on his last
journey from Wanganui, he was lying in pain in a carriage,
when some pressmen appeared at Palmerston North and entered
the compartment. He at once got up, assumed an appearance


of ease, and remained standing while he spoke to them; but as
they thoughtlessly continued asking him questions, and he felt
unable longer to combat the pain and weakness under which he
laboured, he placed his hand upon his side, excused himself,
said he felt tired with the journey, and lying down, concluded
the interview in that position, his questioners little thinking the
agony they were causing him. Up to this time the feeling here
described, and a fear as to its effects, had prevented his
colleagues from suggesting to him the necessity which was
always present to themselves of appointing his successor. When,
however, the result of the consultation was told to him, and Mr.
Ballance was made aware that he was
FACE TO FACE WITH DEATH,
and that the only alternative was an operation so serious that it
might itself involve death, he realised at once the gravity of his
position. It took until the Sunday morning to prepare the
necessary instruments, agree as to a plan of operations, and make
final arrangements. During this interval the poor sufferer was
as a condemned man awaiting his doom. As the hours passed
by he appeared to positively shrink up with the sufferings,
mental and physical, which he was going through, and for the
first time he spoke of a successor. He told his colleagues that
he now saw it would be better for him to resign. Under such
circumstances they passed the matter off lightly, and bade him
be of good cheer and trust that the operation would be success-
ful. On Sunday Sir Robert Stout came, and a message awaited
him at the wharf to proceed at once to the Premier’s residence.
There he found Mr. Ballance waiting to give him his last
requests and directions as to eventualities in the too probable
event of his not surviving the ordeal he was about to go through.
All the Cabinet Ministers in Wellington were assembled at the
house, and there was an effecting good-bye between them and
their chief, Ministers whom the public would think least likely
to give way finding a moistening of the eyes and a choking of
the throat. With Mrs. Ballance, faithful wife and all-sacrificing
nurse, there was, too, an affecting parting, and then came the
word from the doctors that all was in readiness.
THE DREAD PREPARATIONS
for the operation had proceeded in his own bedroom before the
eyes of the subject, much as mediaeval torturers prepared their
wracks and thumbscrews in the sight of the victim, but this time
the effort was to be made in the cause of humanity and not of
inhumanity. Dr. Cleghorn was to perform the operation, Dr.
Fell assisting him, and Drs. MacGregor and M‘Kenzie were
there with Dr. Henry. When the summons came, the Premier,


casting off in an extraordinary manner the depression and weak-
ness which the suspense had produced, sprang out of bed, and,
walking unassisted to the operating table, shook hands cordially
with the medical men, said good-bye to all, stepped on to the
board, and throwing himself on his back bade the operators
begin. It was a wonderful example of physical courage tri-
umphing over physical weakness. Chloroform was administered,
and for about two hours and a half the operation was proceeded
with. The right side above the hip was laid open, and the
bowel exposed and severed and accumulations removed, but the
operation was still incomplete when it was felt that it would not
be safe to continue longer, and the patient was brought back to
semi-consciousness. During all this time his relatives, Sir
Robert Stout, and his colleagues, had been waiting, fearing the
worst as the moments went by. Next morning the patient was
partially conscious, and was able to speak hopefully of the
ultimate success of the operation to his brother-in-law (Mr.
Anderson) and Sir Robert, and at a further consultation on that
evening it was decided that the operation might be resumed on
the Tuesday morning. Once more that anxious group of Minis-
ters and friends gathered at the Premier’s residence, and once
more the poor sufferer, who had been kept more or less under
the influence of opiates, was laid upon the operating board and
placed under the knife. At 8 a.m. the operation was resumed,
and by 11 it was completed, the engorged bowel relieved, the
gaping wound sown up, and a syphon inserted, but
THE OBSTRUCTION HAD NOT BEEN FOUND.
Now came the critical stage. Twenty-four—forty-eight—hours
would show whether the exhausted system could throw off the
weakness under which it suffered, whether the relieved organs
would act, whether the real obstruction did not still exist. The
patient alternated between semi-consciousness and delirium.
There was little hope from the first, but there was some. As
the hours passed on, and it was found impossible to give him any-
thing beyond a very little fluid nourishment, the hope waned
steadily, and the wonderful vitality which the sufferer had
shown threatened to be exhausted at last. From the Saturday
morning until the hour of his death the Premier had no material
food. On Wednesday a last effort was made by the injection of
champagne to stave off the end, and set the bodily functions
once more going. There was a temporary revival—a flicker of
the expiring life—but by Thursday morning the medical men
had practically given up hope, and, as the afternoon advanced
they feared that the end was at hand. Messengers were sent
out in haste to summon Ministers, who had just gone to their
residences after coming out of Cabinet, the Minister for Public
Works and the Colonial Secretary having been earlier in the


morning at the Premier’s residence. Cabs were flying hither
and yon with urgent appeals for haste, and soon all the Ministers
were going to Tinakori Road as fast as horse-flesh could take
them.
Soon there were assembled with Mrs. Ballance and her
sisters (Mrs. Forman and Mrs. Griffiths), who knelt around the
bed, her brother (Mr. David Anderson), Mr. Seddon, Sir Robert
Stout, Mr. John M‘Kenzie, Mr. W. P. Reeves, Sir Patrick
Buckley, Drs. Henry. Fell, and Cleghorn, the Private Secretary,
Mr. Smith, and Mr. Heywood, Secretary to the Treasury. Such
were the actors in that
LAST SCENE OF ALL.
As the hours passed, they saw that the man upon whom
every mind in New Zealand dwelt, the hope of his Party, and
the admiration of his political foes, was sinking fast into the
oblivion which had already come, to all appearance, to his
senses. Presently it was desired to give some stimulant,
and Messrs. Seddon and M'Kenzie spoke to their chief. The
afternoon was waning, and so far the dying man had shown no
sign of consciousness, but hearing the familiar voices, softened
in sympathy, he turned his eyes towards the speakers, and, in
doing so, his glance fell upon the kneeling figure of the stricken
wife. At once there flashed into his countenance a look of
recognition. That was the last sign of consciousness. The
breathing became slower and slower, and as the day waned the
one shaded light in the room threw a weird glow over the group
at the bedside. The watches could be heard ticking off the
seconds as the life went slowly out. A very short time, it was
thought, would see the end, but the watchers by the bedside and
the other watchers without waited till the shades of evening had
closed around them before the white figure on the bed drew its
last faint breath, and passed unconscious into the great con-
sciousness beyond. The wife, by some strange premonition,
saw the change when others perceived it not. Leaning over her
husband she imprinted one last kiss upon his lips. The fitful
flicker of breath stopped in a slight sob, and all was over He
had gone out with the dying day. John Ballance, Premier and
leader of men, was dead ! Dead! Died of starvation, exhaus-
tion, what you will —put it into the jargon of medical science,
or the plain Saxon of the common tongue —but whichever you
may write it, read it
“Died a Martyr to Duty.”


QFUtnour cmb tfe (potfenfe.
Rumours of the impending dissolution had been rife
throughout the day, and expectation of the end hung like a pall
over the community, adding to the gloom which the elements
produced. From time to time these rumours took tangible
shape, and word flew from mouth to mouth that Death no longer
waited for his victim in that house beneath the Tinakori hills.
Telephone bells were set ringing to every possible source of in-
formation, and along the wires came the anxious query, “Is he
dead ? ” As the afternoon wore on a definite statement that the
end had come led to flags going slowly up till they floated half-
mast high above the city, giving outward symbol to the feelings
of the passing crowds below. The Land Board were sitting,
discussing a question of routine, when to them came a messenger
with word that the Premier had passed hence. That was at 4
o’clock. A hurried consultation took place, and the Chairman
announced that the meeting would adjourn as a token of respect.
About the same time a case was proceeding in the Resident
Magistrate’s Court, when intelligence of the rumour was brought
to the Clerk, Mr. James, who informed the Bench. Mr. Men-
teath at once rose, made feeling reference to the news re-
ceived, and suggested adjournment. Mr. Martin, the R.M.,
said that, in the face of the national calamity which had befallen,
he would immediately adjourn the Court. The telephone wires
soon conveyed this rumour back to the Chamber of Death itself,
where the man whose affliction had so moved the multitude lay,
with the hand of the Destroyer upon him, it was true, but not yet
across the borderland. Back down the wires came the announce-
ment that the time was not yet. Meantime the rumour had been
flashed from end to end of the Colony, and many of the papers
published at 4 announced the death which did not take place till
6.20. The Premier’s own paper, the Wanganui Herald, was
one of these, and came out with turned rules, while the man
whom it mourned still lived. As the day closed in, the public
feeling, so long tense, grew and swelled, and, in Wellington, the
Evening Post office was besieged with enquirers. This at last
induced the posting of a notice that the Premier, though dying,
was not dead, but soon after came the expected word, and the
notice was changed.
OFFICIAL AND EXTRA-OFFICIAL.
Almost immediately was issued a Gazette Extraordinary, the
formal language of which gave to official cognisance the news
that was on every tongue. This was its burthen :
“ It is with deep grief I have to announce that the Honour-


able Mr. Ballance, Premier, died this evening at the Premier’s
residence, Tinakori road, at 20 minutes past 6.
“ The officers at the Government Buildings are relieved from
duty on Friday and Saturday.
P. A. Buckley, Colonial Secretary.
“Wellington, 27 th April, 1893.”
Sir Patrick Buckley conveyed the sad news to Government
House, and from Lord Glasgow there came this letter to the
Hon. Mr. Seddon:
“ Thursday evening, 27th April.
“The Governor has just heard, with much regret, from Sir
Patrick Buckley, of the death of the Premier, and he desires to
take the earliest opportunity of expressing to his Ministers his
sense of the great loss the colony has sustained in the removal of
so able and experienced a statesman.
“He also desires to express his own sorrow at the loss of
one with whom his personal relations have ever been of the most
pleasant and cordial description, and whose courteous assistance
and counsel have always been at the disposal of the Governor
during this his first year of office.
“ Glasgow.
“The Hon. the Acting-Premier.”
A NATION’S THEOE.
Friday, April 28th, was a sad day throughout the Colony.
It was a day of universal gloom, elemental and social. Every-
where the papers in the hands of the runner-boys bore the deep
black lines which betokened a national sorrow. The conversa-
tion was upon but one topic—but one name was upon every lip—
and those who, while the dead man lived, had been opposed to
him in all the jar and clangour and bitterness of political strife,
forgot their differences and remembered only his virtues. Every-
where local bodies were meeting and adjourning after passing-
resolutions of regret and condolence, and the telegraph wires, as
they converged from city and hamlet, from lonely pastoral village
and rough diggers’ camp, were heavy laden with the sorrow and
sympathy of a people. The great hive of many-headed industry
known as the Government Buildings was deserted of its swarm,
but in their rooms Ministers, heavy of heart, sought to cope
with the work placed upon them, and the empty corridors echoed
the ceaseless tread of telegraph messengers, as they brought
their faint-written messages of sorrow from city and camp, from
sundered colonies and nations over the sea. To the quiet house
amid the trees beneath the Tinakori hills, these also went with
their letters of sympathy, and there began to arrive, too, wreaths


and floral emblems, great and small, symbols of regard from all
classes and creeds. So it was throughout the Saturday, a tone
of universal sorrow pervading the nation.
At the quiet house there had been another function, painful,
like those which preceded it. It was a post mortem examination
by two medical men (Drs. Fookes and Gane), who had not been
attending upon the dead man. It revealed the fact that the
operation which he had undergone, to have been effective in
removing the obstruction, should have been on the left side
instead of the right —that the stricture was a swelling and contrac-
tion of the interior channel of the descending colon, about three
feet from its exterior termination, of a cicatricial appearance.
The pressure upon the main channel of the bowel was so great
as to deflect it and displace the various organs, and the marvel
was how the sufferer had so long suffered without the relief of
all-levelling Death.
17


<tse Junmf <Cwmonue.
AT WELLINGTON.
aFTEE many days of gloom and drizzle—ceaseless, all-
penetrating drizzle—tlie good people of Wellington on
that eventful Sunday morning saw the sun at last, rising
through clouds, it is true, hut clouds illumined and glowing
with light and warmth. This unfamiliar sun rose upon
a city astir and a people afoot, converging from all points
to Tinakori-road and Hill-street, through which the pro-
cession was to pass to the railway station. By 7 o’clock,
when the time came for the commencement of that last sad
journey, the pathways were packed with a dense mass of
people, all quiet, all sorrowing. Within the house of death
preparations for the removal of the body were proceeding, and
in the quiet of the death-chamber the wreaths which had come
as a spontaneous offering from all parts of the country over
which the dead man had ruled, were being removed with reverent
hands from their places around the room.
The body was enclosed in two coffins. The inner one was of
zinc, and in this was a small glass panel, through which the face of
the dead could be seen. Before the lid of the outer coffin was finally
fastened down, many of the Premier’s friends and colleagues
took a last glance upon his features. The shell was of kauri,
covered with black cloth, the plate bearing the simple inscription:
Johx Ballaxce,
Died
27th April, 1893,
Aged 54 years.
When the appointed hour was at hand, the coffin was carried
forth and laid upon the gun-carriage which awaited it in the
avenue. Then the procession was formed, all its component
parts falling easily into position.
First came the volunteers and seamen of H.M.S. Katoomba,
then the Permanent Artillery escort, with arms reversed, march-
ing to the solemn strains of the Dead March in “ Saul ” from the
Garrison Band; then came the gun-carriage and its freight, with
the members of the Ministry marching on either side as pall-
bearers ; next, the chief mourners, followed by Judges, Mayors,
Captain Bickford, of the Katoomba, and his officers, the heads
of every State department, the Chairmen of the Harbour Board
and the Chamber of Commerce, Magistrates, Presidents of the
various local organisations, and the prison warders in their
sombre uniforms. After these, the general public fell in, walk-
ing first two by two, but as the numbers grew, extending till the


column readied from kerb to kerb. After tlie moving’multitude
on foot came a long line of carriages, including those containing
the relatives of him whose body was being borne to its last
resting-place, His Excellency’s representatives, and representa-
tives of every sect and phase of political feeling. As the pro-
cession moved on, the throng on the footpaths moved with it,
till the streets were converted into bank-full streams of humanity.
Presently the last solemn notes of the Dead March ceased, and
the band gave forth a funeral march interwoven with such a
strain of pathetic melody as to at once enchain the attention —it
was “ The Oarland of Flowers,” by Boyes. Still down the
crowded streets the column moved, every moment adding to its
numbers, and as the railway station was approached it was
seen to be surrounded by a sea of people. Arrived at the
station, the military opened ranks, the people falling back with
them, and through the lane thus formed the coffin was reverently
carried to the funeral train drawn up at the platform. Here, in
a car specially prepared, and following next to the engines and
tender, was the coffin laid, a black velvet pall and the Union
Jack covering it, and these in turn were covered with the ex-
quisite wreaths sent by colleague, friend, and sympathiser.
Next to the funeral car was a carriage with Mrs. Ballance and
her relatives, and after it other carriages with the colleagues and
brother-legislators of the dead man, with the Judges, the Consuls,
the heads of all the departments, the press, the military officers,
and representatives of the local bodies and organisations —some
200 in all. Never has a New Zealand train borne so representa-
tive a freight.
A PATHETIC JOURNEY.
At 7.58 the cars were drawn out of the station and past the
crowd which thronged the road to the Manawatu line, along
which the train sped, flying past stations, each with its group of
expectant sympathisers on the platform, who reverently uncovered
as it rushed by. The panting monster which drew us on only
paused where it was necessary to obtain water for its needs, and
so by 10 o’clock it had reached Otaki. Here we paused, and
as the wheels ceased to revolve, the notes of the Dead March
from “ Saul” came touchingly from a band drawn up upon the
platform. It was a band of the Maori people —the Otaki Maori
Band—assembled in their neat uniforms of black and white, to
do honour to the distinguished dead. As the measured cadences
of the death-chant died away, the chief, Hoani Taipua, himself
a political follower of the dead Premier, asked that the musicians
and a body of chiefs might be permitted to share in the sad
rites which we were performing, and so it was arranged that
they should come in the public train which was thundering
after us. Again were we rushed on, flying past the uncovered


groups on the platforms, and other smaller groups of settlers,
who had come down from their farms, some afoot, some on
horseback, and some in every form of conveyance, to stand by
the side of the line, always with bowed and uncovered head and
reverent mien. At Longburn there was a brief stoppage, but
none at Palmerston, where the big platform was crowded to
excess, and a band was heard playing the Dead March as we
flew past the silent multitude. Just out of Palmerston was one
of the characteristic groups met with on the line. An old man,
white-haired and bent of figure, had made his way to the hill-
side above the cemetery accompanied by the time-worn partner
of his life. With two younger women, who stood by as if to
support them, they waited the passing of the strange funeral.
As we approached, the old man bared his head, and, with his
companions, bowed low in reverent grief. It was an affecting
sight—the picturesque little group, an embodiment of respect-
ful sympathy, their bowed figures outlined sharply against the
sky, beneath them the white headstones of the cemetery, and
between, the moving funeral train. It was typical of life, and
of the sad duty which we were performing —the pause by the
wayside—the rush of fevered existence —the grave.
By 2.30 we were at Aram oho, and there we waited for the
public train to come rip before completing our journey.
AT WANGANUI.
As we steamed into the town with which the dead man’s
life had been so intimately associated, a flag upon the hill-top
dipped repeatedly in solemn salute, and on reaching the station
we found every vantage-ground occupied with throngs of people,
while in the street without was drawn up the procession which
was soon to escort the body to the grave. From every nook and
corner of the district and the colony had come those who
crowded the streets or formed the ranks of the procession, all
with but one common object —to honour the dead. But a brief
space, and the procession set out. Volunteers, marching in
open lines, formed the vanguard, with them the Wanganui
Garrison Band, playing funeral marches. After these, the
Permanent Artillery, the Wanganui Firemen, the Military and
Volunteer Officers, the Wanganui Town Band, and the Otaki
Maori Band, its members wearing in their caps the white
feathers typical of mourning for a chief. The neatly-clad
bandsmen were followed by the tylers of the Masonic Lodges,
the Bible-bearer marching wdth measured step, his book and jewels
carried in front, and behind him, borne aloft, a large and
beautiful wreath of white flowers, surrounded by the Masonic
square and rule in gold. On either side were the sword-bearers,
and then, extending far in solid ranks, wearing their full dress
and regalia, were the brethren of the Masonic Lodges of the


the coast, each man bearing' a sprig of acacia as a symbol of
mourning. Behind them was the gun carriage with its sad bur-
den, the members of the Ministry and the former partners of
Mr. Ballance, marching on either side. Following immediately
was a fire brigade carriage literally covered with magnificent
wreaths most artistically arranged. After this were the chief
mourners, the Governor’s representative, the Consuls, the mem-
bers of both Houses who had gathered from constituencies far
and near, the Judges, the veteran native chief Major Kemp,
beside him another Chief, Takarangi Mete Kingi, and many
others of high rank. Then the members of the local bodies,
the Wanganui Herald staff, the Civil Servants, volunteer officers
from all parts of the North Island, the veterans of the old
Wanganui Cavalry, with their war medals on their breasts, the
Foresters, the railway employes, the general public, and a long-
line of vehicles.
As the procession began to move, the bell on the Fire
Brigade tower boomed out solemnly, and the massed people in
the streets moved with the mourners, cries of grief—the keen of
their race—as sent up by some Maori women bedecked in the
green emblems of their racial woe, adding a weird touch to the
solemnity. Down the crowded Taupo-quay, up Victoria-avenue
to Guyton-street, and thence down the long tree-bordered road
to the Cemetery, the procession wended its way, the bands
relieving each other at intervals, and the regular boom of the
big bell accentuating the already sombre tone.
“ALAS ! ALAS ! MY BROTHER!”
The Wanganui cemetery is a lovely and peaceful spot, sur-
rounded by hills and tall trees, with rows of sombre columnal
cypress on either side of the paths. Just to the right on entering
was an open, brick-lined, grave in the sandy soil of the slope,
under a grove of great pines. To this the coffin was borne.
The Masons, in their bright regalia and sombre suits of black,
massed round the grave. Above it was Mrs. Ballance with her
relatives, on the other side the colleagues of the dead man, and
behind his Masonic brethren were the general public, with the
firing party drawn up in serried ranks, and behind them still,
the background of trees, every branch bending under the
weight of the spectators.
The sea of faces turned towards the grave as the Rev. A.
Williams began the imposing Masonic ceremonial. First was a
hymn—“ Solemn Strikes the Funeral Chime.” Then the service
was read till, after the solemn words “ We have committed his
body to the grave/there to remain till the general resurrection,”
into the tomb was dropped the white apron, emblem of inno-
cence. Then the words “ This evergreen, which once marked the


temporary resting-place of the illustrious dead, an emblem of
the immortality of the soul, thus do I deposit in the grave,”
with the exclamation “Alas, alas, my brother!” Suiting the
action to the word, the little spray of green was dropped in, and
finally came the prayer, with the solemn responses of the
brethren, “So mote it be.” Another hymn, a weii’d and
pathetic dirge, beginning “Days and moments swiftly flying,”
and ending with the lines—
As the tree falls, so must it lie ;
As the man lives, so must he die;
As the man dies, so must he be
All through the days of eternity—
So mote it be !
brought that part of the service to a close, and then came the
most impressive and affecting portion of the proceedings. Bro.
Stevenson, with his hands crossed upon his breast, uttered the
words “We cherish his memory here,” every Mason present
repeating them in unison, wfith crossed hands and bowed head.
Then, as one man, the brethren raised their hands and their
faces to Heaven, with the words, “We commend his spirit to
the God who gave it,” then bent their heads and hands to the
grave, exclaiming, “We commit his body to the grave.”
Thrice was this touching ceremony repeated before Bro. Keesing
gave the final prayer, with the response “ So mote it be ” joined
in by all, and then, with the words “ Alas, my Brother,” he
dropped his spray of evergreen into the grave. Solemnly the
brethren, one by one, filed past, dropping upon the coffin of
their dead brother this last tribute; and as they uttered the
words “ And now, brother that was, farewell! ” the firing party
fired the first volley. Two other volleys followed, the muffled
drums rolled, and all was over.
PRINTED AT THE EVENING POST OFFICE, WELLINGTON.




