

fC7/V
JOHN H. BARROW, ALP
NOTICES OF
HIS LIFE, LABORS, AND DEATH.
Compiled from the Press of South Australia .
FAINTED FOR piF^CULATION.
ADELAIDE:
ADVERTISER, CHRONICLE, AND EXPRESS OFFICES,
KING WILLIAM STREET.
1874.








JOHN H. BARROW, M.P.
NOTICES OF
HIS LIFE, LABORS, AND DEATH.
Compiled from the Press of South Australia.
I^INTED
FOR j"* RIVATE £ I EMULATION.
ADELAIDE:
Advertiser, Chronicle, and Express Offices,
KING WILLIAM STREET,
1874.




PREFACE.
A wish having been expressed by some of the personal friends of the late JOHN
Henry Barrow to have brought together the articles on their deceased friend
which appeared in the newspapers published in the colony, the following compilation
has been made in order to gratify this reasonable and natural desire. The unanimity
with which all the papers in the colony (with a solitary exception) speak in generous
and affectionate terms of Mr. BARROW is peculiarly gratifying. The exception to
which we refer is the Methodist Journal, a denominational organ, which contained an
article on Mr. Barrow that was neither just nor generous, and which we believe has
given pain to the larger-hearted members of the Methodist Church. No one will envy
the feelings of the writer, whoever he may, who has defamed the memory of a great
and good man, whose excellencies, as his intimate friends well know, largely over-
balanced his few weaknesses. The old motto, De mortals nil nisi honum, might
have been kept in mind by the writer of the article. Mr. Barrow’S works speak
for him; and how he was held in estimation by those who knew him best, the
following compilation will show. The writer of this Preface knew him as intimately
as one man could know another, and he gives it as his sober opinion, now that the
excitement occasioned by his death is over, that John Henry Barrow was a man
whose virtues were many, while his faults were very few. Peace to his memory!
The Compiler.
Adelaide, October 1, 1874.


JOHN HENRY BARROW.
In Memokiam.
The laborer resting at last,
The eloquent silent for aye,
The brain-toil oyer and past,
The sun sunk while it was day:
The kind heart beating no more,
The life work brought to a close,
The conflict and bitterness o’er;
He has gone to his last repose.
Manfully fought was the fight,
And bravely lived was the life;
He battled for truth and right,
And nobly he fell in the strife.
Each day’s work claimed his thought,
Each hour its duty pressed ;
For ease he had never sought,
His life-aim was toil, not rest.
But now he rests at last,
And his useful work remains,
The toil and the weariness past—
The troubles and aching pains.
And still let his memory live,
For he served his country well;
And if there be aught to forgive—
There may be—for who can tell ?
Over every weakness cast
The mantle of Christian love;
Leave him, ah, leave him at last
To the mercy of One above—
One who our frailties knows,
And remembers that we are dust;
To Him the wearied soul goes,
In Him the weakest can trust.
—'W. H.


Notices by the South Australian Press.
JOHN HENRY BARROW.
John Henry Barrow, M.P. for the Sturt, and one of the proprietors of this
paper, died at his residence on Saturday morning, August 22, at 9 o’clock, from serous
effusion on the brain. This simple announcement will cause great sorrow through the
length and breadth of the colony, where his name has become something like a
“ household word.” Pew men who ever came to South Australia obtained such a
large amount of personal influence or exerted such a large amount of political power
on the people here as our deceased friend did. To this many causes contributed.
Soon after his arrival in the colony he became connected with the Press as an able
and a powerful writer. He had a well-stored mind, a genial humor, and a wonder-
fully ready pen. Then he was a man of broad views in politics, and of warm
sympathies in private life. He was patient and industrious, conscientiously working
out for himself those social and political problems which rose to the surface of our
daily life. There was a time when Mr. Barrow’s name was a tower of strength, and
a word to conjure with. But he was not only a facile writer, but a powerful and an
eloquent speaker. In a public meeting he was supreme. Wit, humor, playful banter,
combined with a hard and irresistible logic, were all prominent in his best speeches.
He was incomparably the best public speaker in South Australia, and in his palmy
days his reign was almost omnipotent in a great gathering.
Mr. Barrow during his early years lived the life of a hard student. With a view
to the exercise of the work of the ministry amongst the Congregationalists in England
he spent some years in preparatory study at Hackney College. His first ministerial
charge was at Market Drayton, in Shropshire, where he took a good position as a
clever and an original preacher. He then removed to a suburb of Bradford, in York-
shire, as minister of a church there. After retaining this position for a short time,
he became connected with the Bradford Observer, a paper of advanced liberal
opinions, to whose columns he was a frequent and valued contributor. Though at
that time somewhat retiring in his habits, he made a few influential friends in York-
shire, who formed a correct idea of his capacity, and persuaded him to emigrate.
Acting on their advice he came to South Australia, literally a stranger in a strange
land. Very soon after his arrival he found employment in the business department
of the Register, and on Mr. Garran’s removal to Sydney, he succeeded that gentleman
in the literary department of the paper.
At this time a number of families at Kensington asked him to become their minister,
and he began preaching in what was then known as the Institute. The marked ability of
his discourses attracted crowded congregations, and it was at length resolved to erect
Clayton Chapel for his ministrations. He never felt, however, that the pulpit was
his proper sphere. When Mr. G. M. Waterhouse resigned his seat in the Assembly as
member for East Torrens, a number of the electors asked Mr. Barrow to come forward
for the vacancy. To this request he acceded, and he was returned without opposition
for that district. His election was followed by two results. He resigned his official con-
nection with Clayton Church, and he separated from the Register. Several gentlemen,
believing that it was desirable to have a second daily paper in Adelaide, met together


and formed a Company to start a new paper. Mr. Barrow was appointed Editor and
Manager. On July 12,1858, the Advertiser made its first appearance, and on the 17th
of the same month the Chronicle was published. A newspaper published by a joint-
stock Company has many difficulties to contend against. In conducting a paper, as
in carrying on a war, there must be one ruling mind. Though Mr. Barrow wisely
claimed and exercised the right of being uncontrolled in the literary management of
the paper, the business part was subject to divided counsels, and, therefore, the
Company was not a financial success. As a literary and political organ, however, the
paper had taken a high position, owing to the unceasing labors of its able Editor.
On November 30, 1863, the Express was commenced as an evening penny paper, with
which the Telegraph was subsequently incorporated. Its success was most marked
from the beginning, and although it has had to contend against earnest and able
competition, it has still held the high position which it assumed from the first.
On September 10,1864, the Company was wound up, and the papers passed into
the hands of a proprietary of eight gentlemen, Mr. Barrow being one of them, and,
of course, retaining his position as Editor and Literary Manager, the commercial
department being continued under the management of Mr. T. King, another of the
proprietors. On September 30,1871, another change took place in the proprietorship,
Mr. Barrow and Mr. King becoming the sole proprietors.
For a year or two Mr. Barrow remained out of Parliament, the time and attention
required by the papers demanding all his energies. But at an election for the Upper
House in 1861, Mr. Barrow became a candidate at the last hour, and was carried in
at the head of the poll. In the Council he soon took the position to which his abilities
and acquirements entitled him; and notwithstanding the onerous responsibilities
pressing upon him in his editorial duties, he took his fair share of work in the
Council.
There is no doubt that excessive work during this period undermined his health,
and laid the foundation of the ailments under which he has now succumbed. Some
years ago he obtained other assistance, which to a large extent relieved him of the
heavy burden of work, and during the last two or three years his duties in connection
with the papers have been comparatively light. But his mind was so active, and his
love of work so great, that he could not be idle. When Sir Henry Ayers formed his
last Ministry he secured the valuable services of Mr. Barrow as his Treasurer and
leader of the Assembly. The results of hij administration are before the public, and
need not be further referred to here. About two years ago his health gave way, and
with that foresight which was characteristic of him he made all arrangements that
he considered necessary for carrying on, in harmony with his own principles, the
papers in which he felt such a deep interest, and to whose success he had devoted such
a large portion of his life.
During the time he was in office Mr. Barrow accompanied Sir Henry Ayers to
the Intercolonial Conference held in Sydney, where he gave the closest attention to
the work brought forward. While there his health became seriously affected, so
much so as to cause the greatest anxiety to his colleague Sir Henry. He was never
the same man afterwards. Hard brain work had injured his nervous system, and
he returned from Sydney very much worse for his visit. He began to stoop more and
look older, and though his mental vigor seemed to be as great as ever, they who were
brought into close relations with him saw that mental labor, which had once been
his greatest pleasure, now became a toil. He had begun, though somewhat
reluctantly, to curtail the amount of his labor. When the Ayers Ministry resigned
he seemed to long for rest. The arrangements he had made some years before relieved
6


him of much of the heavy toil of an Editor’s life. Until within the last twelve or
eighteen months he still exercised a pretty close oversight and control in the manage-
ment of the papers, about which he was always anxious. But since then he has to a
great extent confided the management and the literary labor to other hands. His
clear insight and wise counsels were still of great value, and were never withheld.
But his day for active work was over. Had he spared himself earlier, his ability for
continued,work would have been greater.
Until about two months ago he managed to attend to his Parliamentary duties,
and although his numerous friends saw with great pain the manifest signs of mental
and physical disease, they were occasionally gratified and amused by flashes of his old
light and humor, and his appearance in the Assembly was always hailed with delight.
These efforts, however, were followed suffering. At length he had to make up
his mind that his work wasdone. Heiwrote out his resignation as member for the Sturt,
and was induced only by the entreaties of friends not to transmit it to the Speaker.
He was afraid the interests of his constituents might suffer through his inability to
represent them; but he was unwillingjto put them to the trouble, and the country to
the expense, of an election so near the end of the present Parliament. His greatest
trouble was his inability to perform the duties he had undertaken, and hence to
impose upon others work which he would have been only too glad to perform himself.
Mr. Barrow’s influence on public thought and political action in the colony has
been very great. He is one of the few public men of South Australia whom it is
most difficult to replace. When in the Ministry his colleagues bore willing testimony
to his great capacity and large industry. His power of grasping a subject in all its
bearings, discriminating between its weakness and its strength, was very marked;
and the lucidity of his exposition was equal to the keenness of his grasp. He not
only saw around a question, but into it. He was never satisfied until he had
“ bottomed” it; and having made it his own, he had no difficulty in showing it in
the clearest light to others. He has left his mark on the page of our colonial history,
and his name will go down to posterity as that of one who did something to build up
the political life of South Australia, on the broad foundation which others had wisely
laid. They who were brought into close relations with him had a high respect, not
only for his ability, but for the kindness of his heart.
We need only add that his condition has been a very painful one for two or three
months. His whole system, physical and mental, was completely shattered. Nothing
but the most earnest solicitude and the most careful watching could have kept him
alive so long. For some nights back he has only obtained slight snatches of sleep
from the use of medicines administered under the direction of Dr. Maclntyre, his
medical attendant. On Saturday morning Mrs. Barrow left him sleeping, a little after
eight o’clock, he having then just walked with her assistance from one room to
another, when he appeared to be no worse than he had been for some days. As it was
unusual for him of late to sleep even half-an-hour at a time, she returned to his bed-
room a little before nine o’clock, and found him quite dead. He had passed away
very quietly at last, without a struggle or a pain. His countenance was calm and
placid; and, life’s fitful fever over, he now sleeps the long sleep from which there is
no awaking, leaving a name behind him which the colony will not willingly let
die. — S. A. Advert iter.
7


THE FUNERAL,
The remains of the late Mr. J. H. Barrow, M.P., were interred in the North-road
Cemetery on Monday, August 24. At half-past 2 o’clock the first part of the usual
service of the Church of England was read by Dean Russell in the deceased
gentleman’s house, the coffin being placed on a table in the hall, and the relations and
personal friends of the late Mr. Barrow being present. The coffin was then removed
to the hearse, and the funeral cortege proceeded by way of Wakefield and King William
Streets to North Adelaide, and thence to the cemetery. The offices of the Advertiser
newspaper, of which the deceased was one of the proprietors, were closed, and the
business establishments along the line of route were partially closed out of respect to
his memory. It was understood that the funeral was to be of a private character,
hence many who would have been present abstained from attending. The officers of
Parliament intended to have been present, but did not attend, from a feeling “ that
they would best show their respect for the late Mr. Barrow by carrying out the desire
which had been expressed, that the ceremony should be as private as possible.”
Necessarily, however, a large number of influential gentlemen with whom the deceased
had been connected both in political and social life, and with whom he had had busi-
ness relations, could not refrain from paying the last mark of respect to his memory,
and showing their sympathy with his family in their bereavement. Following the
hearse were three mourning coaches, the first containing Messrs. J. T. Barrow (son),
H. Burden and F. Burden (stepsons), T. King (partner), and the Very Rev. Dean
Russell; while in the second were Messrs. T. P. Jones, A. Jones, J. Jones (brothers-
in-law) , W. Harcus, J.P. (Editor of Advertiser ), and G. W. Goyder (Surveyor-General).
The third carried Messrs. J. B. Moulden (Solicitor to the firm), M. Goode, the Rev. J.
Davidson, and the Hon. Thos. English, M.L.C. Then came vehicles containing the
gentlemen connected with the office, and following these, about thirty-five carriages,
containing those who had been associated and acquainted with the deceased gentleman
during his life. The service at the grave Jwas conducted by the Very Rev. Dean
Russell, who, at the termination, said; —“ The peculiarity of this occasion may justify
a departure from our ordinary silence at burials, so far as to lead me to say some
words, few and measured. We have here committed to the grave one who has for
many years been a leader amongst us —a man on whom God had bestowed some re-
markable gifts. The keen thinker, the rapid writer, the copious and expressive
speaker—these all men recognised in him; and it will be remembered now that these
gifts of his he sought habitually to use for objects of public benefit. But we do not
stand at the graveside to speak words or eulogy. Rather are we there reminded of
the littleness of the things we commonly account the greatest. Vainglory is there
rebuked and put to silence. Yet we may thank God if the talents he has lent to any
of His servants for the work of mortal life have throughout that life been worthily
employed. He whose remains we are now committing to the earth pursued a difficult
and, in some respects, a perilous calling—one in which natural faculties must be often
unnaturally strained. All that work is done. He is in the hands of One who knows
our frame, and understands our difficulties. But while rendering honor to the body
even in its death, let me remind you that the active intelligence which informed it
has not ceased to live. We commend the soul of our brother to God’s rest, knowing
well that this rest does not mean inaction, but entrance on a career of work restful
to the soul of the worker, because fulfilling his highest aspirations. What now
remains, then, but to repeat that old, so often repeated Christian prayer—meaning so
much of inarticulate charity and desire — Requiescat.”
8


Amongst those present at the grave we noticed—The Hon. Arthur Blyth, Chief
Secretary, the Hon. W. Everard, Commissioner of Crown Lands; the Hon. L.
Glyde, Treasurer; the Hon. Charles Mann, Attorney-General; the Hon. W. H.
Bundey, Minister of Justice and Education; and the Hon. H. B. Bright, Commis-
sioner of Public Works; the Hon. W. Milne, President of the Legislative Council;
Sir Henry Ayers, M.L.C., Hon. J. Crozier, M.L.C., Hon. Thos. Elder, M.L.C.,,Hon.
Joseph Fisher, M.L.C., Hon. Alex. Hay, M.L.C., Hon. W. Morgan, M.L.C., and Hon.
P. Santo, M.L.C., Messrs. J. C. Bray, M.P., W. Cavenagh, M.P., R. Rees, M.P., J. M.
Solomon, M.P., R. I. Stow, Q.C., M.P., B. T. Smith, M.P., Geo. Stevenson, M.P., and
Wm. Townsend, M.P.; Sir John Morphett; Mersrs. W. D. Allott, Mayor of
Adelaide; T. Worsnop, Town Clerk ; L. Scammell, Mayor of Unley ; and J. Water-
man, Town Clerk of Unley; the Revs. T. Hope, of Clayton Church, B. Jenkins, and
W. Nicholls; from the Advertiser, Chronicle, and Express offices, Messrs. J. P. Stow,
J.P., J. L. Bonython, John Opey, L. E. Harcus, B. C. DeLissa, W. Hay, H. Edwards,
C. Wilkinson, E. W. Webb, G. J. Shanks, and C. C. Gooden, with several other
members of the reporting, commercial, general printing, and publishing departments;
from the Register offices, Messrs. B. W. Andrews, J.P., W. K. Thomas, J.P., pro-
prietors ; and J. H. Finlayson, D. W. Melvin, W. Holden, N. J. Hone, T. W. Harris,
R. K. Thomas, and H. Cbnigrave; and Messrs. B. Amsberg, J.P., C. J. Barry, J. N.
Blackmore, Under-Treasurer; G. P. Bailey, T. G Brown, J. F. Conigrave, Jas.
Counsell, W. Colton, G. H. Catohlove, Charles Downer, A. J. Edmunds, Captain
English, W. Ferguson, B. B. W. Glandfleld, E. W. Hitchen, Auditor-General; John
Hodgkiss, J.P., J. N. Hines, A. Kauffman, Wm. King, jun., G. T. Light, Dr.
Mclntyre (medical attendant of the deceased), H. C. Mais, Bngineer-in-Chief; H. C.
Palmer, John Prince, jun., R. D. Ross, J.P. W. Randall, Councillor Stacy, R.
Stuckey, W. W. Tuxford, J.P., S. Tomkinson, J.P., W. K. Simms, M.P., and T.
Brown.
Apologies were received for the absence of several gentlemen from ill-health and
other causes, including the Speaker (Sir George Kingston), Messrs. J. H. Angas,
M.P., E. Ward, M.P., S. J. Way, Q.C , J. B. Austin, P. B. Coglin, Inspector Peters-
wald. Telegrams of condolence were received from the other colonies.— S. A. Advertiser.
We regret to record the death of Mr. John Henry Barrow, M.P., which took place
on Saturday morning, August 22, at about 9 o’clock, at his residence, Hutt-street.
He had been suffering from severe illness for a length of time, although it is only
within the last six or eight weeks that he has been entirely Incapacitated for business.
Early in the year he paid a somewhat lengthened visit to Victoria, and was apparently
much benefited by the change. Upon his return he resumed his Parliamentary duties,
but after a few attendances he was obliged once more to absent himself, and on two
occasions since the House of Assembly has granted him a month’s leave of absence.
The immediate cause of death was serous effusion of the brain ; but, in addition to
this, it may be stated that his physical system had become completely exhausted.
Sadly enough there was no one present in the room with Mr. Barrow when the vital
spark fled. Of late he has suffered so much from want of sleep that opiates, ordered
by Dr. Mclntyre, have had to be administered to ensure for him a few minutes’ rest
at a time. On Saturday morning, shortly after 8 o’clock, Mrs. Barrow saw that he
was asleep, but on returning a little before 9 she found him dead.
Mr. Barrow, who at the time of his decease was in his fifty-eighth year, was
well known in England as an able political writer on the staff of the Bradford
Observer. He arrived in this colony some two or three and twenty years ago, and
9


shortly afterwards became connected with the commercial and subsequently with
the literary department of the Register and Observer, On the removal of Mr. (now
Dr.) Andrew Garran to Sydney, he succeeded him as principal leader writer in those
journals, in which capacity he acted until the middle of the year 1858, when he re-
tired from that position, and started the Advertiser and Chronicle, and still later the
Express, newspapers. With these he was more or less actively connected till the
time of his death, having for some years past shared the proprietorship with Mr.
Thomas King. In addition to his earlier newspaper engagements in this colony, Mr.
Barrow had the charge of Clayton Congregational Church —a place of worship
erected by the people of Norwood and Kensington with the view of ensuring his
settlement among them. Here he officiated for several years, and was known as an
able and striking preacher. He resigned the pastorate of the church in August,
1858, when he entered the House of Assembly as member for East Torrens. His
debut as a Parliamentary speaker was made in moving on the Ist of September, 1858,
the address in reply to the Governor's Speech. He did not seek re-election on the
dissolution of Parliament in 1860, but in March, 1861, he was returned at the head of
the poll as a member of the Legislative Council, and a few weeks later was called on
to move the address of that body in answer to the Opening Speech of His Excel-
lency. In 1869 his seat became vacant through effluxion of time, and having offered
himself for re-election he once more succeeded in securing the highest place on the
poll. About the middle of 1870 he was selected by the Government to represent the
Upper House in an Intercolonial Conference which met at Melbourne, the delegates
appointed to accompany him being the late Hon. John Hart and Mr. Townsend.
In 1871 he resigned his seat in the Council, but at the dissolution of the Assembly at
the end of the same year he was prevailed upon to offer himself for the District of
the Sturt, and was returned. This constituency he represented until his death,
although, as we have stated, he has latterly been able to give but little attention to
his legislative duties. Immediately after the meeting of the Houses in February,
1872, Mr. Barrow became Treasurer in an Administration formed by Sir Henry
Ayers. He led the Assembly through the longest, and in many respects the most
laborious session upon record in South Australia, and at the close of it accom-
panied Sir Henry Ayers as a delegate to the Intercolonial Conference in Sydney,
the labors of which have borne more successful fruits than any of its predeces-
sors. Mr. Barrow continued in office until the resignation of the Ministry in
July, 1873, on the eve of the meeting of the second session of the present Parlia-
ment. In June, 1871, he was elected the first Mayor of the Corporation of Unley,
having previously, on more occasions than one if we mistake not, declined to allow
himself to be put in nomination for the Mayoralty of Adelaide. In addition to the
other capacities in which he has served the country, he held during several years
a seat upon the Board of Education, and for a short time he was a member of the
Central Road Board. He took a keen interest in the volunteer movement, and
was for some time a member of the Free Rifle Corps. It may be added that his is
the second death which has occasioned a vacancy in the present Parliament, the
other being that of the late Mr. Hart.
During the whole of the time he has been in the colony Mr. Barrow has been in
every sense of the word a public man. His abilities both as a speaker and writer
were unusually great. With an exuberant fancy, a genial humor, a keen faculty for
apprehending and interpreting the current of public feeling, joined to a wonderful
command of plain and effective language, he speedily secured a prominent position
in popular estimation, which he maintained to the last. On a public platform he
10


was facile princept, and his fluency in speech was equalled by his facility in writing.
In parliamentary annals his name will not be found frequently associated with the
origination of new measures ; but he was an astute critic, and oftentimes rendered
valuable aid in perfecting them. The fact that he carefully abstained from allying
himself to any party in either House enabled him as a member to criticise more
freely than would otherwise have been the case, but his criticisms were always good-
humored, as well as to the purpose. Among the most useful and best-remembered of
his services are those connected with the Real Property Act. He was one of the
Commissioners appointed in 1861 to examine into the working of that measure, and
he has been a consistent supporter of the principles of the new system of land trans-
fer. As Chairman of the Commission on Diseases in Cereals he also gained deserved
credit for the report brought up, which it is understood was chiefly drafted by him.
It would be impossible, however, to enumerate all the Parliamentary matters with
which the name of Mr. Barrow as a prominent and active member of the Legislature
has been identified, and it is unnecessary that we should enter into a critical review
of his career. Equally difficult would it be to give an account of the public move-
ments in which he has interested himself. From first to last he has occupied a large
space in the public view, and now that he has had to yield to the strict arrest of the
fell Sergeant Death there are none who will withhold from him the tribute of having
been one of the most able —as he unquestionably was one of the most popularly
influential —men that have helped to mould the thought of South Australia.
Mr. Barrow was twice married. Three daughters and two sons by his first wife
are still living, two of the former being married. One of the sons, Mr. John Bar-
row, is in the South Australian Survey Office; the other is resident in Victoria. By
his second wife, who survives him, he also had a son, so that the family thus bereft
of its head is a large one.— S. A. Register.
DEATH OF MR. BARROW, M.P.
The sudden though not unexpected death of this lamented gentleman created a
most painful sensation in the capital, as well as in every other part of the colony.
All classes, even those who had most occasion in past times to differ from the
lamented deceased, admit that an eminent politician has been taken from our
midst, and a gap made in the gallery of South Australian worthies which is not
likely soon to be refilled. By the community at large, whoso prosperity he so
assiduously promoted, this loss will be long mourned, and we do not exaggerate
when we say his removal amounts to a national loss. Mr. Barrow stood in a
prominent position, both as a member of the South Australian Parliament and as
a member ot the South Australian community. Unquestionably many of his fellbws
held opposing views—this was, of course, a necessity; but those who differed from
him could never question the honesty of his purpose, or the sincerity of his convic-
tions. His labors for years past, prodigious as they wore, were no doubt primarily
directed towards advancing the welfare of this colony, but his sympathies wore cos-
mopolitan, his benevolence large-hearted, and the beneficent influence ot such a man
is naturally and even necessarily widely expansive. The doctrines he taught, the
principles he espoused, were of universal application. By them the welfare of our
colony was not purchased at the expense of our neighbors; he looked upon all as
bound together by the ties of common interest; and nearly every act, certainly every
speech of his public life proved him to be imbued with a spirit which soared above
the long-associated prejudice and narrow grooves in which so many of our public
men delight to grovel.
11


Mr. Barrow was one of the foremost]men of his t : me, and he will stand ont
conspicuously in one of the most eventful chapters of our history, viz., the initiation
and perpetuation of Responsible Government in South Australia. His name is
perhaps the most distinctive in the annals of the last twenty years. The ardour
and energy with which he gave himself up to whatever he undertook resembled the
self-devotion of an apostle, and withal he was a man of business. Ever inspired by
patriotism, he scorned the very name of selfishness. Want of loyalty to the colony
was to him little else than a crime. We well remember the withering, scathing
philippic the conduct of Mr. Tomkinson evoked when that gentleman procured the
ringing the Town Hall Bells upon the arrival of the news that the Privy Council had
decided against the Government with regard to the Northern Territory law suit.
His whole soul seemed to well up within him. We give his own words ;■ “ Certain
absentees in England said they were our friends, but they were our bitterest
enemies. They knew the spirit that had the other day set the bells a-ringing. They
tried to ridicule us in every way that was possible when they could get us into a
mess. They made their money here, and then went and spent it elsewhere, and slan-
dered the colony that provided them with purple and fine linen in other countries.”
He quailed before no difficulty, and shrunk from no personal sacrifice, and these
qualities were rendered the more effectual for their purpose by the practical acquain-
tance with commercial men and commercial affairs with which they were con-
joined. He was gifted with indomitable perseverance, indefatigable industry, and
extraordinary vigor of mind. As a speaker, few have equalled him, perhaps none of
his contemporaries. His fluency and oratorical dexterity have received the highest
tributes whilst living, and now that the hand of death has removed him, the
encomiums are even of a higher and universal character. The singular force and
transparent lucidity of his reasoning impressed all who heard him, whilst earnest-
ness and sincerity breathed through all he said and did. His public career was
always distinguished by purity and disinterestedness. Singular as it may appear,
and unusual as it is admitted to be, his powers as a speaker were almost equalled by
his ability as a writer. It is reserved to but few to combine the two in a very high
degree. Thus it was his privilege first to lay down abstract principles in speech, and
afterwards to carry them into practical application with the ‘‘pen of a ready
writer,” with the truth of which he was ever impressed, and which, thanks to the
clearness and vigor of his style, which shone as brightly in his briefest articles as in
his most studied speeches, usually gained the acceptance of reasonable men in the
colony. When wrong in his conclusions, we will say that no man, however differing
from Mr. Barrow upon political matters, or the application of principles, could
have come into communication with him without at once conceiving the strongest
personal regard and esteem for him. Withal he was a plain man of the people, and
nothing could induce him to separate himself from them.
We have said he was a pure and earnest patriot. ,He was more. He was an
ardent and steadfast friend of liberty and progress—ever looking onward. Whoever
else might backslide, or wax cold and conservative, he never tergiversated, he never
recanted any of his generous principles, but clung, to his latest breath, to his belief
in human progress, to his aspirations for the elevation of the masses; and those
masses have in him lost a trusty guide and powerful friend. By the vigor and power
of his intellect, he rose to acquire an ascendancy in the public mind—solely and
absolutely by these qualities - that power and that vigor being ever applied to
purposes advantageous to the colony.
As a logician he was close, sometimes] compact, ever [adroit, sometimes almost
12


subtle; and he always bore forcibly in mind “ the sympathies of his audience.” His
command of language and readiness of vocabulary were so great that he almost
suffered from what De Quincey once called a “ jewelly hemorrhage of words.” Yet
he withal never drove his arguments to an extremity, but was “ both practical and
persuasive.”
Perhaps the weakest point about him was his extreme timidity as a Minister,
when leading the House of Assembly through the peculiarly long and laborious session
of 1872. Able as Mr. Barrow unquestionably was, his sense of responsibility led him
to shrink from the origination of measures, and to f.'iopt those utilitarian notions
which, however, are not singular to him. We do not blame him for this, but, con-
sidering the eminent position he had achieved, and the high class ability he possessed,
he lost, we think, through excessive scrupulosity and timidity, many rare opportuni-
ties which offered, and which ambition might have led a bolder man to seize. Never-
theless, we cannot forget his services as a Delegate, in company with Sir Henry Ayers,
to the Intercolonial Conference at Sydney, which perhaps may be named as the only
Conference of an Intercolonial character which brought any profitable or permanent
return to this colony. He was, however, as a member of Parliament, quite “ inde-
pendent of dissolutions, the caprices of constituencies, and even the course of time.”
We have briefly alluded to his public career. When such a man lies dead, when
sorrow’s faded form is on a country’s face, and “ the penumbra of the same grief is
everywhere felt,” it is difficult to speak of him in his private life.
His nature was kindly and tender; he hated injustice, and could never brook
persecution. We, of our own knowledge, can testify to the warmth of his feeling in
an election not long ago, when a now rising and able member was severely assailed.
Not only did his whole soul rebel against what he considered positive wrong, but he
sought out that gentleman, advised him, and afterwards volunteered and introduced
him to the House of Assembly. Yet of him it might be said —“He did good by
stealth, and blushed to find it fame.”
His gentleness of nature, the depth of his affections, his innate modesty, love,
scrupulous love of truth, invested him with a charm in all circles where he moved,
whilst in business perfect probity and absolute sincerity were his chief characteristics.
We fear we have failed to do him justice; but still one more characteristic needs
allusion—it was his in a pre-eminent degree to be the soul of generosity politically,
and perhaps in the enjoyment of this quality he was unique amongst South Austra-
lian politicians. He could recognise the old and trite
“ Fas est et ab hoste doceri,”
and therefore instead of bandying recriminations, exchanging compliments (?) and
making controversy distasteful, when answering an opponent, he understood no
rivalries but those of peace, and ever employed his “ Shield of Achilles,” politically—
“ persuasion.”
We should be selfish, insensible, ungrateful, if when all others sorrow, and the
whole Press of South Australia weave their literary chaplets, we did not in our humble
way recognise the merits, and rare abilities, and self-sacrifice of one who has con-
tributed so much to the permanent progressive development of this colony.
“Oh 1 be his failings buried in the tomb,
And guardian laurels o’er his ashes bloom.”
— Yorke's Peninsula Advertiser.
The flags from both newspaper offices are flying half-mast high this morning, and
everybody is asking the reason of so unusual an occurrence. The reply of those who
are in the secret is, “ Mr. Barrow, the editor of the Advertiser, is dead.” The event was
13


not altogether unexpected, for the deceased has been ailing for a considerable period,
and has been actually laid aside from work for some months past. Mr. Barrow has
occupied such a prominent position here in connection with literature and politics for
the last 20 years that a few words about him cannot fail to be interesting. He arrived
in the colony in the year 1854, and first obtained employment as a bookkeeper in the
Register office. He soon, however, gave evidence of his ability both to write and to
speak,and opportunity was speedily afforded of exercising both talents. The proprietors
of the Register promoted him to the position of leader-writer in association with Mr.
Garran, now of the Sydney Morning Herald; and the Congregatioualists at Kensing-
ton being without a stated minister offered him the pastorate of Claytou Church,
which he accepted, and held for three or four years. He filled both positions with
marked ability. As a journalist he was trenchant and vigorous, and his articles, par-
ticularly upon the Crimean war, were universally admired. As a preacher he was
also very successful. Though possessing a “ mean presence,” and none of the graces
which belong to the professional elocutionist, he was enabled by the sheer force of his
native eloquence to rivet the attention of any audience. He probably shone greatest
upon the platform, where he has for years been regarded as one of the most effective
speakers In the colony. In addition to a ready utterance he combined the leading
elements of a true orator—pathos and humor—and being wonderfully quick in repar-
tee, he never failed in making a good speech. In 1857 he was strongly urged by his
friends in East Torrens, who at that time almost worshipped him, to stand for a seat
in Parliament. He consented, but the proprietors of the Register not approving of
his decision, his association with those gentlemen ceased. He was triumphantly
elected a member of the House of Assembly, and his supporters helped to start the
South Australian Advertiser, which was called into existence in July, 1858. He has
had the editorial management of this paper—of which, latterly, he and Mr. King have
been the sole proprietors—up to the day of his death. He served a term in the Lower
House, and then transferred his services to the Upper House, where he remained for
several years. In 1872, however, when the elections for the House of Assembly took
place he offered himself to the electors of the Sturt for a seat in that branch of the
Legislature, and he was returned at the head of the poll, Mr. Townsend being his
colleague. It was during this period of his political history that he held the office of
Treasurer in the Ayers Ministry; and many of his speeches will be long remembered
by those who had the pleasure of listening to them. —City Correspondent of the
Border Watch.
By this time the death of John Henry Barrow, member of Parliament and news-
paper proprietor, will have been heralded through the length and breadth of the
land. The daily press has rendered its tribute of praise to the departed ; and I may
perhaps be allowed to say a few words on the same subject, particularly as I was
personally acquainted with the deceased, and had the opportunity of watching his
colonial career from its commencement to its close. Mr. Barrow arrived in the
colony towards the end of the year 1853 or beginning of 1864, when he was between
35 and 40 years of age—just in the prime of life. He had not been unknown even
in England, for he occupied a creditable position on the literary staff of the Bradford
Observer, where he was recognised as an able and facile writer; and he had also taken
part in several platform controversies with Dr. Lees upon the temperance question.
Upon his arrival here he obtained employment in the Register office—first as a book-
keeper, and then as journalist. While holding the latter position, the pastorate of
Clayton Congregational Church was offered to him and accepted; and he continued
to hold the two offices of writer and preacher for three or four years. It was during
14


this period that the public was made aware of his eminent abilities. It soon became
apparent that the leading columns of the Register and Observer were open to the in-
fluence of a new and powerful mind. Mr. Barrow’s articles were marked by a
freshness and vigor, and there was a nervous incision, as well as graphic force, about
them which up to that time had been unknown in the history of colonial literature.
I well remember the stirring leaders he wrote upon the Crimean war, and the
avidity with which they were read. But he shone quite as conspicuously "as a
preacher and speaker. He always gathered crowded congregations, and his
sermons were invariably eloquent, and were moreover, characterised by a greater
profundity of thought than were observable in his newspaper writings or
in his speeches upon the platform. There are many who aver to this day
that they have never heard an abler pulpit orator, though he had but few of
the graces which make up the professional elocutionist. It was, however, as a
public speaker that he was most popular. For years he reigned supreme upon the
platform. Wherever he spoke there was sure to be a crowd. He knew precisely how
to affect a meeting. With a keen appreciation of the humorous, he was not without
the element which melts; and possessing a vocabulary which was never at a loss for
a word, I have seen him convulse an audience with laughter, or subdue them into
tears. I shall never forget his speech in Green’s Exchange, delivered upon the occa-
sion when the brave lifeboat men were being rewarded for their heroism in connection
with the wreck of the Admella. He thrilled every soul present to its very depths by
the sheer force of genuine eloquence. The eminent qualities he displayed both as a
political writer and speaker marked him out ns exceptionably fitted for a position in
Parliament, and the electors of East Torrens, who at that time almost worshipped
the new light which had risen in their midst, did all they could to urge him to stand
at the elections which took place in 1858. After some consideration he consented,
and it was this that compelled his severance with the Register proprietors, who did
not see their -way clear to allowing an to hold a seat in the Legislature. But
his friends rallied round him, and by their aid he was enabled to start the South
Australian Advertiser, with which he was identified, as the leading proprietor, up to
the day of his death. His chief literary effort in connection with this paper was his
vehement advocacy of Goyder’s valuations as representing the people’s rights in
opposition to the squatters. The warmth of this struggle, and the ability with
which the deceased gentleman maintained the popular side of the discussion, will not
readily be forgotten. His services in Parliament were both lengthy and valuable. He
served a course of training in the Assembly, and then advanced to the Council; but
his mind was too active, and his powers too great, for that branch of the Legislature,
in which little beyond supervision is done. It was felt that his proper
sphere was the Lower House and so in the year 1872 he contested the
District of Sturt, and was returned, as he always had been, at the head
of the poll. Shortly after his election he joined Sir Henry Ayers’s administra-
tion as Treasurer, and leader of the House of Assembly. His financial speeches were
remarkably lucid, and his management of the business of the country was able and
not without success, although towards the close of,his term of office he was suffering
from the ailment which eventuated in his death. In addition to his parliamentary
and his literary services he has represented the colony at two Intercolonial
Conferences, the members of which were not slow to recognise his ability, and for a
considerable time he was a zealous member of the Education Board. Such is a brief
summary of the career and services of the useful citizen and faithful colonist who
has now passed away from us. There is little doubt but that the great mental
strain he underwent during the first ten or twelve years of his residence in the colony
15


undermined his health, and laid the foundations of that strange abnormal brain
disease which ultimately led to his death, and about which, because we know so
little of its inner workings, all possible leniency should be exercised. It Is not for us
to judge. The motives which impel human actions are beyond our ken. Let us
admire the good we see in our fellow beings, and acting upon this principle the name
of John Henry Barrow is one which the colony will not willingly let die. —Adelaide
Correspondent of the Kapunda Herald.
It has become the mournful duty of the press of this colony to chronicle the
death of one who for many years has justly been considered its ablest member, and
who has also united in himself various public functions, each of itself important
enough to make his death an almost irreparable public loss.
In the death of the late Mr. Barrow the journalistic literature of the colony suffers
the loss of that mind from which it took the high tone and deservedly admired
character which it at present maintains, and received a vigorous influence which
will not cease to be felt long after he who exercised that influence becomes, in the
course of events, comparatively forgotten. And though for some time past the
ready pen has been, perforce, almost laid aside, there have, within the last two or
three years, been matters so important and interesting as to call for its being taken
up, and to lead men to say, while perusing its keen criticism or far-sighted wisdom,
“ Surely this is Barrow’s ?” It is as a journalist probably that Mr. Barrow exercised
the most powerful influence upon the opinion and growth of the young and striving
colony to which he came some twenty years ago. In all questions (and they have not
been few) which materially affected its present prosperity or future fortune he sent forth
no uncertain sound. And when the exciting events are passed, and the hot humors
of political conflict have subsided, a calm revisw of the whole shows that in most
instances there was displayed, on the part of him of whom we write, a large amount
of penetrative sagacity and intuitive perception of final consequences.
The qualities which make the profound thinker and able writer do not always
constitute the successful politician, though some of them are of the essence of both;
but when, in 1858, the editor’s room was partly forsaken for the more prominent and
exciting arena of Parliament, it was found that the man who could think and write so
well could also most brilliantly act and speak. He was as brave, as ready, as deter-
mined in the presence of the most formidable political opponents as in the presence of
his ink bottle. Our House of Parliament never, in the person of one member, re-
ceived such an accession of brain power and legislative faculty as in that of Mr. Bar-
row. The young member was completely equipped for the contest, and soon displayed
those enviable talents which made him eagerly sought for as a friend and heartily
feared as an opponent. With powers of repartee and sarcasm more pungent and re-
fined, if not so cruelly lacerating as those of Mr. Strangways; with a natural cou-
rage which made his suavity more dignified than Mr. Blyth’s; and, above all, with
unfailing tact, knowledge of affairs, and application almost equal to those of Sir
Henry Ayers, he assumed, in all great debates, a leading position, and became one of
our ablest ministers of the Crown.
Asa preacher, this many-sided man held, in his day, no mean place; and though
his ministrations did not come within the scope of our knowledge of him, we can
readily understand the eloquence and power with which he would treat the great theo-
logical truths. But the quiet unobtrusive life of the Christian pastor was uncon-
genial to the eager stirring spirit of the man, and impelled him to busier scenes.
As a man of business, a gentleman, and a friend, we bear grateful testimony to his
16


honorable character and estimable qualities. With all his acquirements and superior
talent, none were more patient of honest shortcoming and more kindly encouraging
of honest effort than he.
He has gone—preacher, journalist, politician, citizen—leaving behind him in
each capacity an honorable name. It may be generations before such another
character is found amongst us, and we mourn him as one upon whom we are not
likely to look again. His life affords to the young men of this colony 71 most
admirable subject for study and emulation, and we trust that this may be one of its
manifold good results.
We would end this brief notice with the simple prayer with which Dean Russell
closed the few solemn and appropriate sentences he uttered at the grave—
Requiescat!' —Southern Argus.
We regret to notice the death of Mr. J. H. Barrow, M.P., which took place at
his residence, Hutt-street, on Saturday morning, August 22, from serous effusion
of the brain. Mr. Barrow arrived in the colony in 1851, and was for several years
pastor of Clayton Chapel, Kensington, which charge he resigned on entering Parlia-
ment, in 1858, as member for East Torrens. In addition to his clerical duties,
Mr. Barrow was for many years the leading writer on the staff of the Register
and Observer, and on retiring from that position, started the Advertiser
and Chronicle newspapers, of which he ultimately became the principal pro-
prietor. In 1861 Mr. Barrow was returned at the head of the poll as a member of
the Legislative Council, and served the colony for eleven years in that capacity. In
1871 he resigned his seat in the Council, and at the general election in January, 1872,
he was returned to the Assembly as member for the Siurt. Mr. Barrow was, from
February, 1872, to July, 1873, Treasurer of the Province and leader of the Assembly,
and accompanied the then Chief Secretary, Sir Henry Ayers, as a delegate to the
Intercolonial Conference in Sydney, in the labors of which he took an active part.
The deceased gentleman was also a member of the Education Board for several
years.
The interment took place on Monday last, at the North Road Cemetery, in the
presence of a large number of leading colonists and friends, who assembled to pay
the last tribute of respect to the memory of one who had for so many years held
a distinguished position in South Australian literature and politics. Dean Russell
read the burial service, and afterwards delivered a short address.
There were many matters on which, during Mr. Barrow’s career as editor and poli-
tician, we strongly differed from him, and we were not chary in expressing our
opinion of his actions in both capacities. Nevertheless, we have always regarded him as
one whose thoughts and actions were governed by a strong sense of duty, and we but
re-echo the opinion of our fellow-colonists, when we say that, by the death of John
Henry Barrow, South Australia has lost an able, well tried, and conscientious
servant. — Protestant Advocate.
A great man has fallen this day in Israel,"” was the general exclamation on
Saturday morning, when it was reported in town that Mr. Barrow was dead. It was
well known that the health of the deceased gentleman had been ailing for some time,
but few people beyond the circle of his intimate acquaintance suspected that his end
was so near. When the sad event, therefore, became known there was a general
feeling of surprise, mingled with regret. Mr. Barrow was one of the few men who
have risen to eminence in this country, not by successful trading or lucky specula-
17


tions, but solely by the force of their genius. As a writer, a public speaker, and a
politician, Mr. Barrow possessed talents of no mean order, and, what is more, he
knew how to turn them to account. We have read his articles in the columns of the"
Advertiser newspaper, and heard his speeches at public meetings and in the halls of
Legislature, and, although his views diverged widely from our own on many subjects,
we must say that his writings were always readable, and his speeches worth listening
to. No one knew better than Mr. Barrow how to grasp the salient points of his
subject, and his speeches, which were always ad rem., were frequently lightened up
with flashes of playful humor. He was, in our opinion, by far the best speaker in the
House of Assembly, and the best writer in the colony. On Monday afternoon his
remains were conveyed to the North Adelaide Cemetery, followed by a large concourse
of people. We sympathise deeply with Mr. Barrow’s family in their bereavement, as
well as with the journal he conducted with so much ability, in the loss they have
suffered by his death. Peace be to his ashes. —lrish Harp.
There are very few throughout the length and breadth of our colony who will
not feel regret that the Hon. J. H. Barrow has been taken from the sphere of his mun-
dane usefulness
During the many years he has been amongst us there were few men who had so
enthusiastically filled the varied positions to which he has been called, and fewer
still who contributed so much to the general welfare of the province.
His mission was essentially a popular one; and whether in the pulpit, the
editor’s chair, or as a member of the Legislature, he was alike an ornament of
value.
In public speaking his ready utterance and untiring energy rendered him a
favorite, and there never was a moment when he lost the confidence of his hearers.
It has been justly remarked that he never failed to do good whenever the slightest
opportunity offered; and, as Treasurer of the province, he made for himself a name
not easily forgotten. Whatever may be written of a good citizen of the world is
applicable to the deceased; and there is no one in the colony who more deplores his
removal than the present writer, who here records his admiration of the good
qualities of John H. Barrow, as a minister, a politician, and a man of a happy,
genial disposition, and of the kindliest sympathies with all who had the good
fortune to come in contact with him.— Portonian.
We are exceedingly sorry to have to chronicle the death of Mr. J. H. Barrow,
M.P., for the Sturt, which occurred at his residence, Wakefleld-street, on Saturday
morning, August 22. The deceased gentleman had been ailing for some months,
but his death came rather suddenly at the end. He was well-known throughout the
colony as one of the proprietors of the Advertiser newspaper. In his place in Parlia-
ment he was a supporter of the Permissive Bill in a modified form. Mr. Barrow
was not a total abstainer nor a believer in total abstinence —indeed, at one time he
was the opponent of Dr. F. B. Lees in a public discussion on the subject of alcohol
and its properties, in which the doctor, of course, took the temperance view of the
question, yet we are bound to admit that the question of total abstinence was always
fairly treated in the columns of the Advertiser, and opportunity was always willingly
given for a fair discussion of the subject. Mr. Barrow, while in South Australia,
was largely connected with journalism. Very shortly after his arrival he was
employed on the literary stall of the Register, but on entering Parliament as a
member for Bast Torrens, in 1868, he left that paper, and in July of the same year he
18


brought out the first number of the Advertiser, with which he was connected till the
day of his death. He was well known as an eloquent speaker and a sound writer.
In him the colony has lost one whom it could ill afford to spare, and whose loss it
will be difficult to make up.— B. A. lemplar.
In the death of a public man so highly gifted as the late member for Sturt, the
colony has suffered a great loss. His quiet energy, his admirable reasoning powers
and command of language, expressive, in the most lucid and intelligible form, of his
meaning and intent; and his steadiness of friendship, where he found reasons for
bestowing it, were models for the careful study of his successors, who will do them-
selves credit by cultivating those qualities of mind and heart which render his death
so great a loss to our own community.— Bunyip,
Mr. J. H. Barrow, M.P., one of the proprietors of the Advertiser, died at his
residence in Adelaide, on Saturday morning, August 22. For a considerable time his
health has been failing, and change of air was tried, which seemed to benefit him for
a time, and he was able to attend to his duties in Parliament until very recently.
The immediate cause of death was effusion of the brain. —Northern Argus.
As standing out in marked contrast to the above, we append the following
article from the Methodist Journal, to which we have referred in the preface:—
On Saturday morning last there died at his residence in this city John Henry
Barrow, Esq., M.P. for the Sturt, and well known as one of the proprietors of the
Advertiser. Flags half-mast high, and talking groups in the streets, told that no
ordinary citizen was dead. Mr. Barrow's had been an eventful career. As a Con-
gregational minister in England, and subsequently at Clayton Chapel, Kensington,
he was eminently successful. Shortly after his arrival in this colony he exchanged
the pulpit for the press and politics, and none will deny ttut as a newspaper writer
and member of Parliament he was possessed of uncommon abilities. Latterly his
health failed; leave of absence had to be obtained from the House of Assembly, his
editorial duties were transferred to other hands, till the greater and final change
came, as stated, on Saturday last. He was buried in the Nortfh-road Cemetery on
Monday, in the presence of a large crowd.
We have had very great hesitation as to whether we should notice the death of
Mr. Barrow otherwise than in the most formal manner. And having made up our
minds that it was our duty as journalists to do so, we have had still greater hesita-
tion in deciding alike what to say and what not to say. We believe that our readers
would have a right to complain if we neglected this duty; and we should be
ashamed of ourselves if, undertaking it, we did not perform it faithfully. These
considerations have been forced upon us by the elaborate encomiums which have
been lavished upon the memory of the deceased gentleman by all parties and from
all quarters. Whilst none of the articles on the subject (which we have seen) have been
written either with power or originality, all of them have been of so laudatory a style
that a stranger would suppose not only that one of the great ones of the earth, but a
faultless Christian gentleman, had gone from amongst us. We hold that unmeasured
praise is equally— or more—dangerous than unmeasured vituperation; and this can
be affirmed alike of the dead and of the living. Mr. Barrow, alas, can be in no wise
affected by what we write, and if alive would be the last man to differ with us in
holding that the life of a public man departed should carry its lesson as well as its
example.
19


No one can doubt Mr. Barrow’s great and unusual abilities. As a public
speaker—alike in the pulpit, in the Legislature, and on the platform, he was unex-
celled—seldom equalled, when he put forth his full strength. His penetration was
prompt and rapid, and his readiness of reply most extraordinary. He was a good
friend, and not a vindictive enemy. And no man who entered into conversation
with him on indifferent or on social subjects but must have felt how thoroughly
genial as well as how brilliant a companion he was. We believe Mr. Boucaut put it
most aptly when he said, in the House of Assembly on Tuesday, that what chiefly
distinguished him was his love of fair play, as well as a high sense of justice—not
only towards those who acted with him, but towards those who acted against him.
This is a very high quality of character, and in itself in a leading man would cover
a multitude of sins. The apostle said, “ the chiefest of these is charityand in
these days, when the struggle of life is so fierce and the excitement of living so fiery,
that man is no bad man of whom such words can be truthfully said. And we believe
most thoroughly that they can be truthfully said of Mr. Barrow. Even if his faults
were greater, and his virtues less, we can ill afford to lose him.
Having said this, we say further : we believe that he never did himself nor his
abilities justice. In no sense was his the mind to originate ; it was essentially the
critical faculty which distinguished him. But he never did justice even to that. He
always fell short of expectation in acting, as he almost always exceeded expectation
in speaking. A contemporary says that at one time “ his was a name to conjure
with.” This well expresses it. The name was greater than the man; and at his
zenith there was always the feeling, an indescribable instinct, that his action would
fall short of his words. In this he was a remarkable contrast with a previously
departed politician—the late Mr. Hart. In respect of him the feeling was of the
very reverse nature. Mr. Barrow’s wit, brilliancy, education, eloquence—all the
adornments of man —were very greatly superior to Mr. Hart's. Mr. Hart’s was never
a name to “conjure with.” Yet Mr. Hart was a great man, while Mr. Barrow always
fell short —it may be, in a very small degree—of being a great man. His leadership
of the Assembly was brought about and maintained by this peculiar neutral tint, so
to speak. He was a relief from the intense bitterness of the then political strife.
With a great man the war would have continued; with Mr. Barrow all parties sank
into indifferent repose. Mr. Barrow’s constitution would have made him a failure
in a stormy session.
The cause of Mr. Barrow’s weakness was want of decision. He appeared to
hate thoroughness, and to mistake it for tyranny. He feared responsibility because
it harassed him, and because he wished to be on good terms with all men—less,
perhaps, in the Christian sense, for forgiveness sake, than in the worldly sense for
advantage sake. His great mistake was leaving the higher and sacred calling of a
minister of the gospel for the lower and secular calling of a minister of the state. His
conduct in reference to this seemed ever present to his own mind. He appeared
secretly to criticise his own act; and this would not unnaturally be the case if our
judgment of him be the true one. A strong man might perchance have borne up
against the illness which precipitated his death; to an undecided man that illness
proved irresistible. As a minister of the gospel his expositions of Holy Writ were,
in his style, probably second to Mr. Binney’s, and to Mr. Binney’s only, of all
preachers that we ever heard. There was certainly not the evangelical fervor which
some of the more active Non-conformist churches rather love, but there was the dis-
criminating and learned explanation of a scholar to scholars. His church was filled,
and his loss, alike to his congregation and his branch of the Christian church, has
20


never been replaced. All his higher faculties were apparent in the pulpit, and his
lower ones were never perceived. When he left the pulpit for the world —the higher
for the lower calling—he threw oft his higher and put on his lower nature, true
success left him, and the result has been most unfortunate. He passed away at the
comparatively early age of 58 years.
WRECK OF THE STEAMER ADMELLA. MONSTER MEETING IN
ADELAIDE.
[From the Advertiser of August 23,1859.]
His Excellency the Governor ("Sir R. G. Mac Donnell) called upon Mr.
Barrow, M.P., to move the second resolution :
Mr. Barrow, M.P., said he had been requested oy the Committee to take
charge of the second resolution to be submitted that afternoon. He should make
very few remarks in submitting it to the meeting, because having had opportunities
of expressing his own feelings and emotions in the public press, it would ill become
him to occupy to any great extent time which might he better left at the disposal of
gentlemen whose hearts were full of this all-absorbing topic, and who were able with
freshness to give expression to their feelings. Another reason why it was not neces-
sary he should occupy much time, or address any lengthened observations to the
meeting, was that he was sure he had only to read the resolution to secure for it the
unanimous and most hearty and cordial assent of every man in the room, and In the
colony so soon as the colony were made acquainted with the substance. He would
not further keep back the sentiments which he wished them to endorse. It was—
“ That this meeting desires to express its admiration of the heroic exertions made by
the captains and crews of the Ladybird, Corio, Ant, and the lifeboats, and of those
who co-operated from the beach in attempting, at the risk of their lives, the rescue
of the survivors.” He was sure that if manly daring, if noble generosity, if most
complete and thorough self-denial could ever be presented to their contemplation it
was in this instance. (Cheers.) Whether they turned to the records of ancient his-
tory or to modern times they would find nothing more calculated to harrow up the
soul than the details connected with those who were left clinging to the wreck. It
must make them proud of their common humanity when they thought of the heroic
exertions of those who manned the boats to rescue the sufferers. He was sure that
such noble deeds would not soon pass away from the memory of South Australians.
(Cheers.) It was said that in Melbourne it was intended to erect a tablet of marble
to the brave men Who went to the rescue of the sufferers, and he did not know
whether we should erect a tablet of marble or not, but this he knew, that the remem-
brance of those deeds would be enshrined in our hearts and recollections, and those
of our children. (Loud cheers.) He had had an opportunity of publishing the
names of most of those glorious men, and therefore he would not occupy the time
of the meeting by repeating them, particularly as most of the names were familiar;
but they had not been published for the last time yet. It would be long before
they would be forgotten. It would be long before the debt of gratitude
was wiped off. It would be long before they could feel they were acquitted
of all responsibility to make honorable mention of them. (Cheers.) What
could exceed the glorious heroism of that man who fired the rocket, when he
had not the necessary stand to do so; not only did the brave fellow brave
the danger of the deep, but he superadded the almost certain destruction of his right
hand. Could they forget that ? No ; they could never cease to admire it, and rejoice
21


in the fact that he and they were fellow-subjects. (Cheers.) He might refer to other
instances, but where there was such a common feeling of heroism it was almost in-
vidious even to mention the instance which he had. They honored heroes of war and
apostles of science, and let them not forget those glorious men who had done such deeds
and encountered such perils, without being stimulated by the hope of winning victory,
but merely to rescue fellow-creatures from impending death. (Cheers.) They would
not forget those brave and glorious men, but honor them in their hearts, their words,
and their writings; and he hoped they would not forget also a substantial tribute and
acknowledgment such as they merited. (Cheers.) It had been said by His Excel-
lency, and well said, that they could not buy such qualities as these men had evinced,
that they were priceless; and it must be admitted that it was so, for no money could
have induced the coward, the craven spirit, to enter upon such deeds as these brave
men had dared and accomplished. (Cheers.) Such courage was not a marketable
commodity, and no prospect of reward at such a critical moment probably entered
the mind. (Cheers.) The brave fellows had but one object in view—beyond the
breakers they saw a number of perishing creatures, and they said our lives for theirs;
and thank God, without the sacrifice of their lives they saved the lives of others.
(Cheers.) He felt sure that when the meeting had achieved the object for which it
was convened, when a Committee had been organised, funds had been collected, and
precise information had been obtained from official quarters that the occasion would be
recognised in a manner worthy of the colony. Still, however, it was rather a deli-
cate thing, and he thought some discrimination should be used in reference to the
different degrees of exigency and distress. The work was twofold ;in the first place,
to recognise the noble heroism of those who assisted in rescuing the survivors, and,
secondly, to relieve the widows and orphans who were suffering privations from be-
reavements by an inscrutable providence. (Cheers.) He hoped in recognizing the
nobility of character of the one, the claims of charity towards those who were
mourning bereavements, and possibly pining in want, would not be overlooked.
(Cheers.) Reference had been made by His Excellency to the conduct of "Victoria,
but he (Mr. Barrow) had never for a moment suspected the generosity or humanity of
the Victorians. He believed that when the news was made known in Melbourne that
the Admella was a wreck, the self-same feeling pervaded-the people of Melbourne as
pervaded the people of South Australia. The people of Melbourne felt the loss was
theirs as much as it was the people’s of South Australia ; they felt that the sorrow
and responsibility was theirs also; and why not ? Were there not in that ill-fated
vessel wives returning to their husbands in Victoria; and were they to look upon the
Admella as a South Australian vessel only, when her passengers fairly represented
both colonies; and it was therefore quite natural that both should sympathise. They
knew that Victoria did sympathise; but the question was not the sympathy of the
Victorians, but of the Victorian Government. (Cheers.) Without wishing to offer
any observations which could be considered out of place whilst His Excellency was
in the chair, and prefacing that it was his own opinion only, for which he held no one
accountable, he must say that in his opinion the Victorian Government had betrayed
a good deal of heartlessness, and that their conduct was, in fact, as contemptible as
that of the crew of the Portland lifeboat was noble and sublime. (Tremendous
cheers.) They had been told that even on shore at Mount Gambiermen fetched away
the blue guernseys which the sailors had left on the raft, and it was a shame to those
men ; but it was still more shameful on the part of the Victorian Government to see
so many in danger of perishing, and yet not burst the bonds of red tape to go and
save them. (Cheers.) Not that the Chief Secretary of Victoria hadn’t a heart, but
22


he was enveloped in routine; he would have saved the people if he could have done it
constitutionally. (Laughter.,) To-morrow they would have an opportunity of read-
ing in that room files of the Melbourne papers, and they would there find in the cor-
respondence upon the subject that the Chief Secretary of Victoria declined to send
any assistance to the Admella on the ground that he could not under Constitutional
Government take any step involving the expenditure of public money not voted by
the Legislature. (Uproar.) If that were Constitutional Government, away, he said,
with such, and give them rather the Government of the King of Naples. He did not
believe, however, that was the Constitution of Victoria any more than it was the
Constitution of South Australia, and he was glad to find that at the election meetings
which were held in Victoria candidates for Legislative honors were asked if they
would support an enquiry into the heartless conduct of the Government in reference
to the Admella, and not a single candidate had yet dared to attempt to defend the
Government, although an attempt had been made to palliate the conduct of the Chief
Secretary. (Cheers.) All honor to the Portland lifeboat; all honor to the Admella’s
boat and her crew; and he might mention that Germain, the coxswain of the Ad-
mella’s boat, picked up four men, total strangers, who risked their lives in endeavoring
to save the survivors. The names of those men deserved to be recorded with many
others, who, at any personal risk, determined upon saving the survivors. He trusted
the resolution which he had proposed would be carried unanimously, and that the
Committee would direct their attention to the relief of the distressed, and the reward
of the deserving. (Cheers.)
PRINTED AT THE ADVERTISER OFFICE, ADELAIDE.
23










