

<TfVFp
o'
— ;f <r r ~ m ]' f
JOHN SHAW NEILSON
A MEMORIAL
A Bread and Cliecse Club Publication








JOHN SHAW NEILSON
A MEMORIAL
Bread and Clieese Glut
Melbourne




foreword
John Shaw Neilson was not only a
foundation member of the Club, but was
one we were proud to have in our ranks.
His inability to attend all meetings was
a matter of regret to him, as he was keenly
interested in the doings of the Club and
its members, and at informal meetings with
him these were the main topics of con-
versation.
We liked John for his unfailing unselfish-
ness and his kindly and courteous nature;
we respected him for his ability, and we
loved him as a man.
This booklet has been published by
the Bread and Cheese Club as a small
tribute to the memory of one whom it
was a privilege to know and an honour
to call friend.
We send it with our compliments as such.
J. K. MOIR,
Knight Grand Cheese.
Box 1663 G.P.0.,
Melbourne.


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
J. Roy Stevens, 1-7 Knox Place, Melbourne.


{Photo Julian Smith.)
JOHN SHAW NEILSON.




CONTENTS
Foreword: By J. K. Moir.
Biography: By R. H. Croll.
Two Poems: By John Shaw Neilson.
The Prince Has Been Into the Lane .
The Smoker Parrot.
Tributes:
Hugh McCrae.
Mary Gilmore, D.B.E.
Nettie Palmer.
Vance Palmer.
Kate Baker, 0.8. E.
E. J. Brady.
James Devaney.
Victor Kennedy.
Phil Whelan.
Joseph O’Dwyer.
Roderic Quinn.
Frederick T. Macartney
D. B. Coutts.
A. H. Chisholm.
Percival Serle.
H. M. Green.
C. H. Souter.
Louis Lavater.
J. Alex. Allan.
Thos. V. Tierney.
Myra Morris.
Tilly Aston.
Marion Miller Knowles,
M.B.E.
Elsie Cole.
Kathleen Dalziel.
Bernard O’Dowd.
Marie E. J. Pitt.




A Biographica I Note
By Robert Henderson Croll.
A biographer, we are told, should write ob-
jectively. Well, that may be so, but I cannot see
how anyone could write objectively of John Shaw
Neilson—that is, anyone who really knew that lovame
poet. He knocked at no man’s door seeking admission,
yet by some magic he entered where he would, soon
to be as much at home within you as your own
heart.
Quiet, unassuming, gentle, you forgot the poet
in the man as you discussed with him the common-
places of life. He was never “literary” in his talk;
least of all was he inclined to speak of his own
poetry. Your work, yes; his own, hardly ever, save
in reply to question, and then origins were usually
avoided. I had always the feeling that a separate
spiritual creature existed within his physical frame,
lived a life apart and revealed itself only in verse.
No poet ever seemed less concerned with the
technique of his art. You parted from him baffled,
convinced that, like Pope, he sang because the num-
bers came.
T. Inglis Moore has a capable and sympathetic
analysis of Neilson’s methods in Six Australian Poets,
but I feel analysis in this case does not touch the
heart of the matter. It is obvious that you cannot
dissect the technique of a bird’s song. Neilson sang
as a bird does, naturally, tunefully. His education
in the art of the singer was as limited as a bird’s;
he read little, his association with his fellows in the
poetic world was intermittent at the best. Remember
Pope’s Homer:
“Self-taught I sing; by Heaven and Heaven alone
The genuine seeds of poesy are sown.”


I risk some critical scorn by insisting that Neilson
owed about ten per cent, to study and ninety per
cent, to intuition.
That implies much when one considers his deli-
cate choice of words and the variety of his metres,
both suggesting wide reading. His was a poetic
inheritance; the roots were in him even as the
fibres of the vine were part of old Omar’s “pre-
destined Plot of Dust and Soul.”
John Neilson, the father, also a man of slight
education, was poet, too. John Shaw, born at Penola,
South Australia, on 22nd February, 1872, had for
grandparents William Neilson and Jessie MacFarlane
of Cupar, and on the mother’s side Neil McKinnon
of Skye and Margaret Stuart of Greenock. The
father’s home town was Stranraer, in Scotland; the
mother, Margaret McKinnon, was born at Dartmoor,
in Victoria.
With such an ancestry there were inevitably a
Burns and a Bible in the home. The mother fre-
quently read the Bible to the family, and she was
fond of repeating to them the words of the o!d
Scottish songs. The father expressed himself in
verses which appeared in the local papers. He was
an occasional contributor, too, to Adelaide Punch.
Shepherding, shearing, farming, he still contrived to
entertain the Muse, and in 1893 a poem of his
won a competition conducted in Melbourne by the
Australian Natives’ Association., He scored again,
this time at the Warrnambool Exhibition of 1897.
A selection of his verses, under the title, The Men
of the Fifties, was published by the Hawthorn Press
in a limited edition in 1938.
Young John Shaw attended the Penola school
for fifteen months, then, in 1881, the family selected
land at Minimay, in the south-west Wimmera of
Victoria. There was no school in that neighbour-
hood, nor was one established until some years after
the family had settled down. Then the lad, thirteen
years of age by this time, had another fifteen months’
tuition.


Two and a half years’ schooling, followed by
manual labour of the hardest kind road-making,
quarrying, fencing, harvesting, farm work generally
—what a foundation for a poet! If culture and
refinement can be innate they were innate in John
Shaw Neilson, Neither lack of what Is counted
education nor the contacts of coarse toil could
roughen the delicacy of his mind.
The poet laureate, John Masefield, spent a
troubled early life, in which he had to mix for a time
with some pretty rough sections of humanity. When
he came to Melbourne as Victoria’s guest in 1934
he was housed with a well-known businessman for
a few weeks. That man came to me. “I can
think of only one word for Masefield,” he said,
“and that is pure .”
This is the impression John Shaw Neilson left
upon you.
He probably opened his heart more to the late
Gerald Byrne than to most. He told Gerald how
eagerly he devoured a volume of Tom Hood’s poems
which came in his way when he was fifteen. All
the verses alike, grave or gay, were great joy to
him.
From about fourteen to seventeen he worked on
the father’s farm at Minimay, but drought and rab-
bits drove them out. They moved to Nhill, where
the father took employment as bush worker and
road contractor.
John Shaw was still with him, and at about
eighteen or nineteen began to put his thoughts in
writing. The local paper printed some of the verses,
and a year or so later the Australasian accepted a
set.
By 1893 there was still another change of resi-
dence, the move being to a farm at Sea Lake, in
the Mallee, where, like the faithful ghost of the
fable, their ill-luck still followed them. That was
the year which saw the publication in Melbourne of a
Prize Poems, Essay, Novelette, and Manuscript


Magazine (what a title in a busy age!) by the
Australian Natives’ National Fete. Amongst the
prize poems appeared one in the senior section from
John Neilson, and one in the junior from his son
John Shaw. It is said that neither knew of the
other’s entry until the results were announced.
The redoubtable A. G. Stephens took very kindly
to John Shaw’s work, some of which was accepted
by the Bulletin (Sydney) in 1896. Just about this
time, however, came a breakdown in health, and his
production in the succeeding four years was neg-
ligible. Resuming in 1901, he contrived to be a
Bulletin contributor till 1906 —a disastrous period,
for it was then that his sight began to fail. He
told Gerald Byrne that after that he could do very
little reading, and had to dictate most of his literary
work. A curious setback had come in 1905, when
he had collected his published and unpublished poems
and submitted them to Stephens in order that some
might be selected for an anthology. A.G.S. was ever
a severe critic; he told Neilson bluntly that only
three or four of them were worth preserving.
Yet the same A.G.S. could write a little later:
“Remarkable are the melody of his verse,
the ease and strength of his rhythms, his
mastery of time and cadence, his instinctive
sense of words. . . . First of Australian poets,
he reflects lasting honour on the land that
bred him.”
It was Stephens, too, when in 1907 he started
his altogether delightful Bookfellow, who was happy
to give John Shaw constant publication in its
columns, and he was still welcomed in the several
brave reappearances that journal made. About 1908
Randolph Bedford came out with his Clarion, and
John appeared in a new role —as writer of humorous
verse. That vein never really dried, but few sus-
pected it in the sober-faced man we knew in recent
days. I opened it again some years ago when I


challenged him to produce some limericks. He was
then at Merbein. His response was delightful.
In 1916 he left the home at Tyrrell Downs
and began a roving life, which embraced many occu-
pations of the bush labourer type. It is pleasant
to recall that he was eventually relieved of that
exhausting kind of work, and that his latest days
were spent in a post found for him in Melbourne
in the office of the Victorian Country Roads Board.
That post entailed little strain upon his sight, and
gave him physical ease. The esteem in which he
was held by members of the Board is witnessed
by the fact that he received so many personal and
unofficial acts of kindness from his colleagues, and
by the appearance at his funeral of several of the
Board’s high executives.
“The play’s the thing,” said Hamlet. The books
were the thing with John Shaw. They made his
reputation. “How Neilson can write,” came to me
in a burst of admiration from Hugh McCrae, and
he quoted:
, it is a merry morn,
The glittering bird has danced into a tree.”
“Could Chaucer or Wordsworth have imagined bet-
ter,” he added.
But McCrae had admired John since “Heart
of Spring” first appeared in the Bookfellow, which
was long before Stephens issued the volume with
that title. John’s first separate publication was “Old
Granny Sullivan” as an eight-page pamphlet in 1916.
It was No, 2 of a series of Australian Poetry Books
which the enterprising Bookfellow began in Sydney.
It had a young portrait of the author as frontispiece.
Then, carefully edited and proclaimed by A.G.S.,
came Heart of Spring in book form. It had been
announced as Green Days and Cherries, but there
was a four years’ pause in publication, due to the
first World War. Stephens, wisely I think, altered
the title to that of the leading poem. (A lovely
thing—who can forget:


“And long-winged swallows unafraid returning”?)
That volume was issued in 1919, with a laudatory
preface by A.G.S.
When, in 1923, the Bookfellow was very willing
to chance another volume, difficulties were found in
the matter of finance. An appreciative Melbourne
woman, Mrs, James Dyer, who had done much
to foster the arts, came forward and generously
subscribed for 200 copies, making it possible to issue
without loss to publisher or author. This was the
Ballads and Lyrical Poems, put forth in 1923. It
had 112 pages as compared with its predecessor’s
94, but it reprinted most of the poems of that first
collection. Heart of Spring had, in the meantime,
gone out of print, and copies were unobtainable.
John had now an assured audience, if not a
large one, and the Ballads and Lyrical Poems also
became scarce before some of his admirers could
obtain copies. This led to the last volume in which
the Bookfellow had a hand. Known as New Poems,
it came to light in 1927. It was dedicated to Mrs.
Dyer.
That was all in the way of volumes up to 1934,
when the Lothian Book Publishing Company (Mel-
bourne) decided to produce John’s Collected Poems.
I had the privilege (I use that word deliberately)
of editing it. That meant reading, and several times
re-reading, the whole of his serious output, closely
and critically. Nothing as a rule is more debunking
to an author; in this case it only increased my
admiration for the poet, even as the close association
added to my appreciation of the man.
This volume contains all that John himself con-
sidered worth preserving of his three earlier books
and of his output between their publication and
1934.
Finally, in 1938, we had Beauty Imposes, which
he sub-titled Some Recent Verse. Published by
Angus and Robertson, it took its title from one of
the poems.


“All art is betrayal,” said Oscar Wilde. John
Shaw Neilson’s art betrayed a sensitive lover of
beauty who shrank from display—a nature which
attracted you by its simple honesty, and by some-
thing indefinable within him which you could feel
and could not intrude upon, but which revealed itself
in his writings.
One imaginative painter found in John’s poems
lines which gave him titles for many attractive pictures.
It was the cultured water-colourist, Blamire Young,
who not only named Neilson Australia’s foremost
lyrist, but offered to illustrate his next book of
verse. That, unfortunately, did not come to pass,
and now, more unhappily still, both poet and painter
are dead.
When Young first came into touch with Neilson
the poet was working in a quarry in New South
Wales. About the same time the painter was asked
by a Melbourne journal what he would do if given
a million pounds. The reply was characteristic:
“I should buy a large and airy quarry con-
taining lots of stone of the softest and pleasantest
quality that could be found. No; not for build-
ing war memorials. I have noticed that Aus-
tralia’s leading poet, John Shaw Neilson, spends
most of his time working in a dangerous quarry
containing iron ore of the hardest consistency
imaginable. His eyesight is seriously impaired,
and his hands are so knocked about that he
can hardly hold a pen. I urged him to leave
this kind of work alone, but he said that as
he cannot sell his poems he must continue as
quarryman, for that is the only work he can
get to do.
“Now, if Australia insists on having her
quarries worked by her poets, well and good.
I and my million will not interfere. But I
will see to it that the stone in the beastly
quarry is soft, and that the hands of the poets
are as little damaged as possible, in case they
might ever wish to write another ode.”


Many tributes from fellow writers who knew
John (and to know him was to know his worth)
follow this brief biography. I think Inglis Moore’s
summary, in Six Australian Poets, is one of the
truest:
“As a pure singer Neilson at his best stands
unsurpassed in modern English-speaking poetry,
and he can take rightful place in company with
the finest lyrists of all English literature.”
And Nettie Palmer said, beautifully, “his work
has the dew on it.”
John died in Melbourne on 12th May, 1942, so
he had succeeded in completing the Psalmist’s three
score years and ten. He had retired from the
Country Roads Board, and the Advisory Board of
the Commonwealth Literary Fund had recognised
his value to Australian letters by the grant of a
pension.
His health was not good. A trip to New South
Wales and Queensland, in both of which States he
received the most cordial of welcomes, failed to
restore him, and he returned to Melbourne in a more
weakened state, to live only a few months longer.
He was buried in the Footscray Cemetery.
How happily Blake foresaw Neilson. Let the
English poet’s verse stand as the Australian poet’s
epitaph:
“And I made a rural pen,
And I stained the water clear,
And I wrote my happy songs
Every child may joy to hear.”


TWO POEMS
JOHN SHAW NEILSON




1. The Prince Has Been Into the Lane was
written for the Bread and Cheese Book, and appeared
in that publication in 1939. It is fitting that it should
be reprinted in a memorial issued by the Club.
The Prince Has Been Into the Lane.
How soft are the neighbours, they no more complain
At the noise of the children; the Prince has been into
the lane.
How faint was the little one, how tired and thin:
And the Prince was so proud and so distant; ’twas
good of the Prince to come in.
He who can stay the hot foot, and the heat in the
brain,
He did delay for a moment; the Prince has been into
the lane.
No monarch has ever been powerful to stay His
decree,
They fell that He lives on black rivers across a wide
Pity He has not; and yet He has put out a pain;
He stayed not a moment; the Prince has been into
the lane.
Twas kind of the Prince of the Shadows; He had
far to come;
The awe of this honour—it leaves us half hidden
and dumb.
The little one knew but the footway, the dust, and
the rain,
The hard word; the kind word —the Prince has been
into the lane.
He has not the leisure for pity by night or by day—
Oh, thank the good Prince, as He hastened he made
the delay.


Can He be older than Love? We see not an end to
his reign;
Is He kinsman of God? or a vassal? —the Prince
has been into the lane.
2. The Smoker Parrot. This poem has not
before been published.. It was written for Mary
Gilmore, who stated that she doubted if the poet
himself had a copy. When she was dispersing some
of her treasures, “to save making a nineteen-page
will,” Dame Mary madei R. H. Croll a present of the
holograph. With her approval the poem, so charac-
teristic of Neilson, is included here.
The Smoker Parrot.
He is alone; no bird so beautiful
The Northern children know.
Gently they say he is not of the Earth
He only falls below.
The settler’s sunburnt child
In him knows all that Summer ever smiled.
Full moon and buttercup lie on his wing.
He is supremely dressed
With the unpainted happenings of the East.
The proud lights in the West
He has made blithely bold
To claim for his magnificence of gold.


TRIBUTES




Hugh McC rae
UPON A DAY
He, of the prilling well, —Castalia called—
Did deeply drink, yet never once allayed
His quenchless, ardent thirst; for he was thralled,
And sang sweet words unto the music played
By hidden minstrels bounden to that mere;
And, from the self-same bank where Chaucer strayed
In days long gone, his voice rang crystal clear.
Wherefore the gods, for very love, him made
Their laureate ....
Alas! that gods can hear!
21


]\dary Gilmore, D.B.E.
He held hands with the deep, and the deep knew
him. He sang life more fully than most people know.
His restraint hid him. Yet it was power created
the restraint.
Outside his family I think I knew Neilson, in
his poetry, longer than anyone else, except A. G.
Stephens. “Marion’s Child,” written when he was
about fourteen, almost stunned me when I read
it, because of its intensity of restrained power, its
elimination of the unnecessary, and its passion of
pity. It was published in the Bulletin, and I took
it all over the world with me. Years later, when
I told him this, he said he had not known it had
been published, and had never seen it in print. His
sister had sent it away unknown to him. Perhaps
even she had not seen it. I sent him my old yellowed
cutting.
When, in about 1904-5, “Love’s Coming” was
published by Mr. Stephens, that had almost as great
an effect on me, though in another way. And it
was then that I first wrote to Neilson. The corre-
spondence lasted through the rest of his life.
In preparing the matter for Heart of Spring,
Mr. Stephens asked me to go through it and make
any suggestions I thought necessary. I asked that
“Marion’s Child” be included. Mr. Stephens said
that by Neilson’s wish it had been excluded as wotk
of the too young which meant that he thought it
lacked the austerity (and there is austerity, because
there is no word ever used by Neilson for a merely
decorative purpose) of the later verse. When the
book came out the critics damned it with faint praise.
I asked one why. He replied, “To satisfy a grudge
agpinst A. G. Stephens.” Stephens used to read


Neilson with the tears of a reciprocal tide of per-
ception running down his face. He could take any
buifet against himself, but a hurt to Neilson was
like a mortal wound to him. The critics knew this.
Their cruelty to Neilson did not matter to them.
One of my grateful remembrances is that this
man put it on record that, next to A.G.S., I gave
him his first encouragement. That was one of the
dear things about him; he was so honest, and so
remembering. He also told me that he came over
to this side to work so that he could come to Sydney
to see me. Looking back over the years it seems
incredible that I only met and talked with him four
times—once in Melbourne, and three times in Sydney.
He was quarrying near Nowra when he came to
Sydney the first time. And when I saw his work-
swollen hands, with the finger-nails worn to the
quick by the abrading stone, I felt a stone in my
heart. But we talked, and we talked for a whole
half-day; in the house and out, in Hyde Park, where
he insisted on giving me afternoon tea, and out again.
It was dusk when he left. I later arranged for
J. Le Gay Brereton and Christopher Brennan 10
meet him where I was staying. I wrote to Brereton
that I had cried in my heart at his hands, and said
that it seemed incredible that such hands had written
such delicate verses. Only Brereton came, and as
I had done when I introduced Brereton to Lawson,
I sent the two men out so that they could talk un-
trammelled by a woman and a hostess. Outside they
met Brennan,
As a result of our first long talk Neilson wrote
“The Gentle Water Bird.” He sent it to me to be
wholly mine, and no longer his. Could I keep it? I
sent it to the Sydney Morning Herald and enclosed
the trifle paid for it to Neilson. He still said it
was mine, and he instantly bought and sent me a
handbag with the money and as much more of his
own added as paid for it. I have the handbag still.
He wrote me a second piece, “The Smoker Parrot.”
Both poems I gave to the Neilson books. But I sent


the original script of “The Smoker Parrot” to his
friend, Robert Croll. For Croll loved Neilson.
(Note: “Marion’s Child” appears in the Bulletin
Reciter. —R.H.C.)
An Additional Note from Mary Gilmore.
When I first went to see Philip Whelan, a sick
soldier lying in hospital, 1 had with me the A.G.S.
subscription leaflets for the first edition of Heart
of Spring (then to be called Green Days and Cher-
ries: I talked A.G.S. out of that). These I gave
to Philip, and, “The Diggers were very good,” he
said when I saw him recently; “I sold 20 copies.”
I think that ought to go in the Memorial if
possible.


Nettie Palmer
Many of us in Melbourne first met Shaw Neilson
personally when Beatrice Fowler gave a party wel-
coming him to town, nearly twenty years ago. I
think everyone in the room knew some of his poems,
either from The Bookfellow or in his first collection,
Heart of Spring, but we couldn’t tell whether he
would like us to allude to them. Would he find
the gathering oppressive? How could we make it
easy for him?
It soon became clear that this frail wisp of a
man was putting us all at our ease. People who
filed past him for a handshake found themselves
naturally dropping into talk with him. We asked
him about Stephens, and he told us what he owed
him all those years, as mentor and support. Even
financially: “Most poets spend their lives losing
money on what they write. Thanks to Stephens, I
think Fve made quite six shillings a year. But he
must have lost sixty pounds on my book; he would
publish those de luxe copies.”
As for reading—no, everyone knew Shaw Neil-
son’s eyes wouldn’t let him read much. But he
somehow had an instinct for what mattered to him:
nearly had by heart Padraic Colum’s “Wild Earth,”
knew Louis Esson’s “Cradle Song,” remembered some
classics from his youth. . . Little knots of people
who gathered round him there all felt it was their
lucky day.
Neilson’s long-standing semi-blindness, aggra-
vated, if not caused, by work in the dust of a quarry,
was a tragic affair, everyone said. Not so tragic
for Neilson; he, if any man, turned his necessity
to glorious gain. Reading little, what he chose to
read he held. Dimly seeing a landscape, a man,
a child, he wrote as an impressionist, naturally


selecting and omitting. (One might compare him
with the painter, Clarice Beckett.) If he saw men
likq trees walking, he saw trees in a strange glory:
“It is the white plum tree,
Seven days fair
As a bride goes . .
He saw the very colour of Spring where we
see only the details:
“The world is a worpan in velvet: the air is
the colour of ale.”
He felt the blue wren:
“And he puts into the broad sunshine his
melody of blue.”
And even when his sound country knowledge
showed him a starving soil, a poor, poor country,
his abundant inner life made him say:
“But down in the poor country no pauper
was I.”
No pauper. ... It seems symbolic that when
I asked him lately to let me see some of his letters
from Stephens he said that (except for some he
had given Jim Devaney) they had all been destroyed
in the mouse plague at the end of last war. His
frail songs, they were saved because he had sent
them on, and in his books they remain for us. But
they must be permanently saved from the forces of
destruction. A copy of Shaw Neilson’s poems should
be in every strongroom of Australia.


Vance Palmer
I first heard of Shaw Neilson when, coming back
from Europe in 1915, I dropped in to see A. G.
Stephens at his Sydney office. As soon as the talk
turned to poetry Stephens jumped up in his im-
pulsive way, and, bringing down from the shelf a
large, bound volume of typescript, began reading
aloud with a rapt absorption. It did not need the
feeling in Stephens’ voice to make the poems sound
new, strange, and moving. Nor was his assurance
needed to make me recognise that a spring of haunted
water had begun flowing in the dry country.
Soon afterwards I got in touch with Neilson,
and at intervals letters used to arrive in his large,
spidery handwriting. But I didn’t meet him till
he came finally to town in the middle ’twenties.
He was what you would expect from his letters—
a simple, rather frail man, with a quiet distinction
about him, absolutely unconscious in his talk and
his movements. There was nothing of what jour-
nalists called “the farmer-poet’’ in his looks or his
approach to life. He was just a poet, a man who
set down subtle words to match the delicate music
heard by his inner ear.
In life, as in his poetry, he had little to say,
but he said it with an unforgettable accent that
made it seem a revelation. Most of the world was
a shadow to him, but the part immediately within
his range he saw with a rare intensity. His poor
eyesight shut out a lot: this was sometimes a bless-
ing, sometimes a bane. I remember him, saying that
the only print he had to ponder on in his long
journeys to and from his office was the weekly
Truth poster.
Perhaps he would have written more if things
had been easier for him. Life broke him, not with


great, tragic blows, but with an incessant wearing
grind. When I saw him last, sitting huddled in
a canvas chair on Jim Devaney’s verandah overlook-
ing Brisbane River, he was an old, tired man, with
the creative spark in him dimmed. He didn’t want
to talk poetry, and had almost forgotten his own.
But he has left a handful of rare lyrics behind him.


Kate Baker , 0.8. E.
Apart from his benefactress, Louise Dyer, I
may claim the proud privilege and honour of being
John Shaw Neilson’s first Melbourne friend.
In Easter, 1924, I was holidaying at my sister’s
home in Lyonville when I had a note from John
Shaw Neilson in which he stated that A. G. Stephens,
editor of Bookfellow, Sydney, had charged him, “he
must not leave Melbourne without calling on Miss
Kate Baker.” I telegraphed I would be down next
day.
When I saw him a lump gathered in my throat.
I thought, this then is how Australia treats her sing-
ers. There he was, sick, frail, with toil-worn hands
knotted from hard labor, eyesight even then failing,
yet withal cheerful and undaunted.
Despite sickness, hardship, poverty, John Shaw
Neilson fought a good fight.
He has entered into his rest.
The limpid sincerity of his verse is characteristic
of the man. His work is the man steadfast, faith-
ful, true —“a modest proud man,” A .G. Stephens
calls him, and Mary Gilmore speaks of him as “a
spirit singing.”
John Shaw Neilson has left us, but he is not
dead.
Is he dead whose glorious mind
Lifts thine on high?
To live in hearts we leave behind
Is not to die.
John Shaw Neilson lives: lives in the hearts of
those who knew and loved him in his life-time; he
will continue to live in the hearts of the thousands
of those who come after, who will read and ponder
on his evangel.


-E. J. Brady
His weary feet have won the gate
Of Restfulness. Articulate,
His voice still echoes in a song,
Full delicate and fine, along
Green vistas and the hazy, blue,
Australian hills he haply knew.
Eternal Beauty for her own
His spirit claimed. In pathways strown
With budding fancies, fondly fair,
He wandered e’er; and from a rare,
Frail pipe of sweetness softly drew
Immortal notes, that gleam like dew
Of Morning on the pleasant page
Of Southern verse. From age to age
Our Motherland will richer be
For Neilson’s precious minstrelsy;
A heritage of happy phrase
Will comfort, in the coming days,
All kindly hearts. His gentle words
Will, like the sound of singing birds,
Enrapture grateful devotees
Who pause to list by lands and seas
The lilt of Nature far outflung
From magic harps with music strung,
And gladden them whose eyes behold
The glamor of our Land unfold;
Who vision, ’neath whate’er disguise,
The Wonder that forever lies
In those familiar scenes that tell
The Legend that he loved so well.


James Devanev
Now that Shaw Neilson is gone, we are glad to
remember that his last winter was spent here in
Queensland, and that most of our own literary folk
were able to meet him. The last poem he published
was written in Brisbane for Meanjin Papers “To
Norah McKinney.”
One of the charms of poetry, greatest of the
arts, is its inexhaustible diversity. I am sure that
the greatest work (as well as the worst) can come
out of any one of the “schools.” There can be no
patronising attitude towards Shaw Neilson because
he was an unlettered poet and sang simple songs.
One might as well disparage a lark for not being a
magpie. This poet’s gift was unique and priceless,
and if his range was small it was because he was
singularly handicapped, by enforced exclusion from
the treasures of the past. There was never an Aus-
tralian poet who borrowed so little from without.
He is obscure at times, but that is because he
is so often dealing with beautiful abstractions almost
impossible to express. It is not trees and flowers
and birds themselves he is concerned with so much
as the beauty and the wonder they suggest to him.
He wrote only two sonnets in his life: “The Hour
is Lost” and “The Sun is Up.” In neither did he
achieve (if that’s the word) the formality of the
typical sonnet; each, written to a pattern of his own,
is like two verses of an ordinary lyric. For Neilson
was a lyrist, and though the saying is not acceptable
now-a-days, there is nothing greater in poetic
creation than the perfect lyric.
His work belongs to all the future, and the
years shall not winnow it away. But we who knew
him will cherish the memory of the man, too. Poetry
in his conversation was always “rhyme” or “verse,”


and a poem a “piece.” He always had half a dozen
or so lyrics singing in his head at the same time,
in mind or started. He had a direct, beautiful look
when dictating, for he had to dictate. Here was a
poet who sometimes had to wait a month or more
before he could find some one to take down his
rhymes, and he “lost hundreds of lines that he
thought were good.” I once asked him years ago
how much money he had made out of his poetry. He
said that when he first came to Melbourne he had
been “at it” for about 21 years, and that the total
earned in cash up to that time was about £7.
Now the old lovable dreamer has gone down to
his “dim counties,” but he will always be with us.
The poor poet has left us a legacy of endless wealth.
The bookless working man has contributed splendidly
to our national culture. This is the paradox of all art,
for not by bread alone does man live. It might well
give us hope for humanity that things of the mind
are still so rated above the merely material by those
who matter, in spite of all our flimsy facades.
Shaw Neilson the casual labourer takes his unchal-
lengeable place among the aristocracy of the great,
because he made our songs.
—By courtesy of Meanjin Payers.


V ictor Kennedy
My first personal contact with John Shaw Neil-
son was memorable; my last association with him,
25 years later, was just as memorable although sad-
dened by the reflection that I would probably not see
the “good grey poet” again. When my wife kissed
him good-bye on a country railway station in north-
ern New South Wales, she said it was like a final
parting with a very dear relative. Both of us knew,
what the frail-looking traveller did not even guess,
that he was journeying for the last time. A few
months later we had information that he had died
back in his own city and amongst his ain folk.
I was a youth in Bendigo ((Victoria) in 1916
scribbling verse and having my head and eyes and
heart in the clouds. A friend introduced me to the
poet who was on one of his visits to Bendigo. He
came to my home and his conversation was as music
in my ears. He had the soft voice and far-a-way eye
that indicated the meditative mind and I remember
thinking, even then, that he was remarkably well in-
formed on a number of subjects. His summing up
of people, his analysis of what literary work he had
read, was interesting enough, but it was not until
years later that I realised the depth of his natural
insight.
At the time he was not the known figure that
he became; few people took any notice of him at all
until after the appearance of his first book. To me,
however, he was a poet of the Bulletin, the Bookfellow,
the Clarion and other papers.
He gave me the typescript of some of his verses
“Oh Most Unconscious Daisy,” “The White Flow-
ers Came,” “Roses Three,” and others, as well as a
sheaf of press cuttings, and most of them went on
singing in my head more than verse of any other


writer I had ever read. His eyes were troubling him
as they continued to trouble him all his life. They
had been treacherous since he was about 30, he said,
which accounted for the restricted ambit of his read-
ing. Yet he was steeped in the current philosophies
rationalism, evolution, the Labor movement and
Australian poets and poetry. He was fond of James
Hebblethwaite who, he wrote to me afterwards, was
a “very broad-minded man, for a clergyman; a great
nature lover, too.” He spoke with a touch of awe of
Bernard O’Dowd “man of wonderfully large sym-
pathies. It is a pleasure to converse with him.” But
it was Lawson whom he thought our greatest writer.
“Lawson has the heart, the sympathy; it shows
everywhere. His best prose will always live.”
At that time he was preparing his own first book
in conjunction with the late A. G. Stephens. Some
of that verse he gave me was not in this book nor
did the volume itself appear for two years. Still the
most memorable thing about it all was that Neilson,
after he left Bendigo, sent me the full typescript of
the book with A. G. Stephens’ ink emendations,
corrections and alterations all over it. This was the
only copy in the world and was completed for publi-
cation; the poet asked me to send it back as soon as
I had read it, as it had to go to the printers. He
had not only trusted the precious mss to a youth,
but had risked its journey through the post, plus a
taken-for-granted return trip. Had it gone astray I
don’t know even now what would have happened to
Heart of Spring. I often wonder what had become of
that copy ultimately; John could not tell me last year
either, but he thought it had been destroyed by mice
in that verminous Mallee plague soon after Heart of
Spring was published.
Incidentally Heart of Spring was not the original
title of the book. Neilson’s selected title was Green
Days and Cherries. It was essentially Neilsonesque
but A. G. thought it too theatrical and substituted the
colorless title the book finally bore, Stephens was a
wonderful figure in Australian literature and pro-
bably Shaw Neilson would have remained a literary


stranger in his native country but for him. But
Stephens made mistakes and I think this was one of
them.
From Melbourne and later from Chinkapook and
Merbein, Neilson wrote me interesting letters during
the next two or three years. Some were in pencil and
all contained about four words to a line wretchedly
written. This was because of his eyes, although even
to the last, his long-distance focus was normal and
keen. Last year when he stayed with us in Casino
(N.S.W.) he wanted to leave us a specimen of his
hand writing and bought several sheets of cartridge
paper, about 12 ins. by 18 ins. On each he wrote a
verse of his own for my wife, my three kiddies or
myself. On top of all he set out to “build” a special
one as it happened to be the anniversary of our
wedding.
“To Victor and Claire Kennedy; many happy re-
turns of the day —J. Shaw Neilson, 20/11/1941.”
When he insisted on doing these we insisted
that he do only one a day so as not to tax his eyes,
and as he finished each he exclaimed triumphantly:
“Not too bad; not too bad !”
His unassuming character and lack of personal
vanity revealed itself to me early. In those letters
I spoke of, he counselled me “wisely and well” on
several matters, but always as one rhymer to a
brother rhymer and with many fears lest I should
think him a “preacher.”
There was another instance. I was with him in
Melbourne in 1934 and we walked around to see the
Montford statue of Lindsay Gordon. “The Sick Stock-
rider” was mentioned and Neilson, who apparently
had never receded from his original view of the
greatness of Gordon’s poem, began comparisons.
“It will live,” he said. “My poor little verses will
be forgotten when ‘The Sick’ Stock-rider’ is remem-
bered.”


He said that as sure as Heaven.
Another incident. A poor little Pomeranian (in
a certain condition) had been turned adrift and fre-
quented our kitchen in Casino. Shaw Neilson, lying
on a stretcher and contemplating the little bitch, wrote
a poem: ‘‘To a Vagrant Female.” I think it was the
last poem he did write. One stanza gives a clue to
the attraction between him and the vagrant;
“A prowler are you, turned out and on by Fate;
Pirate am I
Thoughts I must have, I do not hesitate,
The dead men can supply.”
This visit to the North had been planned for
many years. In 1928, when I was in Cairns, he wrote
that he must “go over to Queensland some day.”
A few years later the trip nearly came off and then,
at June’s end last year, he came. He stayed first
with Jim Devaney, in Brisbane, and last with me in
Casino. He had had his trip and when he left me it
was with an undertaking to see me after the summer
in Newcastle. I was then hoping to move to New-
castle but I did not expect to see him there, and in
my household is the memory of a slight and failing
little personality that my children called “Uncle
John” and that, somehow, still radiates vitality there
despite the dissolution of its flesh.


Phil Whelan
To Phil and Edith Whelan 25/12/41 is a day
that will ever remain sun-gilt in life’s backward vista.
Shaw Neilson, returning to Melbourne from a holi-
day in Queensland, had broken his journey to join
us at Christmas dinner. He looked very frail and thin
on his arrival and it was obvious to us that the call
of the Reaper would not long be deferred. He seemed
to be aware of the fact, for twice he expressed the
hope that he would get home in time. He ate very
little but chatted freely, mostly about his Cheeser
cobbers and of his beloved Jackie Moir and Teddie
Harrington. Also of the wondrous hospitality of the
Jimmy Devaneys, and the Victor Kerinedys with whom
he had stayed in the North.
Fellows W. G. Cousins and E. Williams took him
to the station in the evening and put him aboard the
train for Melbourne. He promised to write to us,
but Melbourne friends advised that he was too ill to
do so, and was sinking fast.
Later, a May number of the Sydney BuUetin in-
formed us that Shaw Neilson had gone on ahead to
blaze the trail for us. We remembered, as we read,
a line of Kendall’s “Memorial to Adam Lindsay
Gordon” and thought how aptly it might be applied
to John Shaw Neilson: “He also was one of that
bright company this sin-stained world could ill afford
to lose.”
Vale, old friend ! We like to remember that your
last Christmas this side of Valhalla was spent in our
home; and in memory of your all too brief sojourn
with us we touch our hearts, as the Easterns do:
“May the peace of Allah abide with you.”


Joseph O Dwyer
When our old poets die, their souls
are heavy with the bitterness
of cold grey skies and the eternal hills
bitterness of having shown in vain
their love’s perfection for a world deformed.
Their hearts are shut out
from the open hearths of friendship
with the souls that they have longed to touch
and heal; and like old swans
that not much longer sing, they sail
on their last voyage into death, alone.
Perhaps a sole painter holds the heal
of the sick Keats when he coughs out
his rotten lungs in an exile’s land,
hungry for sunshine that his own
could not supply; perhaps
a loved sister is young Rimbaud’s nu'se
when the world flees his gangrenous
body or demented mind; always
the same waste starlight falls:
One more strong, noble heart
turns its face to the final wall
and dies to the world’s indifference.


Rodevic Quinn
One who voiced songs of wave and wood,
Bright merriment and sorrow sore,
Among the singing Brotherhood
Of our Australia, sings no more.
Mute is his lyre alas! and thus,
Oh sad it is that such should be !
No more shall he pour forth for us
His lyrics and his balladry.
Though all life through a fate unkind
He knew, knewi hardship and distress,
Still at his death he left behind
A legacy of loveliness.
Enriched by him, though knowing dearth
Of wealth himself, our Land shall be,
And treasure, as of priceless worth,
His lyrics and his balladry.


Frederick T. Macartney
Sorrow he knew, but made of it a cloud
Diffusing light in colours that enrich
The morning and the evening and bewitch
The steadiness of which the noon is proud.
His pity was a flute played not too loud,
The human heart being a hallowed niche
Of simple dedication, unto which
The incense of his magic was avowed.
Mushrooms are silver thoughts pushing their way
To greet the morning, or love quietly goes
Sighing its hope unbearably away
Amid the buds that prophesy the rose.
Listen: you hear such sounds as dews define.
He fails not: the many loud singers he will outshine


D. B. Coutts
Treading the bitter pavement of the town,
Who feels the heart of spring ? Who tracks her down
Save where the wattle gleams, the shy creek falls,
The bird’s song silvers, and the warm wind calls?
So, does she pass him by who toils and scars
The stubborn soil? Does she avoid the jars
Of clattering wheels and outlaw such as sweat
Under the stab of hunger, sharp beset
By folly of our race? Do blinded eyes
Thrill to the spring’s swift pageant of surprise?
Walk reverently when spring’s ripe hour is nigh,
Whether the city’s bedlam sounds belie
Her presence or the mist of toil bedims.
’Tis in our joy her lovely form dislimns.
Walk softly when she wakes: her wing may sweep
To ecstacy your heart, if it be deep.
And when she fades, beware of mourning her.
She dreams, and wakes to her predestined spur.
Somewhere, deep in the earth, the heart of spring
Pulses until the hour of wakening.


A. H. CJnsh olm
Under the influence of what Shelley termed
“the contagion of the world’s slow stain” most of
us lose, in varying degrees, our youthful sense of the
joy of the earth. Wordsworth, as a striking instance,
confessed that the freshness that lit his childhood
vanished in later years. There had been a time “when
meadow, grove and stream, the earth and every com-
mon sight” had been ‘‘apparell’d in celestial light,”
but when subject to pressure of time he found that
the glory had departed.
How eloquent then is the example of Australia’s
Shaw Neilson, who throughout his whole life of song
responded cleanly and delicately to simple and sunlit
things. Years may have brought the philosophic mind
to Neilson, but the high gods ensured that knowledge
should neither destroy nor dim the fragrance of early
hours; and so the bush boy carried into manhood his
kinship with his “own folk” birds and trees and
all sweet things and so, too, he was able to write:
Blithely a hush hoy wanders on a walk —
Shaking with joy, joyous in heart and limb;
For his delight the trees have learned to talk ,
And all the flowers have little laughs with him
Watching the far sky. beautiful, and dim
Doubtless it was because of his fresh and simple
nature that Shaw Neilson remained attached to fresh
and simple words. Many of his lines are monosylla-
bic. In the whole range of his verse there is not a
single unlovely or harsh word, and, on the other hand,
each poem contains words which in their setting are
compact of beauty and tenderness, so that in many
instances the lyrics express something of the lark-
like qualities contained in the songs of Elizabethan
days.


In particular, this poet of ours was attached to
the word green. He loved it, one imagines, partly
for its simplicity but chiefly for all the vernal charm
it conveys. (“Green is indeed a dear colour,” he
wrote; “we learn to lisp thereon.”)
To me, therefore, John Shaw Neilson was Aus-
tralia’s Poet of the Green Mind, and I like to think
that when the end came when he left his gracious
and familiar Mother Earth he followed the Shakes-
pearian example and “babbled of green fields.”


Pera va I Serle
I met Shaw Neilson for the first time when he
came to Melbourne, about 1924. I was sitting- next
to him at Mrs. Fowler’s reception, when a young
lady got up to read one of his poems. As she gave
out the title, Neilson turned to me with a look of
almost comical dismay and said quickly, “She’s ohosen
the worst thing in the book.” It was the “Little
Dead Milliner,” and he told me afterwards that he
wanted Stephens to omit this set of verses when
Heart o\f Spring was published. It will not be found
in later issues of his poems.
Neilson would have been the last man to set
up as a critic, but he had an instinctive feeling for
what was right in his own or other men’s poems.
You felt too that though glad to have his work appre-
ciated he did not take himself too seriously. He told
me once that he liked writing humorous and ligm
verse. I believe some of his work of this kind ap-
peared in newspapers many years ago, but I have
not come across any of it. He was very charming
on one occasion to a girl of about twelve. She had
written some verses for her school magazine which
were shown to him in her presence. He turned to
her and said: “I think they are very nice, Betty.
Better than I could have written at ,your age. But I
don’t advise you to become a poet I have only
earned about six-and-eightpence a year out of my
poetry.”
This was said with an air of gentle humor
which the child thoroughly understood.


H. Al. Green
In so short a space I can only say a little about
one aspect of Shaw Neilson, but I think it is his most
important aspect. To do him justice I have had to
repeat some phrases I have used before.
Neilson was a mystic, an emotional as distinct
from an intellectual mystic, to whom the core of the
world was beauty. A beauty quite unattainable,
though its presence was perceptible everywhere; but
apprehensions of it came to him in glimpses, and since
his sensitive soul was tender and human and full of
sympathy, these qualities coloured all that he was
able to record. He felt the presence of this beauty,
and it made him happy in spite of everything; but
direct apprehensions of it stirred him to ecstasy, and
he fluttered after it as though a bird should try to
perch upon a rainbow.
Neilson hardly attempted to interpret what he
perceived, and his craftsmanship, though by no means
inconsiderable, was sometimes insufficient even for its
adequate recording. He may perhaps have Peen aware
of this, and afraid of mishandling his vision, or, lo
put it in another way, of rubbing off the bloom.
Sometimes he does mishandle it, either by committing
some fault of taste, or by thinning it out with too
many words*, but how few have such visions at all !
Sometimes he achieved an almost perfect record, and
then how lovely a passage, or even a whole poem:
it is like the most delicate of pastels, a passage from
the most ethereal of violins. Elusive, winged, beside
such poems Daley’s “lyrics delicate as lilac scent”
would seem gross material things; Neilson’s best re-
mind one more of the faint scent of a wildflower, of
the flash of light on a bird’s wing, of the far-olf cry
of a bird at sundown, of “dewdrops on the banners
of the dawn.” It is only because Neilson so rarely
reaches this point, because his work is so uneven,
that he is not appreciated overseas.


Dr. C. H. Souter
I took down the little volume entitled Ballads
and Lyrical Poems, by Neilson, published and pre-
sented to me by my literary sponsor, the late A. G.
Stephens, of immortal memory, twenty years ago.
I opened it and read the first poem in it, on page
11. Nothing that Stephens ever sent me was less than
excellent. He was a severe and conscientious critic.
If I had never seen anything else of Neilson’s but
this one poem, “The Sun Is Up,” and read it for the
first time, I could have come to no other conclusion
than that here was a poet fit to rank with the masters
of our English Song. And he could have had no
better epitaph.
Of Neilson it might truly be said that he was
“ Not of an Age, but for all time.”


Louis Lavatev
It is a popular error to confound verse with
poetry. Housman defines the latter as a specific secre-
tion of the mind. True it is that poets usually put
this secretion into verse as a container, but one
should not assume that every wine-bottle contains
wine. It might be kerosene.
Personally, I find little or, no poetry in Pope's
“ Essay on Man ” or Kipling’s “ Barrack-room
Ballads.” The same may be said of many fine
examples of narrative, philosophic, humorous or
satiric verse.
Great poets, according to Emerson, are distin-
guished from lesser ones by copiousness rather than
by quality; that is to say the secretion is similar, but
the great ones have a more ample supply to draw
upon.
By this standard our shy, modest John Shaw
Neilson was not among the great ones, but was a
true poet nevertheless, perhaps the purest specimen
of the breed we have yet produced in Australia. His
felicities are entirely his own, not derived from
scholarship or imitation, conscious or unconscious.
I always think oi him as a sort of younger brother
of Spencer and Keats.
Like ocher poets, he was not always inspired.
“Granny Sullivan” is pleasant verse, but one recalls
several other Australians who might have written it.
However, here are some “secretions” that are
his alone, and proclaim him truly a poet: —
(a) All their day’s love is sunken
Safe in the comb.
(b) Shyly the silver-hatted mushrooms make
Soft entrance through,
And undelivered lovers, half awake,
Hear noises in the dew.
(c) Again as someone lost in a quaint parable
Comes up the sun.
(d) The mystic breath that exhales from
“The Orange Tree” and ‘‘The moon was
Seven Days Down.”


J. A lex. A llan
“Never while time lasts never again!”
The sad wind fingers tremblingly
The long white lute-strings of the rain,
Playing your last low threnody . . .
And we who linger whence you’ve gone
Will miss you, John !
Painter of pictures wrought of words,
Who mingled on your soul’s palette
Tints from the creek’s voice, songs of birds,
Color of spring woods warm and wet !
Seer of the rapt ascetic face,
Who takes your place?
If it be part of Godhead’s scheme
That some should draw, by work and will,
Sad, war-torn men sometimes to dream
Of pastures green and waters still,
Then is the world more sweet and true
For knowing you !
You have not died: you did but know
A stumble on the road, where late
We strode and sang with you; and so,
Craftsman of dear things delicate,
We wait; and, treading where you trod,
Leave you to God !


Thomas V, Tierney
Sweet lyric singer! ... You, whose jewelled words—
The sweetest in our native minstrelsy
Came with a cadence as of forest birds
Flooding the dawn with springtime melody;
You touched a chord arresting, strange ;and sweet,
Elusive, yet alluring: crystal clear.
So fragmentary, yet so all complete
For those with eyes to see and ears to hear.
Yours was the gift to see in simple things
The beauty other eyes could not descry:
The flash of colour in a green bird’s wings,
A crimson bloom, an opalescent sky.
A-down the years to come your name shall live.
Tis meet the land that claimed you as her own
Should tribute pay and honour proudly give
The sweetest lyric singer she has known.


Alyra jMovvis
Silence he loved
The sound of rain on trees
The tinkle of small streams like breaking
Wind-song,
glass;
Bird-melodies,
Hard frost on silver morns;
The tender hours
Of evening-time that pass
Through lilac into purple; flowers
With honey in their horns;
And furry bees
He took each one of these,
And sang their loveliness
Through hollow pipes of grass.


Tilly Aston
I pause amid the tumult of the hour
To greet a fellow songbird as he wings,
A joyous spirit, to that welcome bower
Where life eternal has its fountain springs.
Here was a man whose hands had known the feel
Of rough, hard things—the quarry’s flinty face,
The detonating charge, the tools of steel,
That tear the rock from its appointed place.
Yet in his heart no ugly thing was found,
No granite hardness, nor the scorching flame
Of sordid envy, destined oft to hound
The weak aspirant to the poet’s fame.
He knew the simple folk, and loved them well,
For faithful brother to them all was he;
His songs the yearning of the shopgirl tell,
The toiler’s wistful dreams he fain would see.
And ever through his singing runs the rune
Of deathless beauty, regal robe of life;
His soul can hear, his voice maintain the tune
Above the bellowings of hideous strife.
Gentle and sacrificial in his love;
And when eclipse of sight crept darkly near,
He met it as it were a crooning dove,
And sang his songs without a note of fear.
Perchance the song goes on; and when I make
My last migration. Fellow Singer Blest,
We both may share the music that shall wake
Glad echoes in that home of light and rest.


Alai 'ion Miller Knowles, M.B.E.
Mute the harp strings which, his fingers
Thrilled so oft to magic themes—
Poesy, the lovely lady
Ot his heart’s impassioned dreams!
But the musfc sweetly fashioned
By the singer called afar,
Shall retain the tender beauty
Which Earth’s changes cannot mar.
Delicate as springtime flowers
Were the thoughts he breathed in song;
And, like bells heard from a distance,
Woke the echoes’ woodland throng.
Wind and wave his fond companions,
Where he wandered Nature smiled,
Purest inspiration giving,
By her well-springs undefiled.
All her secrets to his spirit
Were unfolded day by day;
With the wild birds he went singing,
Howe’er steep the upland way—
Knowing sorrow, knowing hardship,
Yet with hope and courage high,
Ever true to sun-bright promise
Of a blue, unclouded sky.
Calm his rest, and sweet his dower
To our nation, ere his call
From the hillsides and the valleys
That he loved beyond life’s all.
Song of stream, and song of fountain,
Song of breeze, and wattled wold,
He has left us . . . POET-TOILER,
Of untarnished heart of gold.


Elsie Cole
He hears high music through the deafening mart,
To his fine ear it flutes a secret call;
But no sweet secret holds that generous heart —
He gives it—ah, he it! —to us all.


Kathleen Dalziel
He breathed the purest lyric air,
He drank its purest wine.
He captured magic in a snare
Imperishable and fine.
And now I cannot think him dead,
But where a shining throng
Haply have found the fountain-head
Of all immortal song.


Bei navd O Dowd
Due tribute by a fellow-writer to one of the
foremost lyrical poets of our generation on his passing
to other spheres should be in the form of such a
poem as “Lycidas” or “Adonais,” or should be a dirge.
In the time available I am unable to attempt the
former. As for the latter, Marie E. J. Pitt’s haunt-
ing caoine (if they spell it that way in Eire nowa-
days!) at the end of this brochure, coming as it does
from one of the foremost lyrical women poets, living
or dead, of Shaw Neilson’s own Australia, would
make any effort on my part to mark the departure
and honour the memory of our dear friend super-
fluous.
So, though I have to be content to drop this
very small wreath on the grave of the body of John
Shaw Neilson, it is ribboned with admiration for
the divine and singing simplicity of his poetry, and
for his sincerity and manliness during his sojourn
with us.


Mane K. J. Pitt
Gently he walked with us, and gave of his spirit
Magic of dusk and dusk and the inner voice of the
ram,
Gently he went from us and his place shall know him
Never again\
Largesse of wind and wing and the dear faces
Of hidden laughter he gave to us—these remain;
But he who was priest of the altar of lovely places
Never again!
Westivard wheeling of swans' contralto crying,
Deep intoning to deep—and the hushed refrain
Of darkling sheoaks, banshee, and banshee sighing,
Never again!
Desolate siveet song of sorrowing mountain thrushes
From some dear dead September’s castle in Spain —
Lilting loiv croon of the river song in the rushes . . .
Never again!
Reed-sweet and delicate song of his sure finding
Who has trod the way of the spirit and tasted pain
He plucked from life —who shall know the gall of its
binding
Never again!
Last song, last silence, flooding the dark and failing
Like a lost plover out on a windy plain . . .
We, earth-bound, sad, strain song ward unavailing,
Never again!
Swallows shall come, swallows for Spring’s returning,
Thrush ansiver thrush in the lull of the singing rain,
But he shall sing of Heart’s Desire and its yearnings
Never again!
He has gone hence to his own with the High Evangels,
Who shall return to Earth from their white domain,
Though we call, though we speak with the tongues of
men and of angels,
Never again\






31508023384590




y **


Take train to Footscray. An augmented
bus service will run from corner of Leeds and
Paisley streets ; connecting witk 2,15 p.m. and
2.30 p.m. trains from Flinders st.


C 1 ke
ddvead and Gkeese Glut
Incites you to be present at tke Unveiling of a
Memorial to Fellow Member
JOHN SHAW NEILSON
at tke
FOOTSCRAY CEMETERY
3.30 p.m. October 24tk ; 1943.
Tke Unveiling will be Performed by tke
Rigkt H on. Sir Jokn Latkam, (g.G.M.Cg
LLM, M.A, K.S.
An, Oration will be delivered by
0 bDowd, Esq.
of Neilson’s Verse by
FELLOW SERG. VAL ANDERSON


