

p
fclo
Q^~~)
JOHN
DIJNMORE
LANG
Chiefly Autobiographical
1799 to 1878
AN ASSEMBLING AND EDITING OF
CONTEMPORARY DOCUMENTS
Archibald
Gilchrist
Two Volumes Foolscap. 792 pages. With extensive Index.
£5/5/- in Australia and Great Britain. 15 dollars in U.S.A.
Limited Edition, 350. Numbered and Autographed.
SYNOPSIS
Australia's great "Fighting Scot" for more than half a century.
Religious intolerance in Scotland and Australia.
Twenty-one voyages to and from Australia, mostly in windjammers.
The Convict System and the Emancipist Problem.
Land Settlement Methods: Successes and Failures.
Struggle for a Higher Moral Tone in the Colony.
Efforts for Education and Immigration.
New Zealand Flotsam and Jetsam in 1839.
United States visited in 1840 (fifty pages).
Victoria and Queensland separated from New South Wales.
Member of New South Wales Parliaments, 1843 to 1869.
Fight for a Liberal Constitution and Radical Reforms.
This work may be purchased from all Leading Booksellers or from the author:
ARCHIBALD GILCHRIST
24 Nott Street, Malvern, 5.E.5. S Burrabirra Avenue, Vaucluse,
Melbourne, Australia. Sydney. Australia.
Care of National Bank, Care of Mr. R. K. Little,
The Strand Branch. 174 Harrison Street S.,
London. East Orange, N.J., U.S.A.


REVIEWS AND COMMENTS CONCERNING
Dr. Frank W. Boreham: If John Dunmore Lang had been born in Ireland instead of in
Scotland, and had set out on his journey through life with a shillelagh in his hand, nobody
can tell how many skulls he would have cracked in the course of his billowy and
adventurous career. . . . After having ransacked the Mitchell Library from floor to ceiling,
and after having assimilated all the .information to be gleaned from the British Museum,
the Melbourne Public Library, and all other repositories of first-hand data, Mr. Archibald
Gilchrist has told the story of Dr. Lang's variegated life in two large volumes of 800 pages.
The work is readable and even exciting as it stands, and as the reader peruses one
revealing and captivating paragraph after another his appetite is whetted for the further
story that Mr. Gilchrist proposes in due course. . . . The disturbing appearance of John
Dunmore Lang amidst the revolting conditions then obtaining in the new-born colony was
like a bracing wind that, sweeping down from his own Scottish moors, dispersed the
vitiated atmosphere that everybody deplored but that nobody could remedy. ... In season
and out of season, he fought for a more liberal system of education, for a wider franchise,
for land reform, for popular postage and for a greater volume of immigration. For half a
century he was the storm centre of noisy controversy. Posterity may deplore his
incorrigible pugnacity, his freguent tactlessness and the ruthless intolerance with which
he brushed or bludgeoned from his path any who dared to obstruct him; but it will always
admire the passionate devotion with which he struggled for the highest well-being of his
fellow-men and was ready to make any sacrifice in their service. He more than once
suffered imprisonment and hazarded his life for his convictions. It is a brave story, and
Mr. Gilchrist has served Australia well by devoting long years of patient research to the
task of unfolding it so tellingly and so effectively. ["Melbourne Age" literary review.]
Dr. George Mackaness [author of "William Bligh" and other front-rank biographies]:
Your volume two has come to hand. I continue to be astounded by the magnitude of
the material you have handled with such skill and patience. I feel sure that within a
year or two your book will be out of print and eagerly sought by collectors everywhere.
Dr, C, H. Currey, Sydney University: The material you have collected and ordered
serves to give an impression of John Dunmore Lang as nothing about him known to me
approaches. It must be invaluable to the historian who would attempt an appraisement
of him, "warts and all." . . . The index is certainly remarkable and seems almost an
epitome of the study and a succinct summary of his many characteristics. [Dr. Currey is
announced as giving an address, toward the end of 1952, before the Royal Australian
Historical Society, on "An Appraisement of Doctor Lang."]
Copies of this work are now installed in all the chief public libraries in Australia
and in the university libraries. Several of the leading libraries and universities oversea
have also purchased copies.


GILCHRIST’S “JOHN DUNMORE LANG”
Professor Walter Murdoch: You have made a massive contribution to Australian
history. It is a great piece of research. Ever since I first read Australian history I have
been greatly attracted by this extraordinary man, without exactly knowing why. I knew
him as an indefatigable worker and a tremendous fighter for causes he believed in; any
utterances of his that I came across seemed to be stamped with the vehemence and vigour
of a born warrior; but what sort of man he was in detail I had no idea. I didn't know,
and I wanted to know. That was why I was delighted when your book came along and
I found that a worker as indefatigable as Lang himself had unearthed all the facts I
wanted, and a great deal more. I want to browse in your book some more; I delight in
the unsubduable old gentleman. Your book will take its place as an Australian classic.
"Sydney Morning Herald" [literary page review]: The documents compiled and
reproduced here so prolifically are of such intrinsic interest that serious students of
Australia's formative period will find in them an unfailing source of reference and
pleasure. Since he lived until 1878, Dr. Lang's name and reputation are sufficiently linked
to contemporary thought as to give this unique collection of his writings almost a topical
significance. As the editor has been at pains to mention, the papers are "chiefly auto-
biographical," though they also reveal and discuss many facets of the convict system,
the problem of free settlement, and politics, particularly the establishment of responsible
government. Archibald Gilchrist has completed an obviously onerous and complicated
task with immense credit to himself and in a manner to make historians and librarians
most grateful to him.
David W. Bailey, "Financial Review/' Sydney: I most warmly endorse the "Herald"
review. You have produced a work which must be of extraordinary value to historians
in the future. It unfolds a fascinating picture of a period and a character of greatest
interest.
ludge John A. Ferguson [author and compiler of the several volumes of the "Biblio-
graphy of Australia"]: I fully appreciate what an immense amount of research you must
have accomplished in order to prepare your work, which will stand for all time.
Rev. Frank Hanlin, B.D; [an editor and an authority on Lang]; The planning and
documentation are admirable. All students of Australian history must be grateful to you.
Principal Lindsay Lockley, Queensland Congregational College: Ycu have done a
grand job. I found the story very gripping.
Mr. Gilchrist will still be researching in Australia and oversea. Illustrations, correc-
tions and further data will be welcomed.


Please fasten with Scotch tape inside cover of
your copy.
ARCHIBALD GILCHRIST AS LECTURER
IN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA, 1941-9
[752 Lectures and Addresses on Australian Topics in twenty American States.]
New York Historical Society: I have heard nothing but appreciative remarks of your
instructive address.
New England Historical Society, Boston: The composition was a masterpiece of con-
cisely assembled details and was received with absorbing interest.
Twentieth Century Association. Boston: The presentation was thought-provoking and
of unique educational value in its bearing upon our own problems.
Art Association, Newport, Rhode Island; He has the faculty of blending the serious
with the lighter side of life. Most enlightening.
Manhattan C.D.V., New York: He gave us more factual and dynamic information about
his country in his short talk than any of us had ever had presented before.
George Howland Club [High School Principals], Chicago: A rare combination of wit,
humour and information, all put together with a delightful accent.
Germania Club, Chicago: A vigorous and masterful speech
Rogers Park Kiwanis Club, Illinois: A brilliant style and remarkable mastery of the
language.
Dr. Allen D. Albert, Paris, Illinois; Judged by his performance here this evening, he is
one of our very best Rotary Institute speakers.
Carmi (Illinois) Democrat-Tribune; Honest, sincere and courageous, he won his audience
from the very start and drove right home his plea for co-operation and friendship among
the nations.
Blairsville (Penn.) Dispatch: He sleeps, eats and breathes Australia. Perhaps we could
all learn a lesson of love of country from his fine lecture.
Markdale (Ontario) Standard: The strongest and most forceful of the lecturers in the
series. Following the lecture, questions were asked about the politics, fauna and flora,
aborigines and the life of the people. The intensely interested audience seemed loath
to allow him to stop.
Mr. Gilchrist proposes to resume his oversea lecturing at the end of 1952.
