

JOHN NEWLAND
DAVID GRAHAM








ERRATUM.
On page 27, line 13, for “career” read “death.”


(From a Painting by Mr G. F. S. Shanks.)
HILL STREET, SHEWING THE HOUSE WHERE JOHN NEWLAND WAS BORN.


JOHN NEWLAND:
AN ACCOUNT OF THE
Founder of Bathgate Academy
BY
DAVID GRAHAM,
Minister of Inverbrothock Parish, formeiiy Minister of
Bathgate Parish.
ARBROATH : BRODIE & SALMOND.
1901.




PREFACE.
NEED hardly say that what I have written in these
pages was intended, from first to last, for a limited
circle of readers, and has no pretention whatever to being
more than a parochial tract.
Even to those who are not critically inclined, the
inadequacy of the book, in many respects, will only be too
apparent. But for this the blame is not entirely mine. In
the effort to recover authentic memories of the Founder of
Bathgate Academy I have had to contend with enormous
difficulties. The floods of a whole century have passed over
a name which was never conspicuous in the eyes of men,
and little is now left that can enable us to reconstruct the
personality or recount the life of one ?vho, by the closing
act of his life, will continue to impress himself upon the
community of Bathgate for all tune. Of the little that is
now left of .John Newland’s life and work / have endeavoured
to make the most.
I was ordained to the ministry of Bathgate Parish
in the summer of 18gp; and at the beginning of the second
month of iBqB 1 was translated to my present charge. It


was during that brief period of residence in the parish that the
information conveyed in this book was gathered. Ayiy work
I have done in this connection has been a labour of love.
The results of that work are now presented out of a sense
of duty to tny old parishioners. They at e presented, let me
add, as a sincere tribute of respect to the memory of John
Newland.
I desire most heartily to thank Mr Janies Campbell,
of Parkhouse School, Arbroath, the Rev. John Chalmers,
8.D., Galashiels, and Mr David Heggie, M.A., for their
assistance in leading the proofs and making useful sug-
gestions, and other friends, too numerous to name, for the
information and encouragement they so readily gave.
DAVID GRAHAM.
Inverbrothock Manse ,
Arbroath, igoi.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
I. Introduction, ... ... ... ... 9
II. The Newland Family, ... ... ... 22
III. John Newland’s Achievement, ... ... 33
IV. The Disputed Will, ... ... .<,■ 50
V. Margaret Newlands, ... ... ... 72
VI. The Academy, ... ... ... ... 87
VII. Bathgate in the Eighteenth Century, ... 101
Appendices—
I. The Bailie, ... ... ... ... 130
II. The Alleged Newland Letter, ... ... 133
III. Bathgate Parish, ... ... ... 142




ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE
FACING
Hill Street, shewing the House where John Newland
was born, ... ... ... ••• Title
Alex. Marjoribanks, Esq. of Balbardie, ... ... 9
Balbardie House, ... ... ... ... 25
The Academy, ... ... ... ... 4 1
The Old Manse, ... ... ... ... 57
The Pre-Reformation Church, ... ... ... 73
The Church of 1739, ... ••• ••• 97
The present Parish Church, ... ... ... 121


ALEX. MARJORIBANKS, ESQ. OF BALBARDIE.


INTRODUCTION.
HE purpose of these pages is to give some
account of John Newland, the man to
** "***' whom the people of Bathgate and of the
...
surrounding district are indebted for
the Academy—one of the best institutions of its kind
in Scotland—and also to set forth such details of the
history of this memorable gift and other cognate
matters, as are needed to complete the background
of the story.
Un fortunately this task, in any adequate sense,
now borders upon the impossible; and the reason for
this is to be found in the long-standing neglect of
Newland’s life and times by the successive genera-
tions of his fellow-townsmen from the beginning of
the last century up to the present. It is not at all an


ungenerous comment upon the facts to say that it
hardly reflects credit upon those who have enjoyed
the fruits of John Newland’s benefaction, that over
a hundred years have been allowed to elapse without
any attempt being made to rescue from neglect and
misunderstanding the memory of one so remarkable
and so generous. In this, as in so many other things,
the people have accepted, certainly not without grati-
tude, the gift, but, except in name, they have forgotten
the giver. And year by year they are getting further
away from all personal recognition of the man who
has conferred upon them such a priceless boon.
It would be unfair to say that the proverb “ a
prophet is not without honour save in his own country
and among his own kindred ” applies to the case of
John Newland; for the annual celebration of his
so-called birthday is a red-letter event in Bathgate,
and, so far, demonstrates the desire of the people
to honour the name and the memory of a benefactor.
My complaint is not against the annual celebration,
of Newland’s “ birthday,” which, so far as it goes, is
an entirely laudable affair. What I complain of is


that, with all this annual show of appreciation, New-
land has remained for a century and more little else
than a name, the shadow of a shade; and that among
his admirers no one has ever attempted seriously the
task of investigating the facts of his life, his work,
his gift.
Everything connected with his life is involved
in obscurity. Almost every tangible thing connected
with his personality has disappeared, never, perhaps,
to be recovered. His memory has been gossiped into
dim irrecognisability. In the current traditions of
his birth-place hardly an authentic fact remains.
Those who lived at the time when his story might
have been fully told were indifferent to the claims of
posterity, and committed nothing to writing that
might guide us to a personal knowledge of the man
himself. The very house in which he is said to have
been born has become an unsightly ruin'*—a
monument to the neglect of his fellow-townsmen : a
neglect which has been tardily and inadequately
*The house itself has now been swept away to give place to what
are technically known as superior dwelling-houses.


atoned for by the erection, recently, of a memorial
tablet.
It has been left to me, a mere stranger, having
only had a brief and fleeting connection with the
place, to set down such details as are now obtainable,
of the life of the most generous son and greatest
benefactor of Bathgate. What led me to take up
the subject was that in my position as parish minister
and Trustee of the Academy the necessity was laid
upon me to give an address at the annual celebration
of Newland’s “ birthday.” Under this compulsion
I consulted the authorities who were commonly sup-
posed to be learned in the matter. The fullest
account I could lay my hands on was contained in
a single page ; and the fossil remains of fact which
lay within that narrow compass might, as I afterwards
discovered, have been written in a single line. It was
natural enough that I should, for purposes of speak-
ing, make the most of the material at my disposal;
and imagination accordingly lent wings to the meagre
facts and stale conjectures of the said authorities.
But while this kind of thing enabled me indifferently


enough to discharge a passing duty, it was pro-
foundly vexing to reflect that of hardly one single
statement could I feel certain that I was retailing
ascertained fact. All that can be gathered from the
second Statistical Account, and from the book in
which young Mr Marjoribanks, as he was called,
recorded his travels—and these together form the
only published sources of information—may be sum-
med up in one sentence. John Newland, born early
in the year 1737, leaving Bathgate, according to tradi-
tion, in his early youth, settled in Jamaica as a
planter, and by dint of incessant industry and appli-
cation amassed a fortune, which fortune, by a will,
dated Bth July, 1799, he bequeathed, with the deduc-
tion of a few trifling legacies and expenses, to the
inhabitants of Bathgate for the erection and endow-
ment of a free school; but after a prolonged course
of litigation in Jamaica and in this country, it was
finally decided by the King in Council that only the
interest for ten vears on the whole estate, real and
personal —the interest amounted to —should
be so devoted. Beyond this brief statement ab


solutely nothing, excepting the usual vague gener-
alities and tame suppositions which surround the
memory of everyone of note, stands recorded against
the name of John Newland. It would be idle to
speculate what the result would have been if the
whole estate, as Newland himself undoubtedly inten-
ded it should be, had been devoted to the cause of
education in Bathgate ; but, as it is, the comparatively
modest sum represented by the interest of ten years
has given us an Academy which is a landmark in the
neighbourhood, and which, as an educative force, has
exercised an influence beyond our power to com-
pute. In the earlier years, before the churches had
emerged from the chrysalis of ugliness, the Academy
must have appealed to the inhabitants as a magnifi-
cent structure; and even yet, surrounded by the
handsome buildings of recent years, towards the
erection of which it has undoubtedly contributed
some inspiration, it retains a commanding appear-
ance. But, most of all, in the earlier years, when
education was so little favoured by the attention and
the support of the authorities, the inhabitants must


have felt that, through the Academy, they enjoyed
privileges and advantages vastly superior to those
of their neighbours, and must have acknowledged
the Academy as one of the greatest influences for good
in the parish. And to-day, amid the stress of educa-
tional competition, the Academy—because in the wis-
dom of its Trustees and through the enterprise of its
Rectors, it has adapted itself to modern conditions
and requirements—holds its place as a distinct and
pronounced factor in the life of the locality. Now,
all this seems to me to deepen and intensify the
reproach that lies upon us, of having neglected utterly
the memory of the man to whom, in the first place,
the parish owes the distinction of possessing such a
fine building, and the benefit of enjoying such splen-
did means of education. It was this feeling which
led me originally to make enquiry about John New-
land and his gift; and it is this same feeling which
has induced me to put the results of my enquiries
into print. These results are, indeed, meagre in the
extreme ; I only claim for them that they represent
practically all that is obtainable.


When I started this enquiry I was actuated by
natural curiosity and had no desire but to satisfy my
thirst for information. At first I had no intention
of writing a word on the subject. But having
gathered, at considerable cost on the score of labour,
a few straws of information which were unknown
and inaccessible to the many who are interested in the
subject, I felt growing upon me the duty of making
them public property. What restrained me from
discharging this duty sooner was the sense, which
still weighs with me, of disappointment and almost
of failure in the effort to acquire full and sound
knowledge of the life of Newland and his struggle
to fortune. Almost everything I have got at is more
or less extraneous matter.
The original Trustees must have known fairly well
the story of his life. They came into actual con-
tact with men who knew him in Jamaica. They had
correspondence with his half-sister, Margaret; they
may have learned something from the widow of his
brother David; and the friends in Glasgow and
Edinburgh, whose names appear in the will, must have


been able to furnish information of his early career
and struggle to fortune. If Walter Jardine had been
spared to write the Second Statistical Account we
should certainly have been provided with many inter-
esting particulars that are now lost beyond hope of
recovery. The Second Statistical Account was
written by the Rev. Samuel Martin, who seceded in
1843. Mr Martin was ordained to the charge in 1825,
and it was during his term of office (1833) that the
Academy was built. He must have had opportunity
of hearing about the Newland family from people
whose memories carried them far back into the
eighteenth century. It was not impossible that some
may have had faint recollections of John Newland
himself, and it is quite probable that many, then living,
remembered his father and had an intimate acquain-
tance with his brothers. The whole story of New-
land must have been revived and no doubt formed a
genera] topic of public talk about the time the
Academy was being built. Be that as it may Mr
Martin’s extremely meagre account contains nothing
of any value. The fullest reference to Newland


is contained in the book, “ Travels in South and
North America,” issued by Alexander Marjoribanks,
jun., in 1853. But even that is only a passing note,
and the carelessness of its tone is equalled only
by its untrustworthiness. One cannot help record-
ing a grudge against Mr Marjoribanks on this score,
because it is quite certain that it was within his
power, if only he had taken the pains, to give
a fairly substantial acount of Newland and the
events that circle round his memory. Of all that
must have been within the knowledge of those to
whom I have just referred, not a single note about
Newland remains that is of any value. It is only
fair to the original Trustees, however, to say that they
had suddenly thrown upon them, in connection with
Newland’s bequest, grave responsibilites, involving
a serious and protracted law suit; and, while we feel
inclined to blame them for leaving nothing on record
as to the personality of the founder of the Academy,
we ought not to forget that our gratitude is due to
them for the manly stand made by them in the
interests of the community. Their aim was to secure


the whole estate for the cause of education in Bath-
gate ; and that aim absorbed their whole energies.
The gravity of their legal burden gave them no
chance of indulging in excursions in the field of bio-
graphy. That, perhaps, is the best explanation of
the oblivion into which the memory of John Newland
has fallen. And yet we cannot but regret that when
the turmoil of the legal battle was ended, someone
did not think it worth while to make a record of the
struggle and of the man out of whose life-gift it
arose.
It has been well said by Mr Froude in his splendid
volume on “ The English in the West Indies ” that
“ the worthies of England ” —those who have patriotic
scruples as to the use of this word as a comprehensive
term can vary the phrase—“ are the men who have
cleared and tilled her fields, formed her laws, built
her colleges and cathedrals, founded her colonies,
fought her battles, covered the ocean with commerce,
and spread our race over the planet to leave a mark
upon it which time will not efface.” If any apology
be wanted for celebrating the name of John Newland,


it is not far to seek ; it is to be found in this, that he
occupied a humble, but by no means unhonoured
place, in that mighty band of whom Mr Froude has
spoken so eloquently. While we celebrate the magni-
ficent and quite exceptional gifts of a man like Mr
Andrew Carnegie, and notably his recent gift to the
Scottish Universities, which is likely to prove a land-
mark in the history of our country, we are apt to
forget the innumerable host of benefactors whose
gifts have gone to build up our educational and
philanthropic institutions. In the end, perhaps, it will
be found that our deepest debt of gratitude and
honour is due to those obscure benefactors, whose
munificence is known only to a limited circle, because
it applies only to a particular locality. If the sums
bequeathed to educational and charitable objects
throughout Scotland by inen of humble origin, who
have made their fortune by dint of hard work, were
tabulated, we should be presented with a record which
would stir us with pride and gratitude. It is with
this feeling that I have written these pages; and,
inadequate as they are, I am not without hope that


they may lead to a fuller and more satisfactory study
both of John Newland and of the history of the
parish upon which he has conferred so great a boon.


The Memland Family.
|A'p||||3ljHE family of the founder of Bathgate
IL \HHiy I 1 Academy hailed from the Shotts. Early
in the eighteenth century two brothers,
John and William Newland their
father’s name was William —set out from that not
too inviting region to make their way and seek their
fortune in the world. John went to Glasgow;
William, less adventurous perhaps, found his way to
Bathgate. Of John all we have to say is that the
founder of the Academy was his namesake; beyond
that we know really nothing. His remoteness from
the story, whose meagre fragments we have under-
taken to gather, may be judged from this single fact,
that it was his grand-children who figured in the
legal proceedings connected with his nephew’s gift.


Even the grand-children—their names were Patrick,
John, and Mary Newland—are now nothing more
than names ; and such they must continue to remain.
William, who settled in Bathgate, is described as
a “ merchant.” That, as everyone knows, is a some-
what elastic term. In Scotland “ merchants ” are
übiquitous, like “ colonels ” in America. All we are
entitled to gather from the term is that William was
some kind of packman or petty shopkeeper. Tradition
leads us to suppose that his shop, if he had a shop,
or at anyrate his residence, was situated in what is
now a most unlovely spot in the town of Bathgate,
looking across the park to a stately mansion-house,
which has fallen on evil days. Balbardie House was
then in its glory; and now it is a tenement. There
is no sadder chapter in the history of the town than
the passing of the Marioribanks family from * their
ancestral home. And the sadness of this passing
is deepened by the recollection of the noble part
which Alexander Marjoribanks, whom we may call
the last laird of Bathgate, played in the proceedings
connected with the founding of the Academy.


Of William Newland hardly an authentic word
remains except the record of the baptism of his
children. He was twice married ; first to one Isabel
Russell, and on her death to one Jean Robertson. I
have been unable to trace the record of the first
marriage. The evidence of the second is to be found
in these words—“ July 17, 1753, William Newlands
and Jean Robertson gave up their names for
proclamation in order to marriage.”
John Newland—it will be observed that the name
is variously spelled Newlands and Newland the
founder of the Academy, was the first-born of the
first marriage. Those who believe in omens may find
something significant in the fact that in the record
of his baptism two mistakes occur; first, the date is
omitted, and second, the name of his mother is given
as Agnes instead of Isabel. The record runs thus :
—“Baptised April 17, 1737, John, son of William
Newlands and Agnes Russell. Witnesses, Alex.
Brown and Alex. Waddell.” The date of Newland’s
birth, which, I understand, was recently the subject
of an animated and unedifymg controversy in the




BALBAR DIE HOUSE.


local newspaper, is one of those things that can
never be recovered. Owing to some lapse the minister
forgot to record it, and we must, therefore, content
ourselves with the fact—which the organisers of the
Newland’s “ Birthday ” proceedings should humbly
note —that the 17th April is the anniversary not of
the birth but of the baptism of John Newland.
It is interesting, just by the way, to note that
the minister who baptised John Newland was a very
remarkable man—the Rev. George Blackwell. His
father, the Rev. Thomas Blackwell, was minister of
Paisley in 1693 ; in 1700 he was translated .to Aber-
deen ; ten years later he was appointed Professor of
Divinity in Marischal College; and in 1717 he was
made, by appointment of the Crown, Principal of
Aberdeen University.. Two of the brothers of' the
minister of Bathgate were celebrities in their time,
viz.—Thomas, a gifted scholar and man of letters:
he was Professor of Greek in Aberdeen, and from
that office was promoted to the Principalship in 1748 ;
and Alexander, the . adventurer, who had a most
romantic career. Pie is said to have studied medicine
B


abroad. In 1730 he established himself in London
as a printer, but as he had not entered the craft in a
regular way the Guild of Printers set themselves to
ruin him. He became bankrupt in 1734, and was
supported in prison by his wife who published a
work on plants used in medicine, containing illustra-
tions executed by herself, her husband supplying the
Latin names and adding the descriptive matter.
After this Blackwell applied himself to agriculture
and model-farming, in which he seems to have attained
considerable success. Ultimately he went to Sweden
(1742), where it is said he cured the King of an
illness, was promoted to the rank of a royal physician,
and, continuing his passion for agriculture, managed
a model farm. Sweden, at that time, was rent with
political intrigue, and Blackwell both on account of
his temperament and the prominence he had attained,
was drawn into the current. He was made the
cat’s-paw of his party, and being accused of treason
against the state, he was tortured to extract a con-
fession, and despite his heroic protestations of
innocence was condemned to death. “He met his


fate on 9th August, 1747, with remarkable fortitude,
apologising for laying his head on the wrong side
of the block, on the ground that it was the first
time he had ever been beheaded! ” The Rev. George
Blackwell was called to the ministry in Bathgate on
4th September, 1735, and was ordained on 18th
November of the same year. In 1739 he got a new
church built, the church recently demolished to make
room for the present building. He died of fever on
7th April, 1749, in the very height of his life and
usefulness, full of promise towards a distinguished
career. He was 36 years of age at the time of his
career. “He was th 6 best scholar and the most spirited
speaker I knew of his profession,” wrote his brother.
William Newland had other three sons by his
first marriage, viz. :—William, born 14th September,
1738; David, born 30th June, 1742; Robert, born
2nd March, 1748. By his second marriage he had
four children, viz.:—George, born nth May, 1754;
Thomas, born 26th March, 1758 : (so marked
in the baptismal register), born 3rd February, 1760;
James, born 30th May, 1762. The child whose name


is a blank in the baptismal register was Margaret,
the only member of the family who was living at
the time of John Newland s death ; all the others
died without issue during his life time. It seems
strange that in the case of the only two members of
this family whose names emerge as actors in this
story —John and Margaret Newland —a discrepancy
should occur in the baptismal records. Of the remain-
ing members of the family I can find trace of one
only. In the churchyard, at the right hand side of the
steps from Jarvey Street, there is a tombstone bearing
the following inscription :
J 795-
Here
Lyes the
Body of
DAVID NE WLANDS
Mert. in Bathgate
who died 15th Oct.
1794, aged 52 years.
Also MARION NISBET
‘ His' Spouse, who
died , 23rd Febry.
1802, aged 61 years.


That this tombstone was raised to mark the grave
of John Newland’s brother there can hardly be a
doubt. The statement on the tombstone as to his
age coincides with our information from the baptismal
register that he was born on 30th June, 1742. The
designation “ merchant in Bathgate ” points to his
being the successor in business to his father. The
mention of husband and wife only on the tombstone
is an additional confirmation of our view that this
was the son of William Newlands and Isabel
Russell; because in the information laid before the
Court of Chancery in Jamaica in connection with
John’s will it was stated that all his brothers had
died during his life-time without issue.
Newlands is a common name in the baptismal
register of the Parish of Bathgate at this period.
In 1738, e.g., a record is made of the baptism of
Isabel, daughter of Patrick Newlands and his wife,
Agnes Tripney. A John Newlands is mentioned
as witness to a baptism on March gth, 1738. Another
John Newlands finds a place in the record as being
married to one Margaret Fleming; and a child,


David, is born to them in 1763. Later on it was
a common name; and it is not uncommon even
now. The factor of Mr Marjoribanks of Balbardie,
e.g. y from 1800 onwards, was Robert Newlands, the
grandfather, as I have been told, of the late James
Newlands of Jarvey Street. Among the earliest
transactions of the Trustees of Bathgate Academy
there is an interesting note to the effect that this
Robert Newlands was paid the sum of £5 for run-
ning a fence round the park—then known as Rules
Acre—which was feued from the Laird of Balbardie,
and on which the Academy now stands.
There are a great many who claim to be legitimate
descendants of John Newland’s family. I have
seen “ genealogical trees,” compiled with monumen-
tal complacency from the records in the Register
House, to establish the claim of the compiler to be
a true-born Newland, but, in particular, to invest
him with the legal right to a fabulous mine of
wealth—the estate of John Newland—which is
ignorantly supposed to be held in Chancery. But,
without exception, I have found these “trees” confused


jumbles, abounding in absurd cross-divisions, utterly
uncritical, taking every name that spells Newlands
as being of equal value, and presenting, at the end,
what can only be described as a variegated or multi-
form motherhood —a fact which, if we had no other
source of information, might lead us to think
strangely of the Newland clan. It is a fact, es-
tablished beyond all shadow of dispute in the
highest Courts of Justice, that neither John Newland,
nor his brothers, nor his half-brothers had any child-
ren ; and therefore, any claim to descent from the
Newland’s stock must be made, not through the
Bathgate kinsmen, but through the half-cousins of
John Newland, viz., Patrick, John, and Mary Newland
of Glasgow. Of them we know nothing whatever
except what is recorded in the legal proceedings
connected with the disputed will of the founder of
Bathgate Academy. This, therefore, I may be per-
mitted to say, that the efforts of persons of the name
of Newlands, with or without the “ s,” to compile
“ genealogical trees ” tracing their origin to William
Newland of the Shotts, will be applauded because it is


an exercise which probably keeps the said com-
pilers out of mischief, besides being a harmless form
of amusement; but as for the money in Chancery,
it may be cruel, but it is only true, to say that it
does not exist.
Margaret Newland, as we have said, was the only
member of the family living at the time of John’s
death, and of her we have, as will appear in the
sequel, a good deal of interesting information. The
only other member of the family of whom any
trace remains is David. We are, I think, entitled
from the evidence to conclude that the tombstone
referred to was raised to mark his resting-place;
but as the graves were interfered with and the
tombstones re-arranged at the time the present church
of Bathgate was erected, we cannot say that the
simple monument marks the place where his body
lies. Nevertheless, out of so much that has utterly
passed away, there is some satisfaction in being able
to point to one certain landmark of the Newland
family. -


John Newland's Achievement.
N this family group John Newland is the
central figure. Of his life and work
■ only the most meagre details—the merest
fragments—are obtainable ; and in every
case these are drawn from indirect sources. What in-
duced him to leave his native village, and how he
came to be thrown into the life of a West Indian plan-
ter it is now impossible to say. The only thing that is
at all certain is that when he went out into the world
to seek his fortune he faded entirely from the thought
and memory of his fellow-villagers. It was with
amazement that the villagers of Bathgate learned in
the year 1800 that John Newland of Jamaica had be-
queathed his estate for the building and endowing of
a school for the education of the youth of his native


parish. Nobody remembered him ;or if any recollec-
tion remained, it ‘was of the faintest. For the first
time he became a distinct fact in the life of the place;
and as such he remains and will remain. When we
think of a certain kind of immortality we may turn
to him as an illustration. He lives on as an influence,
an impersonal force. '
y
All kinds of stories are afloat as to the reasons
which led him to look beyond the narrow horizon of
Bathgate for a sphere of activity. One is that, much
in the same way as Shakespeare was disgraced for
poaching, Newland had to flee his native place “ for
settin’ fire to a plantin’ ”on the Hopetoun estate. Al-
most every story bears out that he made the place too
hot for himself. Another story is that , owing to a
love entanglement he fled the place rather than meet
the Kirk Session. ' It is commonly asserted that he
was seventeen or eighteen years of age at the time of
his departure ; and assuming this story to be true the
minister whose censure he dreaded Was the Rev.
Thomas Wardrobe, whose incumbency lasted from
1750 to 1757. Another story is that he qualified


himself in the village as a joiner, and that with the
natural desire for promotion, he went up to Chatham
Docks and received an appointment as carpenter in
the Government service. While employed there a
demand was made by the Governor of Jamaica for
the services of trained men in connection with the
colonial docks, and Newland, as a promising young
man, was recommended and appointed, with the result
that in the course of time he became a successful
planter. All this is, of course, purely legendary, except
the fact that by untiring industry Newland acquired
a very considerable fortune; and that he generously
devoted, by will and intention, that fortune to the
good of his native place.
The most extraordinary story about Newland is
one; which attempts to, explain the reasons which led
him to, devote his. fortune to the benefit of his birth-
place, :It, is, connected with the name of Dr James
Corbet* Surgeon in the Royal Navy, who spent the
days of his retirement in a house just opposite the
churchyard in Jarvey Street. This is the story as it
appeared in the columns of the Bathgate Courier


some years ago. “Dr Corbet was a surgeon in the
Royal Navy. To him belongs the credit of advising
h,is old school-fellow, John Newlands, to bequeath
his fortune to his native town. In one of his voyages
homeward his ship called at Jamaica and when on
shore there he paid a visit to his old crony. Newlands
at this time was in a dying state, and on the doctor
(i.e, Corbet) calling he was told by the housekeeper
that Newlands could not be seen. Dr Corbet sent in
his card and left, but was immediately called back,
when, as can be imagined, a very pleasant hour or
two was spent in the house, which had a fine view of
the bay and the docks. Dr Corbet, seeing the con-
dition of his old school-fellow, strongly urged him to
remember his native town in his will, and fortunately,
as we all know, this he eventually did.” I wish I
could believe this story. It is set forth with such an
air of circumstantiality, and it has been repeated on
so many occasions, that it is with a pang of regret I
feel bound to characterise it as the figment of the
over-heated imagination of some unknown writer of
fiction. Dr Corbet was a notable figure in Bathgate,


and he could not but derive distinction from the fact
that he served in the Navy in the great and stirring
days of Nelson. By the kindness of Mr Robert Reid,
who preserves many memories of the old days in
Bathgate, I have in my possession a faded epaulet
which is said to have been worn by the gallant doctor.
And, what is even more interesting, I have beside me
a watch-case beautifully carved in wood, with a part
of the doctor’s crest at the bottom, representing a
corbie (the full crest was a corbie with the words
beneath “ God provides ”). This is said to be the
work of a French prisoner of war, who was tended
by Dr Corbet after some action in the Mediterranean ;
and represents the thank-offering of a wounded man
who was cared for and cured by the good surgeon.
Dr Corbet was certificated by the Royal College of
Surgeons, London, on 19th September, 1794. I have
in my possession his commissions appointing him to
the “Cyclops,” sth March, 1800; to the “Goliath,”
4th May, 1807; to the “ Aboukir,” 21st August, 1809.
He was on board the “ Aboukir ” on 24th December,
1810, when correspondence passed between him and


the Admiralty office. Some difficulty had arisen as
to the early period of his service, and he made a repre-
sentation to the authorities. To his representation
the following reply was sent:
“Navy Office,
“ 2/f.th December, 1810.
“ Sir, —ln return to your letter of 18th instant I
have it in. command from the Commissioners of the
Navy to acquaint you that the period between the
2Sth September, 1794, and the ijth April, 7795, will
be allowed you as part of your service as surgeon. I
am, Sir, your humble servant .
R. A. Nelson.
This letter was originally shown me as a real auto-
graph of the great Lord Nelson. It had not occurred
to the critics to reflect that Nelson was killed at
Trafalgar in 1805. In addition to the ships already
mentioned Dr Corbet is said to have served in the
“ Stately ” and the “ Achilles,” but as some of his
commissions have gone astray, there is no accurate
information as to his movements between the end of
1794 and the beginning of 1800. Careful enquiries


made at the Admiralty offices in London by Mr R.
Walker, Bushey Heath, Herts, who has taken a deep
interest in the story of John Newland, have failed to
confirm the statement that any of the ships in which
Dr Corbet served were ever on the West Indian
station. If Dr Corbet visited John Newland in
Jamaica it must have been between the 19th September
1794, and Bth July, 1799. But there is no evidence of
his ever having been in the West Indies. There is not a
syllable about him in the will or in any of the sub-
sequent proceedings. The reference to Dr Corbet as
an “ old crony,” and even to his being an old school-
fellow of John Newland is simply ridiculous. At
the period of Dr Corbet’s birth (1759) John Newland
was twenty-two years of age, and according to tra-
dition was already seeking his way to fortune in
Jamaica before the gallant surgeon saw the light.
Dr Corbet was thirty-five years of age when he re-
ceived a commission to serve in the Navy, and that
was only five years before John Newland died.
Apart from these facts, the reference to the conven-
tional “ housekeeper ” in the establishment of a


slave-owning planter is distinctly imaginative; and
the very idea of a jolly tar of Nelson’s time roaming;
the high seas armed with a case of conventional
“ visiting cards ” is an entertaining detail which goes,
a great way to suggest the origin of the entire story.
The writer, no doubt, felt bound to show some know-
ledge of etiquette; and it would never have done to
make Dr Corbet and John Newland, Esq., appear as
other than perfect gentlemen, conformable, in all their
actions, to the most recent, most approved require-
ments of correct Bathgate society. I have not the
slightest hesitation in dismissing the story, often as
it has been repeated and much as I should like to
believe it, as entirely apocryphal. To compare small
things with great, this is a good example of how
much of our history is made, of how the web of myth
is gradually woven around the events and actors in
the past life of man.
The opinion I have formed as to the reason which
led Newland to sever his connection with Bathgate,
and seek his fortune abroad is one which is not in-
cluded in the cycle of tradition. If there was any




THE ACADEMY


scandal which fell to be investigated by the Kirk
Session—and the allusion to this circumstance is
so longstanding and so persistent that there must be
something in it—l am convinced that it had no rela-
tion to the personal character or conduct of John
Newland. My opinion is that this story of a scandal
has its origin in the effects upon his household of
the second marriage of John Newland’s father; and
I believe it does nothing more than preserve the
memory of an unfortunate family quarrel. When
John Newland was sixteen years of age (of the other
members of the first family William was 15, David 11,
and Robert 5 years of age respectively) his father
married a second time. That was in 1753. The
new wife was one Jean Robertson. This marriage
seems to have been an honourable enough affair;
no element in it calling for the interference of the
moral police of the parish—the elders. I conjecture,
however, that there was some aspect of incongruity
about it, noted at the time by the gossips of the
place, and preserved, after the lapse of many years,
in the story that it was for an “ affair of the heart ”


that John Newland found it convenient to put some
considerable distance between himself and the vicinity
of Balbardie House, and to choose as his habitation
a place where Kirk Sessions ceased from troubling
and the amatory were at rest. In a word, I believe
that this second marriage of old William Newland
was productive of mischief in the family circle, as
such marriages not uncommonly are; Jean proving,
in effect, a somewhat formidable partner and com-
panion to William, and a terror to the children of
Isabel Russell. Some confirmation of this may be
gathered from the will, where, as we shall see, bequest
is made of one hundred pounds to “ David Russell,
shoemaker, in Edinburgh,” evidently a relation of John
Newland’s mother; of one hundred pounds each to
the children of his cousin, Patrick in Glasgow, mis-
named “ my brother Patrick,” and only fifty pounds
to his half- sister Margaret. This second marriage
of William Newland, so far as I can make out, broke
up the family and led to John’s departure from the
scenes of his boyhood—those scenes to which he re-
turned again so strangely and so potently in the hour


of his death. The view which I have here stated
derives confirmation from a letter,, to which reference
will be made later on, said to have been written by
John Newland, while resident in Jamaica in 1768, to
his father in Bathgate. It is a letter of remonstrance
against the conduct and character of his step-mother,
Jean Robertson; and, among other things that are
stated, it would appear that his brother William, his
junior by one year, has disappeared altogether, and
that his brother Robert, his junior by eleven years,
is with him in Jamaica, while his brother David, his
junior by five years, and in whose future he shows
deep concern, is with his father in Bathgate. It was
the breaking up of the family in this way, and not
any scandal reflecting upon his character, which, in
my belief, led John Newland to leave his native
village. In this early step he showed that indepen-
dence of spirit and decision of character which led
him in the long run to acquire a splendid fortune.
“ In ma young days,” observed a humourist, who
is well known for his caustic sallies on the ways of
men, “ in ma young days everybody wantit to get to


heaven; but noo-a-days naebody wants to get to
heaven : they’re quite content if they can get the length
o’ the Cape.” Well, in the time of Newland, what-
ever may have been the nature of their celestial aspira-
tions, a great many were more than satisfied if they
could get to Jamaica. Any number of men had made
their fortunes there, and it was only natural that
Jamaica should be the pole to which the magnet of
ambitious young men trembled. ‘ There were other
reasons, no doubt, which made “ Westward Ho! ” the
motto of many lives. The poet Burns, when the
gloomy night of misfortune gathered round his head,
looked to the West Indies for a refuge. He had his
passage taken out in the “Nancy, Captain Smith, from
the Clyde to Jamaica.” But fate had other work in
store for him than slave-driving and sugar-planting.
John Newland, unfortunate in his home relations,
and cast early in life on his own resources, went forth,
in the might of youthful independence, to seek what
of adventure, of renown, and of fortune Jamaica con-
tained. The kind of man who succeeds in a colony
is the sober, industrious, plodding man who is not


afraid of hard work, and who sets a stout heart
against disappointment. And, by all accounts, these
were qualities which John Newland possessed in
an eminent degree. Jamaica has changed so com-
pletely that the present condition of the island affords
not the slightest clue to the state of things existing at
the close of the eighteenth century. For one thing
the white population of the island is not now one half
of what it was then. During Newland’s time the pro-
sperity of the island was in its zenith. In 1787 the
population of the island was as follows:—White,
30,000; freed negroes, 10,000; maroons, i.e., escaped
slaves, 1,400 ; slaves, 250,000 ; and it need not be said
that the state of trade and commerce is, for all practi-
cal purposes, indicated by the number of white resi-
dents. It is not proposed, and, indeed, it is not
possible, to give in the course of this brief sketch any
general account of Jamaica. Those who would learn
something of Jamaican life in the eighteenth century
have only to turn to the pages of the immortal “ Tom
Cringle’s Log,” written by Michael Scott, who was in-
itiated into the mysteries of a planter’s business, amid


the scenes which were familiar to John Newland, and
at the very time when the will-case was in process, so
that he must have met and known some of the
men who remembered Newland, and were parties
in the case. But while space forbids any ex-
cursion into the stirring and romantic history of
Jamaica, one or two touches are necessary to fill
the background. Jamaica was divided into three
counties, Middlesex, Surry, and Cornwall; and, in
further imitation of the old country, it was subdivided
into twenty parishes. Newland’s plantation was in
the parish of St Andrew in the county of Surry, one
of the most important divisions in the island, seeing
that it contained the towns of Port Royal and Kings-
ton. His estate must have bordered on the sea, be-
cause among his effects there were boats, and among
his slaves there were carpenters and boatmen. There
seems to be some justification for the statement that
he went out originally as a carpenter to work in the
Government docks; and it is probable that his estate
was in the vicinity of Port Royal. This was one of
the most romantic places in Jamaica. Mr Froude, in


the work already referred to, says of it—“ Before the
first hut was run up in Kingston, Port Royal was the
rendezvous of all English ships which, for spoil or
commerce, frequented the West Indian Seas. Here
the buccaneers sold their plunder and squandered their
gains in gambling and riot. Here in the later century
of legitimate wars, whole fleets were gathered to take
in stores, or refit when shattered by engagements.
Here Nelson had been, and Collingwood and Jervis,
and all our other naval heroes. Plere prizes were
brought in for adjudication, and pirates to be tried
and hanged. In this spot more than in any other,
beyond Great Britain herself, the energy of the Em-
pire once was throbbing.” Newland lived through
one of the most stirring periods of our nation’s his-
tory, and amid scenes where the most brilliant feats of
naval genius were enacted. The struggle of the
British for supremacy in the Spanish Main, the Ameri-
can War of Independence, and still nearer at hand,
the rebellion in Jamaica of the maroons or escaped
slaves—these were ongoings in the midst of which
he lived. He must have seen the great Rodney, and


the “ little captain of the Boreas,” as the immortal
Nelson was named, and other heroes whose deeds
have gone so far to build up the mighty edifice of our
Empire. But, amid all this stress and strife, we are
bound to think of Newland as a plodding, imperturb-
able figure, intent upon his business. Living in the
very midst of this amphitheatre of romance, he was
devoted entirely to his calling. He is essentially a
prosaic figure, a determined, hard-working planter,
and nothing more. Mostly all the estates in Jamaica
at that time were managed by agents, the proprietors
thus contriving to grow rich without the discomfort
of residence in a sultry climate or the drudgery of
plantation life. Newland was the true type of colon-
ist, living on his estate and managing the whole
work himself. The value of his estate, according to
an inventory prepared by one of his executors, was
00 \ but it must have been worth a great deal
more. His slaves, of whom he had a great number, were
worth over £15,000. Johnny brought £2OO, Fanny
£l4O, Hercules £l9O, and so on ; but one or two slaves
ran away at the time of their master’s death, and this,


together with the “walking off ” of portions of the plan-
tation, diminished the value of the estate. Among
other things enumerated in the inventory are lime,
lime-kilns, cattle, mules, carts, boats ; and among the
slaves, some are designated carpenters, coopers, boat-
men, &c. There is not sufficient to indicate the kind
of work in which he was engaged, but it seems to have
been of a general character, and an important branch
of it was cattle raising. In the inventory occurs the
statement that when Newland’s desk was opened after
his death it was found to contain a sum of money
amounting to £54 18s 4d, along with papers referring
to current business. This would seem to indicate
that he had busied himself with his affairs till near
the end, and that the end came suddenly, as a collapse
after a long life of toil.
It is unfortunate that we can now learn so little about
him, but, at any rate, for the manner in which he
achieved his fortune he deserves to be honoured by us,
and for his will which was the crowning act of his
life, he claims our gratitude.


The Disputed Will.
H ° hn NEWLAND’S chief claim to our
Pi regard is embodied in his last will and
|j||!|gpf!f testament. That document speaks for
itself ; here it is :
“ Jamaica : I, John Newland, of the Parish of St
Andrew, in the County of Surry in the said Island,
Esquire, being at present weak in bodily health, but
of sound mind, memory, and understandings do make,
publish, and declare my last will and testament as
follows : First, it is my will and desire that my just
debts and funeral expenses be fully paid and satis-
fied, to the payment of which I make liable all my
estate, real and personal. Item, I give and bequeath
unto each of the children of my brother, Patrick
If ewland, of Glasgow, in North Britain, the sum of


one hundred pounds sterling; I give and bequeath
unto David Russel, shoemaker in Edinburgh, the sum
of one hundred pounds sterling; and I give and
bequeath unto Margaret Newland, of the Parish of
Bathgate, in the County of Linlithgow, in North
Britain, the sum of fifty pounds sterling; as to all
the rest, residue and remainder of my estate, of what-
ever nature or kind the same may be, and of which
I may be possessed or interested in at the time of
my decease, I give, devise, and bequeath unto
Alexander Marjoribanks of Balbairdy, William Innes
of Cathlaw, Andrew Gallon of Wallace,
Wardrop of Cuilt, and Bailie of Pock-
annet, all of the County of Linlithgow, aforesaid,
Esquires, their heirs and assigns forever, neverthe-
less, upon trust that they my said trustees do as soon
as conveniently may be after my decease, put and
place out the same in some public or private fund
upon good and sufficient security", with full power
at any time to call in, remove, or new place out the
same in such manner as they shall think fit, so as
the best annual interest be made thereof, and to


receive and take the annual interest or produce there-
of for and during the term of ten years after my
decease, in trust, to place out the same annually in
like manner so as that the interest may become a prin-
cipal sum, and at the end and expiration of such term
of ten years, then that my said trustees, their heirs
or assigns, or the major part of them, to pay and
apply the annual interest of the whole of such prin-
cipal money in the erection of a free school in such
part of the said parish of Bathgate as my said trustees
or the major part of them shall think fit and proper
for the education of the youth of the said parish;
such school to be under such management, govern-
ment, and direction, and to be carried on and conduc-
ted in such manner as to my said trustees, their heirs
or assigns, or the major part of them shall seem best,
and most to the advancement of the care and educa-
tion of youth; but it is my will and desire that the
annual interest only ' may be so applied, and it is my
further will and desire that the minister of the said
Parish of Bathgate for the time being shall be one of
the trustees for the purpose of this, my will. I


nominate, constitute, and appoint John Jacques, James
Laing, Humphry Ewing, and David Innes of the
Parish of Kingston, in the said Island, Esquires,
executors of this my will; hereby revoking and de-
claring null and void all former or other wills by
me at any time heretofore made? The will is dated
Bth July, 1799.
To the lay mind the intention of this document
seems tolerably plain as wills go, but the legal mind
had to be consulted, and it characteristically invested
the whole thing with an atmosphere of mystification
and dispute.
Before proceeding to deal with the protracted
and wholly unsatisfactory legal imbroglio, it will be
worth while to turn to the list of Trustees named
and mis-named in the will. The names and designa-
tions of the Trustees show conclusively that John
Newland was out of touch with his native parish.
Not only so, but the terms in which the first legatees
under the will are referred to point to wandering
and mental aberration on the part of Newland—or
perhaps it was the fault of the lawyer! “My brother


Patrick Newland of Glasgow ” was, of course, not a
brother, but a cousin. To quote the legal documents
in the case, “ the said Patrick Newland named in the
said will, who died in the testator’s life time, being
the eldest son of John Newland, late of Glasgow,
aforesaid merchant, deceased, who was the son of the
said William Newland, the testator’s grandfather ” ;
that is to say, Patrick, John, and Mary Newland, the
children of the Patrick Newland referred to in the
will as “my brother,” were second-cousins of the
Jamaica planter and founder of Bathgate Academy.
Coming back to the Trustees named in the will, it
is to be noted that Innes of Cathlaw and Wardrop of
Cuilt no longer existed as local families when the will
was executed. It was found, however, that the des-
cendant of Innes of Cathlaw was a Mr Thomas Innes
“now resident in France” ; and that the nearest rela-
tive of the Wardrops of Cuilt was Mrs Dickson,
“ wife of the Rev. David Dickson, senior, one of the
present ministers of Edinburgh.” Of the other
Trustees named, Alexander Marjoribanks of Balbar-
die alone is correctly designated. The others “Gallon


of Wallace and Bailie of Pockannet” point to the
only authentic glimpse of the character of John New-
land that now exists. The names, as everyone in the
district knows, should be Gillon of Wallhouse and
Baillie of Polkemmet. Newland, who appears to
have remained an unsophisticated old Scotsman to
the end, used the local pronunciation of those places
which must have been well-known to him (old people
still speak of Wallus and Pokemmet), and the lawyer
had just to make the best of it. There is another
peculiarity of the will which is of interest, inasmuch
as it lends colour to the tradition that Newland had
a conflict in his early years with the ecclesiastical
authorities, and had no great love for the church.
The name of the Parish Minister is introduced as if
it were an after-thought that he should be one of the
trustees. Probably the lawyer suggested that as some
of the names looked a little ragged, the name of the
minister should be included in order to give a touch
of balance and certainty to the body which was to
administer the bequest.


The first meeting of the Trustees was held in
Bathgate on 29th December, 1800. This meeting is of
so much interest in connection with the story of
the Academy, that I think it worth while to give the
extract referring to it in full. The minute of the
proceedings is in the following terms :
“ Lord Polkemmet, Alex. Marjoribanks of Marjori-
banks, Esquire, and the Reverend Mr Jar dine of
Bathgate, being the three Trustees named in the will
of John Newland, late of Jamaica, having formerly
accepted the Trust, and Colonel Andrew Gillon of
Wallhouse, another of the Trustees named in said
will, having this day agreed to accept, they four,
being a majority of the Trustees, in order to follow
forth the purposes of the Trust, agreed to employ
John Spottiswood of Spottiswood, Esquire, Solicitor
at Law, London, to manage the business and authorise
him to take such legal steps as are necessary to bring
the matter to a good issue. And for that purpose
the other Trustees beg the favour of Mr Marjori-
banks to desire Mr James Gray, Writer, Edinburgh,




THE OLD MANSE.


to correspond with Mr Spottiswood and desire him to
send down a power of Attorney in the most ample
manner in his own favour to be signed by the
Trustees.
(Signed) Will. Baillie.
Alex. Marjoribanks.
Andrew Gillon.
Wal. Jard/ne.”
This meeting was held, as will be noted, about a
year after the announcement of John Newland’s death
and bequest had reached this country. Prior to the
meeting a considerable amount of investigation must
have been carried on, presumably by Mr Marjori-
banks, who from first to last was the moving spirit
among the trustees. In particular, the opinion of
learned counsel in London had been asked upon the
following enquiry: “Whether the Real Estate is
well devised to the Trustees, and have they a right
to apply the profits for ten years to the charitable
purposes in the will, and must the interest of the
Personal Estate in Jamaica and the dividends of the


money in the Funds be applied in like manner during
the same period? Is the Real and Personal Estate
devised absolutely to the Trustees, and have they a
power to sell the Real Estate and to make a good
title to the purchaser, or is it merely a devise of
the rents and profits of the Real Estate and the
interests of the Personal Estate for ten years? And
if so will there not at the end of ten years be a
resulting trust both of the Real and Personal Estate?
And will not the Real Estate at the end of the ten
years result to the heir-at-law and the Personal
Estate to the next-of-kin? And what measures
would it be advisable for the Executors and Trustees
to adopt for their own safety in carrying the will of
their Testator into execution?” This enquiry prac-
tically suggests the answers that were returned by
learned counsel, and foreshadows the decision ulti-
mately arrived at by the Supreme Court after infinite
meanderings through the meadows of law. Although
counsel expressed serious doubt in the matter, they
concurred in the opinion that the Trustees were en-
titled not to the whole estate, but only to the profits


of the real and the interest of the personal estate
for ten years, and that after the expiry of that time
the real estate would revert to the heir -at law and the
personal estate to the next of kin. On 7th March,
1801, Mr Spottiswood wrote to the Trustees stating
that in view of the opinion taken as to the import
and effect of the will, “ it appears that it cannot be
carried into effect and the different rights of the
parties ascertained without a decree of the Court of
Chancery, and the sooner such proceeding is com-
menced the more it will be for the interest of all
parties concerned.”
The first decisive step to this end was taken on
24th May, 1803, when power of Attorney was granted
to Messrs George Kinghorn of Kingston and John
Shand of Spanish Town; that is to say, these gentle
men were appointed agents for the Trustees in
Jamaica. On the part of the Trustees, however, there
had been a great deal of misgiving and hesitation.
The inaccuracies in the naming of the Trustees and
the obscurity as to the actual meaning and effect of
the will made them very wary, and they naturally


recoiled from the prospect of a costly law suit. One
of their number, however, had no misgiving and no
hesitation—that man was Alexander Marjoribanks.
It is impossible now to understand in the full the
difficulties and the perplexities of the situation.
There were burning interest and grave doubts and
fears on the part of the Trustees, long delays in the
exchange of communications between Bathgate and
London and between London and Jamaica, and entire
uncertainty as to the outcome of the legal imbroglio.
The executors of the will, Messrs John Jacques, James
Laing, Humphrey Ewing, and David Innes, seem to
have been a rather sinister pack, from all I can
gather. It is on record that Laing had started to sell
out the Funds before any legal steps had been taken
by the Trustees, that the same gentleman made an
offer to the Trustees —what he called a “ compromise ”
—to give them “ for all the rights they may have in
the real and personal estate the sum of £11,200,
Jamaica currency, payable as follows—£l2oo down,
and per annum for ten years, with adequate
British security for the regular payment in Britain


equal to £BOOO sterling.” It was shown that the in-
ventory of the estate, on which this offer was based,
was mis-stated and “ faked ” by Laing and that with-
out prejudice to the claims of the parties concerned
the sum of £ 20,000 would have been nearer the figure.
Ewing was “ considerably indebted ” to John New-
land at the time of his death. These two, at least,
were hardly fitted to play the part of upright execu-
tors. There can be no doubt that those executors
made the most of their position to advance their own
personal interests, and to prevent Newland’s estate
passing for the object to which it was evidently in-
tended. Various allegations were made at the time as
to stock being sold or transferred by them for private
use, and the aim of the executors was seen to have
been to manipulate the estate and generally to cause
the Trustees as much trouble as possible before legal
proceedings were started. In this design the execu-
tors would receive every encouragement from the
Jamaica lawyers, who were adepts of the first water
in that art which is known as sharp practice. In the
“ Journal of a West Indian Proprietor, kept during a


residence in the Island of Jamaica ” by Matt. G.
Lewis, then a well known writer and celebrity,
better known in his time as “ Monk ” Lewis, and
now almost altogether unknown, (his first residence
extended from 1815 to 1816, and his second from
1817 to 1818) we find the following illuminating re-
ference—“ The law charges in Jamaica have lately
been regulated by the House of Assembly ; and by all
accounts (except that of the lawyers) it was full
time that something should be done on the subject.
A case was mentioned to me this morning (23rd Feb.,
1818) of an estate litigated between several parties.
At length a decision was given : the estate was sold
for but the lawyer’s claim must always be
the first discharged, and as this amounted to more
than £ 16,000, the lawyer found himself in possession
of the estate. This was the fable of Afsop’s oyster
put in action with a vengeance.” The Trustees under
the will of John Newland soon found that these
were’ the kind of men they had to deal with; and
there is little wonder that they wavered. But one
of their number was undaunted ; and by his persis


tence and enthusiasm he carried the others with him
along the pathway of an aggressive policy. The
creditable part played by Mr Marjoribanks, of Bal-
bardie, has often been celebrated. For generations
it has been asserted and reasserted that to his fearless
enthusiasm we owe the securing of the gift of the
Academy to the parish ; and this claim has certainly
not been overstated. To his hesitating and doubtful
colleagues Mr Marjoribanks wrote the following
letter, which may almost be described as the Charter
of the Academy. I therefore reproduce it in full.
“ Edinburgh, 24-th May, 1803.
“ Gentlemen, —As you have this day, along with
me, as Trustees of the late John Newland, of the
Island of Jamaica, signed a power of Attorney to
George Kinghorn and John Shand, both of that
Island, for ascertaining our right as Trustees fore-
said, to, and for recovering the Funds of the said
John Newland; and as proprietor of the estates of
Bathgate and Balbairdy, I am more interested in the
subject of the foresaid Trust than any of you, provid-


ivig the intended school is ejected upon my property
or upon a feu from it, I therefore hereby bind and
oblige me, my heirs, and successors to relieve you of
any expense which may be incurred in prosecuting
and bringing the foresaid affairs to conclusion and
am, Gentlemen, your very obedient servant,
Alexr. Marjoribanks.
To Wm. Baillie, Esq., of Polkemmet, Lieutenant
Colonel Andrew Gillon of Wallhouse, Rev. Mr Walter
Jar dine, Minister of Bath gated
One or two circumstances will be sufficient to give
perspective and emphasis to this letter. The first
thing the Trustees discovered in connection with the
case was that in the Executors they had a sharp and
unprincipled set to deal with; and their earliest ac-
quaintance with this fact was the somewhat staggering
news that these gentlemen were tampering with the
estate. Then there was this further difficulty—if
these were the kind of men who were executors of a
will for charitable and philanthropic purposes, could
they trust their interests to the lawyers, Messrs King


horn and Shand, who had been recommended to
them? Under the influence of this doubt the Trus-
tees appointed Colonel Gillon to wait upon Mr
M‘Leod of Muiravonside, “ a very respectable gentle-
man from Jamaica” —I wonder if he was any relation
of the M'Leod of Muiravonside who is mentioned as
having been concerned in the Jacobite rising of 1745
—to ask his opinion about the prospective Attorneys.
Lord Polkemmet, the only lawyer among the Trustees
—he was, of course, a Lord of Session, and signed
himself simply “ Will. Baillie,” a name still honoured
in the county of Linlithgow—also raised difficulties.
“ His Lordship,” writes Mr Marjoribanks to Mr Gray,
the agent in Edinburgh, three weeks before the famous
letter already quoted, “ expressly declares he will not
sign his name till he has security from me that he
shall not be called upon to advance a farthing, and
likewise to relieve him of every claim that may or
can be brought against him for his intromissions.”
Mr Marjoribanks then adds—“ the expense of a law
suit, that may last five, ten, or twenty years, appears to
me a very serious business; besides, the other Trustees


have as just a claim as his Lordship, and if it should
not be advisable for me to grant it, what is to become
of the cause ? ” The enquiries about Messrs Kinghorn
and Shand appear to have been satisfactorily an-
swered ; Lord Polkemmet, however, remained obdur-
ate ; and Mr Marjoribanks generously agreed to assume
all responsibility in the case. A meeting of the Trustees
was held on 24th May, 1803, at Lord Polkemmet’s—
presumably at his Edinburgh residence—when the
power of Attorney to Messrs Kinghorn and Shand
was signed, and Mr Marjoribanks’ famous letter of
the same date “ was given to Lord Polkemmet for
behoof of himself and the others.” On 30th May,
1803, the power of Attorney was formally confirmed
by oath, taken by Mr Gray before the Provost of
Edinburgh, and the Trustees found themselves and
their business launched upon the stormy waters of a
hotly contested lawsuit.
In the same year (1803) a memorial was presented
to Major-General George Nugent, Lieutenant Gover-
nor and Commander-in-Chief in Jamaica. The case
was referred to the Court of Chancery in Jamaica,


and the Trustees filed “ information and bill ” against
the Executors, John MacDougall administrator ad
litem for Patrick Newland, against Margaret New-
land, David Russell, John Newland, and Mary
Newland, the prayer and intention of which was ‘ to
have the whole of the said Testators estate, both
real and personal, sold and converted into money
under the authority of the Court, and that the whole
free residue of the monies thence arising, after dis-
charging funeral expenses, debts, and legacies, might
be decreed to be paid and transferred to the Plain-
tiffs (i.e.y the Trustees) in Trust for the erecting and
maintaining for ever a free school in the parish of
Bathgate for the education of the youth of the said
parish, according to the alleged intent of the said
will.” That was the case of the Trustees. This
process of filing bills and answers and information
and supplemental statements on the part of the
various parties concerned went on from 1803 to 1809.
In the meantime, however, Messrs Shand and King-
horn were appointed by the Chancellor “ receivers of
Mr Newland’s estates, say rents and profits thereof,


subject to the order of the Court of Chancery ” ; a
master was appointed, also, to order upon the accounts
of the executors ; and an order was granted for the
executors to replace stock sold out by Mr James Laing
on or before ist May, 1808. After a preliminary
palaver, on the part of the lawyers, of over five years,
the case came before the Chancellor of Jamaica for
decision on 26th January, 1809. The decision given
was “ that the real estate of John Newland became
vested in Patrick Newland as his heir-at-law; and
that the said Alexander Marjoribanks, Andrew Gillon,
and William Baillie were entitled to the whole of the
said Testator’s personal estate, and the interest, divi-
dends, and produce which had accrued since his death
upon the Trusts of the said will; and the Court
decree and order accordingly.” That is to say, the
real estate, minus the accumulated profits for ten
years, passed to Patrick Newland, and the whole of
the personal estate, with interest and profits of both
real and personal estate, passed to the Trustees.
Against this decision appeal was made to the King
in Council—which at that time dealt with all appeals


from the “ plantations ” —(i) by the Trustees in so far
as the real estate of Newland was concerned ; and
(2) by the Executors, in so far as related to the per-
sonal estate, to which, after deducting ten years’
interest thereof, they claimed right as Newland’s
Executors. The appeal of the Trustees was opposed
by Patrick Newland, and the appeal of the Executors
was opposed by the Trustees. When the case came
up in London, John Chalmers and his wife, Margaret
Newland, as parties in the case were also allowed
to appeal to His Majesty in Council from the said
order or decree, in “ so far as the interests of the said
Margaret Newland, as next of kin to the Testator,
were thereby affected.” The case having been de-
bated and considered in the Court of Common Pleas,
the Lords of Committee of Council for hearing
Appeals, in accordance with the decision transmitted
to them by that Court, made report to His Royal
Highness the Prince Regent (afterwards George IV.)
that the decree of the Court of Chancery of Jamaica
be varied in respect that the Trustees be found en-
titled only to the interest and produce of the personal


estate for the term of ten years from the decease of
John Newland, and that so subject the personal estate
should pass to Margaret Newland as next of kin ,
the costs of all proceedings to be paid out of the
real and personal estate.” This decision was ratified
by the Prince Regent and Privy Council on 17th
August, 1815. The Trustees, therefore, were found
entitled only to ten years’ interest on the whole estate,
free of all burdens; the real estate passed to the
heir at law, Patrick Newland, and the personal estate
to the next of kin, Margaret Newland, minus , in both
cases, the interest for ten years and the cost of the
protracted litigation. It took twelve years to reach
this conclusion; and sixteen years had elapsed from
the making of the will and the death of the testator.
What was spent, or wasted, in the course of this ab-
surd palaver, dignified by the name of legal pro-
ceedings, it is better that we should not enquire, even
if it were possible to find out. Reverting to the
statement made by “ Monk ” Lewis, himself a bosom
friend of the Prince Regent, we must conclude that
what the lawyers left, after their “ pickings ” were


accounted for, was the poor remnant of a splendid
estate. I cannot say to what extent Patrick Newland
was enriched by the result; but there is evidence that
a sum, probably £IO,OOO, was remitted from Jamaica
through bankers in London “ being the property of a
poor woman, residing in Bathgate, near Edinburgh,
named Margaret Newland, who is the wife of John
Chalmers, residing in Edinburgh, and also of a low
station in life.” The account of Mr Spottiswood,
who acted as agent for the Trustees in London,
amounted, from beginning to end of the proceedings,
to over £1000; and, in proportion, the accounts of
the innumerable agents, attorneys, counsel, &c., must
have been enormous. The portion that fell to the
Trustees was roundly £14,500. Looking at the facts
of the case with unprejudiced minds, we cannot but
conclude that they were entitled to more; and the
whole proceedings only tend to confirm the adage that
“ law ” is one thing, and justice another.


Margaret Newlands.
S|fS|HE position of Margaret Newlands (it
|j Ii will be observed that in orthodox
|i fashion she spells it with an “s”)is so
interesting as to deserve a chapter by
itself. Born on 3rd February, 1760, she was the only
surviving member of the Newland family at the time
of John’s death. She was the half-sister of John
Newland, and by the will she was expressly men-
tioned as being entitled to the sum of £SO. By the
time the news of the death and bequest of Newland
reached Bathgate she had attained to the unromantic
—or is it really after all the romantic—age of forty.
At this time she was living, in prospect of perpetual
maidenhood, at a place—here, at any rate, we can be
dogmatic, and say positively, in the unromantic neigh-




THE PRE-REFORMATION CHURCH.


bourhood of Armadale—glorying in the name of
Blairmuckhole. She had suddenly become famous.
The parish, then undivided in the ecclesiastical sense,
was discussing her. Eligible single gentlemen sud-
denly discovered unaccountable charms in the vicinity
of Blairmuckhole. Lawyers became aware of the
twitchings of philanthropic desires and overwhelmed
the maiden with legal advice. Margaret rose to the
occasion, and, accordingly, when it became known
that the Trustees were meditating legal proceedings
she presented to them, from the retirement of Blair-
muckhole, the following petition, inspired, no doubt,
by some legal dignitary.
“ TJnto the Trustees for the behoof of the Free
School to be erected in the Parish of Bathgate from
the fund bequeathed by John F! ewlands' latter will ,
/, Margaret Newlands, residing at Blairmuckhole ,
shall hereby bind and oblige myself to give up all
claim whatever respecting my brother's estate, real or
personal, in the Island of famaica or elsewhere, in
consideration of which the Trustees shall grant me a
E


bond under their hands to make good to me, or my
heirs, or executors or assignees, one fourth fart of the
above-mentioned subject, free of all expense to me,
my heirs, executors or assignees, and they shall have
such deed of conveyance from me that shall be
thought needfid for accomplishing the same. I might
have had an opportunity long ago of joining my
friends in Glasgow, but being advised rather to join-
ing with the Trustees than my friends. — Gentlemen,
Your Humble Servant,
Margaret NewlandsT
This document bears the date of sth August, 1801.
The Trustees, who were only getting under weigh in
their voyage of litigation, had no end of things to
perplex them, and they do not appear to have been
dazzled by Margaret’s offer, for they never even ac-
knowledged it. But Margaret was importunate, and
accordingly she wrote again to Mr James Gray, the
Edinburgh agent of the Trustees, (this time evidently
without the aid of a lawyer) under date of 13th Nov.,
1802.


“ I am more than surprised that yon have sent me
no word relative to my business , notwithstanding you
being invested with full power to that effect , and, of
course , I expect you l return me an answer speedily to
me what you intend to do for my general interest ,
that I may know what to do."
Still there was no reply. In the meantime Mar-
garet, from the high vantage ground of a “ lass wi’
a tocher,” had become more than ever somewhat of
a flame in the parish, attracting and captivating many
a human moth. She did not, however, prolong the
agony ; in less than a month from the writing of the
letter just quoted she was married. This sudden
change in her fortune was the result of the eminence
attained by her as the next of-kin in a disputed law-
suit and the prospective possessor of a substantial
fortune. Her husband was one, John Chalmers, “ a
butcher in Alloa.” That is the only description of
him that exists, so far as I know. I have no doubt
tne butcher lent his inspiration to the following letter,
written by Margaret under date 4th Dec., 1802, in
which there is the breath of exultation and defiance,


so characteristic of one in her condition, who finds
long cherished dreams suddenly fulfilled, and is al-
ready treading the road that leads to the city of
almost abandoned hope. The letter is again ad-
dressed to Mr Gray.
“ I am laid under the necessity of writing yon
again in regard of my business. Sir , you being
impowered to act for me in that respect , I expected
something should have been done before now , for I
mean to stand up for my right as executor to my
deceased brothers funds against all opposition and
will not come under the Tutorial Conduct of no man
nor quorum of men as l am now in cloathed with a
husband and will claim my right according to my line
of kin and agreeable to the law of this nation. Sir,
I expect answer speedily first post direct to me at
Bathgate.”
Of course it was not possible, even for Mr Gray,
any longer to ignore Margaret as a factor in the
case, or to remain irresponsive to her repeated appeals,
especially as stated in this climax of remonstrance.
Some conference seems to have taken place between


her and the Trustees or Mr Gray; and she received
a promise that information would be given her of how
the case was proceeding, and what steps were likely
to be taken to prosecute the interests of the Trustees
in the Court of Chancery in Jamaica. Under date
of Btn January, 1803, she again writes Mr Gray, this
time from Alloa, to the following effect.
“ I write by your desire to inform you that my
husband and I are at present in this place and will
remain for part of most of next week. /, therefore,
request to hear from you in course if you have re-
ceived any word from London about my brother's
affairs since I last saw you and direct to me to the
care of George Chalmers , feuar, Alloa."
In this year proceedings were begun in Jamaica, and
Margaret’s name appears in the list of litigants. But
from the first the Trustees opposed the claims of all
parties, and fought for the whole estate ; and it does
not appear that any further correspondence passed
between them and Margaret. In the decision given
by the Court of Chancery in Jamaica in 1809, she was


altogether ignored. This was probably due to the
fact that she had not pressed her claim through the
medium of a well-fee’d lawyer. When the case was
appealed to His Majesty in Council in London, she
had learned what steps were necessary to ensure a
hearing; and in 1813 by “petition and appeal” she
was admitted as a party to the case. And, as we have
seen, by the decision of the Lords of Committee of
Council, ratified by the Prince Regent and Privy
Council on 17th August, 1815, she was found entitled
as next of kin to the personal estate of her half-
brother. This windfall must have been diminished
very considerably by the proportion of the legal ex-
penses charged upon the personal estate; but after
this deduction was made, Margaret had remitted to
her from Jamaica the sum of £ 10,000. Fourteen
long years of doubt and anxiety had elapsed between
the date of her first letter to the Trustees and the
announcement of this decision. When the news of
her half-brother’s death reached her, Margaret was
forty years of age; when the result of the protracted
litigation was finally made public she was approach


ing her fifty-sixth year. She had made a plucky
fight for what she considered her rightful share of
the spoil; and she succeeded, probably beyond her ex-
pectations. While we must continue to regret that
any portion of the estate was diverted from the great
purpose of education, we cannot feel it in our hearts
to blame Margaret for the part she played. Friends
and relatives always feel that injustice is done them
when a rich kinsman passes them by and bequeaths
his means to a public charity ; and it is quite clear that
Margaret felt and expressed her resentment at being
practically ignored. For the next of kin, nay a half-
sister, to be provided with the miserable pittance of
£SO, out of an estate which in its time and place was
regarded as princely, was indeed worse than being
ignored : it was to have insult added to injury. So
she must have felt. But rather than throw in her lot
with the more aggressive portion of the tribe in Glas-
gow, she preferred to make terms with the Trustees ;
and it was only when that course was shown to be a
hopeless one that she fought for her own hand.
Throughout the long process of litigation, Margaret


appeals to us as a pathetic figure, hovering in the back-
ground, and knocking, almost without hope, at the
gates of justice. But, in the end, she wins our admira-
tion and even establishes a claim to gratitude. There
is abundant evidence that in her struggles to establish
her own rights, she was never animated by merely
mercenary motives. One of the first things she did
after the personal estate came into her possession, was
to make a “ post-nuptial contract of marriage and
deed of trust ” between herself and her husband, John
Chalmers. The final decision in the case was given
in London on 17th August, 1815, and this contract
was drawn and ratified in Edinburgh on 26th April,
1816. In addition to this she made, without refer-
ence to her husband, a separate trust disposition, con-
veying the estate to the Trustees, in the same terms
as those indicated in the marriage contract, and this
trust was duly ratified at Balbardie House, Bathgate,
on 30th April, 1816. From the latter circumstance we
may conjecture that Mr Marjoribanks had made him-
self active in the matter by advice and persuasion.
In these documents Margaret makes it quite clear


that in her opinion John Newland intended that his
whole estate should be devoted to the cause of educa-
tion in Bathgate. She insists also that provision
should be made for clothing, feeding, and lodging,
providing with books, papers, and other articles useful
or necessary for education; and also for binding the
young people apprentices to some useful calling, or
otherwise setting them up in life after leaving school.
The main provisions of the contract and trust may
be gathered from the following statement: —the hus-
band was to have secured to him an annuity of ;£ioo,
and in consideration of this he was to give up all
right in the estate. Margaret was to have the right,
during her life-time, of drawing such sums as she
thought fit out of the funds, and whatever was not
used was to be invested so as to form part of a capital
sum. Further, of the whole estate inherited by her
she reserved the power to bequeath one fifth part to
any purpose she pleased. The remaining four fifths,
and such portion of the rest as was not used, was to be
applied to the purpose of education as set forth in
the will.


I have not been able to trace the date of Margaret’s
death; but I conjecture that it was in the year 1819 or
1820. It gannot be said that she enjoyed the fortune
that had come to her. The fifteen long and anxious
years that elapsed between the death of John New-
land and the final settlement of the legal contest, and
the brief period between that time and her death,
were years mainly of vexation and sorrow. Better
for her had she never known more of the world and its
ways that lay beyond the retirement of Blairmuck-
hole. Immediately after her death Chalmers nomina-
ted trustees, among others being a William Newland,
evidently next-of-kin to Margaret, for the purpose of
challenging the marriage contract. In the action
which was raised in the Court of Session before a
jury, at the instance of these trustees, the marriage
contract was reduced or set aside, mainly upon the
ground that John Chalmers was “of facile disposition,
and weak mind, and easily imposed upon,” and, there-
fore, did not understand the purport of the contract.
The Trustees of the Academy did not appear as par-
ties in this case.


There remained, of course, independent of the
marriage contract, the trust disposition, conveying
Margaret’s estate to the Academy Trustees. Mar-
garet’s next-of-kin and other interested parties then
sought to reduce or nullify this provision in order that
they might obtain possession of the funds. The
reasons alleged for this reduction were “ that Mar-
garet Newlands was of weak mind and facile dis-
position ; that she had been in the habit of living in
such a state of intoxication as to have impaired her
faculties ; that she did not understand the meaning
of the deed, which she is said to have expressed her
regret at having executed, when made aware of its
effects ; and that she had granted it without consent
of her husband.” The Academy Trustees before
thinking of embarking upon another legal contest had
the advice of learned counsel as to how they should
proceed. In their statement to counsel they declared
that so far from being weak in mind or facile in
disposition, Margaret was a particularly strong-
minded person. She was given to intoxication, they
admitted, but not to such an extent as to impair her


faculties. She had never expressed any regret at
agreeing to the contract or trust of disposition; on
the contrary, both in a state of exaltation and in
the lucid intervals of sobriety, she had. again and
again declared her determination that the money she
had inherited should go to the school. Learned
counsel, however, pointed out that the Trustees had a
bad case. The reduction of the marriage contract
really settled the whole-question. She had granted
the trust disposition without consent of her ‘husband,
as if he had no right to be considered. And, besides,
the contract and trust disposition bore, on the face
of them, that they were arrangements agreed upon by
the agents on both sides, rather than free and genuine
expressions of the desire of the parties themselves.
The Trustees were, accordingly, advised that they had
better not oppose the action for the reduction of the
trust. They wisely took this advice, with the result
that nothing came to the Academy from the funds
inherited by Margaret. What with intoxication, and
indulgence in that most expensive of all forms of
revelry—legal advice, Margaret’s estate was by this


time sadly reduced. It was calculated that, at the
time of her death, it amounted to some two or three
thousand pounds. A comparison of her ambitious
scheme for the welfare of the youth of Bathgate with
this attenuated fortune is certainly not without a sug-
gestion of the influence of the bottle. In justice to
Margaret it must, however, be remembered that to her,
who had been accustomed all her days to poverty, and
who had never risen above the level of prevailing
ignorance, even the sum of £2OOO appeared a splendid
fortune. From the evidence there can be no doubt
that she had good intentions towards her native town,
and those intentions were certainly not improved by
the clumsy attempt of her agents to give them expres-
sion in legal form. The marriage contract could not
well have been more elaborate even if it had referred
to the conveyance of millions or the division of a
kingdom ; but we must not hold her responsible for
that. As for those “ friends,” who had not the
shadow of a moral claim upon one penny in the estate,
they have blurred our vision of Margaret by dragging
her failings into the light. She can never be the


romantic and shadowy figure we should like to dream
about; something unsteady in the gait of the form
which reels through the story and then vanishes, will
always touch us with pity and, perhaps, impatience.
But we must not forget that, with her failings, she had
a good heart and meant well, and the memory of that
will soften our judgment of her. The “ friends,” who
had no anxiety to vindicate their kinswoman, but only
to get possession of her means, are too shadowy for
any remembrance ; they will take their place among
the nameless host of harpies in the sordid drama of
human greed.


The Academy.
ITHOUT a reference to the Academy
{(ill (mbl 111 an y sketch °f J°hn Newland would be
incomplete ; for it may be well said that
the boy who left the parish as an exile,
to light his way to fortune in an unfriendly world,
came back in the end to stay with us. In the institu-
tion, which his generosity has reared, his spirit lives.
The Academy is his only monument. Though his
bones lie mouldering in an alien tomb, his spirit dwells
at home. Though dead, he lives and speaks to us in
this pile of buildings—not in the stone and lime
merely, but in the influence which the institution has
had in moulding the lives of men, who, influenced and
upheld by his example, have found honoured places
in every walk of life and in every quarter of the
world.


Another reason for speaking of the Academy in
this connection, is the splendid work which was done
by the original Trustees —four, and, during many of
the most trying periods, only three, in number—in
fighting the case in the law-courts, in building, and
organising the institution.
There were fifteen years of suspense and anxiety,
full of labour for the Trustees, during which, if it be
not ungenerous to say it, the legal gentlemen were
doing their best to diminish the estate. The game of
justice being over, the Trustees found themselves in
the possession of ,£14,500, but as this was to be a
capital sum, they could not proceed to the erection of
a school until sufficient interest had been accumulated.
The work of finding safe and profitable investment
for this money was in itself very exacting. Then
there was the problem of making temporary provision
for the better education of the children in the parish
until the Academy was built and equipped. In order
to meet the educational needs of the place, the Trus-
tees rented several rooms in various parts of the town
and in the country, and appointed teachers to take


charge of them. These little schools seem to have
been placed under the charge of the teacher in the
parochial school—Mr James Taylor—who made quar-
terly reports to the Trustees. One of these reports
dated Ist August, 1829, gives the following statistics
as to the rolls of the various schools—“ Brown Square
School, 100 ; Engine Street, 97 ; Armadale, 70 ; Drum-
cross, 11 ; Gideon Street, 105 ; Public School, 189 ; the
total number of children in attendance being 572.”
Those teachers, by the way, were not paid on the scale
with which we are now familiar. Miss Elizabeth
Binning, who had charge of the Drumcross School,
got £l2 yearly, the others ranged from £42 to £"56,
and Mr Taylor had £9O. In 1829 the Trustees adver-
tised for a male teacher, “ qualified to teach English
in all its branches, writing, arithmetic, geography, and
Latin at a salary of £ 60.” The cost of maintaining
those schools was a drain upon the resources of the
Trustees, and they became more and more anxious
to proceed to the erection of a suitable institution.
Their first definite step in this direction was to acquire
the site, upon which the Academy now stands—Rules
F


Acre as it was called—from Mr Marjoribanks of Bal-
bardie. As early as 1822 it was resolved to have
plans for the Academy from Messrs Brown & Play-
fair, Edinburgh, and these gentlemen were asked to
come out and inspect the ground. The cost of erec-
tion, all things included, was not to exceed
The plans ultimately prepared by Mr Playfair were
accepted ; but, so far as I can gather, these plans were
never carried into execution. I suppose Mr Marjori-
banks had most to do with this ; in consideration of
his years, and still more of his generous interest, the
Trustees deferred to him in everything. He died
several years before the Academy was built; and I
fancy that after his death new measures were adop-
ted. It is worth noting, in passing, that although the
ground, which was to form the site of the new school,
was acquired by the Trustees in 1824, and enclosed by
their orders, Mr Marjoribanks never collected any
feu-duty; that was only done a good while after his
death. In the meantime the Trustees let the ground
to William Anthony at an annual rent of £5. In
1829, the Trustees, so clamant had the educational


necessities of the parish become, applied to counsel
both in this country and in England for advice as to
whether they were entitled to apply any portion of
the capital sum to the building of a school ; and they
were advised that it was within their power to do so.
Why Mr Playfair’s plans were set aside I cannot say,
unless it was that they were prepared with a view to
a more costly building than the Trustees found it
possible to face. At any rate, new plans were adver-
tised for, the cost of the building not to exceed the
sum of £2,500, and the design submitted by Messrs
R. &R. Dickson, Edinburgh, was accepted. Mr
Robert Hardie, builder, Edinburgh, was the contrac-
tor selected from the list of applicants ; the contract
was dated April, 1832, and the building was to be
finished in a year. In the course of erecting the build-
ing the original plan underwent very considerable al-
teration ; and some of the most prominent embellish-
ments in the present structure were afterthoughts—
notably the railing on either side of the tower, which
was meant to conceal an undue protuberance in the
roof. After considerable difficulty the Academy was


taken off the hands of the contractor on 18th Novem-
ber, 1833. It was not quite ready at that time, and the
finishing touches were not given to it till six months
afterwards. The classes were started in the Academy
on 25th November, 1833.
When the Academy was opened the Trustees found
their labours were only beginning. The name of
Mr Marjoribanks has often been celebrated in con-
nection with this institution; he died before the
Academy was built, and had no hand in the educa-
tional difficulties. But the man to whom, without any
doubt, the credit is due for having organised the
institution on a sound educational basis, is the Rev.
Samuel Martin, the parish minister. Now-a-days, .with
our Educational Codes, fixed curriculums, and estab-
lished methods of working, it is difficult to realize the
position of a school where everything had to be
organised from the very foundation. Mr Martin
visited many schools notably such institutions as
Dollar Academy—in order that he might be in a posi-
tion to suggest rules and regulations for the working
of the new school. In addition to that he sent out to


prominent teachers and professors throughout the
United Kingdom carefully prepared schedules con-
taining all sorts of enquiries as to the best methods
of organising such a school as the Academy. It may
seem strange to us now, but one of the special enquiries
made was whether it would be advisable to have an
Infant Department in connection with the school.
The enquiries made were the product of a mind fully
alive to the necessities of an improved educational
system. The answers which were returned to these
schedules went far to form the system of teaching
and organisation on which the Academy was origin-
ally based. Of course, this system was only gradually
developed, and the rules and regulations of the
Trustees were altered to meet the growing necessities
of the times. From the very beginning, however,
the Trustees anticipated many of the most recent de-
partures in our educational system. We are hearing
a great deal at the present time about commercial and
technical education ; and it is interesting to note that
at one of the earliest meetings of the Trustees Col.
Gib on suggested that, having regard to the industrial


and commercial character of the nation, a prominent
part should be given to practical and scientific studies,
and that, in appointing teachers, the Trustees should
insist upon securing men qualified to undertake the
teaching of science. It may be noted also, that in
almost all the answers given to the list of questions
drawn up by Mr Martin, doubt was cast upon the
value of gratuitous instruction.
In all these matters Mr Martin did the lion’s share
of the work. When teachers had to be appointed
the choice was very often left entirely to him, and,
in every case, he was called upon to visit schools, to
interview teachers, and to report for the guidance of
the Trustees. When the preliminary arrangements
had been carried out, and the Academy had been pro-
perly set agoing, it was felt that Mr Martin had been
put to so much trouble—the bulk of Trustees’ meetings
were held in the manse —and had done all the work
assigned to him so well, that his services should be
specially recognised. On the suggestion of Mr Alex.
Marjoribanks, jun.,—who, by the way, sometimes made


rather odd suggestions—it was resolved to make Mr
Martin a present of nine dozen bottles of wine, and
to give his servant two guineas. Some years after-
wards the Trustees gave a further and very decided
proof of the respect in which they held the parish
minister. In the memorable year 1843, Mr Martin
left the Established Church to form in the parish with
those who followed him, the Free Church. He, at
once, sent in his resignation as a Trustee—and this
step cost him, perhaps, more pain than going out of the
old manse and severing his connection with the old
church. He then asked permission to be allowed to
meet for public worship, with those who followed him
out of the Parish Church, in one of the rooms of the
Academy. The Trustees granted this request, but
made it plain that their action was not to be taken
as an expression of sympathy for the movement with
which Mr Martin had connected himself. Accord-
ingly, if not the first, at any rate, one of the very
earliest meetings of Bathgate Free Church was held
in Mr Dawson’s class-room in the Academy. The
associations of the place seem to have been painful


to Mr Martin, and he took the earliest opportunity of
removing to a more suitable place of worship.
The first Rector of the Academy was Mr James
Taylor, the old parochial schoolmaster; but he only
lived about a year to enjoy the honour thus conferred
upon him. After the Academy was started all grants
to the outside schools were stopped, and the connection
with the parochial school was ended. The original
staff of the Academy consisted of the following—Mr
Taylor, rector, and Messrs Robert Dawson, Andrew
Lang, and Thomas Oliphant. The Rector appointed
in succession to Mr Taylor was the Rev. John Smith ;
but within two years from his appointment, he left to
become the parish minister of Ecclesmachan. This
process of translation, as in a fiery chariot, did not
please the Trustees, and they determined they would
have no more ministers as rectors. The next rector
was Mr James Fairbairn, who in 1844, was promoted
to be House Governor of Heriot’s Hospital, Edinburgh.
Next in order come Messrs Gibson, Inglis, Smith, and
Bourhill. In succession to these come two names that
are best known to the present generation—Mr D. F.




THE CHURCH OF 1739.


Lowe, LL.D., whose work as rector is too well known to
require any recommendation at my hands, and who
now occupies one of the foremost positions in the
educational world in Edinburgh. The other name
is that of our present rector, Mr Andrew Dunn, M.A.
Mr Dunn was appointed in 1881, and from that time
till now under his management enormous changes
have taken place in the institution. Originally the
rector’s house was in the centre of the building. In
the course of time this residence had to be turned into
class rooms. In Mr Dunn’s time a house was built for
the rector; but quite recently it was found necessary
to convert this building into a workshop and physical
laboratory. In order to show the strides the Academy
has made in recent years, it is only necessary to men-
tion that in 1881 the accommodation was for 773
pupils, the number on the roll was 812, and the aver-
age attendance was 689. At this moment the accom-
modation is for 1095 pupils, the number on the roll is
1116, and the average attendance is 912. The school
now possesses special rooms, fitted up in the best style,
for Physics, Chemistry, Cookery, and Woodwork.


Of course many of those improvements could not
have been carried out without the Government grants
which are earned by the school. But it remains to
be said that in the first place to the generosity of John
Newland, and then to the. enterprise of the Trustees,
and an able succession of rectors, is due one of the
best schools of its type in the whole of Scotland.
In 1870 the Trustees—they consisted of Sir Wil-
liam Baillie, Bart., of Polkemmet, Andrew Gillon,
Esq., of Wallhouse, and the Rev. Joseph Milne, parish
minister—applied for a Provisional Order in terms of
the “Endowed Institution (Scotland) Act, 1869” for
the modification and rearrangement of the Trust;
and it is under this Provisional Order, of date 29th
June, 1871, that the affairs of the Academy are now
administered. The main alteration in the manage-
ment of the school introduced by this order has regard
to the Trustees. They now consist of the following
seven—the proprietor of Polkemmet, the proprietor of
Wallhouse, the parish minister, the master of the Mer-
chant Company of Edinburgh, as proprietor of Bal-
bardie, a representative elected annually by the Com


missioners of the Burgh, or by the Provost and Magis-
trates, the Sheriff of the County of Linlithgow, and
the Principal of Edinburgh University. Another
alteration effected under the powers conferred by the
order was this—ln 1870 there were in the Academy
an Upper and Lower School, each presided over by a
headmaster; the Trustees placed the entire superin-
tendence of the school under one responsible teacher,
the Rector.
The honour of inaugurating the annual procession
in honour of John Newland belongs to the Rev. James
George Wood, who was appointed to the charge of
Bathgate Parish in 1843, in succession to the Rev.
Samuel Martin, who seceded in that year. Originally
the children met in the church, where a service was
conducted, and an address suitable to the occasion
was delivered by the minister. All the teachers took
part in the procession, and the children were arranged
in their various classes. Now-a-days the procession
is carried out by a committee recruited entirely
from the ranks of the working men in the parish ;
and while we think that every credit is due to them for


their efforts to celebrate the memory of John New-
land, we hold that the procession would gain by par-
taking more of the spirit and character of Mr Wood’s
time. It would be a splendid thing if the children were
to meet, as of old, in the parish church at the com-
mencement of the day’s proceedings. The Parish
Church is the most suitable and most appropriate place
for the delivery of the annual oration on Newland
and his gift.


Bathgate in the Eighteenth Century.
©%>r^A |
BT hardly falls within the scope of the
task I have undertaken to give a de
tailed description of Bathgate during
the life-time of Newland, the latter half
of the eighteenth century. All I can attempt is a
brief reference, and for that I am indebted mainly
to the description of the parish contained in the
Statistical Account of Scotland, which was contributed
by the Rev. Walter Jardine, minister of Bathgate from
1781 to 1812.
Mr Jardine is rather an interesting figure. He
was one of the original trustees on Newland’s estate,
and he took an active part in the protracted litigation
connected with Newland’s will. He came to the
parish originally as a schoolmaster, to which office


he was unanimously appointed on 22nd October,
1767. He came with the very highest recommenda-
tions ; among others who testified to his fitness for
the work of a grammar school was Mr French,
one of the masters of the High' School, Edinburgh.
In 1777, 9th April, he was appointed assistant minis-
ter or helper to the Rev. Adam Wadderstone, minister
of the parish ; and four years later he succeeded to
the charge. This year 1777 is rendered memorable
by the fact that in it was reared the first tombstone
in the churchyard which surrounds the present church.
This tombstone stands near by the monument erected
in memory of David Newlands, to which reference
has already been made. Walter Jardine had a
good deal of difficulty and friction with the
Heritors. He was censured by the Heritors for
using the churchyard for grazing and other things.
But, most extraordinary of all, he was taken to task
for letting the new churchyard—that is, the church-
yard attached to the present church, which in those
days was simply a field—to George Rankine, butcher,
for grazing! As a “ man of peace ” —so he styled


himself in one of his letters to the Heritors—he
managed remarkably well, and got out of his diffi-
culties always on the right side. The manse in those
days—he was practically the last occupant of it:
his successor, the Rev. John Smith (1812) arranged
an excambion with the Laird of Balbardie. and re-
moved to what is now known as the manse and
glebe of Bathgate—the manse in those days was a
thatched dwelling beside the old churchyard, and
under the shadow of the ruins of the pre-Reformation
church. In 1794 the new road from Edinburgh to
Glasgow was formed, and as may be seen to this day
it not only cut up the old glebe, but cut past the
very door of the old manse. This road was
the prime cause for the securing of a new
manse and glebe. Mr Jardine had great trouble
with the manse; and frequently appealed to
the Heritors about it, but with scant success. He
took his revenge in the statistical account, where he
remarks that “ the manse is an old building
frequently wanting repairs.” There is a tombstone
in memory of Walter Jardine in the new churchyard ;


but his chief monument is the characteristic reference
to the parish which he wrote for the Statistical Ac-
count.
In 1750 the population of Bathgate parish was
1594. At the end of the century there was a popula-
tion of 2309 —“984 males and 1325 females.” The
number of people residing in the village of Bath-
gate, so-called in the records, at the latter date was
1400, and in the country part 900. The remaining
reference to population is so characteristic that it
is best that it should be quoted. “In the 20 years
preceding January, 1790, it appears there were 1142
baptised and 771 buried ; and for ten years preceding
January, 1734, there were 415 baptised, making an
annual average of births in the latter case,
and in the former 57J5 births and deaths.
There are about 21 marriages every year, and each mar-
riage may produce about 5 children. Of 2309 inhabi-
tants, 1989 attend the Established Church; about
320 are Seceders, and 3 are of the Episcopal per-
suasion. In the parish are 27 heritors, 10 of whom
reside, 2 clergymen (the Established minister and


the pastor of a Burgher congregation), 4 surgeons,
3 writers, 2 students of Divinity and 1 of Medicine,
255 mechanics, of whom 50 are apprentices ; 55 far-
mers, in each of whose families there are at an
average 9 or 10 persons, of whom 3 are generally
hired servants.” Even more interesting is the
following statement as to the size of the town a
hundred years ago. “In the village of Bathgate
there are about 469 houses or rooms occupied by
separate families, whereof 29 are uninhabited. The
total rental of the town, gardens, and some small
pieces of ground amounts to £619 14s per annum ;
and the mean rent of a house or room comes to
20s a year.” In 1787 the assessment for the Poor
amounted to 7d in the £ on house rent, one half being
recoverable from the tenant “ except in the case of
those whose rents are less than 15s sterling yearly,
who are hereby exempt from paying any part of
said assessment.” So careful was Mr Jardine to
give a complete account of the parish that he even
gives statistics of the animals within the bounds.
“ In the parish are about 320 milch cows, 700 young
G


and old black cattle, 250 horses fit for labour, about
60 more from 1 to 3 years old, and not above 200
sheep.”
The ruins of the old castle of Bathgate must
have been an object of interest to the people of
Newland’s time. Bathgate was part of large estates
granted by,King Robert the Bruce, in 1316, as the
dowry of his daughter, Lady Marjory, to Walter,
High Steward of Scotland. The castle of Bath-
gate was one of the principal residences of the High
Steward; he died there in 1328. The site of the
castle and its surroundings have undergone great
changes. Traces of the mansion are described
in the eighteenth century as being “in the
middle of a morass or loch about a quarter
of a mile distant from the town.” These traces
have now disappeared altogether, and the descrip-
tion of the surroundings can only barely be recog-
nised by those who know the place as it now is.
In Mr Jardine’s time several causeways leading to
the castle remained, and in later times they could be
traced; but the railway has remorselessly swept


away what little remained of these ancient land-
marks. With characteristic candour it is stated in
the Statistical Account, neither apology for nor
censure against the vandalism being stated, that
“ hewn stones have been frequently dug from the
foundations of it, as also some kitchen utensils of
copper or brass, and several coffins of flag-stones.”
The predatory habits of the natives account in the
main for the disappearance of this ancient pile.
Connected with the castle another object of pos-
sible, but alas only of possible interest, was the old
pre-Reformation church, which now stands, with
its stunted w r alls, hideously be-plastered, and reduced,
under the operation of the unromantic masonry of our
time, to the dead level of a common dyke, as a mute
protest against the vandalism and neglect of long
generations. How did the old church and manse
come to be built so far away from the village, which
is about a mile distant? The suggestion has been
made that both church and manse were originally
appendages of the High Steward’s residence —it is


very questionable if the village existed when the
castle and church were erected—and that the melan-
choly ruin which now stands in the old graveyard
was originally erected as a chapel for the High
Steward and his various retainers. The present
church seems to be the fourth in order from the pre-
Reformation church. The third church, occupying
the present site in the heart of the town, was erected
in 1739 during the ministry of the Rev. George Black-
well. The divisible area of this church, as a note
in the Heritors’ minutes informs us, was 2062 feet.
We learn that the Rev. William Crichton, A.M., who
was minister of Bathgate first from 1654 to 1656,
and again from 1687 to 1.694, preached in the roofless
old church at Kirkton for a year (what year is not
stated, but probably in the early stage of his ministry)
the town church being occupied by another minister.
Crichton was ultimately settled in the new church
by the help of the military. This points to the fact
that at a very early date after the Reformation a
new church was built in the centre of the village, on
the site occupied by the present church.


The pre-Reformation church was from a very
early time neglected and allowed as a matter of
deliberate policy to fall into decay. As it stands
it can hardly be described as a ruin; it is rather an
eyesore. The neglect of the old church would be
partly sentimental and partly utilitarian; the incon-
venience of its situation with regard to the village
would be even a stronger reason for its disuse than
the fact of its having been a “ synagogue of Satan.”
So far as I can discover from the records, the people
of Bathgate have always been fond of protest; but
I am not aware of a single instance in which they
have shown themselves indifferent to convenience.
The interest of the parishioners during the eighteenth
century was concentrated not upon the venerable kirk
at Kirkton, but upon the kirk in the centre of the
village, and especially upon the building of 1739
which was recently demolished to make room for the
handsome building of our time. Round this build-
ing there was a considerable expanse of ground. The
extent of it may be gathered from the fact that the
minister let it to a local butcher for grazing. It was


only towards the close of the eighteenth century that
it was used as a burying ground : the old church-
yard at Kirkton was the recognised place of interment.
It is probable that the ground round the new church
was at first unenclosed. About the middle of the
century (in the sixties) Mr George Jarvey, brewer in
Bathgate, made an offer to the Heritors to “ build ye
dyke ” for £2B ; and for the sum of to make
Communion tables and rearrange the loft. The ground
around tfie town church was put to many uses besides
the grazing of cattle. On washing days it was a
sight to be seen. And on every day, but on the long
summer evenings especially, it was the recognised
playground for the children of the village. I have
no doubt that John Newland played many a game
on this spot, and that it was the memory of happy
summer evenings spent under the shadow of the old
kirk of Bathgate, in the graveyard which was then a
playground, that made him a boy again in the hour
when the twilight of death fell upon him, and he
resolved to give his fortune for the welfare of the
youth of his native place. Even after it was used as


a regular place of interment the churchyard must have
been the scene of many a merry game among the
youngsters. We hear complaints of the windows of
the church being broken by children playing at ball
and otherwise. One Russell of Easter Inch, whether
in a spirit of playfulness we cannot say, went so far
as to break a window in the church by firing his gun
at it. He was ordered simply to replace it.
As to education I have been able to gather little
or nothing about it; the only notices that appear
having reference to the later years of the century.
These invariably refer to the appointment of the
parochial teacher. When Mr Walter Jardine was
appointed in 1767 there was apparently only one
teacher. On his promotion, to the office of assistant
minister he was succeeded by Mr James Johnstone
(1780.) The Heritors recommended Mr Johnstone to
get an assistant, but in order that this might be done
“ without much hurt to his own profits,” they resolved
that the fees should be raised for all subjects except
reading. The fees were fixed as follows :—“ When
English is taught by itself, is 6d; when writing or


arithmetic is taught along with the English, or by
themselves separately, 2s 6d ; for Latin or Greek or
French, 45.” Three years later, on the occurrence of
a change, this scale was ratified, except that for the
last item 3s 6d was to be the charge.
These fees can be measured only in the light of
the general condition of the parish; and all the evi-
dence points in one direction—that the lot of the
majority of the inhabitants was a hard one. The
fees for the higher branches of education would be
prohibitive to the majority; and it was probably on
this account that the Heritors decided not to raise the
fees for reading. There can be no question that it
was a scramble for people to live in those days, and
the education of a family involved great sacrifice
to the parents. I have no doubt whatever that it was
with painful memories of suffering and poverty, as
well as with the desire to be a benefactor, that John
Newland decided at the close of his days to devote
his fortune to the cause of education in Bathgate.
Education, which is a necessity to us, was a luxury
to the people of that time. One cannot go through


the records of eighteenth century life in Bathgate—
such as, after generations of carelessness and neglect,
they remain to us—without feeling that the problem
of the Heritors and Kirk Session, in whose hands
all parochial work was then concentrated, was the
problem of the poor. At every step we come upon
traces of the curse of poverty.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century manu-
facture was represented in the parish by a brick and
tile work, a tannery, all on a limited scale, and
by a tallow chandler “who carries on a pretty con-
siderable trade.” In addition to these branches of
industry, ironstone was worked on the estate of
Barbachlaw by the Carron Company. Then there
were the collieries on the estate of Lord Hopetoun.
The extent of these may be gathered from the fact
that the entire number supported by the collieries was
95. The deepest seam, we are told, was 40 fathom.
Though coal was worked from a very early date, the
people had no idea of the mineral wealth of the
parish. There was “an inexhaustible supply of
moss”—so the Statistical Account informs us, though


we now know that Mr Jardine overestimated the quan-
tity of moss when he used so extreme a term—“ and
many burn peat.” One of the coal pits is thus
described: —“ In this work 20 coal miners are con-
stantly employed; each of whom works from 15 to
25 loads a day. The load is 12 Linlithgow pecks,
and sells on the hill at 6d the great and 4d the small
coal.”
As to wages, a day labourer got is per day;
masons, carpenters, and bricklayers got is 6d to
is 8d; and “ taylors, when they worked out of their
own houses, 8d and victuals.” Speaking of the
general condition of the working classes, Mr Jardine
says—“On 5s a week, with what the wife could earn
—not more than 2s —many brought up families
decently.” The mainstay of the population was
agriculture. It may be of interest in passing to quote
the Statistical Account on ploughing. The plough
used up till the close of the eighteenth century was
“ the old Scottish plough drawn by four, six, and
sometimes eight cattle. Small’s chain-plough drawn
by two horses and two oxen is now beginning to be


used.” About this time, also, we notice the gradual
depletion of the rural population, and the gradual
increase of the town and village. After stating that
many of the farms were let at between ios and
an acre, some at 20s ; “ and several small enclosures
of ten or twelve acres are let on leases of nine-
teen years at 50s and 55s an acre,” Mr Jardine
remarks significantly that “ the number of farms have
diminished of late, two or three being sometimes let
to one person or kept in the proprietor’s own hands.
Hence in some places there is not a sixth part of the
inhabitants there were twenty years ago.”
Improvement in agriculture, as in other things,
was in those days exceedingly slow. Witness
the attitude taken up by certain ministers when
fanners were introduced in 1720 at Saltoun. “Wind,’
they argued, “ was raised by God alone, and it was
irreligious in man to attempt to raise wind for himself
or by efforts of his own.” Farming was a poor affair
at that time, whatever it may be now. Smiles tells
us that the Lothians at that period were practically
in a state of nature. “In the interior little was to be


seen but bleak moors and quaking bogs.” The farms
consisted of “ outfield,” or unenclosed land, chiefly
moorland, and “ in-field,” enclosed land, “on which
oats and bear or barley were grown, but the chief
crop was weeds.” As for the towns, “ they were for
the most part collections of thatched mud cottages,
giving scant shelter to a miserable population. The
whole country was poor, desponding, gaunt, almost
haggard. The common people were badly fed and
wretchedly clothed, those in the country living in
despicable huts with their cattle.”
From the earliest records of Bathgate parish in
the eighteenth century we find that the question of
the poor was a pressing one; and so it remained to
the close. The main source of revenue for the poor
was collected by the poor themselves. There was an
authorised and legalised list of beggars who were
allowed to beg through the parish “ once in two
weeks.” The symbol of their beggarly authority
was a badge, openly displayed. These beggars were
native born, or such as had acquired what is called
a “residence.” The lists were very carefully kept,


and all intruders and interlopers were summarily
dealt with. Witness the following minute of the
Heritors of date 7th June, 1786. The meeting being
informed by the minister that two poor people are
lately come into this parish, the one belonging to the
parish of Torphichen, and the other to the parish of
West Calder: the meeting authorise and appoint the
collector to take the proper steps to have the said
two poor people, and all others who may come into
the parish in like circumstances, removed.” In 1783
a time of great scarcity—matters became so serious
that at a joint meeting of the Kirk Session and
Heritors it was resolved to “uplift the Poor Fund.”
This fund consisted partly of the proceeds of an
assessment, partly of church door collections and
other voluntary offerings. Mr Marjoribanks of Bal-
bardie agreed at the same meeting to lend £2O to the
fund; and Mr William Graham, elder, was
appointed to go to Dalkeith to buy meal. It is
worth noting also that the meal so purchased was to
be “lodged with Mr John Fleming, Bathgate Mill,
who has offered the use of his girnals for the present


charitable purpose.” About this time the state of
the poor was so distressful as to be almost beyond
the power of the authorities to cope with. Irregu-
larities were reported ; and for a time begging was
absolutely prohibited. Dissatisfaction prevailed as
to the administration of the Poor Fund. John Jar-
vie and James Prentice, constituting themselves cham-
pions of the oppressed poor, made formal complaint
to the Heritors alleging that the minister and Kirk-
Session were not administering the poor fund pro-
perly. Walter Jardine, “ man of peace ” though
he was, crushed these complainers, whose charges were
found to be totally false and groundless. A regular
“ Committee for regulating the affairs of the Poor ”
was formed (1785) —consisting of the Heritors, the
minister and Kirk Session, and five representatives
from the town. These five representatives were
Bailie Wardrobe—a notable man of affairs in his
time—George Boyd, Thomas Mair, John Rule,
Thomas Watt. It is mournful to read these names
with the knowledge that as names only they survive.
One of the first steps of this committee shows how


desperate was the pass to which the affairs of the
poor had come. “ The Committee of Poor appointed
Mr John Fleming of Craigs and John Waugh, Wester
Inch, to call upon the Associated Congregation Ses-
sion with a view to their giving something to support
the poor.” These gentlemen accordingly approached
John Callender, one of the members of the said
Session, and represented to him the views of the
committee. “ John Calender laid before the said
Session the committee’s intimation that a more equal
mode of distribution of collections taken at places
of public worship is required.” The result of this
embassy is instructive. “ The Session of the Associ-
ated Congregation thereupon alleged that they were
neither able nor willing to appropriate any part of
the money collected as above mentioned to the main-
tenance of the poor.” Whereupon Messrs Fleming
and Waugh were again appointed by the Committee
of Poor “to let the Associated Congregation know
that it is a resolution of this meeting and if the
Associated Congregation do not choose to give, their
poor will be struck off the list.” The poor assess


ment for the whole parish at this period was £6O ;
one half payable by the heritors and one half by the
tenants. Difficulties were raised by the inhabitants
of the village as to their proper share of contribution ;
and an agreement was come to that the “ inhabitants
of Bathgate shall be computed as one half of the
inhabitants (of the parish) on whom one half of the
assessment falls, which makes their proportion £is.”
The assessment was fixed at sevenpence in the pound
on house rent, one half being recoverable from the
tenant “ except in the case of those whose rents are
less than fifteen shillings, sterling, yearly—who are
hereby exempted from paying any of said assess-
ment.” The ground of objection taken by the inhabi-
tants of Bathgate against this assessment was that
they were subjected to a greater proportion of it than
the inhabitants of the country part of the parish.
In 1787 an Assessment Book was made up, contain-
ing a list of the inhabitants of Bathgate, with particu-
lars of residence and rent. This book would be a
very interesting and important document if it could
be recovered ; but, I am afraid, it, like many more




THE PRESENT PARISH CHURCH.


very important records, has been submerged, beyond
hope of rescue, beneath the tidal waves of vandalism.
Between the Heritors and the Kirk Session there had
always been a considerable amount of friction, and
after this Committee of Poor was appointed it grew
to such an extent that all relation between them in
the management of the poor ceased. The committee
continued to manage the £6O assessed on the parish
independent of the Kirk Session. The committee
hereafter consisted of “ Baillie Wardrobe, John
Fleming of Bathgate Miln, James Binning in Hard-
hill, Archibald Hutton, Wright in Bathgate, and
George Jaffrey, Dyer there, any three a quorum, Baillie
Wardrobe, convener, to receive the £6O assessment
laid in for the poor, i.e., to collect and distribute the
same.” But so many changes were made in this com-
mittee that it is impossible to follow the course of
it. The committee or committees found it hard work
to administer the poor fund. Abuses were con-
stantly creeping in, and the difficulty of dealing
with the improvident, still such a striking factor in
the affairs of poverty, was so tantalising that ulti-
H


mately the committee resolved upon an extreme
measure. In these days Committees of Poor were
neither helped nor hampered in their administration
by Acts of Parliament. “ They resolve ” (ioth Sept.,
1790 “ t° suspend any assessment at present for the
future support of the poor, but in order that the poor
may be provided according to Law that last
refuge of those on whom the duty of charity is laid
“ they resolve that badges shall be given to such poor
persons as are legally entitled to the Parish Charity,
and they appoint the following committee for the
purpose of giving badges to the poor, and with power
to them to fix the days of the week when, and the
districts of the parish through which, the poor are to
travel; and they recommend it to the committee that
no badges shall be given excepting to those who can
show that they are natives of the parish or have had
their residence within it three years preceding their
original application for charity.” It was ordained
that the badges should be worn on the side or
breast, and the poor were debarred from receiving
charity unless their badges were produced. The


decision of the authorities as to when and where
begging operations were to be carried on is one which
must not be omitted here. “ The committee appoint
the persons who have received badges” (in 1791 the
number amounted to twenty-one) “ to travel through
the houses situated betwixt the roads leading to Hard-
hill and Blackburn by the chapel, on Monday each
week. And through the houses situated betwixt the
roads leading by the chapel and the east of the road
leading by Balbairdy House towards the east side of
the Burn on Tuesday; and from the said road west-
ward to the road leading by Hardhill on Thursday ;
and through the town of Bathgate on Saturday.”
What a motley crew they must have been. One in-
stinctively recalls the nursery rhyme “the beggars have
come to town.” But fortunately this sad picture is
not unrelieved ; amid the degradation of poverty the
spirit of sturdy Scottish independence shines forth.
Hard as the times were, and bitterly as the demon of
poverty pinched, there was a body of hard-headed
independent workmen who relied upon themselves
and made provision for evil days, which rendered


them independent of the “ Committee of Poor.” The
better portion of the working classes had for long
supported a Friendly Society. And the witness of
this is to be found in a minute of the Heritors dated
4th August, 1792.
“ There was laid before' the meeting a letter signed
by David Miller, deacon convener of a society under
the title of the Trades Box of Bathgate for the
purpose of giving relief to indisposed members, re-
questing as a favour that the Heritors would allow
them to ring the church bell to warn the managers
to attend their general meetings, and they engage that
no damage shall be done it. The meeting having
considered the foregoing application, as they have
every reason to applaud the principle of this society,
so they very readily grant the desire of the applica-
tion—the Bellman being always employed on such
occasions.”
In no respect does the life of the present stand in
such striking contrast to the past as in the matter
of roads and travelling, and general means of com-
munication. As the author of “ Coaching Days and


Coaching Ways ” remarks, “ travelling was travelling
in those days; now it is rather a matter of arriving
at places.” In the early part of the eighteenth cen-
tury there were hardly any roads in Scotland ; and
such roads as existed were exceedingly bad. It was
only during the last twenty years of the century that
road-making and bridge-building was taken up in
earnest. During that period the whole face of the
country was changed, and the means of communica-
tion between the various towns and counties were
enormously developed. In the early days little or no
traffic could be conducted owing to the wretched state
of the roads. The traffic at that time was chiefly in
the hands of “ cadgers,” who with sack or creel hung
across their horses’ backs vended their wares from
place to place.” When Smollet, the novelist, went
from Glasgow to Edinburgh in 1739, on his way to
London "there was neither coach, cart, nor waggon
on the road.” It was not till 1749 that a conveyance
was started between Edinburgh and Glasgow. In
that year “The Edinburgh and Glasgow Caravan”
made its first journey, which it took two days to per


form. “ The Fly ” —so named because of its superior
velocity—was started in 1759. It took one day and
part of another to cover the distance. The carriers’
carts plying between Edinburgh and Selkirk took a
fortnight to do the double journey.
Bathgate was particularly badly off in the matter
of roads. Mr Jardine in his account mentions only
two. “ The turnpike road leading from the Iron
Works at Cleugh to Burrowstouness runs through
the parish; as also a branch from the great road
between Edinburgh and Glasgow by Whitburn.”
The town was thus cut off from the main stream of
traffic. All means of communication with neigh-
bouring towns were severely limited and imperfect.
The parish, and especially the town, was a place by
itself, enjoying little intercourse with the outside
world. A man arriving from Mid Calder was looked
upon as a foreigner; and one who had been to Glas-
gow was regarded as a great traveller.
Walter Jardine throws light upon what the ex-
pense of travelling meant towards the end of the
century, in an account which he presented to the


Trustees of John Newland for personal expenses in-
curred during a series of visits made to Glasgow on
business connected with'the Irust. This was, of
course, in the days after the new road from Edin-
burgh to Glasgow was made.
1800— September—For Coach hyre to and
from Glasgow, - - - £> l 10 °
Personal Expenses —Three days, o 15 o
December —At Glasgow for myself
and horse, - - - - 018 o
1801 — October —At Glasgow for myself
and horse, three days, - 018 o
December —For Coach hyre to and
from Glasgow, - - - 1 10 o
Personal Expenses —Three days, 1 o o
Several years afterwards Mr Marjoribanks, jun.,
and Mr Playfair, the architect employed by the
Trustees, made a journey from Edinburgh to Bath-
gate, and their account for expenses, including break-
fast at Uphall and dinner at Bathgate, amounted


to £4 4s gd ; but this sum probably included the
inevitable professional fees. The expense alone
made travelling rare; but apart from the expense
the discomfort was so great that travelling was for
the most part undertaken only as a matter of duty
or stern necessity.
When John Newland set out for Jamaica, assum-
ing, as is most probable, that he went from his home
in Bathgate, he would make his way to Whitburn
on the great main road, where he would join the
Caravan ” ; then on to Glasgow and Greenock—
a long and weary journey. If travelling by land in
those days was tedious and fatiguing there is no name
for a voyage at sea. Taking ship at Greenock it
would be ten or twelve weeks—weeks full of peril
and hardship—before he touched the shores of
Jamaica. On his way through Glasgow he would
most likely call on his uncle John and his cousin
Patrick, whom he speaks of in his will affectionately
as “my brother Patrick.” He would see the fine
houses of the great Virginian and West Indian mer-
chants, and the whole flourishing prospect, as we may


well fancy, gave him an incentive and an inspiration
to that career which ended so honourably to himself
and so fortunately for the future generations of
the remote and poverty - stricken little town upon
which he had turned his back. I can fancy that the
memory of that journey, of all the romance and
wonder of the new life that was opening up to him,
and of himself as a lonely and friendless youth
thrown upon the great highway of the world, to battle,
in the strength of his own unaided powers, his way
to fortune, came back to him as in a “ sunlit shower
of dreams,” in the hour when, worn out and weary for
rest, he set himself to put his affairs in order, ere he
went forth upon that long road to which every path-
way in the world is leading.


APPENDIX I.
The Bailie.
c W'^© v Ns>
f AILIE WARDROBE was the chief man
■1 in the town. The Bailie of those days
1 was practically equivalent to the Provost
of our day, with the difference that his
power was less and that he owed his appointment to
a superior. The position of matters will be under-
stood if I quote the statement of Mr Thomas Dick,
“ the first and only Town Clerk of Bathgate.” After
giving the information that Bathgate was made a
Free and Independent Burgh of Barony in 1824, and
that its magistracy from that date was to consist of
a provost, three bailies, treasurer, and twelve coun-
cillors, elected by the burgesses in September annually,
he adds the following note. “ King Charles 11, in
1663, erected this town into a free burgh of barony,


in favour of Thomas Hamilton of Bathgate, to whom,
and his heirs and successors, the power to appoint
baillies, clerks, officers, burgesses, &c. was given. The
superiority of the burgh stood in the person of the
Earl of Hopetown when the Jurisdiction Act of
1747 was passed. From that time till 1824 the town
was governed by a bailie , appointed by a superior,
and who in terms of that Act could exercise no higher
power than what it reserved to magistrates of depen-
dent burghs or bailies of baronies, i.e., judging in
questions of debt to the extent of 40s, and imposing
a fine for petty delinquincies of 20s, and imprison-
ment not exceeding a month. Alexander Marjori-
banks, of Marjoribanks, Esq., held right to the charter
and superiority in 1824. He consented to the applica-
tion for the passing of the Act of Parliament, erecting
the town into a Free AND INDEPENDENT BURGH OF
BARONY; and it was quite well understood that with-
out such consent, Parliament would not have granted
the new constitution of this burgh. Mr Marjoribanks
was unanimously chosen its first provost, and held
that office by re-election till last September ; the Act


limiting the burgesses to choose the same person
provost for more than three years successively (August
1828).” The constitution of the burgh was again
. changed, of course, in 1865.


APPENDIX II.
The Alleged Newland Letter.
The following letter appeared in the West
Lothian Courier of 19th April, 1901. It was originally
printed in the same paper in 1876. On that occasion
the editor prefixed this statement —“ The following
letter from the hand of John Newlands, founder of
Bathgate Academy, will be read with great interest by
many. It has just come into the possession of a
Bathgate gentleman, and by him has been framed in
such a way that so long as the Academy stands, the
letter will be handed down as an heirloom. We
give it verbatim et literatim .” That was the state-
ment given; and here is the letter itself:
Kingston , Jamaica ,
June 26th , 1768,
Honrd Father, —l was very glade to receve my
brother in this coniry , he has told me a great deal


Concerning the bad behavour of your wife and says
if her progress is not stoped that for carten it must
both be your rewen, and the rewen of your family ,
therefore I wood advise you to prevent such a calamity
to take my brother David into co-partners with you
and he will have a great sway to chack her likeways
it will be forading the young man in the world for as
you now grows old it will take a troble of the business
from you and it will be a means to keep her from
handling of your money and of concequence put an
stope to her badness, there was John Finlay's family
rewened by his wife and to see this Dismall Event of
that going to prove to yours; which is so large a
famely is bad, take him in to your business it will be
a great help to you, your famely will never be any
larger than it is but will soon be smaller, I grouss
very infirm myself and His fust thought to make my
will and Testament and David my brother will be my
Hair to all I have been so industirously working for,
for I have no knowledge where my brother Willm is
and Robrt is provided for, I wid do to the outmost of
my indavour to sende you a puntion of rume with a


Glasgowe shipe that is heir if it will but fall in the
pice for their has been a great call for rum on account
of the Election in England that keeps up the price or
if not rume I will send you money you must see and
gett fames Millar to ingage for four years to Come to
me for my brother is nevered tyred of speaking good
of him to me and 1 will pay all coste of fright and
passage, or if you cannot get him to come There is
little Willm Cudday that is annother of his favoureets
who he recommends to me that you must provele if
possible to com and you may give between 20 to go
pounds pr anni7m (time I would have payed them
. . drawn on me by my unkle, but you took a
very insure way to get the money for as you gave the
order in the Captns name that I trought the money
was for you and not the Captn by your letters and
my brother and the Captain told me that the passage
was payed and that prevented me fro7n giving the
money to him for feer it would not be sure for. The
7nan is a stranger to you and my unkle both as my
brother told 7ne. Do to the outmost of your power to
sc7iie Ja7nes Millar to me, and be advised by me to


take David to the shoap to you when it is his provit
as well as yours he will behave with a great dele of
care for if anything be the matter and God shuld
take me from this troblesome world he'll be the richest
man in Bathgate. If he has Justice done him Brother
and I joins in our compliments to you and famely
and to not forget for Tennant my old acquaintance
and well-wisher and my brother David and all f reends
concluds your Dutiful Son ,
John New land.
It is added that the letter was addressed thus—“ To
Mr William Newlands, Mercht. in Bathgate [To the
care of the Postmaster in Linlithgow.] ”
By the kindness of Mr Robert Hendry of the
Courier I am informed that the original of this letter
was seen by Miss Hamilton of Kirkroads, that it was
the property of a Miss Wardrope of Falkirk, and that
it was shown in the shop of ex-Provost Johnston,
formerly bookseller, printer, and newsagent in Bath-
gate. Beyond this, however, nothing seems to be
known. The letter, which does not seem to have


created widespread interest, has disappeared somehow,
and not even the frame, which was to give it per-
petuity, is left.
I hardly know what to think of this letter; but
warned by my experience of other alleged historical
statements in connection with the Newland’s case I am
free to acknowledge that I harbour deep suspicions of
its authenticity. Of course, the fact of not having
had an opportunity of seeing the original letter stays
the hand of criticism. I am not even prepared to
assume that the letter, which is here exactly repro-
duced from the Courier, is, in every respect, an accur-
ate reprint of the original. All I cam do is to take
it as it stands and to state one or two obvious argu-
ments for and against its authenticity.
Reference is made in the letter to the price of rum
being affected by the election in England. As to
the bibulous practices of the electorate raising the
price of rum I am not prepared to speak, but it cer-
tainly is a fact that during the three months previous
to the date of the letter elections were in progress in
this country. Parliament was dissolved on 12th March,
i HD;.


1768, and the new Parliament met on ioth May, 1768.
Again, I have no doubt there was a cleavage between
the two families in the Newland household ; and the
spirit of that is reproduced in this letter. The names
which occur, William, David, and Robert, are all
members of the first family. No mention is made of
the members of the second family, of whom, at the
date of the letter, the oldest was fourteen and the
youngest six years of age. So far as the names of
the members of the first family are concerned there
can be no doubt as to their accuracy. But, on the
other hand, there are, I shall not say • inaccuracies,
but improbabilities in the letter, and these I shall
enumerate.
(1.) It is very strange that the letter should be
addressed to the care of the postmaster in Linlithgow,
in view of the fact, which must have been known to
Newland, that the mail coach from Glasgow to Edin-
burgh passed through Whitburn, one of the stages,
only a few miles distant. Linlithgow was not on
the main road, and was then, as it is now, by no
means accessible to Bathgate. The conveyance of a


letter from Linlithgow to Bathgate certainly does not
present insuperable difficulties, but if we are to sup-
pose that the “ puntion of rume ” was consigned by
that route our good opinion of John Newland’s sense
of economy will have to be modified. If it is said
that Newland did not know that the mail coach
passed within two or three miles of Bathgate and
addressed the letter to Linlithgow as being the nearest
town of prominence, the answer is that the letter
itself expressly represents him as being in constant
communication with the locality, and as having access
to the most recent changes and arrangements through
his brother Robert who is represented as being with
him in Jamaica.
(2.) In the letter Newland talks of himself as
growing “ very infirm,” thinks seriously of making
his “ will and testament,” and speaks dolefully of the
possibility of being soon taken from the cares of this
“ troublesome world.” This is strange language on
the part of a man who was only, at the time indicated
in the letter, thirty-one years of age! Is it possible
to conceive that at that early age he had made his


fortune, provided for his brother Robert—then only-
twenty years of age—in such a way as to render him
independent of any prospective benefaction, and was
prepared by his will to make his brother David, then
twenty-six years of age, “ the richest man in Bath-
gate ” ?
(3.) In the letter reference is made to his father
having “so large a family.” The combined family
of William Newland was eight in number. At the
date of the letter every one of these eight was able
to do for himself, except three; and of these three
the oldest was ten and the youngest six years of age.
A man who had lived a hard life could scarcely be
supposed to regard this number of dependents as a
burden grievous to be borne.
(4.) Again, why should he have made David his
heir to the exclusion of his brother Robert who,
according to the letter, was with him in Jamaica, and
of William, whose whereabouts are stated to be un-
known? And if David was to be made heir to a
fortune which was to make him “ the richest man in
Bathgate,” why such a persistent and almost passion


ate appeal to his father ,to make David a partner in
the business of a paltry Bathgate shop?
(5.) As to the young men who are entreated to
come out to Jamaica not the faintest reference, direct
or indirect, is even made to them in the proceedings
connected with the will, or in the floating traditions
of the place.
Taking the whole circumstances into account, I am
prepared to say that there is an air of genuineness
about the letter ; but having regard to the many mani-
fest improbabilities contained in it, I must continue to
assume an attitude of suspicion and doubt.


APPENDIX III.
Bathgate Parish.
The following account of the parish is given in
Mr John Penney’s “Account of Linlithgowshire” :
“ The parish of Bathgate had once the honour of
being a Sheriffdom, and has been long dignified by
the location of many gentlemen’s seats within it.”
[To this dignity it can unhappily no longer aspire.
The old family seats to which Penney refers have
almost all disappeared ; and Boghead alone remains
to uphold the ancient honour of the parish : Balbardie
being a seat, or possibility thereof, without the gentle-
man.] “In the charters of the twelfth, thirteenth, and
fourteenth centuries the name of this place is written
Bathket, Batket, Bathkat , and Bat he at. The name is
obviously Celtic, but the etymology is difficult. Bad-
cad, in the Gaelic, would signify the high bush or
clump of wood; Bad-caid would mean the bush or
clump on the summit; and Bad-coed, Bad-cat, would


convey the idea of a bush of wood. It seems im-
possible to fix the meaning of the name, which has
been corrupted, on any satisfactory principle. The
church, of old, appears to have been of middling
value. In the ancient taxatio of the churches in
decanatu de Linlithcu , there is the ecclesia de Bathket
which was assessed at 30 marks. Malcolm IV.
granted to the monks of Holyrood the church of
Bathket , with the land, which was set out by Gal frid
de Malleville, and Uchtred, the Sheriff of Linlithcu.
(Vide Chart , Newbottle, 159. The land thus laid off
was merely a c arm cate or plough of land.) Robert,
the diocesan, who died about 1159, confirmed to those
monks the church of Bathcat , with a carrucate of land,
and the tithes and pertinent. During the reign of
Robert I. the church of Bathcat , and its tithes, lands,
and pertinents, were transferred by the Abbot and
monks of Holyrood to the Abbot and monks
of Newbottle, in satisfaction of a long arrear
of rent which was then due for some salt works and
estates in the Carse of Callender, and this interested
transfer, of difficult times, was confirmed by the


diocesan, Bishop Landels, in 1327. The monks of
Newbottle now enjoyed the church of Bathgate till
the Reformation, the cure being served by a vicar.”
The church here referred to is, of course, the pre-
Reformation church, the ruins of which still remain,
as .may be seen from the photograph reproduced in
this volume. The church of 1739 —all the churches
between it and the ruins of the old church have
perished entirely—built in the time of the Rev. George
Blackwell, was altered in 1780, and was demolished to
make way for the present church, which was erected
in 1884. The figures appearing in the foreground of
the photograph of the church of 1739 are those of
my predecessor, the Rev. William Bennie, to whose
exertions the erection of the present church is, in
a great measure, due, and Mr Thomas Johnstone,
worthiest of beadles, whom I gratefully remember,
and gladly celebrate.








