

for the JU IReb Cross.
JOHN THE JACK
A STORY FOR CHILDREN,
BY
STACY WADDY.
OKE SHIELIKG.
v >.
THE ENTIRE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF THIS BOOK
WILL GO TO THE RED CROSS FUNDS.
Copies can be obtained from Mrs. Stacy Waddy, The King's School, Parramatta.


Cl
(Next to
Families
Phone : 16,
I
George Howe
a
vj
w
m .
Sydney Gazette JPresst
W J'erguson Collection.
!{{ Rational Library"
Canberra
1 415.
\ T orih).
TER.
i
>,
THE OLD ESTABLISHED FIRM OF PLUMBERS, DRAINERS,
AND GASFITTERS.
173 CHURCH STREET PARRAMATTA.
We guarantee Accurate and Reliable Dispensing and entire
Satisfaction to every customer at
RYE’S PHARMACY,
PARRAMATTA.
CHURCH STREET, (Opposite the Post Office) PARRAMATTA
A. GiLLESPIE
PASTRYCOOK AND CONFECTIONER
Wedding, Birthday and Christening Cakes to Order on the Shortest Notice.
Tea Meetings and Picnic Parties Supplied.


For the Red Cross.
Ye that have gentle hearts and fain
To succour men in need,
There is no voice could ask in vain
With such a cause to plead —
The cause of those that in your care,
Who know the debt to honour due,
Confide the wounds they proudly wear,
The wounds they took for you.
Out of the shock of shattering spears,
Of screaming shell and shard,
Snatched from the smoke that blinds and sears,
They come with bodies scarred,
And count the hours that idly toll, \
Restless until their hurts be healed,
And they may fare, made strong and whole,
To face another field.
And yonder where the battle’s waves
Broke yesterday overhead,
Where now the swift and shallow graves
Cover our English dead,
Think how your sisters play their part,
Who serve as in a holy shrine,
Tender of hand and brave of heart,
Under the Red Cross sign.
Ah, by that symbol, worshipped still,
Of life-blood sacrificed,
That lonely Cross on Calvary’s hill
Red with the wounds of Christ;
By that free gift to none denied,
Let Pity pierce you like a sword,
And Love go out to open wide
The gate of life restored.
O.S.
[These verses were published in “Punch’ ’ at the begin-
ning of the War. The Eed Cross Society now wants help
for our Australian wounded, and we cannot do better than
quote such a moving appeal.]


JOHN THE JACK
A STORY FOR CHILDREN.
Adapted from the greatest of French Novels,,
Victor Hugo’s “ Les Miserables,”
BY
STACY WADDY,
HeadmaSler of The King’s School, Parramatta, N.S.W,
Author of “ Come for Strength,” “The Great Moghul,” etc.
Iparvamatta:
The Cumberland Argus, Ltd., Printers and Publishers,
1915.


“The Story of John the Jack.”
PEOPLE WHO COME INTO THIS STORY:
John: A man just out from gaol, after nineteen years. He
is hunted by the police all his life.
Javert: The police-inspector who took the lead in hunting
John.
The Good Bishop: Who was so kind to John that he
changed John’s heart.
y -
Father Madeleine : This was what John called himself at
one time of his life.
Petit Gervais: A little Italian organ-grinder.
Cosette (or “The Lark”) : The little girl whom John saved
and made happy.
Marius : The man whom Cosette married in the end.
Thenardier and His Wife: The only really bad people in
this story.
Gavroche: A plucky, witty little gutter-boy.
Pauchelevent : An enemy of Father Madeleine; but Father
Madeleine saved his life.


“The Story of Old John.”
WHAT IT IS ALL ABOUT.
I am going to tell yon the story of a man who found life
very hard. His name was John. Everything seemed to be
against him, from the time he was born till the time he
died; life pressed very hard upon him, and he nearly be-
came a very, very bad man. Only you will hear how, just
at the right time, he met a very, very good man; and that
changed John ; and always afterwards John tried to be
very good himself. And he had some wonderful adven-
tures, but he always behaved like a hero; and he was tre-
mendously strong, and could lift great weights, and could
climb any wall, and hit the mark with a bullet every time.
And while we are telling his story we will hear about
other people too who found life press very hard upon them.
There is little Cosette, who had no father or mother, and
was very cruelly treated by die savage Thenardier and
Thenardiess (they are the only really bad people in these
stories). And there is Javert, who hunted Old John for
years and years—but John saved Javert’s life. And there
is sharp, plucky little Gavroche, and Fauchelevent, and
the two little stray children, and Marius, and the dear
good old Bishop who changed John’s heart. And we shall
see what happened at the Bishop's house, and at the Con-
vent of the Petit Picpus, and inside Gavroche’s elephant,,
and when Marius watched through the peephole into*
Thenardier’s room.
And these things happened—not long, long ago, but only
about a hundred years back from to-day. The great
Napoleon was Emperor during part of the time; the dear
old Bishop knew him; then Louis was king; then Charles
the Tenth. And we will hear about the terrible battle of
Waterloo, and about the people fighting against the sol-
diers behind a barricade in the streets of Paris ; and about
the cruel way the French people treated men in gaol (but
our English people were nearly as bad).
I cannot say that the things in this story really and
actually happened. But at any rate they are just like
things that really happened to real people. The man who
wrote this story was a great Frenchman named Victor
Hugo; and his heart was sorry for the hard life that men
like Old John had, and Gavroehe, and poor helpless little
Cosette (but Old John saved her, and at last she married
and lived happily with Marius). And Victor Hugo wished
to make us sorry for such things too. It is true that things'
are much better now. But there is much still for us to*
grieve over; and when we grieve over a thing, then we
should try to make it better.


1.—THE MAN JUST OUT FROM GAOL.
One evening*, just before the sun went down, a strong-
looking man in very poor clothes came trudging into a
little town in the south of France. He had a knapsack on
his back, and a big knobbed stick in his hand, and hob-
nailed boots; and he looked very tired, as if he had walked
•a long way. And the people who saw him did not like the
look of him at all. And first he went to the police-station;
and then he went to an inn.
There was an excellent dinner being cooked; and when
the man asked, the landlord said “Yes, you can have din-
ner, if you have money.” So the man sat down. Rut the
landlord did not like the look of him at all; so while the
man was not noticing, the landlord sent a boy along to the
police-station to ask if they knew who the traveller was;
•and the police sent a message back, “He is a man just out
of gaol; take care—he is very strong and very dangerous.”
So when the landlord heard this, he said to the man,
“Go out of this.”
The man said, “I w'ant some dinner and a rest ; I have
money, and I am very tired.”
But the landlord said, “No, I have no dinner for you,
and no bed.”
“Then I will sleep in the stable,” said the man.
“There is no room there either,” said the landlord.
But the man said, “This is an inn; you must let me
stay. ’ ’
Then the landlord said, “Go out of this. You are just
out from gaol. The police told me so.”
And then the tired man took up his knapsack and his
stick, and went out very sadly.
He did not know where to go. It was night now, and
getting cold. He went to another inn; and the landlord
there said he could let him have dinner and a bed; but
just then a man came up who had seen what had happened
at the first inn; and then the landlord turned the man out
in the same way as the last, and used very rough words.
And the tired man wandered round the town; and he was
so hungry that he knocked at other houses and asked for
food; and they would not even give him a glass of water
for pity’s sake. At one house they threatened to shoot
him. For all the people had heard now that a man just out
from gaol, very strong and dangerous, was in the town;


and they were too frightened to show pity. The man even
asked the police to put him in gaol, but they would not.
And in a garden he saw a small hut, and he crept into that
to sleep; but there was a tierce dog in that, and it rushed
at him, and tore his ragged clothes.
His heart was almost broken; "I have not as good a
house as a dog,” he cried;; “no one will give me a chance.”
So he wandered back into the town. The wind was blow-
ing fierce and cold; and at last he lay down on a stone
bench, close by a building that he could see was a Church.
And he hated everybody; and he shook his fist at the
Church. His heart was black with hatred.
Just then an old woman came out of the Church. And
&he saw the man.
“What are you doing there, my friend?” she s-aid (She
was a good, kind woman.)
“I am going to sleep, can’t you see?” said the man,
angry and surly.
“Haven’t you any money? Why do you not go to an
inn ? ’ ’
“I have no money; I can sleep here,” he said.
Then she gave him all the money she had—it was only
twopence. And she said, “That will be enough for a bed.
Have you asked anyone to help you?”
“Yes/ 7 he said, “I have knocked everywhere, and no
one will help me.”
Then the good woman touched his arm and pointed out
to him a little low house on the opposite side of the square,
with a very grand house alongside it; and she said, “Have
you knocked at that house ?’ ’
“No,” he said.
“Then knock there,” she said, and went away.
Now in that little house lived the Bishop. It was not
really his house; the grand house next door belonged to
him; and the little house was really a hospital. But the
Bishop said, “I will give my grand house for the'sick
people, and live in the little house.”
And so he did. That shows the kind of man this Bishop
was. He gave away nearly all his money; and he used
not to have nearly such a good dinner as the people at the
inn, though he could have been rich if he had liked. And
in his little house he always left the door open; and if
anyone knocked at the door, he at once said “Come in”;
and if any poor person came, the Bishop was sure to help
him. He loved all men; and especially he loved to help
people who were in misfortune, even if it was their own
fault and they had been wicked.


The poor man just out from gaol did not know all this *
but the woman who told him to knock knew it well.
Just at that moment, the Bishop was sitting down to his.
supper. His sister was with him; she was as kind and lov-
ing as he was. And the only other person who lived in the
house was a faithful old servant. But she was different*
she was good and kind, but still she said the Bishop was
foolish to help people quite so much and give away all his
money; and especially she wanted the Bishop to lock the
doors at night, instead of leaving them open as he did.
She did not trust people quite so much as the Bishop did;
and she said, "You ought not to say 'Come in’ until you
have had a look to see who it is that knocks.”
So this night, while she was laying the plates for supper,
the old servant was telling the Bishop and his sister that
they really must lock the doors to-night, for there was a
man in the town just out from gaol, very strong and very
dangerous. So if the Bishop would let her, she would just
run round to the locksmith and get him to put on a good
strong padlock, and
Just at that very moment there came a violent knock at
the door.
"Come in,” said the Bishop promptly. (He had not
been taking a bit of notice of what the old servant was
saying about a dangerous man.)
The door opened. It was shoved wide open, violently.
A man came in, with a great knobby stick in his hand; and
his eyes w r ere tired and fierce. He looked hideous and
angry, and as dangerous as a wild beast.
The old servant was too frightened even to scream. It
was the very man! The Bishop’s sister half jumped up
from her seat; then she looked at the Bishop, and he was
quite calm; so she quietly sat down again.
# r^'^ie °ld Bishop was just opening his mouth to speak
kindly to the man. But the man did not wait. He began
at once, fiercely.
Look here—my name is John. lam just out from gaol.
I have been there for nineteen years. They let me out four
days ago. I have walked for four days. To-day I have
walked thirty-six miles. I went to the inn here; they said
'Go out.’ I went to another; they said 'Clear out.’ I
crept into a dog-kennel—the dog bit me. Someone said,
'Knock here.’ Who are you? I have money. lam very
tired. Will you let me stay?”
Without a moment’s hesitation the Bishop turned to the
frightened old servant and said, "Put on another plate for
supper.”


The man came further into the room. “But you do not
understand,” he said. “I told you that I am just out from
gaol.” Then he took out of his pocket a yellow paper;
they gave him that when they let him out of gaol; and on
it was written that he was “very dangerous.” “Now,”
he said, “who are you? Is this an inn? Do you mean to
let me stay? lam so tired. May I sleep in the stable ? ’’
Then the Bishop turned to the old servant and said,.
“Put some sheets on the spare bed for this gentleman.”
Then he said to the man, “Sit down and warm yourself.
We will have supper in a minute. Then your bed will be
ready for you.”
At last the man understood. His face had been hard
and savage; now it turned almost stupid with joy. Ho
could hardly speak. He stammered.
“What?” he cried; “you won’t drive me away? I tell
you lam just out of gaol. You call me a gentleman? You
do not say 'Get out, you dog,’ like the others? Oh, that
kind woman who sent me here! lam to have supper, and
a bed —a bed with sheets and a mattress! It is nineteen
years since I slept in a bed! You really mean to let me
stay ? 0, you are good people. And I will pay. What is-
your name, Mr. Inn-keeper? You are an inn-keeper,
aren’t you?”
“I am a priest who lives here,” said the Bishop.
“A priest? 0 noble priest! I suppose you are the rec-
tor. Of course —rector of that big Church. How stupid I
am.”
Then the man put his knapsack and stick in the corner,,
and put the yellow paper back into his pocket, and sat
down. The Bishop’s sister looked at him pleasantly. And
the man went on to tell the Bishop that, after working for’
nineteen years in gaol, they gave him a little over four
pounds and said that was what he had earned. And the
good Bishop felt more and more sorry for him, and made
him pull his chair closer to the tire.
Now before the Bishop had become a priest, he had been
a wealthy man; and although now he gave away all his
money, and lived very plainly, yet he had kept just two
very tine things that belonged to him before. One was a
pair of silver candle-sticks; the other was a set of six silver
plates. They were of pure silver, and very fine. The
Bishop always used the silver plates; but he only used the'
candle-sticks when he had a visitor and wished to honour
him, And to-night he had a visitor —the poor man just
out from gaol. But he wished to honour him. So he said!
to the old servant,
“That lamp gives a very poor light.”


She knew what he meant. So she went to the Bishop’s
bedroom and brought the silver candle-sticks and lit the
candies and put them on the table. Then the Bishon said
to the man, You are my brother. It is a joy to me to help
jou. Come, let us have supper.” **
ad down. The man ate very hungrily. And
the Bishop told the old servant to put all the six silver
-uesT °Aud e i ab i e ’ l n h ,° noUrof the fact tllat they had a
An , d . the B J sho P s sister and the old servant went
to bed upstairs. Then the Bishop said to the man, “Come
1 will show you your bed.” ' ?
There were only three rooms downstairs; one was the
nexTfvTtbi mi neXt WaS the Bisll °P’ s bedroom ; and the
as tL Rkfl rtt * e ™ om w]lere the spare bed was. Just
rLi l ? in' 1 f man were Soing out of the dining
Kft. loct 0 "- S '“ ,le CUi>b“"d-
/then the Bishop took the man into the next room where
there was a clean white bed. He put one of the’ Sver
candlesticks on the small table, then said, “There, my
vriend a good night’s rest to you; and before you «o to^
JOU “ USt haVe a g °° d drink of our mi lk. Good-
“ Thank you, priest,” said the man.
And f e Blsh fP Messed him, and went calmly out lor a
walk in his garden before going to bed.
* * # #
~ An 4 tka * I s bow John, just when his heart was full of
■hatred, and he was nearly becoming a very bad man met
a very, very good man. And it „ved Joto. W.l,
if* llow »<Na his heart, and made him live like a
.heio in all bis. adventures afterwards.


2.—HOW THE MAN OUT OF GAOL ROBBED THE
BISHOP.
We have seen how the man just out of gaol was cruelly
treated by everybody in the town; no one would even., give
him a glass of water for pity’s sake. Then, just as his
heart was savage with hatred, so that he was ready to
become a very bad man, who would like to hurt anybody
he could, we saw how he met a very good man.
Someone told him to knock at the door of the good old
Bishop (John did not know it was' the Bishop), and the
Bishop welcomed him, and gave him food and called him a
gentleman. And the Bishop showed him honour by put-
ting on the table the only two fine things he owned—a pair
nf silver candlesticks, and a set of six plates of pure silver.
Then the Bishop had the spare bed made ready, and took
.John there, and blessed him, and said, “Good-night, my
friend; before you go in the morning you must have a good
drink of our milk. ’ ’
But after the Bishop, had taken John to the bed, before
he left him there,, suddenly the man out of gaol turned to
the Bishop and said,
“Do you mean that you are going to let me sleep in your
house, as close to you as that? Have you thought about
it? lam very strong and dangerous; how do you know I
won’t kill you?” ' ; w .
The Bishop said/“God will take care of that.” Then
he blessed the man. There was an altar in the room, and
the Bishop knelt down and said a prayer; then.went out
into the peaceful garden for a walk before he settled to
sleep.
The man out of gaol was so - utterly tired that lie did not
undress and get into the .clean white sheets; he blew out
the candle and fell on the bed, dressed, and went sound
•asleep.
As the Cathedral clock struck two the man awoke. All
'his tiredness was gone; for when he was in gaol they did
not let him have much time for sleep. Besides, he was
enormously strong. No one else in the prison had been
nearly so, strong.- At any hard work be was equal to- four
men. Sometimes he would lift enormous weights on his
back; the other men nicknamed him John the Jack (be-
cause a jack is a thing that holds up heavy weights, such


as a cart). Besides lie could'climb almost like a fly. To
climb up a wall and find hold for his feet where you could
not see anything hut smooth wall, was easy for him.
So now, after four hours sleep, he felt quite fresh again.
He closed Ms eyes and) tried to go to sleep again, but he
could not, so he began to think. Such strange things had
happened to him that day. And one thing fixed itself in
his mind, and at last drove away all other thoughts. That
was—those six silver plates-. They were solid silver. If
he had them, he could sell them for at least £B—twice as
much as they had given him for ■.nineteen years’ work in
prison! And he knew where they were; he had seen the
old servant put them in a little cupboard in the Bishop’s
room; they were only a few feet away from him.
For a whole hour he lay thinking. The clock struck
three. He got up; there was not another person awake in
the whole house. John went on thinking; then he took off
Ms heavy boots. The clock struck again; it seemed to say
to him, “Come along.”
He got up. on his feet and listened. All was still in the
house. He looked out of the window; there was a full
moon, but heavy clouds, so that sometimes it was dark,,
then there would corne a gleam of light.
Then he went to his knapsack and took out a short iron
bar, and with this in his hand tip-toed to the door that led
to the Bishop’s room. The Bishop had not locked it. Not
a sound!
The'man pushed the door a little, then a little more. It
creaked loudly. He shivered. Surely someone must hear
it ! But no, nobody heard. He went into the room.
A deep calm filled the room. He could just see the*
Bishop’s books, and the stool where the Bishop used to
say Ms prayers; and at the other end of the room he heard
the quiet, steady breathing of the sleeping Bishop. He
crept to the bed, and at that moment a ray of moonlight
shone through the windows and lighted up the Bishop’s
face.
What a beautiful calm face it was in sleep! It seemed to
shine with content, and hope,- and happiness; it, was. as
though he saw Heaven in his dreams. There seemed to-
be a halo round his head. His white hair and closed eyes
seemed to be wrapped in calm and splendid glory.
The man from gaol, with his black thoughts, stood and
looked almost with terror. He had never seen anything
like this.' He took off his cap. It seemed as if he was'
going to kiss the Bishop’s hand, that hung down by the
side of the bed. The Bishop slept on. At the head of the 4
bed hung a figure of the Saviour on the Cross; it seemed


-as if the hands were held out to bless the sleeping man, and
to offer forgiveness to the man from gaol.
Suddenly the man put on his cap, and moved quickly to
the little cupboard. The key was in it; he opened it; he
would not look at the Bishop again. He took up the basket
in which the .silver was, hurried; into his own room, took
his stick, put the silver in his knapsack, stepped out of the
window, threw away the basket, ran across the garden,
jumped the wall like a tiger, and fled.
Next morning, before the sun was up, the Bishop was
walking in his garden. (He loved his flowers; every day
he used to spend some time digging and attending to
-them.) The old servant came running out to him. with ex-
citement.
My lord, my lord,” she cried, “do you know where the
basket is that holds the silver ? ’ 5
“Yes,” said the Bishop.
Oh, lam so glad,” she said. “I did not know what
had become of it, ”
The Bishop had just found the basket? on a flower bed.
He gave it to the old woman, and said, “Here it is.”
“Yes,” she said, “but there is nothing in it. Where is
-,the silver?”
ci Oh,'' said the Bishop, “it is the silver you are worrying
about, is it? Ido not know where that is.”
“Good heavens! It is stolen! The man who came last
night has stolen it! ”
Off she ran into the Bishop's room. Then ran into the
spare room and back she came to the Bishop, The Bishop
was bending over to see what he could do for a flower that
was broken where the backet had fallen.
“My lord, the man has gone, and he has stolen the sil-
ver ! ”
Then she caught sight of a part of the wall where the
top stones had been thrown down. “Look,” she said,
'“ there is where he got out. Oh, the wretch! He has stolen
our silver!”
The Bishop thought for a minute. Then he said, “Well,
I ought not to have kept those silver plates, after all, when
there were so many poor people to be helped. We can eat
off wooden plates just as well.”
In a few minutes the Bishop and his sister were having
breakfast in the same room where they had given supper to
the man from gaol. The old servant was grumbling as she
moved about.
“Fancy taking in a man like that, and giving him a bed
too! The mercy is he did no more than steal 0, my stars!
It gives me goose-flesh when I think of it.” '


Suddenly there was a knock at the door. ■
“Come in,” said the Bishop.
The door opened. A strange fierce group stood on the
threshold.' Three men were holding a fourth by the collar*:
The three mfen were policemen. The fourth was the man-
just out of gaol. The sergeant of the police came forward-
and ■ saluted the Bishop.
“My lord/ 7 he began—.
Directly he heard this, the man from gaol looked up.
“Did you say ‘My lord? 7 he muttered. “Then it is not the-
Rector? 77
“Silence/ 7 said a policeman, “it is my lord the Bishop. 7r
The Bishop came as quickly as he could to the door. He
looked at the man from gaol.
“Ah, there you are/ 7 he said. “I am glad to see you..
But I gave you the candlesticks as well as the plates. They
are silver too. Why did you not take them with the-
plates?' 77
~No words could tell how the man from gaol looked at the ■
Bishop when he said this.
“What, my lord! 77 said the sergeant. “Then it is true
what the man told us? We saw him running away, so we
stopped him to see what was the matter. He had this
silver. 77
And, 7 7 said the Bishop, “he told you it had been given
him by the good old priest with whom he stopped the
night f I see how it was. And you brought him here. It
is , all a mistake. 77
“Well, then, 77 said the sergeant, “we can let him got 7 . 7
“Certainly/ 7 said the Bishop.
They let him go. But he shrank back from the Bishop.:.
‘‘ls it true that they are to let me go ? 77 he said. He looked
confused, as if he was speaking in his sleep.
The Bishop went to the mantelpiece and took the two-
silver candlesticks and brought them to the man. “Here,
my friend, before you go, take your candlesticks. 77
The Bishop’s sister "and the old servant did not say a
word. - r-
_ The man was trembling all over. He looked wild and
dazed. He took the candlesticks as if he did not know
what he was doing. ,
Now,, said the Bishop, “go in peace. And, by the-
way, my friend, if yon come again, yon need not climb
through the garden. I never lock the front door day or ■
night.. Come in and go out by that. 77 :
Then he said to the policemen, “Gentlemen, you may
go. 77 . And they went away.


The man from gaol looked as if he was going to faint.
The Bishop came close to him and said in a low voice:
, “Never forget—never—that yon promise me to use that
silver to become a good man.”
The man stood amazed; the Bishop spoke very solemnly.
Then he continued, “My brother, you do not*belong ter
evil any longer, but to good. I am buying your soul for"
you. I take it away from the spirit of evil, and give it to*
God.”
3.—HOW THE MAN FROM GAOL THOUGHT IT
ALL OVER.
-We saw how the man from gaol woke in the night, and
could not help thinking about the. silver plates that were
worth so much money; and how he crept into the Bishop A
room and stole the plates and ran away. But the police-
brought him back. He would have been sent to gaol again
for all his life, or perhaps put to death, but the old Bishop
saved him,' for when he saw the police he said at once- -
“Ah, there yon are, my friend. I gave yon the silver
plates, but you forgot the other things I gave yon too.”
Then the police let him go, of course. And' the Bishop
said, so that only the man could hear him,
“Now yon promise me to be a good man always. I have
bought your soul back from Satan, and I give it to God.
Go in peace. ? ?
In all his life the man from gaol had not met a man like
this. He could not understand it. Everyone had always
been so cruel to him that he did not know there were any
good, kind men in the world. And now he could not think.
He rushed away out of the town. He rushed out into the
country; and wandered up and down all the morning and
afternoon. He had not had any food, but he did not re-
member that he was hungry.
People had always been hard to him; here was a man
who was wonderfully kind. What did it mean? Would
he have to change all his ideas about life? He could not
understand it, his thoughts tossed about inside bis head
like waves of the sea. ■
He sat down behind a clump of bushes in the midst of a
lonely plain. And he began to think it all over.
He hardly remembered his father and mother; they Both
died when he was youngs His father had been a primer of
trees, .and so had he. Then his father fell out of a tree and


.was killed. He had only one sister, and her hnshand was
, dead/ and she had seven little children. The eldest was
■■only eight, so John had to earn money for them ail.
He could hardly do it; he never had a holiday, never
had any fun or sports; and- often there was not enough for
them to eat. Then it went to the children and John went
without. The children used to beg.
One Sun da y night the baker heard a crash of breaking
glass. He ran down. There was a window pane broke,
and an arm thrust in, taking a loaf of bread. He ran after
the man and caught him. It was John. The police came;
John was sent to gaol for five years. Poor fellow!
They took him to gaol. What became of the sister and
her little children? AlasPwho knows? Perhaps they
starved. John never saw them again. Life is very hard
to some people.
In prison he was treated very cruelly. He became very
strong. He tried to escape, three times over. Each time
they caught him and made it worse for him, and said he
•must stay longer. So that at last John had to stay nineteen
years-—all for taking a loaf of bread to give to his sister's
little children who were starving.
While he was in prison, John thought it all out. He did
not pretend that he had done nothing wrong. Certainly he
ought not to have , stolen tljfe bread. But he said to him-
-self, “Is it right for them to give me so much punishment?
I think it is cruel.."
And so John made up his mind that all men are cruel,
and the laws are cruel.. He said, “Very well, people have
treated me like this. Then I will hate all people. ■ I will be
cruel, too, whenever I have the chance."
He brooded and brooded over this, and made up his mind
not to trust anyone, or to love anyone, but always to hate
and to harm. It was like a man sharpening a knife to
attack anyone who came along. John . sharpened his
hatred.
And then he met the dear old Bishop.
When he thought it all over, he said to himself, out
there on the plain, “It cannot be true, after all, that all men
are cruel. So then it cannot be right for me to hate every-
one. - Shall I go on hating, them, and taking every chance
;to harm them? Or shall I try to be like him and take
every chance to help people, and love them?"
So his mind tossed about fin dreadful struggle. Do yon
see, he had been thinking about hatred for nineteen long
years, and it was not easy to change his thoughts.
Just as the sun was setting, while he sat there, he heard
-a sound of happy singing. A path ran just in front of him.


He turned his head, and along the path he saw coming a,
little Italian boy, about twelve years old, with his hurdy-
gurdy and monkey, singing as he came. He was one of
those little fellows who wander about, always merry and
gay, though his knees stick through his trousers.
Always: singing,- the boy stopped now and then and
tossed up in the air some pieces of money that he had—
probably his whole fortune. -There was one two-shilling
piece amongst them.
He did not see John, but he stopped just by the clump
of hushes-and tossed his handful of ha’pennies; his trick
was to catch the whole lot on the back of his hand as they ■
fell. .But this time the two-shilling piece rolled on the
■ground, close to the man from gaol. The man put his foot
on it.
But the boy had seen it roll. He was not frightened,,
though it was such a wide plain and not a person in sight
■except the- savage face of the man.
“Sir,” said the little fellow, innocently and trustfully,.
“my two-shilling .piece, please.”
“What is your name?” said the man.
“Petit Gervais, sir ”
“Clear out,” said the man.
‘‘Sir, please give me my money.”
The man was looking at the'ground and did not seem to
notice.
“My money, my silver money!” exclaimed the boy.
The man seemed to be thinking of something else. The
hoy took hold of his collar and shook him. And he tried
to move the big, iron-shod shoe which covered his treasure.. ■
“I want my coin, my two-shilling piece.”
The little fellow began to cry. The man lifted his head..
He looked at the boy as if he had not seen him there be-
fore ; then he reached out his hand to his heavy stick and
shouted in a terrible voice, “Who is there?”
“Me, sir, Petit Gervais—me. Give me my coin, please.
Take away your foot, please. Take it away, will yon! ”
The man rose up to his feet hastily, but still kept his shoe-
over the coin.
’ ’What! You here yet ? Look out for yourself! ’ ’
The' poor little fellow looked at him now with terror ;:
then began to tremble from head to foot; then he turned,
and ran. with all his might, without daring to look back or
cry out. Boon he had to stop to get his breath, and the
man, who was still thinking, and thinking, heard him sob-
bing,. Then, in a few minutes, he was gone.
And the sun went down.
B


The man remained standing and did not move. His eyes
were fixed; he hardly seemed to breathe. . He was think-
ing, thinking; he did not know what he was doing.
Then, suddenly, he seemed to feel the cold. He 'shivered,
pulled his cap over his forehead, and stepped forward to
pick up his things. Then he saw the two-shilling piece,- It
was like an electric shock, “What is that V 7 he cried; he
stood staring at it.
Then he seemed to remember. He sprang to the coin,
picked it up, and looked all round with eager eyes, and
seemed to tremble. He could not see anything. Night
was falling. He walked fast in the way the boy had gone;
he stopped, looked round, but saw no one. “Petit Ger-
vais, 77 he shouted, “Petit Gervais. 77 No answer. He ran
and,shouted and ran. ‘ ‘ Petit Gervais. 7 7 His. voice was full
of terrible grief.
He met a priest. He asked if he had seen a boy. He
gave the priest .ten shillings and said, “Give that to help
poor people. 77 Then he. gave him another ten shillings;
hacLndt the priest seen a little fellow with a monkey and a
hurdy-gurdy,—named Petit Gervais ? : Then, he - cried wild-
ly, “Mr. Priest, have me arrested,-1 am a thief! 77 -
The priest was so frightened he spurred his horse and
galloped away.
The man ran and ran, and shouted —“ Petit Gervais,
Petit Gervais! 77 At last he fell down exhausted, his face
on his knees and his hands clutched his hair, “0 wretch
that I am, 77 he moaned. His heart swelled and he burst,
into tears. It was the first time he had wept in nineteen
years.
How did he come to do such a thing as to steal that poor
little boy 7 s money ? • The fact is, he did not know what he
was doing. He was thinking so hard, he might have been
asleep.
There were two kinds of thoughts tossing about like,
waves of the sea inside his head. One kind said, “Hate
everyone, and hurt everyone, as people have done, to you
all your life. 77 The other kind said, “Be like the Bishop.
He loved you; he gave your soul back to God. 77
But he had been thinking the first kind of thought for
nineteen years; and so when he saw the money (just as
when he saw the six silver plates) he acted on those savage
thoughts without knowing dt, and stole the money, and
threatened the helpless little boy.
But the other thoughts won the victory inside his- head.
He became a different man. He resolved to love and to
help, to do always what the Bishop would have done; to
be ,God ? s man, not Satan 7 s. So when the cold woke him


up from his thinking, and he saw the two-shilling piece
and remembered what he had done, it seemed like an awful
clream, and he longed and longed to undo it, and hated
what he had done. But it was too late.
And from that day John never did another unkind thing,
or had hateful thoughts. He became like the Bishop, He
was just going to become a very very bad, man, very
strong, and very dangerous. Then he met a very very
good man. God arranged it; and after a great struggle,
John became a very good man too. It saved him.
But in the’midst of the struggle, without knowing it, he
did a very bad, cruel thing. It helped him*in the straggle;
for it showed him the kind of things he would have gone
on doing all his life. It was a turning point in his life.
For a long time he wept, with hot, bitter tears. His past
life, the kind of thoughts he had been thinking and cher-
ishing, seemed awful and horrible to him, like those, of a
wild beast.
Nobody ever knew how long he wept, or what he did
afterwards. But the man who’ drove the coach, that came
into the town at three o Mock in the morning, saw a man
kneeling outside the window of the Bishop ? s house, pray-
ing-
4.— MORE ABOUT THE OLD BISHOP.
These stories are about Old John, who at the first was the
■man just out of gaol. The dear old Bishop does not come
into the stories again; his share is only that John met him
,and was changed by him from being full of hatred to being
full.of love. But there • were many stories about the
Bishop • everyone knew him and talked about Mm,
Most men who become clergymen make up- their minds
when they are young, before they have started in any other
way of life. But it was not so with our Bishop; he had
-started life as a lawyer; he was handsome, and fond of all
■the pleasures of the world. Then came the terrible French
Revolution; he had to fly for his life to- Italy; and the next
we hear of him, he had become a priest, and come back to
be Rector of a little town in France; and he was over
sixty years old.
One day he had to go and see a great Cardinal-Bishop in
Paris. And it happened that the Emperor Napoleon visit-
ed the Cardinal too that day; and as he came out he saw
the old priest in the waiting-room, looking at him curious-
ly. The Emperor said,


“Who is this good man who* looks at iid”'
“Sire,” said the old; priest, “yon are looking at a good
man, and I am looking at a great man.- Each of ns cam
benefit by it.” ■
That evening the Emperor asked the Cardinal who this
priest was. And some time afterwards the surprising
news came to the priest that he had been appointed to be
Bishop of D——.
At first when he went to live there were all sorts*
of .stories and gossip about him rather unkind: But now r
after the people had seen what sort of a life he lived year
after year, they would have been ashamed to mention
theny or even to remember them.
I must tell you the first thing he did,, for it showed what
kind of man he was.
The Bishop ? s palace was a beautiful building, and it
stoodi next door to the hospital. Now the Hospital was a
rather poor little building.
Three days after he came, the Bishop visited the Hos-
pital. When he had looked round it he asked the Director
to come into his palace. And he said,
“Sir, I notice that the Hospital is not a good one. It is
not big enough to hold so many poor siefe people; and it
is not cool and fresh and well-ventilated, and when people
are. getting well they have only a small garden where the3 r
can sit in the sun. ? ?
“Yes, rny lord, but what can we do V r said the director.
“I will tell you,” said the- Bishop, “Book what a
splendid place I have—much too large for me; and the-
poor sick people have a hospital much too small for them.
There is a mistake. Come now—this shall he their house r
and I will have the other. Let ns change at once.”
And next day twenty-six poor sick people were installed,
in the Bishop's palace, and the'Bishop) lad settled in the*
. hospital.
That was the sort of thing; the dear old Bishop 1 was
always planning and wishing to do. He drew out a pro-
gramme howi to spend his money; he'kept" very little in-
deed for himself, and gave all the rest away to help differ-
ent missions and churches and hospitals.
He wished he had more money Jo* give- 5 away, and one 1
day he thought of a trick. His old servant said to him,,,
“My lord, yon have a right to-get about £T2O a year extra,
money to keep a carriage to travel about in yonr diocese,.
Why don’t you get it?” 4
“Good,” said the Bishop, “I never thought of that.”"
And at once he wrote and asked for it. And the - people


<said, “Ah, now you see he is just like others. He likes
money as much as the rest. ’’
However, it was given to him, and the old servant said
with joy, “Now we will have more money for the house,”
But the Bishop smiled, and sat straight down and made a
list of other churches and hospitals he wanted to help, and
.gave away the whole of the moneyl
He loved poor people especially, and when people came
to know him, the rich people used to send him large sums
of money to give away for them, because he knew best who
needed it. Still he wanted more money. Whenever he
went out, if he had some money he went to see poor people;
if he had no money he went to see rich people.
The Bishop wuuld not keep a carriage, but all the same
he travelled ,all round his diocese, which was very hilly, so
that some .of the places were hard, to get at. Sometimes he
walked, sometimes he went in a cart; in the mountains, he
rode a donkey.
Some of the great people laughed, and some were angry,
for they said, “A bishop should not go about so poorly.”
But he only said,/ 'Why should not Ido what the Blessed
■Saviour did?” :
Once there was a man who had been very wicked, and
killed another man; so the law said he must be put to death
too. And the day before he was to die they sent word to
the priest of the place to. come and speak, to him. But
..alas, the priest said, “It is not my place to be with a man
from prison.”
When the Bishop heard this he said, “The priest is quite
right; it is not his place ; it is mine.”
So he went to the ’ poor man who was terribly afraid;
...and spent all the day .with him telling him about the mew
ciful Saviour who was put to death on the Cross, and teach-
ing the man to be sorry for what he had done. Next day
the Bishop went with him ; and the man was brave now,
and very sorry, and trusted that Hod would forgive Mm.
Whenever anyone was sick or dying, the dear old Bishop
loved to go to them, and help them. He said, “It is the
grandest work I have to do.” ' He wonld say, “Be careful
to think rightly about those who are dead. Think of their
glory and joy with the Saviour in the real life,”
There are-such a lot of things that the people used to tell
about him ; how beautiful his face was, for it had a sort of
light that came from the loving thoughts that were always
in his head. And what-simple, plain sermons he used to
preach, often with little stories in them, like the Parables'
of our Lord. And how he loved to dig in his garden, for,
he said, ''Our souls are like a garden”; and how he always


took a walk in his garden at night, and looked up at the
■wonderful stars and thought about, the great God wher
created them: And how once when he saw a rich man giv-
ing a very small coin to a poor woman, he said, “Look at
Mr. X——; he is trying to buy a pennorth of Paradise!”
And how the people came out to the doors and smiled as-
he went along. And how he was as brave as a soldier, only
with a quiet bravery; and sometimes did: great, daring,
even grand acts without seeming to know it himself. And
how he made his old cassock last such a long time; and
sometimes, when it was cold, went to bed in all his clothes/
so that he would not have to spend money, and would have
more to give away. And how he never would have any of
his doors locked, and always said “Come in,’' no matter
who knocked. And the old servant did not like this, but
said, “You ought not to say ' Come in ’; you ought to lock
the doors. ’’
The people were always talking about their beloved
Bishop; and I might go on writing about what they said.
But I roust tell you just two more things.
First, how he used to live. He ate very simple, cheap
things. But he had kept two of the tine things that he had
before he became a clergyman, when he was rich—a set
of six silver plates, and two fine silver candlesticks. And
also, whenever anyone came to stay with him, he used to
have a much better dinner to give them, and a bottle, of
good wine, though he never had it for himself.
He did like his silver plates. Often he used to say to his
sister and the old servant, “I really donT think I could eat
my food off anything but a silver plate.” And when any-
one came to- supper, perhaps a poor clergyman, perhaps a.
rich great man, the Bishop* liked to have all the plates on
the table, even if they were not all needed, and the candle-
sticks. It showed honour to his guest.
Sometimes quite a lot. of people came to see him at- once.-
And then the dear old Bishop did not quite know what to
do, for there were only a few chairs in the house. He
would go and fetch the chairs out of all the rooms; that
made just eleven chairs. But suppose there were twelve
visitors! ;: Well then the Bishop used to pretend that he
wanted to stand in front of the fire, or to walk in the
garden!
There was only one more chair, and that had only three
legs, so that it, was no use unless you knew how to prop it
against the wall!
And now I must tell you last of all one thing the Bishop
did. ,<


There was a very fierce robber who lived in the hills, and
had a lot of followers and robbed people everywhere. He
was cruel and cunning and' cared for no man; he even
robbed, a Cathedral, and took away all the robes, and the
things used in Church service. Everyone was terrified.
In the midst of it all the Bishop came to a town near
where the robber band was. He was going through the
very hills where the robbers hid.
The'people said, “You must not go. You would have to
have three policemen, and then the robbers would kill the
policemen. You would not cause the policemen to be
killed, would you?”
“No,” said the Bishop, “so I will go by myself,”
“You must not think of it,” said the people.
‘ c I am going to start in an hour, ” said the Bishop,
4 'You must not, my lord, you must not.”
"Listen,” said the Bishop. YUp there in the hills is a
little village, I have not been able to get to see the people
there for three years. They need someone to tell them about
the goodness of God. What would they think of a Bishop
who was afraid to come?”
''But, my lord, the robbers?”
“Ah, yes,” said the Bishop, “I am thinking of them too.
I may meet them; they need someone to tell them of the
love of 'God. too.”
“But they are a pack of wolves.”
"Perhaps Jesus made me their shepherd.”
"They will rob you,” said the people,.
"I have nothing.”
'' They will kill you. 7 7
'' What ? Kill a simple old priest who goes along saying
his prayers? What good would that do them:? 77
"But if you meet them, what will you do? 77
"I will.ask them to give me money for the poor. 77
"My lord, my lord, you are risking your life, 77
"That is Just it,” said the Bishop. "I am not in the
world to. care for my life, but to help people 7 s souls. 7 f
So off he went, mounted, on a donkey. And he came to
the village safe. He stayed a; fortnight, teaching his people.
Then he said,:"Before I go, we will have grand service, and
sing a Te Benin in state. 7 ' 7
But alas, the people were so poor that they had no fine
robes for a grand -service. And what do you think hap-
pened?
A great-chest was. suddenly brought, to the parsonage.
Two horsemen brought it; no one knew them, and they
rode straight away- again. And when it was. opened there
were, splendid robes and a mitre ornamented with dia


monds, an archbishop’s cross—all the magnificent things
that the band of robbers had stolen from a cathedral.
(Someone had told the robbers what the Bishop had said,
and they sent him these!)
When the Bishop came back along the road, the people
flocked out to see such a man.
And if you ask me what became of the beautiful things,
I have to confess that the Bishop did not send them back
to the cathedral. He said, “The thieves stole them; and
now I think I will steal them to help my poor people in the
Hospital! ’ ’ And so he did!
5.—HOW JOHN BECAME GOOD FATHER
MADELEINE.
Not very far from the town where the good Bishop lived
there was another town that was very happy and pros-
perous. All the people had comfortable homes; and there
was a big factory where everyone could get work. It had
not always been so; it had been a poor village; the change
took place quite suddenly, and it all came through one
man. The people called him “Good Father Madeleine,”
•and they used to speak about him in the same sort of way
that the other people talked about the good old Bishop.
And who do you think this good Father Madeleine was?
None of the people knew it; but he was the very same man
that we saw when he came out of gaol! Then, he was full
of hatred for all men; he sharpened up his hate like a man
would sharpen a knife; he wanted to hurt everyone when
he had a chance. And now, well, listen to the kind of
things he did, and tvhat the people said about him.
He was a man about fifty years old. No one knew where
he came from. They said that when he came to their town
he had only a few pounds in his pocket know that he
got those because the Bishop gave him the silver plates and
candlesticks, but he did not sell the candlesticks)* He hap-
pened to come to the town just when a big fire broke out
at the police station; and he showed how much lie had been
changed after the Bishop was so good to him, and he had
thought it all over; for he rushed into the fire, risking his
own life, and saved the two children of the police-ser-
geant. And the sergeant was so thankful to him that he
did not ask him where he came from or who he was. And .
this was very lucky for John; for if the sergeant has asked


him, lie would have had to show that terrible yellow.' paper
which told people that he was put out of gaol, very strong
;.and very dangerous. And they would have huntedliim out
of the town. But now they all admired him.
So John settled down in this town. And he saw a way
uf helping the people to make things better and cheaper
-.(the things they made there were those black jet orna-
ments). The result was that Tie not only made a fortune"
himself, but - also—and this he cared for most—all the
people who lived there became prosperous and happy. And
they called him “Good Father Madeleine.’’
Nobody knew how much money he had. It was said, he
had thousands of pounds at his bankers in Paris, and that
he left word there saying, “Have that ready for me to take
eaway at any moment. For poor John knew that even now
he might be found out ; and people would not care for the
fact that he had become honest; they would send him back
to gaol. So he kept his money ready.
But still he did not'try to make all the money he could.
He would give work to anyone. He always said, “Be an
'honest man. Be an honest woman.” He knew that he
himself was sent to gaol first because- he could not get
work, and the little children were starving.
He loved giving money to people. There' was a Hospital
there, and he gave a lot of money so that there was room
•for-more'poor sick people (and another man, when he saw
it, -did the same, so there was a double help to the Hos-
pital). He used to give good salaries to the schoolmasters,
for, he said, “The people who help the nation most are
"those who nurse'children, and those who teach them.”
And he would not take any honours when they were
offered to him. The King awarded him) the Cross of the
"Legion of Honour. “Aha,” said some of the people with .
bad nature, “now we see what he wanted when he pre-
tended to be so kind.” But Father Madeleine refused to
take the Cross.' Then he was appointed Mayor of the town.
■“'Aha,” said some unkind; people again. But he said, “No,
I will not be Mayor.” And he would not; but one.day a
poor woman said to him, “Why won’t yon be Mayor? A
good Mayor, could help' us so much.” Then John said he
would;-and so he was.
But still he remained just, as simple as 'at first. He always
-seemed to be very thoughtful. He had brown hair, He
would not go to dinner, or to parties with grand, people
when they asked him. He ate simple things, ' and had only
-one little room, with good simple furniture,;- and on the
mantle-piece'were two fine silver candlesticks. He always
•read a book while he was- eating. He loved reading: And


- people said he was wonderfully strong. He often helped
men to lift things, such as a cart wheel that had stuck in-
the mud. . He went regularly to Church.
people said he did good things as secretly as other men
did had things. He would steal into houses in the evening,
and creep up the stairs; he would even break a door open.
Then some poor man when he came home would, call out,
6 A thief has been here, 7 ? When he got in he would find a
sovereign on the table. ■ The thief was Father Madeleine!
One day lie wore mourning. People did not know why.
But he had seen that the good old Bishop was dead. The
old man had been blind for some years; but he was quite
happy,.and his sister read to him. Blind people are often-/
. very happy if someone loves them and always stays with.,
them. .
And just one otner thing people noticed. He was always
very, kind to Italian boys with hurdy-gurdies and monkeys*.
He remembered Petit Gervais. But he never saw Mm
again. Only one boy told others; and such a lot of them
used to come to Father Madeleine!
■ You would think that such a good generous man. would
be loved by absolutely everyone. And nearly everyone did
love him. But he had two' enemies. One was- called
Fauchelevent; the other was called Javert. (And this is
tne first we hear of the man who chased John for years and
years and-.spoilt all his life.) And we will see-That John-
defeated, both his enemies in the best possible way, the way
our Saviour showed—by loving them and helping them*
even when they hated him. - u
Fauchelevent used to sneer at him. He was
because he was losing money and Father Madeleine was
making money. He did all he could to harm the good
Mayor,
Tile other enemy was Javert. He was a police inspector;
He thought Father Madeleine was deceiving all the people -
but he kept muttering, “He can’t deceive me.” He seem-
ed to hate him like a fox hates a lion.; he would grumble ■
and sneer when he saw people welcoming Father Madeleine
-m the streets; and he would say, AT am sure I have seen
that man before. Now who is he? Who can he be?”
We must not blame Javert too much ;he was just what the
laws made him. They wanted policemen to be like hounds,
who only care to follow a scent and hunt down- the man
they are chasing like a wild beast. This man had to catch
men and put them to prison. O, Father Madeleine, it will
be temble for you if Javert gets an idea you have been in
gaol! You must be very, very careful not to give him any
sign that you are John. Already he is asking himself 9


“Where' have I seen that man before ?” And Javert used
to be at the very prison .where John was. And he is think-
ing- and thinking, trying to remember the face. ’ Take care.
Father Madeleine!
Now there were, two things that Father Madeleine was
always thinking of. One was, to hide the fact that he had
been in gaol; and the other was to help people. But sup-
pose it should happen that, in order to help someone, he
would have to let people find out who he was? ‘Why, then,.-
John was so loving now that he would give the help to the
people, and run the, risk. We will see that, in the rest of his*
life, he could have lived happy and rich if only he would
have stopped helping people sometimes, when it showed
who he was. For Javert was watching and watching. And
Javert was like a tiger to people who had been in gaol. He ■
would have hunted his own father or mother if they had
escaped from gaol. He said, “If a man has been in gaol,
he is absolutely bad. No mercy to such mend
And' so he was watching and spying on good Father
Madeleine. And soon Father Madeleine noticed it. But
he treated Javert with kindness, like everyone else.
, Now I must tell you of two things that happened about
this time.
One day Father Madeleine saw a crowd in the street and
heard shouting. He hurried up. Pie saw old Fauchelevent
lying under his cart. The horse had fallen down. (Oncer
Fauchelevent had been rich; now he'had lost all his money,..
and had nothing left but a horse and cart.) .
The poor horse had broken its legs and could not move.-
Fauchelevent had fallen between the wheels of the cart,
which had a heavy load; he could not get out, and little by
little the cart was sinking, and would crush him to death
unless it was lifted. He was groaning terribly. Javert had
just come up, and sent off for a jack to lift the cart. But
it would be a quarter of an hour before it came; and the
ground was' soft and muddy, the cart was sinking—the
poor man would be* crushed to death in five minutes.
“Look,” said Father Madeleine; “there is room fora.,
man to creep under the wheels and lift the cart. If he can-
lift for a minute we can pull Fauchelevent out. I will give
five pounds to the man who does it.”
Not a man stirred.
“I will give ten pounds.” \
One of the bystanders said, “He would have to be tre-
mendously-strong. And be might me crushed himself.”
“I will give twenty pounds,” said Father Madeleine.


Then Javert spoke to him. “It would have to be a won-
vlerful man to hoist that cart. I have only known .one man
who could do it. He was in gaol. 7 7
Father Madeleine shuddered. He saw now that Javert
ifelt pretty sure that he was John. , For Javert looked hard
;.at him. And if Father Madeleine went under and lifted
the cart,' Javert■ would feel sure. And why. should he do it
for Fauchelevent, who had always been his enemy? It was
one of the times when John had to choose; if he helped
someone, he would let this awful policeman know his
■secret. He saw it now. Then he must go back to the hor-
rors of that cruel gaol. Just then Fauchelevent screamed
out, “Oh, oh, I am dying; help, help 1 7 ’
Father- Madeleine looked at Javert. Javert said again,
'“The- only man who could help would be that man from
gaol!”
Father Madeleine gave one sad smile. It was .very hard;
Then down he went, and crawled under the cart.
-Not a person spoke or breathed. He had to be nearly
■ -flat under the fearful weight. Thrice he tried to hoist with
his shoulders. The people shouted, “Come out, Father
Madeleine. Even old Fauchelevent said, “Go away, sir,
I must die. Leave me, or you will be crushed too. 77
All at once the great load hoisted, slowly, slowly; the
wheels came half out of the ruts. In a smothered voice
Father Madeleine cried, “Quick, help. 77 The crowd rushed
in, caught the cart, hoisted it. Fauchelevent was ,safe. And
he kissed Fa-ther Madeleine 7 s knees and said he was like
the good God,
But Father Madeleine was very pale. He knew he had as '
good as told Javert who he was. He had ruined his own
life to save a man who had always done him harm.
Now for one-other story of how kind he was.
There, was a-poor woman who had become bad just be-
cause she could not get any work; and she had a dear
little child named Cosette. She had left Cosette with some
people that she thought were very kind and good; but
really they were very bad-and cruel. They were called
Thenardier, and they are the only really bad people in all
these stories.
One night Javert caught this poor woman; he said she
had been making'a noise in the street. It was not really
her, but a cruel man; but Javert said she must go to gaol
for six months.
And she said, “But if I do, nly little Cosette will starve. 77
And she cried and wept. Javert said, “Policemen, take her
away to gaol. 77 They seized her arms.


Just them Father Madeleine came in, and he made Javert
let her go. Javert was terribly angry, and that very night
he wrote to the head policeman at Paris an cl said,
44 Madeleine is really John, and must go back to gaol. 77 '
But Father Madeleine took the poor woman and said, 44 1
see you. are ill. Why did you not come to me ? I will pay
your debts, and I will bring your child to you, and you can
live free and happy. 7 7
Then the poor woman was so glad that she fainted. And’
good .Father Madeleine took her to the Hospital, and he
wrote to the Tlienardiers and told them to say how much?,
the woman owed them for looking after Cosette, and said,™
44 Send the child at once. 77 (But we will see that the cun-
ning, cruel Thenardiers would not do it; they said, 44 We
will get a lot more money for this girl. 7 ' 7 )
And. every day Father Madeleine used to go and see the
woman, who,was very, very ill, and comfort her, and tell
her she would soon have her child again, and tell her the
good God would forgive her sins.
And the woman said, 4 4 You are like the good God your-
self. 77
6.—HOW JOHN WENT BACK TO GAOL.
It was a little while .after the time when good Father
Madeleine had hoisted the cart to save the life of Fauch-
eleven!; and Javert had said, 4 4 The only man who could do
that is a man out of gaol called John. 77 But although
Father Madeleine saw that if he did it then Javert would
he sure-who he was, yet he did it. Fauchelevent had been
his enemy';, but he ruined his life to save Fauchelevent.
■And; Father Madeleine put him in the Hospital; for""
Fauchelevent had broken his knee; and now he had no-
money at all. But next morning when he woke, he found
a lot of money in an envelope by his bed, and a short note
from Father Madeleine, “I am buying your horse and
cart, 77 But the horse was dead and the cart was broken so*
that really they were worth nothing. Then Father
Madeleine found some work that Fauchelevent could do;
he became gardener in a convent at Paris. We will hear'’
later on how he saved John, from Javert in that convent.
But that same night Javert wrote to the head policeman
at Paris and said, 4 4 Madeleine is really John, and he must
go back to gaol. 77 fK | ?
One morning Father Madeleine was in his office, when?
they said, 44 Javert wants to see you. 77


When Javert came in he said, “Sir, I have told a lie
about you. I thought I had found out that you were a man
called. John, and must go back to' gaol. So now send me
away; I deserve it. ”
Father Madeleine turned very white. Javert went on,
“I know now that you are not, because the head police-
man in Paris wrote back and said, “You are mad; we have
just caught this John; and he will be sent back to gaol for
all his life.”
“What did you say?” said Father Madeleine. “They
have caught John? Are you quite sure?”
0 yes,” said Javert. “His trial will be at Arras to-
morrow. Of course he pretends he is not John. But he will
be sent to gaol for life.”
Then Father Madeleine spoke kindly to Javert; he would
not send him away._ Javert really felt he deserved it; and
if John had sent him away, perhaps it might have saved
him a lot of trouble. But he could not do harm to anyone
to save himself, even to Javert.
And now began a terrible struggle in the mind of good
Father Madeleine. Here was a poor man going t® be sent
to gaol for life, because people said he was John. The only
man who could save him was the real John—that is Father
Madeieine. And the only way he could save him was to
go to Arras and say in the Court, “Look, he is not John.
lam John. Let him free and send me to gaol instead.”
But what an awful thing to have to do. He had a lot of
money, mow; he was helping a lot of people to be happy and
prosperous ; he had his books, which he loved. He knew
how awfully cruel they would be to him in prison. Plow
.could he do this? And if he only stayed still, this man
would go to gaol, and then no one would ever think again
that Madeleine was John; he could live happy and safe.
Father Madeleine, ever since the Bishop had made him a
new man, had only two ideas; one was to keep people from
■knowing who he was; the other, to be a good, kind man.
Once before, he helped Fauehelevent when it almost meant
telling Javert who he was. But could lie do it again. If
he saved this other man. then there was no hope ;'he must
go to gaol for all his life. What a cruel- law it was, that
would take no notice of what a different man he was now
but would say, “You are bad; go back to gaol.”
Father Madeleine left his office, did his work calmly all
.day, then went home and locked himself in his room to
think it out. What should he do? Should he speak or
not? He biew out the light. No one could see him noiv
he thought. Then he remembered—yes. One could see
him—God. And he seemed to see written on the wall in


letter of fire— ‘ ‘Go, tell who you are. Send yourself to
gaol.”
He lit the candle again. He took a key from his pocket
and opened a secret cupboard in the wall. And out of it he
took the clothes he had been wearing the day he saw the
Bishop, and a great stick and a knapsack. He took them
and piled them all on the fire. Out of the knapsack
dropped the two shilling piece he had taken from Petit
Gervais. Then he took the two silver candlesticks too, and
was going to put them on the fire, till they should have
melted into a lump.
All this while he was thinking, ‘ ‘ I will not fell them I am
John. And I will burn all the things that might let people
know who I was. ”
For he had been saying to himself, “If I do not speak,
then no one will ever know that lam John. So I can go on
doing good to people. For if I go to gaol all the people
here will suffer—the poor people, and the Hospital, and
that poor mother of Cosette. No, I must leave this man to
go to gaol instead of me. It is bad either way, but that is
the best.”
Then suddenly he began to think differently.
“That is a wretched thought,” he said. “What, when
I know how cruel they are in gaol, can I let another man go
instead of me?” It was the first wicked thought that John
had let himself think for eight years; and it was like a bad
taste in his mouth.
So he went on thinking, thinking all that night. It was
another great struggle in his mind, like that time after the
Bishop had given him the silver plates. His thoughts toss-
ed about like waves of the sea. The sweat rolled off his
forehead. It makes us think of our Saviour in the Garden,
saying, “Father, put away this cup from me. Neverthe-
less, not my will, but Thine be done.”
If he did not speak he would be a bad man; was it not
better to be a good man and go to gaol, than to stay out of
gaol and be a bad man? He seemed to hear a voice saying,
“God will hear the curse of that poor fellow who goes to
gaol instead of you. ”
What shall Ido? ”he moaned. ‘ ‘ Great God, what shall
I do ? ”
He put the silver candlesticks back on the mantelpiece,
At last he said, “I will go to Arras and see the trial. Per-
haps I cannot get there in time, after all. I will try. And
when I am there, I will decide what to do.”
It was now early in the morning. He got a fast horse,
and a light trap, and he started off. The roads were bad;
the wheel of the trap broke. It is a wonderful story, how


every tiling seemed to stop Mm. from getting to Arras in.'
time to save the other man. And all the while John’s heart
was
let me, then I will be free.”
So he tried and tried; and at last he got to Arras about
eight o’clock-at night. And the court closes at six o’clock...
Surely he was too late—the trial must be over I , He. could
not help feeling glad.
But it was not over. He asked the way to the court
house. He could not get .in—it was full. He sent in word
to the Judge, and the Judge said, “We all know goodl
Father Madeleine, let him come, and sit by me.” . The-
moment had come at last; he must decide. Even while her
had his hand on the door-knob he nearly turned hack. Them
he opened it, and went in. -
He looked at the prisoner who was supposed to- he John.
Certainly, : John felt, he is very like me. The poor man kept
saying, “I do not know who'this John is that yon are talk-
ing about.” But three men, who had been in prison wit In
John were brought in; and they all said, “Yes, that is-
John.” One said, “We called him John the Jack, because
he was so strong.” •
So the Judge said he was sure this man was John; hu
had robbed Petit Gervais; and he was a monster and a ter-
rible man. And the Judge was just beginning to say, “You
must go to gaol”-—when suddenly a strong, hut very sad
voice was'heard calling the three men who said John hacE
been in prison with them. Everyone in the court looked
round. It was Father Madeleine. , He was going to speak,-,
to say who he was. ,
He said to the three men, ‘ £ Look! ”
A lamp shone full on his face. He said, “Do yon know
me!”
Then he turned to the Judge and said, - “Let that mam
go free- —he is not John, I am John.”
-What surprise there was in the court! Not a maim
breathed. The Judge thought that good Father Madeleine
was crazy; he wanted to send, for a doctor. And John’s-
face had so changed from the good thoughts that he always-
had now instead of the bad, hateful thoughts he used to
have, that even the men who were in gaol with him for
years did not know him.
So even now he might have got out of it. But he said r
“I am, not mad, gentlemen. lam doing my duty. Let that
man go free. lam the unhappy man, who was in gaoL I
robbed Petit Gervais. God sees me from on, high, and
knows I am doing right to tell you. I have done my best
ever since;- you know I am rich, and have tried to be an


honest man. Ah, when I first went to gaol I was not bad,
only hungry. After I came out I was bad, hut a good man
changed me. But there, you will not make any excuse for
me.' Go and look in my house —you will find the two-
shilling piece. Let that man go freed ? -
Then he told each of the three men something that show-
ed he had been in gaol with them. And he went to the door
and said, “Yon will know where to find me. lam going
home to do some things first.”
Every man in the crowded court held his breath. Not
a hand: was stretched out to stop him as he slowly walked
to the door. There was a grandeur about him such as made
men stand back and make room for him to pass. At the
door he turned and said to them all:
“You. are all pitying me, are you not? Great. God, when
I think of what I nearly did—to keep silent and let a man
suffer instead of me—-I know I. am : so happy now that you
ought to envy me ! Still, I wish it had not happened.”
Someone opened the door for him. He went out. The
innocent man was set free. And the Judge at once sent
word to Javert, “Catch Father Madeleine; he is,really
John.” ■
7.—HOW JOHN ESCAPED FROM GAOL.
It was early the next morning after John had behaved
in such a grand way, and mined all his own life to save
the other man that they said was John. All that night
John had travelled as fast as he could; and all that night
a messenger from the Judge had travelled as fast as he
could, to go to Javert and say “Catch Father Madeleine;
he is really John/ 7
Just as the dawn came, Father Madeleine came to the
Hospital. He said, “I must see Cosette’s mother at once.
Perhaps I will not have much time. ? ? He meant, if he could,,
to go and bring Cosette to her mother before he was
caught; and also he wanted to get those thousands of
pounds that were lying ready for him at the bankers.
So he went in to see the mother. But before he went the
nurse said, “Why, sir, what has happened to,you? Your
hair is all white I”
He looked in a glass. So it was! ' That terrible struggle
in his mind had turned his hair white in one night!
He went to the bed. The mother was asleep, but she
opened her eyes and smiled and said, “Is Gosette here? ,y
c


'She thought the good Father Madeleine had been on a
journey to fetch her child. She was very ill ? but she seem-
ed to get better. She began to talk about how happy they
would be. Suddenly she stopped, and looked terrified. She
was looking over Father Madeleine 5 s shoulder. He turned,
-and there he saw Javert at the door. ,He looked savage'
with joy. lie had caught John at last.
Once before, Father Madeleine had saved her from
Javert. .Now she cried, “O save me.”
Javert same forward, and clutched Father Madeleine by
the collar. He treated him already as if he was in gaoL
He laughed at him, and ordered him to hurry along.
Father Madeleine said he would come; but he said to
Javert, “This poor woman is very ill; give me three days
to go and get her child. Then I will give myself to you. 5 '
But Javert spoke out loud, and was rude to Cosette 5 s
mother, and .told her there was no Father Madeleine, but
a monster named John. And the mother fell back on her
pillow, dead.
■ Father Madeleine said, “You have killed that woman.”
*‘Come along, I tell you, 55 said Javert 'furiously. John
opened Javert 5 s hand that clutched his collar, as easily as
if it was a child's hand. Then he wrenched the iron leg off
a bed in the corner and faced Javert, and said, HI advise
you to let me alone for a minute, 55 And Javert shrank
.back.
, Father Madeleine went to Cosette 5 s mother and looked
at her'very pitifully. He leant down and seemed to whis-
per to her. I think he'was promising that he would look
after Cosette. Then he went quietly with Javert.
But, that night, he escaped from prison. He walked to
Paris, went to the banker and got out his money, and hid
it in a wood; then, just as he was getting into a coach, to go
down to the village where the Thenardiers lived, and where
Cosette was, the police caught him, and he was sent to gaol
at a place called Toulon, which is by the side of the sea.
And before we tell about how he escaped'from, there, we
must notice that, as soon as he was gone from .the town,
everything went wrong. Before that, when people, quar-
relled, Father Madeleine made them friends pmow, they
. did harm to one another; and the factory closed, .and there
. was no work and no money. And alas,' all the people forgot
how kind Father Madeleine had been, when they heard he
had been, in gaol ;, they turned- against him and said, “Oh,
how he deceived us, the wretch. 5 5
. Now we must see how John escaped from.gaol. .A great
man-of-war sailed into the harbour-at Toulon. She needed


some repairs; and crowds of people used to stand and
watch, for she was a splendid ship.
One day the crowd saw an accident. The sailors were
up the masts and on the yards, furling sails. One of them,
high up, lost his balance. He tottered. The crowd uttered
a cry. He fell. But as he fell he grasped a rope. The mast
hung over the water, so that the man would fall all "that
distance, not on to the deck, but into the water.
It would be a terrible risk for any one to go and help him.
None of the crew dared to do it. He could not hold on for
loug; the ropes swung and swayed, and soon he would lose
his hold and fall and be killed.
Suddenly, the crowd saw a man climbing up the rigging,
as active as a cat. He was dressed in red—-that showed he
was in gaol; he wore a green cap—-that showed he was to
be in gaol for all his life. The wind blew his cap off, and the
people saw that his hair was quite white.
In fact, directly the accident happened, one of the men
from the gaol who was working on the ship ran to the
warder and said, “ Let me risk my life and try to save that
man.”
“Yes, ,? said the warder. One blow from a hammer
knocked the chains off;; he ‘ tookj a ‘rope in : his hands and
began to climb. In the twinkling of an eye, he was on the
yard. He paused a moment—here was the danger ; to the
crowd that moment seemed a year. At length he raised his
eyes to heaven, and took a step forward. The crew'd drew
a long breath. The man ran out along the yard. When he
reached the tip, he fastened one end of the rope to it and
let it hang down. Then he let himself down by his hands;
and the crowd, with terror, saw two men dangling there
instead of one.
Then John (for of course it was John; even in prison he
still longed to help people) seized the other man. It was
like a spider seizing a fly ; only the spider in this ease was
bringing life, not death. Ten thousand eyes were watch-
ing; not a word was uttered ; every man held his breath,
as if even a whisper would make these two men sway- about
even more.
At last John reached the .sailor. He was just in time; in
another moment the man would have let go. John tied
him to his rope; then climbed up again, then hauled the
sailor up; then carried him to the mast, and handed him
over to the other sailors.
Then the crowd cheered and shouted. Even the cruel
policemen wept; women hugged each other; everyone cried,
This man should be set free. ’ ?


John was going straight back to his work. He slid down
a rope, and ran out on another yard. Everyone was watch-
-15- Suddenly he staggered; there was a thrilling cry.
Me tumbled into the sea. It was specially dangerous, for
two ships were lying close together, and he fell between.
Pour men jumped into a boat at once. The people cheer--
ed them. The man had not risen to the surface. They
looked and looked, but could not find him. The next morn-
ing the newspaper said, “A man from gaol fell overboard
yesterday and was drowned. He was named John. ’ ’
® ut Jolm not dead. It was a plan of his to escape,
vv hen he fell into the sea, he swam under water to a ship
at anchor, to which a boat was fastened. He hid in the boat
toll evening, then he swam to shore, and got some clothes.
Me bid In ms elf and travelled and travelled and at last came
to Pans. -And now he was free; and surely none would ever
take him j-or John again, because the newspapers all said
John was drowned. Even Javert saw that, and believed it
And John had the money that he got from the banker’s and
buried in a forest.
8.— HOW OLD JOHN FOUND COSETTE.
" At last Old John was free.
We saw how lie did a thing that only a very strong man
and a very loving man could have done -he saved the life
ot a sailor high up in the rigging of a man-of-war. And
then John fell into the water himself; it seemed to be an
accident, but really he did it on purpose ; they looked for
ins body and could not find it ;so the newspapers told
•everyone that he was drowned.
At last John had a good chance of hiding himself and
never being found out, for even Javert thought that he was
(react.
We would think that, after doing such a brave deed, he
would have been let out of gaol; and indeed all the crowd
said, this man deserves to he set free. 7 ? But John knew
too well that if they caught him they would send him back,
again just the same, and he more cruel than ever. They
did not take any notice of his kind, honest life when he
called himself Madeleine ; and they would not take any
notice of his brave deed now. Javert would say “You
belong to gaol. There is no good in yout 60 back.*'
, kne „ w tliat ail the rest of his life he would have
to hide himself, and be prepared to run away at any mim


ute. That was one of the things he must care for—to keep
people from knowing who he was. And all the rest of his
life there were two other things he cared for. One was, to
help other' people whenever he got a chance. And the
second was to look after little Cosette.
You will remember how he whispered in her mother’s
ear on the day Javert caught him by the collar, but John
snatched up an iron bed-leg and said, advise you to let
me alone for a minute.”
Those were the three things Old John kept thinking of.
And we will see that, just as when he hoisted up the cart,
and when he told them who he was in the court, so even
now lie was ready to risk people finding out who he was,
if it would help him to protect Cosette, or to be kind to
other people. All his future troubles came from his being
so kind. What a change from when he was the man just
out of gaol who robbed the Bishop!
The first thing John had to do after he was free, was to
get some money.
Do you remember how, after Javert had caught Father
Madeleine, he got away and went to the bank, and took out
all the thousands of pounds that were lying there ready?
And Javert could never find out what he did with it. But
John had buried it in a forest where he could find it again,
and for the rest of' his life he used to go there when he
wanted money and get some out.
As we know this, perhaps we can understand the follow-
ing story that puzzled the people who lived near that
forest. They said that the Devil himself used to bury
treasure in that wood—some of them had seen him, they
said! If you saw him, and went and spoke to him, then
you would die in a week. If you watched him digging the
jiute to put the gold in, then went and dug it up to get the
gold yourself, you would die in a month. If you ran away
as hard as you could as soon as you saw him, you would
die in a year.
There was an old road-mender who worked there. One
day he was going to his work about day-break; he saw a
pick-axe and spade hidden under a bush. That same even-
ing he saw a man going into the forest carrying a large
box. He hurried after him, but lost him. He waited and
saw him come out without the box, but with a spade and
pick-axe. The man was big and strong, and so the road-
mender hid; and then for weeks and weeks he went into
the wood and tried to find where the box was hidden. But
he could not.
We know-that the man was Old John ; but all the people


there talked about it and said, “Ah, certainly it was the
Devil.”
Now that Old John was free, and had plenty of money,
the first thing he bought was a plain dress for a girl of
about eight years old. It was for Cosette. He meant to
get her at once. And we must first see what kind of people
she was living with—the Thenardiers.
Oh they were cruel, and bad, and cunning ! All these
years they had been taking money from little Cosette ? s
mother, and instead of spending any of it on clothes and
food for Cosette they let her go cold and barefoot and half
starved, and beat her, and made her work like a slave, and
spent all the money on fine clothes for their own two daugh-
ters.
Madame Thenardier (we will call her Thenardiess) was
■ strong and big, and as savage as a wild beast; The only
things she loved were her two daughters. She had a little
baby son, too, but she did not love him at all. She beat
little thin Cosette. It was like a mouse being servant to an.
elephant. '
But her husband was worse. To look at him you would
not think so. He was little and bony, he smiled and was
polite to all who came (he kept an inn). He talked a Iot r
and said he had been a soldier at Waterloo, and had saved
the life of a general who was wounded. But really he had ■
not been a soldier at all. He sneaked after the army, and
then after the battle he was mean enough to go and roh
the poor dead and wounded men of what was in their
pockets;' He was sly and greedy and clever. ■ He never
beat Cosette, but he was much crueller. It was he who
took the-money her.mother sent, and said,.“Let Cosette
go barefoot in winter.”
The Thenardiess did. exactly what he told her, although
she looked so much more strong and savage. Poor Cosette
suffered-from-both ;of them. The neighbours called her ■
“The Lark,” because she was up in the morning before
anyone else. But the poor lark never sang!
One night four travellers came to the inn. Cosette was
sad that night; she had noticed that all the water was;
gone, and if anyone wanted a glass she would have to go to
the well to get some more. It was so dark; and Cosette
was Terribly afraid of the dark. No one had ever taught
her about the good God, and the holy Angels who watch.
If the four men asked for water, she must get it. She
trembled, but, no, they took-wine. - They talked about how
dark the night was. One said, “It would take a cat to go*
along the street without a lantern.” Cosette shuddered,,
but she thought she was safe ; no one wanted water.


Then another man came in and said to Thenardier, “ Yon
have not given my horse water.” He was angry.
Cosette said, 44 0 h yes, sir, the horse did drink; a whole
bucketful; I gave it to him myself, and talked to him/ 7
But the man said, “N 07 7; and lam afraid Cosette was
not speaking the truth; for she was so terribly afraid of
having to get that water in the dark. At last Thenardiess
said, “Go and get water, Cosette. Get along. And here,
take this sixpence and get a loaf at the baker 7 s when you
are coming back. 77
Poor Cosette went out. It was Christmas Eve, and some
shops were lit up with Chinese lanterns. And Cosette
stopped to look at one glorious doll two feet high, beauti-
fully dressed. Cosette thought to herself, “Only a prin-
cess could have a doll like that. 77 She thought that the
man that owned the shop with all those dolls must be like
the Eternal Father. .
While she was looking, Thenardiess saw her, and
screamed,; “Haven 7 t you gone yet? Here, wait and see
what I will do to yon! 77 But Cosette ran off as hard as;
she could into the dark; for that was the last shop, and a
lane led to the well.
She ran and ran ; she was too frightened to walk. She
came to the well, bent over, filled the bucket. She wanted
to run back into - the light; but she, was -too tired. She
crouched down and shuddered in terror. She started with
the bucket, then had to rest, and started again, staggering
on a little'way. ■ How cold it was, too. And no one saw- the
poor child—no one except God, and perhaps her dead
mother. The only word she could say was “God, God. 77
Suddenly all the weight seemed to go out of the bucket..
An enormous hand had caught it. A man had come behind
her and was" helping her.' Strange ■to say,, Cosette was
not for a moment afraid of the man. It was Old John. He
did not know that this was Cosette ; but he saw a little
girl in the dark with a bucket and was sorry for her. God
sent him to her.
He talked to her kindly, and said, “What is your
name? 77 But when she said “Cosette 77 it seemed to give
him an electric shock. For he had thought that the
Thenardiers treated her kindly.
Cosette told him how the Thenardiers had two daughters;
whe had beautiful dolls and played all day long, but
Cosette had to work all the time because there was no-
other servant. Sometimes for a little while the Thenardier
girls let her play with their dolls ; but the only thing she
had of her own was a little lead sword, as long-as .that—
here Cosette put out her little finger. When they were*


.near the inn, Cosette said, “Please, sir, let me carry the
bucket now ;■ Thenardiess will beat me if she sees someone
else carrying it for me.”
Just then they passed the big doll; Cosette could not help
sending one longing look at it. Then she went into the inn.
. “0, it's you at last, you little beggar—what a time you
have been, 7 7 said Thenardiess.
“0, Madame, 77 said Cosette, trembling, “Here is a
gentleman to stop the night. 77 (For, when John heard she
was Cosette he said, “I will come to the inn. 77 )
John came in. Thenardiess saw that his clothes were
poor, and she wanted to turn him out. She made him pay
double for his room; but he paid it and sat down. Cosette
sat down under the kitchen table, and went on knitting.
Cosette was not pretty. She might have become pretty
if she had been happy and well fed. Her little face was
pale and pitiful; her eyes looked as if she often cried, and
her mouth was twisted through sorrow. Her bones seemed
to show through her thin body; her clothes were rags, and
through them and on her face, could be seen bruises where
Thenardiess had hurt her. She had no shoes or stockings;
■she was always shivering. Every movement she made
showed that all the time she felt one great emotion—fear.
Even now, coming in all-wet, she dared not go near the
fire, but crept out of sight under the ; table, . hoping
Thenardiess would forget about her. She had never been
to Church, Thenardiess made her work all the time.
All of a sudden Thenardiess said, “Oh, I forgot ; where
is that loaf I told you to get? 77
Then Cosette remembered. She was so frightened, she
told a lie.
“The baker 7 s was shut, 77 she said.
“I don 7 t believe it/ 7 said Thenardiess; “but give me
back the sixpence. 77
Now Cosette did not know it, but when she leant over
the well to get the bucket filled the sixpence dropped out
of her apron into the water.,.; So now she put her hand into
the pocket. It was gone!
“Come along—didn 7 t you hear me? 77 said the fierce
woman.
Cosette felt and felt, she could not speak.
“What, have you lost it or stolen it? 77 cried Thenardiess,
and she reached out her hand for a whip that stood, in the
corner.
“Oh, forgive me, Madame, Madame, I will not do it
again, 7 7 moaned ■ Cosette. She shrank into- a. heap -in ■ the
corner; Thenardiess lifted the whip. Then John spoke. ■


“1 saw something fall out of the little girl’s apron.” He
■pretended to look on the-floor. 4 'Ah, here it is,” and he
!gave her a coin.
44 Yes, that is it,” said Thenardiess. (But it was not; it
was a shilling.)
Cosette went back under the table, and fixed her eyes
■on this man. She did not know him. She felt a great trust
in him.
So now Old John had found Cosette. Her mother thought
the Thenardiers were kind people. They promised to look
well after Cosette. They used to write her letters full of
lies; they said, 44 She is growing well. She wants more
clothes; she is happy.” They got all the money they could
in tliis way, and made Cosette work like a slave.
Old John had promised that he would look after her, he
never thought she was treated like this. Now he had
found her out; and he saw that she was treated as cruelly
ns he used to be treated in gaol. He resolved to set her free
from the Thenardiers, and take her away and make her
■happy.. - ■
Poor little--Cosette had a friend at last. God had not for-
.gotten her. He had sent Old John.
9.—HOW OLD JOHN TOOK COSETTE AWAY.
Now I must go': back to the time when Cosette was quite
-.a little girl, and tell you how her mother came to leave her
with the Thenardiers.
This mother had been very cruelly treated by a bad man
in Paris. So she made up her mind to go back to the town
’Where she used to live (which was the town where John
• did so much good when he was. called Father Madeleine.)
The mother said, 44 I will get work; but wha t can I do
with my little baby while I am working?”
At any rate., she started to go there; and as she was very
poor she had to walk, carrying Cosette, and a carpet bag.
One night she came to the Thenardiers’ inn. Their two
Tittle girls were playing by the door. Cosette could'just
■walk, and she toddled over' and began to play with them,
'"This pleased Madame Thenardier, who loved her children;
and Cosette’s mother thought Madame Thenardier seemed
very kind.
She said to herself, 44 1 wonder if she would look after my
•child while I work V * : So she asked her. And, the cunning


Thenardier heard; and he thought, “We can get money
from her; yes, we will keep the child. ’’
So they did; and the poor mother never saw Cosette
again, but thought that the Thenardiers were kind to her.
But now Old John had found out.
Directly he found Cosette, John began to help her. He
carried the bucket for her (that was before he knew who
she was); and he pretended to find a shilling on the floor,
and saved her from being beaten with a whip. He sat look-
ing at her; and she looked at him and trusted him.
Then a door opened, and Thenardier’s two daughters
came in. The eldest was just as old as Cosette. They were
very pretty little girls, and had warm, pretty dresses. They
went and sat by the fire. They had a doll, which they
nursed on their knees, and talked to like a baby.
Cosette went on knitting, but she looked at the doll with
longing. The girls took no more notice of Cosette than if
she were a dog.
The doll was old and-broken, but-Cosette thought it was-
wonderful. She had never in her life had a real doll of
her own. The Thenardiess saw her looking, and she said,
"Is that the way you work? 11l make you work with the
whip, I will.”
Old John said, “Why, Madame, let her play.”
If Old John had looked rich, Thenardiess would have
been polite to him. But he seemed poor, so she said
sharply, “She eats, so she must work. I won’t keep her for
nothing. ’ ’
But John knew that the mother had paid money for
Cosette.
“ What is she making f” he asked.
“Stockings for my girls,” said Madame.
“I will buy those stockings,” said Old John. Then he
turned to Cosette and said, “'My child, never mind the
work. You can play.”'
Thenardiess was angry, but John gave her far more than
the stockings were worth.
Cosette' took out of a box a few old rags, and her lead
sword. The Thenardier girls did not look at her ; they
had thrown their doll on the floor, for they had just caught
the kitten, and were ' dressing it up in lot of clothes and
red and blue rags.
- "This is better than the doll,” they said. “This is alive.
Let us play that lam a lady and this is ray little girl. I’ll
come and see you; and you look- at ' her and, see her
whiskers, and then see her tail. And you say, 'Good
gracious!” and I will say, ‘Oh yes, Madame, little girls
have whiskers and tails now-a-days, ’ ”


Cosette made. her lead sword a doll. : She
dressed it up, hugged it in her arms, then sang it to sleep !
No one noticed her. The other men in the inn were singing
a lond song; and Madame Thenardier y who began to think
that this queer man must be rich after all, began to tell lies*
about Cosette. She said,’
“We have been kind to her. ■ She is a silly child, with no
mother. We have had no money for her, it is kind of ns to
keep her," .
Suddenly Cosette noticed the doll that belonged to the
Thenardier girls. It lay on the floor. They had forgotten
it. , She dropped the sword that she was pretending, was a
Ml She looked round;, no one was watching. She crept
out from under the table, looked round again, then darted
at the doll and seized it.
Next moment she was back under the table. Oh, how
happy she was as. she nursed it! She turned, so that the
shadow would hide it if anyone looked. No one saw but
Old John.
But Cosette did not’notice that one of the doll's feet
stuck out, and the light from the fire shone on it. One' of
the girls saw it. She went to her mother and said,.
“Look!" Cosette did not notice, she was so happy.
Thenardiess was terribly angry,’ That Cosette should
dare to touch her children’s doll! She shrieked out,.
“Cosette!" Poor Cosette shuddered. She put the doll
back on ■■the floor and- burst into tears. ■
John got up and said; “ What is the matter V r ■
“Don’t'you see?" said Thenardiess; “that beggar has-
dared to touch mV children’s doll."
John walked straight out of the .front door. Thenardiess*
gave Cosette a cruel kick, which made her shriek.
The door opened. Old John walked in. He had in his*
hands, that glorious doll that Cosette had seen—two feet
high, dressed in lovely clothes. He stood it up before
Cosette saying, 4 4 There, that is for your own. ’ ’
Cosette could'hardly breathe. ' The Thenardiers stood
like statues. Even the men who were, singing, stopped.
Then Thenardier went and whispered to his wife, 4 4 That
doll cost a lot of money. He : must be rich. : Some mil-
lionaires like to wear shabby old clothes. Behave well to
him."
So Madame Thenardier tried to seem kind to Cosette
and' said, “Why don’t yon take your doll?" And Then-
ardier said, “Dear little Cosette, the gentleman gives yon
a doll. Tt is yours. Take it." '
And Cosette felt just as if someone said to her, “Yon are
a queen I” She said to John,. “Is it really for me!” Then


she seized the doll eagerly! “I will call her Catherine/ 5
■she said, and put her in,a chair and sat looking at her.
Soon they all went to bed. But John sat at the table
with his head on his elbows. Hour after hour he sat think-
ing. What was he to do for this poor little girl? It was
three o'clock in the morning when at last he■ went to his
[bedroom. Thenardier had sat up too. Then he went back
to his wife. ' She was savage, with Cosette and the strange
man.
“I will kick that Cosette out of the house in the morn-
ing/' she said,
‘‘That you will," said Thenardier.
Even then Old John did not go to bed, but sat thinking.
What was best to do for this poor little girl. Then he took
off his, shoe! took a candle, and went downstairs. He
wanted to find where Cosette slept.
He heard her breathing. He looked. It was a sort of
cupboard under the -stairs. There, amongst all sorts of
.old rubbish, and dust and cobwebs, was a bed—a mere
mattress, full of holes, stuffed with straw. There were no
-sheets. Cosette was sleeping,.there in- ail her clothes so as
:to keep warm. In her Vanns she hugged'the big doll. Me:
.noticed there was only -one .shoe by the side of her bed.
Near Cosette's bed he saw a door. He went in. The two
"Thenardier girls slept there in nice cots. There was ano-
ther cot too. In it slept the haby boy, but his cot was
bare. Thenardiess did not love him. John had heard him
.crying that night.
Just as John was coming away he noticed that the girls
Ihad put their pretty shoes in the fireplace. Then he remem-
bered—it was Christmas Eve. They had put them there
for Father Christmas. And in the far corner of the fire-
place he saw a heavy wooden shoe, rough and ugly. It
was Cosette's. She had never had a present from Father
Christmas yet, but she put her shoe out.
In each of the pretty shoes, John saw that already there
was a gift-—a shining sixpence each. There was nothing
in Cosette's shoe! Old John felt in his pocket, and took
#out a golden sovereign rand put it in the poor wooden shoe.
"Then he went to bed.
Early 'next’ morning, Madame Thenardier found that
.John was up, and She gave him his bill. She charged him
far too much, but she said, “1 need money; that Cosette
a eats such a lot.'’'
Joho. said, V 4 Woilld you like to "get rid of her ?''
Thenardiess said, u O take her! I will bless you."
44 ~ Call her -at once/'' said John. **•* I will take her. 51


But now Thenardier, who was listening, came; in and said,
“Wait, I love that child. I cannot let her go.”
John looked steadily, at liim.
Cunning Thenardier went. on,. “ We Have kept her since
she was little, and had no money for her. But although I
am poor I love her ; I will keep her still. How do I know
that you will be kind to her as we have been?- You must
tell me who you are, and where you are going to take her.”
John said, “Thenardier, if I take the child,- I take her
altogether. You shall not know who I am, or where I go.
She shall never see you again in all her life. Now do you
agree?' Yes or No!” -
Thenardier did not know what to say... He was in debt,
he wanted money. Tie saw last night how John had liked
Cosette. Tie said, “Before you take her, you must give me
£100.”
John simply took out his purse, took bank notes out for
£lOO, and said, “Bring Cosette.”
In the meanwhile Cosette woke up, and ran to her shoe.
What! A golden sovereign! She had never seen one; she
did not know how much it was worth. She hid it in her
frock. She felt it had come from the kind man.
Life seemed to have changed since she had met this
stranger near the well. She had never felt warm before ;::
now her soul seemed to be warm. She had always been
cold with fear; she had been alone. Now she did not feel
alone.
While she was sweeping, Thenardiess came and said,
“Cosette, come at once./ 7 ’ Cosette went -where Old Johm
and Thenardier were.
John took the bundle he had. The black dress he had
bought was in it, and the warm petticoat, and the nice red
felt hat, and the little brown shoes and red stockings. He
said, “Little one, take these and go and dress quickly.”
A little while after, people saw a man in shabby clothes-
going out of the village, and a little girl, with a big doll in
her arms. Where was she going? She did not know; only
that she was going away from the Thenardiers. How she
hated them.! They did not say. good-bye to her and as she
looked up to this great strong man, she trusted him. She
felt almost as if she was near to the good God.
Old John had got Cosette at last.
But one more thing happened. The greedy, cunning
Thenardier said to himself after they had gone, “Why he
gave me that £lOO at once; I ought to have asked for-more..
I will go after them.” He ran along. He thought to him--
self, “I ought to have brought my gun.”


At last he saw them. John had sat down by a . bush to
give Cosette a rest.
Thenardier came to them and said, “Here is your hun-
dred pounds. 77
4 * What do you mean? 77 said John.
“It means lam going to take Cosette back, 77 said
Thenardier. Poor Cosette shuddered and crept close to
John.
John said slowly, “You—take—Cosette—back? 77
“ Yes, 7 7 said Thenardier, “I can 7 t give her to you. The
mother is dead. ' I can only give Cosette to anyone who
brings me a letter from the mother telling me to give her
up. 77
Thenardier thought this was impossible. But it happen-
ed that when John was Father Madeleine, the mother had
given him a letter saying that Thenardier was to hand
Cosette over to him; for Father Madeleine was going to
bring her to her mother, only Javert would not let him go
for three days to get her. So now John took that letter
but of his purse, and handed it to Thenardier.
Thenardier was enraged. He thought John would have
given him more money when he saw the purse. Now he
said, “Well, you must pay her other debts. 77
John looked all round. There was no one near. Then he
said to Thenardier, “I know all about you. The mother
paid you a lot of money, and I have given you more. I
will keep Cosette. Gome, Cosette. 77
He took her hand. They went on. Thenardier snarled
like a wolf, but he saw what a big stick the man had. He
tried to follow them. But at last John looked back at him
so angrily that Thenardier went off home with his £lOO.
John went to Paris. Cosette Was very tired. At last Old
John took her in his arms, and she went to sleep, still hug 7
ging the doll.
Old John had got Cosette at last 1
10.—“HOW JAVERT CHASED OLD JOHN.”
Ho Old John had got Cosette at last! '■ And now. she was
free from Thenardiess: And Old John was free, and had
plenty of money. And he had only to keep people from
finding out who he was; then he could love Cosette, and
help other people, as much as he liked.
So that night, when he had Cosette asleep in his arms,
and she had Catherine asleep in her arms, John took her to
a very poor old house, where he meant to live. He chose a


poor house, and he wore poor clothes, so as do keep people
from noticing him. .And we will see that no one would
have noticed him, only that he was so kind, and gave so
much money to help poor people, that everyone did begin
talking about him. John simply could not help loving
people now !
When John carried Cosette into his room, she was sound
asleep; and he laid her in a little cot bed, and then began
to look and look at her; and oh, he was so glad! He bent
down and kissed her hand. Nine months before, he had
kissed the hand of Cosette 7 smother, just as she fell asleep
too. He was sorry for her then; he was sorry for Cosette
POW. He knelt down and prayed by the side of the cot.
Next morning, early, a heavy cart outside made a great
noise going along the street. Cosette started up out of her
sleep. “Yes, madame, 77 she said; “here I am! Here I
am!” She threw herself out of bed, still half asleep, and
reached out her hand to the wall. She thought she was still
with the Thenardiers.
‘ 4 Oh, what shall I do ? 7 7 she said. 4 4 Where is my
broom?”
Then she saw Old John smiling at her! And now she
knew; and she felt happy at once. “Good morning, sir,”
she said. Then she saw Catherine, and hugged her, and
began to ask questions. Was she in Paris? Was Them
mrdiess really far away? And she said, “Must I sweep?’’
John said, 4 ‘ Play! ”
And all that day Cosette was happy with her big doll and
big John.
As for John, he felt like a different man. He had never
had anyone of his own to really love. Now, he trembled
with joy when he went near Cosette. He felt like her
father; she filled his heart, which before that seemed to
have a big, empty, hungry place in it. It seemed as if God
had sent Cosette just to fill it. John gave her nice clothes
.—black, in mourning for her mother. He taught her to
read, and watched her playing. And he talked to her
about her mother; and he taught her to say her prayers.
She called him “Father. 77 She never asked his name.
John would spend hours watching her dress and undress
her doll, and listening while she sang and talked; Life
.seemed full of interest to him now ; he did not mind living
a long time, and growing old, so long as he had Cosette,
And Cosette helped him to get back all his loving, kindly
thoughts. For I must say that when John saw that he was
-sent to gaol again, even though he had been so honest and
kind while he was called Good Father Madeleine, he had
begun to forget,about the Bishop a little, and to have bitter


thoughts about men like Javert. He had seen so many"
wicked men, that he began to be a little like the John who*
had come out of gaol, believing that all men were cruel,,
and hating them. Only a little like that—but then God.
sent him Cosette. And that made him loving again; and
he lost the bitter thoughts, and remembered the good old
Bishop again, and wanted to help everyone. So we see?
that the■ strong. man saved the little child, and also the
little child-saved the strong man. God sent them to one-*
another.
And now Old John began to give money to poor people.-
He loved to do it. He did not want them-to know that he*
was rich, so he always wore such shabby clothes that people
often gave him a penny, thinking he was a beggar ! And
he never went into the big streets, and he never went out at
all from the house until it was evening and darkness was-
falling. He often went to the-nearest church.
Cosette was very full of play,'and she liked to go out for'
walks with him; she liked it even better than playing with
Catherine. And when they saw a poor man begging, Old.
John would look all round and make sure that no one was
watching, then he would go carefully to the beggar, give
' him' money, and walk away fast.
But this made people talk about him; they began to call
him ‘‘the beggar who gives money away.”
- And another thing made people talk about him too. The?,
woman who did the cooking for John could not understand,
him. And one day she- looked in through the keyhole; and
she saw him take out needles, thread, and scissors; then he
cut the-lining of his shabby old coat, and took out a piece
of crinkly paper. It was a bank-note worth £SO! She ran
away. And she told a lot of people- about it. They alb
talked it over. Who could this man be? ' And a few days*
later, when Old John was cutting wood, and had : his coat-
off, the nasty old woman saw it hanging up, and went and
felt it; and she could feel other bank-notes in the lining.
Now the head of the police in that district was—who dm
you think ? Javert! He heard that there was a mysterious-
man living there who kept a lot of money in a shabby old
..coat, and gave .coins to beggars.. He said to himself, “II
must' find out who this is. ”
So Javert made up a trick. ■ There was one ■beggar who
always sat at the door of the church where John went y and
John often gave'-him money; Javert dressed himself up tn
look like that beggar, and sat down where the beggar
always sat. John came along r and gave him money. The 1 "
beggar lifted his eyes, stared hard at Joint or' a.- moment,.
then looked down again.


Old John shuddered. “Surely,” he thought, “that was
riot the old beggar’s face, but a terrible face that I know
well.” He felt as if he had just met a tiger in the dark.
He could not move for horror. Luckily, he did not speak.
Then John said to himself, “It cannot be. lam mad. I
am dreaming.” And he went home ;he was very anxious;
he hardly dared say even to himself that the face he
thought he had seen was Javert’s. -
But some few days afterwards, John found that another
man had come.to live in the same old house as himself.
John heard the man’s heavy boots. He blew out the
candle; he told Cosette to lie very still in bed ; and he listen-
ed, He thought he heard someone now outside his door,
tip-toeing along so as not to make any sound.
John could not sleep that night.
Next morning he heard the man go by his door. Swiftly
John opened it after the man had passed, and saw—there
was no doubt of it now—that dreadful Javert.
■He must fly. Poor Old John. Truly, life pressed very
hard upon him.
He tied up his money in a bundle, and put it in his
pocket; but one half-crown fell and rolled across the floor.
Just as it was getting dark, John went to the street door
and looked carefully all round. No one was there. He
said, “Come, Cosette’'; and he took her by the hand, and
they went out,.
There was a full moon, so that in some places there were
deep- shadows, but at other places bright light, Paris in
those times was a rambling old city, full of streets that
twisted; and turned. John did not go straight ahead, but
turned and turned. Sometimes he stopped to listen; but
he could not hear anyone following. Cosette did not ask.
any questions; she felt safe with Old John, She did not
know where they were going. And Old John did not know
either. Cosette trusted John; and John trusted God. He
felt as if someone greater than himself was holding him by
the hand, just as he led Cosette.
Just as the clock struck eleven, something made John
turn his head; and he .saw three policemen, on the dark side
of the street, following him!
‘ ‘ Come along, Cosette, ’’ he said. Then he played a trick
He turned round to the right, went into a great square,
and hid, “Now,” he thought, “I can make sure whether
they are chasing me. And it is moonlight here too—l can.
see who they are.”
* And in a minute he saw the policemen; there were four
now, with great clubs in their hands, tiptoeing along. They
stopped; one said, “He has gone that' way,” and pointed
3>


straight at Old John. Another said. No that way.
And in the clear moonlight John saw beyond all doubt who
it was. Javert was hunting him again!
Off he went now. Gosette was tired, so he picked her up
in his arms. He made for the river, and crossed a bridge.
There was a toll-keeper there, and John had to pay. He
paid for one. “No,” said the man, “you must pay for
two. That child could walk.” John saw a cart; and he
walked right across the bridge in the shadow of the cart.
Gosette said she would like to walk now, her feet were
cold; so John put her down. On the right hand, he saw
some dark timber-yards; to get there he must cross a large
open space. But he felt safer now. He crossed it, and hid
in a dark lane. He looked back at the bridge. Oh! there
were the four policemen! Perhaps they had not seen him.
If he went down the little dark street, he might get into
the open fields, and be safe.
Now this street was something like the letter Y. John
went a little way, then he came to the fork; one street
turned to the right, one to the left. John took the turn to
the right. Gosette was tired now. John picked her up
again. She rested her head on his shoulder and did not
speak. John plunged ahead, looking for some little side
street to hide in. He did not know this part of the city.
But Javert did!
A little way farther on, the road forked again, like ano-
ther Y. The turn on the left led to a big street; that on
the right led to a high blank wall, among some great sheds.
John turned to the left at once. Then he stopped short.
He had looked back, and saw those terrible figures follow-
ing. And now, as he made for the big street, he saw one of
the policemen standing there like a black statue. He had
been put there to watch for John!
This part of Paris is called the Petit Picpus. It had very
few lamps, and poor streets; no shops, no vehicles; only
sheds, and yards, and a convent, and big walls, and silence.
What was John to do now ? He could not get out into the
big street —Javert had put a man to watch there. He could
not go back the way he came—Javert was coming that
way himself. John was in a trap. He felt as if he was tied
by a chain that was slowly winding rip. He looked up to
heaven in despair.
He hurried down to the blank wall that ended the street
on the right. He looked at one house; no—the moonlight
was full on that; Javert would see him. Besides, it was a
three-storey house.
He ran to the other wall. It was in the dark shadow.


’There was some ivy on it, and a big tree spread a branch
over the top. He must hurry. What was he to do?
At that moment he first began to hear a regular sound
not far off. Tramp, tramp, tramp! He looked back. There
were eight soldiers just turning into the street to come
.after him. Their bright bayonets shone in the moonlight.
Javert was leading them. They kept stopping, to see if
•John was hiding anywhere. “At this rate, 7 ’ thought Old
•John, “they will be upon me in less than a quarter of an
hour. 7 7 Only those few minutes now stood between John
•and that awful, cruel gaol again. And he would lose
'Cosette for ever. It was a terrible moment.
Now, bad men learn a lot of tricks that good men do not.
But John was different; he was a good man, but he knew
all the tricks that bad men know. Especially, he had learnt
how to escape even from gaol. He had climbed out three
times. He could even climb a bare wall, where an ordinary
person could not see anything to which to hold.
John looked up at this wall. It was eighteen feet high.
He could climb it, perhaps. But what about Cosette? He
•certainly would not leave her; but he could not climb with
her on his back. If only he had a rope ! (Tramp I Tramp !
came the feet of the soldiers.) Where could he get a rope?
He would have given all his money for a rope.
He saw the lamp-post. The lamps were not lit, because
it was full moon. The lamps used to be hoisted up by a
rope. John rushed to the post, forced open the lock of the
box where the rope was kept, cut it off, and in ah instant
was back to Cosette. Poor Cosette was getting frightened
now. She did not cry, but pulled old John 7 s coat. (Tramp !
Tramp! came the feet; tramp, tramp, tramp, tramp!)
“Father, 77 she said, “I am frightened. Who is that
coming? 77
a Htish, dear, 77 said poor old John. “It must be the
Thenar diess. 7 7
Cosette shuddered.
“Do not say a word, 77 said John, “I will look after hen
If you cry, or make any noise, Thenardiess will hear you.
She is coming to catch you 77
Quickly he took off his necktie, and tied it round under
Cosette ? s arms. (Tramp! Tramp!) He tied the rope to
the necktie, took the other end in his teeth, took off his
shoes and socks and threw them over the wall; there was a
desperate scramble—-and John was on the top of that great
wall.
(Tramp ! Tramp! Tramp !)
Cosette watched him without saying a word. The name
of Thenardiess frightened her dumb.


All at once she heard old John’s voice calling to her in a-
whisper. ‘ 4 Put your back against the wall. ’ ’ She did it.
“Do not speak, and do not be afraid.”
She felt herself being lifted from the ground. Before
she had time to think, she was on the top of the wall. John
took her on his back, and took her two little hands in his
left, and crawled to the end of the wall. There was a little-
shed close to the tree. Just then TRAMP! TRAMP!
TRAMP! louder than ever—the soldiers had come, and
old Jqhn was still on the top of the wall. “ Search here,”
roared Javert. “He cannot get out.” Old John slid'
quietly down to the roof of the shed. Cosette had not said
a word. Her little hands were scraped. John caught the
tree, slid down the trunk, and reached the ground.
_ He could hear the soldiers banging and tramping out-
side. He dared not breathe. He hid in the shed. He put
his hand on Cosette’s mouth.
Then, at last, tramp ! tramp! they went away. He was-
safe.
Cosette and old John fell on their knees.
11.—HOW OLD JOHN GOT OUT OF THE CONVENT
OF PETIT PICPUS.
We have seen how Javert chased poor old John, and
nearly caught him, to send him back to the cruel gaol. But
John climbed up a high wall, and pulled Cosette up too, and
got down into a garden just as the tramp, tramp of the
soldiers came up. They looked all round, then they went
away, and John and little Cosette fell on their knees and
thanked the good God.
And, oh, Javert was so angry. At first when he had
heard of this mysterious beggar who gave money away of
course he did not think it was old John; for he had read
in the newspaper that John was dead. Even when he
changed clothes with the beggar and saw old John close,
he could not he quite sure. So he went and stayed in the'
same house.
When John dropped the half-crown on the floor, the 1
nasty old woman thought, “Ah, he is getting all his money
ready to run away”; so she sent word to Javert, and Javert
hid behind a tree when John looked out of the door-them
got some policemen and followed him.


Javert was sure now that it was John; he felt as glad as
a tiger when it is certain of catching a deer; and he thought
he had caught John in a trap in those streets. In another
minute he would have him, for he saw the wall that blocked
the street, and thought that no man could climb it.
And when he got there, John had vanished! Javert felt
that he could have howled like a tiger in his despair and
fury. All that night Javert hunted that neighbourhood
and set spies to watch. But he did not think John could
have climbed that wall with a little girl. So he left some
men to watch and went home. But for weeks afterwards
he used to go and search and search; he was so angry.
It Was about the middle of the night when John climbed
over the wall. Inside was a vegetable garden. Just as the
tramp of the soldiers went away, old John and Gosette
heard lovely music, sweet voices singing a hymn. Then it
died away. All was still.
It was . very cold. Cosette did not speak. John leant
over to look at her, and he saw her eyes were open; she
was not asleep. She said,"! am very cold.” Old John
began to be afraid that she was ill.
"Is she there yet?” said Cosette,
"Who?” said John.
"Madame Thenardier. ’’
Oh, no/ * said John, ‘ ‘ don T be afraid any longer. ” And
Gosette sighed as if a great weight had been lifted off her
breast.
The ground was damp and the wind cold. John took off
his coat and wrapped up Cosette, and went out to find what
place it was he had got into. Cosette put her head on a
stone and went to sleep before John came back.
And no w John noticed a queer tinkling sound, like a bell
moving about. John looked, there was a man going about
IHBBBg§t the vegetables; he limped, and when he moved the
bell rang. John picked Gosette up to run awmy. He
noticed that her hand was icy cold. She would not' speak
when he called her. He shook her. He thought, "She is
dead of cold,” and he shuddered from head to foot. He
must get her into a warm bed in a few minutes, or she
would die.
He walked straight up to the man and took some money
out of his pocket. He said to the man, "I will give you £5
if you will shelter me to-night.”
The man looked up. The moon shone full into old
John’s face. The man said, " Why, is that you, Father
Madeleine?”
John was surprised. Who could the lame old man be?
He had a leather knee-cap on his left knee, with a bell hung


to it. John did not know who this could be. The maa
seemed very glad to see John, but surprised. He said r
Did you drop from heaven! That is where you belong I
know. r ’ ' ....
“Who are you?” said John. “And what place is this?
And why do you wear that bell?”
“What! You don’t remember me? Why you got me this,
place yourself; I am old Fauchelevent; and you saved mv
life, and got me this place as gardener in the convent of the-
Petit Picpus. I have to wear the bell because it is a con-
vent, and I am the only man here. When they hear the
bell the nuns know I am coming, and go out of the way.
And how you got here, Father Madeleine, I simply cannot
think. But you must get out again.”
Old John shuddered. It would be like going back to*
some hungry tiger if he had to go into that street. So he
asked old Fauchelevent to give him shelter for his little
grandchild, and to trust him without asking questions.
And Fauchelevent said,
I will. You were always a man of God.” And he said*
to himself, “If Father Madeleine had stolen something,,
would I help him to get away from the police? Yes, f
would. If he had killed someone, would I help him ? Yes,,
I would. No matter what he has done, I will help him. He
saved my life, I wish I had a chance to save his.”
n Soon they were in the old man’s hut, with a fire, and
Losette was in the bed warm and snug, and John and
Fauchelevent lay down to sleep on straw mattresses.
But neither of them could sleep a wink. Old John*
thought, If I can stay here it will be the very place,
Javert will never look in a convent. I must stay here.”
ho he said to Fauchelevent, “You can save my life if you
keep me here.”
And Fauchelevent was wondering however he could do
this. He had never heard how Father Madeleine had
turned _out to be a man from gaol; so he did not know why
the police would chase him; but he said,
“He is a, saint; he had fallen from heaven; the good God
took him up to speak to him, then made a mistake when he
put him back, for He dropped him into a convent. I must
keep him; only how—-how?”
At last he thought he saw a way of getting the Prioress
u? v Jolm eome ' n an d be gardener too. But then
old John was inside already; so he must get out first, before-
he could come m. He said to John, “How are you to come-
in, when you are in already?”
Just then a bell tolled. Fauchelevent said, “One of the
holy nuns is dead. I have to go and see the Prioress about


the funeral. You and the little girl must not move outside
the cottage till I come back. They keep a girls’ school
here, and the littlh girls run all over the garden, and would
see you.”
So old Fauchelevent went to see the Prioress. He had a
plan in his head. He would ask her to let his old brother
come and live in the convent too, and help him with the
garden; and his brother’s little grandchild could go to the
school. Then he would get old John out somehow, and
Cosette, oh, he could manage Cosette; he would carry her
out in a basket ; and then they could knock at the door r
Walk in—“this is my brother” —and it was dope!
But I don’t think the Prioress would have said “Yes,”
on any other morning but that one. For she was very
strict about men being allowed into the convent; they were
not allowed even into the church where the nuns said pray-
ers and sang hymns. (The music that John heard after he
climbed the wall in the middle of the night was the nuns
singing. They had a service called “matins” at one o’clock
every morning.)
But the fact was, the Prioress wanted old Fauchelevent
to do something for them that the police would not have
allowed if they had known it. One of the nuns had just
died. She was very old; she had said her prayers in the
Convent Chapel all her life; the others loved her ; and
when she was dying she said, 4 4 Bury me under the altar of
the Chapel where I have prayed all my life.”
The Prioress wanted to do this. But the law said, 4 4 All
people must be buried in the cemetery.” So now the
Prioress wanted Fauchelevent to play a trick. He was to*
bury the old nun under the altar; then he was to till
another coffin with something to be a pretend dead body;:
and let the undertaker bury that in the cemetery ; and he
was never to say a word about it.
And at last it was settled. If Fauvent (that was how
they shortened his name) would help them, he might then
bring his brother and the child to live in the convent. So
Fauvent went back to old John, thinking hard, 4 4 How am
I to get Father Madeleine out ? ’ ’
He told John all about it. “I can bring you in to-mor-
row, but how can I get you out to-day? The little girl I
can carry out in a basket. Will she stay quite still?”
John said, 4 4 Cosette, this good man will carry you out in
a basket. Then you will wait for me, and we will come
back and live happily here. If you don’t keep still when
he is carrying you, Thenardiess will get you. Will you do
it ? ” .And Cosette nodded her head.


Then Fauvent said, “The Prioress lets me do this if I
help her in a very serious matter. A nun is dead, and they
want me to play a trick; to bury her under the altar, and
then give the undertaker a coffin filled with earth. But
suppose the earth shakes about, and they find out ? ”
“What is that?” said John.
Fauvent told him again,
John said, “Put me inside that coffin.”
Fauvent sprang up as if a cracker had gone off under
him.
‘ 4 What! ’ ’ he said. ‘‘ Go out in a coffin! 7 ’
We saw that old John was a good man, but knew all the
tricks that bad men knew. So he thought of this trick.
But Fauvent said, “No, no. You cannot go out in a
coffin. It is too terrible. You would have to hide in the
dark dead-room all night, until to-morrow afternoon. Then
you must be nailed up in the coffin; you must drive all the
way to the cemetery. It would be too terrible.”
But John said, “I must do it. If I don’t get out I will
be caught. The only thing that troubles me is—what will
happen at the cemetery? Can you open the coffin before
it is buried, and let me out ? ”
“Oh, that will be all right,” said Fauvent. “I know the
grave-digger. We will arrive at the cemetery just about
dark, I will have a hammer and chisel and pincers in my
pocket. The priest will say the prayers and go off. I will
say to the grave-digger, Tome and have a drink.’ I will
make him quite drunk; then I will take his card to let me
pass back into the cemetery, and let you out and bury the
coffin.”
So it was settled. Fauvent was to bore some holes in the
coffin so that John could breathe. He still thought it was
too terrible, but old John was brave and said, ‘ 4 l will do
it.” Fauvent thought, “Oh God, do not let anything go
wrong.”
Next morning Fauvent carried Gosette out in a big
basket on his back. That was all right; she did not say a
word.
Next afternoon the people in the streets lifted their hats
as a funeral went by. There was a white cloth over the
coffin; they said, ‘‘lt is a nun. ” (But John was inside that
coffin.) A priest followed the hearse, and one choir boy ;
and an old limping man with a hammer, chisel, and pincers
sticking out of his pocket.
They came to the cemetery. There was no one there.
Fauvent was pleased. He had got Cosette out; he had
buried the good nun under the altar; he would even have
Father Madeleine out ; for the grave-digger knew Mm and


would be sure to come and have a drink. No one was al-
lowed out of the cemetery gate after dark, and it was just’
getting dark; but he could easily take the grave-digger’s
card, and then the porter would let him in and out. He
rubbed his hands with glee; he almost laughed for joy.
And then he suddenly felt like a man hit with a cannon
ball. He saw the grave-digger. It was a different .man!
The one he knew was dead! What could he do now?
They came to the grave. Old John was inside the coffin,
and as his conscience was good he felt calm and trusted in
Hod. He felt the coffin lifted. Then he went dizzy, for
Hiey tipped it up in lowering it * then he thought, 44 I am at
bottom of the grave.’ ’ It gave him a chill feeling.
He heard the priest say the burial service and the choir
boy read the responses. He thought, 44 It will soon be over
now. Fauvent will take the man away to drink, then pre-
tend to come back and fill in the earth, and let me out.”
He heard the last words, “Eequiescat in pace.” Amen.
Then he heard steps going away. ’“Now lam alone,” he
thought.
Suddenly he heard a sound like a clap of thunder over
his head. It was a spadeful of earth on the coffin. Then
another spadeful; it blocked up one of his breathing holes.
Then a third! They were filling in the grave!
There are some things not even the strongest man can
bear. This was too awful. Old John fainted.
Now old Fauvent felt as bad as John did. Already he
had tried hard to get the new grave-digger to come away
and drink ; but the man said, 4 4 No, I do not drink. ” When
the first spadeful went in on to the coffin, Fauvent nearly
fell into the grave with horror.
4 4 Oh, come and drink, ” he implored.
44 Very well,” said the man, 44 but not till I have finished
here.” «
Come, come, I will pay. ”
44 You keep on, ding-dong, ding-dong,” said the man.,
4i Wait till I finish. ”
He stooped to get another spadeful. It made his waist-
coat pocket open. Fauvent saw his card; an idea came
to him—quick as lightning Fauvent stole the card without
the man seeing. The man threw in a fifth spadeful
Fauvent pretended to be calm now. He said, 4 4 By the
way, have you got your card? It is getting dark. They
won’t let you out without it.”
44 0 h, yes,” said the man. He felt in his pocket Then
he felt another, and another, and all of them.
4 4 They fine you a pound if you are late, you know, ” said
Fauvent.


“I must have forgotten it,” said the man.
Oh, well, I’ll tell you what,” said Fauvent. “The sun
is just setting. It is a lot of money-—the flue of a pound.
They know me; they won’t fine me; but you are new.
Hurry along home and get your card. I will watch here r
and you can be back in five minutes.”
‘‘Will you! Oh, thank you.”
“Hurry,'hurry,” said Fauvent.
Off went the man at a run. “Father Madeleine,” said
Fauvent. No answer. Fauvent dropped into the grave-
with a shudder.
‘ ‘ Are you there ? ” he cried.
Not a word from inside the coffin.
Fauvent could hardly breathe. He took his chisel and
wrenched off the lid of the coffin. John lay white and still,
“He is dead,” cried Fauvent. He beat his arms on his.
shoulders.
“That is the way I have saved him,” he moaned. He
began to sob and talk to hihfself. “It is that grave-digger’s;
fault for dying, and letting a new man come. 0 God,.
Father Madeleine is dead. And what am Ito do with the
little girl! 0 Father Madeleine, Father Madeleine—one of
the best men God ever made—the best, yes the very best!’
And for me to have done it. I shall stay in the same
grave.” And he tore his hair and called, “Father-
Madeleine, Father Madeleine! ”
He heard the cemetery gate close. He bent over John.
Then he started back. John’s eyes were opto looking at
him. He went as white as a stone.
John said, “I was falling asleep,” and he sat up.
Fauvent fell on his knees.
“Oh. how you frightened me,” he said.
The fresh air had revived John, but now Fauvent nearly-
fainted.
“Let us get out at once,” said Fauvent. He gave John-
some strong brandy, and John felt all right. They put the-
lid on the coffin and buried it. John was very cold and'
stiff. They gave the card at the gate, and the'porter did
not look, but pulled the latch. They went out and got
Cosette, and went into the convent. The Frioress said to
John, “You be gardener now to help your old brother.”'
They went to the cottage.
They were safe at last!


12.—HOW MARIUS BECAME POOR.
Old John and Cosette were safe in the convent. , The/
stayed there for many years, and it was the happiest time
in good old John’s life. Cosette went to school in the con-
vent; and she grew tall and pretty, instead of being thin
and frightened. Only sometimes she said, ‘‘l wish I had
known we were coming away. I would have brought
Catherine.’ 7
Cosette did not talk much, for so often the Thenardiess
had beaten her for talking; but after a while she talked
and laughed with the other girls. And every day she came
for an hour to be with old John in the little cottage. It
made it seem like heaven to him.
He worked in the garden; he looked up at the sky and
was peaceful; he looked at Cosette and was happy. The
play of the children, the quiet of the garden, entered into
his pour' sore heart, and gave him peace. He never went
out. If there was an errand to go, old Fauvent went
Javert watched in that lane for a whole month, then gave
it up.
But later on we will see that John and Cosette went out
of the Convent, and met other people. So now I must tell
you about those other people, who were going to become
part of John’s life and Cosette’s."
If you had looked into that old house where Cosette had
left Catherine, you would have found that in one room
lived a young man called Marius, who wore very shabby
clothes, but seemed to be a gentleman - r and in the other
room, with only a wall between, lived a wretched family
of people, a father and mother, and two* big girls.
Marius was really a gentleman. His father was a very
brave soldier; his grandfather was a rich nobleman. I
must tell you how Marius became poor.
His father had been an officer in the army of the Emperor
Napoleon, who was always having Avars. After each
battle, Napoleon would write down the names of those who
fought bravely, and often he wrote, ‘ ‘ George Pontmercy
has been very brave.” That Avas Marius’s father. Then
came the terrible battle of Waterloo. George Pont-
mercy did a great deed; he captured some flags
belonging to the enemy and brought them to the
Emperor and laid them at , his*. feet. And the


Emperor said, “Sir, I make you a Colonel and a Baron, and
give you the Cross of the Legion of Honour.” But a little
later Pontmerey was wounded, and lay amidst a great heap
•of people who were dead or wounded too.
And night, a cruel cowardlly man went round the
battlefield stealing things out of the pockets of the dead.
Hear him was his little cart, with a savage looking woman
an it. lie slunk along, and soon he came to the great heap
of dead people where Pontmerey lay. The man saw his
hand, it had a ring on it; he took that. Then he pulled the
body out, for it had rich uniform on it; he stole the silver
cross of the Legion of Honour, and took a watch and purse
out of the pockets.
Just then the officer awoke! He thought this cruel brute
was helping him! He said, “Thank you. You have saved
my life. Who are you ?’ ’ The man said, “lama sergeant
named Thenardier. But we have lost the battle, and I
must go or I will be shot.” Then Pontmerey said, “You
may take all the money I have.” But the man said, “There
is none in your pocket. ”
He pretended to look, but he knew, for he had just
stolen it. So Pontmerey said, “Go now, and I will never
forget you.”
Now this brave soldier did not die, but got better from
iiis wound and lived. He was poor, for Napoleon was not
Emperor any more after that battle, and the new King
hated all Napoleon’s soldiers. The King would not let
Pontmerey call himself Colonel or Baron; he said,
•“Napoleon had no power to make you a Baron.” But
Pontmerey always did call himself Baron.
Baron Pontmerey had married the daughter of a rich
nobleman who hated Napoleon too. So now when Napoleon
was gone, the rich nobleman said he would have nothing
more to do with Pontmerey. The daughter who married
him was dead, but left one little son named Marius. The
rich grandfather said to Pontmerey, “I will look after
Marius and make him rich ; but I will only do it if you give
‘him to me and never come near him.” And the poor lather,
though he loved the boy with all his heart, thought, “I will
do it, for it will be better for the boy. ”
So he gave him up. Only about four times a vear the
poor unhappy Baron would go up from his little house in
the country to a church where little Marius was taken, and
stand behind a pillar and just look at him; and tears rolled
down his face. Marius did not see him.
The cruellest thing the rich grandfather did was this.
He always told Marius that his father was a bad man, a
•robber and a swindler, and made the poor little boy


ashamed of his own father. When the Baron wrote loving
letters to his son. the grandfather took them and? did not
let Marins read them.
One day the grandfather said, ‘ ‘ Marins, to-morrow you
will go to Vernon.” (Marius was grown up now, eighteen
years old.) , . .
£ ‘ What for ?■” said Marins.
To see your father. ? ’ And Marins actually shuddered ;•
he had been taught to be ashamed of his father. He diet
not want to see him. The grandfather said, “He is very
sick it seems. Go to-morrow.” But Marins could have
gone that night.
Next evening Marius came to Vernon. They showed him.
where the Baron lived. He rang the bell.
“Is Monsieur Pontmercy here?” he asked the woman
who came to the door. She nodded.
“Can I speak to him?”
The woman shook her head to say, “No.”
“But lam his son. He expects me.”
The woman cried, “He does not expect you any longer,”
she said, and pointed to a door.
Marius went in. There lay the brave old soldier on the
floor, dead. If Marins had come the night before he would
have seen him. Just when he was driving into the town,
the Baron had cried out, “My son has not come; I am
going to meet him”; and he fell dead on the floor. His son
had come too late.
Marius looked at his father. He had never seen him.
He saw a brave, manly face, marked wdth wounds from
battle; white hair, strong limbs. The old servant loved
him, and wept. The, doctor and the priest wept. But
Marius did not; he did not love him.
The Baron did not leave any money, but he left a letter
for his son. Marius read it.
“FOR MY SON.—The Emperor made me a Baron on
the battlefield of Waterloo. As the King says now that I
am not a Baron, I ask my son to claim that I was, and so
he is. And be worthy of the title.”
Then on the back was written: “At the same battle of
Waterloo a sergeant saved my life. His name is Thenardier.
If my son meets him, let him help him all he can.”
A little while after, Marius went to Church and knelt
down. A man came up and said, “Sir, that is my place.”
After Church the man came up and said, “Sir, I want to
tell you a little story, to show why I always keep that place.
Every two or three months for ten years, I have seen a
poor brave father come to that place; that was the only
way he could see his own son. I do not believe that the


poor little boy ever knew his father at all. The father hid
behind that pillar and watched his son; and he used to cry.
He loved the, boj. I saw it. I knew him too. His wife’s
father was rich, and said he would give no money to the
boy unless the father gave him up. And now he is dead, I
believe. My brother Is priest where he lived, at Vernon.
His name was something like Montpercy. ’ ’
Marius turned pale. “Pontmerey!” he said.
Yes, that Was it,” said the man. “Hid you know
him?” ‘
‘‘Yes,” said Marius. ‘‘He was my father.”
“Then,” said the man, ‘‘you had a father who loved you
well.”
That set Marius thinking. His grandfather had told him
That Napoleon was a monster; but he read about him now,
.and said, ‘‘There was something grand about Napoleon.”
And his mind changed altogether about his father; lie loved
him now and was proud of him. And he began to go oft'
now for three or four days at a time; his grandfather did
not know where he went, but he was very curious to know.
And he found out by accident.
It was this way. There was a cousin of Marius’; and his
grandfather said, ‘‘lf you see Marius, tell me where he
goes.”
One day the cousin saw Marius buy flowers. He said,
“I believe he is going to give them to some young lady; I
will follow.” So he did. They went by coach. They
■came to Vernon. Marius went to the churchyard; the
.cousin followed. There he saw Marius kneeling down by a
grave, with his face in bis hands. He had scattered the
flowers on the grave. And the name on the cross at the
head of the grave was “Colonel Baron Pontmerey.” It
was his father’s grave he used to go to.
A little while afterwards the grandfather found out
what Marius thought. There was a terrible quarrel,
Marius said, “My father was not what you told me; he was
a hero; lam proud of him. He fought battles; he risked
his life amongst bullets and swords; he marched in the mud
and the rain. He loved his country, and he loved me.”
The old man screamed_ out bad words about Napoleon
and Marins father. Marins felt as if he had a whirlwind
in his head. Then he shouted bad words about the King.
riie grandfather went scarlet with rage. He swelled, with
fury. He said, “Leave my house. Be off.” And Marius
went.
So he made himself poor. He could hardly earn any
money; his clothes got shabby; sometimes he had not near-
ly enough to eat. The grandfather sent him money every


six months, and always thought he would come back* but
Marius- would not take the money, and would not go back.
He thought of his heroic fatherland he thought about the
King, who did not govern well, and he felt, 4 ‘lf ever I get
the chance, I will fight for the people, and drive this King
•away. J J
That is why Marius was poor.
And now we must see who lived in the next room. It
was a whole family—-a father and mother and two girls.
The man was a hideous wretch, small and cruel, with a
JBhg grey beard. He wore a woman’s blouse and dirty
muddy trousers, and boots from which his toes stuck out.
The woman was huge, with ugly hair. The two girls might
have been pretty, but they were half-starved, and nearly
naked.
And who do you think they were! Why, that horrible
Thenardier and his family. They had lost their inn and
their money; and now they lived in Paris, absolutely
wretched, but wickeder than ever.
Oh, that room was terrible. It was as dirty as dirty
.could be. (Whereas Marius, though he was poor, always
kept his room clean.) The only furniture was a chair, a*
ricketty table, and two dirty beds. There were spiders*
webs over the windows. The dust lay thick; no one ever
There was a fireplace full of rags and old iron.
Marius did not know these people. But one day when
he heard they could not pay their rent and were going to
be turned out, he was kind enough to pay for them. One
of the girls came and thanked him, and he was sorrier for
them than ever.
The Thenardiers had one visitor sometimes. It was a,
little gutter boy, who used to come every couple of months*
A sharp, smart, barefooted little fellow; their own son,
whom they had kicked out into the streets to live or die ;
that little boy we heard crying at the inn in the cradle.
They did not smile at him when he came.
13. -HOW THE THENARDIERS LAID A TRAP FOR
OLD JOHN.
One day Marins was out for a walk in the beautiful
gardens by the Palace of the Luxembourg. Tie saw a fine
old man sitting on a seat, with a girl about fourteen years
old sitting by his side. The man looked sad and serious,
and very strong. The man and girl talked to one another
and laughed gaily. Marias thought, “I like that man, but
not the girl.”


Six months afterwards Marius saw the same couple, but
npw he said, “What a lovely girl she has become. ”And
from that moment he loved the girl. He walked in the
gardens every day ; he thought of her all the time ;he
began to wear his best clothes every day.
It was old John and Cosette. They had come out of the
convent now. John w r ould have been quite happy to stay
there; if he came out, Javert might find him again and
send him to that cruel prison. But John always thought of
other people first; and he thought it would be best for
Cosette to come out; so he came. He was full of love;
will see that if only he could have stopped helping people
he would not have got into any more trouble.
Just at that time Marius had paid the rent for the
Thenardiers, and the young girl had come in one evening
to thank him. Marius thought, “I ought to have helped
them more.” Then he noticed that there was a crack in
the wall between the two rooms; and he thought “I will
have a look at this room; I might be able to help them.”
He looked in. Thenardier was sitting at the table writ-
ing. And I must tell you now how Thenardier got any
money at all. He used to write letters to different people
and say, “I am very poor; please help me.” He never
called himself Thenardier; Marius thought his name was
Jondrette. The girls used to go with these letters.
Just after Marius went to the crack to look into the
room, one of the girls came running into the room and
said, “He is coming here!”
“What, coming here himself?” said Thenardier.
“Yes, the kind gentleman from the Church. He would
not give me money. He said, ‘My daughter and I will come
and see you.’ He will be here in a minute.”
Then Thenardier did a curious thing. He jumped up,
and smashed the seat out of the chair, and broke a pane of
glass, and made the Thenardiess get into bed and pretend
to be sick, and told his daughter to cry and weep. He
thought, “The poorer we seem, the more money he will
give us.”
There was a knock. “Come in,” said Thenardier, and
in came—old John and Cosette.
Marius could hardly believe his eyes. He shuddered to*
think of the girl he loved in that awful room. Thenardier
told lies, and John gave him five shillings and said, “That
is all I have now; but I will corpe back this evening at six
o’clock and give you more.” Then he went away,.
Thenardier calling him a noble gentleman and a great maul
But directly he was gone Thenardier said, “I know him.
I knew him at once. It is that wretch who l took our little*


girl away. It is eight years ago, but I know him. He
stole The Lark from ns."
Thenardiess was furious.'
“:What! That girl have such a beautiful dress, and my
daughters go in rags!" She looked like a tigress.
And then Thenardier made up a terrible trick. He said,
“That fellow is coming back at six o'clock. I will go and>
get some of the strong bad men to come here. We will
catch him, and make him give us a lot of money this time
eh, thousands of pounds, and we will take The Lark away
from him, and we wall kill him." He gave a horrible
laugh.
It was one o'clock then. ' He went out to see the villains
who were to help him. Just as he left he said to Then-'
ardiess, “Have a good fire to-night."
■ Now Marius had heard all this. He was- frozen with
horror, 'to think of the danger to the girl he loved, and her
good old father. “The wretches, I will crush them like
vipers," he thought.
He went out to the police station, and told his story to*
the inspector. It was Javert. Javert said, “Take this,
pistol. Do not let these people know you are in the room.
Watch through the .crack, and when you think the time has
came fire the pistol, and I and my men will rush in."
Marius went home.. The sun was setting; if was winter;
there was snow falling, it would be quite dark before six
o'clock. He must get to his room without the Thenardiers
hearing him. He did not make a sound getting to his room,
he did not strike a light. He took his boots off and pushed
them under the bed.
Thenardier came in. He had bought a big steel chiseL
Marius heard, him say, “Put that in the fire. The' trap is
open"; the mouse will come."
They put grease on the hinges so that the door would
open quietly. One girl wassent down to watch. 'lt was
half-past five. Thenardier said, “Are you sure our neigh-
bour is out?"'
“You know he is always out at this time; still, daughter,,
take a candle and go and see."
She looked through the door; she went in. . Marins was
trembling; he crept under the bed. He thought she was
coming straight to look there, but she only looked in the
looking-glass. Marins thought, “She must hear me
breathing. ||
She called out, “I have looked under the bed and all
round; he is not here," (But really she had only looked
in the .looking-glass.) She went out. Marius jumped up
to the crack again. Then he got another fright.
K


“We must have two chairs. Get our neighbour’s. Take
the candle. ”
Thenardiess said, “No, I can do without the candle.”
Marius had not time to get under the bed. Would she
see him? No, she got the chair and went back. Marius
took out the pistol and got it ready to fire. He looked
and saw that Thenardier had fixed a rope ladder to the
window.
Six o'clock struck.
“Come in, kind gentleman."
Old John walked into the room. ““There is money for
you, poor man," he said, and he sat down.
■ Thenardier talked to him for some time, until his villain-
ous friends could get outside the door. He said, I hope
yon will buy a beautiful picture I have. It shows me doing
a brave deed at Waterloo. I saved the life of Baron Pont-
mercy." ‘ t ' ; •„ ,
■ Marius could not understand this. The mam- was called-
Jondrette, and his father said the man who saved him was
called Thenardier.
Suddenly the door opened, and first one man, then ano-
ther, slipped into the room. Horrible wretches they look-
ed; they had their faces stained black. Old John gave a
start
“How much do you want for that picture?” said John.
(It was worth about five shillings.)
“I will take a thousand pounds,” said Thenardier.
John jumped up and looked quickly round the room.
'There were four men now. Thenardier shouted, “Do you
know me?”
At that moment three more men came in at the door;
one had a stick, one a butcher’s axe, and one a heavy iron
key. The other men picked up bars and hammers.
Old John saw it all now. He looked very strong and
brave. He pushed the table in. front of him. Marius
thought, “Shall I fire and save him now?” But he waited.
Thenardier said, “I tricked you. lam Thenardier. Now
<do yon know me?”
“No,” said John.
But Marins nearly fainted. His father had said, “Help
•a noble sergeant named Thenardier whenever yon can.”
And now he had found him, it was this abominable wretch,
trying to murder the father of the girl he loved. What
should he do? If he fired, the man who saved Ms father
would be taken to gaol. If he did not, his beloved girl’s
father would be murdered.


Thenardier cursed and raved at old John. “Ah, you
■■■■stole my girl, The Lark. I knew yon at once.:' Now you
must give me ten thousand pounds. 7 7
“I don’t know you/ 7 said Old John. “But I see you
are a robber. 77
All of a sudden o/d John jumped over the table and was
half out of the window; but the men caught him, and
Thenardiess seized his hair. There, was a tremendous,
struggle. Marius said to himself, “Father forgive me/ 7
and was just going to fire, when Thenardier called out,
‘‘ Don 7 t hurt him. 77
John made a great fight, but the men got him down, then
.stood him up and tied him to the bed-post, and took every-
thing out of his pockets. John was quiet now. Marius
wondered to see how quiet and brave he looked.
Thenardier took ink and pens and paper, put them on
The table and pushed it close to John. He said, “ You must
;pay us ten thousand, pounds. Now write what I tell you. 7 7
“How can I write when my hands are tied? 77 said John.
So they untied his right arm. Thenardier told Mm what
■to write.
“My dear daughter, come to me at once. I want you
i>adly. The person who brings this : letter knows the way.
I am waiting for you. 77
John wrote that down. “Now/ 7 said Thenardier, “put
The address where you live, 77
John thought for a moment, then wrote an address.
'Thenardier seized the letter, and told his wife to go off
with it at once. The fierce man with the axe went too.
And now there was not a sound in the room for half an
Jiour. Then Thenardier said, “I may as well tell you that
we are not going to bring your daughter here. She will be
• driven away, thinking she is coming to you; but you wilt
not see her again till you have paid that money. And if
you don’t pay, we will give The Lark a pinch that will
make her squeak. 7 7
John did not say a word. He seemed to wriggle a bit
from time to time, Marius thought.
For more than an hour—a fearful hour—they waited.
Then Thenardiess burst into the room, glaring and breath-
less.
, “It was the wrong address, 77 she shouted. “They .did
not know anything about him at that house. He has cheat-
■ ed you. 77 :
At that moment old John gave a great shake, and he was
free! He bad given the address so that he would have time.
For he had used another trick he learned in gaol. He had
a penny that had been cut open and hollowed out so that


really it was a box, and in that box was the tiniest little
saw. His right arm was free; he got it out, and those
wriggles Marius saw were when he was silently cutting the
ropes.
Now he was free all but his foot, and before the aston-
ished men could leap at him, he pulled the red-hot chisel
out of the fire, and was ready for them!
“What?” said he, “you think you can make me speak
by killing or hurting me? Look.” And he put the red-
hot chisel on his bare arm. It must have hurt him terribly;
but he showed that he could stand any pain. Marius shud-
dered. Even the bad men were horrified. “Now,” said
John, throwing the chisel out of the window, “do what
you like,”
“ Seize him, ” said Thenardier.
They caught him,; one man got ready to knock his-
' brains out. “We must kill him,” they said'. Thenardier
, opened a drawer and took out a knife.
“What shall I do?” thought Marius. He lboked down.
He saw a letter. An idea came to him.
Now that letter had been written by the Thenardier
daughter when she came in to thank him for paying the
rent. She wanted to show that she could write, so she took
up a pen and wrote down “the bobbies are here” (bobbies
is the thieves 7 word for policemen).
Marius picked it up, broke off a bit of plaster, wrapped
the letter round it, and threw it through the crack.
Just in time. Thenardier was going over to old John
With the knife.
‘ ‘Something fell, 7 r said Thenardiessi' She ; sprang to ■it
and handed it to Thenardier.
“How did it come here? 77 he asked.
“It came through the window; I saw it/ 7 said one of
the men.
Thenardier read it. He swore.
“It is my daughter's writing. She is watching .-below.
She says the bobbiesmre here. Quick. Down the ladder;:
leave the man. ”
‘‘ I will cut his throat, 7 7 said’ one.. -
“No time,” said Thenardier.
They let old/ohn go, Out of the window went the rope-
ladder in a twinkling. John seemed to be praying.
Thenardier made a rush for the ladder; The others said
“No you don't, you must draw lots who goes first.”
“You fools," said Thenardier, “we are losing time.
What, put our names down, and put them: in' a cap—- 7 7


“Yes, and how would you like my hat?” said a voice
from the door. They all looked round. There stood Javert!‘
Be smiled and held out his hat.
Thenardier tried to shoot him, hut the others knew him
and were Afraid. A lot of policemen came into the room
and all the robbers were handcuffed. Then Javert saw
the man the robbers had been going to kill.
“Untie the gentleman/ 9 he said, “and let nobody go
-out/ 9 , ' ■
Javert sat down at the table, took some paper and wrote
a few lines. Then he said, “Now bring forward the gentle-
man/’ •
The officers looked round. John was gone ! He had
slipped out of the window and down the ladder!
Old John was safe again. And he had been more afraid
of Javert than of Thenardier and the robbers.
14.—HOW G AVROCHE FOUND TWO LITTLE BOYS
POORER THAN HIMSELF.
We saw how Javert caught the Thenardiers in that hor-
rible room, and put the handcuffs on them and on the other,
wicked robbers who were ready to help them kill old John.
But old John slipped quietly out of the window while they
were all looking at the robbers, and Javert was writing.
When Javert said, “Now let the gentleman who was
going to be killed come here/’ they looked round and said,
'“'Why, he is gone!” And they looked out of the window;
there was the rope ladder swinging about, showing that
someone had just gone down it quickly,
Old John went home with relief and delight. But Javert
was angry. He said, “That man was afraid of the police.
I wish I had caught him even more than these robbers.”
But he had not seen who it was.
Now I must tell you about how they put the handcuffs
on the Thenardiers. All the other robbers were so afraid
of Javert and his policemen that they did not fight. They
were rushing for the window, but Javert said, “ You might
catch cold there (he was poking fun at them) ; come out of
the door one by one, not out of the window.”
One of the robbers pulled a pistol out of his pocket and
put it into Thenardier’s hand. He said, “That is Javert.
I dare not fire at him • would you ? ”


Thenardier took the pistol and aimed straight at
who was only about three yards off,
Javert did not care; he was very brave, we must say.
All he said was, “You had better not fire.”
Thenardier pulled the trigger. The pistol would not" go.
off.
told you so, said Javert. And all the robbers said,,
“You are a devil; we won't fight; we surrender.”
The policemen came into the room. Javert said, “Put
the handcuffs on them. ? y
Suddenly a great voice shouted, “Come on then!” The
policemen jumped back. It was the Thenardiess. She tmd
got into a corner, and Thenardier hid behind her; she held
up a huge stone to throw it. “You cowards,” she said to
the/ robbers. 1
Javert was not afraid. He smiled and walked quietly
towards her, looking straight at her. Her hair was flying,
wild and terrible.
“Take care, if you come near, I smash you,” she roared.
“What a warrior!” said Javert. “You have a beard,
like a man, but I have claws.”
Suddenly she heaved the stone, and threw it at him. He
stooped, and it went over his head and smashed into the
wall, knocking down a lot of plaster.
Javert put one big hand on Thenardier, and one on his
wife ? s shoulder, and simply said, ‘ 'Bring handcuffs. ’ ? And
they were all secured. Thenardier and the robbers were
sent to one gaol, and Thenardiess and her daughters to
another.
As far Marins, he hated this house now. He went away
and hid. He did not want to have to tell Javert how bad
Thenardier had been; for he thought, “Although he is so
bad, still he is the man who saved my father at Waterloo.”
So Marins hid; and although he was very poor, he sent
five shillings to the prison for Thenardier, and Thenardier
wondered who had sent it.
A few days afterwards the old woman who owned the*
house was out in the street, when she saw a little boy all in
rags coining .along. It was that smart; brave, cheeky little
Gavroche, who never had enough to eat, but always
in good spirits. No one ever earned money for him, as
fathers generally do for little boys. He had" to look after
Ms own living like a man; and he was braver and cleverer
than .many: men are.
And now he was coming to see his father and mother.
He did not know they had been taken to gaol. He knocked
against the old woman and began to poke fun at her.
“Beg pardon, I thought you were a big dog,” he said.


She was very angry and said, “I will kick’ yon.” ■
Gavroche began to “sssss” at her, and said, “Why it is
a dog after all.” She jumped np.
He said, “Madame, I do not like your style of beauty! ”
He went on and knocked at his father’s door. No one
opened, so he kicked and battered and shouted. The old
woman ran up. “ You will break that door in, you imp, ”
she said.
“I have come to see my father and mother,” said Gav-
roehe.
“They have gone to gaol,” she answered.
Little Gavroche turned round and went away. He could
not feel very sorry. They had never loved him. He began
to sing. Most of the people he knew went to gaol some-
times.-.
He went along the street. He was terribly hungry. He
thought, “What day is this? I believe it is Tuesday. Let
me see —I had dinner on Friday last. It is time I got some
more, this is getting tiresome. ’ ’
Poor little chap! He was only about ten years old!
He looked in at a window of a barber’s shop and won-
dered if he could steal a cake of soap, then sell it for a .half-,
penny and buy dinner. Just then he saw two little child-
ren, one bigger than the other, but both smaller than Gav-
roche—about seven years old and five—coming along the
street. They were crying, and their teeth chattered with
cold. It was raining now, cold bitter rain. They went into
the shop to ask the barber to help them, but he turned them
out and said, “What do you mean opening the door and
making me cold?”
Gavroche ran after them and said, “What’s the matter r
kids!”
”We don’t know where to sleep,” said the biggest of
them.
“Is that all?” said Gavroche. “Why, we men don’t cry
for as little as that.
Then he said, “Come with me.” He was poor enough,
but he was going to help them.
Well done, Gavroche. Surely he would have been a
good, brave, clever boy if he had ever had the chance. But
life presses very hard on some people. There are thousands
and thousands of boys like him in Paris or London, who
never had a home, whose fathers and mothers never cared
for them. So they become desperate and have to steal, and
then they are sent to gaol and become really bad.
The two little boys followed him, full of trust. Gav-
roche muttered, “That brute of a barber ! He has no
heart.”.


He poked fun at people as lie went along, and made them
angry. But soon he saw a poor beggar-girl, with hardly
any clothes, shivering. Gavroehe was wearing a good
shawl; lam afraid he had stolen it. He gave it to the girl
and went on, shivering, but singing.
He said to the two boys, “ Gentlemen, have you had
•dinner?”
“Sir,” they said, “We have not had anything to eat
since this morning. We have looked up and down all the
streets.”
“Haven’t you a father or mother ?” he said.
“Yes, but we don’t know who or where they are.”
(Now I know who they were. And. who do you think
were the father and mother of those two little boys! Why,
those brutes of Thenardiers ! Thenardiess did not love
these two babies when they were born, after John had
taken away Cosette. She said, “I have- no use for a pack of
squalling boys.” So she gave them ■ away to another
woman. But that morning the other woman had suddenly
been taken away to gaol by Javert. She gave the two
children a letter and said, “Ask where that address is and
go there.” But the wind blew the letter out of the boy’s
hands and now they were lost.
But God sent Gavroehe to them! And,' wasn’t it worn
derful ? He was their own brother, but he did not know
it, and they did not know it. Their own father and mother
had turned them all out, but Gavroehe looked after him-
self and them too.
Gavroehe had one halfpenny in his pocket. They came to
a baker’s shop with fine bread and cake in the window.
“We can have a good, supper for three with this,” said
Gavroehe, and he took them in.
“A haporth of bread, my boy,” he said to the big man
behind the counter. If yon had stood the three children
on top of one another they would not have been as tall as
the man. But Gavroehe called him “My boy!”
The man received the coin, and took some black bread to
cut it.
“What’s that yon got?” said Gavroehe. ‘'White bread,
my boy, I am giving my friends a feast.”
The man cut three slices of bread, one was smaller than
the others. Hungry Gavroehe gave two pieces to the boys.
“Put that in your gun, ’’ he said. He himself, who had had
no dinner for four days, took the smallest piece. (Surely,
if he had grown up, Gavroehe would have been a loving
man like old John !)
They went out of the shop. “Now,” said Gavroehe, “we
will go to my house and sleep A


This sounded very grand, And I must tell you that if a
’policeman had found these three poor little children sleep-
ing in the streets, he would not have been sorry for them;
he would actually have sent them to gaol!
They went along till they came to a sort of board fence
in the corner of a big square, Gavroche said, ‘ 4 My room is
in the elephant!” The little boys were amazed, but they
followed him. Behind that fence they saw a huge elephant,
made of boards and plaster, and as big as a two-storey
house! It had been made by the order of the Emperor
Napoleon to be a big monument; but Napoleon was gone,
?and the King did not want it; so it had grown old and
cracked, and everyone had forgotten it. Gavroche had
found a hole in it and it was hollow inside; so he called it
his house and slept in it!
The Emperor had done one good thing when he built
That elephant; he helped three homeless children without
knowing it. Napoleon had the idea, and God made use of
it! :
“Don’t be frightened, kids,” said Gavroche.
He helped them to crawl through a hole in the fence*
They were a little frightened, but they felt a great trust in
The boy who seemed to have been sent by God to them.
'Gavroche took a ladder that lay there, and hoisted it up
against one of the elephant’s fore-legs.
Just above where it ended they could see a sort of hole
in the elephant’s stomach. “Up you go and get in that
hole,” said Gavroche. But they were frightened. So
Gavroche, who never bothered about a ladder himself,
climbed up the leg, got through the hole, and stuck his face
nut again. “Now come,’;’ he'said, “I will give you a hand.”
So the elder one went up. He tottered on the ladder ;
■the little one cried when he was left alone. Gavroche call-
ed out, 4 ‘ Don’t be afraid. Well done. Be plucky. ’ ’ Then
he caught hold of him and pulled him in.
‘ ‘ There you are, ’’ he said. “Now, my gentleman, kindly
sit down, and I will fetch the other.”
So he climbed down, hoisted the tiny little fellow up on
To the ladder, and called to the big brother, “I will push
him, and you pud him, ” and before the little fellow knew
it, he was inside.
“Hurrah,” said Gavroche. “Kids, you are in my
house! Now we will shut the front door.”
It was a crack that only a cat or a little’boy could get
through. Gavroche pulled along a board, and that shut it,
Tt was pitch dark. 'Suddenly the boys winked; Gavroche
had struck a light; and his candle that he lit was a bit of
-string soaked in resin. It gave' more smoke than light, but


still they could see. Gavroche spent a ha’penny a month
on these candles.
The little boys felt like Jonah in the whale’s 'belly. It
was a big room inside the elephant. The plaster had fallen
down; spiders built huge webs.
Oh, it is dark/’ said the tiniest boy,, hugging close to
liis brother. ’ '
Gavroche did not want them to be afraid,, so he pretended
to be rough and angry.'
“You have got a candle here, what more do you want!
Outside it is dark, and listen how it rains-—but here it is-
dry and snug; you goosy goosy gander, you.”
- “Now be quick,” he said; “here is my bed.”
It lay on the floor of the elephant ’s stomach. There was-
some straw, and a blanket over it—a good one too; and a
rug. The blanket belonged to the-giraffe at the Zoo; the
rug belonged to the monkey there-; Gavroche had stolen
them. (People looked after the animals better than they
looked after children!) Over the bed' hung , a frame of
wire, like the fender that stands before a nursery fire.
“Creep under this on your hands and knees,” said:
Gavroche. They all did. Then he fixed the wire frame,
and wrapped the rug over them.
“Now, kids, I must blow out my candle, I must not
waste,” he said, and the little fellows began to get dry and
warm and, sleepy und cosy.
Gavroche blew out the light,, and that very moment they
heard a scurrying and pattering of little feet. They seemed
to climb the wire and sharp little teeth bit it and tried to
get through.
“What's that?” said the little boy.
Rats, my kids, ” said Gavroche. And so it was, thous-
ands of them; and the savage things would have killed the
boys if they could have got at them. But Gavroche with
his wire was too much for them.
‘‘ Why don’t you have a cat?” the boy asked.
“I brought one here, kid, but the rats ate her,” said
Gavroche.
Oh, how frightened the little fellow was! But Gavroche
comforted him. “We are all safe,” he said; “hold my
hand and go to sleep-how. ’ ?
Then Gavroche gave them a little lecture.
“You must always be brave,” he said. “Never cry and
I will take care of you. Go to sleep. 11
Poor little kiddies! Brave, kind little Gavroche!


15.—HOW GAVROCHE SAVED OTHER PEOPLE,
BUT NOT HIMSELF.
It was early in the morning, just before it grows light,,
Gavroehe and his little brothers were asleep inside the'
elephant. Suddenly he woke up, for he heard a curious
call from under the elephant. He knew who was calling.
It was a robber; a friend of Thenardier's and of the other
four robbers whom Javert had put in gaol for trying to
kill old John. ,
"All right/' said Gavroehe, and slipped out of bed r
through the hole and down to the ground. The robber was*
quite a young man, very'smartly dressed, and very, very
strong. He said to Gavroehe, "Come and help us. We
want you."
"Here I am," said Gavroehe, cheerfully, and off they
went.
Now I must tell you a story about this : robber which*
Gavroehe knew, but he did not tell the robber he knew.
There was a very poor old man, a friend of -Marius, who*
lived near Paris, and had a little garden with a hedge
round it, and an apple tree in it. He used to have' some
money, but now he had sold everything, and had none left,-
One evening Gavroehe was looking round for some supper
he saw the apple tree; he thought "I will get over the
hedge and have an apple.".
Then he stopped. He heard the old man talking to an
old woman inside the garden, quite close to him,
“Sir, the landlord says he will turn ns ont, because you
have not paid the rent. And the grocer and the butcher
will not give us any more food without money."
"Well, I have no money, I must eat apples," said the"
weary old man, Thu woman went away,
"Oho," thought Gavroehe, "then I won't steak the
apples. I’ll have a sleep, and see if I wake up less hun-
gry, '' So he snuggled down.
Soon he saw two men coming along. One was an oid r
man; one was a strong young man—in fact the young
robber. He was slinking along after the old man, who did 1
not notice him, Gavroehe felt very sorry for the old man ;;
but, ho thought, "even if I help him, the robber can easily
beat us both, he is so strong."


Then all in a moment the strong robber leapt at the old
man from behind, like a tiger. A moment afterwards, and
one of these men was under the other, panting and
-struggling, and helpless. Only it was not what Gavroche
idealt with the robber so terribly that it seemed as if it
was the strong robber that had no . chance. Gavroche
oould not help clapping his hands.
The old man—it was old John, and we know how strong
he was—held the robber till he lay quiet. Then he said,
“Get up.”
The robber wriggled and jerked furiously to get away ;
Old John hardly seemed to notice it. Gavroche was de-
lighted.
Old John said, “You are young, why don't you work?”
.And then he spoke to him very kindly. “You don't know
what this will lead you to. Don't rob; be honest. The
:gaol is awful. If you take as much trouble to work as you
do to steal, you will be happy. Now, what did you want
to get from me? My purse? Well, there it is; I give it to
you. Go, and be honest.” And he quietly walked on.
The robber stood still after he had put the purse in his
pocket, thinking. Gavroche crept out without a sound,
Hipped his hand into the pocket, took the purse, and crept
away. And then, instead of keeping the money, he threw
the purse over the hedge, right at the feet of the poor old
man who had said, “I have no money!”
That was some days ago, and now 7 Gavroche was walk-
ing along with the same robber. As they went, the robber
told him that the other day he met a man who gave him a
purse and a sermon. “I put the purse in my pocket,” he
said, “ and next moment it w r as gone! ”
Gavroche chuckled, he all about that. He said,
“I hope you kept the sermon.”
They hurried along; and soon they came to a street near
the gaol, and sawi a high wall three stories high; and on
top of that wall they could just see a man lying flat. The
other thieves whom Javert had caught were at the foot of
The wall. And the man on top was Thenardier.
What had happened w 7 as this. Those thieves were very
clever at getting out of gaol (just as old John was; but
they were bad men.) Thenardier was in a different part
of the gaol. They made a rope and came down in the
middle of the night. Thenardier came after them. He
found a little bit of the rope they had left, but it w r as not
long enough for him to get down to the ground. They
waited at the foot of the wall for him; they did not see
r Mm up there-and he dared not call out. They said, “We


must go; he must have been caught again.” They were'
just going, when Thenardier dropped the bit of rope at"
their feet. They looked up and saw him.
' But how could they get him down. It was so high;;
three stories high. He was cold, he could not climb any:
more. Then the great bell rang in the gaol which showed..
they had found out that he was gone. In a little while it
would be light, and the soldiers would look and see 1
Thenardier. What could they dot One of them said,.
‘‘Only a boy could climb up to him with a rope.”
“A boy I” said another robber. “I know the very boy
to do it. ” So he ran off and was fetching Gavroche.
Gavroche came. They mnst hurry. It was very dan- -
gerous.
“Can a little fellow like this get up there with a rope?”"
they asked.
“Bah,” said Gavroche, and off he started. Then he saw
it was Thenardier up there. “Oho,” he said, “it is my
father.” He felt inclined to leave him there. “Never -
mind, I 11 do it all the same, ” he said, and went on.
In another minute, Thenardier was in the street safe! He
took no notice of Gavroche! The little felloiv waited, .
hoping his father would turn to him, then he put on Ids,
shoes and said, “I must be off to take care of my kids,”
and went. He had saved his brothers and his father inn
one night.
He never saw the little ones after that morning, though
he told them to come hack to the elephant and he would!
look after them. And now I must tell yon the last adven-
ture of little Gavroche.
There was fighting in the streets of Paris. The people-
hated their King, and got guns, and built up barricades?
with stones and carts, and fought the soldiers. And Gav-
roehe thought, “I must have a share in this. How grand!
So he went inside a barricade. He laughed and sang
They gave him a gun, and he fired it. He did brave
things. He did things that made them laugh even when'
they were fighting. He saw a thin dog, and he said, “Poor-
bow-wow. Have you swallowed a cask? I see the ribs.”
He took an old pistol that he saw; it would not fire, but'
it felt grand to wave it abont. He saw the shop of the 5
barber who would not give help that other night to his two 1
little brothers, and he threw a great stone and broke the
window ; and the barber, who was just saying how he
would like to be killed by a bullet on the field of battle
went as white as a sheet when he heard the crash of the-
window I


. He broke all the lamps he could see. He stole a hand-
.cart, and when a soldier tried to stop him, he drove it full
tilt into the man’s stomach and ran away. - At last he came
inside the barricade, singing all the while, thoroughly en-
joying himself.
The fighting was terrible. There was a cannon firing at
the barricade; the men inside would not surrender, but
determined to die. That poor old man to whom Gavroche
Iliad flung the purse, was there, and a bullet went through
his head and killed him. He would never want food any
more.
At last the brave men behind the barricade found that
they had hardly any more cartridges to fire. The soldiers
had plenty. Suddenly the soldiers made a charge right
up to the barricade and nearly got over; but a number of
them were killed, and the rest went back. The men inside
the barricade rested.
Suddenly one of the leaders saw someone outside the
{barricade. It was terribly dangerous even inside it, where
the wall stopped most of the bullets that the soldiers fired ;
but outside it looked like certain death.
‘ ‘ What are yon doing VI he called out.
It- was, little Gavroche. He had heard the captain sav,
We have hardly any more cartridges, ” so he thought,
-■ Those dead soldiers have plenty. I will get some from
them. He had taken a basket and slipped out, and was
taking cartridges out of the pouches of the soldiers who
had been killed, so that his own friends would have more.
When he heard the captain’s voice he cocked up his nose
; and said,
“I am filling my basket.”
.“Why, don’t yon hear the bullets?”
“Oh,” said Gavroche, “I thought it was raining; that’s
*11.”
“Come hack, came back!”
“In a minute, ” said Gavroche.
Some of the dead soldiers lay near the barricade, but
tsome were down the street, quite near their own friends.
The street was filled with smoke from the powder, so that
the soldiers hardly saw- Gavroche while he was- taking the
cartridges from the dead soldiers who lay near the.barri-
cade.
He went to one dead soldier, took his cartridges, then to
another and another. - He crawled flat on his stomach; hi
ran on hands and feet; he twisted and wriggled and crept.
His friends watched; they dared not call to him; it would
have made the soldiers notice him. Once when he was
taking a dead soldier’s cartridges a bullet hit that soldier.


-“Why, they are killing my dead - men,” laughed Gav-
roehe.i
He went further and further down the street,- away
from the barricade and nearer to the soldiers. They could
•see him now. They were aiming at him. One bullet hit
the stones by his feet; another upset his basket. He stood
straight up and looked at them, and began to sing. He
picked up his basket, put in the cartridges again that had
been spilt out, and went still closer to the men who were
firing, to get another lot of cartridges. Another bullet
Just missed him. lie sang on.
This went on for a time. It was a terrible sight. They
fired at him; he laughed and jeered at them. They began
.even to laugh while they shot at him. He lay down, sprang
up, hid himself, disappeared, escaped, returned, made
faces, and all the while he was filling his basket.
His friends were breathless, and followed him with their
eyes. He seemed to be a fairy; to be able to jump quicker
than bullets. It was an awful game of hide and seek.
At last one bullet hit him. He tottered and fell. The
■whole crowd gave a cry. He rose again; sat up, with blood
pouring down his face; he looked at the men who fired,
;,and went on singing.
Just before the last words of the verse, the same man
fired at him again. Gavroche fell with his face on the
pavement. His great little soul had gone to God.
16.—HOW OLD JOHN WENT INTO THE
BARRICADE.
We saw that old John would have been content to stay
in the convent always; but although it might let Javert
find him again and send him back to that awful gaol, he
came out because he thought it would be better for Cosette.
And one day he and Cosette saw some miserable men who
were being taken to the gaol; even in the streets the
■gaolers were beating them brutally, though some of them
were sick • and they had heavy chains on, and ugly clothes.
-Cosette wondered about them ; she did not know that old
John had once been like that, and that if Javert caught
him he might be again; but old John shuddered and hur-
ried away.
'Still, as it was better for Cosette, he would not hide just
to save himself. He would run the- risk; And also he


would go on helping people though that made his risk
greater. We saw how he helped Theiiardier and fell into
a trap through it. That was the sort of man he was now;,
he could hardly think of himself, when he had a chance of
helping anyone. But he took care to make all arrange-
ments; so that he could run away in a hurry if danger
came. He bought a house that had a secret way out at the
back, and an overgrown rambling garden. (Cosette loved
the garden, and an old stone seat that was in it.) When he
went out for walks with Cosette, which he delighted to do,,
he wore nice clothes that made him look as if he had been
an officer in the army. But when he went out by himself,,
it was generally just about dark, and he wore clothes like
a working man, and a cap that came right down over his
face and hid it. And this was partly to keep people from
seeing who he was, but partly also it was because John
felt very humble, and would not give himself pleasures or
comforts, though he gave them to Cosette and other people.
It was the same about his food and other things. One-
day Cosette said to him, “Father, why don't you have n
fire in your room? It is cold.",
“Dear child," said John, there are many people who are-'
better than I am, but have not even a room at all."
“But, Father, why do I have a fire then and such a com-
fortable room?"
“Because,;dear, yon are a woman, and I love to give it
to you."
Another time Cosette said, “Father, why do yon always
eat miserable black bread, and give me nice white bread?"'
“Just because," said old John.
“Well,Then,"' said Cosette, “if yon can eat it, so will IW
Then old John ate white bread for fear Cosette would eat;
the nasty black bread.
Cosette adored old John, and he simply lived for her.
But yet, as she grew into a big girl and became very beau-
tiful, gradually old John's happiness began to be spoiled,..
like a bright sky with a' cloud spreading over it. Why?;’
Because he began to fear that she loved someone else, and
would want to get married and go away and leave him..
That - thought was terrible to him.
He had noticed Marius watching them in the Gardens.
He saw that he was a htodsome ;i young man; and at first
he thought “That rellow loves Cosette, but she never looks
at him/ ' Then he began to notice little things, and he
said to himself, “Cosette loves him too." It was an awful
blow to him.. He almost hated Marius.
. And I must tell you, though'old John did not know it,,
that Marius used to- climb- into the .rambling .old' garden, 7 .


and Cosette met him, and they sat on the stone seat, and
he told her that he loved her, and they were so happy
that she almost forgot about old John. They used to sit
on the seat for hours, hardly speaking, but just holding
hands. '
Another thing that made John anxious was, that several
times he "had seen Thenardier about the streets. And he*
knew that if Thenardier recognised him, he would not be
safe. And Javert might see him too. So at last John said
to Cosette, “We must go away ; this time we right
away from France; we will go to England." Then,
thought John, “I will be rid of Javert and Thenardier and
of this fellow Marius. 77
Poor little Cosette was heartbroken. She sent a note
along to Marius and said, “We are going away at once,
to England, and I will never see you again, and I don't
know how I can live without you."
When Marius got that note he nearly went mad. Ano-
ther thing had just happened that enraged him. He had
gone to his rich old grandfather and told him that he loved
Cosette; but the grandfather was cruel and bitter and said
he must not think of marrying her. So he rushed away in
a rage. And when he got Cosette*s note, he thought, “I
have lost her; I do not care if I die."
At that very moment he got a message from some of his
friends, saying, “We have built a barricade; we are going
to fight against this King and his soldiers; come and join
its."
Marius rushed off. It would be a relief to him to fight
savagely and die, he felt. It was that very barricade to
which Gavroche went. The Captain and the other men
there welcomed him gladly.
When he got there, and felt “I will never go away from
here alive," he thought, “I will send a last letter to dear*
Cosette." So he wrote it; he said, “lam near death. By
the time you read this, my soul will be near you." Then
he looked round to find a messenger, and saw little Gav-
roche. Gavroche had been cheery and brave, for the*
fighting had begun now, and already Marius had nearly
been killed, fighting like his brave ' father. ' And once-
Marius had saved Gavroche Vlife.
. “Will you do something for met" said Marius.
“'Rather," said Gavroche, heartily.
“Then find a way out of the barricade, and take this let-
ter to this lady. Go at once before the soldiers get all
round and block every road."
Gavroche did not like going away; but he went. But
before he went, he did one other thing. He had caught
w


■ sight of one man who was only pretending to fight He
looked at him in surprise. He said to himself, “Eh, what!
No, surely, it can’t be him! I’m dreaming!” Then he
went up to the Captain and said, “Do you see that fellow
there ? ”
“What about him?”
“He is a spy—a policeman come to catch you all.”
“'Are you sure!”
. “Sure? Why a week ago he pulled me off a wall by the
ear.”
The Captain called four men. They quickly surrounded
the big man Gavroche had pointed to.
The Captain came up and said, “What are you?”
The man gave a start, and looked round. He said, “Ah,
I see you have found me out.”
“You are a spy,” said the Captain.
“lam a policeman,” said the man.
In a moment they were on him, and had him down, and
searched him. They found his policeman’s badge; the
name- on it was—Javert!
They tied him up to a post in a room. Gavroche came
up and said, “Oho, the mouse has caught the cat this
time, ” '‘
Javert had not cried for help. He was brave, . this
Javert!
The Captain said, “You will be shot ten minutes before
the soldiers take the barricade and kill us.”
“ Why not now?” said Javert, quietly. “Use your guns
.or a knife.”
They left him there, and Gavroche took his gun. Soon
after, Gavroche went ,off with the letter from Marius to
©osette.
Just before this, old John had found something out by
chance. He was in the room where Cosette had her writ-
ing pad. She had just written to Marius, and blotted the
letter on the pad, so that the writing came off quite clear
on the blotting paper, only back to front. John happened
to lift the pad in front of the looking-glass, and then the
writing showed in the looking-glass quite clearly, and the
right way round. It caught his eye and he read it. Cosette
said to Marius in that letter, “I cannot live without you.”
Poor old John. He had thought that Cosette; did not
love Marius. -He was going to take her away. And now
he found that she could not live without Marius.
He went outside. He felt he could kill Marius. Just
then he saw a sharp little boy with a letter. An idea came
into John’s mind.: “I wonder if Marius is sending her an


to her letter ? 7 ' He said to Gavroche, 6 ( Is that the
letter I am waiting for?”
"Yon! Yon great big fellow—you are not a young
lady/’ said Gavroche.
"It is for Cosette, is it not! I am to take it to her/ 5
said John.
"That’s the name/ 5 said Gavroche; and he fiiade a mili-
tary salute and gave him the letter.
John said, “Where did it come from?”
Gavrotte told him where the barricade was.
John took the letter and went inside.
He opened it. It said, "I will be dead before you get
this.”
And now old John had one more great struggle in his
mind. His thoughts tossed like waves of the sea. “I hope
he will die/ 5 he thought ; '/then I will have Cosette to
■myself.” "No,” he thought again, “I cannot let him die.
If I leave him. there, he dies. If Igo and stand by his side,
perhaps I will be killed. But I will go, and perhaps I can
-save him for Cosette, though it will ruin all my happi-
ness.”'
And he put on his soldier’s uniform, and went out—to
save Marius. Well done, old John! «
Over at the barricade, the noise and fighting were
furious. Let me tell you how they made a barricade. They
found a narrow street, with high houses on both sides*
'They took carts and omnibuses and mattresses and paving
stones —everything they could find; tables, chairs, furni-
ture; they piled them in a monstrous heap, blocking all
the street. Then,.they got behind this, and in the windows
of the houses; and fired at the soldiers, who had to charge
up to these barriers and climb over them while the men
shot at them. The soldiers were brave, and the men behind
the barricade were brave too. The soldiers had cannon as
■well as guns; the men in the barricade had only guns.
'When once the soldiers climbed over, they gave up using
guns and fought hand to hand with bayonets. It was
„ awful.;
Marius did not care if he was killed,so- he did wonder-
fully brave things. Once he . saved Gavroche’s life. A
.soldier was rushing at Gavroche, The brave little chap
.had Javert’s gun, and. he lifted it and fired. But- Javert
was only pretending to fight, so he had not loaded Ms gun.
The soldier laughed, and was just going to stick his sharp
bayonet through Gavroche, when Marius killed him.
Another time the soldiers had almost got over the barri-
cade. They swarmed on it. Suddenly they heard a
■ thundering voice, “Get oft, or I will blow you all up!” It


■ was Marins; he had a cask of powder at' his feet, and a*
torch in his hand ; if he lit the powder, they would all be 1
blown to pieces. ....
“You will blow yourself up too,” said the soldiers,
“Yes,” said Marius. He did not care.!- They all rani
away!
It was late at night by now. Nearly all: the men. beldnd
the barricade had been killed. It was evident that the
soldiers would beat them. The Captain called his men
together and said, “I want to save some of you. You have
fought bravely ; you must escape, and fight again another
time. You cannot get away in your clothesg but here are
four soldiers’ uniforms;, if you dress in these you can get
away safely, pretending to be soldiers. V
The men were brave • none wanted to escape. The Cap-
tain said, “All the married men must go; or your wives
and children will starve.” Then five married men were
found. But there were only four uniforms. How could,
they save the fifth %,
At that very moment another uniform coat fell down on
top of the four. That made five. The fifth married man
could be saved too! Where did it come from?
It came from a big old man who had just jumped into-
the barricade, dressed as a soldier. It was old John. He
had come to save Marius for Cosette. If he had kept the-
uniform, he could have got away safe. But old John never
thought of himself when he saw a chance to help other
people. He gave up his uniform at once. The five men
■got away safe.
And old John -stayed there to save Marius.
Marius looked up to-see who this-brave man could bn
who gave up his own chance of safety to rescue- another
man. And 10, it was the father of Cosette!'
17.—HOW OLD JOHN SAVED MARIUS.
Marius did not know what to think. He did’ not know
Old John was there simply to save Marius’s life, because
Cosette had written, “I cannot live without Marius.”
And indeed there was not much time for thinking. The'
fighting was terrible. They had been fighting all night ;
it was morning now, and it went on till afternoon. More
and more soldiers kept coming, with cannon too. Old
John risked his life time after time ; but some of the mem


noticed that he did not try to kill any of the soldiers. All
lie wanted was to save Marius.
Once the Captain and Marius and Old John went into the
room where Javert was. He had been tied, up all night
waiting to be killed. But he was not afraid. Truly he
was brave. He said to them, “ Give me a drink, if you are
not going to kill me yet; and I should be more comfort-
able if you laid me on the table. 7 7 So they tied him there.
Old John did not know he was John looked at him;
and Javert look at John, and recognised him. ■ ‘ Just what
I would expect—to find that man here/ 7 he said to him-
r-self. , _ ■: .. ■ .
Directly after this, a great cannon fired at the barricade.
Plump went the cannon-ball. At that very moment Gav-
roche took a flying jump over the barricade, He had come
back after giving the letter to John. Marius was angry.
When he sent him out he thought, “That is Thenardier’s
son; I have saved him, as Thenardier saved my father.”
■Now he said to Gavroche, “What did you come back here
for?” . i
Gavroche put out his tongue and said, “ And what did
you come here for?” Soon after this poor little Gavroche
was shot. Marius at once sprang over the barricade, and
carried him back. A bullet scratched his forehead. He
Mid not mind. He thought, “That is what Thenardier did
for my father. I have done it for his son, but I have not
•saved his life.” He kissed the little dead face, even with
all the blood on it. They divided up all the cartridges that
'Gavroche bad gathered. Only Old John would not take
; any. Marius thought, “In a few moments I will die now.
I wonder what my father will say to me?”
I must tell yon two of the things Old John did, to make
the barricade safer for Marius. A cannon fired what is
(•called grape shot —-a whole cloud of bullets instead of one
big ball. This was worse; it would not get through the
barricade, but the bullets bounced off a wall sideways and
killed people. “0, if only we had a mattress—the bullets
would not bounce off,” said the Captain.
Old John had noticed a mattress tied by two ropes in
front of a window high up. An old woman had put it
there to stop bullets from coming into her window. John
took aim and fired, and the bullet cut one rope. He fired
again and cut the other. The mattress fell outside the
barricade.: John walked Out among the bullets, picked it
up and put it on the wall so that the grape shot would not
bounce off it. This would make Marius safer, he thought.
Hater on he saw a soldier up on a roof, where he could
spy down into the barricade. Old John fired, and knocked


the soldier’s cap off. Another came; John did the same to*
him. Then no more would come, John was a wonderful
shot. But he would not MIL. those, soldiers. He only
thought of Marius, and how to save him.
No—he thought of one other person too; of JaverL
Javert had hunted him like a tiger ; Javert had ruined his
life; and now Javert was lying there, bound and helpless,
and John had a pistol. He went to the Captain and said,
"Are we going to blow that man’s brains out!”
"Yes, ’’ said the. Captain. ■
' ‘‘ Then let me do it—l ask you, as a favour, ’ ’
"Yes,” said the Captain, Javert heard, and smiled, and
said, "It is only natural he would like to.”
John went to Javert, and carried him out of the house y
round a corner, where none of the men could see. He held
a pistol, ready to fire. Then swiftly he took his knife,
Javert thought, ■‘ £ He ■ will stab me then. ’ ’ John cut his
ropes and said, "Go free.”
"What!” said Javert, amazed,
"Go free. I know you will catch me now, even if I get-
away from here alive.' But go free.”
' Javert said, "I cannot stand having a favour from you..
Kill me.”
‘ ‘ Horry, ’ ’ said John. Javert went. J ohn ■ fired his pis-
tol, to pretend he had killed him, and went back to the men
and said, ‘ ‘l have dealt with him. ’’ Marius and the others
thought, of course, that John had shot him dead.
Suddenly the soldiers’ drum beat for a charge, and they
rushed for the barricade. The fighting was awful. It was-
too horrible for words to tell. The soldiers beat the men
the men were forced back to the door of a house; the gal-
lant Captain fought all alone against the soldiers with his
sword till every one of his men had gone through the door ;■
then he went too. The soldiers broke it down; all the men
were killed at last but the Captain. He threw away his*
weapon and said, "Fire—shoot me!” He folded his arms.
He was grand; any man is grand who dies for what he*
believes to be right.
The soldiers made a line opposite him. The sergeant
said, "Would you like to have your eyes bandaged!” ■
, "No,” said the Captain.
"Take aim,” said the Sergeant.
Suddenly a man rose up; it was a friend of the Cap-
tain’s; he had actually been asleep in spite of all the noise,
and danger. He said, "Stop.”, The soldiers lowered their
guns. He said to the Captain, 4 6 May I die with you! ” He-.
stood up by his side. : The- soldiers aimed and fired,' : They
both fell dead.


Now Marius had not gone through that door. He had
so many wounds you would hardly have known his blood-
stained face. At last, just by the door, a bullet broke his
shoulder. He fell. As he tumbled he felt strong arms
seize Mm. “I am a prisoner/’ he thought. “I will be
shot.’ 7 -■ ' _ .
But it was Old John who had him. He leapt at him like a
tiger, and carried him round the corner. But how was he
to get him away ? He looked all round and up and down;
suddenly in the pavement he saw an iron grating, about
two feet square. He hauled it up, lifted the body of
Marius, and dropped into a hole.
What a change in one second! Instead of blazing sun,
black darkness; instead of crowds of men and the roar of
fighting, silence and solitude. In fact, Old John had got
into one of the great drains that run under the city of
Paris, and carry off all the dirty water and filth and empty
it into the river.
They are big drains ; a man can walk upright in them..
But they are as dark at pitch, and smell frightfully, and
are terribly dangerous, because in some places there are
pools with sticky oozy bottoms, deep and still, and if a man
got into one of them he would sink and could not get his
feet clear, and would surely be drowned.
Of all the things that Old John did, I think the bravest
and most wonderful was the way he carried Marius miles
and miles through those drains and got him out safe.
Marius seemed to be dead; though his heart beat. John
tied up his wounds, to stop the bleeding; he put Marius’s
two arms over his own shoulders, and carried him tenderly
on his back. He could hardly see a step ahead of him.
Once he sank into an awful pool, right down to his chin ;
by a great effort he just struggled out. But even his
mighty strength was gone at last. Every three or four
steps he had to stop and pant for breath and lean against
the wall. Once he had to sit down and thought he could
not get up. But his heart was as brave as ever. He would
not leave Marius, even if Marius was dead. And at last,
after some hours—he saw light ahead. It was another
grating. He could get out. He had fallen to his knees
just then, and he stayed there and thanked God.
And when he came to the grating—it was locked !
He tore and pulled; he could not move it. Despair came
to him. After all, Marius would die.
Suddenly he heard a voice, “ITI go you halves. 77 He
gave a jump. He turned round. It was Thenardier!
Old John was used to thinking quickly. At once he saw,


t ‘ This fellow does not know me yet. I must not speak,, ami
I must keep my back to the light. 77
Thenardier had made a key for himself to unlock that
grating; for he and some other robbers often hid in the
drains. And of course he thought Old John must be a
robber hiding too; and when he saw Old John carrying
Marius, he said, “I see, you have killed this fellow' and
want to get out and drown his body in the river. Well,
.give me half his money and I will let you out. 77
John thought, AI will let him think that. 7 ! He took out
all his money; it was only about £2. Thenardier grumbled,
4 ‘You kill a man for very little, 77 and took, not half, but
all of it.
He unlocked the grating. John staggered out with
Marius, who was still fainting. He was free, and Marius
would be saved for Cosette.
Suddenly, right in front of him he saw—Javert!
John did not know it, but this was really a trick of that
hrute Thenardier. For Javert had been chasing Then-
ardier, and had seen him go into the grating : and he sat
and waited. Thenardier thought, “If I let this fellow go
out, Javert did not see it was me who came in, and will not
look for me any more. 77 So he let John out.
What was John to do P Javert would know him. But
he must save Marius. He went up to Javert and said, “I
am John. Take me. But I ask you one thing, I want to
save'this man 7 s' life. Let me drive him to his grandfather 7 s
before you take me to gaol. 77 (He had saved Javert 7 s life
too; but he knew well that Javert would take him to gaol
just the same.)
Javert thought a moment. He looked at Marius and said
“He is dead. 77 Then he said he would let John take him
home; but he went with him. Marius was still in a faint.
So they brought Marius home. His life was saved. Oh,
well done, John, well done indeed!
18.— HOW JOHN CONQUERED JAVERT AT LAST.
Perhaps the grandest thing Old John ever did was when
he saved Marins in the barricade, and carried him., miles
and miles through the dreadful drains under Paris, so as
to save his life, because Cosette had said, “I cannot live
without Marius.” Even-John’s mighty strength was hard-
ly enough to do this; .and Marius seemed to be dead, and
did not know who was saving him. But at last John got


tout into the open air again; and there he saw Javert. He
*could not escape without leaving Marius ; so he was ready
.even to go back to gaol, if he could save Marius. There-
fore he went up to Javert and said, “I am John; take me
:to gaol ; hut let me first take this young man to his home
.and save his life.” And Javert drove there with them.
They came to the door, and knocked, and told the porter
'■ who it was.
They carried Marius upstairs and put him to bed. Javert
-said," The man is dead. There will be a funeral here to-
morrow.” But Old John shook his head to comfort them,
. and show that Marius was not dead.
Then Javert touched John on the shoulder. John knew
what he meant, and went down at once. Javert followed.
“They got into the carriage.
John said, “Sir, I wish to ask you one more favour.”
“What is it ?” said Javert, roughly.
“Let me go to my house for a moment. Then I will fol-
low you.” ■
Javert thought for a moment. Then he leant out and
*said to the driver, “Go to this man’s house.”
Neither of them said a word the whole way.
What did Old John want? To say good-bye to Cosette;
to tell.her Marius was safe at home; perhaps to tell her
where he had buried the money. Was not he going to
.attack Javert and get away? No. Since he had met the
dear old Bishop, he hated the idea of hurting anyone,;
even to save himself. And he had promised to go with
Javert.
.Javert and John got out, and paid the driver. They
L-came .to .the door. Javert said, “Go in, I will wait, for
jou.”
Now the way he said this, made Old John look at him.
.Usually Javert spoke so haughtily and cruelly. He was
.different somehow. And I must say that after John saved
;his life at the barricade, Javert spoke to him just a little
differently; and he had been thinking hard. Before that he
had been like a eat with a mouse.
John went up the stairs. At the head of the stairs was a
window that looked out on the street. John was very
tired and sad. He stopped, and happened to look out.
Then he leaned right out and looked all up the street. He
could not believe it—but Javert had actually gone away!
He was not waiting.
We must follow Javert. He walked on and on, thinking
more deeply than he had ever thought in his life. At last
lie came to the river; and he leant on the railing, thinking.
His thoughts were tossing in his mind like waves of the


sea, just as John’s had been when he had met the oldi
Bishop. And it was the same kind of reason. Before-
that, John had believed that all men were cruel; then he*
met an absolutely kind man, and it upset all his ideas. So
Javert had always believed that all men in gaol were-
thoroughly bad; but now he had met a man from gaol who-
saved his life; and it upset all his ideas.
And he did not know what to do. He was like a man;
walking along a road, and he thinks it goes straight on
then suddenly it forks, and he does not know which branch
to take. Bo Javert had always thought his road went 1
straight on ; if he met a man who had been sent to gaol, he
was to catch him. But now he saw two roads instead of
one. Either he could catch John and send him to gaol—
but how could he do that when John had saved his life?'
Or else he could let John go—but then he was a policeman,
so how could he do that? It would be failing in his duty.
On the one road was the head of the police, who would say
to him, Catch that man. ’ But on the other road be-
seemed to see another Person that he hardly ever thought
of. That Person said to him, “Cannot you see that John-
is a good man, not a bad? Could you dare to spoil his life
again, when he saved yours?” And the Person who said
this was greater than the head of the police; it was God.
Javert hated to think that John was good. It upset all
his ideas. He could not help thinking it though. He began,
to remember now some of the loving things that John had
done when he had called himself Father Madeleine; and
Javert seemed to see John wearing the ugly dress they
wore in gaol, but with a halo round his head. Javert hated
to . think it. He wished that John had killed him in the-
barricade, after all.
All the time they were riding in the carriage, Javert
had started twenty times at least to put his hand out and
catch John’s collar, to jump on him like a tiger. He had
only to call out through the window to the nearest police-
man “This is John, who got out of gaol,” then he need
not do any more; he could leave him to his fate, and sav
J- have nothing to do with it.” But he could not help
feeling that would be like Pontius Pilate handing over-
Jesus to the Jews, and washing his hands and saying ‘I
have nothing to do with his fate. ’ ” So each time Javert
went to raise his hand, it was as if an enormous weight
pressed it back. Then when John went into the house
Javert hurried away and left him free. He felt he had to’
.' . C ? hardly tell why he did it. He felt as surprised
that he had spared John as that John had spared him.
Suddenly he made up his mind. He went to the nearest


police station, and wrote down some things that he wanted
to tell the head of the police in a letter. Then he went
back to the river. Just at that place it runs swift and.
dark. A in an who fell in there would be sure to be drown-
ed.
He thought it out once more. “This John ought to go to-
gaol. It is my duty to ruin his life. But he saved mine!
I cannot hurt such a man. But it is my duty. W hile I
live I will do my duty. If I live, I must catch him. Welh
then, I must not live; I must die.
And next minute, if you had been there, you would have 1
seen Javert fall into the water. Old John had beaten him.
at last, not by being clever, but by being good.
Next day John read in the paper that Javert was dead.
And now he felt safe at last, and happy.
And soon after John was able to do another loving thing;
too. To show what it was, we must see what happened to
Marius. Tie was not dead, though he had been fainting,
all the while Old John was carrying him, and did not know
how he got home. They laid him on a bed, and sent for a.
doctor. And his old grandfather, who had really loved
Mm, and was pining for him to come home, fainted too
when he saw him; he said, ‘Here have-1 kept his room all-
ready for him ; and the picture of him as a little chap'
hung by my bed; he had only to come back and I would
have forgiven him. And he comes back dead! Head-
before poor old me, that am 90 years old! I remember how
he used, to come into my room in the mornings, and I pre-
tended to scold him, but it was like sunshine to me. Dead.
Ah, well, that will be two funerals—mine as well as his.”
But although Marius had dreadful wounds, slowly he got
well. And the porter said a kind looking old gentleman
used to call every day and ask how he was, and bring lint
to dress his wounds (Cosette made it herself, and Old John
brought it).
But Marius was not happy ; for he said, “My-grand-
father will not let me marry Cosette, and I cannot live
without her.” So one day he said to his grandfather, “I
want to marry Cosette,” and the old man said, “Ah, you
think I will quarrel with you about that! No, no. I have
found out where she is, and she shall come and see you to-
morrow. ? ? But Marius said, “ Why not to-day! ”
So Cosette came, and Old John. And John had a parcel
under his arm, like a very big book. And old grandfather
thought, “I don't like parcels; why did he bring that!”'
But he changed his mind later on. For while Marius and
Cosette were so busy talking to one another that they did
not notice anyone else, the old grandfather said, "'The only


-thing I am sorry for is that I have not got much money to
leave them when I die.” Then Old John said/ “My girl
will have a large fortune. Here it is, count it. 7 7 And they
; saw piles and rolls of bank notes ; so that Cosette and
Marius could get married at once, for they would be rich.
Of course you will guess that this was the money that Old
John had kept ready at the banker 7 s, when he was Father
Madeleine; and then he had taken it away and hidden it
In a forest. And when he wanted money, he used to go
secretly into the country and dig up the box and get some
out and bury it again. And the people in the neighbour-
hood thought it was the Devil. And the last time John
went there, a road-mender saw him, and followed him, and
came at last to the place where John had buried it—but
only to find the empty hole ! And he was very angry in-
vdeed. ■
■ You will 'guess this. But you will not guess that when
'Old John gave it to Cosette, he gave her thousands of
pounds, and hardly kept even a few pounds for himself.
It was a delight to him to give it to her ; and he thought
“I can manage to live somehow myself.’ 7
So now they fixed the day for the wedding, Marius was
not strong yet; he lay on a couch; and John used to bring
Chsette to see him' every day. 'And Marius did not know
.John had saved his life; he was not even sure that Old
John was the man who had been in the barricade; John
pretended that he was not.
And when he thought about the barricade, one thing
-used to puzzle Marius 'terribly. “I remember being
wounded, then I remember nothing more till I found my-
self here, 77 he would say. “You tell me that a policeman
found some man carrying me out of the great drain. But
who would be brave enough to go down that awful drain?
And who would be strong enough to carry me all that
-way? 77
Old John did not say a word.
Then Marius said, “Do you say that all those thousands
of pounds are mine and Cosette 7 s? 77
“Yes, 77 said John. (He hated to be thanked. He did not
even say that he gave that money to Cosette; he made tip a
story that someone had died and left that money for
Cosette as soon as she should be married. He loved to do
kind things, but not to let people know that he did them.)
“Well, 77 said Marius,- “Do you know what I would do?:
I would give all those thousands of pounds to find out the
brave splendid man who saved my life, 7 7
Old John did not say a word.


At last came the great day of Cosette’s life—the wed-
ding!'
They drove to the church. The old grandfather, who had
been so happy all these weeks that he skipped and danced
and played tricks on everyone, and said that he had fallen
in love with Cosette himself, had arranged everything in
grand style. The service was said, they were married.
Afterwards they had to sign the certificates. But del
John had his arm in a sling that day and said he could not
sign. (The real reason was that, as he had been in gaol,,
the law said he must not sign papers. No one knew he had
been in gaol. But John always thought about everyone
and he said to himself, “If ever I was found out, it might
cause trouble to Cosette if the police found I had signed:
her wedding certificate. ” So he pretended he had hurt 1
his thumb, and someone else signed instead.)
Then they all drove home to the splendid house where 1
the grandfather lived, to the wedding breakfast. Cosette
and Marius were to live there; and they all told John he 1
must come and live there too, and they would all be happy
together. John had not promised, but Cosette said,.
“Father, you must.”
Cosette looked lovely! She was absolutely happy. She
wore a white dress, and lace, and a necklace of fine pearls,-
and a crown of orange blossom. Marius had the scars of
wounds on his face, but looked handsome and manly. The 1
old grandfather was gorgeously dressed. Old John wore 1
plain black.
Oh, how happy Cosette was ! Even Old John could not
have wished her happier. After all their suffering r and
hiding, to be married at last to the man she loved and to be*
rich and admired! It was like a dream to him. He thought
of her poor mother; he felt “I have done what I pro-
mised. I said I would take care of Cosette. God has let"
me make her happy. 7 ’
In the great dining hall there was a feast. All the guests*
thronged round Cosette, giving her good wishes. There 5
were flowers everywhere, glass and crystal, wine and fruit, -
porcelain and gold and silver, and music.
All the guests sat down. There were two large chairs.;,
one on each side of the bride, one for the old grandfather,
one for John. But when they sat down they said, ‘ ‘ Where
is Cosette’s father?” He was not there. He had slipped"
away quickly, and left a message to say that his sore hand"
was hurting him, so he would not stay to dinner, but he
would come and see them to-morrow. So they w r ent om
without him.
And where was Old John ?'


He slipped out and went off home. How empty the house
seemed—just like his heart! He had made Cosette happy
-—but he had lost her himself. He looked into his own
room. He saw a box and opened it. In it were the first
.clothes that he had bought for Cosette, after he had got out
of gaol, before he had found her and taken her away from
the Thenardiers.
John had kept them all these years. There was a little
dress, a pair of strong child’s shoes, an apron, some wool-
len stockings. The little stockings were hardly bigger
than John’s great hand.
John laid them on the bed; and his thoughts went back
to the poor starved little "lark” that he had
ing, beaten, starved by the Thenardiers. He remembered
•"Catherine'” and how he had put the sovereign in Cos-
ette ’s shoe, and how they walked away hand in hand. He
remembered all the joy he had found in looking after
Cosette since. He remembered what he had promised hen
poor mother. He had made Cosette happy—but to do it
lie had made himself miserable. He had given her to
another man, and lost her himself.
His strong white head fell on the bed; his brave heart
seemed to break. He hid his face in Cosette’s old clothes.
Tf you had been there, you would have heard terrible sobs.
John had defeated Javert, and harder still—-he had de-
feated every thought of self in his own heart.
19.—THE LAST OF THE THENARDIERS.
Cosette was married and happy. The day of the wmd-
tding was .Shrove ■ Tuesday, and that is a great holiday in.
Pans. So when the carriage, with Cosette and Marius and
the grandfather and Old John in it, was driving back from
The- Church after the wedding, they got into the middle of a
great noisy procession, and had to go very slow. Now
Cosette was dressed all in white, with a necklace of pearls;
and the old-grandfather was splendidly dressed: and they
were laughing and gay ; and the people noticed them and
..said,, "Look, if is a weddingd 7
So all the crowd looked at them. Some of the people
were in fancy dress, and you could see they were ncT nice
people by the way they behaved. ■ And there was one man
There dressed as a Spaniard, with a large pretend-nose and
enormous black moustaches; and a young girl with a. black
mask over her face. These two looked at the wedding car


riage. Suddenly the Spaniard nudged the girl and said,
"Look at that old fellow—do you know him?”
''Which one, father?” said she.
"There in the carriage with the wedding partv; I know
-him. '
It was Thenardier and one of his daughters. - The other
daughter was dead; poor girl, she was not so bad as the
rest; and the Thenar disss had died in gaol; and Gavroche
was dead; and we will see in a minute about the other two
little boys. But the police were looking for Thenardier;
if they had caught him they would have killed him; so he
hid, and only came out with his face disguised, or at might.
And he saw Old John, and knew him, and found out that
it was had married Marius; but he did not
know that Marius was the son of the brave Colonel that he
had been robbing at Waterloo, when the Colonel woke up
and thought Thenardier was a brave man saving him So
the Colonel had said to Marius, "My son, if ever you meet
a sergeant named Thenardier, help him all you can.”
y 1 revenge
on this man; and I can force Cosette and her husband to
pay me money. ”
So he went to Marius’s house one day, dressed in a wig
and green spectacles, and walked with a stick. He sent in
a dirty, smelly letter, and Marius told the servant to bring
him in. In the letter, Thenardier called himself by a dif-
ferent name; but Marius knew Thenardier at once; for he
had watched him well that time through the chink in the
wall when Thenardier seized Old John.
Manus felt, “I ought to help this scoundrel: he saved
wretch 1 ’’ 1 ’ bilt ’ 01 ’ 10W 1 dislike him, the cowardly
Then Thenardier told a lot of lies, and said he wanted
money, to go away to America and find a-rich gold-mine
And he said, I have a secret to tell you.”
Marius said, “I know a secret about you too. I know
; a \ y !i U W ame 18 Thenardier, and where you lived and
the bad things you did.” ‘ ’ dna
Thenardier was astounded. He had never seen Marius
though Marins had seen him. He felt he must get moTev
somehow and get away from Paris before the police caught
is H j , sald >' ‘U' at «*o calls himself father of rrar
” ° Ut “ “ °™ e that >’»" b.ow
“What was that?” said Marius.
Truly the ways of God are wonderful. Thenardier now
set out to do all the harm he could to Old John ; but what
was the result? He told Marius two things that Mariiis


longed to know; he let Marins see that Old John had not
killed Javert in the barricade with that pistol (yon remem-
ber, John fired it off, and came back and said, , " 1 have dealt
. with the spy 7 ’ • and of course Marins thought he had shot
him), and secondly, he let Marins see who was the won-
derfully brave good man who had carried him safely out
of the barricade through that awful drain. So Thenardier
did good to John, when he meant to do him harm.
For when Thenardier said, “I have a secret to tell you
about the man who says he is Cosette’s father,” Marius*
said, “I know it ; he has told me he is not her father ; and
he killed Javert in.the barricade.”
“■Oh no,, you are on the wrong scent, ” said Thenardier.
," Something worse than that it is; but he did not do that.
For here is a newspaper cutting that says Javert. was-
drowned, not shot; and that Javert had told another
policeman that a man had saved his life in a barricade by
only pretending to shoot him.” ' ;
"What is this crime then?” said Marius. 1 ' He was very
pleased to find that John had behaved so well, and not
killed Javert.
"The man is a robber and a murderer,” said Thenardieiv
Poor Marius went cold all over.
“I had to hide in the great drain one day,” said Then-
ar dier. “I saw a man coming along with another on his*
back.”-
Marius gave a start. He became very excited.
"It was this fellow who calls himself Cosette ? s father r
He asked me to let him out. I saw what he had done. He ;
had murdered a man, taken all his money, hid in the drain,
and now he was going to throw the body into the river. ”
Marius was so excited he could not speak now!
I thought, 7 said Thenardier, "I would do something to-
find out who the murdered man was. So when this man
was not looking I cut a piece off the coat of the young man
he was carrying. Some day, I thought, I can find out by
that who he was.”.
Now Marius had always kept that coat. He noticed at
the time that a piece was cut off. Thenardier held up the*
piece now. "Here it is,” he said.
Marius rose up, pale, hardly breathing. He opened a
cupboard and took out an old coat!
Thenardier went on, "I am quite sure that this wretch
had made a trap for some poor young man, and murdered
him, and taken his money. ”
Marius cried, "I am the young man, and there is the
coat! At last I know who saved me so-, nobly. It was this»-
man. Cosette. Cosette. Let us go and see him at once.”


Thenardier was thunderstruck. Marius was furious with
him. 4 ‘ You wretch, liar, slanderer,/ 7 he said. * 6 l know it is
you that are a robber, and you dare speak against that
noble man 1 And he never told me it was he who saved me.
0 splendid man.”
Then he said to Thenardier, ‘ 4 Here, I will give you
money, because of Waterloo. Then go to America—go and
get hung anywhere you like!”
“Waterloo?” said Thenardier. He was amazed; he
thought Marius would call the police; instead of that,
Marius offered him money. What had Waterloo to do with
it? T I
“At Waterloo you saved the life of a colonel. 7
4 ‘No, it was a general, 77 said Thenardier.
“That is another of your lies, 77 said Marius. “But it
happens that that Colonel was my father; for his sake I
will spare you and help you. There is a thousand pounds.
Begone! 77
Thenardier thought himself very lucky! And he went
to America. But he did not become a better man. He be-
came one of those cruel men who buy and sell slaves. He is
the only really wicked man in all these stories.
We said that Thenardier had only one daughter with
him. What had happened to the other ?
She was not so bad as the rest; if she had had a chance,
she would have grown up good.
Do you remember how she went into Marius 7 s room to
thank him for paying their rent? Well, she fell in love
with Marius. She helped him to find where Oosette lived,
for he did not know, and John was hiding. She used to
follow Marius about without his seeing her. And one even-
ing he had gone into the garden to be with Cosette, and
Eponine (that was her name) watched at the gate.
It was the night after that on which Gavroche saved his
father out of gaol, Thenardier did not thank him. The
other man said, “Do you know that was your son who
saved you? 77
“Was it? 77 said Thenardier carelessly, “Now let us go
and rob a house somewhere. 77
The house they fixed on was Old John 7 s. And when they
came to the gate, they saw Eponine there. She saw them
slink along, six of them—desperate men, and whisper
round the gate. She thought, “I must stop them going in;
Marius is there; they would kill him, 77 She went up to
them. Her father bristled like a wild beast. “It is your
daughter, 77 said the others. They carried great heavy
crow-bars.
. ■ . • ' ; jv ■ Q


Get out of this—off you go—don’t disturb us,” said
Ihenardier, savagely.
Bponine tried to persuade them not to go in. They said,
‘‘We will.” Then she boldly sprang in front of the gate
and said, “Then I will stop you.”
They were amazed. They were ready to kill her. They
could do it easily. She said, “I know you can kill me. But
it one of you lays a finger on that gate to go in, I will yell
tor the police—and where are you then? lam not afraid
—not even of you, father.”
_ And they went away! She had risked her life to save
Marius, Surely she would have been a good woman if she
had had a chance. Life is very hard on some people.
A little while after came that terrible fighting in the
barricade. Marius was there; we saw how bravely he
fought. he saw a soldier pointing a gun straight at
him; suddenly a young man put his hand right over the
muzzle of the gun, and saved Marius’ life. He did not see
what happened afterwards. But in a minute the soldiers
were driven back, and for a time the noise ceased, and it
was quiet.
Then Marius heard a feeble voice call his name. It was
only a breath of a voice. He looked round; the voice said,
Here at your feet.” He saw it was the young man who
had saved him, lying on the gronnd.
“Do you know me?” said the voice.
“No,” said Marius.
am Bponine,” she said. She had dressed as a man,
and bravely followed him into that awful fighting; she saw
the soldier going to kill him—she pulled his gun aside—
and the bullet went through her. It went right through
her hand, then into her body and out at her back.
She was dying;
P° or head on his knee and made her
comfortable. She said, ”1 am happy. You will die here,
but I wanted to die before you. Will you kiss me on the
torehead when Xam dead f I loved yon* ??
And she fell back and died. Poor Bponine.
We have only now to see what happened to the two little
brothers, and that is all about the Thenardier family
While all the fighting was going on, the two little boys
wandered mto a great park. One was only seven but he
inl hl fv t e brother hy the hand, and felt that he must take
care of him, just as Gavroche had taken care of them. The
little one, aged five, kept saying, “I am hungry.” They
were wet They could not find the elephant again. They
were all in tatters. 1 p - -


They enjoyed the warm sun, and the light and the grass
and the birds. Some swans were swimming in a lake; then
they saw a man and his little son go and look at the swans.
The boy had a bun.
The father said, ‘ ‘ Eat your bun. ” “lam not hungry, ’ ’
said the boy. (The other boys thought, “We are.”) The
father said, “Well, feed the swans with it.” They threw
it into the lake, near the shore. The swans were some way
off in the middle of the lake and did not see it. The father
called them; they came swimming over. Just then the
father heard the shots of the fighting and said, ‘ ‘ We must
hurry home.” Off they went.
Then the elder of the two poor little chaps leaned right
over to get the bun out. It was a race for that bun! But
the swans hurried now —and they helped the boy; for they
swam so fast that they made waves in front of them, and
the bun rocked on the waves, and came close to shore. He
just caught it in time, frightened the swans, and got up.
He broke it in two pieces, one big, one small.
He took the small piece himself, and gave the big one
to his little brother. He said to him just what Gavroche
said to them at the baker’s when he took the smallest piece.
‘ ‘ Put that in your gun. ’ ’
I don’t know what happened to the little fellows after
that. They had to look after themselves, just like Gav-
roche. Perhaps they grew like him —knowing a lot of bad
things and bad people, but brave and willing and kind.
Perhaps they got into prison like Old John; and if they
did, perhaps like him they did not become bad, but met
kind friends and turned out good true men. Poor little
fellows!
20.—THE END OF OLD JOHN.
Cosette was happy at last! Old John had saved her
from the Thenardiers, had watched over her and loved her
and run into dangers for her; now he had saved Marius
and she was happy and rich for life. But Old John felt
that he had taken all the joy out of his own life in bringing
the last joy into hers.
Cosette loved him though. She said, “Father, you must
come and live with us. ’’ Why did not he?
Oh, how he did want to! And that night of the welding,
when he went away before the wedding breakfast and took
out her old clothes and put his head down and wept, he had


a terrible struggle with himself. It was the fourth lime in
his life. The first was after he had met the Bishop; the
second was when he made up his mind to tell people that he
rrH 8 f, 0t ? athel ' Madeleine, but John, and go back to gaol.
Ihe third time was when he felt inclined to let Marius be
Killed; but instead of that he went and saved him out of
the barricade. And.the fourth was as bad as any of them •
his heart seemed to break; his thoughts tossed about like
waves of the sea. He felt that it was his last battle. It
was like a hurricane breaking loose within him.
Why should he not go and live with Cosette, and be
happy all his life« He had made them happy. Surely he
deserved it. I can t give up any more,” he felt.
Jn1 N °4nft* ZT e f Vo \ ee in him ’ “ You are a man from
& . on might be found out. It would wreck their lives
it you were. Never mind your own happiness. Give it up
to make sure that Cosette will be happy, ?? P
thitkw* Vn g Wint ui u ight ke sat like a thinking,
nking. You would have thought he was dead. Only
One saw him—the One who is in all darkness. f
At last John made up his mind. In the morning early ] ie
went round asked to see Marius. He was very oale
while he waited for Marius to come. ' 1
i ame “ all „ i ? yful - “ 0h > jt is you, father. How
glad lam to see you, he cried. “We did miss you yester-
day. Cosette and I have agreed that you must and shall
wmiie so h 6 With She has your room. We
will be so happy, and you will share it all. ”
g aJohn said, “Sir, I came to tell you that lam a man from
Marius stood aghast.
John said, “That is why I would not sign the marriage
register; see, my hand is not really hurt That is whv°T
C *“ Th “ is & 1 «Sf *.*
the'last loved*Co™if 1 thes^d, noble story. He said at
V; Ja “ 1 loved Cosette, but now I must leave her ” TT P
did not even tell Marius that the money Cosette had was a
gift to her ; nor did he tell Marius that it was he wh^had
S’-11.™‘7' ‘W «“• Wghtful drain t
S I have Struggled with myself all night. You would
r Safe** f
Marius he!d out his hand and said, “Take my hand ”
He felt a wonderful respect for brave John! but aU


same he was horrified to think of having a man from gaol
living in his house.
Suddenly Gosette came dancing in. She said, “Kiss me,
father. lam as happy as a queen.” Poor old John drew
hack; then he went and kissed her forehead. Marius made
her go away. He said, “Alas, when Gosette knows.”
John groaned; he said, “Of course, she must be told; it
is awful.” _ ~
“No,” said Marius, “I will keep your secret to myself.
“I am going now,” said John, 44 but I ask one favour.
You cannot think what it will be to me never to see her.
Let me come sometimes.”
I am afraid that Marius was so horrified to know that
John was from gaol that he wished him never to come near
Gosette again. But he said, “Yes, come any evening.”
John went out.
Gosette could not understand it at all. And at first she
was very miserable, for John behaved quite differently to
her now; he was so humble, and would not kiss her. He
would not even call her Gosette ! And she began to get
rather cold towards him. He saw it, and it made him miser-
able. And although Marius knew that John had behaved
like a father to Gosette, yet Marius tried to separate them;
he had such a horror of John since he knew he came out of
gaol. It was very cruel, and it hurt John terribly; but he
bowed his head, and wiped away a tear, and thought, It
is for the best.” He saw they did not want him. At last
he gave up coming to see Gosette. He used to go and look
at the house, then walk sadly away. And he grew older
and rather feeble. His vast strength was leaving him.
At last he became ill and could not go out. He could not
eat his food. A doctor came. John got a little better, and
went out and bought something, which he hung where he
could see it from bis bed. It was a figure of Christ on the
Gross. It comforted him.
The doctor had to come again. When he came out he
said, “The man will die. He seems to have lost a great
friend. It breaks people’s hearts and kills them some-
times.”
Then one evening John found that he could hardly raise
himself up on his elbow. He felt his pulse; it hardly beat
at alk His breathing sometimes almost stopped.
Then he felt one great desire. It gave him strength to get
out of bed, and dress himself in the humble working clothes
he always wore now~. He had to stop several times to rest;
the sweat rolled down his forehead.
He took out Gosette V old dress again and spread it on
the bed. He lighted the good old Bishop’s silver candle


sticks. Every step he took he had to rest. He caught sight
of his face in the glass; he hardly knew himself-miserv
had made him look so old m the last few months; it was
the mark of death that was now near at hand
faSr ™ ha i got acha , ir and a table and P en and ink, he
tainted. Then he revived again, and felt thirsty, but could
not even lift ihe water-jug to drink; he tilted it-over, and
got a mouthful. There, in the light of the Bishop’s candle-
l took the pen to write his last letter. The point
Of he mb was bent back, so he had to write with the back
. Ihe ink was all dry, so he had to struggle out and
get some water to put in it, and he had to stop two or three
timesmn the way. The strong man who could hoist the cart
oi er Fauchelevent could now hardly lift a pen '
John wrote the letter.
“Cosette, God bless you. I want to explain to you that
your husband was quite right to separate me from you
Ihe money I gave you was honestly earned. I found out
a new way of making jet, and grew rich.”
Here Old John stopped; the pen fell from his fingers and
handf e Oniv b Ood°b e Tm llim I wllile his head fell
see her ° God beard him as he cried, “Oh, I shall never
see hei again. If I could only see her once before I die'
Gml,'r? GoT” 6 W ° uldthat harm anybody ? My
thiS W f ? e 7 e 7 evening Thenardier went to
see Marius. And while poor Old John was breaking his
heart all alone, Marius was finding out that John had really
been the man who saved his life in that dram He £
j' 1 '? ( ™ A llc dld not know it before—that John had been
lather Madeleine; and that all the monev Cosette had was
given to her by Old John. (For John had said, “It is hers
it was trusted to me to give her when she married ”
h 7Su gh t someone else had given it to her, not John.)
h 3 fA! a ™ S remembered how he had treated John. He
had a horror of him—and John had risked his life to save
im. He was rich—and he had taken Cosette away from
the man who made him rich! He called ont “rVic Q +f
Cosette there has been a dreadful mistake Let us at
once and see your father. ” g 0 at
piihe very moment Old John was praying “My God if
“Come in,” said the old man feebly,
intolhfrbom hurried ro ’ l ™ cL Cosette rushed


out his shaking arms. Cosette fell on his breast.' ' Father, 9 J
she said.
'Cosette, is it you! Oh, thank God. Then you forgive
mef ?
Cosette kissed him and smoothed his hair. Old John
said in a faltering voice, "I thought I would never see her
again. But I forgot God; and God said, "You silly man,
you think she has left you; I will send you an angel.”
And He sent Cosette. "And your husband—he forgives
me too, does he!”
Then Marius spoke all that he felt in his full heart.
"Cosette, that is the man that saved my life, and gave you
to me—and he asks me if I forgive him 1 There never was
so brave and grand a man. Sir, why did not you tell me!
You risked your life for mine; you were the good Father
Madeleine; but you only told me the bad about yourself,
not the good. Why did you do it!”
"I thought it was better for me to be parted from
Cosette, ?? said John.
"Parted—but you shall not be,” cried Marius. "To-
morrow you shall come to live with us.”
"To-morrow I shall not be here,” said Old John. "It
would be lovely to live with you. It shows how good God
is, that you are here now. To live with you I It is a pity.
I cannot,”
Cosette took his hands. She was going to laugh and say,
"I will carry you off.” Then she felt that they were cold
as ice.
"Aren’t you well, father!” she said, alarmed.
"Quite well,” said John. "Only——■” and he stopped.
‘ ‘ Only what! ” s
"Only I shall die in a few minutes,” said John.
Cosette uttered a piercing cry. Marius begged Old John
to pardon all he had done. They both said, "Live, and we
will have only one thought, that is, to make you happy. ”
John said, "I am happy now. God is very good. It is
best this way. ? ?
Then the doctor came in. He said to them, "He is bet-
ter, It was you then that he was mourning for. But you
came too late.”
John was gazing at Cosette. He was quite calm. Sud-
denly he arose, and seemed to be strong. He walked firmly
to the wall, took down the little figure of the Saviour on
the Cross, laid it on the table and said, "Behold the great
Master.” Then he sank back in the chair.
Cosette held him up. She was sobbing. She said,
"Father, don’t leave us.”
"Do you wish to see a priest!” they asked him.


I have a priest here/ 9 said John. And he pointed into
the air And who knows? Perhaps the dear old Bishop
was really there; John seemed to see him.
John grew weaker and weaker. He was near the shadow
ot death. Already the light of heaven seemed to be in his
eye. He looled grand and venerable. With his last words
he told fhem where he would like to be buried, and talked
about Cosette when she was little, and told them to give
money to help poor people. He told Cosette how unhappy
her mother had been, and how she loved her daughter He
told how he used to go and look at their house. He said
that from the Invisible World he would watch them. Then
as they knelt by .him, each holding one of his hands, and
choking with tears, he fell back dead, with the light from
the old Bishop s candlesticks on the white old face turned
up to heaven.
Wholly set up and printed by The Cumberland Argus, Ltd., Church and
Macquarie Streets, Parramatta,


: '
£
MR
Fhere’s Nothing . .
Better for
Growing Children
than good bread, thickly spread
with bolter or jam —and there’s
no better Bread made than
GRANGER’S.
Granger's Bread is made from the finest floor, machine-mixed, and
baked to a crisp deliciousness. Give the kiddies plenty of it. They
will thrive on it!
The Oldest Established Bakery in GRANGER
GOOD FOOTWEAR FOR OUR BOYS & GIRLS
Cali and See Our SPECIAL LINES:
The “LITTLE LADY,” and “THE LITTLE GENT ”
Boots and Shoes, for light Wear, and for school wear, are un-
equalled for comfort and durability.
JOHN HUNTER & SON, LTD.
RAWLINSON BROS., LTD.
GENERAL GROCERS AND
PROVISION MERCHANTS
CHURCH STREET, PARRAMATTA.
Lowest Prices.
Prompt Deliveries,
Tels. 140, 409 P.


Do you Want the
Best Goods at the
Lowest Prices ?
Of ccurse, you do !
Then come and insped
the value at
ERBY'S
-
New Goods Opening Every Week.
•i* ' *l-
- AND BOY’S CLOTHING.
MEN’S MERCERY AND HATS.
BOOTS AND SHOES.
4*
DRAPERY. MILLINERY, FANCY GOODS.
G. T. ERBY,
IMPORTER,
Wycombe House, CHURCH ST., PARRAMATTA
