

3T/VF p
hi n
JOHN MARDEN.




DR. MARDEN


preface.
Requests having come from different quarters for a gathering
up of tributes to the late Dr. John Harden, from the Press, colleges
and pulpits called forth by his death, Mrs. Harden has honoured me
with the task of collecting these for publication in the form of a
remembrance booklet.
I am sure his many friends will be glad to have such a token
of remembrance, though, of course, wholly inadequate to Dr. Harden’s
work and influence.
The plan of this booklet forbids the insertion of much of Dr.
Harden’s own writing, that would bet read with interest and profit,
but space has been found for a poem which embodies his well-known
deep love for little children; an Australian ode, illustrative of his
scientific interest; a dedication and a farewell address to the girls,
conveying the great ideals of his own life; portion of a graveside
address which reveals a lasting and loving friendship with that great
missionary, Dr. Robert Lamb, a sympathy with Dr. Lamb’s mysticism,
and Dr. Harden’s own attitude to life and death. There is also
included an adaptation of a hymn of Whittier, breathing calm amid
the stress of the great War, when his own son and the brothers of
many of his pupils were at the front. Because Whittier was a
favourite and for the above reason, many who sang it then will be
glad to see it again with the tune.
The original intention was a few copies for the Principal’s old
pupils and friends, but as the project of a “John Harden Memorial
Library” at Croydon College has been taken up, the distribution of
this booklet has been handed over to those furthering this scheme,
which, it is hoped, will be stimulated thereby and brought to successful
fruition.
There are those in this State, and all over Australia, who have
passed through the Colleges under Dr. Harden’s guidance, who will
feel, as they turn these few pages, sacred memories crowding on
them and the tender grace of days that have fled. Looking back
to their school days, they will be able to say in those beautiful words
recently quoted by the Right Hon. Stanley Baldwin, Prime Minister
of Great Britain: “It was good for us to have been there, for
unknown to us therein were three tabernacles, one for us, one for
our schoolmaster, and one for Him who is the friend of all children
and the Master of all schoolmasters.”
H. D. HACKIE,
sth Hay, 1925. “Forres,” Leura.


ilrath of tU\ iilariunt.
> L.
School J^rrfrtcrs-
Croybmt College.
It is with profound sorrow we have to record the death of our
first beloved Principal, John Marden, M.A., LL.D., who, for thirty-
three years, guided the destinies of the Croydon Presbyterian Ladies’
College, after which the establishment of our sister school at Pymble
demanded all his energy till he retired at Easter-time, 1920. Though
in the earlier months of the year his state of health gave cause for
anxiety, it was hoped that a lengthy stay in West Australia would
prove beneficial, but, alas! during the latter part of his visit he
failed rapidly, and within six weeks of his return he passed away
on the 29th October.
When we assembled on the morning of the announcement, Dr.
McQueen gave a feeling address, after which Dr. Warden’s hymn—
the School hymn—was sung. During the two days following the
School flag, was down at half-mast.
Extract from “Croydon College Magazine.”
|Jymble College.
On the morning of Thursday, October 30, when the sad news
came of Dr. Marden’s death, a short service was held at morning
assembly. The service consisted of special hymns, prayers and Bible
reading, and a short address given by Miss Jobson in honour of
Dr. Warden’s memory, in which she said: ‘No name can ever be
held in higher honour than that of Dr. John Marden, the founder
and first Principal of Pymble, and for thirty-three years the Principal
of Croydon P.L.C. His is a name that will always be remembered
with reverence and affection by all who came within the sphere of
his influence an influence the value and extent of which can never
be truly estimated. His high ideals of womanhood could not but
bear fruit in the characters he strove to mould on the lines of beauty,
and of truth, and the influence he thus exerted must inevitably pass


on from one generation to another, strengthening and ennobling our
national life. For it is woman who sets the standard of that national
life, and that the standard set by the pupils of the colleges should
be worthy of our tradition and heritage, was ever the aim and
purpose of Dr. Harden’s work.’
“Individuals die! —but the amount of Truth they have taught and the sum
of Good they have done dies not with them. ’ ’
Chopin’s “Funeral March” was played most feelingly by Miss
Gillan, during which the girls stood in reverent silence.
Extract from “Pymble College Magazine.
Extracts front iMimttes of ii]t p.IC.CCL (Council JtfUetimp
2*i£ December, 1924.
“On receipt of the official announcement by the Chairman of
the lamented death of Dr. John Harden, first Principal of the P.L.Cs.,
the College Council desire to record their highest appreciation of his
ability, zeal, and loyalty to the Church, and of the high standard
of education, morals and religion he established and maintained
amongst his students with far-reaching results.
“The Council also record their deep sense of the loss to the
Presbyterian Colleges, Church and community by his retirement from
office and subsequent death.”
R. W. Gillespie, Chairman.
Jjteutnrial jibrfrrce at JSL Jitrphen’s.
John Harden, M.A., LL.D., known throughout the State as
the Principal of the Presbyterian Ladies’ Colleges at Croydon and
Pymble, died on October 29, at the age of sixty-nine years. The
representative gatherings at St. Stephen’s Church and at the grave-
side at South Head Cemetery bore eloquent testimony to the esteem
in which the late Dr. Harden was held.
The teachers, pupils and ex-pupils of the Croydon and Pymble
Ladies’ Colleges attended the service in St. Stephen’s Church in large
numbers. This service was conducted by the Rev. R. J. IT. McGowan,
who was assisted by the Moderator (The Rev. William Robertson),
the Rev. C. E. James, and the Rev. H. D. Mackie (of Leura and
Wentworth Falls).


The Rev. R. J. H. McGowan spoke as follows:
Once again Death approaching with velvet footfall has taken
a beloved leader from our midst, one who occupied a unique place
in educational work in our Church, and one regarded with intense
and lavish affection.
Dr. John Harden was born near Melbourne of an old English
family. Always studiously inclined, he early showed his talent for
teaching. When a teacher at the Geelong College lie left such an
impression on Norman Morrison —(afterwards one of the greatest of
Australian College Principals) that Morrison kept Dr. Harden’s photo-
graph on his desk as an inspiration to him in his work.
He was appointed nearly 40 years ago as Principal at Croydon
for his academic standing, success in teaching, and Christian character.
From an enrolment of a few resident and day pupils the work grew
to a registration of 600 or 700 with two great colleges, and every
prospect of continued growth. For thirty-three years he directed the
educational affairs of our Girls’ Schools with conspicuous ability and
success. Students came from the length and breadth of Australia,
particularly from the best in New South Wales and Queensland, in
large numbers and successive generations.
Dr. Harden had very high and lofty ideals. He desired that
Australia should have a noble, pure, unselfish type of womanhood.
He himself has told us what the chief function of a great college is.
It is that from it there should proceed, year by year, a steady,
persistent stream of noble womanhood, dowered by the best education,
bathed in the radiant atmosphere of college life, blessed by the dis-
cipline of its games, consecrated by the grace of God —a stream to
uplift, regenerate, purify, at its heart, the national life of this country.
He thought that in this stream of womanhood from the colleges lay
the hope of Australia. If Australia is to endure and be a strength
amid the nations she must have in her homes good women—women
of self-sacrifice and devotion.
The apostolic injunction, ‘'Whatsoever things are true, what-
soever things are honourable .... just .... pure .... lovely
. ... of good report .... think on those things,” was one he
heeded. How he loved all that was good in literature and art! how
fond of music and poetry!—himself a writer of verse of no mean
order. What a lover of trees and shrubs! In the college grounds he
gathered trees from all parts of the world. He loved the good, the
noble, the beautiful, and it lias been asked do not the first two con-
stitute the third? Do not the good and noble make the truly beautiful?
He loved that which tended to the uplifting and development of
mind, body, soul.


He was a great believer in the value of adequate playgrounds
for public schools. When the late Col. Goodlet, Mr. J. H. Beatson,
the Rev. John Ferguson, and others were negotiating for the starting
of Pymble College, what care he took to see that there were ample
playing fields. Mr. Robert Vicars could also testify to this point.
Self-sacrifice and service were to him the essence of life, and
one of his favourite texts was, “The Son of Man came not to be
ministered unto but to minister”—to serve.
lie owed much to his wife, who gave both to her husband and
the College such unselfish, devoted, faithful and loyal service; and
our deepest sympathy goes out to her in her great sorrow, and to
her son and daughters and relatives.
I think I may say I knew him well? I married three of his
children, I baptized some of his grand-children, I was with him in the
death-chamber of a beloved daughter. I owe much to the, trust he
reposed in me. I shall always gratefully remember how, when I came
to Ashfield —17 years ago—he gave me, and continued to give to the
last, his unswerving, loyal, cordial support. As to his inner spiritual
life, one does not care to speak much. I might refer to two things.
(1) When a busy Principal he told me how essential the Sunday service
was to him, and over and over again he said to me, “I could not
do without it.” (2) The other thing is—he carried in his pocket
the New Testament —Moffatt’s version—-given him by our Kirk Session
when he left us. He carried it in his pocket and diligently compared
it with the original and other translations, and in it he wrote the
words—
“Unanswered yet? Faith cannot be unanswered,
Her feet were firmly planted on the rock,
Amidst the wildest storms she stands undaunted,
Nor quails before the loudest thunder-shock,
She knows Omnipotence has heard her prayer—
And cries it shall be done —some time, somewhere. ’ ’
To-day he stands in the unveiled Presence of the great Prayer
answerer.
His life teaches us the value of religious education. Jefferson
—the great American statesman (the man who drew up the Declara-
tion of American Independence) —was asked by Daniel Webster,
“What is to be the salvation of this great nation?” His reply was —
“Webster, this nation is going to he saved, if saved at all, by teaching
the young people to love the Lord Jesus Christ.”


That is true for all time, true for every land, true for Australia
to-day.
I was impressed by an article in the Literary Digest, “Will
Education save a nation?” It took the last war as an illustration.
The Germans were the most highly educated nation in the world.
Germany bristled with universities just as it bristled with forts.
Graduates filled the land. Schools, technical institutes abounded.
Yet these were powerless to prevent Germany committing the greatest
apostacy of all history. Think of the awful things they did —gases
and burning oils —sinking ships full of non-combatants and the strik-
ing of medals in commemoration of it. How did Germany sink to
such depths? How did she do these unutterable things? The answer
is written across the skies in letters of living flame —“Education
divorced from Christianity.” As a nation’s creed is so will its
actions be.
How can we save Australia from that? How can we make
Australia great? There is only one way—by teaching the Word,
“Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. ’ ’
As to-day we do reverence to the memory of Dr. Harden, I
would commend the great work of religious education.
“The. grass withereth, the flower thereof falleth away, but
the Word of the Lord endureth for ever.”
The Rev. C. E. James, of Wahroonga, read portions of the 7th
chapter of Revelation and the 23rd Psalm, the prayers being offered
by the Right Rev. the Moderator (the Rev. W. Robertson) and the
Rev. H. D. Mackie, 8.A., of Leura and Wentworth Falls.
The hymns sung were, “Dear Lord and Father of Mankind,”
and “There is a Land of Pure Delight.”
Draped around the coffin was the College flag, and upon it lay
the Croydon, Pymble, and ex-students’ wreaths, surrounded by others
numerous and exquisite, many being from distant parts of the State.
After the Benediction the congregation stood in the sacred hush
while the Scottish lament, “The Flowers of the Forest,” stole tenderly
from the organ, followed by the intensely solemn, measured chords
of Chopin’s k ‘ Marche Funebre ’’ as the mortal remains were reverently
borne down the aisle and from the church.
At the South Head Cemetery the service was conducted by the
Rev. R. J. 11. McGowan, assisted by the Rev. C. E. James, the Rev.


H. D. Mackie and the Moderator. At its close a touching incident was
observed when two little College girls advanced and gently dropped
flannel flowers into the open grave. And thus our late beloved
Principal was left to his last long rest overlooking the ocean he
loved so well.
at JXnbrefo’s, 333entfoortl] ,3]alls.
On Sunday morning, 9th November, at St. Andrew’s, Wentworth
Falls, where the late Dr. Marden was Session Clerk, a Memorial
Service was conducted. Dr. Marden was a well-known figure in
Wentworth Falls where he had lived since his retirement.
There was a large attendance, many from other churches being
present.
A quartet consisting of Mrs. S. McCloy, Mrs. A. Marshall and
Messrs. W. G. Crawford and J. C. Clucas sang sympathetically
Tennyson’s “Crossing the Bar,” and Mrs. A. A. Kemp played most
impressively Chopin’s “Funeral March.”
The text was from 11. Corinthians iii., 18 “But we all with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord are changed into the
same image from glory to glory.”
The Rev. H. D. Mackie, 8.A., the minister of the parish, said: —
In the grey dawn of morning the brightness of the stars fades
and we lose them altogether as our world moves on to the glory of
sunrise. The glory of a candle light fades into the glory of an
electrically lighted chamber.
If we look at life deeply we see that it is such a movement from
glory to glory. Our friend gone from us whom we hold in loving
remembrance this morning would say so; that every stage of life
has a glory and one fades into the other. There is the glory of
childhood with all its beauty, passing into the splendour of strong
manhood in which none of its grandeur need be lost and that man-
hood that bravely faces life fading into the glory of the richer
experiences matured and mellowed with the passage of the years into
the evening of life.
The poet whom Dr, Marden loved, sang truly for him
“Grow old along with me,
The best is yet to be,
The last of life for which the first was made.”


In the same way the development of religion and its revelation
is a passage from splendour to splendour. We must never forget there
is a glory in the Old Testament. If we read it sympathetically we
find that is so. There is a side of it which shows a religion of statute
of restraint, prohibition, repression. Paul had known that side and
found it fading into the glory of Christ, the liberty wherewith He
makes us free: fading into a religion of expression, labour in love, en-
thusiasm not in which restraints are lost, but in which restraints are
not before the mind.
Paul’s compatriots saw not the glory of Christ or of the Old
Testament. “Even unto this day when Moses is read, there is a veil
upon their hearts.”
I think it was with an unveiled face and heart, Dr. Marden tried
to see the glory of life. He was without the pride of these Jews,
their prejudice, their absorption in the importance of their own selves,
and systems of thought .... heavy veils that hang darkly round
the soul. He was an intellectual man. He was strongly emotional
and mystical. He was not a proud man. Mentally preoccupied per-
haps, rapt, gazing into the wonder of earth and sky, until, like the
poet Wordsworth, its sensation, form, colour, and soul, all melted into
him, and swallowed up his being. Proud he was not. “Thy soul was
like a Star and dwelt apart. Lonely perhaps in a commercial age,
and looking for those who like himself had sensed wherein the true
wealth of life lay. A teacher of others, the veil of pride was not
upon his heart. He was a humble man who ever sat at Jesus’ feet
as a pupil. Of selfishness he knew nothing. To his calling he gave
himself unsparingly, and warm, kindly and generous impulses were
dominant in the structure of his soul.
When one put things a little differently or surveyed truth from
a different angle to those whom he loved and for whom he cherished
the warmest affection, one could see there was no veil of prejudice.
His was ever the open mind. To me he gave the same affection and
ever with unveiled heart sought behind our varying forms the Great
Heart that varieth not.
And so it was with open face he looked into the mirror. The mirror
of nature everywhere round him, and into the mirror of the gospels
which were never far away. And looking into them he was changed in
his life and spirit from glory to glory for no man can look~there
steadily and remain the same.
He looked into the flowers, the shrubs and trees of his beautiful
garden which he loved so dearly. He was changed to their beauty,


their purity, their simplicity. Frequently he came along one of the
walks to meet me, eating an apple fresh from one of his trees. He
had a rare taste for the flavour and quality of an apple and always
loaded my pockets and others ere we left. To me this was most
significant. A taste as pure as nature herself, and as simple. In
this Australian climate show us boys and girls growing up with such
tastes and we show you men and women for whom the temperance
question is not a pressing personal one.
He looked across those mountains with their inimitable blue, the
deep valleys dappled o’er with shadows flung from the brooding
clouds. He looked into the mirror of the wide spaces. Sometimes
we would sit surveying the scene till night thickened and the stars
shone out. And that scene mirrored for him the wonder, the mystery,
the infinity of its Creator. And beholding it, he was changed into the
same image. He grew to feel the deep pulsations of the world. And
when he retired and came to live among us, he wanted above all things
a magnificent telescope, that in the deepening night he might see more
clearly in the great mirror that other infinite of Kant in the star-
spangled heavens. One can hardly imagine a little and mean astron-
omer. And he grew that he could do nothing except on a noble and
grand scale.
He beheld in the New Testament the glory of the Lord and was
changed. Why, we might ask, is he loved in a thousand homes?
Because he came in contact with young people at a time when the
lofty and noble make their most powerful appeal. It was those bright
and shining ideals he saw that captured their admiration, and his
honest endeavour to live in the light of them that retained their lasting
affection.
In the mirror of the New Testament he saw Christ. That vision
was the inspiration of all his life. It was at the back of all his school
work. Not examinations, although for himself or his school he would
not have shirked them, but a noble womanhood in Christ was the ideal
of his school. In the service in St. Stephen’s, we felt that he, assisted
by his good wife, had got to closer grips with some of our problems
than any of us. That he had touched our national life for good in
its most sensitive spot and in a place where such touch, hallowed by
the goodness, the unselfishness, and the love of Christ, would have the
most far-reaching consequences.
I never met a man more reverent. With bared head, uncovered
heart, and soft footfall, he drew near to listen and to see in the
mirror of the New Testament, which he so loved, the face of One who
had a word to give that others had not, upon Life’s use and destiny.


S fSBiror' 'fr iP"
. 5F *-*
MYOORI.
•• i
MYOORI, WENTWORTH FALLS AND SURROUNDINGS.


And because he was being changed to the same image, our Session
mourns the loss of its Clerk; our office-bearers, members and friends,
one who served ns truly; and your Minister, a real encourager, an
affectionate friend and brother, whose interest in the advance of
Christ’s kingdom in this place was sincere and sustained.
We think of him who has gone from us on this Armistice Stmday.
A brother minister told me Dr. Marden happened to be in his study
on the great Armistice Day. He took out his watch, and as it ticked
on to the hour, he said, “We will be with them over there.” In that
hour he prayed. It was the hour when the battle was done, and the
guns had ceased. Thankfully he prayed, you may be sure, and
tenderly, thinking of those who had fought the battle bravely and gone
west. He knew they had passed from glory to glory, and in death
they had not passed from the keeping of the Eternal Love and the
Eternal Care. And now for him, too, the battle is done.
The last time I saw him, he said he was going to the wide spaces
of the West. It was Autumn, the glory of Autumn in his own garden,
and reminded me of a memorable Autumn day in Perthshire a year
before the Great War. A gentle breeze stirred the leaves, and laid
them softly on the lap of Mother Earth. One could not help thinking
of those lines of Meredith: —
“Into the lap that yields the rose,
Shall I, with shuddering, fall?”
1 said good-bye, but looked back and lingered by the gate. What
a scene of red and scarlet, yellow and crimson—a russet shroud
dropp’d with gold. I felt it was the last time, and in the glory of such
an Autumn setting, his fine figure and white hair were lost to view.
I came again as the trees were putting forth their new leaves. It
was the Springtime glory. He was not there. The gardener greeted
me in a quiet spot. He took me, as of old, to a richly laden orange
tree. He filled my pockets, as his master had done. He spoke ten-
derly of him. A spirit lingered among the trees. “The Doctor went
yesterday” .... A spirit lingers among the hearts of his Culture.
The Doctor has passed to the Springtime of God.
Reference to the death and work of Dr. Marden was made by
Rev. J. J. Gilmore, 8.A., from the pulpit of the Presbyterian Church,
Pymble, and also in the Ashfield Church by Rev. R. J. H. McGowan,
where Dr. Marden had been an elder for nearly thirty years.


ilxtrad front Asljfielb Presbyterian (El]urcl| Report, 1919.
‘ k In the removal of Dr. Harden we lost one who had been very
closely connected with our congregation and one who was for over
30 years one of our foremost members —for the last 28 years an elder.
In congregational matters he took the keenest interest and gave
ungrudgingly of his strength. In spite of the many claims upon
his time, he was regular in his attendance at our Session Meetings,
where his counsel and guidance were of special value. On occasions
he officiated in the pulpit with much acceptance.”
Extract from Report, Ji>t. Anbrefo’s Presbyterian (Efjurcfj,
“In presenting the report for the year ending 31st December,
1924, the Committee of Management refers with sorrow to the death
of the Session Clerk, Dr. John Harden. The late Dr. Harden was
for many years associated with the Church, and during the past six
years took an active part in the work of this Committee. He was
keenly interested, and was earnestly desirous of the expansion and
improvement of the work. He will be sadly missed by the office-
bearers and members, who had for him a sincere and affectionate
regard.
Geo. Thomson, Hon. Secretary.
At JHarben’s
App rec^^on *
Ihe Council of the Presbyterian Ladies’ Colleges, realising the
great debt of gratitude they owe to Dr. Harden, cannot allow his
retirement to take place without expressing their high appreciation
of his incalculable work. He was the first Principal, in connection
with the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales, of educational
work amongst girls, an undertaking which has grown, under the
Divine blessing, from the enrolment of a few resident and day
students meeting in a house in Victoria Street, Ashfield, to a regis-
tration of nearly five hundred, with two splendid Colleges at Croydon
and Pymble, and with every prospect of continued growth. For


upwards of thirty-three years he directed the educational and adminis-
trative affairs of our Girls’ Schools with conspicuous ability and
success. He ever sought to emphasize high and lofty ideals, and the
thousands of pupils who received their training under his Principal-
ship hold him in very affectionate regard.
In Mrs. Marden he had an invaluable helper, and the Colleges
owe much to her capable, devoted and loyal service.
The Council express the hope that Dr. and Mrs. Marden may both
for many years enjoy their well-earned rest.
For the Council of the Colleges,
John Ferguson, Chairman.
presentations to 33r. anb ifflrs. iMarben.
On the 26th March, 1920, handsome presentations were made to
Dr. and Mrs. Marden by the students and staffs of Croydon and
Pymble Colleges.
On Thursday, December 10, ex-students of the Presbyterian
Ladies’ College, Croydon and Pymble, met in the school hall of the
Croydon College, to bid farewell to Dr. and Mrs. Marden.
The Rev. John Ferguson was in the chair and, after prayer,
offered by the Rev. R. J. H. McGowan, spoke of Dr. Marden’s wonder-
ful work in building two tine Colleges of over 500 pupils, from a
beginning of less than a score, 33 years ago.
Mrs. J. J. K. Taylor, one of the first pupils, then presented Dr.
Marden with a wallet and cheque, and Mrs. Marden with an amethyst
and pearl brooch, as an affectionate remembrance from the “Old
Girls” of the College.
Many messages were received from all the States of Australia
and New Zealand, conveying good wishes for Dr. and Mrs. Marden.
Dr. Marden expressed the deep appreciation of Mrs. Marden and
himself of the handsome gifts, which would be valued indeed as a
token of their affectionate esteem. Thereafter he delivered a farewell
address, published elsewhere.


3Joljn iHarhrn,
{By the Very Rev. Professor J. Laurence Rentoul, 0.8. E., D.D.,
Ormond College, The University, Melbourne.)
The tidings of John Mar den’s death came to me as a heavy
personal blow. Earth seemed poorer and lonelier thereby. Another
greatly valued comradeship was broken, except for memories.
On my arrival in Australia, and on my beginning my Ministry
in Victoria, more than a generation ago, with an unknown environ-
ment round me, three young and eager faces in my audience used to
arrest my attention, each face seeming to betoken a vital personality.
Each personality was a seeker, in this world of problems which beset
young souls. I was the speaker then, at first; and they were the
listeners, with a pulpit’s high and hard distance keeping us separate.
Later, we got nearer to one another, and more on a common level.
They were now the speakers and questioners; and I was the listener,
at times making reply. They were searching for a trusty road on
which to get firm and forward footing, and I knew they were sure to
find it. For they were clean of life, and pure of heart, and frank of
soul. And ‘ ‘ the pure in heart see God, ’ 9 by and bye.
Their chosen method for Life’s struggle was (as one of them
said, with special side-reference to his comrade, John Marden)
“To shun delights and live laborious days.”
And they did this. Fortunately no “blind fury” or “remorseless
deep”—such as swept away from Milton’s young friend, “loved
Lycidas,” the desired life-opportunity—bereft young Marden of the
great chance of such life-struggle and its attainment. He was granted
length of days and scope for battle. Step by step he conquered the
baffling “blows of circumstance,” and reached a goal worthy of his
high aim, and its unwearied upward effort.
Marden’s university career is in itself a striking testimony to
his intellectual powers, and his persistence in studious work, until
he stood at length prominent, with an array of symbolic letters
attached to his graduate name, and (as John Stuart Blackie, in his
brilliant “’Varsity Ballad” phrases it)
“Capp’d an’ Doctor’d an’ a’.”
Yet university degrees and distinctions are but an inadequate and
merely external indication of one aspect of a scholarly man. They
convey no real measurement of the depth and width and vital worth
of personality. And John Marden’s personality was a very distinct,
vital, winsome, and, in short, unique personality.


If I may attempt to estimate some characteristics of that person-
ality, I would say:—
First of all, Dr. John Harden was, mentally, ethically, and in his
strong quiet will-force, a happy blend, and balance of the idealist
and the realist. The mere idealist runs the risk of falling into the
fanciful and extravagant in thought and action, devoid of practical
sagacity and wisdom-guided judgment, and so fails to win the confi-
dence of sober-minded men. It was, I think, the remarkable union
in John Harden, of high “ideals and aims with strong, wholesome,
practical knowledge of affairs, ’ ’ and powers of administrative arrange-
ment and guidance that made him so notable a success, as one of
Australia’s most distinguished and influential educationists.
Again, and in keeping with this, Dr. Harden had the poet’s soul,
with its clear insight into truth, and into the souls of others round
him. This gave him the fine touch of quick and unfailing sympathy
with the individual temperaments and puzzles, and even foibles, of
the young lives committed to his care. How quick and sympathetic
his perception was, how winsome he was in drawing out the trust
and affectionate confidence of the hundreds of young personalities
that, from year to year, passed through his great College—great
because he made it great—is indicated by the wonderfully loving
and grateful regard felt for his name by a vast number of cultured
lives throughout Australia. No member of any of his successive
teaching staffs, and not one of the widespread host of his former
pupils, can be met who has not the same worshipful reverence for
“Dr. Harden.”
Another characteristic of Dr. John Harden I myself wish grate-
fully to record. I mean his rare magnanimity, the great unselfish
quality of his friendship. The man or woman was fortunate who
knew him as a friend. And his pupils, all of them, were his friends.
He was devoid of bitterness to a foe (if he had any foe). He was
without envy or guile towards any rival. And he never failed a
friend. He was thoughtful —to a wonderful degree—of what would
be for the benefit of others. He was quick to anticipate their feelings
and needs. His was a nature to love, and to be loved. And love’s
tendance was round him in his home. Dr. Harden was a beautiful
soul. And, as “the style is the man,” his literary style was clear
and beautiful. He dreamt to be a poet, and had the poetic gift. But,
amid his many cares, he had not time. He has, however, written lyrics
of fine quality; I hope even a few of them will appear in the brief
biography.
I feel I cannot adequately express in words what should be said
more fully regarding my friend, and (as he himself thought), in some


measure, my ‘‘spiritual pupil.” But, comparing and contrasting him
with very many other men whom I have known, I always feel inclined
to say of him —what Tennyson makes even a doubter say of one of
Christ’s gentlest yet most heroic of standard-bearers: —In him
“The elements were kindlier mixed.”
JJrom tfye 333 alter ,iHatl]ison, JLJV.
It was my good fortune to be a near neighbour of Dr. Marden
for a number of years. I soon conceived a great admiration for him,
and as my knowledge of him and his work increased my admiration
grew. He was one of those rare men who are a true enrichment to a
country. He was a man of high, unbending principle, of noble ideals,
interested in all that most intimately concerns the wellbeing of a com-
munity, always pained by what was shallow and superficial, always
indignant at what was mere time-serving and expediency.
I admired his earnest grasp of the problems of life. He grappled
with them so manfully.
“He would not make his judgment blind,
He faced the spectres of the mind
And laid them.”
But he “laid them” at severe cost to himself. His temperament
caused him to feel acutely the mystery of things and the tragedies
of human life. He must have had many dark hours when the “burden
and the mystery of all this unintelligible world” pressed heavily upon
him. But through all he had the Christian secret of courage and
rest and hope.
The work, to which his life was consecrated, and in which he was
so conspicuously successful, was the noblest and most fruitful. His
influence upon the girls committed to his charge was very deep. He
won their affection and their enthusiastic reverence in an eminent
degree. The extent and life-enlarging, life-ennobling character of his
work are incalculable. How many Australian homes will be the richer,
more highly toned, set to finer ideals, through his influence. If the
great test of a man’s life-work is what of solid worth and developing
power remains when he has passed from the scene of his labours, then
Dr. Marden has bequeathed a legacy to his country of the noblest
and most enduring kind.


Jfrom tl|c JUb. 3J- 31- Gilmore, JL^A.
I esteem it a great privilege to be allowed to express my tribute
to the memory of the late Dr. John Harden, for many years Principal
of the Presbyterian Ladies’ College.
It is especially of his work in Pymble that I wish to speak, as it
was there that I came into most intimate association with him. As is
well known, he was the founder of the Pymble College, and, indeed,
this was the dream of his later life.
Daring in conception, and liberal in design, he saw in imagination
a splendid “School Block” and a number of “School Houses,” that
would be worthy of the great Church to which he belonged—a Church
that has ever cherished the highest ideals of education and culture.
Only part of this scheme did he live to see realised, but he saw
it by faith, and doubtless his faith will be counted to him for righteous-
ness. Dr. .Harden was a man of the highest culture and scholarship
and it was his passionate desire to pass on as much as possible of
these gifts to those who came, year by year, under his care.
He wished, above all things, to turn out young women of culture,
who would be the strength and glory of the young Commonwealth.
His great idea was that of service—the service of God in the service
of our fellow men. He had in the highest degree the power of
capturing the hearts of the young, and of inspiring them to carve out
careers for themselves.
He never lost touch with the “Old Girls,” nor they with him.
And he was always glad to hear of their success, and to know that
they were carrying out the ideals of the College.
To-day his former students speak of him with reverence, and with
tears of gratitude in their eyes, and they are planning just now to
raise some suitable monument to the memory of one whom they so
much revere.
It is hardly necessary for me to say that Dr. Harden could not
have succeeded so admirably in his life work had he not been a
sincere Christian gentleman. That was the secret of his charm for
two generations of College students. He always treated them with
the most chivalrous respect, and therefore they could not fail to
respect themselves, if only to justify his good opinion of them.
The late Dr. Harden was a fine scholar, a sound educationalist,
a noble Christian, and both the State and the Commonwealth are to-day
much the poorer for his loss.
Pymble, 11/2/’25.


(Sfront (Scorge pmbbs.
John Marden, M.A., LL.D., Principal of the Presbyterian Ladies’
College, of Croydon, was a man of striking personality. My earliest
recollections of him relate to his keen appreciation of the true func-
tion of education. Prof. Dr. Rein, of the University of Jena, the
world-famous pedagogue, held that the most fundamental element
therein was the formation of character, and that the informative
element was subordinate thereto. Probably most informed men now
recognise this, but it was not ever so, even among those who ought
to have known. Dr. Marden, however, was unquestionabty one of
those who not only recognised the truth of that doctrine, but in every
way endeavoured to mould his life-work in accordance therewith.
It has been said that the, destiny of a people is determined by
the ideals which are formed “in the minds of its rising generation.”
To Dr. Marden this great idea took perhaps the form that “in the
minds of its mothers lies the power to make or mar the people.” Those
conceptions of life which govern the inner attitude of the young
women will surely express themselves in the life of a nation. This
idea governed all his work. To form the minds of the girls who
passed through his college so that as women they should be among
the forces that are to have a salutary and ennobling influence upon
the people of Australia —this was the dominating idea in his labours.
In every way he could think of, he endeavoured to make the daily
tasks of the girls who passed through the college regime react to high
motive. To preserve fine ideals of life, to work with thoroughness,
and to maintain a spirit of kindliness in all things, these were ever
his effort. In personal relations and in public addresses, he always
upheld this theme, and one of the best evidences of his success was
the respect and affection which he won. Few men of his views have
been more popular among their pupils, or more deeply respected. At
all gatherings of the college this was markedly evident, and his regard
for his pupils’ well-being was rewarded by the place he took in their
memory and esteem.
Probably every woman who passed through the Croydon Presby-
terian College recognises more clearly now the true nature of its
influence. Taking a broad view of his functions, he endeavoured to
make each realise that the efforts of her school-life were but the
shaping of those instincts and ideas which later would mould each
element of conduct. If at times they seemed over-serious, that was
corrected by the geniality of his nature, and by the range and activity
of his sympathies.
In personal relations with his fellows Dr. Marden was perhaps


always recognised, by his life-calling and his temperament, as a man
somewhat apart. He was greatly interested in the deeper aspects of
life-work, but perhaps less so in mere outward success. That success
in life ought to be measured by its inner and ethical values and not
by its financial gains, was to him a self-evident commonplace. Thus
an appreciation of the importance of public affairs and of economic
success was always subordinate to their drift and purpose. And
though this was in no way paraded, it was obvious enough to his
friends.
His attitude to learning was perhaps tinged with preference for
the finer thoughts which Jiave come through ancient Greece and Rome,
and from India, but he was also in sympathy with those extensions
of human knowledge which have come through astronomy and the
physical sciences generally. If he had a leaning in any particular
direction it was to the appreciation of the value of history and
philosophy. In these fields perhaps some would regard him as lacking
a normal degree of scepticism. But his personal view seemed to be
that national conduct shaped the futures of peoples as assuredly as
in personal affairs character shapes the externals of individual lives.
As an expositor he was perhaps impulsive rather than judicial.
His legal reading moulded but little the form of his ideas, for it was
poetry and the poetry of life that attracted him. And his idealisations
of things perhaps coloured the greyness of much that is actual. The
power of phantasy, however, is one of the advantages of the fuller
life, and in all references to the actualities of our Australian develop-
ment or of world movements he saw the picture in the richer colours
in which a vivid mind tends to paint them.
Dr. Harden’s legal discipline tended to make him exact in expres-
sion and rigorous in thought, but his tastes were essentially literary
and humanistic. On the scientific side he recognised the immense
effect on the human mind of its advancing knowledge and that the
survey of the Universe had transformed our conceptions of Time and
Space. “End is there none to the Universe of God: lo also there is
no beginning,” said Richter. Dr. Harden realised how the significance
of these words had deepened with the vision that had come through
modern research. The infinitely small and the infinitely great were
alike of interest, not merely in themselves, but rather as they revealed
the powers of Han to cogitate on the problems of his being. Han and
the mystery of his inner life, as reflected in his thoughts and aspira-
tions these were the things that attracted him and that coloured
his daily life. Thus he will always be warmly remembered by those
to whom he was really known, and those who reacted to his personality.
As his work in the college advanced it attracted larger numbers


of pupils, till it had to be enlarged. Limitations of space required
that its annexe should be separated and it was decided to make this
at Pymble. It involved him in more work and must for a time have
been a somewhat heavy tax. He met it, but it was a load to carry.
This, however, is but a matter of detail. Dr. Harden lives in the
memories of his pupils and his friends as a man of lovable personality,
always sympathetic, genial and kindly, carrying on his work with an
ever-present appreciation of the fact that he was helping in his
measure to mould healthily the future of Australia. This was his
inspiration. He will live in the memories of pupils and friends as
one of those whom it was well to know, and one who has won a place
in affectionate recollection.
(Elje Principal.
{By Mr. John H. Beatson.)
Late Hon. Treasurer and Chairman Works Committee, P.L. Colleges.
It was on the day the Church laid the late Principal Kinross to
rest that I agreed to join the P.L.C. Council at the request of several
friends, notably the late Colonel Goodlet and Dr. John Harden
himself. Dr. Kinross was one of the founders of the P.L.C., and
the early records show that he wrote the minutes of the first meeting
at which Dr. John Harden was invited to come to Sydney and establish
the College. The Doctor and I became close friends. I made him a
promise, the endeavour to live up to which at once drew me very
near to him, in gentle touch, it often seemed to me, with his inmost
being, and I think, I knew him well, indeed very well. As I write,
a letter from his dear hand from W.A. is open before me; it reads,
“I miss you very much; we had a few slight differences now and
then, owing, I think, to over-wrought brains and nerves, but we valued
each other, I think, and got very close in heart and feeling. It has
been much to me; this intercourse with you I shall greatly value all
my life. I shall never forget it. In many respects you were more
to me than any other man.” I make this one extract from corres-
pondence from which many could be given, and I do so, believing that
anything I say in the brief appreciation of my friend, will perhaps
be deemed justified from our intimate relationship.
The Doctor never claimed “the perfect life,” nor that the notes
of the great life he lived were always attuned to perfect harmony.
He knew that at times one is weak when strength is needed, and that


not always is the viewpoint just correct, or the judgment just as it
might perhaps have been, but the ideal which was his very being
ever craved for freedom to go on. Restraint, or anything that checked
or gave pause to his ideals regarding the future of his deeply cherished
P.L.C., provoked irritation that was never concealed. Even his know-
ledge of the immediate impossibility of securing many things which
he eagerly desired was an equal cause of disappointment to him. His
was the soaring spirit refusing to recognise the impossible. The
“vision glorious” was ever before him, though not so clear was the
path of accomplishment. To him it was given to lay foundation stones.
He endeavoured to put the last finishing touch to the great work of
making the two P.L. Colleges all he would have them be, with Pymble
complete—he once believed it was within the range of possibility,
and his heart glowed at the thought. But to every man his task;
his to establish; others ’ to carry to completion the desire of his soul.
Dr. Harden was a great college Principal, kind, generous, and
gentle, beloved by pupils and teachers. For all the scholars who
came under his influence he desired good, immediately and in all the
years to follow “school girl days.” Passing from the college halls
into life they were enriched in thought and gifted with a wider and
more serene outlook by having lived within the atmosphere of this
great school presided over by my friend.
I believe the Doctor’s love and yearning for the students’ every
good was so deep a part of his life that, if a request could have been
made by him to the Great Master, as the mother of the Zebedees
petitioned for her sons, his desire would have been that the beauty
of the Lord our God should be upon the P.L.C. girls all their days,
and that they should enrich earth by the radiance of their lives and
the Christ-likeness of their characters. Moreover, his hope was that
the lofty conception of what our girls’ colleges stand for should be
assiduously maintained, and that these should ever continue Halls of
Righteousness. He believed that the hope for this fair land of
Australia lay in the hands of our young womanhood. He worked
and prayed that the P.L. Colleges should have a leading part in
this noble work —the Christian education of the girls of all denomina-
tions, and the fitting of them for the greater tasks of life.
To Dr. Harden, from my knowledge of him, everything was
secondary to the attainment of his ideal, namely, that the colleges
should one day be completed, all the Church would have them be,
all he would have them be. In the last few years of his administration,
during which Pymble was being established, his sacrifice was remark-
able. He made the suggestions which rendered it possible to secure
the necessary staff and the assistance he needed in the administration.


One may only write in general terms of matters which came under
the College Council’s purview for their consent and decision. Dr.
Harden’s comfortable home at Croydon became, at his own request,
an extension for the boarding students; subsequently, the Grey House
occupied by him at Pymble was likewise utilised in this way when the
two houses were crowded out.
Now that my friend has entered into the fuller life, how my
heart goes out to him, for all he was, for all he did, for all he hoped.
To me he was an inspiration. I could not refuse to work for him,
and with him. We often talked with brotherly frankness, wholly
without semblance or reserve. He sometimes wondered why I did
not see eye to eye with him, and why I did not appear more
sympathetic. Slight differences occasionally arose, but we both had
the saving grace of saying all we had to say to each other only , and
then leaving it for good.
I had hoped to pen in some feeble way a little appreciation of
the great first Principal of the Ladies’ Colleges of our Church, but
I have become reminiscent of what Dr. Harden was, as I recall his
desires and hopes, our friendship, and our love, and I must leave
what I have penned; it is at least a tribute to the memory of an
outstanding figure in the life of the Presbyterian Church of Australia,
and particularly of the Church in the State of New South Wales.
Hy association with Dr. Harden was a great experience throughout
twenty years of a very busy life —it was much to me; I may not
say more. This meeting and working in life side by side for a space,
and then the parting, are so strange, and yet, though we do not always
recognise it, such experiences are just a fragmentary part in the great
plan of Him who is all-wise Love. I will conclude by copying from
Holy Writ and think of my friend that —“Having served his genera-
tion by the will of God he fell on sleep.”
April, 1925.


u
0
Ui
J
J
0
u
z
0
Q
>-
0
a:
u


UJ
O
UJ
_l
_J
0
o
UJ
_l
m
2
>■
CL


Press goitres.
(Sfrmtt “fUlj t Peralh,” (October 30th-
Dr. John Harden, H.A., who for very many years had
directed, with conspicuous success, the educational and administrative
affairs of the girls’ colleges associated with the Presbyterian Church,
and who was well known throughout the State as the Principal of the
Presbyterian Ladies’ Colleges at Croydon and at Pymble, died yester-
day in a private hospital at Randwick, at the age of 69 years. He had
been ill for about six weeks.
1 A man of distinguished scholarship, of high and inspiring ideals,
and of unsparing energy, Dr. Harden had won for himself a distinctive
place among those charged with the intellectual guidance of young
people. A progressive educationalist, Dr. Harden did much to establish
at the Presbyterian Ladies’ Colleges at Croydon and at Pymble those
splendid traditions and high ideals which they have preserved and
always kept before them.”
Jjfront tlje nt
“Dr. John Harden, whose death in Sydney is announced, was the
first principal of the Presbyterian Ladies’ College, Croydon, N.S.W.,
and held that position for over 30 years, with the respect of all who
came in contact with him. He was a man of high ideals in education,
and so successful were his methods, that it was found necessary after
some years, to establish a second college on the same lines. This
means that there are now two large Presbyterian Ladies’ Colleges in
New South Wales —one in the southern, and one in the northern
suburbs, forming together the finest monument that could be erected
to the memory of ‘the Doctor,’ as he was always called by his pupils.
Dr. Harden retired from active work some years ago, and had recently
visited a married daughter in Western Australia, but died shortly
after his return to Sydney. His name will be recalled by many old
boys of Geelong College, where he was senior Haster, ”
jSjrom “
{By Rev. C. E. James.)
“By the death of Dr. John Harden, the late Principal of the
Presbyterian Ladies’ Colleges at Croydon and Pymble, the cause of


education has lost one of its foremost champions. Dr. Marden would
have been distinguished in any walk or vocation in life. The Presby-
terian Church in New South AVales was fortunate in securing his
services at an early stage in the history of an institution which, thanks
mainly to him, reached a high place in the scholastic world. The
story of the development of the P.L.C. is largely the story of the
consecrated culture and devoted energy of a truly remarkable man.
It is also the story of the impact of high ideals upon the life of youth,
an influence of priceless worth in the lives of the hundreds of young
women who, throughout Australia, will mourn the loss of their old
teacher and friend. To our modern ideas there is something incongru-
ous in committing the educational training of girls to a man rather
than to a woman. There are so many capable women fully qualified and
admirably adapted to take charge of female education that he must
needs be an exceptional personality who is entrusted with a similar
task. Dr. Marden was such an exception. Those who had the privilege
of seeing him at work recognised at once his exceptional qualifications
for his duties as the head of a girls’ school. His grave dignity, his
quiet, kindly speech, his chivalrous courtesy, as well to the youngest as
to the oldest scholar, wrought in the pupils a great reverence and admir-
ation united with respect for his scholarship and loyalty to his leader-
ship. Who can tell how many homes in town and country through-
out Australia have benefited by the high ideals of life and character
inculcated by this gentleman of God. Dr. Marden had the outlook
of the optimist, without which no teacher of the young can succeed.
All his life he was an earnest student, cultivating an evergrowing-
knowledge over a wide area of investigation. His own example of
tireless devotion to his work inspired both his pupils and those who
taught them under his direction. He was a lover of nature, and to
him many of her secrets were unfolded as he pursued the paths of
science. His knowledge was at once deep and varied, and he was
never afraid to reach and state his own conclusions on any subject
which had claimed his attention. His gifts of organisation and over-
sight were invaluable to the schools of which he was the real founder
He pursued a policy which took time by the forelock and knew the
value of an expenditure which aimed at future efficiency. In the
early, as well as later, scholastic ventures he had the enthusiastic
support of such men as the late Colonel Goodlet, who himself took
the larger view of the future. Dr. Marden was a man of deeply
religious spirit, and was possessed of the child heart which sees into
the mysteries of the Kingdom of God. Those who from time to time
listened to his addresses in the General Assembly of his Church, when
speaking to the college reports, were not only charmed with his
command of beautiful English, but were deeply impressed with the


depth of his insight into the pressing problems of the educational
world, and, more than all else, with the intense earnestness with which
he set forth the true aim and object of the institution over which he
presided. Dr. Marden had barely reached the ‘three score years and
ten’ when he passed away. He was the centre of a beautiful home
life, and with his family, who alone know what they have lost, we
deeply sympathise. Those who in the years to come visit the schools
with which Dr. Marden’s name will always be associated and see his
portrait on their walls, will look upon a man who has taken a high
and honourable place among those who have contributed to the moral
and intellectual stability of this southern land. To no class in the
community is its debt greater than to the men and women who spend
their lives and devote their talents in the effort to inspire the young
with high ideals.”
t Presbgtmnit Messenger.’ ’
[By Dr. E. Neil McQueen.)
I am sitting in the room at Croydon where Dr. Marden did
much of his work, and much of his thinking, the room where I so
often came to him for advice, as son to a father, when we were
colleagues here. Looking through the windows, I see all round the
shrubs and trees which he put in, many with his own hand. I can
hear his voice quite plainly, telling me of his plans, or something about
the difficulties incidental to school life. These memories will always
be a benediction to me. I had to intrude often on the privacy of his
family life, but he always made me welcome, though my coming often
meant breaking into his rest after an exhausting day. I knew him
as a man “given to hospitality,” and I saw him free from all formality
as the kindly head of the house.
We often talked seriously, and I remember well his telling me,
before I came to the school, not to come unless I really believed it
to be worth while to put the work before all else; and how he told
me later that the reason for our being in this world was, so far as
he could read it, that we should sacrifice ourselves to make it better.
And this is what he did. He would never allow himself to take a
real holiday; the school was always in his mind, and he would come
back again and again to carry out things which he could not rest to
leave undone. When away from the school he was always restless,
and felt that he must needs be about his Father’s business.
For many years, as we all knew T , his aim was the establishment


of a great school at Pymble, and it is fortunate for the State that
he was able to pilot that school through its initial years, and see it
firmly set. He carried the burden of the Croydon school through
more than one financial crisis. It may not be generally known that
at one time the financial position was so serious that he found it
necessary for some time to sacrifice his sleep in the doing of journal-
istic work, so as to obtain sufficient money for the school to meet its
obligations, and that at the opening of the Pymble school he insisted
on a reduction of his salary by almost half, so as to make possible
the appointment of a vice-principal, an appointment which he saw
was rendered necessary by the opening of the new school. Such
actions as these speak louder than any words of his or mine.
Knowing him as I knew him, I do not think that we should
mourn that he has passed on. He was never really happy after the
time when his resignation became necessary. To live was not to live
when his life’s work was done. And because his life’s work was
done so well, we who follow him have a solid foundation on which
to carry on his work. Whatever the schools may become, whatever
effect they may have on the lives of women, and through them of
men, will have been made possible only because the burden and heat
of their day was borne by John Harden.
Jfroxtt “'©lje 'plonfcon of
(By Dr. Prescott.)
A conspicuous figure in the life of New South Wales, and indeed
Australian, schools has been removed by the death of Dr. John
Harden, at the age of sixty-nine Educated in Victoria, he was
brought to Sydney in 1887 by the Presbyterian Church to found the
Presbyterian Ladies’ College It prospered from the beginning,
and a large number of girls passed through it. Subsequently a large
drift of population took place from the Western Stiburbs, where the
school was built, to the suburbs on the north side of Port Jackson.
. . . . AYith fine enterprise and audacity, Dr. Harden suggested to
his Church that a second school should be built here, originally as a
branch of the first. • A large block of land, comprising some eighty
acres, was secured and plans on an extensive scale prepared. A
substantial part of the proposed buildings was erected, the rest will
follow when required. All this was carried out under his direction,
and both schools have flourished. Between them they have about 600
girls, many of them boarders. He retired from active service a few


years ago, but to the last watched with interest the institutions he
had planted. He was a man of wide attainments, cultivated tastes,
and high ideals, and his memory is cherished in hundreds of homes
for the important part he took in the shaping of secondary education
generally in New South Wales.
My earliest recollections of Dr. Marden are of a time before the
Sydney College was begun, when for some years he and I were col-
leagues in a Melbourne school. Even at that time I was struck by
the earnestness which he put into all his work and by his abounding
joy in Nature. So when I was called to work with him again in
Sydney, I felt it both an honour and a pleasure to be, in however
small a way, his helper in the great work of building up the Presby-
terian Ladies’ College in New South Wales.
Memories come to me of the very early days, when the College
was begun in a charming old house and grounds at Ashfield. What
a task it was for him and Mrs. Marden to decide on all details of the
college life as it was to be at Croydon, knowing it was the foundation
of a great work, involving the formation or guiding of the minds of
many of the future mothers of Australia. I believe this thought was
ever present with him, and was “the crowning task” he aimed at.
He looked not into the immediate present, but to the future, to the
results of his present work in long years to come.
In the early days at Ashfield one event stands out prominently,
the visit of the late Professor Henry Drummond to the school, and
the address he gave us, but especially do I remember Dr. Marden’s
intense enjoyment of a walking tour he made with the Professor and
a few chosen spirits to the Blue Mountains. The Professor had shown
them how a good Christian could also be a “good fellow,” fond of
fun, and enjoying to the utmost the free open-air life and beauties of
Nature. Dr. Marden reflected this spirit in himself, and I am sure
it lightened the heavy task he had before him.
The early years at Croydon brought out his best points, when he
steadily overcame almost insuperable difficulties, trying to get his own
ideals carried out, yet at the same time unconsciously impressing all
with whom he came in contact —Council, pupils, parents, teachers,


workmen —with the steady purposefulness of his life, combined with
that joy in Nature which was always his relief.
That he expressed himself at times in verse was known to only a
few of his friends. I have thought that these verses (attaining some-
times a high measure of poetry) were significant, in that they showed
the manner of man he was when he held commune with himself.
There was an elusive character in the lines that seemed as if he had
had the vision of the Holy Grail.
‘‘All over covered with a luminous cloud.” To him there was
always some high goal to be attained. What it was he could not
clearly say, but he felt it drawing him on, and he tried to make others
feel that the only thing worth doing in this life was to aim at the
highest.
.iHtss (iHarton
Having been for a period of twenty years in close co-operation
with Dr. Marden, and that at a time when he was in the plenitude
of his powers and when his life task was but a dimly envisaged dream,
I prefer to speak of his attitude to that task rather than of any branch
of his many-sided personality.
Dr. Marden was a keen lover of art, of literature, of horticulture,
and the great questions of the day were never far from his con-
sciousness and were eagerly discussed by him, but he brought to the
creation of the Presbyterian Girls’ Colleges, which are at once his
monument and his reward, a whole-hearted devotion to which all other
interests were subordinated, and from which no other interest caused
him to swerve. Whether he was facing the solution of an ethical
problem demanding days and nights of thought, planning construc-
tional additions, laying out the Croydon garden (his favourite recrea-
tion in those early days), or leading a procession of ready helpers to
prepare and decorate the School Hall for Speech Days, the true
welfare of the College was always paramount, and the keenest sifter of
motives would have failed to find in that unanimity of aim one strain
of self-seeking. Unflagging, unbending devotion was the key-note of
the great harmony.
And Dr. Marden walked no narrow path in this consistent press-
ing forward in one direction. His eyes were always free to look on
broad sun-lit plains and his mind was tempered to far-distant vistas.
In teaching he got to the farthest point possible from the pedant, in
discipline his decision was always “as the gentle dew from heaven,”


and in play, even when not an actual participator (he joined in many
games at one time), no hand was quicker, no eye merrier.
It was this grand simplicity in things great and small which en-
deared Dr. Marden to those who, able to appreciate the innate bigness
of the man, stood at his side in his beloved task, bore and forbore in
his company, and loyally followed his leadership, with the persuasion
that he was not so much their chief as their fellow-worker and friend.
JiuUber of |lumblr.
iHfiss 01. (JHackttess-
It is a commonplace that he who builds must build not just
with bricks and mortar, but with his soul; that truth is more
necessary than a trowel in raising a structure to beauty and
stability.
And he who really built the P.L.C., Pymble, and rests from his
labours now—he whose mind bodied it forth in grander and lovelier
form even than that we know—built with his soul. In the structure
he did so much to rear, as in his educational work there, we can
trace the moral principles that were the man.
He built it, first of all, for beauty; not the beauty that is mere
prettiness, mere ornateness, but the beauty of simplicity, grandeur,
grace, and truth. The massiveness, the regular outlines, the graceful
arches that distinguish the school, have a charm that does not weary
as more pretentious styles of architecture do.
And that is just the kind of beauty he dreamed of and planned
for Pymble girls—the beauty of simple sincerity, of solid virtue, of
natural graciousness. He set them down amidst physical loveliness
that could not fail to refine. There was to be nothing shoddy, mean
or ugly about the school that housed them, and he planted it where
Nature at her loveliest should teach them grace. Little laughing
creeks babbled through their grounds; at their very gates began a
tangled fairyland of fern and flower, and at night the myriad lights
of the city twinkled with a magic glow across the ridges whence
fresh breezes blew, laden with woodland fragrance. And it was
moral loveliness and grace that he tried to foster in their natures.
He believed in the best that was in them, and used his wisdom and
his sympathy to make it grow. In many a case, those who laboured
with him saw it develop appreciably; lurking meanness would slink


away ashamed at contact with his generous nature, and flagging
enthusiasm would revive at the touch of his unfaltering idealism.
So the beauty that was in him wrote itself alike in the building he
planned and the lives he guided.
And then, he built it for the future. Those who were privileged
to talk it over with him when it lived but in his eager brain —a
dream school without a pupil, when no architect’s pencil had yet
tried to confine his dream with rule and line, will remember how
he insisted that no temporary device must mar the final plan, even
though that plan could hope to see its realisation only after his life
should be done; no gardens even must spring up haphazard and
spoil the symmetry that should appear when cottage after cottage
crowned its appointed site, and tower and chapel rose in their midst.
And did he not think more of the future than of the present for
his pupils, too? He tried, indeed, to equip them mentally for the
battle of life. But always he looked ahead; he saw them as the
mothers of a world unborn, and trained them for gracious woman-
hood, even more than for distinction in class-room and on plavino 1 -
field.
Moreover, he gave his building space. Those wide fields and
orchard slopes are all as he planned them, for he loathed the narrow
and the cramped.
And it was space—width, outlook, largeness—that he tried to
give young minds. He had always been many-sided, tolerant, full
of wide sympathies and lofty ideals; he loved nature, art, music,
science, literature, history; and the Pymble girl who came under his
influence unconsciously developed varied interests and broad
sympathies.
Again, he planned school and houses for use, and not for empty
show; grace and spaciousness were combined in every part with
effectiveness for educational purposes, dust so he aimed at showing
the girls the beauty of usefulness. He encouraged them always to
aim at some worthy work in the world and to eschew the life of
mere frivolity and pleasure. “Useless” was to him a word of
terrible import, and the cry of his soul was in the motto he chose in
early Croydon days for the College magazine :
“Here hath been dawning
Another blue day;
Think! Wilt thou let it
Slip useless away?”


Finally, he saw to it that the foundations of that massive struc-
ture reared at Pymble were deep and sure. And depth was what
he tried hardest to give the young. He taught them the solemn
earnestness of life, and his own simple piety pointed to the Rock on
which he would have them build a foundation that could not be
shaken by the storm-winds of adverse fate.
Of this beloved builder, whose visible presence is with us no
more, shall it not be said that his beauty and sincerity of character,
his wise foresight, his broad outlook, his effectiveness, his depth of
soul, stand in brick and stone at Pymble still? And that still they
shed their gracious influence wherever the footsteps of his pupils
linger ?
( 3for JRrmrmbrancr.
(iHrs. ( A. jiH. c isliumn
Croydon College, with its grey stately pile and quaint massive
towers enshrined in green, stands to-day an indestructible monument
of the restless energy and devotion to duty of Dr. John Marden,
known to all the P.L.C. girls of his time as the “Dear Old Doctor.”
“Du, petit on vient an grand.” This grand old College began in a
small way in a private house in Ashfield, with twelve boarders all
told, who were privileged to a far greater degree than the P.L.C.
girls of to-day, since Dr. Marden, with his wife and their two little
daughters, lived en famille with the College staff and boarders. To
all his girls, he was “teacher tender and comrade true,” guiding
daily their steps aright and sharing their sports; and this association
with him in his beautiful home-life is one of the dearest memories
of the very first P.L.C. girls. He was a man of great personal charm
and variously gifted, a brilliant scholar, an accomplished speaker, a
clever writer. He loved all things simple, sweetly pure and good,
and searched passionately for truth with the deep understanding of
and love for human nature, combined with an indomitable spirit,
which gave him the greatest influence over those who came under
his sway.
His fineness of character, added to his tireless activities and
eager resolve to win through, to the range and depth of his know-
ledge of literature and to the gift of imparting his great store of
learning, has raised the College to what it stands for to-day—the
Good, the True, the Beautiful —and has brought eternal honour to


his name. that honour never be sullied by the word or deed
of any College girl, past or present.
His voice is now silent within the “ reverend walls in which of
old he wore the gown,” but to those who knew him well, it is easy
to recall his cultured voice, his radiant smile and the intentness of
his listening face.
His life’s work is done; he has passed on, and though it is hard
for those who loved him to see the vacant chair and think
“How good! How kind! And he is gone!”
It is not meet to mourn, but bravely bid him
“Farewell—a long farewell!”
,-fHrs. JL (Hooper.
President of the John Harden Memorial Library Committee.
Days of vivid impression are often days on the fresh mind of the
schoolgirl which have a great influence over her in after years.
Looking back on the strong, lovable personality of Dr. Harden, to
many the outstanding impression came on the last day of their
school life, when the Doctor called to higher visions for the battle
of life ahead—not physical attractions, not worldly advantage, but
a life lived in the service of others.
One address those who were privileged to hear will well remem-
ber. It was founded on Solomon’s words in Proverbs: “Favour is
deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that feareth the Lord she
shall be praised.”
To one who ever tried to foster a love for the good and beautiful
in literature, it was felt that no more fitting memorial could be
raised than a library at the Croydon School, where he so long
laboured.
The ready response which is coming from the Old Girls shows
how much Dr. Harden has done for those who were privileged to be
under his care.
A great educationalist he was, but above that an inspirer of
character.


a (Erojjbmt J£x-Ji?tubent-
With the passing of Dr. Harden, every old college girl who came
under his sway feels she has lost her best friend, a loss which will
be felt in all the ends of the earth by women who, as girls, spent
their school life at Croydon. During his long term of office, girls
came from every State in the Commonwealth and fyom many lands
and islands of the Pacific region.
The writer can remember how he held and led us in the right
path when the passions of youth were strong. Usually wise and kind
and gentle, yet occasionally, when serious wrong-doing lifted up its
head, he would show a stern, inflexible will and make us hate for
ever the thing that brought about his rare displeasure.
He could teach from the lowest to the highest forms, and he
taught many subjects himself. No one ever forgot when the Doctor
gave the lesson.
He always believed in cheering and encouraging a girl. Even a
dull girl could take her troubles to his study, when he would find
something she knew and could feel pride in, and so help to build
on that. For the true student he was most helpful. He would lend
books from his own private library, ask a few pertinent questions
when the books were returned, and often lend another ; so in this
way dull and bright students were each helped and encouraged, and
the College became known for its scholastic side, as well as a builder
of character.
He taught his girls to appreciate all that was best in Archi-
tecture, History, Art, Music, Literature, Science, and his exposition of
the Scriptures can never be forgotten.
He taught us what life really meant, not all brightness and
happiness, but that there would be times of stress and sorrow as well.
Nevertheless, he tried to build a courage to meet all sorrows and
dangers and strove to educate so that one knew what to do in sudden
emergencies. He was the first to sympathise in sorrow and the first
to congratulate in success.
Dr. Harden was a great horticulturist, as the garden at Croydon
shows, with the shrubs and trees from many lands, which prove a
joy to the teacher of Botany.
To sport he devoted much of his spare time. I can remember
his giving the first lesson in tennis to many beginners, and also giving
the team some very hard practice before they met their opponents
in a match. And the teams, coached solely by him, went out season
by season and brought home the victory time after time, as the various
tennis cups at Croydon truly show.


He believed in the equipment of the School being of the best.
The pictures and documents, and specimens in glass cases, which line
the walls of the dining hall, school hall, and class rooms all show
his vision and foresight.
He knew each girl personally, and what is more wonderful,
seemed to remember them always. As they went through life, their
children were like so many grandchildren. It was a common sight
on Jersey Day to see the Doctor with some small person clinging to
his band, and both seemed to delight in each other’s society.
To him we owe our flag, our badge, our hat-band, our motto,
our uniform, our pipe organ, our original orchestra, and very many
other things. Let us never dishonour his memory by bringing dis-
honour to any of the things he gave us.
His beautiful home at Wentworth Falls was “open house” to the
old girls. lou simply went there to spend the day and were quite
at home, because you were with those who loved you, and your
children played in the garden with that best of playfellows, “the
Doctor.”
pig a Jlx-Ji>tubenL
“There are many people in Sydney who claim to have had the
friendship of Dr. John Harden, whose death was announced on
Wednesday, and doubtless, they could write a finer tribute to his
memory than I, but as an ex-pupil of the Presbyterian Ladies’ College,
of which Dr. Harden was Principal for many years, on behalf of the
thousands of students whose school days were all the happier for his
teaching, let me tell what he meant to ‘the girls of the tartan,’ for
surely they knew him best!
He had boundless faith in the girls of the P.L.C., and it was his
chief delight to read aloud letters from his former pupils who were
out in the world, as nurses at the front, teachers, housewives, women
in offices and universities, who wrote to him, knowing how he loved
to hear of their successes, being assured of his ready sympathy at
their failures. He was the best friend they had at college, and his
keen understanding, his justness, and his love of humanity smoothed
over those unpleasant moments that must occur in the best regulated
colleges. He never forgot a name or a face. Everyone loved and
admired him, his heart and soul were in his work, and it is through
his goodness and greatness, his ambition, and his love of the noblest,
that the college is what it is to-day.


Though we are told that Dr. Harden is dead, he will never be
forgotten by the girls of the F.L.C.”
<3from (iftiss jHargaret JVntog, JLJV.
President of the Ex-Students’ Union.
To ex-Students the College meant Dr. Harden. Nobody who
was at Croydon for any length of time failed to realise that he wanted
to be her friend. The discipline was necessary, yet the path of school
life was smoothed by his ready sympathy and help. They looked
forward to being warmly welcomed on Jersey Day by the Doctor,
who with his wonderful memory for faces, would make kind inquiries
of each about her family or career.
Since much that one could say has already been frequently
expressed, I might just mention two of Dr. Harden’s striking
characteristics —his delight in Nature, and his fondness for children:
“He loved the witchery of the soft blue sky,” the sea, the
mountains, the carolling of birds, the blossoming of flowers.
How often he would seek others to admire with him a waving
stretch of golden daffodils, or the greening boughs of oak and elm
unfolding to the breath of Spring; or again to listen to the music
of the thrush or bulbul in some thicket of the spacious grounds where
a myriad of songsters—the robin, the wren, the wagtail, peewit,
kookaburra —all found sanctuary.
How the younger ones delighted to cluster round him, each with
her little story, into which he would enter with humour or sympathy
as the case demanded.
’Twas a book he loved to read, the heart of a child, and of such
is the kingdom of Heaven.
38


Scenes round Dr. Warden’s Home at Wentworth Falls.


by ;©r. JlHctrhrn at jpytttble mt lljr occasion of tt|c JUtsif
of tl ]c Ciobcntor-Cicneral, Ji>ir JHimro
at lt|£ of tfjo College,
“Your Excellency, will you allow me on behalf of the students
of the Presbyterian Ladies’ College, who cannot speak for them-
selves, to extend to you a hearty welcome on the occasion of your
visit to dedicate the College?
“The young womanhood of Australia, representing much of
the territory of this great continent—for our students come from
the length and breadth of Australia —greets you, the representative
of ‘this little spot of earth, this England,’ which, after Palestine, has
done more for the welfare of the people of the world than that of any
country, ancient or modern, not even excepting Greece or Rome! It
greets you and bids you hail, the dwellers in that dear land of
Shakespeare and Milton, of John Knox and of Cranmer, that land
swept by the stormy winds of the Atlantic, and more or less chilled
by the dark grey waters and fogs of the historic North Sea!
“It might perhaps be thought that there would be great disparity
between the denizens of the British Islands and Australia, with its
long distances, its extremes of drought and rainfall, the land of
contrasts, where, as writers tell us, the bark drops from the trees
instead of the leaves, where the birds are falsely said to have no
song, the land of the monotonous gum tree, of the kukuburra, the
kangaroo, the emu and the platypus; as Kendall tells us, the land
of the hateful snake and the spiteful speed of centipede; where, as
the geologist tells us, everything was in the beginning and in the
making, but was left unfinished, the tertiary being but sparsely
represented—it might be thought, I say, that there would be some-
thing strange and bizarre, too, in its young womanhood. Perhaps
the type is somewhat different. Our girls are perhaps more
emotional and demonstrative, less reserved, too —(‘the stony British
stare’ of Tennyson would be impossible in Australia) ; but different
in its essential characteristics? No, a thousand times, no! That
noble, pure, splendid, unselfish type of woman in England, Scotland
and Ireland, which, as the poet tells us, contains all the beauties of
the Universe within it, has its counterpart here.
“These girls are the sisters of those Australian soldiers who,
placed for the first time beside the trained armies of Europe, left
their ineffaceable record at Pozieres and at Fleurbaix, in Egypt,
Palestine, and Mesopotamia. The bodies of many of the brothers


of these girls lie sleeping peacefully on the battle-fields of Europe,
and in the rays of the Syrian sun—‘Surely they take their fill of
deep and liquid rest, forgetful of all ill. ’
“We did not get conscription, but, thank God, ‘Zebulun and
Naphthali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death
in the high places of the field.’ And these girls are made of the
same stuff as their fathers and brothers! More than that, they are
the hope and the only hope of this wide land. I can say, after an
experience of over 30 years, the students who have gone out from
this College are among the best and noblest types of women it has
ever been my good fortune to meet, or the world’s happiness to
possess.
Charles Kingsley says of England: ‘ ’Tis the hard grey
weather breeds hard Englishmen.’ But this surely cannot be wholly
true, else why are their congeners in Australia of the same type—
Australia of the blue sky and enticing surf?
“It might be rightly asked what is the function of a great
College such as this in the body politic, in the great scheme of
national evolution?
“I can tell you in a word. The old Romans used fondly to tell
their children how in one great crisis of their history Rome was
saved by its women. Well, from this College proceeds year by vear
a quiet, but steady, unfailing, persistent stream of the best of the
national womanhood, dowered by the best education, bathed in the
radiant and purifying spirit of College life, blessed unspeakably by
the discipline of its games, and consecrated as we would believe by
the Grace of God, a stream to uplift, to regenerate, and to purify
at the heart the national life of this country. It is the little leaven
which is to leaven the whole lump—-like the great battle-axe of the
warrior of old—with axe-like edge unturnable, it ever smites the
v i ong and fears not. In this stream of womanhood from the
Colleges lies the only hope for this part of the Empire.
Only thus will Australia, ennobled by the efforts of her good
women, and purified in her heart and in her homes by sacrifice and
devotion, endure, a strength amid the nations!
“In another and a greater sense than that of Rome will
Australia be saved by the devotion of her women! ”


b]j iflarbru at Olroubtm tm lt]e occasion
of l]is JfarcfoclL
I have to thank you most sincerely for having given me this
last opportunity of seeing you and of shaking your hands before
I ‘pass hence and be no more seen.’
But you will not think that though we have come to the
parting of the ways, T shall forget the Old College, the land of my
mystic dreams, the seat of my most anguishing exploits, the source
of my tenderest memories, and perhaps the field of my greatest
failures. For regret it as I may, and pathetic as the situation is,
when the Great Books are opened I shall have to be judged largely
out of this great College Book, the Book of College remembrance,
where most of my mistakes were committed, most of my prayers
and tears called forth. Is it any wonder that as I speak a great
avalanche of thronging memories is upon me, memories which no
one can number, and perhaps none but God rightly estimate.
“ ‘So you remain, though all man’s passionate seas
Roar their blind tides, I can forget all these.’
“ ‘ Tis bound by a thousand links to my heart,
Not a tie will break, not a link will start.
Would ye learn the spell?’
“Because there is one person in this great assembly who has
most, of all its inmates, to thank the College for —and that is myself.
Whatever it has done for any one of you, it has done a hundred
times more for me. Whatever of misery you may have suffered in
it, I have suffered more; whatever good you have got out of it, I at
least had a share in.
“Both Mrs. Harden and myself desire to express our highest
appreciation of your kindly thought of us, your good wishes for
our future, and your gifts which you have asked us to accept as a
token of those good wishes. We do this last with some reluctance,
such, perhaps, as old Abraham must have felt when he made his
reply to the King of Sodom after the Battle of the Kings.
“As a last word, I have been wondering what I should say to
you —and the visit of the Prince of Wales presents itself as a sub-
ject-well, he is not a subject—but never mind.


“All of you know, no doubt, that the motto of His Royal High-
ness is ‘lch dien. ’ The language is what we now call German, but it
should be remembered that there was then no Germany, as we now
know it, when the motto was adopted. The words ‘lch dien’ were
borne by the blind King John of Bohemia, who was present at the
Battle of Crecy in 1346, and who had joined King Philip of France
against the English. ‘You are my friends,’ said he; ‘I pray and
beseech you to lead me so far into the fight that I may strike one
good blow with this sword of mine.’ Linking their bridles together,
his little company plunged into the combat. After the melee, King
John’s body was found on the field where the dead lay thickest. The
circumstances of his death were so dramatic that it is said the Black
Prince placed the Bohemian circlet upon his own brows, and ever
since the eldest son of our King uses the words ‘I serve’ (‘lch dien’),
‘that I may strike one good blow with this sword of mine.’
“How nobly he—not descendant, indeed, but present represen-
tative of the Black Prince—who was in Australia just a few weeks
ago, has kept the pledge of old King John of Bohemia, I need not
tell you.
“To-day, then, I would speak to you of ‘Service.’ ‘I serve.’
‘ Even the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to serve. ’
“There never was a time when the world was crying louder
for service than it is to-day. The fountains of the great deep have
been opened and a rising tide of individualism and unrest is sweep-
ing over the world.
“In connection with this, I should like to speak to you of a
College in America, founded by Miss Mary Lyon, in Massachusetts,
83 years ago. It was to be a set-off to Yale College, which had been
designed by the Pilgrim Fathers for their sons more than a hundred
years before. This College had taken for its watchword ‘Service’—
‘that our daughters may be as corner-stones, polished after the
similitude of a palace.’ That was the school motto. It was an
epoch-making time, just as the present is.
“Mary Lyon was determined that American girls should have
the same opportunities of religious education as their brothers had.
So Mount Holyoke was begun, a seminary for girls, just as Yale was
for boys. That was all, but it was everything. It took that noble
woman years of work, of struggle, of heart-breaking disappoint-
ments, of splendid, unfaltering courage, of never-failing devotion,
of brain-sweat, heart-anguish, and agony of purpose to realise it.
Never once, brave heart that she was, did she think of giving up.
When on one occasion some friends came and asked her to abandon


the enterprise, as her strength was not equal to the task, like the
glorious old man of Cayster, who, after seeing his son and his grand-
son washed out of the lifeboat, and everyone but three out of the
thirteen of the crew drowned, in answer to the question, 'Why did
you not turn back? 7 replied, 'The men of Cayster never turn back’—
she, too, said, ‘I shall be carried out when God pleases, but I shall
never "get.” ’
"She lived to see her dream fulfilled. Before Mary Lyon passed
hence, she saw hundreds of girls passing through the doors she had
opened, and in vision thousands more who would enter. There are
nearly 900 in residence in that College. What a sight it must have
been on Graduation Day (as the Americans call it) to see 192 of
the Graduation Class, each carrying a white wreath and a bundle of
laurel, march in solemn procession to her grave in those glorious
campus fields surrounding the building, and there twine a laurel
chain about her grave!
"At Mount Holyoke they have their commencement orator.
The speaker on this occasion was Professor Zueblin, of Boston. The
address, so the newspapers say, created a profound impression. The
girls listened with an intenseness which the onlookers could but
feel, especially when he urged that America —and it is just as true
of Australia —needed not so much an increased as an improved
population. He appealed not for more, but for better people.
"Modern commercialism, in offering to sell the precious things
of life, has as its slogan, ‘By this advertisement conquer’; not 'by
this its worth conquer.’ These are unworthy ideals. The vision
which will save the world will come through the faith of youth,
unafraid to think, undismayed by the world’s glamour, undeterred
by its devious ways and selfishness, roused to enthusiasm and deeds,
born of the new, yet old, wisdom:
" 'Even the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto; but
to serve —and to give His life (the greatest of service) a ransom
for many.’ ”


(@ma.
“Of such is the kingdom of Heaven
Because of gifts of tiny press of feet
That patter on the floor,
Life’s onward march becomes a path flower-sweet
And cheerier than before.
Because of prints of chubby hands that raise
Strange memories from the past,
The earth seems full of golden other days
And types that come to last.
Because of childish prattle innocent
That knows not devious ways,
Hell’s black untruth takes utter banishment
And ill has stress of days.
Because of little peals of laughter brought
From gates of paradise,
Joy gleams with richer math of after-thought
Within our gladdened eyes.
Because of trust that makes full man afraid,
Whose hopes have somehow sped,
Rise phoenix-like the old faiths firmer laid
In hearts aforetime dead.
Because of tattered coats and little seams
That restless limbs have frayed,
Deeds grown to measure of our noblest dreams
From rough routine are made.
Because of one small plot of garden lands
With rose and daisies pied,
Life bids us hope from out its smirching sands
Some beauty will abide.
Because of spider strokes and blotted page
That nervous Angers trace,
There will be pity infinite and sage
Found in our Master’s face.


Because of timid orisons from lips
Pressed to the mother’s ear,
No prayers of ours to God shall have eclipse
Year circling unto year.
Because of one low mound of cherished earth,
Where calm days breathe and go,
Love yearns in utmost throes to keep the worth
That makes the worth of woe.
John Harden.
The spirit of
Australia.
The nebular
genesis of the
earth.
The dawn of
Creation.
Au Australian (Obe.
I love with warmth the great Australian wild,
Where Nature, winsome as a little child,
Takes many a mood,
Through many a rood;
Where, early, late,
And reckless if men come or go,
She beateth out her concords low,
Speech inarticulate!
’Twas not for nought, a seething globe and lair
Of vapours myriad, thronging thick the air,
Earth shone —a star,
Flinging afar,
Athwart the dark,
A feeble gleam, through chilly space,
And speeding on in tireless race,
A new created spark.
'Twas not for nought she bore the throes alone,
And graved fast upon her plinths of stone,
With fingers strange,
On many a range,
While aeons roll,
Her purpose, only clear to eyes that see,
Deep running through the pageantry,
The great concerted whole.
46


The Carbonifer-
ous to the Cre-
taceous periods.
The coal
measures.
The Tertiary.
The period of
the uplift of the
great mountain
chains.
The Pleistocene
anterior to man.
The beginning of
modern things.
Man and mind.
Nor nought it was when wandering by the rim
Of reedy lake and fell, the monsters grim,
In reptile state,
With swinging gait,
Heavy and slow,
Lifted their shallow brains ’mid fluted firs,
And ferns like dew-drenched gossamers,
Waving in morning’s glow.
Thus, too, it was when surging ocean’s deeps,
Billow on billow, rolling ’gainst the steeps,
Thundered and foamed,
And caverns domed
With fringes white,
Made weird its ever-sobbing roar,
What time upon the great sea-floor
Fell thick the Nummulite.
Then when were strewn upon the open page,
The traces of the lonely “Great Ice-Age”—
Kame and moraine
And flinty grain
Of splintered rock,
How deeply still God’s silence breathed
O’er glacier sheet, with cascades wreathed,
And huge erratic block.
Oft on the open plains of the Paroo
Wandered the emu tall and kangaroo,
With heavy beat
Of tireless feet
Pacing the blue.
Still, still unfinished was the rune
Of nature, yet but half in tune,
Yet half, her retinue.
And as Creation’s circles ever ran
Wider and always wider, till with Man
Reason awoke,
Like gentle stroke
On tuneful bell
Through which the sweetest concords race,
So on the mighty voids of space
Subtler vibrations fell.
47


The long day
of evolution.
But evolution
with a purpose.
Beauty and
ugliness conspire
to the end.
Moloch Horridus.
Bird of Paradise,
Mind finds its
development
through agency
of matter.
“God saw all
that He had
made and behold
it was very
good.’ ’
And still, as shadowy forms on dimmest quest
Flit past the bivouac fire nor seem to rest,
Day after day
In long array
Glimmered and sank—
While dark cave-men the boomerang
Wrought from the lightwood tree, and sang
In mossy caverns dank.
All through God’s fixed purpose ever beat—
In times of glare and waves of throbbing heat,
When winter’s chill
Edged every rill
With crystal rime,
Still was His Hand not stayed nor slack,
Love shimmered o’er the uncertain track
Through centuries of time.
From first to last, from vaporous gas to sea,
To solid mass centred by gravity,
From ugly taint
Of lizard quaint,
To splendent wing
Of Paridae, the spirit’s stress
With beauty as with ugliness
Was ever broadening.
For matter dense is linked to mind akin,
And mind to matter —as the fish’s fin
With mirthful sea
Finds harmony
And element;
So mind is but interpreter,
As morals are of character,
And makes arbitrament.
And when upon the wilderness and plain
Where no man dwells comes forth refreshing rain
And straight awake
From mound and brake
Earth’s slumbering brood,
Man’s spirit, god-like, answering deep
To lowest life and things that creep
Finds fellowship and good.
48


He ndeth And w h e n the winds of God blow as they list,
upon the wings , ... . . • /
of the wind.” And rush and pipe with myriad voice acquist,
Through ravines wide
With giant stride,
Till sky and earth
Commingled seem, and rocks are rent,
’Tis but his garments orient
That give the whirlwinds birth.
andMightning 1 ' But neares t oft in dread magnificence,
fulfilling His When lurid sheets of flame o’erwhelm the sense,
Word ” And thousandfold
The glowing gold,
Flashes sword-bright
Its keenest white —it but reveals
The strife of soul in dread ordeals
And travail for the light.
Tis thus I love Australia’s wild and stream,
Where I am taught of things I did not dream,
In wilderness
And lone recess
There beauty dwells,
And dusty plain and flowered rise,
And mountain drear are “bright with eyes,”
As fern-decked mossy dells.
John Harden.


(EnUrge
(JKbapteb from 333bittter for use buring tl|e (ireat 3Uar).
2he Peace of God, which surpasseth ail thought, shall sentinel your
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus!’ 1
0 God, who deign ’st to mortal man
Serenity from strife,
Whose pathless tracks, beyond the ken
Of summer-bird o ’er moorland fen,
Throb with the pulse of life.
In steadfast faith of those who dwelt
In distant Galilee,
We come, 0 make Thy Presence felt,
Dwell with us as with those who knelt
Beside the Syrian Sea.
Breathe through the plains where cornlands glow
Red golden in the sun,
Till, over burdened hearts below
The sunshine of Thy favour flow
In rest and benison.
Thy confidence o’erspread us all,
Deep as the plumbless sea,
The secret promptings of Thy call,
The guerdon of Thy blessing fall
On us expectantly.
0 still our spirits with the hush
Of gentleness and balm,
May ours be strength, no shadows rush
Athwart that blue where sunsets flush
The evening’s peerless calm.
Drop Thy sure boon of quietness
Till petulances cease,
Lift from our souls the anguished stress,
To-morrow’s load of anxiousness,
And fill our hearts with peace.
John Marden.
50


F C. MAKER.
(| j I.] -y±*\* *
Y? f ff?y rr pj 11
1111 J-g^rJ
P|r? r r|i j ~iij
J\t the Oirabestbe of jCamb
(Portion of Address by Dr. Marden.)
“To-day we commit to the ground all that was mortal of Dr.
Robert Lamb, but I need not tell you that the remains we have this
day thrust into the ground, out of sight, are not Robert Lamb at
all. Even Plato, more than 2,500 years ago, knew better than that.
He records that Socrates, when he was asked by his disciples where
they should bury him after his death, replied, ‘You may bury
Socrates when you catch him; but you must catch him first/ And
we, in this 20th Century of Jesus Christ, know also that Robert Lamb
is not lying here in the cold tomb—he has gone elsewhere to fresh
avenues of work, to new activities of service, to labour under better
conditions than he enjoyed here.


“It is now nearly 16 years since I knew Robert Lamb first, for
Ido not call him ‘Doctor’ any more. That was a part of his earthly
equipment, which is laid in the dust beside his body. I think of
him as Robert Lamb, the white-souled, gentle, clean, great man of
God he was, gone to his great Master’s presence
“Of his life in Wentworth Falls I need not speak. You all
knew him. I think you all loved him. Llis illness to a great extent
set him apart, but there he was, his winsome personality triumphing
over every prejudice! But you did not know, as some of us did
who got into the inner circle of his life, how near to God he lived;
how strong his belief in goodness was; how firm as adamant his
faith in the hereafter was. Among his last words to me were, ‘Of
a personal immortality I am quite sure, and I can therefore say
good-bye with confidence. We shall meet again.’
“It was indeed given to him to see visions of the next world
not granted to many of us poor mortals. I had many long conversa-
tions with him about them. Of them as he told them to me I may
not speak. Let it suffice to say he lived on the high tablelands with
God.
“God grant that, when our turn comes, we may go to our death
with the same unflinching courage, the same eager expectancy, the
same quiet faith, the same joyous alacrity, the same humble sub-
mission, with the same triumphant note as Robert Lamb did.
“ ‘So live that when thy summons comes to join
The innumerable caravan which moves
To that mysterious realm where each shall take
His chamber in the silent halls of death,
Thou go not, like the quarry slave at night,
Scourged to his dungeon, but sustained and soothed
B'y an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave,
Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.’ ”
Boulton Bros., Printers, 210 George Street, Sydney.




