

Series A. No. 2-JOHN MACARTHUR
1


iced
fitu-
and
jury,
Hon,
No. I.—For The Term of Their Natural Lives (Con
vict Days).
No. 2.—John Macarthur
No. 3.—The Roadmaker (Governor Macquarie).
No. 4.—William Charles Wentworth.
• At the end of this story there are blank pages
for your own notes. It’s a good idea to jot down
points for discussion as you go along.
A.A. EDUCATION SERVICE
DISCUSSION GROUP SCHEME
>n —
the


JOHN
MACARTHUR
AUSTRALIA to-day is the world’s largest wool-pro-
ducing country. Her 114,000,000 sheep produce
1,000,000,000 lb. of wool every year. The founder of
the wool industry was hot-blooded John Macarthur.
Wool is his memorial.
But in his day he filled most of the parts of the old
nursery rhyme that goes “Tinker, tailor, soldier,
sailor.” Captain John Macarthur was soldier, grazier,
farmer, milliner, shipowner, rum runner, trader, law
student, amateur historian. He was poor man until
wool made him rich man.
Sub-Lieutenant Macarthur, of the New South Wales
Corps, landed in 1790 with his wife Elizabeth and small
son Edward from the “Scarborough,” a transport of
the Second Fleet. His one idea was to make his for-
tune. His young wife, whose name was later given
to Elizabeth Farm at Rose Hill (now Parramatta), saw
“every expectation of reaping the most material advan-
tage” from the settlement.
The restless subaltern was given routine duties
keeping discipline among the marines guarding the
convicts. The infant colony was on short rations.
Governor Phillip’s attempts at farming with discon-
tented, lazy, and often desperate convicts had failed.
Near his future home Macarthur saw James Ruse
growing the first crop of wheat. Macarthur planned
to settle on the land. But the Governor would not
grant the land to his officers who had a job of work
to do. John had to wait and fret. Promotion in the
service was slow, and he thought of throwing in his
hand and returning to England.


But England had little to offer the exiles. John
had been born in Plymouth. His father had settled
there after an exile in the West Indies, where he had
fled after fighting for Bonnie Prince Charlie. Young
John had entered the army, but had soon tired of the
life and retired on an ensign’s half-pay. He took up
in turn agriculture, law, and history, but could see
no future in any of them.
For a time he turned milliner, and was dubbed “Jack
Bodice.” But he was a fine duellist with a fiery
temper, so he was not very often chipped about his
early occupation. The New South Wales Corps
offered brighter prospects. John volunteered for
service in the colonies, and was commissioned as Sub-
Lieutenant in the Corps. Macarthur, his wife, and
son were drafted to the “Neptune.” The self-assertive
subaltern fell out with the master before sailing time,
and he and Macarthur settled the matter with pistols.
Captain Gilbert was replaced by Captain Nepean. On
the voyage out Macarthur could not get along with
Nepean and the family was moved to the “Scar-
borough,”
The energetic young officer was a man of action,
and he chafed under the discipline of garrison life—
even the lax discipline of the Corps.
His chance came sooner than he hoped. Two years
after Macarthur’s arrival, Governor Phillip, worn out
by the worry, hard work, and short rations of his
earlier days, took sick leave to England. Major Grose,
of the New South Wales Corps, became Acting Gover-
nor, and Macarthur was made Paymaster of the
Regiment,
Phillip had tried to settle marines and expirees
(convicts who had completed their sentences) on small
blocks of land. He wanted to found a colony of
peasant farmers. He would not make large grants of
land to the officers.
Grose had other ideas. What were they here for,
anyway? Should murderers, pickpockets, thieves and
forgers get all the best land? Should marines get
chances denied to the officers? Certainly not! What
kind of life could one lead in this hole on the miserable
pittance of an officer’s pay?
4
JOHN MACARTHUR


The officers of regular regiments were too proud to
indulge in commerce, a calling unfit for gentlemen.
They had the traditions of their regiments to uphold.
But it wasn’t so with the New South Wales Corps.
They were not regulars, they had been recruited as
gaolers of convicts, and they had no esprit de corps.
Grose and his successor, Colonel Paterson, parcelled
out land among the officers. Never backward, Mac-
arthur got in for his share. He was granted 100 acres
of good land on the river banks of the Parramatta.
He became an enthusiastic wheat farmer. Two years
later he had 250 acres. By 1795 he was the owner
of a prosperous farm of 5,000 acres.
Grose offered 100 acres as a prize for the first
officer to get 50 acres under crop. Macarthur won the
prize. He was a first-class farmer. Labour was cheap
—assigned convicts rationed and quartered at the
Government’s expense. The Government store bought
wheat at 10/- a bushel and beef at 5/- a lb. At last
he was in the money. His dynamic energy and Scot-
tish shrewdness made every post a winner.
Elizabeth Farm (as he now called his new home)
blossomed with pear and apricot trees. (It still stands
to-day with huge cedar beams, stout doors, and wide
hearths a colonial homestead built to outlast the
years.) Macarthur’s wheat lands were a model for
others. He became Superintendent of Agriculture.
The officers of the Corps were doing well. They had
cheap land and labour. They controlled the price of
farm produce sold to the Commissariat, which they ad-
ministered themselves. Soon they had the monopoly of
the colony’s food. Sydney was growing into a lively
port; ships of all nations were bringing goods to the
colony. Officers, with credit in England, imported car-
goes and sold them at their own prices in the town. To-
bacco rose to 20/- a lb., tea to 10/-, spirits went ever
upwards—and the officers’ spirits soared likewise.
Cargoes of trading vessels were auctioned at the wharf,
but the Corps had a gentleman’s agreement not to out-
bid a brother officer. All shared in the spoils. The
retailers had to pay or go without.
5
JOHN MACARTHUR


Despite the boom in trade there were few coins in
the colony. The convicts were paid their miserable
wages of 1/6 a week in tobacco, clothing, tea, at the
ruling prices. Wheat was used as a medium of
exchange. Then the Corps found a more profitable
means of payment. Many of the convicts, slum
dwellers from the dives of London, had been brought
up on gin. One London gin shop advertised:—
Drunk for a penny,
Dead drunk for tuppence,
Bed for nothing.
The sailors and marines liked the main brace of the
Navy; Scotsmen drank their own fiery spirit. It was
an age when heavy drinking was the fashion, when
gentlemen were rated as “two bottle men” or “three
bottle men.”
All spirits were known as rum. Here, then, was
something worth cornering. The military ring bought
up all spirits imported into the colony and used rum
as money. Wheat, vegetables, meat, milk, were paid
for in rum. Wages were paid in rum, and the price
of land was reckoned in gallons an acre.
The military clique became known as the Rum Corps
—a fitting title for the racketeers. Four Governors—
Hunter, King, Bligh, and Macquarie—tried to smash
the racket, but it continued to flourish.
Macarthur became the leader of the ring as his
fortune and power grew. But he did a greater service
for Australia than his fellow officers of the Rum Corps.
Early in 1794 he bought 60 Bengal ewes and lambs,
imported from Calcutta, and two Irish ewes and a
ram. The Indian and Irish sheep were raised for
mutton, not for wool. The Indian had long coarse
hair and the Irish sheep a coarse wool. Macarthur
crossed the two and, as he wrote, “had the satisfaction
to see the lambs of the Indian ewes bear a mingled
fleece of hair and wool.”
He decided to breed sheep for fine wool. Two vessels
went from Sydney to the Cape of Good Hope in 1796.
England was at war with France. France had occupied
Holland, which had settled the Cape Station. England
captured this key port to the Indian and Australian
6
JOHN MACARTHUR


colonies and held it until 1815. The captains of the
two ships bought merinos from the Boers of the Cape;
Macarthur got four ewes and two rams to continue his
experiments.
Elizabeth Farm became our first sheep stud. Mac-
arthur saw that the profits from wheat and other
farm produce might slump. Governor King was
settling convicts and marines on small farming blocks.
There would soon be a surplus of wheat, oats and
barley. Farmers like Macarthur would be ruined.
Macarthur thought, talked and dreamt of wool —a
commodity that could be shipped to markets in Eng-
land without injury. The finances of the country would
be permanently benefited—so would John’s. Other
Parramatta farmers, Waterman and the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, were breeding sheep. But Macarthur con-
centrated on his six merinos and produced a quality
of wool that astounded the scoffers.
By 1800 he had 611 sheep and was worth at least
£20,000 —not a bad effort for a lad who had arrived
ten years before with a debt of £5OO over his head, and
a young wife and son to support. (By 1805 he was to
own one-third of the sheep in the colony.)
Rose Hill prospered. It had become the cradle of
our three greatest industries—wheat, wool, and racing.
James Ruse, the convict, had grown the first wheat
crop, Macarthur had bred the first merino sheep, and
the officers had built the first racecourse there.
Two sons were now the heirs to Elizabeth Farm.
John and Elizabeth kept open house in the best colonial
style. They were devoted to each other. But the
subaltern, now captain, was running foul of authority.
He quarrelled with his C. 0., Lieut.-Colonel Paterson,
and fought a duel with him. Paterson was wounded.
Macarthur was arrested and sent to England for court-
martial.
In India, on the way to England, he met Sir Robert
Farquhar, who was under a cloud from the Army
authorities for having made an unprovoked and unsuc-
cessful attack on Amboina, in the Netherlands East
Indies.
Farquhar spoke of writing a letter of apology to the
Governor-General and Council. Macarthur, who had
7
JOHN MACARTHUR


always_ adopted a truculent attitude to those in
authority, laughed at him. “If you write such a letter
you will be laid on the shelf for life,” he told Farquhar.
“Tell them they are not fully aware of the position of
the Dutch settlement, or the circumstances of your
attacking it; that you are determined to renew the
attack. Having thus written, do so, and mind you
take the place.” Farquhar took the advice, the town,
and the glory, and Macarthur made a friend for life.
Farquhar’s father was a physician to the Prince of
Wales, and was related to the secretary of Lord Cam-
den, who shortly became the Secretary of State for
the Colonies. Macarthur again grasped the chance
offered, and used his friend to gain the ear of Camden
himself. Nerve! Under arrest, awaiting court-martial
for duelling with his senior officer, a member of the
notorious Rum Corps yet here he was in London
mixing with Cabinet Ministers.
The French armies were over-running Spain and the
Peninsular War had begun. Supplies of merino wool
from Spain were stopped. The wool barons of York-
shire had to find other sources of supply. Macarthur
showed them his samples of merino and crossbred wool.
They were good —as fine as those of the Spanish
uplands.
He tried to promote companies to exploit the wool
business in a big way in New South Wales for (as he
put it) the Imperial good. He even wrote to the Com-
mittee of the Privy Council suggesting a huge Govern-
ment wool-growing scheme in Australia with himself
as manager of a grant of 10,000 acres and thirty
convict shepherds. This was certainly high-pressure
salesmanship. He lobbied, persuaded, and sought to
interest the authorities in his schemes.
The court-martial was forgotten. Macarthur sold
his commission and returned to Sydney with a promise
of 10,000 acres at Cowpastures,* the best pasture land
in the district, and of thirty convict servants. He was
a free man and “the hero of the fleece,” as Governor
King ironically called him.
*So named because Phillip’s cattle that had gone bush had selected
this area.
8
JOHN MACARTHUR


Governor King, however, was impressed by Mac-
arthur’s friendship with his chief in London, and
reluctantly made him a grant of 5000 acres. Probably
the cargo that the ex-officer unshipped from his own
vessel impressed King still more four pure-bred
Spanish merino rams from King George Ill’s own
Royal flocks at Kew. These aristocrats had been
culled from the flock that the Spanish Ambassador’s
wife had swopped for four white coach horses. Royal
preferment! The Macarthurs moved to Camden and
set up in state at the Cowpastures, and became known
as the Macarthurs of Camden Park.
Two great forces were clashing in the colony.
Phillip, the founder, and Governor King had tried to
make the colony prosper by building up a community
of small farmers from the expiree and marine classes
—a peasant farmer system. Along the Hawkesbury
and Nepean many small farms were flourishing.
Macarthur and the Rum Corps wanted to build a
community of large estates with plenty of cheap con-
vict labour. The battle of these two forces is the story
of our earliest years.
Stories of the racketeering of the Rum Crops and
of the low moral standards of Sydney were worrying
the authorities in England. A disciplinarian was
needed. The authorities chose Captain Bligh as
Governor. The tyrant of the “Bounty” turned his
study at Government House into his quarter-deck. He
was a law unto himself, and he said so. When opposed,
he stamped, fumed, foamed at the mouth, swore, and
shook his fist in the face of the person who was so
presumptuous as to question his authority. He
would bawl out a man in the street, in his own house,
or even in church.
To the great delight of the small farmers on the
Nepean and Hawkesbury, who had suffered from flood
and drought, and who had seen their crops bought up
by the officers, and their supplies of tools, tobacco, tea,
bought up and sold to the Rum Corps, Bligh set out
to break the racket. He prohibited the use of rum as
currency under threat of severe penalties.
9
JOHN MACARTHUR


The fight was on. Certain irregularities had crept
into the early land deals. Bligh found a flaw in one
of Macarthur’s leases and cancelled it. Round one to
the Governor.
The distilling of grog was a profitable side-line.
Macarthur had ordered two stills to be shipped to
Sydney on the “Dart,” a whaler of which he was part-
owner. Bligh ordered the two stills to be sent back
to England. Macarthur gave up the pipes and the
head, but wanted to keep the copper boilers for his'
own domestic use. Bligh would not compromise, and
ordered the naval authorities to seize the coppers.
The port officer sent his nephew to do the job.
Thereupon Macarthur brought an action against the
officer, and the court of military officers gave the ver-
dict to Macarthur. They ruled that the naval officer
should have superintended the removal of the coppers
in person and not by proxy. Round two to Macarthur.
This wtas mere sparring. The opponents were warm-
ing up. In the ring were the impetuous, overbearing
sea captain and the cool, calculating ex-officer.
Blaxcell and Macarthur owned a schooner, the “Parra-
matta,” which traded in the South Sea Islands. The
two owners had put up a £9OO bond that no convict
would be given a passage out of the gaol colony.
Early in 1807, John Hoare, a lifer, had stowed away
on this ship, reached Tahiti, and escaped to India. The
schooner returned to Sydney. The naval officers sued
the owners for the forfeiture of the bond. The court
granted the bond. Macarthur appealed.
Two police officers were placed on the “Parramatta.”
Macarthur refused to supply pay or provisions to the
crew, and abandoned the vessel. His son James tells
us that his object was to “drive the Government into
violent and precipitate measures.” It did. Port
Regulations said that owners could not permit their
sailors to be at large in the convict settlement. The
crew walked ashore. Macarthur, as owner, was sum-
moned to appear before Judge-Advocate Atkins to
answer for this breach. Atkins wrote a letter to John
(to whom he owed money) instead of sending him a
formal summons.
10
JOHN MACARTHUR


Macarthur replied that he had abandoned the vessel
to the Government and that they were responsible for
the crew. The next day, a bench of magistrates,
which included Major Johnston, issued a second war-
rant. Macarthur was committed for trial and was
bailed out.
The court sat on 15 January. Excitement was at
fever heat. Judge-Advocate Atkins, deeply in debt to
Macarthur, sat with six officers of the Rum Corps.
Macarthur refused to be judged by Atkins, who could
have been charged with wrongful arrest and was a
personal enemy of his. The officers refused to sit with
Atkins, who, terrified by the soldiers who crowded the
court, withdrew, declaring there would be no court
without him.
The six officers, who had been ordered to form the
court by the Governor, proceeded to deal with the
prisoner and remanded him. On 26 January Macarthur
was arrested and put in gaol for escaping from the
custody of the Provost Marshal. Bligh summoned the
six officers to appear before him at Government House
to answer for “certain crimes.” He sent a message
to Major Johnston that he intended to arrest the six
officers.
The Major was nursing a hangover from a heavy
night at the mess, but he drove into Sydney. He
found the place in an uproar. Officers and soldiers
stood in groups in the barrack square. Johnston was
cool and mild-mannered; he was not the type to take
ill-considered action. But rebellion was in the air.
He could not control the troops.
He ordered that Macarthur be freed. The “hero”
walked into the sunshine of the barrack square.
Resting a piece of paper on the barrel of a cannon,
he drew up a petition for the arrest of the Governor.
“Every man’s property, liberty and life is endangered,”
he wrote. Johnston was implored to assume the gov-
ernment. The petition carried 151 signatures.
The regiment, with colours flying, and the band
playing the “British Grenadiers,” advanced upon
Government House and set up their guns. Four officers
11
JOHN MACARTHUR


with troops went inside to arrest the Governor, who
was found hiding his official papers. Some soldiers
told tall stories of finding the Governor hiding under
the bed. A lance-corporal insisted that he found Bligh
in “a position too disgraceful to mention.” Another
saw him “with his uniform befouled with white
feathers.” But the man who sailed an open boat 8618
miles from Tahiti to Koepang (Timor) in a 23ft. open
boat would scarcely hide from a regiment of mutinous
soldiers.
That night the streets of Sydney were lit by torches.
There were bonfires and drinking. The memorable
“26 January” was painted on signboards. Major John-
ston was a hero in Highland uniform. Macarthur was
the real author of the plot to overthrow the Governor.
He had won the third round.
The rebels were not a happy family. Major John-
ston, Lieut.-Colonel Foveaux, and Lieut.-Governor
Paterson (from Port Dalrymple in Van Diemen’s
Land) took over in turn. There was little law and
order, and the officers quarrelled among themselves
and parcelled out land to their friends.
The military were not certain of their legal position.
Bligh had sailed away on the “Porpoise.” Macquarie,
the new Governor, was on his way with orders to
arrest Johnston and Macarthur. They did not wait
to welcome him, but sailed for England before he
arrived. Johnston was court-martialled, found guilty
of mutiny in extenuating circumstances, and cautioned.
He returned to Sydney and settled quietly on his farm.
Bligh was promoted to rear-admiral and retired.
Macarthur could not be prosecuted for mutiny under
military law because he was no longer an officer. But
he could not return to Sydney until Macquarie’s orders
were withdrawn. His friends in high places gave him
the cold shoulder. “Rebellion” had a nasty sound in
English ears when applied to a convict garrison. He
tried to get the warrant for his arrest quashed, but
all his efforts failed. England had no appeal for him
now. Although his son John was studying law at the
12
JOHN MACARTHUR


Temple in London, and another son, Edward, had a
commission in the army, his two youngest sons, James
and William, wanted to return “home” to New South
Wales.
His flocks which were his life-work began to worry
him. He wrote long letters giving detailed instruc-
tions about breeding. He wanted to keep the strain
of his cherished merinos pure. He visited all the large
wool warehouses and watched the bales being opened
up. Wool that was carelessly washed or too curly in
the staple did not attract buyers; careful instructions
were sent to Elizabeth to watch the shearing, classing,
and packing of the precious bales. She replied with
long accounts of the flocks, the new woolshed, and the
story of the crossing of the Blue Mountains in 1815.
She was managing his vast estates capably and was
building up his fortunes at home.
In 1815 he set out on a tour of France with his two
youngest sons. The vineyards of France attracted him,
so he planned to make the visit a walking tour of the
south. He saw the slopes of his Parramatta home
clothed with vines, and he engaged two wine-growers
from the famous Montpellier vineyards to accompany
him back to Australia.
Elizabeth was told to prepare ten acres at Parra-
matta for planting vines and olives. A Swiss pony
carried cuttings and seeds from the south of France.
Macarthur even inquired into silkworm growing, poppy
oil, and rape, for making brooms.
He had kept on lobbying to have the order for his
arrest revoked. After eight years of exile, Macquarie
agreed that if Macarthur would admit his part in the
rebellion was mutinous, he would be prepared to re-
admit him to N.S.W. John flared up at Earl Bathurst,
the Colonial Secretary, in his old truculent style and
the bluff won. Bathurst healed the breach, and after
nine years John sailed home again.
John got along well with Macquarie, although the
new Governor’s policy of settling convicts on the land
was opposed to the capitalist’s interest. It did not do
to quarrel too openly with Macquarie. (The account
of Macquarie’s dictatorship is told in No. 3 of this
series.) Macarthur gave his energies to his flocks.
13
JOHN MACARTHUR


In 1822 John won a gold medal for importing into
Great Britain wool which equalled the finest Saxony
and was well above that of Spain, In 1827 his famous
“I. McA.” brand brought a record price of 196 d. a pound
—a record that has never been equalled.
When Governor Brisbane succeeded Macquarie, Mac-
arthur again fell out with the judges. He was the
leading citizen of the colony, with interests every-
where. The Bank of Australia had made him director.
Brisbane offered him a magistracy, and then withdrew
it on the advice of Judge Barron Field. Macarthur,
his honour sullied, could not challenge the Governor
to a duel. He sent his challenge to Field, but nothing
came of the affair.
By this time, the fires were dying out; the former
healthy farmer was a victim of gout, which kept him
to his chair for weeks at a time. The old fire-eater
was full of complaints: James and Willie did not seem
intent on making money and were poor managers; the
expirees and marines were prospering. “Your father
is low and complaining,” Elizabeth wrote to her sons
in 1830.
He died in 1834, but his work lived on. His tireless
industry, his thirst for experiment, had built up the
great wool industry that was to make Australia the
Land of the Golden Fleece. He was a go-getter out
for his own interests, unscrupulous and self-assertive,
but he had the stuff of which pioneers are made. More
than any other man, he laid the early foundations of
Australia’s future prosperity.
Points for Discussion
1. Was the Rum Rebellion justified?
2. What contribution did Macarthur make to Aus-
tralia’s future?
3. Was Macarthur a racketeer or a patriot?
14
JOHN MACARTHUR


NOTES


NOTES
By authority: Ramsay, Ware Publishing Pty. Ltd., 117-129 King Street, Melbourne


TELEPHONES:
CENTRAL 7185
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY.
MILITARY BOARD.
""’TADJDTANT-'GEN'ERS’n —
Melbourne, S.C. 1,
89-10-105 .
KCUCE craBEES
Army headquarters,
VICTORIA BARRACKS
I wish to acknowledge your letter of 15 App 47,
"Arm/ is not one of our publications but was produced
by Array Magazine, 56 Young Street, Sydney.
Attached please find copies of ,! The Roadraaker n and
H Mac Arthur”.
It is regretted that we are unable to supply you with
other Array Education Pamphlets, as our stocks are now very limited
and must be kept for serving members.
Yours faithfully.
Director of Army Education*
App 47.
Mr. Justice J A Ferguson,
Judg e s C hamb er s,
Industrial Commission,
Queens Square,
SYDNEY. NSW.
