

The Frontier News
PUBLISHED BY THE AUSTRALIAN INLAND MISSION of the Presbyterian Church
■i».


7Hcmorial minute
of the Genera! Assembly of Australia
THE VERY REV. JOHN FLYNN, 0.8. E., D.D., was bom in Moliagul,
Victoria, on 25th November, 1880. He was educated at Victorian State School,
University High School, Melbourne, and Theological Hall, Ormond College.
He served on the teaching staff of the Victorian Education Department from
1898 to 1902, when he joined the Home Mission Staff in Victoria. Ordained
in Adelaide in 1911, he served in the Smith of Dunesk Mission for two years.
Early in 1912 he was commissioned to visit what was then known as the Northern
Territory and Central Australia and submit a report for consideration by the
General Assembly meeting in September of that year. His report was of such
a comprehensive and challenging nature that it stirred the House, and authority
was given for it to be published in booklet form for general distribution. The
Assembly then agreed that "the Home Mission Board take up the Northern
Territory as a Special Home Mission area with such territory adjacent as may
be transferred to the jurisdiction of the Board by the State Assemblies con-
cerned,” and further, "that the Rev. John Flynn be appointed Organising
Agent and Superintendent of the Assembly’s Mission area for the period
of two years.”
For thirty-nine years, through his personal drive, enthusiasm and inspiration,
he was able to enlist a team of patrol padres who have covered the vast
outback areas. Nursing Homes and Welfare Centres were also established at
strategic centres —but perhaps his greatest triumph was the formation of the
experimental flying doctor service base at Cloncurry, and the bringing to
fruition the pedal radio transceiver. These two services, in conjunction with
the nursing homes, provided the Inland with that mantle of safety which was
the realisation of his heart’s desire. But the A.I.M. to him was a three-fold
ministry, and John Flynn was never satisfied unless the practical was related
to the spiritual. Consequently, through the nursing homes and the clubs,
with the wonderful co-operation of the patrol padres, this dream of his was
realised. Both bodily healing and spiritual help were brought within reach of
the outback people.
In 1933 His Majesty the King honoured him with the title Officer of the
Order of the British Empire, and in 1940 the Presbyterian College within the
Magill University, Montreal, Canada, bestowed on him the Degree of Doctor
of Divinity. In 1939 the Church bestowed on him its highest honour—that of
Moderator-General, which position he occupied until 1942.
The wonderful tributes which have been received from pedal wireless
outposts and from other centres all over the Continent are a testimony to the
Inlanders’ love and appreciation of all he has done on their behalf.
John Flynn died in harness. His was a life of devoted service to his
fellow men, and his passing is a great loss to the Church and to the Nation
To those who knew him more intimately it was apparent for some time that his
health was failing; however, the end came suddenly, and he passed away
quietly in the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, about 2 p.m. on
sth May, 1951.
Looking back upon Dr. Flynn’s life and work, so selfless throughout,
and so filled with a broad and deep charify, we record our deep gratitude to
God for this servant of his—this his great gift to our Church and Nation.
It was given to him to dream dreams and to see visions, but aJso to bring
those dreams and visions into bright working realities, fraught with healing
and blessing to so many. We pray that the work so well begun and con-
solidated may continue its fine ministry.
To Mrs. Flynn, in her great loss, we extend our deep sympathy, and
pray that the Great Father will comfort and sustain her.
• THE FRONTIER
NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952


A J)raycr of Thanksgiving
—by Rev. F. W. Rolland, M.C., M.A.
O Qod, as we remember with honour and commemorate with gratitude Thy servant JOHN FLYNN,
we would praise Thee for one who was like no other, who dared to
look at this Continent with his own far-gazing eyes—not with the eyes
of explorer or exploiter, but rather with the vision of one who came
to minister . . .
"Flynn of the Inland"
• THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37. 1?52


THIS IS WHAT THEY SAID
Rev. J. Gray Robertson, 8.A., B.D,
Convener A.I.M. Board
at Funeral Service in
St. Stephen's Church, Sydney
• The history of Australia contains fewer, if any, greater romances
than the life history of the Very Rev. Dr. John Flynn, 0.8. E.,
Superintendent of the Australian Inland Mission since 1912,
Moderator-General from 1939 to 1942, a minister of our Pres-
byterian Church, revered and respected throughout the land. And
for generations to come, in cattle camps, in mining settlements,
among the remote settlers scattered throughout the Continent, men
will tell the story of this man’s vision and courage, of his practical
Christianity, of the man who spread “the mantle of safety”—as he
loved to call it—over this vast Continent.#
Rev. K. F. Partridge, M.A.
Central Patrol Padre
at Interment of Ashes at foot
of Mt. Gillen, Alice Springs
•He was great because of his great capacity to rise beyond and
above man-made creeds and the barriers of denominationalism. He
was great in his ability to translate the Gospel of Jesus Christ in
terms of practical help for his fellow-men.®
►His service was stupendous, and the progress of it had a logic of its
own. There was the initiation of the patrols by ordained ministers, the
establishment of nursing homes, and the initiation of the flying doctor
service with the pedal wireless as a handmaiden of friendly voice. Any
one of these developments would have been an achievement for the
average man, yet John Flynn contrived them all within the compass
of his lifetime. Remembering this, and sadly remembering that his
vivid imagination and his serviceable hand will be active on earth no
more, with bowed hearts we are constrained to say ‘A prince and a
great man has fallen in Israel.’ ... He taught us how to build upon
the deep intent, the deed. John Flynn’s life and work have an unusual
completeness. No loose ends have been left dangling in the air;
no odds and ends are to be seen lying about. All that he attempted
he accomplished. The dream came true, because he did so much to
make it come true. He wrought strenuously—head and heart and hand
—the whole man. He had one end in view, and he, who keeps one end
in view, makes all things serve,^
Rt. Rev. R. Bardon, B.A.
Moderator General
at Service in St. Andrew's
Brisbane
►To him, faith was no nebulous, up-in-the-air sort of thing. It is sub- Very Rev. J. R. Blanchard, B.A.
stance. It assumes forms you can see and handle. It is the injection into ex Moderator General
your mind of dreams which are already realities in the mind of God, ,' n r ß [? ad 3 as !...
i i• i i . i jv ' i j I "The Salt of the Earth"
and which you, also, to whom Cod has given them as dreams, must
accept as realities. . . . Flynn often talked in a heart-to-heart way like
that. It was the secret of his life.^
Rev. C. T. F. Goy at Memorial Service conducted by General Assembly ot Victoria—
“The secret of his life, quite apart from his keen intellect, his natural gifts for organisa-
tion, his tremendous tenacity of purpose, and his remarkable manner of enlisting interest
and support in his undertaking, was the simple fact that early he found his life’s work,
and stayed in it to the end. That, I think, is the secret of most great lives!”
2
• THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37. 1952


“Few lay persons have, in modern times, exerted such a profound
influence on medical services as did the Very Reverend John Flynn,
sV— 7. 0.8. E., D.D. Owing to his vision, personal efforts and inspiration
the whole aspect of medicine in the inland of Australia has been
altered. . . . Fie saw the need, he got the idea, he saw who could
implement the idea, he interested them and proved the idea to them,
he saw that they did the rest. That has ever been his method, and
the reason for his great achievements is that he inspired others
to do the work.”
Dr. George Simpson
Article in
"Medical Journal of Australia'
Mr. David G. Wyles “In that land of vast distances, with its absence of organised corn-
Article in munication of any sort, John Flynn, dreamed dreams and saw visions
curna o nstitut'i °n o alO / of the day when wireless communication could be organised for
engineers Australia .11 r r i • 1 1 • c i . T
the beneht ot the inhabitants ot those territories. . . . The Institu-
tion of Radio Engineers Australia elected him an Honorary Life
Member in 1947 because of his efforts in connection with the de-
velopment of inland communications.”
Rev. A. S. Houston, M.A. “Over those great distances have been spread the Mantles of Safety,
Chairman A.I.M. Council, Victoria "p Fellowship, and Grace .. . And all that is due, to an astonishing
rice m e essen 9 er degree, to the dreaming, the planning and energy, and organising
ability of one man—Flynn of the Inland!”
Queensland Jack
an Old Timer at Hatches Creek,
Northern Territory
0 “John Flynn put hobbles on the bush.”
HE SAID
On 26th September, 1912, Rev. John Flynn, aged 32 years,
spoke to the General Assembly of Australia—and the
Australian Inland Mission was born!
“The failure of the Church as a whole to reach the outposts is
our shame.
“I am convinced that never can health be manifested fully in our
home congregations until faithfulness marks our frontier policy.
“Difficulties of a serious nature will arise in shoals in every fertile
mind.
“To each one a reply can only be made in words already familiar:—
‘Do not pray for tasks equal to your powers,
Pray for powers equal to your tasks!’”
3
• THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952


“Here he dreamed his dreams under many a starlit sky. Here he worked
with pride and joy in a task well done, so here he lies where he longed
to be. He is not dead. His work abides, his memory is for ever eloquent,
for across the lonely places of the land he planted kindness, and from
the hearts of those who call those places home, he gathered love.”
These were the concluding words of Rev. Kingsley Partridge
as he committed the ashes to their last resting place
The final historic service held on the afternoon of 23rd May, 1951, when
John Flynn's ashes were buried at the foot of Mt. Gillen, Central Australia
The entire service was broadcast over the Alice Springs Flying Doctor Network. A Flying Doctor Aircraft cast the shadow
of a cross on the hillside as the approach was made to drop a wreath on the crest of Gillen.
4
• THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952


Uhe John Jlynn Tflcmorial Church
IN JULY, 1920, a year after John Flynn had taken up two splendid allotments for the A.I.M. in Todd
Street, Alice Springs, he wrote—
"We can already see a central A.I.M. Cathedral in Alice Springs, with full
services every Sabbath." (in'ander Vol. VI.)
But that Cathedral did not eventuate. In the early twenties John Flynn hoped that the Alice Springs
Cathedral would be built around an Inland wireless transmitting station and that the services would be
broadcast over the whole of Central Australia. However, a succession of inexorable events made the dream
an impossibility.
The A.I.M. has never yet erected a Church building.
Throughout the forty years of the vigorous life of the Australian Inland Mission every ounce of energy
and every penny of funds have gone into practical enterprises which have shown by their realistic witness
the true nature of the Church of Jesus Christ. The A.I.M. from the beginning has been the Church in
action. John Flynn's apostolic aim was to show that the Christian faith had every-day substance. The
spiritual and the material were inseparable in the gospel he preached. The Word indeed became flesh in
the Never Never—and the hands of Flying Doctors, the feet of pedal wireless operators, and the voice of
Nursing Sisters, were none other than the hands and feet and voice of the incarnate Christ.
But the day has come when Inlanders themselves are calling for a visible symbol of this faith. Cen-
tralians have now taken up the cry for an "Inland Cathedral."
Therefore the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Australia has instructed the A.I.M.
to launch this project and make it the Flynn Memorial.
The John Flynn Memorial Church will be built in Alice Springs.
Alice Springs is symbolically and geographically in the heart of the land that Flynn loved. It was the
scene of so much of John Flynn's labours—in the shadow of the McDonnell Ranges he cut ironwood posts
and burnt lime when the Nursing Home was being erected there. It was the birthplace of so many plans
—in the very grounds where the Memorial Church will stand he helped to conduct some of the first
wireless experiments. «f.—•'* Jk
It is planned that the John Flynn Memorial Church will not be a big structure, but in detail it will
be architecturally beautiful. In its design and texture will be expressed the rugged character of the man
whose name it will perpetuate.
It will be an Inland symbol of the Christian faith, erected to the glory of Sod in the midst of the
land where John Flynn was His Apostle.
The John Flynn Memorial Appeal will close on 30th June. Donations to this Appeal may be sent
to Rev. Ken Beckett, Director John Flynn Memorial Appeal, Box 100 G.P.0., Sydney.
• THE
5
FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952


Diagrammatic Only
I
I
I
I
I
NURSING HOMES
<*-3 WELFA « E c “<“
Wj FRONTIER PARISHES
It'Wm PROPOSED JOHN FLYNN
MEMORIAL CHURCH
PROPOSED JOHN FLYNN
MEMORIAL CHURCH
OLD TIMERS' HOMES
rJ!^ A^ WEE " HOLIDAY HOME
FOR INLAND CHILDREN
PATROL PADRES
€) MONUMENT AT MT. GILLEN
WHERE ASHES OF FLYNN OF
THE INLAND ARE BURIED
PATROL AREAS AS INDICATED
==^======= === J 6
PATROL AREAS AS INDICATED
• THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952
I


Here they are:
Patrol Padres
Central: Rev. K. F. Partridge, M.A.
A.I.M. Ministers
Kimberley: Rev. K. C. W. Beckett
Peninsula: Rev. C. R. Ford, B.Sc.
South-Western: Rev. H. D. McAndrew, B.A., B.D-
Sturt: Rev. V. J. Murrell
Western: Rev. A. T. Cottrell
Western Q'land: Rev. A. L. McKay, B.A., B.D.
Mt. Isa Church & Welfare Club: Rev. W. A.
Doing Special Work
Walker, B.A., B.D.
'
Darwin United Church Enterprise: Rev. J. W. S-
Welfare Officers
Lang
Kalgoorlie & Boulder United Church Enterpriser-
Rev. H. Perkins, B.A.; Mr. S. J. Shearn.
Seraldton - Carnamah - Yandanooka: Rev. J. H-
Sregson
Tennant Creek Welfare Club: Mr. J. Reynolds
Nursing Sisters
Carnarvon Welfare Club: Mr. N. Adamson
Old Timers' Homes: Mr. S. Paton
Alice Springs Convalescent Home: Sister M. A.
Gordon
Beltana Nursing Home: Sister 1. Ryan; Sister J„
Todd
Birdsville Nursing Home: Sister M. Henry
Dunbar Nursing Home: Sister J. Tighe; Sister P.
Wilson
Fitzroy Crossing Nursing Home: Sister C. M.
Edwards
Hall's Creek Nursing Home: Sister H. Martin;
Sister T. Morrison
Innamincka Nursing Home: Vacant
Oodnadatta Nursing Home: Sister M. Bowen;
Sister A. Sparks
"Warrawee" Home for Inland Children: Sister N.
Inglis
“If you seek his memorial—look around you.”
Flynn will be best remembered by his continuing work, and
the field staff will always be known affectionately as
“Flynn’s Mob.”
A study of this Map will show the great expanse of the work
of the Australian Inland Mission as it goes on at the present
time.
Note that the drawings used to represent the various activities
are diagrams only—but they tell the story in pictorial form of
FLYNN’S MOB ON THE JOBI
We thank Thee that Thou hast created in this church a
conscience and a concern that in the compassion of Christ
we exercise a particular care for folk in this wide land who'
are far removed from town or village. We thank Thee for
the Australian Inland Mission. Let the beauty of the Lord
our God be upon us, and establish Thou this work of our
hands.”
(Extract from prayer by Rt. Rev. R. Bardon, Moderator GeneralJi
• THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952


WARRAWEE
BY THE SEA!
"Then felt I like some watcher of the sky
When a new planet swims Info his ken"
What is it that claims these eager eyes?
Allan Coppock (Gibeanie Station, via Alice Springs), James Lander (Arkaringa Station, via Oodnadatta), Alan Langford
(Yamba Station, via Alice Springs), Janice Moloney (Tennant Creek) and Joyce Brumby (Sundown Station, via Alice
Springs) on an Inland Children's Holiday at "Warrawee," December, 1951.
On the faces of these children is the only story we need to te!!!
Forty such young Inlanders were brought to Adelaide last December and January.
Complete medical and dental overhauls were given by specialists.
Six Adelaide Presbyterian congregations gave special welcomes to the children at
church services. Groups of P.G.C. girls acted as guides and helpers.
Rev. V. J. Murrell, Mrs. Murrell, Sister Inglis, Miss Rose, John Holt, John Hardy,
and several others made a grand team in charge of a large family.
The A.I.M. Holiday Home for Inlanders, known as ‘‘Warrawee, on the seafront at the Grange, Adelaide,
is now a going concern.
It represents the fulfilment of another of John Flynn’s dreams.
Each year groups of inland children will be brought to the seaside for planned holidays. The medical,
social, family and national value of this scheme must show itself in the future citizenship on the frontiers.


“AS I SEE WARRAWEE”
—By Miss E. M. Ferguson, Presbyterian Girls 1 College, Adelaide
“ No one will deny that the two camps of Christmas, 1951, and early 1952, have easily been the
best yet. This is especially gratifying, as this is really the first time we have had two full length
camps in our permanent home at ‘Warrawee.’
6t The outings were many and varied, and a veritable mixture of educational and of pure entertain-
ment value. Who can picture the delight of the visit to the Zoo, with extras such as a ride on
Pop-eye, the first glimpse of an elephant and of the fascinating penguins, the amusing antics of
the monkeys, and last, but by no means least, the party fare provided by the ‘Advertiser.’ A
lovely day, and one that the children will never forget!
** Another great event was the party which was really the grand finale. This was held on the lawns
at ‘Warrawee,’ and about one hundred adults spent a very happy evening together. Many bush
folk were there; A.I.M. nurses who went out in the beginning and who have never lost their love
of the outback had tales to tell each other of Inland Australia. Three children made presentations
to the much-loved senior members of the staff, and as the gifts were handed to recipients the
child made special mention of the love and care (and good food) given to them. It was so spon-
taneous and happy—something no onlooker will ever forget.
If
Over and above other impressions is the one of the children leaving the Adelaide Railway Station
—as the train pulled out they sang sweetly and tunefully the words of the 23rd Psalm to Crimond.
No words of mine could express adequately the feelings of dozens of people standing on the plat-
form, but one felt it was the Children’s Benediction. y%
is like our former Mother Wireless Station. It sends out a friendly “Come In” to all inland homes.
"WARRAWEE" IS THE A.I.M. IN ACTION FOR THE GOOD OF INLAND CHILDREN
♦ THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952
9


THE BIRDSVILLE CRISIS
Inlander, Sydney
Birdsyille Nursing Home and contents destroyed by fire 1 a.m. except
Aboriginal Ward. Both escaped in pyjamas uninjured . . .
Sisters Henry and Whitehead
This urgent pedal wireless message was received at Headquarters
from our two Nursing Sisters at Birdsville on 10th Nov., 1951.
The Flying Doctor from Charleville, Dr. Alan Vickers, imme-
diately flew to the scene with emergency supplies.
The two Nursing Sisters, in spite of natural physical reactions
to the tragedy, refused to quit.
Padre Les McKay rushed to Birdsville in his truck from up near
Burketown.
An emergency hospital was quickly set up in the two small
rooms of the Aboriginal Ward. A bough shed was built adjoining.
And the service went on!
A young bush mother, the wife of the Birdsville mailman, gave
birth to her third child a few weeks afterwards in the impro-
vised maternity ward —secure and happy.
Sister Mona Henry
BECOMES THE BIRDSVILLE MIRACLE
The example of these two gallant nurses —the unanimous senti-
ments of the people of the Birdsville corner —and the utter
urgency of the whole situation —compelled the A.I.M. Board
immediately to launch a special appeal for funds to start from
scratch again and build a completely new hospital.
The response to this appeal has been magnificent!
Two little children in a country town sent in the wool
clip of their pet lamb—
A lass in a certain congregation was seen emptying her
whole purse into an offering plate for Birdsville, and
then had to walk home without even a penny for the bus —
And the story went on . . . and on . . . and on. It will all be
told later in a special brochure.
The Queensland Government has agreed to subsidise donations.
And the miracle was that fourteen weeks after the fire sufficient
funds were in sight to commence building immediately.
Sister Lillian Whitehead
So, thanks to the goodwill and generosity of so many people—
BIRDSVILLE WILL HAVE A COMPLETELY NEW NURSING HOME BY THE END OF THIS YEAR


NEWS AND NOTES
Headquarters:
It was with very mixed feelings that
all members of the A.I.M. Family
learned last August that Mr. C. P.
Hughes, General Secretary of the
A.I.M. for seventeen years, had been
offered an attractive position with a
reputable Sydney firm. It was as diffi-
cult for Mr. Hughes to leave the
A.I.M. as it was for us to lose him.
The General Assembly of Australia
passed a special resolution conveying
to Mr. Hughes the deep gratitude of
the whole Church for his invaluable
and unstinted service over the years.
The A.I.M. Board also made suitable
recognition of Mr. Hughes’ work. We
are all delighted that Mr. Hughes is
still able to give his valuable help
on the A.I.M. Council in N.S.W. and
in other ways.
Miss Catherine Lofts, after serving
as Acting Secretary for over six
months, was officially appointed as
Secretary to the Board at the Inter-
state Meeting on 19th March, 1952.
Mr. A. V. Dangerfield, a retired Bank
Manager and respected elder of the
Kirk, has undertaken in an honorary
capacity the duties of accounting, and
is already an invaluable member of
a very happy team.
The Field:
Rev. Victor Murrell has taken over
the work in Darwin for four months
while Rev. Stewart Lang mixes his
deserved holiday with some valuable
deputation work.
Rev. Arthur Cottrell has started “on
the wallaby” in the Carnarvon area,
and Rev. Colin Ford is baking dampers
somewhere up in Cape York Peninsula.
Colin and his wife did some valiant
work at Birdsville before filling their
waterbags for the Northern road.
Everybody gives these new members of
our patrol staff a right royal welcome.
Rev. John Gregson has been appoint-
ed to Geraldton-Carnamah-Yandanooka
for another two years.
Rev. Ken Beckett, of the Kimberley
Patrol, has requested leave of absence
for a period and will be sailing over-
seas with his wife on the 28th June.
The good wishes of their countless
friends go with them. They will be
back on the job early in 1953.
Rev. W. A. Walker will complete his
six years’ sterling work at Mt. Isa at
the end of this year, and will then
probably be called to “fresh fields.”
Rev. Les McKay has turned carpen-
ter at Birdsville and has done a tre-
mendous job in dismantling the de-
stroyed building and erecting tem-
porary shelters for the Sisters. The
practical skill of this young man is
such that Ben Hargreaves, the building
contractor who is constructing the new
Nursing Home, has requested him to
be his right hand craftsman. So Les
McKay drives nails all the week and
preaches on Sunday!
Rev. Kingsley Partridge on a recent
patrol was the first in Australia to use
the new Packhorse Traeger Portable.
This is Alf Traeger’s latest . . . and
it fits almost in a quart pot!
Rev. Harry McAndrew has been
doing some intensive patrol work in
the South West, and last month joined
forces with Mr. Cottrell at Carnarvon
for a period.
Reports from Kalgoorlie and Boulder
show that Rev. Harold Perkins and Mr.
Sidney Shearn are making history in
the Presbyterian-Congregational merger.
Sister Mary Glass, of Fitzroy Cross-
ing, has applied for release and is to
become Mrs. David McConnell of the
Animal Husbandry Department, with a
home in Alice Springs. Sister Edwards
is holding the fort alone at Fitzroy
Crossing.
Sister Lillian Whitehead has com-
pleted her two year term at Birdsville
and is leaving to become the wife of
Constable Clyde Dixon. Their future
home will be at Prairie.
Sister Thelma Morrison, of Forbes,
N.S.W., has now joined Sister Martin
at Hall’s Creek.
Sisters Marion Bowen and Alva
Sparks are having great fun with the
Sunday School at Oodnadatta.
Sisters Irma Ryan and Jean Todd
have settled into Beltana and like it.
Sisters Joan Tighe and Pauline
Wilson, of Dunbar, are planning to
run the first Produce Fair in the Penin-
sula belt. May their ingenuity be
rewarded!
Miss G. V. Bramley has been
appointed to assist Sister Gordon at
Alice Springs.
Sister Nance Inglis is creating the
real A.I.M. atmosphere at “Warrawee.”'
Sister Mona Henry has volunteered
to remain on at Birdsville till the new
Nursing Home is completed. Another
nursing sister will leave shortly as
partner to Sister Henry.
A.I.M. Family:
It is with profound sorrow we re-
port that during the last few months
the A.I.M. Family has lost from its
ranks three notable leaders by death.
Rev. D. A. Brown of Queensland,
Rev. A. S. McCook of N.S.W. and
the Rev. R. D. Birch of N.S.W. These
three ministers all served as val-
uable members of the Board and
of State Councils; and in 1937 Mr.
Brown and Mr. McCook went to
Birdsville for the opening of the
Nursing Home. Mrs. D, A. Brown
also passed away in December after
having served faithfully for many
years as Convener of the Office Team
in Queensland.
The news of the death of Mr.
Norman Bourke, President of the
Flying Doctor Services in Queens-
land, was a sad blow to all mem-
bers of the A.I.M. Family. Mr.
Bourke was the person selected by
Dr. Flynn when in 1938 he was
searching for a trustworthy guar-
dian to take over the care of his
flourishing child, the Aerial Medical
Service.
Acknowledgements:
Kind acknowledgement is made to
the Flying Doctor Service, Queens-
land, for the use of the picture of
the painted portrait of Dr, Flynn
(page 1) ; and to the Adelaide Ad-
vertiser for the block of “Inland
Children” (page 8),
The Cover Page of this Memorial
Issue of the Frontier News is a do-
nation from Qantas Empire Airways
through the graciousness of Mr, Hud-
son Fysh.
We are grateful also to the B.M.A.
Journal, the Magazine of the Institu-
tion of Radio Engineers, Australia, the
Victorian “Messenger,” and the Aus-
tralian Broadcasting Commission for
permission to use extracts from ar-
ticles on Dr. Flynn (pages 2 and 3).
11
• THE FRONTIER NEWS Vol. 37. 1952


REV. J. GRAY ROBERTSON, 8.A., 8.D., the Convener of the A.I. M. Board, says—
"A critical situation has arisen. If
we are to continue our work it
will be necessary for all lovers of
the A.I.M. and of John Flynn to
to the rescue in this time of
The situation is now upon us when we need an extra income of £15,000 each
fear to keep the flag flying.
Therefore the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Australia has
authorised the A.I.M. to launch an appeal to raise an extra £15,000 annually
to maintain and develop the work of John Flynn.
Special Appeals, such as the “John Flynn Memorial Church Appeal,
can be used only for one specific purpose—but the urgent challenge is
to maintain and develop the working enterprises of John Flynn—these
are his living, every-day memorials: Nursing Homes —
Patrols —
Welfare Centres —
Children’s Holiday Schemes —
Old Timers’ Homes.
If 10,000 keen Australians pledged themselves to give 30/- a year to our working
funds, our present problems could be faced —and the ship would be kept
moving on.
We want more people who will reverently and regularly give us their help.
And alert Australians who can see the permanent worthwhileness of the
service that the A.I.M. gives will wish to remember the A.I.M. when
they give thought to the sacred task of making their last will and
testament.
THE AUSTRALIAN INLAND MISSION
of the Presbyterian Church of Australia
(Incorporating the Federal Home Mission Committee and the Commonwealth
Co-ordinating Committee)
Headquarters: Assembly Building, 44 Margaret Street, Sydney
Box 100, G.P.O.
Telegrams: "Inlander," Sydney. Telephone: BX 1735
Convener of A.I.M. Board Superintendent
Rev. J. Gray Robertson, 8.A., B.D. Rev. Fred McKay, M.A., B.D.
The A.I.M. has no longer any administrative control of or responsibility for the
Flying Doctor Service, which has now graduated to full independent status.
FACING FACTS
There is not one enterprise of the
A.I.M. which is self-supporting. There
never has been.
In every Nursing Home—
In every Patrol—
In every Welfare Club—
In every Special Centre—
a service is given which can never be
met by local financial income.
The A.I.M. has stood for a distinctive witness in the Inland for over forty
years because people of goodwill have stood with the A.I.M. And the A.I.M.
has continued to exist only because understanding folk, by legacies and gifts*
have just kept it going.
We do not hoard our gifts.
We use them with care, scruple and wisdom, so that every penny is an investment
in the kingdom of love and service.
AND FACING THE FUTURE
When making your Will you will
wish to remember the A.I.M.
FORM OF BEQUEST
"I bequeath the sum of
pounds free of
all duties to The Australian Inland
Mission connected with the Pres-
byterian Church of Australia for
the general work of the said
Mission and I declare that the re-
ceipt of the Treasurer or other
proper officer for the time being
of the said Mission shall be a
sufficient discharge for the same."
CONCESSIONS FOR INCOME TAX
REBATE ARE ALLOWED ON ALL
DONATIONS TO THE A.I.M. FOR—
NURSING HOMES (Birdsville, Beltana.
Innamincka, Oodnadatta, Fitzroy Cross-
ing, Hall's Creek)
OLD TIMERS' HOMES
CHILDREN'S HOLIDAY SCHEMES
emergency—for the plain fact is:
our expenditure on absolutely vital
work far exceeds our present
income."
12
♦ THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37. 1952


FROM THE NEW SUPERINTENDENT
In producing
to keep alive
this issue of the “Frontier News” the endeavour has been made
the spirit which was so characteristic of the young John Flynn.
But even he
if I am true
would not want me to apologise for the individuality which*
to myself, must inevitably show itself.
Dr. Flynn warned me of the shoals ahead of our old ship. So I am not
expecting a steady course.
But if we think
must experience
in terms of centuries and continents—and Christ—we surely
something of the joy that comes to optimistic adventurers.
I have no misgivings about the crisis which is at present facing the A.I.M.
Some aspects of our financial position are positively frightening.
One of our real problems is that the church and the public generally do
not know the true facts; and false prophets tell wild tales.
I want you to do me the justice of believing me when I say that
the A.I.M. is in dire financial straits.
Rev. Fred McKay, Superintendent
We have exhausted our reserves —and already stern measures are being suggested by trusted advisers.
If retrenchment is forced upon us, then we shall face it with courage and wisdom.
Meantime, we are going forward.
We have reorganised our Headquarters administration and costs have been cut down severely.
All members of the team in the field are working with a will.
And I believe that once people are aware of our problems, they will stand with us.
Pessimism and panic have no place in a missionary platform.
In this bold undertaking in the name of the Presbyterian Church of Australia we shall go on
with faith in God—and with faith in our fellow men.
A J)raycr for the inland
Prepared for use in Fellowship Groups by Rev. John Flynn 37 years ago
Lift our eyes, 0 Father, that we may see our fellow-citizens even unto the furthermost shores
of our continent. Quicken our imagination until their deeds become clear unto us. Call to our
remembrance our own struggles amid difficulties when isolated, our own sighings when in loneliness.
Open all hearts that our love may flow out in warm streams of blessing, expressed in things both
seen and unseen. Keep and enable all whom we have sent forth in Thy Name.
Follow our pioneers through all the days: in the midst of drought or flood keep them from
harm; in the day of loss give them patience; in time of temptation, strength; in the season of
pain, joy.
Especially we ask Thee to bless the children
in isolated homes. Enrich their lives, and make
them great.
Let Thy pinions cover us and them. Let Thy
- —comfort, inspire, perfect.
Spirit—Who knows no distance, no time, no barrier
Let the love of Thy Son flow about us all and
bear us into Rest, for His sake. Amen
13
THE FRONTIER NEWS —Vol. 37, 1952


rr
From Flying Doctor Service
TO WORLD ROUTES
Among the happiest phases of its progress ducted this aerial medical service for ten
Qantas Empire Airways is pleased to record years before the great national organisation
its association with the Very Rev. Dr. John known as Flying Doctor Services was
Flynn and the “mantle of safety” which he formed. Qantas continued its association
spread first through the Western Queens- with the Flying Doctor Service of Queens-
land outback, using Qantas pilots and land for a further fifteen years.
machines. „ r „
ror a quarter of a century Qantas has
John Flynn’s dream of “Sky Doctors” co-operated in one of the greatest humani-
became a reality in May, 1928, when a tarian enterprises of Australia —and is proud
•’Qantas ambulance aircraft .. . the “Victory” of its close association with the late founder
De Haviland . . . took off from Cloncurry of the whole service—Flynn of the Inland.
with Dr. St. Vincent Welch.
Thus was inaugurated the first Flying
Doctor Service in the world
John Flynn and his Australian Inland
.Mission, in co-operation with Qantas, con-
tom
QANTAS EMPIRE AIRWAYS LTD
(incorporated in Queensland) in association with 8.0.A.C. and TEAL
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Central Press Pty. Ltd., 309 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
