

AUSTRALIAN EDITIO:
JOHN ASHWORTH’S
STARANGE TALES.
WILKINS.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
THE VICTORIAN TRACT DISTRIBUTION SOCIETY,
BY PERMISSION OF THE AUTHOR,
BUT ONLY FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION.
First and Second Series of the VICTORIAN TRACK DISTRIBUTION SOCIETY'S Selections contain
about 3000 pages each, and comprise the following publications:—London Religious
Tract Society’s Biographical Sketches, John Ashworth’s Strange Tales,
Peter Drummond’s Stirling Tracts; Dublin, American, Ipswich,
Sanitory, Household, and others.
The two sets, bound and numbered each from 1 to 50, can be obtained on application to the
HOB. Secretary, No. 5 Bond-street, Melbourne, 10s. 6d. per set; and Ashworth’s
Tracts separately at per 1000, for free distribution.
Melbourne:
MASON, FIRTH, & M'CUTCHEON, GENER.
51 AND FILNDERS LANE WEST.


WILKINS.
WHEN Hunt and Cobbett were England’s heroes, almost wor-
shipped by millions, and greatly feared by thousands; when
“ the cause for which. Hampden died on the field, and Sidney on
the scaffold,” was printed on our milk-cups, butter-plates, banners,
and pocket-handkerchiefs; when white hats, turned up with green,
constituted the patriot’s badge of allegiance to liberty and mid-
night meetings; when Tories believed that England’s death-knell
was tolling, and 'Radicals that her sun, of hope was just rising;
then Wilkins, the subject of the present tale, was a strong and
active man. The excitement of the times led all parties into the
most ridiculous follies; the pulpits warned the people against
politics and demagogues, and mob-meetings ; warned them against
tyrants, and parsons. Extremes always beget extremes, and Wil-
kins was one of the extreme men of that day. Had any one pro-
posed that all parsons should be hanged, Wilkins would willingly
have provided the rope.
The doings of any age can only be judged correctly by the light
of that age. Wilkins no doubt believed he was doing what would
secure his country’s freedom, but he fell into the snare that has
entangled thousands—he began reforming on the wrong side of the
door; the world within was neglected for the world without. He
could shout for a nation’s reform, while he neglected to reform
himself. The stump orator could find in him a seconder, and he
was always ready,to take the chair for the infidel lecturer. He
was one of a large circle of free-thinkers, and freely and bitterly
did they both think and speak against any one who dared to think
differently from themselves. . Some of them declared it to be im-
possible that any man thinking the Bible true could be a free-
thinker; free-thinking consisted in thinking as they thought, and
thinking nothing else.
One of these worthies once tauntingly held up a purse filled
with silver, and sarcastically -quoted part of Wesley’s hymn—
“ This, this is the god I adore, ray faithful, unchangeable friend.”
Several years after, a friend informed me that this same man was
in great poverty-jchfiihad-,-never-been married,, lived alone, was in
very poor health, and in great destitution. I had considerable
respect for him, and on calling to see him playfully asked him if
his god was still alive. He instantly remembered the purse and
the two lines of the hymn, and smilingly replied, “No, no; he is
dead long since; I wish he was not; but I am not the first that
has worshipped a money-bag.”
Another, refused a book I wished to lend him, observing, that
he “wanted neither me, nor my books, nor churches, chapels,
Bibles, parsons, nor cant. 1 ' It was about two o’clock one Sunday
afternoon; he was scraping a calf s foot with a rusty knife; he had
a week’s beard on his face, a week’s dirt on his shirt, clogs that
seemed never cleaned, and trousers covered with various-coloured


patches. The house, the wife, the children, all indicated anything
but domestic comfort.
“Well,” I replied, “I admire your frankness; you hoist your
colours at once. I expect you are one of the men that ‘ want
more pigs and fewer parsons.’ ”
“You have just hit the mark,” was his answer.
‘•'Well, sir’,” I said, “but observation convinces me that men of
your creed, or rather no creed, have rarely either pigs or parsons;
and I have also observed that godliness, as a rule, gives a man the
advantage and pleasures of this life; it has given to millions a
comfortable home, a good character, a good suit of clothes, respect-
ability, a place in God’s house, a happy mind, and glorious pro-
spects.” Then turning to the wife I added, “Mrs. , suppose
that your husband was a religious man, that you were well dressed,
as you see nearly all that go to church or chapel are, leaning on
your husband’s arm, and your children neatly attired, walking on
before to the house of God, how would you like it ?” With a good
hearty laugh, she turned to her husband and said, “Harry, I should
like to try.” Harry and I subsequently became good friends; he
.now reads my books, and has got new trousers.
Many such as the above were amongst Wilkins’ free-thinking
acquaintances when I first knew him. He had a sort of leader-
ship amongst this class of men; he was superior to them 1 in intel-
lect, and in better circumstances; he was an extensive reader of
infidel works and “ultra” newspapers; talked large, scoffed at
religion, and boasted that for thirty years he had never entered
either church or chapel. How it was that I became so anxious
respecting this man’s salvation all at once is to me inexplicable,
except on the Bible principle, that God’s Spirit does move humkn
agency to effect His purposes.
On one occasion, when Wilkins was passing down the street, a
co-worker in the school and church, Mr. Thomas Schofield, called
my attention- to him, observing that He supposed he- was a strange
character, and wondered if it was possible to get an interview
between him and our mutual friend Mr. Molineux. lat once saw
the possibility, and believed it was my duty to do what I could to
get them together. Feeling considerable confidence in the result,
1 went at once to Mrs. -S- , one of Mr. Wilkins’ married
daughters, and requested her to propose the 'matter to her father ;
she was amazed at the idea, and, in evident surprise, asked if T did
not know her father’s principles.
“Yes,” I answered, “but if you propose the thing to him in as
agreeable a way as you can, perhaps you may succeed better than
you expect.”
“Well, but if he gets angry with me, as I am certain he will,
L shall have to lay all the blame upon you.”
“Very well; I will cheerfully bear all consequences, whatever
they may be,” was my reply.
3
WILKINS.


Mrs. S went to her father’s house that night, and told
him the strange request that I had made, and as she expected, he
was greatly offended. The following day he called at my shop,
and demanded why I had presumed to speak to his daughter
respecting him, and whether I supposed that he was incapable of
judging for himself in matters relating to his own welfare.
I saw he was greatly irritated, and knew that much depended
on the next minute. I handed him a chair, requesting him to be
seated, offering, at the same time, to take his hat and walking-
stick. He took the seat with evident reluctance, but refused to
give his hat, and held the stick in a manner that indicated a wish
on his part to use it.
I at once confessed that I had requested his daughter to speak
to him ; told him how the thought had arisen; that I had known
him ever since he was chairman at a lecture given by the noto-
rious infidel, Carlisle, of Sheffield, in the old playhouse: and that,
having been a victim to the paralysing influence of scepticism, I
could feel for others carrying the same yoke. Here he inter-
rupted me by sharply asking if I “wished him to be pestered with
some young upstart that would cram damnation down his throat.”
“No,” I replied; “the man I wish to introduce to you is both a
gentleman and a scholar. You have read much, are acquainted
with some of the sciences, and know something of speculative phi
losophy; and, religion apart, I think he is just the man to gain
your highest esteem. If you wish to talk with him on geology,
he will give you the strata from the primary transition, secondary,
tertian, to the superficial; if on astronomy, he will dilate on that
wonderful science from Mercury on to Uranus, with satellites,
comets, <fec.; if on botany, he will give you the names of flowers
and plants, with their Latin names and English derivations,
almost from the cedar on Lebanon to the hyssop on the wall. He
has also travelled a little, and knows something of human nature;
and if you want to have your book-knowledge well rubbed up, he
is just the man for you.”
While I was speaking, Wilkins smiled, and observed, that he
“ thought I was a painter in more respects than one; that he
should like to see the man I had so eulogised, if only through a
telescope; and, if he would leave out his religious twaddle, he
might call upon him when convenient, but only on that condition.”
“ Well, then, I will undertake to see the gentleman, and frankly
tell him of your wish and terms. I have no doubt the compact
will be honourably kept on his part, but I expect you will break
it yourself; for you have been so long under the impression that
you could prove all parsons fools, par excellence, that you will be
trying your hand upon him.”
“Parsons! parsons! is the man you have been speaking of a
parson?” exclaimed Wilkins, with evident astonishment.
“Yes, sir; he has long been in the ministry, but at present he


is not a travelling preacher; being, however, extensively known,
he is still in great request as a preacher; and though he is sixty-
seven years of age, I would have you be on your guard, for he k
an adept in stenography, and will be able to take down your words
as you speak them.”
This last sentence was spoken in a playful manner; nor could I
help laughing outright on seeing Wilkins’ embarrassment, on dk-
covering that the gentleman with whom he had promised to have
the meeting was a minkter; and seeing, also, that this fact ap-
peared to him somewhat to alter the state of the case, I offered te
liberate him from the contract, providing he wished it.
“No, no,” was his answer; “ let him come, let him come; you
know the terms—no religious cant. If the bargain be kept, I
shall be glad of hk company; and if he breaks the compact, he
will not catch an old bird with chaff.”
Those who know Mr. Molineux will at once acquit me of having
said too much respecting his general attainments. God in Hk
word, and God in His works, were themes on which he could
dwell to the instruction and edification of his hearers. I thought
him just the man for the work in hand. The following day I
made him acquainted with all the circumstances of the case, and
was glad to find that he entirely agreed with the conditions; he
promised to call upon Wilkins on the following Wednesday after-
noon.
They met at the time appointed, and by an agreement betwixt
themselves, arranged for a weebly interview. Being two intelli-
gent men, they had no lack of interesting subjects. For several
weeks the conversation was on botany and politics, and, just as I
expected, Wilkins was the first to break the terms of agreement.
He asked Mr. Molineux what he thought of the evidences of the
existence of a great first cause. The question opened up a subject
the collateral bearings of which would necessarily include internal
as well as external evidences. Their opinions respecting some of
the evidences did not materially differ; but when Wilkins declared
that he could not reconcile the many absurdities and contradic-
tions found in the Bible with the belief that it emanated from an
infinitely wke Being, such as God must be, Mr. Molineux replied,
“ Have you found the absurdities and contradictions in your own
reading of the Bible, or in books written against it 1”
“ Oh, in books written against it. I have never read either the
Old or New Testament myself, thinking it a pure waste of time to
do so,” replied Wilkins.
“ Well, but if you refuse to read the Bible itself, in order to
judge impartially, you should have read books in vindication of it*
truth and consistency,” observed Mr. Molineux.
“ Yes, perhaps I ought; I have often boasted of thinking for
myself; but in regard to the Bible and its teachings, I have
allowed its acknowledged enemies to think for me. If, however,


you have any books that profess to explain its absurdities and
contradictions, that are worth reading, I should be obliged if you
would lend them to me; and, as the New Testament is a small
book, I will at once read it carefully through; but I have never
been able to make anything of your Jesus, as you call Him, nor do
I expect to do.”
Mr. M. furnished Wilkins with Bishop Newton’s and Simpson's
Key to the Prophecies, and other works, such as he knew would
answer; and, in the meantime, Wilkins, as he had promised,
began to read carefully the New Testament, making notes as he
proceeded. While seeking for contradictions and absurdities, he
found what he was not seeking, and what he was not expecting to
find. He found that the Word of God is quick and powerful,
sharper than any two-edged sword; he saw that, if what !he was
reading was true, he was a lost man; he found the truth crowding
on his soul with such telling power that he could not sleep in his
bed; and he found himself on his knees in the dead of the night,
bathed in tears, groaning for mercy, agonising for pardon, beseech-
ing God for Christ’s sake not to send him to hell, not to cut him
off in his sins, not to turn a deaf ear to the broken-hearted sinner;
but in mercy to spar e him, in mercy to blot out his transgressions.
In this state of mind he came to my house, requesting a private
interview. How different was this visit from the one he paid me
about two months before! Memory and conscience—-a guilty
conscience—were working with a crushing power; the events of
iiis past life distressed and appalled him. His confessions, then
and afterwards, were such as prudence would cover over with a veil
< f charity. He was greatly troubled on account of having been the
cause of others imbibing infidel principles. Several cases he men-
sioned were peculiarly distressing.
At a subsequent interview he was more calm, but spoke with
great force of the want of principle and virtue amongst infidel
writers; greatly deploring his past life, and wishing he had earlier
read the Bible and thought for himself.
The iron had entered into Wilkins’ soul; the crushing conse-
quences of infidel principles came upon him with all their force;
and he now stood before me a miserable, broken-hearted man. I
-..dvised him still to read on as he had begun; to examine for him-
s-If; to get as much aa possible into private, and pray for thfe
Holy Spirit’s guidance, not doubting but he would find mercy.
“Yes,” he exclaimed, “but how am I either to reader pray
with any hope of pardon 1 The thing seems to me impossible. O',
sir, the fearful results of my teachings are more and more terrible
as I now see them! I have already given great offence by allow-
ing Mr. Molineux to come to see me. I have sown the dragon’s
teeth in my family, and now they mock all niy attempts to induce
them to re-consider their position; sneer at me for reading the Bible,
and declare they will not be frightened by religions bugbears. 1 *’‘


And this was true: the family did all they could to prevent liis
intercourse with religious men. Mr. Todd, one of Wilkins’ neigh-
bours, a good old Christian, hearing of this, offered Wilkins his
sitting-room, promising to read and pray with him fifty times a
day, if he wished it. Wilkins gladly embraced the offer, and spent
a considerable portion of his time in Mr. Todd’s house; and there
the venerable old Christian, and the penitent, weeping publican,
together read God’s blessed word, and together bowed the knee
at the throne of grace.
One evening Mr. Todd, at Wilkins’ request, came to ask me to
spend the evening with him, if I possibly could spare time. Ii
was a memorable evening. He had copied from the Bible many
passages that seemed to destroy all hope that a man such as lie
was could ever expect to have forgiveness; he read them to me
with a trembling voice. I met all his objections by one answer—
“ He is able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by
Him.” I held him fast to that one point—“able to save to the
uttermost.” He begged me to kneel down and pray for him ; we.
all weeping, fell down before our Maker; but how different the
cause of our tears! Mr. Todd, the hoary-headed saint, wept for
joy at the prodigal’s return; Wilkins wept tears of sorrow ami
contrition, and before I could utter one word, he exclaimed, “0
Jesus, Jesus, Lamb of God, have mercy on me! 0 Jesus, Jesus,
how I have scorned and despised Thy very name, scorned and
insulted Thy servants, mocked at Thy sufferings and death ! —yes
Thou wast wounded, bruised, and afflicted for me; Thou didst die
on the cross for me; Thou didst shed Thy 7 precious blood for me.
for me, for me! 0 Jesus, Jesus, Lamb of God that taketh away
the sin of the world, have mercy on me! Lord ! I would believe:
help Thou my unbelief. I know I have sinned in heart and life
millions of times; but is there not mercy 1 0 Lamb of God, have
mercy on a poor guilty man!”
That night was to Wilkins a night of great bitterness. He
spent the most of it in strong cries and prayer. He wept and
sought, and at last brand the grace of God through a crucified
Redeemer. And 0, the joy that sprang up in his heart when he
found that his deeply-stained, guilty soul was washed in the bloos
of the Lamb ! For days he was in ecstacies. Praise, nothing bm
praise, night and day—“ Praise the Lord,” was his continual theme.
On our first interview after his conversion, Wilkins took hold
of my hand, and, with an earnestness that astonished me, exclaimed
—“0, how happy I am; the blood of Christ can save a million
worlds—He has saved me, the chief of sinners. By faith I sa*- v
Him nailed on the cross for me; in ray heart I believed He died
for me—that His blood was shed for me; and now I am a sinnce
saved by grace; and if Christ could save me, He can save any
man out of hell! I have had more real peace since I became a
child of God, than I ever possessed in all my days of sin ”


Some time after, Wilkins wished to receive the sacrament. He
desired that it might be administered to him in Mr. Todd’s house,
Mid that those friends might be present who had been with him in
his conflicts with the powers of darkness. The day was fixed; the
friends were invited; they came to join with their once guilty, but
now pardoned brother, to commemorate the most momentous of all
events —to comply with the last injunction given by the world’s
Redeemer to His disciples on that night of nights, when the
accumulated guilt of the whole human race centered on, and
weighed to the ground His sinless soul; that night of nights,
when, agonising in sorrow and blood, “He heaved the mountain
from our sinking world,” “Do this in remembrance of Me.” “Yes,
Lord,” is the sad but grateful answer of His Church in the wilder-
ness; we will remember that night of Thy sorrow, when Thou for
us wast stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; we will remember
that Thou w’ast wounded for our transgressions; that Thou wast
bruised for our iniquities; that the chastisement of our peace was
laid upon Thee; that by Thy stripes we are healed; we will
remember that the bitterest of bitter cups was for us drained to
its very dregs !
It was a solemn and melting time. Mr. Molineux, with his
grave and serious voice, pronounced the promise of our Saviour,
“ Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in My name,
there am I in the midst,” and then read the impressive service.
Poor Wilkins ! every eye was fixed upon him. He wept much,
hut not as he had wept before. Then he wept tears of anguish;
now he wept tears of joy. He trembled as he took the cup; a
sense of his unworthiness almost overcame him; but his joy was
deep, his peace with God was now more complete, and from that
hour he sought to “ adorn the doctrine of God his Saviour in all
things.”
Some time after the preceding events, Wilkins expressed his
conviction that he should die suddenly. He thought an affection
of the heart had set in, and he desired that, if it were possible,
either I or Mr. Molineux should be present at his death. His
earnest wish was, that the last words he might speak in this life
should be, “Blessed Jesus;” and God, in His goodness, granted
him his request. On entering his room on the last day of his
life, he smilingly took my hand, and asked me to lift him a little
higher. I complied with his request. He then turned his face to
the wall, and, in a faint whisper, said, “Blessed Jesus! Blessed
Jesus!” While this faint whisper was yet trembling on his lips,
the spirit of the converted infidel entered the pearly gates of
paradise, and might there vie with the thief saved on the cross,
which of the two should loudest shout the praises of redeeming
love.
MASON, Firth, AND M'CutCHSON, Steam Printing Works, 51 and 53 Flinders-lan*
West, Melbourne.
8
WILKINS.
