

which I could only say was an impudent falsehood,
completely confuted by my own public acts and
deeds for thirteen previous years.
The concealment of McGarvie’s letter of crimi-
nation, by Principal Macfarlane, entirely shut my
mouth, and made the public believe that I had nothing
to say for myself. It also enabled Principal Mac-
farlane to get his protege created a D.H., for the
services he had rendered himself in the pluralities
case of 1828; and it has possessed the public at Home
with the idea that McGarvie has been the deserving
character in the Australian Church case, and I the
offender to the present day. But, as our blessed Lord
appeals to His works in reply to the infamous charges
laid against himself, I am happy to be able to do so,
also, to mine in the matter of the Australian Mission.
Such, then, was the discreditable conduct on the
part of the General Assembly’s Committee that
virtually compelled me to renounce all connection
with the Presbyterian Church, as then constituted
in the Colony, and to resume my position in the
Synod of New South Wales.
This, however, implied a great sacrifice on my
part —not less, indeed, than that of £SOO a-year for
life, which Lord Glenelg and Sir George Grey had,,
without any solicitation on my part, deemed it
expedient to award to me from what they had seen
of the services I had rendered to the Colony in
a great variety of ways. Believing, however, that
I could no longer hold that very liberal grant while I
refused to join McGarvie’s Presbytery, I resigned it
freely into the hands of His Excellency, Sir George
Gipps, who only wished, as he told me, that all the
State-paid clergy in the Colony would do the same.


as they gave him a great deal of trouble. It has been
alleged, indeed, that my resignation of my donum of
£SOO a year for life, so honourably awarded me for
my services by Lord Glenelg and Sir George Grey,
was a piece of great folly on my part; perhaps it
was; for I was under no compulsion in the case;
hut I simply thought that it would be inconsistent
for me to retain that donum as a Presbyterian
Minister when I had refused to identify myself with
McGarvie’s Presbytery. It enabled me, however,
to hear a much stronger testimony than I could ever
have done otherwise against the union of Church
and State, between which we succeeded in effecting an
entire separation in this Colony in our local Parlia-
ment of 1862, as the Light Honourable Mr. Gladsome
did in Ireland so long thereafter.


CHAPTER VIII.
MT ENTRANCE INTO THE COLONIAL PARLIAMENT, AND
THE SEPARATION OF PORT PHILLIP, OR VICTORIA,
FROM NEW SOUTH WALES.
I happened, during a short visit I paid to Melbourne
on some educational business, shortly after my return
to the Colony from America, in the month of Novem-
ber, 1841, to he invited to attend a public meeting
to he held in that city on the state of the district of
Port Phillip, now Victoria, which was then univers-
ally and deservedly regarded by its inhabitants as an
ill-governed dependency of New South Wales, and of
which its immediate and entire separation from that
Colony and its erection into a separate and independent
province were urgently necessary. I stated, on being
invited to address the meeting, what I had myself
seen so very lately on the subject in America —the
moderate extent of their different States, as compared
with our mammoth Colony, and the comfort and
happiness enjoyed by the people under their respective
governments ; expressing my cordial approval of the
agitation that was then in progress in the district for
the separation of Port Phillip from New South Wales,
and its erection into a distinct and independent
Colony.
There had by this time been a whole series of
agitations in every conceivable form, throughout
Port Phillip for separation from the older Colony.
Petitions from the district generally, praying earnestly
for separation and setting forth the reasons for such


action petitions addressed respectively to both
Houses of the Colonial Parliament, as well as to both
Houses of the Imperial Parliament, by all classes of
the colonists generally, petitions by the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Councillors of Melbourne; by the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Councillors of Bourke; and by
the Warden and Councillors of the District of Grant.
But no response of any kind was given to any of
these petitions; the policy of the Imperial Govern-
ment, after conceding representative institutions to
any Colony—which was not yet done in this case —
being to leave all such questions to the consideration
and decision of the local Legislature.
As a separate pamphlet, containing an account
of the entire proceedings in connection with the
Separation of Victoria from New South Wales, was
published in Sydney, I shall continue the narration
in the smaller type of that pamphlet.
Towards the close of the year 1842, a new Constitution, of an
untried and experimental character, was granted by the Imperial
Parliament to New South Wales, at the instance of the late Earl
Derby, then Lord Stanley, and Principal Secretary of State for
the Colonies; Under which a Legislature was constituted, consisting
of thirty-six members, two-thirds of whom were to be elective
members, and the remaining third Nominees of the Crown. Of the
twenty-four elective members, six were assigned to Port Phillip-
one for the town of Melbourne, and five for the district. And as my
opinions on the subject of Separation were generally known in
Melbourne, while I happened to be eligible for the office under the
existing law of the period—having recently before resigned my salary
as a State-paid minister—l was put in nomination by certain zealous
members of the Separation Committee, as a fit and proper person
to occupy one of the five seats for the district of Port Phillip—as
distinct from the town of Melbourne—in the Legislative Council or
Parliament of New South Wales.
There were six candidates for the five seats for the District; for
as to the seat for Melbourne, it had been allotted in public estimation


for months before the time of election, to the late Edward Curr,
Esq —a gentleman who had been manager of an unfortunate Land
and Agricultural Company in Yan Dieman’s Land, now Tasmania,
and had come over to settle in Port Phillip in the infancy of the
settlement, with the property he had managed to save from the
wreck of the Company. Being thus a gentleman of considerable
fortune and of great Colonial experience, as well as of a public spirit,
who took a prominent part in all the public movements of the time,
it was generally understood that Mr. Curr would be elected for
Melbourne without opposition. Of the six candidates for the five
seats for the District, four were sure of election. The contest,
therefore, was for the fifth seat; and it happened to lie between the
late Sir Thomas Mitchell and myself. Sir Thomas was then Surveyor-
General of the Colony, and was very popular throughout the Port
Phillip district, from his having discovered and described Australia
Eelix—the name he had given to the district —to which a large
immigration, of a highly respectable character was then in progress.
But Sir Thomas was known to be strongly opposed to Separation •,
having described the Colony of New South Wales, in one of his
books, as extending from Cape Capricorn to Bass’ Straits—an extent
of territory equal to that of three of the largest European Kingdoms
—and compared it to a Spread Eagle, of which Sydney was the head
and New South Wales Proper the body, while Port Phillip and
Moreton Bay were the two wings. In contrast with these claims,
I was known merely as an old colonist who had rendered consider-
able service to the State in the way both of education and of
immigration, and who had taken up with great warmth and energy
the question of separation—the leading question of the day. For in
my addresses to the constituency, both in Melbourne and Geelong, as
well as elsewhere in the district, after showing at great length how
the process of separation had been carried out for a period of a
hundred and fifty years in the thirteen British colonies, afterwards
the United States of America, I alluded on one of these occasions to
Sir Thomas’s famous figure of the Spread Eagle, and maintained that
it was then high time that one of the wings of the noble bird, viz.,
Port Phillip, should be lopped off ; and I ventured to predict that
if that wing should actually be lopped off, the other, viz., Moreton
Bay, now Queensland, would at no distant period be lopped off also.
I then asked the meeting what they thought the Spread Eagle would
be like with both of its wings lopped off ? and nobody offering to
reply, I told them to their great amusement and delight, that it


would then be liker a colonial bird than ever; for it would then be an
Emu, a bird which they all knew had never had wings at all, and
did remarkably well without them. In short, I had by this time
obtained a large amount of popular support on the Separation
question, and my election was no longer doubtful.
In the meantime, Mr, Edward Curr, the then unopposed
candidate for Melbourne, was guilty of a piece of folly which I have
never seen equalled in all my Parliamentary experience. Mr. Curr
was a zealous Roman Catholic, from the North of England; and for
months previous no objection had ever been made to him on that
ground ; but as I had published in the year 1841, immediately after
my return from England, a pamphlet entitled “ The Question of
Questions ; or, is this Colony to be transformed into a Province of
the Popedom T Mr. Curr started up, at the close of a long speech
on Separation which I had delivered in the Mechanics’ Institute,
Melbourne, where the tide was evidently and strongly in my favour,
to denounce me as an unfit and improper person to represent the
district; brandishing a copy of my pamphlet as proof positive
against me.
As that pamphlet throws much light on what might otherwise
seem unaccountable in the early history of> Victoria—l mean the
very large proportion of its Irish Roman Catholic population—l may
be permitted to refer to it more particularly. From the year 1831
—when the practice of giving large grants of land in New South
Wales to respectable immigrants from the mother country was
discontinued, and the waste lands were thenceforth sold by public
auction, at not less than a certain minimum price, and the proceeds
devoted to the promotion of the immigration of suitable families and
individuals into the colony—the business of emigration from the
United Kingdom was superintended and conducted by certain
functionaries at home, designated “Emigration and Land Commis-
sioners.” These gentlemen engaged, principally, experienced surgeons
of the Royal Navy, to proceed to the different localities in Great
Britain and Ireland, from which it was desirable to promote
emigration to the colonies ; selecting the classes of emigrants required
and proceeding with them themselves to their destination. In this
way a large and most valuable addition to our population was made
from time to time in the shape of farm labourers from the agricul-
tural counties of England, and particularly that of Kent, as well as
from the South and West of Ireland; of mechanics of the various
handicrafts required in house-building from Glasgow, Dundee,


Belfast, and Londonderry ; and of shepherds and farm-servants from
the Highlands of Scotland. But in the year 1839, when the Land
Fund—arising particularly from the large extent of land sold in
Port Phillip—began to assume gigantic proportions, and to give rise
to an extensive immigration from all these parts of the United
Kingdom, certain long-headed, but most unprincipled members of
our mercantile community in Sydney, conceiving that if they could
get the management of this fund into their own hands they could
make something very handsome by it—as certain of their number
eventually did—got up a hue and cry against the Government system
of immigration then in progress, and induced both the Government
and the public to believe that if they could only get the management
of the business of immigration and the control of the Land Fund out
of the hands of the Emigration and Land Commissioners, they could
get us a much larger number and a better class of immigrants for the
amount to be expended on the service.
In this way what was long known as the Bounty System of
Immigration was inaugui’ated; the local Government issuing Orders
on the Land Revenue, at the rate of £l5 for every statute adult
immigrant imported, to all who chose to apply for them, under the
absurd idea that the individual colonists could themselves select and
engage immigrants of the description required from the mother
country better than the Government Commissioners. For as not one
in fifty of the colonists of that period could do anything of the kind,
these Orders, for whomsoever obtained, fell, as a matter of course,
into the hands of the Sydney merchant, who was now largely engaged
in the Immigration business, and in partnership of some kind with
certain Emigration Brokers in London. On these gentlemen (the
London ship-brokers) there was no check or supervision whatever
exercised by the local Government: they had merely to send out so
many statute adults to enable them to claim the regular bounty;
and, like all mercantile men, they endeavoured to find these adults
in the cheapest market.
That market was the South and West of Ireland ; where the
London ship-brokers had thenceforth their whippers-in engaging
emigrants at so much per head for Sydney and Melbourne, and
forwarding them, with but little or no inquiry about their character
or qualifications, to the Australian emigrant ships—to the general
rendezvous of the period in Plymouth Sound—by the Dublin or
Cork steamboats trading to London. For as vessels could generally
be chartered to sail from London at a cheaper rate than from any of


the outports of the kingdom; while cargo to fill up with, and cahiu
passengers, were more likely to be found there than at any outport,
the Australian emigrant ships chartered by the London ship-brokers
sailed from London to touch at Plymouth—after having got safely
over the worst part of the voyage, the passage down channel—to
receive their complement of Irish bounty emigrants in that port.
I happened to come out as a cabin passenger by one of these
ships from Plymouth in the year 1840. For having missed my
passage by another vessel from Liverpool, I crossed over to Dublin
and from thence by the Dublin steamer to Plymouth, where there
was a vessel to touch on her way from London to the Colony. That
steamer was filled, to my great surprise, with bounty emigrants to
Australia, who had been collected in the South and West of Ireland,
and who were accordingly transferred from the deck of the steamboat
to that of the emigrant ship in Plymouth Sound, without ever
touching the English soil, The motto of the Colony of New South
Wales is Sic fortis Etruria crevit. It might well be translated, in
reference to this period of our colonial history, “ It was in this way
that the great Colony of New South Wales, including Port Phillip
and Moreton Bay, had very nearly become an Irish Roman Catholic
colony.”
By far the greater number of these emigrants were Roman
Catholics of the humblest class, from the South and West of Ireland ;
the proportion of Protestants in certain of the emigrant vessels
arriving in Sydney and Melbourne at this period being as low as one
in eighteen. Besides, the general character of these immigrants and
their unsuitableness to the circumstances and wants of the Colony,
were described in the following language by the late Dr. Thomson*, of
Geelong, as a witness before the- Select Committee of the Legislative
Council of New South Wales on Immigration, in the year 1843.
“We have had a great many immigrants brought to Port
Phillip who are utterly useless ; in point of intellect, they are inferior
to our own aborigines.
26. By the Colonial-Secretary : What do they represent them-
selves as being Labourers.
27. By Dr. Lang : Where do they come from 1 The South of
Ireland.”
* Dr. Thomson was one of the first six members elected for Port Phillip
in the Legislative Council of New South Wales, in the year 1843.


It was thus—through the heartless cupidity of certain Sydney
merchants and the incapacity and culpable neglect of the Local
Government of the day—that the Land Fund of the colony, which
in nine cases out of every ten was derived from the purchase of land
by English and Scotch Protestants, was expended for years together
in inundating the colony with Roman Catholics of the lowest class,
from the South and West of Ireland. My pamphlet, already referred
to, was the first protest against this monstrous perversion of every-
thing like honesty and justice. But it was not the only one; for in the
following year, the late Bishop Broughton entered a similar protest,
after making a speech on the subject in the Nominee Legislature of
the period, in which he showed that from the Ist January, 1841, to
the 30th June, 1842, there had been imported into the Colony at the
public expense not fewer than 25,330 immigrants, of whom 16,892
were from Ireland, chiefly Roman Catholics from the South and West,
while only 8,438 were from England and Scotland together.
I had, therefore, no reason to feel ashamed of my pamphlet; and
as it was evident to Mr. Curr himself, from the demonstration in my
favour at the Melbourne Mechanics’ Institute, that I had every chance
of being elected, I recommended him, as far as I was personally con-
cerned in the case, to make the best he could of his adverse circum-
stances, and to set himself to do his utmost for the welfare and
advancement of his adopted country in the Legislature of New
South Wales.
In the course of my observations, in reply to Mr. Curr, I related
the following incident, which was remarkably well received by the
numerous meeting in the Mechanics’ Institute. “In some part of
England, where the Society of Friends, or Quakers, were pretty
numerous, it was a rule of the body that when a bachelor wished to
change his condition and take to himself a wife, he was not allowed
the privilege of ‘ free selection ’ in the case, but had to submit the
matter to the principal Friends and take the partner they assigned him
On one occasion the lady selected for a particular Quaker bachelor
was not altogether to his liking; but submitting himself resignedly
to his lot, he thus addressed her— ‘ Martha, thou art not very
beautiful, and thou art not very handsome ; but as the Friends have
sent thee, I must take thee ; so sit thee down and spin.’ Then turn-
ing to Mr. Curr, to the great amusement of the meeting, I added that
it was very possible I might neither be very beautiful nor very hand-
some, in his estimation, as a representative of the people, in the
Legislative Council; but, as it was very evident that the friends had


determined to send me in, in that capacity, I thought his proper
course was just to make the best of his bad bargain, and, like the
Quaker’s wife, to sit himself down and spin,”
But Mr. Curr was not satisfied with being the unopposed
member for Melbourne, He must dictate to the constituency as to
whom they were to send in along with him ; and in particular, that
they were on no account to send in me. Nay, he actually told the
constituency, by way of threat, in a letter which he published in the
paper devoted to his interests, that if they elected me for the district,
they were not to expect him as their member for Melbourne, as he
would not sit with such a person.
But this, Mr. Curr found when too late, was going a step too
far, as it not only excited the indignation of the Separation Com-
mittee, who were satisfied with my candidature, but at once aroused
the Protestant spirit of the great majority of the people. It was
therefore determined to take Mr. Curr at his word, and to relieve him
of all fear of being subjected to the indignity of sitting with me
by getting rid of him altogether. The gentleman who was first solicited
to allow himself to be nominated for the representation of Melbourne
was Mr. Hull, a gentleman well known in the early history of Vic-
toria ; but he declined the honour. The late Mr. Alderman Kerr,
at whose bouse I was staying, and who was one of the zealous advo-
cates of the Separation movement, then asked me, on the Thursday
evening before the nomination, which was to take place on a Tuesday,
to accompany him to the house of a Mr. Condell, a respectable
Scotch brewer, who had then been very recently elected the first
Mayor of Melbourne, as it had been proposed to request him to con-
test the election, in the interests of our common Protestantism, with
Mr. Curr, who seemed determined to establish something like Romish
ascendancy in the district. The night was pitch dark, so that nobody
could know what was a-foot \ and as there had been a great fall of
rain immediately before, the streets of Melbourne, which were then
neither paved nor lighted, were up to the ankles in mud. "We found
the Mayor rather hard to move; although, as a consistent Protes-
tant, indignant enough at the intolerable arrogance and insolence of
Mr. Curr. He was a mere tradesman, he told us, and no statesman
or politician, and therefore quite unaccustomed to such literary work
to draw up such papers, for instance—as might be required in
the position in which it was proposed to place him, I relieved him,
however, of that difficulty, by pledging myself to assist him in any-
thing of that kind that might be required of him. At length he


consented to stand, provided there should be a requisition to that
effect, signed by not fewer than two hundred of the electors of
Melbourne by four o’clock next day. By two o’clock of that
day, the requisition to Mr. Condell had obtained two hundred and
fifty signatures, and he agreed to stand ; the requisition, with all the
names appended, being published in the Saturday’s paper. This unex-
pected movement produced perfect consternation in Mr. Curr and all
his supporters ] and their only resource was to affect to treat it with
contempt, and to speak disparagingly and contemptuously of Mr.
Condell as a mere brewer. In fulfilment of my pledge to that gen-
tleman, I wrote his speech for him at the nomination, which I was
told he delivered with great vigour and animation, or as Hamlet
says, “ trippingly on the tongue.” There was one part of it, which
was much noticed at the time, and which told remarkably well for
Mr, Condell. “ They say lam only a brewer. Ido not deny it;
I am a brewer, and they will find before this election is over, that we
have brewed them some of the bitterest beer they ever drank in their
lives.” The result was that Mr. Condell was elected for Melbourne by
a large majority over Mr. Curr, while I was also elected for the
district—the Geelong vote giving me a majority of eight over Sir
Thomas Mitchell.
There was quite a riot in Melbourne the night after the election;
and the Tipperary boys, who had been brought out in hundreds with
the Protestant funds of the colony, under the system of Bounty
Immigration I have been describing, actually threatened to burn
down the town in revenge for the defeat of their champion. For Mr.
Curr informed the citizens, at the hustings after the election, that
they owed it to him that the town was not burned down about
their ears !
The question, as will he seen, on the occasion
was not really so much whether Dr. Lang or Mr.
Curr should occupy the then vacant seat, hut whether
Roman Catholic ascendancy should not he permanently
established in the Province.
The first meeting of the Legislative Council, or
Colonial Parliament of New South Wales, was held on
the Ist August, 1843, and my first motion in the
Colonial Parliament was as follows :


“ That as it is the bounden duty of the Legislature of any Christian
Country, and accordant with the uniform practice of both Houses of
Parliament in the United Kingdom, to commence the business of each
day with a solemn recognition of the Divine Majesty, and a humble invo-
cation of the Divine blessing.
“ Public prayers to Almighty God be offered up daily at the
opening of this Council, as soon as the Speaker shall have taken the
Chair.
“ That a suitable Form of Prayer for this purpose be selected or
prepared, under the superintendence of a Committee of Council ; and
that the said form of prayer, when approved of, be used exclusively on
all such occasions.
“ That as both Members of this Council, and their constituents,
belong respectively to various religious denominations, all of which are
placed by the law of the land on a footing of perfect equality in relation
to each other, the said Committee consist of, at least, one Member
of each of the denominations to which the Members of Council respec-
tively belong.
“ That a Minister of Religion, or Chaplain, be appointed annually by
the Council to officiate on such occasions ; and that the Minister or
Chaplain so officiating, discharge his duty in a black gown or white
surplice and bands.
“ That any Minister of Religion of any denomination, residing either
in the city or its vicinity, be eligible for this office. ”
My motions haying eventually been moved
separately, the following was the result:—
Dr. Lang, pursuant to notice, moved—
“ That as it is the bounden duty of the Legislature of any Christian
Country, and accordant with the uniform practice of both Houses of
Parliament in the United Kingdom, to commence the business of each
day with a solemn recognition of the Divne Majesty, and a humble invo-
cation of the Divine blessing, public prayers to Almighty God be offered
up daily at the opening of this Council, as soon as the Speaker shall have
taken the Chair.”
Debate ensued.
The Speaker having put the Question —“ Whether the clause of Dr.
Lang’s motion, then under consideration, should be carried,” Council
divided ; Ayes 11, Noes 19.
During the Session of 1844, Mr. Cowper, the son
of one of the Episcopal Ministers of Sydney (whom a
humorous old Scotchman in the Council used to call
“ the Member for the Church of England ”), after-


wards Sir Charles Cowper, brought in a motion of a
somewhat similar character. It was as follows ;
Daily Prayer on Opening the Council.—Mr. Cowper, pursuant to
notice, moved—“ That Public Prayers to Almighty God be offered up
daily at the opening of this Council, as soon as the Speaker shall have
taken the Chair ; and that a Chaplain, who shall be a Clergyman of the
Church of England, be appointed by the Speaker to perform this
duty.”
Moved, as an amendment —“That this question be now put.”
Debate ensued.
Question put on the amendment; Council divided—
Ayes, 8.
Mr. Lawson
Mr. Bowman
Captain Dumaresq
Sir T. L. Mitchell
Mr. Lowe
Mr. Suttor
Mr. Cowper
The Colonial Treasurer (Teller).
As I had voted for
Noes, [l4.
Mr. Hamilton
The Auditor-General
Mr. W. C. Wentworth
Mr. Elwin
The Colonial Secretary
Major Wentworth
Mr. Windeyer
Dr. Lang
Dr. Bland
Mr, Robinson
Mr. Bradley
Mr. Young
The Collector of Customs
Dr. Nicholson (Teller).
somewhat similar motion
during the previous year, I have to state, by way of
explanation, that I went to Mr. Cowper before his
motion was put, and told him that if he would only
divide that motion into two, making the first of a
general nature, that there should be prayers at the
commencement of the business, I would vote with
him for a chaplain of the Church of England, and
he would in all likelihood carry his motion; but if
that motion were merely to be a declaration of the
supremacy of the Church of England, as I believed
it was intended to be, I would vote with the majority.


Mr. Cowper haying declined dividing his motion, I
voted accordingly with the majority.
On the commencement of the active work of the
Parliament, I immediately moved for the requisite
Returns in aid of the movement for Separation of
Port Phillip, as the following extract from my
pamphlet on the subject will show more particularly:
During the first session of our Colonial Legislature, which
commenced its sittings on the Ist of August, 1843, I moved for
certain Statistical Returns, to bring out the case of Port Phillip
as a dependency of New South Wales, for the six years, from
the commencement of the settlement, in 1837, to the close of
1842. From these Returns it appeared that the total amount
of the Ordinary Revenue of Port Phillip for these six years
had been £222,984 Os. 7d., while the expenditure, including
the whole cost of setting up the Government, amounted to
£254,965 Os. 6^d.; but that while the revenue arising from the
sale of land and town allotments in Port Phillip, during the
same period, had amounted to not less than £393,911 11s. Id.,
the whole amount expended for immigration into Port Phillip,
these six years, did not exceed £204,446 ss. O^d,; thereby show-
ing that besides repaying to the Treasury of New South Wales
every sixpence of the whole amount expended in setting up its
own civil Government, Port Phillip had actually paid into that
Treasury £157,484 6s. Id., for which it had never received any
return.
Having thus prepared the way for my motion, I gave notice,
on the first day of the assembling of the Legislative Council in
1844, that, on a certain day, which was afterwards postponed to
the 20th of August of that year, I should move that —“ A
humble Address be presented to her Majesty the Queen, praying
that her Majesty will be graciously pleased to direct that the
requisite steps may be taken for the speedy and entire Separa-
tion of Port Phillip from the territory of New South Wales, and
for its erection into a separate and independent Colony.” I
accordingly made this motion on the day I have mentioned, in
a speech of two hours, in which I stated at great length the


various grounds or arguments on which the motion was based,
and described the of the Imperial Government in
America, where the two Colonies of North and South Virginia,
established hj King James L, of England, iti the year 1606,
had become, by successive Acts of Separation, both North and
South, not fewer than thirteen colonies, afterwards the United
States of America. The other Port Phillip members were all
strongly in favour of my motion ; but with one solitary excep-
tion, the whole of the other members, both elective and nominee,
for the rest of the Colony, were strongly opposed to it. That
exception was Mr, (now the Right Honourable) Robert Lowe,
Chancellor of the Exchequer in England, who was then merely
a nominee member of the Legislative Council of New South
Wales ; and I confess I cannot but regard the support of my
measure by so eminent a man, as one of the memorabilia of my
political life. The state of the vote, there being one seat vacant
at the time, was Ayes —six, viz., Dr. (now Sir Charles) Nicholson,
Mr. Walker, Mr. Young, Mr. Lowe, Dr. Lang, and Mr. Robinson,
then member for Melbourne, Teller ; Noes —nineteen, viz., Mr.
Murray, the Attorney-General, the Auditor-General, the Colo-
nial Secretary, the Collector of Customs, Mr. Macarthur, Mr.
Lord, Mr. Therry, the Commander of the Forces, Mr. Cowper,
Mr. Bland, Mr. Panton, Mr. Foster, Captain Dumaresq, Mr.
Lawson, Mr. Coghill, Mr. Bradley, Mr. Icely, and the Colonial
Treasurer, Teller.
The result of this effort gave rise to prodigious disappoint-
ment and to feelings akin to despair in Port Phillip. On
thinking over the matter, however, for a few days thereafter, it
seemed to me that the case was not absolutely hopeless ; for as
the whole of the six Port Phillip members, without a single
exception, were strongly in favour of Separation, it occurred to
me that if these' members petitioned for it themselves, on
behalf of their constituents, they might, possibly, meet with a
favourable result. I wrote, accordingly, to Dr. James Kilgour,
then Chairman of the Separation Committee in Melbourne, now
a prominent colonist of New Zealand, submitting this proposal
for their consideration as a dernier ressort , and requesting them,
in the event of their approval of it, to write to the other five


New Brunswick
27,704 square miles.
Nova Scotia and Cape Breton
18,742
do.
Prince Edward’s Island
2,131
do
members, and to invite their co-operation. They did so, I
believe, however, rather as a matter of courtesy to myself, than
with the slightest hope of success. A meeting of the six Port
Phillip members was therefore held on the subject in the Library
of the Council; and as the proposal had originated with me, I
was deputed to prepare the Petition to her Majesty and to sub-
mit the draft for their approval at a future meeting. My draft
was cordially approved of by all the other members, with only
a few verbal exceptions ; and on being engrossed and signed by
the six members, it was presented to them by His Excellency,
Sir Greorge Gripps, to be forwarded to Lord Stanley, for presen-
tation to her Majesty, on one of the last days of the year 1844.
The following is a copy of the petition :
PETITION TO THE QUEEN FOP THE SEPARATION OF PORT
PHILLIP, FROM THE SIX MEMBERS FOR THE DISTRICT.
To the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
We, your Majesty’s loyal and dutiful subjects, the undersigned Mem-
bers of the Legislative Council of New South Wales, representing the
entire district of Port Phillip, beg leave to approach your Majesty with
the assurance of our cordial attachment to your Majesty’s Royal Person
and Government.
We humbly solicit permission to represent to your Majesty that, in
our deliberate opinion, the District of Port Phillip, which at present
constitutes the Southern portion of the colony of New South Wales, is
peculiarly fitted—as well from its superficial extent, its geographical posi-
tion, and its other physical characteristics, as from the amount, respect-
ability, and intelligence of its population, from its entire isolation from
all other colonial communities, and from the comparatively high state of
general advancement which it has so speedily attained—for being a sepa-
rate and independent colony.
We beg, therefore, to submit to your Majesty that the Superficial
extent of the District of Port Phillip is 139,500 square miles,* while that
of the undermentioned British colonies is as follows :
* It was always supposed, previous to the final Separation of Port Phillip, that tha
Colony would include the tract of country between the Murray and Murrumbidgee Rivers.
Had that been the case, the extent of the Colony of Victoria would probably have been a
above stated ; but it was difficult at the time to procure a correct estimate. Its actual exten
is only 85,000 square miles.
