

Wv,
Bier
|| BRITISH ||
COMMONWEALTH LEAFLETS (p
I JOHN I
I WILLIAMS |
i? (1796-1839) ||
Series A
“ Pioneers who Served ” Jgg


JOHN WILLIAMS
(1796-1839)
A hundred and fifty years ago the South Pacific was the
home of cannibals and savages. Crude wooden idols
were worshipped with rites which demanded killing
and self-mutilation. The stone altars for human sacri-
fices and the ovens where victims of battle were roasted
to be eaten were sanctioned by custom and religion.
Children were destroyed by their mothers , chiefs' widows
were strangled , to be buried beside their husbands , war-
canoes were launched over living bodies. Besides the
cruelty and terror which ignorance and heathen ritual
imposed on life in the Pacific islands , there was always
the fear that over the sea's horizon might appear the canoes
which brought yet another war; and war did not
mean only fighting and slaughter , it meant pillage and
destruction and famine.
THE Pacific islands are to-day very different places.
Many of them are dependencies of Britain, places
where order and freedom co-exist. On such islands you
would see village councils in friendly conference ; hospitals,
schools, child welfare centres, all run largely by the islanders
themselves. You would notice the standard of education ;
in Fiji, for example, the proportion of people who can read
and write is almost as high as that in any western European
country. Perhaps above all you would be struck by the
happy, peace-loving natures of the islanders, and you would
find it difficult to believe that a savage delight in cruelty,
an utter contempt for human life, once governed them.


To find the reason for this astonishing transformation
you must go back to the beginning of the nineteenth century
and to the stories of men like John Williams, the missionary
of the South Seas. Missionaries are not the only men whose
influence on the peoples of the Pacific has changed bad to
good. John Williams was not the only missionary to risk
his life and meet his death in a fearless crusade to bring
Christianity to those then almost unknown islands. But in his
courage and his singleness of purpose, Williams was typical
of those pioneers ; and in his practical skill, ingenuity and
perseverance he stands alone.
When John Williams was a child, living in the country
village which Tottenham, Middlesex, still was at the end of
the eighteenth century, there was a saying among his sisters :
“ John can do it.” If there was a toy to be made, a boat to be
rigged up for a game in the garden, they shouted for their
brother. At the little school at Lower Edmonton he was
known as an active and observant boy, with a hatred of
lying and dishonesty ; not specially clever, but good at
practical things.
At fourteen John was apprenticed to an ironmonger in
the City Road, London, and here he showed the same
ability for working with his hands. His job, which he did
conscientiously enough, was to serve behind the counter.
But his real joy was to watch the men in the workshop who
made the implements he sold, and when the place was empty
he would steal in, blow up the forge fire and put his observa-
tions into practice. So skilful a metalworker did he become
that if his employer wanted anything specially well made he
would say, as the children had said in the garden at Totten-
ham, “John can do it.”


John Williams grew from a light-hearted youth into a
devout and serious-minded young man. At that time Britain’s
conscience was being awakened to the suffering of the
South Sea islanders under the reign of heathenism. Captain
Cook’s voyages and his death at the hands of cannibals had
stirred the public imagination, and the London Missionary
Society, formed in 1795, had already begun its work in the
Pacific. Gradually and with much heart-searching, Williams
saw where his vocation lay, satisfied himself that his motives,
“ a sense of the value of an immortal soul ” and “ a con-
viction of the debt of love I owe to God for his goodness,”
were the right ones, and volunteered for service in the
South Seas. In 1816, at the age of twenty, he sailed with
his young wife Mary on the long voyage which a year later
brought him to Tahiti in the Society Islands.
It was characteristic of Williams that his first action on
stepping on board the “ Harriet ” at Gravesend was to set
to work with his hammer and transform a bare cabin into
a comfortable room. It was characteristic also that no sooner
had he reached Eimeo than he was rolling up his shirt-sleeves
and blowing up the forge fire. For the missionaries already
on this island had been trying to build a ship in which the
islanders could trade their coconuts and palm-oil with New
South Wales, but had been obliged to leave it unfinished
because they had no ironwork. Within a few days Williams
had beaten out the nails and bolts, and the ship was assembled,
to be launched to the joyful shouts of people who had never
seen anything bigger than a canoe hollowed from a tree-
trunk.
The South Sea islanders were savages, and frequently
cannibals, but they were not hostile to missionaries. They
might kill any stranger, whoever he was, who landed on
their shores ; but if he made friends with them and told


them that he had come to teach a religion of peace and love
which would make them overthrow their gods of war, then
they would listen eagerly, burn their idols, and clamour to
learn more. The next step was to teach them a new way of
life to replace the old. Life to them meant lying in the shade
of the trees, swimming in the lagoons, dancing on the coral
beach to the rising moon. It sounds a happy life ; but idle-
ness swung to savagery when an island’s king summoned
his people to war and the canoes were launched for the
next raid on some weaker neighbour. It was the missionaries’
task to give a sound and practical foundation to the new
regime of peace and order, and for this no one was better
fitted than Williams. This is how he dealt with the problem
in Raiatea, another of the Society Islands and a place which
he came to love and to remember as his first settled home
in the Pacific.
King Tamatoa of Raiatea had himself begged the
missionaries to visit his people, and when Williams and his
colleague Threlkeld arrived, the Raiateans had welcomed
them with gifts of pigs and yams, and the King had given
them as much land as they wanted to build houses for them-
selves. Looking round at the islanders’ homes, thatched
roofs on poles, with dirty, dried grass for a carpet, and
several families to a hut, Williams resolved to build a house
which the people could copy for themselves. He had realised
that good housing goes a long way towards making good lives.
The islanders watched in amazement the growth of a
vast wooden framework which developed into a fine seven-
roomed house, with walls plastered with burnt coral. By
the time Williams had begun to make the furniture—he was
as good a carpenter as builder—they had decided that they
must have houses and furniture for themselves. Soon they
were crowding round him, asking to be taught. Williams’s


plan had succeeded. In a year the island was transformed.
Groups of little white houses had sprung up ; men were
busy at the lathe or bench or anvil, or crushing the sugar-
canes in the mill which he had made for them. At the school
which Williams and his wife had founded, adults and children
were eagerly learning to read ; for a reading-book they had
the Gospel of St. Luke, translated and printed in their
language (never before written down) by the missionaries
on another island, and bound by the Raiateans themselves.
But there was one old man whom Williams found sitting
despondently outside his house when the others were at
school. “ I am out of heart,” he explained. “ I am still
learning the Ba-Ba,” by which he meant the alphabet. “ I
shall never be able to read the book of Luke. I am not going
to school any more.”
“ That is a bait of the devil,” said Williams, and added
that when a man went fishing he hid the hook with bait,
and in that despondent thought was the fish-hook of laziness.
“ Let us go and learn,” he said, and the two went off together
to school.
The islanders loved Williams—or Viriamu, as the
Raiateans called him—for his simplicity and kindness, which
found a response in their own natures. One day Williams
was surprised to find the King and Queen grinding arrow-
root. When they explained that it was their subscription
to the London Missionary Society (they did not use money),
he suggested that their subjects could do it for them ; to
which the King answered, “We would not give that to God
on which we have bestowed no labour.”
But in Raiatea there were still some young heathens who
thought that missionaries had spoilt the good old days of
plundering and killing. They plotted to murder him. Their


ringleaders were caught and condemned to die by a chiefs’
council, but were spared by Williams’s intercession. This
departure from the old-established law had far-reaching
results. The Raiateans adopted a new code of law drawn
up by Williams, and they built a new church, at one end
of which was a court-house, where a judge and jury, elected
by the people, tried criminal cases by a system of democratic
justice.
The missionaries of the South Seas brought the islanders
a great many new arts and new sources of livelihood. While
Williams was teaching the Raiateans building and furniture-
making, sugar-boiling, ironwork and other industries, the
same sort of thing was going on in the other islands. In the
book which he wrote after spending nearly twenty years
in the Pacific (and travelling a hundred thousand miles
in the course of his voyages among the islands) Williams
describes the crafts and trades which had been introduced.
He lists the new food crops, such as pumpkins, pineapples,
oranges and lemons ; the livestock, including goats, sheep,
horses, pigs and poultry ; and adds, “ In communicating
to the people the useful arts specified above, I have spent
many hundreds of hours, not merely in explaining and
superintending the different processes, but in actual labour.
For this, however, I have been amply repaid by the great
progress which the natives have made in many of these
departments of useful knowledge, but especially in building
small vessels of from twenty to fifty tons. More than twenty
of these were sailing from island to island when I left.”
It was, indeed, in shipbuilding that Williams performed
his greatest feat of ingenuity and perseverance : a feat which
shows, as perhaps nothing else does, what a remarkable man
he was.


“pioneers who served”
Williams had been staying in Rarotonga, in the Cook
Islands, establishing in this recently Christianised island
the peaceful but occupied existence which no one could
organise better. Now he was waiting for a ship to take him
on to places which needed him more urgently. A few years
earlier he had written to the Directors of the London Mis-
sionary Society : “A missionary was never designed by
Jesus Christ to gather a congregation of [a hundred or two
natives, and sit down at his ease, as content as if every sinner
was converted, while thousands around him, and but a few
miles off, are eating each other’s flesh, and drinking each
other’s blood, living and dying without the Gospel. . . . For
my own part, I cannot content myself within the narrow
limits of a single reef.” The longer he waited for the ship
that never came, the stronger grew his desire to visit other
islands; particularly Erromanga, in the New Hebrides, from
which Cook had been chased away with spears and arrows.
But the New Hebrides were over a thousand miles away.
So Williams decided to build a ship for himself.
He had never seen a ship built in his life, though he had
studied every detail of the vessel which brought him out from
Britain. Nor had he any equipment beyond a few tools,
which did not include a saw for the planks. There was
an old chain cable, left years ago on the beach, which would
do for nails and bolts ; there were plenty of trees, and there
were willing if-unskilled helpers in the Rarotongans.
For nails and bolts you need a forge fire, and to blow up
a fire you need bellows. Williams therefore began with the
bellows. The three goats which could be spared provided
the leather—and rats ate it. So he invented an air pump,
on the principle of a water pump, made of wood. By making
two of these pumps and working them alternately he got a
continuous blast of air. With charcoal to feed the fire and


a stone for an anvil, the first problem was solved. The next
was how to make curved planks. The Rarotongans could
split and smooth trees with hatchets into straight planks,
but there was no steaming apparatus to bend them when
necessary. Williams had another good idea. When he
needed a curved plank he bent a bamboo to the required
shape and sent a Rarotongan into the woods for a tree or
branch like it, to be split into two and used on each side of
the ship.
So the vessel grew into a rough but serviceable shape ;
with home-made oakum and rope, and sails made from
two thicknesses of the native sleeping-mats, quilted and
joined together like patchwork. The ship’s pumps werejhe
Rarotongans’ chief delight. In under four months the ship
was finished and named the “ Messenger of Peace.” She
looked strange with her bending masts, thick sails and rough
timbers —indeed, she was later taken for a pirate ship by
the Tahitians—but she proved herself seaworthy on her
trial trip to Aitutaki, about two hundred miles away.
Williams now had his ship; but there was other work
to do before he could sail to the New Hebrides. First he
went back to Rarotonga with a cargo which included cats
to keep the rats down, and pigs, which turned out to do this
job even better. Then he sailed to Mangaia, where, on
the once savage islands on which some of his heroic native
teachers had landed some time before, he now found neat
cottages and a big white church. At Atiu, which he had visited
before, the islanders had been saving up questions to ask him
about his teaching. There was another missionary with him,
and the two arranged to take their sleep by turns so that one
could always be awake to answer the eager questioners. On
another island he found the people building a church and
felling the trees by burning for lack of axes. Williams supplied


the axes and taught the men how to use them. Revisiting
Aitutaki, he was presented with £lO3, the first money the
people had ever handled. They had collected it, by selling
pigs to a trader, as a gift towards the spreading of the “ good
news.”
By now Williams and his colleagues had brought Christi-
anity and peace to many South Sea islands. In 1834 he
returned to Britain with his wife and three sons and embarked
on a lecture tour. “ If I can only gain the ear of the public,”
he said, “ I know that I possess facts which must interest
them ” ; and his eloquent account of those far-away islands
drew enthusiastic crowds. One listener described him as a
“ messenger from fairyland.” A cab-driver who took him
home after hearing him speak refused any money. In the
same spirit, people from all over the country contributed
thousands of pounds for a new ship for his missionary travels;
and when this ship, the “ Camden”, was launched, the
ship’s pilot insisted on the “ privilege ” of doing his job
for nothing.
Back in the Pacific, in 1838, Williams revisited Rarotonga,
which he had not seen for five years, and was hailed with
shouts of “ Viriamu has come ! ” The King’s own house was
put at his disposal ; the people waited on him, eager to show
their affection. When he had travelled round a great many
islands and seen the consolidation of his work, Williams
decided that now was the time to sail west to Erromanga and
the other islands he had longed for so many years to visit.
He left Mrs. Williams on Samoa, begging him not to go. Her
courage equalled his and her powers of patient endurance
were even greater, but the thought of Erromanga terrified
her. But Williams had made up his mind, though even he
had forebodings. As the “ Camden” neared the island he told
a friend that for the first time he had had a sleepless night.


As the palms and volcanic hills of Erromanga came
nearer, Williams put to shore in a boat with three other
Englishmen, Morgan, Cunningham and Harris.
“ There are boys playing on the beach,” he remarked ;
“ that is a sign of friendliness.”
“ Yes,” said Morgan, “ but there are no women. That
is a sign that the savages mean mischief.”
And Morgan was tragically right. After some signs of
friendliness from a chief, a yelling mob attacked the party,
and Williams and Harris, stumbling as they all ran back to the
boat, were clubbed to death.
The islanders mourned Williams bitterly. In Britain it
was decided to build a ship, bearing his name, to carry
on his work in the South Seas, and it was typical of the love
and respect in which people held him that a pitboy worked
all night to earn his contribution—one shilling. In 1844,
nearly five years after Williams’s death, the “John Williams ”
began voyaging, the first of a line of ships of his name.
To-day a fine modern schooner sails among the trans-
formed islands of the South Seas. To the islanders she is
their “ Good News Ship,” a living memorial to the man
who brought their forefathers the message of Ghistianity
and the means to live in peace and freedom.


