

JONES V. JENKYNS,
OR
THE BUSHRANGERS' REVENGE.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
ASTIFF YARN
BY "WALKER"
DEDICATED
(WITHOUT PERMISSION)
TO THE MEDIUMS OF SYDNEY
AND THEIR FRIENDS.
GIBBS. SHALLARD & CO. PRINTERS SYDNEY.




JONES V. JENKYNS;
OR,
THE BUSHRANGER’S REVENGE.
A STIFF YARN.
BY “WALKER.”
Dedicated (without Permission)
TO THE MEDIUMS OF SYDNEY
AND THEIR FRIENDS
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
108 Pitt Street North.




JONES V. JENKYNS;
OR,
THE BUSHRANGER’S REVENGE.
THERE’S A MEDIUM IN EVERYTHING.
CHAPTER I.
“ The harmless jest, the playful spirit’s sway,
The local hit at follies of the day,
The tale to pass an idle hour away.”
Why will not a chair dance? Because it is stable. —Tomkyns.
Let no one peruse these pages who is not a medium, or the intimate
friend of a medium, and a staunch believer in mediumistic agency, as
applied to the overthrow of furniture, the mysterious appearance of
cabalistic sentences on inverted slates, and all the phenomena which
manifest themselves at spiritualistic seances. The sceptic who scoffs at
these and similar dark doings may possibly refuse credence to my story,
which is as true a tale as any which was ever received from the spirit land
by the recognized code of signals. He may deride the achievements of
my bushranger and sneer at the utterances of my medium. Let him : for
such a man I care not a rap. I here affirm, and am prepared to back my
assertion by oath before a Commissioner of Affidavits, that, during the
time I have been engaged in writing this novel—which has been mostly in
the evening, just before bed-time —I have been frequently under the
influence of spirits. Nay, more: while under their control I have talked
with a fluency never attainable at other times, and my pen has glided
over the paper with a rapidity only to be accounted for by spiritual agency,
and if I had been asked the next morning to repeat what I had written
overnight, I should have been utterly unable to do so. What more can I
say to prove the spirit inspiration ? The spirit I have generally summoned
to my aid has been . But, no ! that brand shall never be attached
to me.
John Jones was a youth of great promise and of some note, and was
duly honoured at maturity, as all promissory notes should be. He was of
lowly extraction :


“his ancient but ignoble blood
Had crept through scoundrels ever since the flood,”
and there was nothing in his humble name or antecedents which gave any
indication of the remarkable career which awaited him. But while some men
are born great, and others have greatness thrust upon them, there is a third
class who have the merit of achieving it; and it was this class to which my
hero belonged. He was naturally of an aspiring disposition, and having
set his foot on the lowest rung of the ladder of Fortune, he resolved to
climb to the top of it, and to allow no one to take a “ rise ” out of him
during that process. Jones possessed that great essential to Colonial
advancement—cheek, unbounded, unblushing, and undaunted —
“He that hath but impudence
To all things hath a fair pretence;
And if among his wants be shame,
To all the world he lays a claim.”
In the Grecian upper lip, the Hibernian nose, and the haughty but care-
fully arranged curl of scorn upon his noble brow, the phrenologist would
have seen in the dim distance the wealth and distinction which were to
follow. His father had been a fisherman, and he had early acquired a liking
for plaice ; while his mother was the daughter of a baker. It is possible,
therefore, that the hankering after the loaves and fishes, which was one of
his principal characteristics, was to a certain extent hereditary.
At the time my story commences Jones was twenty-two years of age,
but he looked three months older, a peculiarity which attended him through
life. He then occupied the humble position of a third-class clerk in the
Waste Lands Department of New South Whales, and when at home sur-
veyed the outer world from the peaceful retirement of a two-pair back in
the charming and picturesque village of Macdonaldtown, one of the
delightful suburbs of Sydney, the capital of the colony, immortalized by
the Poet Laureate in his poem, commencing—
“Ye environs of Sydney,
How pleasantly ye smell—
There’s poison in the atmosphere,
And sewage in the well.”
His occupation in the Lands Department brought him in continual contact
with Members of Parliament, and woke within him the germs of ambition.
He was not slow to perceive that whenever conditional sales were effected
the principal condition to be observed in the sale was the payment of a
liberal douceur to the member acting as land agent, or —as he was often
irreverently termed by the unthinking public—“ land shark,” who effected
the negotiation.


Jones looked on and admired, mentally resolving to go and do like-
wise when the right time should come. There is an old French proverb
which says that “ everything comes to the man who knows how to wait.”
Jones knew how to wait—having once been a waiter in a hotel, and he
bided his time. In the meanwhile he commenced to prepare himself for
the duties of a member of Parliament. He became a prominent member
of a Debating Society, where he frequently assisted in turning out a Ministry
upon some popular question : he also attended Spelling Bees innumerable,
and became a practised and fluent orator —
“ Whether he knew the thing or no,
His tongue eternally would go ;
For he had impudence at will,
And boasted universal skill.
Ambition was the end in view:
Thus by degrees to power he grew.”
He had also another string to his bow. Observing the number of adherents
to the new doctrine of Spiritualism, and believing that they would soon
become a power in the land, he became a convert to that mystic science,
and soon, by a regular attendance at the seances of its professors, he developed
into a first-class medium.
CHAPTER II.
“ Love in a cot
Her dream was not,
And, her defence to wind up —
From her high estate
To derogate
She couldn’t make her mind up.”
In the city of Melbourne, the capital of the adjoining colony of Victoria,
in the humble post of house and parlour maid to a wealthy ironmonger,
there lived at this time a young lady whose name was Marianne Smith. As
she is destined to play a prominent part in our story, it is necessary to say
something about her by way of introduction. She was tall and of noble
proportions, with eyes of heavenly blue, a nose decidedly retrousse , and
hair of that rich colour so fashionable in the time of Queen Elizabeth.
She was in her seventeenth year, and possessed all the charms which
belong to that age. In short, she was a sweet girl—
“ Sweet is the scented air that blows
O’er the grass the mower grows,—
The briar with its breath divine,
The fragrant perfumed jessamine,—
Sweet the wild honey in the wood,
But sweeter still is Maidenhood.”


On one occasion she had met Jones —on one occasion only—when that
hero had paid a visit to Melbourne. She was then but a child, and he
was all that may become a man—a youth in knickerbockers : yet some
subtle influence attracted them to each other. Something in the girl’s large,
lustrous eyes arrested the boy’s attention, and he had whispered in her ear,
“You’re a medium,” to which she had involuntarily replied “You’re
another.” They had never met since, yet each knew that the other’s des-
tiny was closely interwoven with his (or hers).
She was a very spirited girl, and—although she was not aware of the
fact —she was a medium. Marianne had plenty of admirers ; but she was
ambitious, and had as yet met no one who could offer her the position to
which she aspired. She had seen too many instances of advancement
from the rank she occupied to the highest positions to doubt her future;
and, like our hero Jones, she bided her time.
CHAPTER III.
“For what potent lever the few doth uplift
Above the unhonoured and grovelling throng ?
Is it intellect ? No ! not uncommon the gift!
What, then ? ’tis a purpose immovably strong !”
The Ministry having been turned out on the Circular Tramway question,
it occurred to the aspiring Jones that now was the time to act upon the
hint given to Colonial statesmen by Mr. Gladstone in the memorable
words, “Speech is a power in the colonies.” Jones not only possessed
the power of speech, but he had made a power of speeches on various
subjects during office hours, for which he had been frequently rebuked,
and at debating societies, where he had been as often applauded. Now
he resolved upon making a still more powerful speech, and to address
that speech to the electors of Sydney. The next morning he addressed
an official letter, written on half-margin, to the head of his department,
resigning his post, and made his arrangements to contest the electorate.
He resolved that no mock modesty should withhold him. Accordingly,
at the appointed time and place he presented himself on the hustings,
before a large assemblage of free and enlightened citizens, and the
electric light having been turned on full tap, he proceeded to enlighten
them upon the popular questions of the day, in a speech which occupied
an hour and three-quarters : free trade, land at sixpence an acre, no
taxation, the abolition of the duties on wines, spirits, beer, and tobacco,
and the education of Chinamen on the roads of the colony, were among


the reforms he advocated. The result was triumphant ; Jones s name
appeared at the head of the poll, and after the payment of a considerable
sum of money spent by his committee in whisky and Hansom cabs, he
was permitted to enjoy his triumph, and to occupy the proud position of a
Member of the Legislative Assembly of New South Whales. Devoting
himself assiduously to his duties, Jones soon became known as a rising
man. He introduced a Bill for the abolition of bushranging as a
dangerous phase of Colonial society, which in due time became the law
of the land. Under its provisions various well organized attempts were
made to capture the men who thus set law and order at defiance, but they
all failed, the only measure of success which crowned them being the
apprehension of a free selector named Jenkyns, who was accused of
aiding and abetting, and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. This
man, justly believing that he owed the loss of his liberty to Jones,
conceived a deadly and implacable hatred against that honourable
member, and swore a fearful oath that he would exact a terrible revenge.
We shall see how he kept his oath.
CHAPTER IV.
“ For ways that are dark,
And tricks that are vain, ■$ T
The Heathen Chinee is peculiar.”
On the bank of the River Tchin, in the outskirts of the City of Hong-
kong, pursuing the peaceful and industrious occupation of a market
gardener, lived a Chinaman named Hung Foo. No gardener in the
neighbourhood could grow turnips of such Brobdignagian proportions, or
could cultivate cabbages with such tremendous results. The secret was
known only to himself, and was probably like all Chinese customs, of
ancient date. It was said by some, who denied his merits but envied his
prosperity, that the mode in which he prepared his soil was open to
objection, but the freshness of his lettuces dispelled these suspicions, and
his customers, while they munched his radishes at breakfast, were not
curious to enquire into what species of compound their roots had
penetrated. Every morning at five p.m. he juft his home, carrying a
long bamboo cane with a hamper suspended from either end, containing
five hundredweight of vegetables. Ihe choicest of these he sold to
the wealthy English merchants, at high prices, the rotten and decayed
specimens he kept for home consumption, and thus he became wealthy.
On Sundays and holidays he would hire a sanpan and visit a friend in the


country, when the two Celestials would amuse themselves by flying kites,
drinking green tea out of the best china cups, and smoking opium. To
this latter indulgence Hung Foo was greatly addicted, and after a second
or third pipe he usually went into a trance. Decidedly Hung Foo was a
prosperous man, but he was something more than that —he was a
medium !
CHAPTER V.
“ For bread and cheese and little ease
Small thanks but no repining ;
Still o’er the sky they darkling lie—
Clouds—with no silver lining.”
Meantime, the unhappy Jenkyns languished in durance vile : a whole
year, twelve dreary months, had elapsed, and his prospect of release was as
remote as ever. Tidings of the outer world reached him from time to
time in his confinement, and he knew that Jones, his deadly foe, had
triumphed, and was now a Minister of the Crown, while he was a hopeless
captive. Oh ! for the days when, with his comrades in arms (the bush-
rangers) he had ranged over the Australian bush, owing allegiance to no
man —when he lived upon the fat of the land and replenished his purse
from the spoils taken from the purse-proud squatter or timid bank manager.
Ha ! ha ! an inspiration seized him. Years ago, when attending a spiritu-
alistic seance in the Isle of Man, he had been informed through the
medium of a 100 table that a spirit en rapport with his existed in a foreign
country, who would render him essential service. He resolved to invoke
the aid of that sympathetic spirit. He would do it in a trice, or, if not,
in a trance. Ha !ha ! the tables should be turned upon the enemy—
Jenkyns was a medium.
CHAPTER VI.
“ With visions such as these beguiling
My soul from darker thoughts to smiling,
I cheer my spirits, drooped with care,
By building castles in the air.”
It must not for a moment be supposed that the Honourable John Jones
—into whose hands a sudden turn of the wheel of fortune had placed the
welfare of a large and important community —was not fully impressed with
the responsibility attached to his position. He was quite aware of it, and


the knowledge added an inch at least to his stature. Jones was in many
respects a remarkable man, and was now a devout believer in the doctrine
of spiritualism. His researches into this question had led him to the
conclusion that the failures which so frequently occurred in invoking
spiritual advice arose in almost every case from the want of unanimity on
the part of those who took part in the performance. It was necessary
that each person present should be animated by the same desire^ —one
strong wish must rule the minds of all who composed the circle. The short
acquaintance he had enjoyed with the other members of the Ministry had
been sufficient to show him that upon one point they were, one and all,
actuated by precisely the same feeling— a resolve to keep their places against
all opposition. Whatever dissensions and divisions might take place in the
House, they only served to cement this feeling more strongly. The mere
hint of a threatened vote of censure while the Cabinet were seated at the
table in the Council Chamber had such a magnetic effect that its influence
was sufficient to compel the attendance of any spirit, however refractory.
This psychological discovery was turned to good account. Each Cabinet
meeting was converted into a spiritualistic seance. The messages from the
spirit world, conveyed by a friendly spirit, with the assistance of the official
furniture of the chamber, were duly entered on the minutes for considera-
tion at the next Executive meeting.
This was the plan pursued by Jones and his colleagues to get to the
bottom of every question which it behoved them to deal with, and to its
adoption, combined with a consistent determination to take the opposite
course in all public questions to that advocated by the leading journal, may
be attributed the remarkable success which attended his Government.
Occasionally the replies from the spirit world were couched in enigmatical
terms, like those of the oracles of old. But Jones was never at a loss to
derive comfort and encouragement from them. Here is an instance . On
one occasion, after the usual preliminaries had been gone through, and the
spirits had, by a number of vigorous raps on the Council table, expressed
their willingness to afford information, the following question was written
on the slate —
“ Will the police succeed in capturing Banks’ gang 1 ” alluding to a
notorious gang of bushrangers who had held the interior of the colony in
a state of terror for over ten years, and the answer came promptly.
“ Occurrences which ought not to happen are the facts which serve as
clues to new discoveries.”
This message, if oracular, was at any rate a little mixed ; but, as a rule,
the inhabitants of the spirit world were favourable to Jones’s administration.
Unlike his predecessors, he neither courted the favour of the public nor
did he fear their frown : his motto was—
“ There is a medium in everything.”


On one point he was resolved—no bushranger should remain at large to
endanger the lives and properties of her Majesty’s subjects while he assisted
to rule the destinies of the colony.
CHAPTER VII.
“ And busy scenes came back as thus lie sat all lonely,
For there in his narrow cell he lived in memory only;
Once more he was a careless youth, unknown to grief and sadness;
Again he roamed the forest wild, and sung of joy and gladness.”
We must now return to Jenkyns, the incarcerated. The dreary monotony
of Darlinghurst had begun to tell upon him; he had still plenty of
cheek, but it had lost its ruddy hue ; his appetite was still good, but the
gruel and dry bread supplied by the authorities ill satisfied its cravings.
He slept well, but no visitation from the spirit world attended his slumbers*
Where was his alter ego , the sympathetic spirit of foreign extraction by
whose aid he was to effect his release? On the morning of the 24th
ultimo he rose as usual in an unusually despondent frame of mind, and
spent the day in killing cockroaches, the only relaxation which the narrow
limits of his cell afforded him.
It was sufficiently evident to this lonely man that no spirits were able
to obtain admittance into the precincts of the gaol, and that to find a
medium of communication with his friends he must have recourse to stra-
tagem. The adjoining cell was occupied by a Chinaman. Somehow his
heart warmed towards his almond-eyed brother, imprisoned by the barba-
rians for some paltry act of petty larceny. Here was a man accustomed to the
ceaseless chatter of a score or two of Celestials throughout the day, doomed
to hear only the echoes of his own voice—a gregarious, if not particularly
clean biped, used to smoke himself to the sleep of unconsciousness through
the medium of opium, with eight or ten bedfellows, similarly engaged, in a
shanty twelve by ten —now forced to lie awake on a spare bed, the sole
occupant of a lofty and well-ventilated chamber, solus cum solo. Mutual
misfortune begets sympathy, and Jenkyns began to pity the Chinaman. It
was hard upon a foreigner. Ha ! a foreigner—a Chinaman ! Could he by
any chance be the long-lost medium ? Ah, pooh ! The idea was absurd.
He uttered these words with such emphasis that his next door
neighbour, whose name was Ah Foo, believing himself to be called, said
softly in reply—“ Welly good !”
The next day the joyful discovery was made—Jenkyns and the China-
man were sympathetic. One grasp of the hand was sufficient to show that
magnetic influence was negative in each case, while both were positive in
the possession of one ruling desire—to escape 1


It is hardly necessary to add that Ah Foo was a relation of the rich
gardener of Hongkong ; in fact, he was his younger brother, and the poor
relation of the family. Often in his moments of bitter reflection he had
exclaimed, “Ah ! if I were Hung !” It was, perhaps, fortunate for him
that he was not hung, and especially so for Jenkyns, though it is an open
question whether Society would not have been a gainer. The gift of
divination ran in the family, and nothing more was required to put any
member of it into a trance than an ounce of opium and a pipe. But these
were unattainable luxuries at Darlinghurst, and there were other obstacles
to the success of a seance which seemed to be insurmountable. The prison cells
boasted of no table. There were no wash-hand stands or chests of drawers,
and the beds were firmly fixed to the floor. Would the spirits condescend
to a manifestation in connection with furniture which was immovable!
Would they not feel insulted by being asked to deliver a message upon an
inverted water-bottle, the only article available for the purpose ? Then,
again, writing materials were absent. But necessity is the mother of
invention. Desperate situations call forth desperate resolves, and evoke
extraordinary ingenuity. Before long the fertile brain of Jenkyns had made
his arrangements for a seance. A sheet of note-paper and an envelope were
procured, ostensibly for the purpose of writing to the Governor of the
Gaol, and a piece of magnetic wire picked up in the yard, and passed
through the grating of the cell, served to connect the two criminals, already
joined together by the common tie of misfortune. The envelope, duly
closed, was placed upon the jug. Jenkyns grasped one end of the wire,
Ah Foo the other, and both fixing at the same moment their thoughts on
the hope of escape, the necessary conditions were fulfilled, and a slight
rustling of the paper indicated to the watchful ear of Ah Foo that a mes-
sage had been received. It was in Chinese, and when deciphered by that
Celestial contained these words in the writing of Confucius, translated into
English for the benefit of our readers :
“ Force cannot exist without matter; matter cannot be sen-
sibly active without force. Reason is a flower, and its fragrance
is liberty and knowledge.”
Jenkyns gathered from this that, as he had been forced into the matter,
there was every reason to employ his knowledge in obtaining his blooming
liberty. The spirits were evidently propitious. A subsequent message
from the spirit of Jack Sheppard —
“ Clear ouCwith the Chinese clyfaker !”
confirmed him in his resolve to escape—but how? A lucky incident
placed the means within their reach. The contract for the supply of beef
and mutton for the gaol was in the hands of an unscrupulous contractor,


and the articles were of a very inferior description. The prisoners, who
had the greatest stake in the contract, were the sufferers. The next day, at
dinner, a joint of beef which had formerly belonged to a working bullock
smoked on the dining table. It was so bad that it scarcely held together,
and the artful butcher, to preserve it intact, had transfixed it with an iron
skewer\ For one moment the diamond optics of the celestial glittered as
he saw within his grasp the means of escape ; a second later, and he had
sekewered the weapon, dexterously hiding it under his sleeve, while the look,
“ so child-like and'bland,’’with which he regarded the company was refreshing
to witness.
The conspirators resolved to make the attempt that very night. By
feigning sickness Jenkyns contrived to ward off the suspicion of the warders,
and by twelve o’clock they had pierced through the third brick wall, and
the outer wall —some twenty feet high—was now the only obstacle
between them and freedom. But how to scale it, with an ascending scale
—pianissimo ?
Fortune favours the bold. At one corner of the courtyard, adjoining
the quarters of the attendants, a gigantic creeper had been trained against
the wall, one of those magnificent tropical productions which are only to
be found in the sunny land of Australia.
It was the Victoria Regia ! !!
Joy! joy! Here was a ladder provided by Nature ready to hand.
The rapidity with which these exotic plants send forth their tendrils may be
guessed by the fact that not a vestige of verdure was perceptible in the plant
the day before. Now its gorgeous blossoms hung in festoons from the
summit of the wall to within a few feet of the ground on either side.
To seize the opportunity, and at the same time one of these tendrils
with the prehensile grasp of a ring-tailed ’possum was with Jenkyns the work
of a moment, and in less time than it takes to relate the daring feat, the
escapees had cleared the impediment, and were speeding on their way
rejoicing. The next morning, disguised as gentlemen, they were on their
way to Jerilderie. With two mouldy biscuits, a tin panniken, and the iron
skewer as a weapon of defence, they felt that all was not lost.
CHAPTER VIII.
“ Day and night my toils redouble,
Never nearer to the goal;
Night and day I feel the trouble
Of the wanderer in my soul.”
How interesting are the investigations of science, and what praise is due
to the hardy explorer ! Who can express the charms which present them-
selves to the enthusiastic admirer of Nature in the pursuit of botany.


Until recently it was popularly believed that the pathetic ballad of “ Jack
and the Beanstalk” was merely an imaginary romance improvised by an
ingenious nurse of a literary turn of mind in order to quiet some fractious
infant insensible to the drowsy influence of Godfrey’s cordial or soothing
syrup. Now, it has been proved beyond doubt that this delightful story
was founded upon fact. On the shores of Northern Queensland may be
seen whole groves of the Faba Siliqua Gladiola, or sword bean, the
identical plant by which the hero of the narrative so cleverly effected his
escape. The incident on which the tale is founded is as follows :—A
small vessel was off the Queensland coast during a terrific storm. Dark
clouds hung like a funeral pall over the ship, which was drifting under bare
poles at the rate of fifteen knots on to the rocks. The compass was out
of order, the skipper had lost his reckoning, no one knew where the
horizon was, not a star was visible, all was doubt, danger, and uncertainty.
Suddenly one of the hands exclaimed (he was a Scotchman, but had
been for some years in Queensland) “ Eh, mon, dinna ye hear the
rattlin’ of the bean-pods?” The vessel was then thirty miles from
the shore and going free, too free, alas, for safety. The captain at
first thought of putting the man in irons as a hopeless lunatic, but
Jack persisted, and shortly afterwards the sound was plainly dis-
tinguished by all on board. Every head was turned in the direction
from which it proceeded, but as nothing could be seen the ship’s head
was also turned and the danger averted. These magnificent trees, often
towering to a height of three hundred feet, are covered in seedtime with
long pods over six feet in length, each pod containing from three to six
beans about the size of a Clarence River oyster. No two pods contain
the same number, a fact in natural history which has given rise to the
query—how many beans make five ?—and when a high wind gets up and
the pods become shrivelled and partly open, the beans rattle like peas in
a bladder. Thus we see that everything in Nature has its use, and
nothing is made in vain. The cackling of geese saved the capitol of
Rome, and the rattling of a bean-pod gave warning to a vessel at a distance
of thirty miles from land. A strong corroboration of this touching incident
is found in the use of the bean by the Sydney people as a match-box. It
was found that in no other way could the story be matched. Envious
critics have attempted to show that any connection between the Queens-
land bean and “ Jack and the Beanstalk” is a chronological impossibility.
Very likely it is, and, if so, it is appropriately introduced in a work of
fiction. The modern novel writer cannot stop to make minute calculations
and to compare dates, when his readers are waiting for thrilling incidents
and hairbreadth escapes. Some people are never satisfied.


Some five hundred miles journey from one of these bean forests, in a
northerly direction, in one of the mountain fastnesses of New South Wales,
and not a great way off the Victorian border, about five miles off everywhere,
was the home of the outlaws. The spot they had selected for their camp was
in the midst of an impenetrable scrub, where, if there was but little law,
there were plenty of lawyers ready to take the very clothes off the
daring intruder. These prickly shrubs, with their long serrated leaves
bristling with sharp points like the teeth of a saw, were formidable
obstacles to encounter; and as there was about a mile of jungle to
traverse to get to the camp, and that camp was known to contain
four desperate men, armed with repeating rifles and Colt’s revolvers, be-
sides a lot of other equally murderous weapons, the mounted troopers who
were sent after the bushrangers usually preferred to camp outside the scrub,
and to lose the track at that particular spot; and, under the circumstances,
we say small blame to them, if any. Yet one blazing hot day, about a
month after the occurrences related in the last chapter, two ragged,
unhappy-looking individuals were trudging along towards the scrub in
question with the evident intention of exploring it. They did not look
much like troopers. The latter often affected various disguises, but the
characters which now appeared in sight were hardly such as would have
been chosen even at a Mayoral Ball in Sydney. The first was a little, lean,
wizened old party, with a face the colour of a mahogany table, almond-
shaped eyes, a bald head and a pig tail, dirty and dishevelled. His height
was five feet nothing or thereabouts, and he was slim in proportion. The few
articles of clothing, which still belonged to him, hung in tatters, his shoes
had large holes in them, and his whole appearance was eminently dis-
reputable. His companion was a larger and stouter man, but equally
ragged and objectionable in his general get-up. He carried in his right
hand a goad, which a close examination would have shown to be an iron
skewer such as butchers use to connect and to force into circular form a
fillet of veal or a rib of beef, and with this effective weapon prodding the
Chinaman a tergo (for our readers will have recognized from the above
description Jenkyns and Ah Foo) he had forced him to do his thirty miles
a day along the dusty road for a fortnight or more since they had left the
gaol at Darlinghurst. The poor little beast was almost dead beat, but
Jenkyns, albeit a kind-hearted man, was compelled to put him through his
facings; for although he was eager to rejoin his friends he did not care to
travel without his medium. The sympathetic feeling on Ah Foo’s side had
pretty well died out, and it was now a week since he had uttered his
favourite exclamation, “ Welly good.” For the last three days they had
subsisted upon a kangaroo rat and a fig of tobacco. But now they were
at the end of their journey, and rest and food awaited them.


CHAPTER IX.
“ I’m a robber, I’m a thief,
I’m a great guerilla chief,
I can either knock you down,
Or prig your pocket handkerchief.
Every kind of villainy,
Cometh natural to me,
And I finish all my actions
With a one, two, three.”
Of the birth and parentage of James Banks, the leader of the outlaws,
but little is known, except from the accounts given by the newspapers of
the day, which are slightly mixed. From these we learn that he was a
native of the Colony, born in the North of Ireland, of Welsh extraction,
and that he was sent out to this colony at an early age for sheep-stealing.
Certain it is that in the pastoral settlements of the colony, among the
great sheep walks of Australia, he gained the notoriety which marked
his career. We first hear of him in Victoria, with his brother and a
mutual friend, sticking up the bank, and forcing the manager to jump over
his own counter, and his wife to sit down to the piano and play the
“ Battle of Prague ” to silence interruption while the safe was broken open
and its contents appropriated. Then in an encounter with the police,
shooting a few troopers, and taking their horses, weapons, and ammunition.
Afterwards, in New South Wales, sticking up stations, and even townships,
dining at the best hotels at the landlord’s expense, riding the best cattle
taken from the squatters’ paddocks, and behaving in a generally amusing
don’t-care-a-d —natory sort of way. They thought as little of bailing up a
township as you, gentle reader, would think of baling out a bucket of
water. But at the time we are describing, it was noticeable that the bush-
rangers had become much more cautious. Jones had vowed to extirpate
them root and branch, and had offered a reward of for their heads
—alive or dead —and this being a time of considerable commercial distress,
when the banks were giving 7 per cent for fixed deposits, there were a
great many persons in want of Thus it was that the outlaws
were forced to exercise the greatest vigilance and to sleep metaphorically
with one eye open. There were plenty ol plucky men among the police,
but as yet none had dared to beard the lion in his den. dhe outlaws
were well supplied with provisions by the cockatoo farmers in the neigh-
bourhood, and wine and grog ad libitum , which they drank in bumpers to
the overthrow of Jones’ administration. Thus they hurled defiance to the
outside world, and drowned care in the flowing bowl. In the words of
the old song r— '


“ Troy had a breed of bold stout men,
But Greece made shift to rout her,
’Cause each Greek drank as much as ten,
AncT therefore was the stouter.”
It will not, therefore, excite surprise to learn that about the time the
two travellers had got half way through the scrub, and the last vestige of
clothing attached to Ah Foo had been dragged from his body by the thorns
and briars, leaving only an attenuated specimen of naked humanity, the
report of fire-arms resounded through the woods, and a rifle ball lodged
itself in a tree about one inch above the head of that despondent and
fatigued celestial. The next moment, with the infuriated bound of a
spring chicken after a grasshopper, a tall, bearded ruffian sprang from his
ambush, and the ominous words “ bail up,” shouted in a stentorian voice,
brought the party to a stand. A glance, however, showed the outlaws that
the newcomers were not troopers in mufti—indeed, they were almost in
bufti—and the next moment their chief executed a pas de sent, and,
exclaiming “Jenkyns,” rushed into the arms of the escaped aider and
abettor, like the father into the arms of his long-lost daughter in the
closing scene of a melodrama. The camp was soon reached; supper and
champagne, from the cellars of a purse-proud squatter, were produced and
done full justice to; and then, for the first time for a whole fortnight, Ah
Foo uttered his favourite exclamation —“ Welly good.”
CHAPTER X.
“ Her eyes were bright; her locks were light,
Yet strong enough to bind him ;
She had a kind of clinging way—
The girl he left behind him.”
Marianne Smith was one girl in a thousand. It is not easy to see how
she could have been more, but the phrase is employed to show her
superiority over any nine hundred and ninety-nine other girls the colony
could produce. In consequence of a slight difference of opinion between
her and her mistress as to the number of times during the week in which
it was expedient for her to leave her household duties for the purpose of
seeing her mother , she had left her situation, and, hearing that wages were
high in Sydney, had persuaded her mother to leave for that colony. She
had even ventured to hint that a message from the spirit world had
informed her that a high destiny awaited her there. But the old lady,
although not unwilling to quit Melbourne, was not disposed to place any
reliance upon spiritual tidings, the only medium which she acknowledged


in connection with the “ sperruts” being the gin and water which she
consumed during the lonely evenings when her daughter was out. dhe
seances which Marianne attended she looked upon as a “ pack of trumpery,”
and ridiculed the idea of a number of young persons of both sexes sitting
round a table waiting for the spirits to manifest themselves. Indeed, she
went so far as to quote scripture against these manifestations:
“ Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished.”
Marianne however gained her point, and before long they found them-
selves in Sydney, where the young lady soon obtained a situation as
barmaid in a fashionable hotel. Before many weeks had passed over her
head she had turned the heads of at least a dozen young men. The
spirits she served certainly backed her up in this position, and soon her
admirers became legion. They drank nobblers from her fair hands and
became intoxicated without getting tight, and the custom of the hotel
increased so rapidly that the proprietor offered her his hand, and upon
being refused doubled her wages on the spot. The bar was anything but
a bar to her advancement.
One evening as she was taking the air in Hyde Park, in that sequestered
avenue known as the “ Lover’s Walk,” she was accosted by a tall and
distinguished-looking individual, who insisted upon entering into conversa-
tion with her. What was it that attracted her to this man so that her
heart warmed to him at once, and she —so coldly repellant—became sympa-
thetic all in a jiffy ?
Before she had talked to this gentleman for ten minutes, she seemed to
have known him for years. Was it ?—yes- no—could it be ? —yes, it was
the hero of her youthful romance, now the Honourable John Jones, a
Minister of the Crown. He came again and again ; he saw her and was
conquered, while she, having made a conquest, soon riveted the chains
which bound him, by the thousand-and-one fascinations of which she was
mistress. He spent all the time he could spare from his Ministerial duties,
besides a good deal of ready money, in her presence, and on one occasion
actually voted against the second reading of a bill he had himself intro-
duced—his thoughts being, not with the measure before the House, but
with the measures which the fair Marianne was serving out in another
place. In short he had lost his heart to the pretty barmaid—it was
bottled, corked up, and hermetically sealed, and safe in her keeping at the
hotel —
“ He speaks in dulcet silv’ry tones,
That sweetly Mary thrill;
The name by which he’s known is Jones,
But Mary calls him Bill,”


Letters passed between them—letters chiefly in his hand, but adroitly
transferred to hers—until she had accumulated a store of billets doux
sufficient to have obtained heavy damages in a court of law if her admirer
had dreamed of breaking off his engagement; but that never entered into
his head, he was too far gone for that—
“He loved her, oh! He loved her so
Outrageously that soon he
Became what men will now and then
Characterise as spooney.”
They were married. To describe with any degree of accuracy the
bride’s dress and the majestic air with which she walked up the aisle,
followed by her sixteen bridesmaids, would be simply impossible—
“ She entered, but oh, how imperfect the verb
To express to the senses her movements superb ;
To say that she ‘ sailed in’ more clearly might tell,
Her grace in its buoyant and billowy swell.
Her robe was a vague circumambient space,
With shadowy boundaries made of point lace,
The rest was but guess work, and well might defy
The power of masculine critical eye.”
The honeymoon, which happened during the recess, was passed at a
seaside watering-place called Manly Beach, where, at evening time, at the
end of the solitary wooden pier which graces that favourite resort, watch-
ing the debarkation of passengers from Sydney by steamer, the happy pair
might have been seen —she, exhibiting the glories of her trousseau to an
admiring public —
“ A vision fair, with glowing hair,
And lilies white twined in it;
With eyes whose bright seraphic light
Transfixed him in a minute ; ”
he, smoking the pipe of contentment, with a fishing line in his hand
leaning over the railing and vainly endeavouring to secure the artful
mullet or the wily flathead. Marianne took no interest in this piscatory
amusement. She had hooked her fish with very little trouble, and °be
panted to return to the metropolis and take her part in its gaiety and
amusement. She had now reached the goal of her ambition : she was the
wife of the most influential man in the colony, and she determined to
profit by her position to the full extent of her power. Upon their return
to the metropolis she soon became a leader of fashion, and at the numer-
ous balls and parties to which she was invited she shone resplendent in
silks and satins, like a diamond of the first water set in Australian gold—
or like one of those crack liners described as Ai, coppered and copper-
fastened, and a remarkably fast sailer, The latter simile is, perhaps, the


most appropriate, for she carried so much sail that Jones, upon observing
the amount of her quarterly bill for millinery, was compelled, in gentle but
forcible terms, to direct her attention to the motto of his family —“ There
is a medium in everything.”
Meantime, while the fair Marianne was thus enjoying her advancement
to riches and honour, and doing her level best to ruin her husband, her
mother was found by both husband and wife to be considerably in the way.
The old lady, who had not been educated up to her daughter’s standard,
and was not particularly refined in her habits, was Jones’ bete noir. She
was not only objectionable as a mother-in-law, but as an unpresentable
member of society. Jones, as we have endeavoured to show, was no
ordinary man; he was not only a Prime Minister but a prime strategist, and
the way he succeeded in ridding himself of this encumbrance did equal
honour to his head and heart; it was diplomatic—it was ingenious. Per-
ceiving that the old lady had a decided penchant for gin and water —a taste
which had been fostered by a short residence in the hotel at which her
daughter had acted as barmaid —he introduced to her notice a new kind of
ardent spirits, called “ schnapps,” at that time undergoing a good deal of
puffing in the newspapers as an infallible cure for rheumatism, dyspepsia,
tic-doloureux, want of appetite, and the several other ailments with which
his mother-in-law was afflicted. Mrs. Smith took kindly to this prescrip-
tion, and he had the satisfaction of seeing her—shortly after undergoing
several sharp attacks of delirium tremens —safely lodged in a lunatic asylum
at Parramatta, an inland town about fifteen miles from the city, which was
once the seat of Government, and is said always to have contained more
lunatics than any three towns in the colony ; and there the old lady may
be seen any afternoon by a visitor, threatening all the attendants with im-
mediate dismissal if her carriage is not brought round in twenty minutes.
The mother and daughter being thus comfortably disposed of, it is
now time to return to the other dramatis personae, who are playing high
jinks in a totally different part of the colony.
CHAPTER XI.
“ Nor is there anyone in sight
All round, in valley or in height ;
No shout or cooee strikes his ear—
What is the fellow doing here ? ”
On the summit of a lofty, breezy knoll, on a spur of the great Dandelion
Range, at the extremity of a thin wall of limestone which juts out from the
crest of the hill, one clear summer evening, about a couple of months


after the events we have just described, might have been seen, by anyone
in sight of it, the solitary figure of a man standing erect and gazing
intently in the direction of the sea, which was not visible at that point. A
thin wreath of flame for a moment lit up the scene, deepening the gloom
of the forest in the background, and affording a momentary view of his
face. What was he doing there ?
He was lighting his pipe !
A tall, powerful-looking individual, with a bright eye and a resolute
cast of countenance, covered with a bushy beard. A reckless, desperate-
looking ruffian, dressed in an old velveteen shooting jacket with
breeches and boots, and carrying four revolvers and a large bowie knife
in his belt. Not the sort of man it would be pleasant to meet in a dark
lane on a foggy night if you had a few hundred pounds, a gold watch, and
sundry other articles of valuable portable property in your possession, and
were entirely unarmed.
This man was Jem Banks, the bushranger !
“ Why does he tear his raven locks,
And look so ashy pale ?
Why does his manly bosom heave
Like billows in a gale ?”
After smoking in silence for some minutes, he put his fingers in his
mouth and gave a long, shrill, and thrice repeated whistle. Presently
several other forms emerged from the shelter of the trees and approached
the spot, until there were fourteen men assembled around their leader. The
whole gang were in attendance, and if a .photograph could have been
taken of the group, there and then, it would have pourtrayed fifteen as
ragged, ferocious, and hungry-looking individuals as could have been found
at that time in the colony outside of Darlinghurst and Berrima gaols.
Among these were our old friend Jenkyns and his familiar Ah Foo, who
having been, on account of his remarkable culinary skill, appointed head
cook and bottle washer to the gang, attended in his official capacity. The
ingenuity displayed by the Chinaman in providing dinners when the party
were on short commons, and the energy he showed in hunting for succu-
lent herbs to season them with, was fully appreciated. Haunches of
kangaroo, stuffed and roasted by Ah Foo, became delicacies not to be
despised ; while his ’possums, smothered in onions, his jugged wallaby and
baked bandicoot, or fricasseed flying squirrel, and his celebrated cater-
pillar custard were dishes of sufficient merit to tempt an epicure. To the
bushrangers, who had no regular supply of food, this diminutive foreigner
was invaluable.
It was evident that on this particular evening something was on foot.
Indeed, for that matter, every one was on foot, but their horses were not


far off. A cave on the steep side of the mountain, and accessible only by
a narrow path among the rocks, had been converted into a stable, so that
to the uninitiated it appeared that the bushrangers were like the grenadiers
who scaled the heights of Abraham—
‘ ‘ What was astonishing, nay, very particular,
They marched up rocks which were quite perpendicular.”
A consultation was about to be held to decide upon the next movements
of the gang. To aid this object a manifestation of spirits became desir-
able for each outlaw, if not a medium, was a firm believer in spirits, and
frequently under their control. The spirits on this occasion were not long
in manifesting themselves in the shape of sundry bottles of brandy, rum,
and whisky, levied from various sources in the course of midnight
attacks. Seated round the slab of rock to which they had been sum-
moned, and which served as a table, the bushrangers held their seance , and
the raps which resounded from the table soon became as decided as the
most ardent spiritist could desire, with the advantage, not always obtainable
at seances , that there was no possible doubt as to the quarter from which
they proceeded. Numerous were the propositions made by members of
the gang, and numerous were the libations which followed these proposi-
tions, but nothing was decided.
The bushrangers had been drinking heavily for two days, but now the
liquor ran short, and an earnest and excited conference took place, the
result of which was a project to attack the Bung Bung head station, bail
up the inmates, and carry off the contents of the larder and cellar,
besides such other valuables as they could lay their hands upon. This
proposition was mooted by Jenkyns, who had obtained information at a
bush public-house not far off that his enemy Jones would be there on a
visit in a few days, with the intention of proposing to the voters of that
electorate one of his supporters to represent them in Parliament. The
outlaw, as he sat by the camp fire that evening sharpening his bowie knife
on the sole of his boot, chuckled at the thought of the revenge which
awaited him. Jones in his power ! Jones, the purse-proud member of
Parliament, face to face with the convict of Darlinghurst! If the spirits
could only bring that about, he would never doubt them again. A
consultation with the cook with the object of evoking the aid of the
spirits to the success of the expedition only resulted in the prophetic
exclamation, Ah Hung ! The bushranger received this message in moody
silence, then he swore fourteen horrible oaths and retired to res';


CHAPTER XII.
“ Are things what they seem, or is visions about ?”
In the meantime a seance of a very different character was being held in
Sydney. The science of spiritualism was in high repute at that time in
the metropolis, despite the sneers and ridicule with which it was assailed
by self-constituted scientists in many quarters. Marianne had always
considered herself a medium ; and since she had joined hands with Jones,
who was an adherent from political motives, she was more than ever
impressed with the advantage of having the spirits on her side. Many
were the occasions on which the spirits manifested themselves to a select
party of friends in her back drawing-room, and delighted their audiences
with messages from departed friends. Mediums became the rage in
Sydney, and anything that happened which was at all out of the ordinary
course of events, was attributed to their agency. If a man, on getting
half-way to his office, suddenly recollected that he had forgotten some
important papers, he was convinced that he had been reminded of them
by a friendly spirit, and on taking out his handkerchief he would find a
knot tied in it. If he knocked his head against an article of furniture
when he came home from his club at 12 o’clock at night, he was sure it
was the spirits, as no doubt it was in most cases. Mrs. Jones had received
a message from a certain John Smith, who had been dead about two
years, and who claimed to be her ancestor, which was satisfactory as
showing that she came of a respectable and ancient family ; and one of
her wealthy friends, who had lost a diamond brooch, was directed to a
pawnbroker’s shop where she found the article ticketed for sale at half its
value. The eccentricities displayed by the spirits excited as much admir-
ation as the marvellous feats they performed. Although stationery was
plentiful and pens cheap, and cream-laid paper could be purchased at one
shilling for five quires, no spirit could be induced to convey a message
upon anything but a school-room slate with a chip of pencil about the size of
a barleycorn, while the inhabitants of the spirit world reversed the mundane
order of things by invariably writing under the table instead of upon it.
There was no end to the wonderful things they did. Pocket compasses,
when controlled by a spirit, would insist upon pointing East or West
instead of North and South, Messages were received from persons who
had never existed, giving the minutest details in the most ungram-
matical language, showing that there were lying spirits as well as
truth telling ones. In short, there was no limit to the tricks they
were up to. On the evening to which we refer, the wife of the
minister had invited some friends to preside at a seance at which a cele-


brated medium, then on a visit to Sydney, had promised to attend. All
the necessary conditions had been complied with: the party consisted of four
persons of either sex ; a square deal table with flaps had been sent up
from the kitchen, and several preliminary taps upon it shewed that it was
sound and not hollow. A minute examination of the table and surround-
ings, by an inquisitive visitor, shewed conclusively that there was no
prestidigitative or mechanical apparatus concealed in it; it was evident
that there was no intelligence present, even in the faces of the enquirers
after truth. All was fair and above-board except the slate which was held
under the table by the great medium. The circle having been formed, and
the usual number of raps, signifying make ready, present, fire away,
having been given on the table, according to the usual code of signals, a
series of spiritual knocks, in rapid succession, resembling a postman’s
knock at the front door, shewed an unusual alacrity on the part of the
spirits to go to work. Perhaps the presence of the great medium stimu-
lated them to a more than usually ready demonstration.
Will you give us a manifestation ? was the first question. Imme-
diately the table rose, as if by magic, about eighteen inches from the floor,
then pirouetted upon one leg for about a minute, knocking two or three of
the party off their chairs, and finally danced a Highland fling, con spirito.
On enquiry it was found that this feat was performed by the spirit of
Robert Burns. Lights were then extinguished, at the request of the
Professor, and a number of spirits made their appearance known and felt
by sundry touches at the arms and legs of the party, and several hollow
sounds gave evidence that some of the visitors had received tolerably
hard raps on the head. Those, the Professor observed, were the spirits of
schoolboys, who had gone to the spirit land before their education had
been completed, and were still up to their larks.
It was now proposed by the hostess to obtain, if possible, some
messages by means of a slate and pencil, and the spirits having expressed
their willingness to communicate anything, Mrs. Jones ventured to ask if
Mr. Jones would meet with a good reception.
The Professor then, having carefully washed a very dirty slate, and
placed upon it a piece of slate pencil about one-eighth of an inch in
length, held them under the flap of the table with one hand, while with
the other he signed to the others to join hands.
For full five minutes the party listened in breathless silence : presently
a faint scratching was heard, and on the slate being withdrawn the
following words were found written upon it in a fine bold hand :
“ They intend to make it pretty warm for him.”
Everybody was delighted, and no one more than Marianne, who saw in
this prediction an ovation for her husband and fresh honours in the


distance, possibly knighthood, when she would be Lady Jones. After
some further interesting phenomena, performed by the spirits at the
request of the professional medium, and a slight exchange of property in
the form of a cheque, between that favoured individual and his hostess, the
party broke up and the seance was at an end.
CHAPTER XIII.
“ He drank of the milk foaming fresh from the cow,
He eat the ripe apple just pulled from the bough,
He lifted his hand to where hung within reach,
All laden with honey the ruddy-cheeked peach.
There he had all for his use or his vision,
All that the wishes of mortal can seize ;
There where he lay in the county Elysian,
Happily dreaming under the trees.”
The head station on the Bung Bung run, which run comprised some
20,000 acres, more or less—probably less—of the richest pastoral country
in New South Whales, was distant some 15 miles from the outlaws’camp, in
the Dandelion Range. It consisted of a cluster of huts resembling a small
village surrounded by stock-yards and paddocks leading one into the other
in such a way that to get up to the residence of the proprietor was almost
as difficult as to thread the maze at Hampton Court. It was built on a
slight eminence at the foot of the range. Behind the station was a wooded
mountainous background, while a long grassy plain stretched in front of it
for miles. A large creek ran —when it ran, which it only condescended to
do for about two months in the year—through this valley and enlivened
the landscape, besides watering the cattle. It was one of those picturesque
spots which novelists generally assert are only to be found in the particular
country they are describing, but are really to be found all over the world.
In short the scenery was truly rural and beautiful, as all Australian scenery
is, or ought to be. And when there was anything going on in the shape of
a muster of cattle, or there were visitors at the station, which happened
occasionally, the place was pretty lively; at other times it was as dull as
ditchwater. But it was a remarkably healthy spot and the people who
lived there had prodigious appetites.
These consisted of the proprietor, whose name was Grimshaw, his
daughter ; a married couple who cooked and looked after the house, and
half a dozen men, stockmen, splitters, and so on.
Grimshaw, the proprietor or “ the cove,” as the men were in the
habit of calling him among themselves, was not one of your blue-blooded
aristocrats who had come out to the colonies and invested a few thousands


in pastoral pursuits, who lived at their clubs and paid their overseers high
wages; on the contrary, he was a hoary old reprobate, who had been
originally a stockman, in which capacity he had displayed remarkable
energy in hunting up stray cattle and putting his own brand upon them
until he had got together a respectable herd, when he took up a small tract
of country and commenced squatting on his own account. He was very
illiterate, and could neither read nor write, but he was naturally shrewd and
was very chary about putting his mark to any document which was likely
to bring him into trouble. He had got on bit by bit until he was now the
owner of one of the finest properties in the colony. When we add that
he drank like a fish and swore like a trooper, the reader will have some
idea of the individual in question. He was about 60 years of age, but still
strong and wiry, and a tough customer in a row. His daughter Susanna,
who had just returned from a young ladies’ school in Sydney and was a high
spirited and accomplished girl, was the only person about the place who
could manage him, and she ruled him with a rod of iron. In addition to
the above-mentioned residents at the head station, we may mention that a
friendly tribe of blacks had made Bung Bung their head-quarters and that
their chief “ Cookaburra,” or “the Laughing Jackass,” almost lived at the
station. Grimshaw and he were linked together by the ties of friendship
and gratitude. Some years before, when Susanna was a child of four, a
large old man kangaroo had taken a fancy to her, and taking the child up
in his paws had hopped away with her, and but for Cookaburra she might
never have been seen again alive. The blackfellow had met this strangel)
assorted pair about four miles from the station, had speared the kangaroo,
and brought back the child in safety. Thenceforth he had always been
a welcome guest at Bung Bung, and Grimshaw felt confidence in his
presence against any surprises either from hostile blacks or other bad
characters.
' This was the station which Banks and his followers had determined
to “ stick up” on the night of the 29th May, 18—.
CHAPTER XIV.
“ O’er the golden grass-land
Floats a drowsy hum,
Like the distant, dreamy
Roll of fife and drum. ”
The sun rose in a clear unclouded sky on the morning of the day fixed
upon by the marauders for their deeds of rapine and bloodshed, tinting
with gold the peaks of the Dandelion Range, and making the long kangaroo
grass in the Bung Bung valley glisten like a field of golden corn. The


busy hum of insect life had commenced; the wild fowl had left the quiet
lagoons where they had passed the night, and flown away to inland waters ;
the opossums and other nocturnal animals buried themselves in holes
and hollow trees now that night was turned into day; the cattle and horses
rose from their camping places and began to feed; smoke issued from
the kitchen of the homestead and the gunyahs of the aboriginals; the
king of the poultry-yard clapped his wings exultingly and crowed long
and loudly ; the wattle-birds chattered in reply ; the paroquets screamed
from the tops of the lofty gum trees, and the day’s routine commenced
peacefully and pleasantly :
“ The milch cows lowing at the gate,
The magpie w r histling in the dell,
The bull-frog calling to his mate,
The tinkling of some bullock bell.”
On the verandah, clad in a light morning wrapper, and looking as
fair as Aurora herself, stood Susanna surrounded by her pets —offerings
from the hand of her preserver and faithful follower Cookaburra, —
a tame kangaroo, a young emu, a native companion, and a white
cockatoo, were waiting for her, while on her shoulder perched a young
opossum which had only been brought in the day before, the whole
forming as pretty a picture as you would be likely to see if you were to
travel the length and breadth of the Australian continent. Having
fed her pets, the girl was about to retire into the house, when suddenly
the shrill unearthly yell of the laughing jackass fell upon her ear,
and Cookaburra stood before her in his Sunday attire, which consisted of
a pair of military inexpressibles, no shoes or stockings, and a blue serge
shirt, open at the front, and shewing his manly breast, tattoed into a variety
of devices, which were, no doubt, marks of honour equal to the titles of
K.C.M.G., C. 8., or A.S.S., worn by some of the great colonists whom the
Queen delights to honour, and very probably the reward of equally meri-
torious achievements. But even this slight attire was more than he
usually wore. Ordinarily he was like the ancient Briton who
“ wore no clothes
But a coat of paint, with painted hose,
And a dab of red on the tip of his nose.”
His hair, which, on this occasion was anointed with native bear’s
grease, with a slight tinge of red ochre, to give him a martial appear-
ance, had never known brush or comb, and resembled, more than
anything else, a huge bird’s nest. It served as a receptacle for his majesty’s
pipe and various other small articles of daily use, including a thin stick
about a foot long, to one end of which a small bone hook was attached,
and used for the purpose of drawing out from the holes, in the bark of


gum trees, those large maggots which are considered such a delicacy by
the aboriginals of Australia. The features of the king of the Bung Bung
tribe, although possibly they might not have been considered handsome
according to our standard of beauty, were, no doubt, greatly admired by
his own people. In consequence of a custom practiced by his tribe, his nose
had been flattened in infancy, and was now about three inches at its base,
while underneath it was a mouth which would have gained a fortune to its
possessor if he had been Bones in a company of Ethiopian serenaders,
on account of the extremely broad grin of which it was capable. 1 hen
he displayed a splendid set of teeth ; and his hearty and frequent laugh—
for he was keenly alive to humour —had gained for him the title of Cooka-
burra, or the Laughing Jackass. But the most remarkable feature in his
face was his eye. It was nq£ an eye to threaten and command, but to
observe and detect—nothing escaped it. Put Cookaburra into a lady’s
drawing-room for ten minutes, and he would be able to lell for years after-
wards what the room contained and all about it. Let him once get a good
look at a man, woman, or child, and he would recognise him again under
any circumstances or in any disguise. His powers of observation were
something marvellous. The surface of the earth, which was a sealed book
to the obtuser vision of the white man, was to him an open page or chart,
on which he could follow with ease the movements of man or beast, and
by noting those movements closely he could often arrive at a tolerably
correct conclusion as to the object of the pursued. He could tell, by the
amount of spring left in the grass, trodden by a man or horse, how long
the track had been made ; and he would at once perceive a peculiarity in
the shoe which distinguished it from all others. In short, Cookaburra was
born to be a detective, instead of which he was a mere good-natured idler,
amusing himself by hunting, shooting, or tracking lost hoises and cattle
for his friend and ally the owner of Bung Bung, and the devoted servant
of that old party’s fair daughter, Susanna. Old Grimshaw was not unap-
preciative of the good qualities of the king of the blackfellows of that
district and the protection his friendship afforded him, and was always
ready to testify it by rations, rum, or cast-off apparel, of which His Majesty
might be in need. One little speck alone tarnished the lustre of Cooka-
burra’s character, and that was his habit of beating his wives—of whom he
had three—until they roared again. This was always the case whenever a
bottle of rum found its way into his gunyah
“ For then, until the grog was gone
He filled the flowing measure ;
And, ere he went to bed at dawn,
He kicked his wife for pleasure.”


But customs differ. Among the native Australians the women are not
considered particularly weak vessels; at any rate whenever they carry on
too much sail they are very soon brought to their bearings by a liberal use
of the waddy.
“ Good morning, Cookaburra,” said Susanna.
“ Good morning Miss Susy. You like him parrot, plenty yabber that
fellow by’m-bye,” pulling out of his bosom a pair of young paroquets
which he handed to the young lady.
“Oh ! what beauties. Oh, thank you, Cookaburra ! What must I give
them?”
“ You give it him plenty damper, plenty sugar, by’m-bye plenty yabber,
all same white man.”
“ Wait a bit, Cookaburra, I’m going to bring you something,” and the
girl tripped away to return with a glass of grog, which the blackfellow tossed
off with great relish.
“ Missy, you tell him, Mister Grimshaw, Cookaburra want him.”
Just then the old man came out of the house, and entered into con-
versation with the blackfellow
“ Well old man, did you want to see me ? ”
“ Yes, Mister Grimshaw.”
“ Why what’s the row ? ”
“ You remember, two days ago you give Cookaburra bottle of rum —
budgery that. Cookaburra drink plenty grog that night—plenty sleep ;
by’m-bye dream —see plenty whitefellow along of house —no good that
fellow—what you call’em—bushmen.”
“ Do you mean they were bushrangers, hey old man ? ”
“ Believe so, no good that fellow sit down over there (pointing to the
range), plenty white fellow, plenty horse—like that (holding up the fingers
of both hands). You get him gun ready. Cookaburra make a light.”
“ All right, old man. You go in and get some dinner. I’ll look out.”
Grimshaw was a man of few words, but he had implicit faith in his
friend and ally and he knew that the situation was a serious one. For
himself he had no fear, and, had he only been concerned, would have been
quite ready to meet any number of the gang with no other assistance than
the station afforded, but he was cautious for his daughter’s sake, and also
for the visitors whom he expected that evening from Sydney. The Hon.
John Jones was coming up on a visit in company with a neighbour of
Grimshaw’s, a squatter named Griggs, who had put up in the pastoral
interest for that electorate, and who was an admirer of his daughter
Susanna. They must be protected from any attack if possible, but he
would do more than that, he would capture the whole gang. Collecting


the stockmen together he informed them that a visit from the bushrangers
would probably be made that evening, and Cookaburra, having been sum-
moned to the conference, informed them that since he had spoken of his
dream he had seen three suspicious looking men on horseback, who were
evidently reconnoitering the station. It was proposed to send off to the
township, and, if possible, get half a dozen troopers over and secrete them
in one of the outbuildings shortly after dark in readiness for the attack.
This suggestion was acted upon, and at about seven o’clock the station
contained in various hiding places twelve good men and true, all well
armed.
Now here was a singular phenomenon, Cookaburra had never heard
of spiritualists or seances , and yet, while under the influence of spirits, he
had been warned of danger impending to his friends. Could he have been
an unconscious aboriginal medium ? We leave that for scientists to
determine. Grimshaw was slightly taken aback when he heard of the
mode in which the information had been transmitted; but he was, as we
have said, a man of few words, and the only remark he made was “ Well,
this is a rum start !”
CHAPTER XV.
“ The evening breeze passed by,
The leaves were gently stirred ;
But the thumping of her heart
Was all the sound she heard.
And now as wilder blew the wind,
And as the night grew drearer,
Adown the glen rode armed men,
Their trampling sounded nearer.”
It was about half-past nine o’clock the same evening when six men, armed
and mounted, might have been seen approaching the Bung Bung station.
They consisted of Jem Banks, the leader of the outlaws, Bray, his lieutenant,
our old friend Jenkyns, and three others. They wore no masks, and
advanced with a confident air to a clump of trees outside the paddock
where Ah Foo, the Chinaman, was waiting to take charge of their horses.
They anticipated an easy victory, and took no precautions against surprise.
Meantime the Hon. John Jones and his friend had arrived, and
Susanna had exerted herself to her utmost to entertain her visitors. Her
father had given her no hint of the attack he was expecting, and the t'ete a tete
she had enjoyed with her admirer had been disturbed by no thoughts of
danger. She was sitting at the piano singing that simple Scotch ballad
beginning “Ye banks and braes o’ bonnie Doon,” when Messrs. Banks


and Bray walked up to the front door and summoned the inmates to bail
up. Jones was congratulating himself on the warmth of the reception he
had met with and was in the lower room smoking a pipe with the proprietor,
and taking the opportunity of sounding him as to the number of votes he
was able to influence when these ominous words fell on his ear.
But Grimshaw was prepared for the newcomers, and, whispering to his
companion not to be alarmed, opened the door promptly and admitted
the two bushrangers with two others who had followed them. He knew
that the blackfellow had been on the lookout, and that his men were
closing round the hut. The next moment a shot was fired outside, and at
the same instant four troopers burst into the room and a free fight ensued,
which fully satisfied Jones that there had been no mistake in the message
he had received from the spirits, “ That they would make it pretty warm
for him at Bung Bung.” Never had he seen the tables and chairs so dis-
turbed at any seance since he first became a medium. Everybody was
fighting, and it seemed to him that they were fighting for the possession of
his person.
But Jones, accustomed to hold his own against a powerful opposition,
gave way to no craven fear, but dashed boldly into the fray. Oh, for the
pen of Homer, to describe the conflict that ensued.
Then the son of Jenkyns, singling himself from the throng, and per
ceiving his mortal enemy before him, rushedc-forward, looking terribly, and
aimed a furious blow at his throat. But the haughty Jones, leader of
councils, avoiding the blow aimed at his slender neck, escaped black death
by letting go his variegated necktie ; and admiration possessed those look-
ing on, both the horse-taming settlers and the well-booted bushrangers, at
the dire encounter. Then Jenkyns, firing off his pistol without injuring
his assailant, threw his arms round the shoulders of the husband of the
fair-haired Marianne and hurled him with violence to the ground, till he
lay supine in the dust of the well-slabbed floor, provoking him at the same
time with harsh, cutting words.
But while a dark cloud obscured the vision of the eloquent debater in
Parliament, and the lookers on trembled lest the warlike son of Jenkyns
should transfix him with his silver-hilted knife, which he had drawn from
its sheath made of ox-hide, Grimshaw, the owner of cud-chewing cattle,
rushed to the rescue and flung the attacking bushranger on his back with
fierce hostility, hurling at him terrible words, and placing his foot on the
prostrate body, shouted loudly, “ Lie there, you blooming son of a sea-
cook, and think not to escape the fate that awaits you.”
While the battle thus raged, the valiant leader of the well-booted
bushrangers, Banks the long-armed, seeing that black night had overtaken
his comrade in arms, and that his only chance of safety lay in gaining the


shelter where his solid-hoofed horses were waiting, rushed to the portal and
attempted to fly. This he did ; and would have escaped the grasp of the
avenging troopers, had not Cookaburra, chief of the native warriors of
Bung Bung, raising his weighty spear, hardened in the fire, and casting a
long shadow behind it, hurled it by means of the bone-tipped womerah at
the retreating figure. Swift flew the deadly weapon till it pierced and
quivered in that part of the frame of the flying Banks which was most pro-
minent as he stooped to pass under the thrice-railed slip-panel.
“Ky yi,” shouted Cookaburra, as his enemy lay prone on the dung
in the stockyard. “ You are like a dingo come from a distance skulking
round a sheepfold; while I am an ally of the white man, living near and
fighting for his rights.”
It will be seen from the above description that the fight terminated on
the side of law and order. The bushrangers were unmistakeably routed,
and Jones and his host were triumphant. A review of the killed, wounded,
and captured showed the following results : Banks, the leader of the out-
laws, wounded and unable to stir; Jenkyns in the front room hors de combat;
two of his comrades bound hand and foot alongside of him; and two
lying dead in the front paddock.
But where was Susanna, the princess of Bung Bung? When we last
saw her she was seated at the piano, treating her admirer to a little plaintive
music, and discoursing about* various matters, the principal theme being
life in Australia —
‘ ‘ She talked of her pa, her pets, and planner,
And the bird of her country a’ singin’ Susanna.”
Then a shot was fired, and the warm blood faded from her damask cheek,
and she clung to Griggs for support —
‘ ‘ One trembling arm stretched out for aid,
And one was round her lover.”
But when the muster roll was called, Susanna was nowhere to be found,
and Jenkyns had skedaddled.
Here was a pretty go !
We may as well record here the lamentable fact ffi Foo disap-
peared from that time forth. The bushrangers’ horses were secured, but no
traces of the unfortunate celestial could be found. Dark suspicions were
excited. The Chinaman had waxed prodigiously fat. He was no longer
a medium in point of girth, and it is surmised that his oily condition had
been too great a temptation to the followers of Cookaburra. They
probably speared him in the first place, and in the second place, as to inter
him would have been an undertaking —they ate him. Be that as it may,
he was never again seen in the flesh, and a good cook, under peculiar
commissariat difficulties, was added to the inhabitants of the spirit world,


CHAPTER XVIII.
‘ ‘ The tongue of the absent,
The sword of the brave,
The song of the poet,
The knife of the knave.”
Great was the joy expressed by Mrs. Jones, nee Smith, when the tidings
of her husband’s double success reached her—the triumphant election of
the Government candidate, who had been returned by a large majority,
after an eloquent speech from Jones, and the capture of the notorious
Banks. Never did a man so suddenly become famous. It had got about
that Jones had gone up on purpose to assist in the apprehension of the
bushrangers, and that their capture was due entirely to his foresight and
management, and the press were unanimous in crowning him with laurels.
One paper, having a large circulation, piled on the agony to such an
extent that it concluded a long panegyric by likening him to a second
Coeur de Lion :
“ ’Gainst whom the lawless Jenkyns could not wage the fight,
Nor guard his spoils from Jones’ might.”
The spiritualists made great capital out of the exploit, and proved con-
clusively that the spirits had warned him of the impending danger, and
that thus only had he been able to meet iteso successfully. The leading
Sydney journal promptly offered one hundred pounds prize for the best
epic poem which should be written to commemorate his prowess, and
twenty-two Australian poets thereupon sharpened their pencils and went to
work. Some remarkably talented effusions were sent in, but that to which
the prize was awarded was the following poem by a native of the colony,
who chose the appropriate motto, “ Quod tuum tene ” (Hold your own).
•
CANTO I.
Sing gentle muse the story of a fight,
That woke the silence of a summer’s night,
When Banks and his party did environ
A cattle station on the Dandelion :
And all were killed or captured to a man,
Before the fifteenth Parliament began.
Come prompt me now the battle to rehearse
In terms befitting Halloran’s flowing verse,
Or to the fire of Kendall’s manly strain
Or Lyric’s spiritualistic songs attain.
Oh ! animate for once my silken sail
To charm my readers with a thrilling tale.
’Twas in the Western district far away,
Three hundred miles or more, so travellers say—


Where sheep and cattle fatten year by year,
And neighbours ten miles off, are thought too near—
Within a drawing room some twelve feet square,
In slab-built house—for brick and stone were rare—
Reclining on a couch Susanna lay,
And watched the summer sun’s departing ray.
A lovely maid endued with every grace,
Slim as a cornstalk, seraph as to face.
No haughty peer or nobleman begot her,
Susanna was the daughter of a squatter.
Her father was the founder of his tree,
No richer tenant pastoral than he.
’Twas evening and two visitors were there
From Sydney —aristocrats from Wynyard Square.
Both of distinguished and refined address,
Swells of the class called heavy, nothing less.
This a slim, youth, tall, elegant, and pale,
The other one, the hero of my tale.
Refreshed with food, they sat and smoked their pipes
And drank the wealthy squatter’s swipes,
While strains melodious fell upon the ear—
Susanna sat and played the piano near.
CANTO 11.
What distant sounds disturb that tranquil scene ?
What does that noise of rushing horses mean ?
As when some cockney of uncertain seat
Gallops at random down the street;
Or is a wild bullock, broken loose
From stockyard or from paddock —what the deuce ?
Six mounted horsemen—steeds with reeking flanks,
And at their head the dreaded outlaw Banks.
At that fell sight and unexpected call,
Fear seized the inmates, one and all,
Then fright infernal filled the female mind ;
The women fled and slammed the door behind.
Susanna peeped and saw six bearded strangers,
Then screamed “My word—oh Pa ! bushrangers ; ”
While Banks dismounting, armed from top to toe,
Stood beneath her father’s portico.
And while the frightened girl was running up,
Roared out in tones stentorian “bail up !”
Well was it then for those inside that room,
111 for the savage men who met their doom,
Those two blue-blooded visitors were there,
Unused to fight, yet prompt to do and dare ;
No thought of pistol, gun, or bowie knife,
Slung shot or other instrument of strife,
Following their host’s example, these two brick?


Rushed boldly to the conflict—three to six.
As when some noble hound to seize his prey
Flies at an old man kangaroo at bay,
Full at his throat in one terrific bound,
Then tugs and strains and bears him to the ground ;
So Jones, my hero, seized the outlaw chief,
And floored the moment after, came to grief,
While his opponent drawing forth his knife,
D d both his eyes and swore he’d have his life.
But Jones undaunted by that savage roar,
Sprung lightly from the dusty wooden floor,
And while the fire of rage inflamed his brain
He went into the enemy again
Unarmed, then clutched the seeming victor
Who hugged him like a boa constrictor, —
They tug, they wrestle, till the building shakes,
Now gentle youth look out for snakes.
No lady’s arm is lightly round thee thrown,
And you’re a little, just a little, blown.
With arms entwined, down, down, they go—
Jones falls above, the bushranger below.
Then with a f°ot upon the outlaw’s breast
Unhurt, but minus half his coat and vest,
Our hero turns and hears a welcome shout,
And friends bring timely succour from without;
And every single bushranger gets roped,
Except one individual who sloped.
It is not for my muse t’extend this lay
And sing of other deeds of arms that day,
What skulls were then first cracked, what broken bones—
I sing thy praise alone —heroic Jones !
Who then into a famous warrior sprang
And singly took the leader of the gang.
CANTO 111.
Breathes there the man with intellect so dark
As never to have seen or known Hyde Park,
That urban, calm, and picturesque retreat
Where tired citizens at evening meet,
And lolling on the grass exchange their views,
And quote the Echo or the Evening News.
Where arm in arm the amatory couples stalk,
And hold sweet converse on the “ Lovers’ Walk ;
Or sit and whisper on some rustic seat
Near to the slope that faces College Street,
Where, dexter arm uplifted, Captain Cook
Surveys the landscape with a martial look.
Here Sunday idlers take the Sydney air,
And rival pastors wage religious war.


There at the northern end, within the gate,
Where patent cabmen barred from entrance wait,
Stands an ungainly structure built of wood,
Towards which in humorous or angry mood
Crowds of excited voters come and go
To hear their fav’rite politicians blow.
What makes the branches of those noble trees
Flutter so wildly in the evening breeze ?
Why do the citizens so mutely stand
Despite the horrors of the German band ?
What means that gay and brilliant cavalcade,
Both men and horses in their best arrayed ?
Why does the crowd excited surge and sway
Upon that ever memorable day ?
Why are the flags from every window hung ?
He comes, he comes, the hero of Bung Bung !
Then rose afloat one grand almighty cheer
Striking the tympanum of the ear
Like martial music, while like roll of drums
Reverberates the welcome sound “ he comes ! ”
Macquarie Street takes up the joyful sound
From where the Immigration Barrack stands
To Circular Quay, and thence to Public Lands —
Th’ Assembly on the spot is counted out,
Balmain and Watson’s Bay return the shout.
That cry goes forth to the descending sun,
Through Redfern, Waterloo, and Paddington ;
Backward again it hurtles on the ear
Through Pyrmont, Camperdown, and places near.
Its echo runs along each railway block
To Ashfield, Burwood, and Five Dock.
Its sound was plainly heard at Cockatoo,
Through Kent and Sussex Streets it quickly flew,
Till died away those joyous jubilant sounds,
Expiring in the Exhibition Grounds.
While walls resounded and the very stones
Gave forth the cry of triumph—This is Jones !
Then modestly emerging from the ranks,
Exultant rode the capturer of Banks.


CHAPTER XIX.
“ She loved a knight, renowned in fight,
But very poor in rental;
What we should style, in town slang vile,
A very detrimental. ”
Where, where was Susanna Grimshaw? and what had become of Jenkyns
the undaunted ? To obtain a satisfactory answer to these questions old
Grimshaw would have given fifty of his fattest cattle, or even his favourite
racing mare, Lady Godiva. But no trace of them could be found. Susanna
did not come down to breakfast the next morning, and it was clear
that her bed had not been slept in, while every possible hiding place in
and around the station, capable of concealing the missing bushranger had
been explored in vain. That they were alive seemed probable, inasmuch
as there was nothing to show that they were dead. That they were to-
gether seemed also likely, since if they had adopted different places of
concealment, one or the other must have been discovered. The distracted
parent of Susanna went about like one demented, crying, “Oh, my
darter ! oh, my darter ! ” and, what between grief and rum, his dependents
had a hard time of it. Even Cookaburra’s encouraging words, “ By’m bye
make a light,” failed to bring consolation to the bereaved cattle-breeder.
“ Oh, Susanna ! ” was all they could get out of him.
‘ ‘ Remembrance woke, with all her busy train,
Swelled at his heart, and turned the past to pain.”
What puzzled the blackfellow was that there were no tracks leading from
the house ; that, after a minute examination of the ground, was as clear to
Cookaburra as mud in a wine-glass. Where, then, could the fugitives be
concealed ! Cookaburra had a son —a promising piccaninny of some
eighteen summers, and a very smart specimen of the semi-civilized savage.
The lad had never been christened, but some years before a gentleman
from Sydney, who was on a visit to the station, on being asked to give the
youngster a name, suggested the following, “ Oh, rare and glorious Apollo,”
a high-sounding appellation which greatly delighted the parents. Unfortu-
tunately, they did not succeed in acquiring the correct pronunciation, and
the boy was called Polio. To him was entrusted the task of keeping a
watchful eye on the premises, for in some part of the building Cookaburra
felt certain his young mistress would be found sooner or later. With Polio
on the watch at home, and Cookaburra trying to make a light abroad, there
seemed very little doubt that a discovery would soon take place. But love
laughs not only at locksmiths but detectives, black or white, and there


are very few dodges which an Australian girl is not up to when her heart is
bent on success. Yes ! the truth must be told. Susanna had fallen in
love with the handsome bushranger, and the bashful Griggs, who seemed
likely to bear away the prize when no rival was nigh, had now not the
ghost of a chance, and was doomed to bear the pangs of unrequited love
and to realise the truth of the lines —
“ ’Tis sweet to love, but oh, how bitter
To love a girl, and not to git her ! ”
Jenkyns came ; he saw, and she saw that he saw ; and, although a captive,
he conquered. This is how it came about. We left him lying on the floor
of the room in which the fight took place, to all appearance insensible from
the blow he had received from Grimshaw. But the wily Jenkyns was only
playing ’possum, and while the troopers were securing the other bush-
rangers, believing him to be hors de combat , he slipped quietly through the
back door. Then, feeling that his only chance of safety \ps to remain
hidden in the house, he crept into a cupboard, the door of which was in-
vitingly open, and lay perdu for a couple of hours till everything was quiet.
Then emerging from his place of concealment, he stole noiselessly upstairs,
and, encountering Susanna on the landing, fell literally and metaphori-
cally at her feet. It was a case of love at first sight. Susanna neither
screamed nor fainted. If she had been a fashionable young lady she
would probably have done both. All the romance in her nature came into
play. She regarded the good-looking youth at her feet with a tender in-
terest, while, as for Jenkyns, admiration was so plainly written on his face
that the young lady was entirely disarmed, and the tear of pity bedewed
her brilliant eye.
“Oh, Susanna! don’t you cry for me ! ” said Jenkyns. There was a
pause for several minutes, say eight or nine at a guess. Meantime the
wild winds whistled plaintively through the silent stars, and the branches
of the lofty gum trees on the summit of the Dandelion Range waved im-
patiently. Then, leaning her balmy brow upon her agitated elbow, while
her golden locks coruscated with the sparkling teardrops that suffused
them, she whispered* softly :
“ Tell me, blue-eyed stranger,
Whither dost thou roam ;
Why art thou turned bushranger,
Hast thou no friends, no home ? ”
Susanna pitied him, and pity, we know, is akin to love. But there was no
time to lose ;at any moment their tete d iete might be interrupted. Then
it was that the quick-witted Australian girl, hit upon the expedient which
saved the life of her lover. Beckoning him to follow she led the way to


the kitchen, and softly opening the door which led into the yard, she
lowered him noiselessly down the well, where, although he kicked the
bucket more than once in his descent, he was in no danger of losing his
life. Then for the first time she recollected that Jenkyns had seen her
deshabille. She was like a lovely edition of the “ Woman in White,”
“ Her arms were bare—what arms they were ;
She hadn’t even a quilt on ;
The dress she wore was little more
Than Eve’s described by Milton; ”
and she blushed to the roots of her hair, until her pearly skin and alabaster
brow assumed the roseate hue of a Sturt’s Desert Pea, or a Waratah in full
bloom. But Jenkyns was out of harm’s way, and if his ardour was a little
cooled he was safe for the present, and her father was not likely to go to
the well, water being a liquid in which he very seldom indulged. What
she did with herself during the whole of the next day until night came on
and gave her an opportunity of releasing Jenkyns from his confinement, I
and where she concealed herself, we havn’t the slightest idea • but certain !
it is that she managed to baffle all pursuit, and that for the first time in his
life Cookaburrawas at fault. Polio, however, had found out Jenkyns’s retreat,
and had whispered to his father, “ Whitefellow sit down along a well ; ”
a piece of information which would at once have been conveyed to Grim-
shaw had not the delighted eyes of the blackfellows pere et fils at that
moment rested upon Susannas matchless form advancing towards them,
her finger on her mouth, and such was the fascination she exercised
that in a few minutes they were both her confederates, and had arranged
the escape of the hunted bushranger. Then she went in search of her
father. The old man was sitting on the verandah watching for her—
“ He watched for the feet that used to tread
With him on the cattle track ;
And he heard but the echoes dull and dread,
Of the feet that came not back;”
and his joy at seeing her again was so excessive that he quite forgot to ask
where she had been, and she forebore to volunteer the information.
Truth, we are told, lies at the bottom of a well, but when that truth is per-
sonated by a bearded outlaw, six feet two inches in his elastic sides, it is
not always desirable to bring it to the surface.
Late that night, after the household had retired to rest, she drew up
Jenkyns from his watery bed, and three days afterwards they drew up at an
hotel in Sydney.


CHAPTER XX.
“ He stoutly asserted his fitness to
Attend to the duties he had to do,
And so far from appearing sad,
His spirits unwontedly light and high,
Were clearly but little affected by *
The narrow escape he had had.”
About six months after the events recorded in the last chapter, and about
three months after the execution of Banks and two of his comrades, a fancy-
ball upon an unusually splendid scale occupied the attention of the fashion-
able world. It was given by Lady Jones, wife of the Prime Minister, and
was attended by all the elite of Sydney.
Marianne, although she now occupied such a distinguished position in
society, and had a great portion of her time taken up in the case of Jones
junior, who had lately appeared upon the scene, was more than ever a
devout believer in Spiritualism. She was not, therefore, surprised, on the
evening in question, at being accosted by one of her visitors, evidently a
lady, attired in the costume of a Greek slave, who begged for a few minutes
private conversation.
Drawing her guest aside, she entered a private apartment, and listened
to the following story. The young lady informed her that she had
been married about six months. Her husband was a medium, and had
been for a long time in the habit of attending spiritualistic seances. On
one occasion he had been informed by the spirits that if he came down to
Sydney he would obtain a Government appointment. She knew she was
now addressing a medium. Would Lady Jones be the medium of bringing
about that desirable consummation. Marianne was greatly struck with the
young lady, and became deeply interested in her story. Her visitor told
her that she was the daughter of a squatter in the Dandelion country, at
which Marianne pricked up her ears, and when she went on to say that
she was the daughter of the owner of the Bung Bung station, at which the
fight had occurred in which Jones had played such a prominent part, the
wife of that distinguished statesman was fairly overcome. She burst into
tears, and the two young women fell into each other’s arms weeping like a
couple of watering pots.
The next day, Susanna, for our readers will have recognized the Aus-
tralian Girl through the flimsy disguise of a Greek slave, introduced her
husband, a tall, handsome-looking man, clean shaved, with the exception of
an enormous moustache, and wearing a pair of green spectacles. Some
interesting conversation ensued on the subject of mediumistic influence,
and Lady Jones promised to exert all her power on behalf of the husband


hl d h been'merit d “ t:me h ® Waited Upon the Minister > who
ad been urged by his wife to give him an appointment. Jones was not
L onTetlfrl th ?, leadingS ° f *"> ™-n! and he gave
• , ’ F° rt unately, an important vacancy had recently occurred
m -f , e management of a department which appeared the very thino- f or his
wires The, me, as entire strangers ; the applicant was ouestbned
to his previous career, and stated that he had been nearly 111 his life
comected with the police. The following week he was gazetted
Inspector-General of Police f !
It was Jenkyns the outlaw, and that was his revenge ,
From that time forth, no more bushrangers stuck up passengers on the
hgh roads of New South Whales. The two families flourished and muld
phed. Jones sons married Jenkyns’ daughters, and the male scions of the"
J yns tribe mated with the fair daughters of Jones. The hatchet was
uned, the two deadly enemies became firm friends; the quondam bush
ranger, in course of time grew wealthy and adopted for his family motto .
In medio tutissimus ibis.
At a family gathering which took place some years after at the Buna
ung station, there were no less than eleven Jones’ and nine Jenkyns’ of
various ages present; and, while the silent moon shone serenely upon ‘
upturned faces, and the spirits hovered about the room, and rapped out hi
mgs by the dozen, the faithful Cookaburra and his son Polio inth P ' b 6SS "
gladness of their aboriginal hearts, danced a corroboree it^front'ofThe^mtion 1
and called upon all created nature to witness the touching spectacle. C ’
( To be discontinued.)




Slum LOCKSTITCH sewing machines
i JtiltElLii) these machines have obtained the first and
Ij lOilliinAeilM HICHEST prize medals wherever exhibited.
Centennial Exhibition, Philadelphia, 1876 —GOLD AND
INTERN 1 AT/ONAL MEDALS,
The ONLY Machines receiving these Double Honours.
London,* Manchester, Dudley, York, Ipswich, Cheltenham, Paris
Moscow, Sydney, Hamilton, Montreal, Chili, & Five Honours (including
the Older of Francis Joseph fromiH.l.M. the Eaperor), Vienna, 1873.
* - THE W4NZER ‘‘‘A” STRAIGHT RACE. \
With Neu) Patented Motion, suitable for alt kinds of Work.
The best Light*Family Foot 'Alachme, and is easily worked by Hand.
Warner “A ” 'lf the great success ojL 19%6. ft combines all the known advan-
tages of other flachines, and several importajit improvements It is nearer
perfection thah any Machine yet made. Price 1 os.; Stands from £2 ss.
• * ' * » Jim V , "m
mi: wanxek new i'.uui.v machine “f.” |
With patent Reversible Feed and Stitch Lever.
Z feripr to any Machine for Family 'Work or for Dressmakers.
The p a t en t Reversible‘Feed and- Stitch Lever enables the to fasten the
threads at the beginning and ending of seams ; also to strengthen any parts
liable to extfa strain, *ty, SPi WfiVO, if AOK WARDS <P FORWARDS
»■, over them 'WITHOUT STOPPING Ihe Machine. Price f 8 Sr.
THE WANZER WHEEL-FEED MACHINE 17 E,”
With Rolling Presser, for Foot Closing and Heavy Leather Work ,
. arid with ’a Special post for -Heavy Tailoring. Price jf r o i os.
GIBBS, SHALBARD,* & CO., Agents,
108 PITT STREET, NEAR HUNTER. STREET, SYDNEY. V
