

Jordain's
Dental Journal:
OR
Information for the People.
“ The knowledge of disease in half its cure."
VoL. 3.] MELBOURNE, 1858. .[No.
Mr. J ORDAIN in submitting the present number of his Dental Journal to i
the discerning Melbourne Public, wishes it to be fully understood that his
;main object is thereby to become as extensively known in the Metropolis as
he is on the Victorian Diggings, where he has successfully practised for
‘past Five Years, and trusts while attempting to instruct them «in,
Dental Science, to beneﬁt himseﬂ without detriment to any other practitioner:
Mr. J ORDAIN does not profess to have any Teeth or Stoppings superior to
any other Dentist, but places his skill in the hands of the public feeling every
conﬁdence a meritorious ambition will obtain its own reward. The Teeth,
Gold, and Cement, Which Mr. J ordain uses are imported from'AsH 8:, Son,
London, Her Majesty’s Dentists, (and all respectable Practitioners are supplied
from the above Firm.) '
, In a Colony like this, where many Tradespeople have taken. to
Dentistry—4(l know many men of this classin practice), who, having been.»
employed as journeymen jewellers, or ivory workers in some Dentistk:


laboratory, throw themselves on the world as accomplished ﬁentists.
The public must, however, thank themselves, in some measure for
this. The mystery with which they endeavour to envelope any transaction
they have with a Dentist, for fear the prying eye of a neighbour should
suppose it related to artiﬁcial teeth, render it necessary, in most cases, for a
person, even with a competent knowledge of his profession, to have recourse
to publicity to make himself known. This easy mode of introducing;
themselves to the public, by some pretended new discovery or wonderful cure,
puts it. in the power of the most ignorant to commence business. Having no
knowledgeof the anatomy and physiology of the teeth, they will often do
great injury to the hard and soft structures of the mouth. The simple
extraction of a Tooth is often the result of serious injury, and the consequence
is that Dental Science is by many brought into ridicule.
Mr. JORDAIN may be Consulted on the LOSS of TEETH and all
Diseases of the Mouth, Daily, from 10 till 6, at 103, COLLINS STREET,
EAST, MELBOURNE, (next door to Dr. Motherwell’s).
BALLARAT TESTIMONIALS.
I have great pleasure in certifying that Mr. Jordain operated on my Teeth, in removing ﬁve
stumps, witha piece of the Adveolar process with great success, which was‘unsucc‘es‘sfu‘lly attexnpetd
on several occasions previously. I also saw him- operateon‘ others, and from the ‘knowledge of
Anatomy, which I found him possess, I consider him pre-eminently entitledto the first rank amongst
dental, Surgeons.
WM. MORTON, MD.
Member of the Royal College of
Surgeons, M.M.B.V.
Ekobt. J ordain, Esq.
May 4th, 1858.‘
Mr. lordain has requested me to testify to his skill in Dental:Bm-gery, which I have great P106811”
in doing, having had ample opportunity of seeing his practice. He removed a stump from the lower
jaw of alady, whose lower jaw had been fractured by some person‘ in Melbourne, the stump being
mpacted between the two ends of the jaw, rendered the operation peculiarly diﬂicult.
W. LINDESAY RICHARDSON
/ MID. Edin.
M.R.C.S.
M.M._B.V.
Webster Street,
May sth, 1858. V
-
‘ Additional Testimonials may be seen at Mr. J ordain’s Residence.
2
MR. JORDAIN’S DENTAL JOURNAL.


‘The. importance of the Teeth is such, that
they deserve our utmost attention, as well with
regard to the preservation of them, when in a
healthy state, as to the methods of curing them
when diseased. They require this attention, not
only for the preservation of themselves, as
instruments useful to the body, but also on
account of other ports with which they are con.
nected; for diseases in the Teeth are apt to
produce diseases in the neighbouring parts.not
unfrequently of serious consequences.-Hunter.
Part of the following article was written by M.
Le Drug of London, in the year 1837.
" What pity, blooming girl.
- That lips so ready for a lover,
Should not beneath their ruby casket cover
One tooth of pearl!
Butglike a rose beside the churchyard stone,
Be doomed to blush o'er many a mouldering
bone.-—More.
LOSS OF TEETH DETRIMENTAL TO
HEALTH.
In this reﬁned age, in all stages of life,ln every
grade of society, a good state of the mouth is of
the greatest importance; the Loss of Teeth not
only destroys the contour of the features, but is
highly detrimental to health.
The inconveniences attending the Loss of Teeth
are too well known to require comment; but to
those who have not experienced the comfort of
Artiﬁcial Teeth, Mr. Jordain is de-irous of
showing some of the difliculties more or less
endured by every individual without them. When
the Teeth are lost. it is-impossible to make use
of solid food and if the stomach is then loaded
~ with pieces without being masticated, the patient
is exposed to the most distressing indigestion,
the stomach loses its power of contraction, and
becomes weak in proportion as it no longer
digests ;. besides, when Teeth are gone, a great
zvncuum is left in the mouth, which occasions
ever? u uscle in the face to be destroyed, and the
wh ‘e‘ features are completely drawn from their
original position.
To insist on the importance of the Teeth,
whether in regard to the functions of digestion
and articulation, to which they are so essential‘,
or to personal appearance, in which they are so
much concerned, must appear a waste of words,
were it not obvious that there are many persons
who never give themselves the trouble to think
upon the ‘subject; who seem scarcely aware that
they possess Teeth at all. .
The next point of view in which to consider
the importance of the Teeth, is that of their
connection with the grand prerogative of man-
the gift of speech. The Teeth are absolutely
indispensable to a perfect articulation, and are
mainly concerned in the modulation of the voice.
Their preservation is, therefore, essential to all
persons, for what can be more disagreeable than
that mumbling which renders conversation a
task and robs it of half its charms.
To all public speakers, whether in the senate,
in the pulpit, at the bar. on the stage,Teeth, real
or artiﬁcial, are of the utmost importance. With-
out them the graces of eloquence are lost, and
the powers of oratory very much diminished.
A5 M1 essential Doint of beauty. the Tneth must
ever stand preeminent. No regularity of feetures
no bi-illiancy of complexion, no sparkling; eyes,
or silken hrairls of jetty hair can render that
lady beautiful, who, when she opens her lips
(though they be of coral‘, discloses a set of Teeth
irregular or discoloured. On the contrary, even
homely features and a sallow complexion are
embellished and rendered agreeable by a good
set ot 'l'eeth. A mouth large and ill formed will
pass unnoticed when it contains teeth beautifully
white and even.
In short, under every circumstance. good teeth
well kept, will prove a redeeming feature,‘ be the
others what they may. Even the sooty African
becomes an object of some interest when he
smiles and exhibits a perfect row of white teeth,
in strong relief against the ebony of his skin.
On DISEASES of the TEETH dz GUMS.
Diseases of the Teeth generally arise from the
unhealthy state of the stomach, and the Teeth.
To preserve the Teeth in their pristine state
nothing is so much needed as to keep free from
disease; not only does disease in its natural
operation infect the mouth. but also do the rem-
edies applied in order to bring the” system into
healthful being again. There is no disorderof‘.
the mouth to which we are so liable. and to which
so little attention is paid during its progress as
Tarter on the Teeth. When any quantity is
suffered to collect, the gums become swollen. red
turgid, ﬂaccid, and liable to bleed at the slightest
touch This inﬂammation produces absorption
of the alveolus, and consequently premature loss
of teeth.
The breath becomes hot and offensive; the
general health is affected as the stomach sympa-
thises with the mouth; and ulceration of the
gums invariably ensues, and if this disease is not
attended to decay of these useful ornaments of
nature. (the teeth) must he the result. Mr.
JO RDAIN will cure this and all other diseases of
the teeth and gums.
DECAYE D TEETH.
He who pays no attention to his Teeth, by this
single neglect betrays vulgar sentimentu.—LAvA'rln.
When Decay or caries makes its appearance in
a tooth, however small the aperture may be, it
should be ﬁlled without delay ; it is a great error
to postpone this until the tooth is painful, as the
earlier the teeth is stogpecl the more successful
will be the result andt e greater number of years
will the tooth be preserved. The progress of the
decay is entirely arrested aud_the tooth saved by
stopping the hollow with a preparation which
excludes the air, and prevents foulnsss,ur the
pain and irritation occasioned by food lodging
in it.
There is more science required in ﬁlling a
Tooth than any other operation, yet properly
ﬁlled will last from 10 to 20 years. “ *
3
MR.‘JORII)AIN’S DENTAL JOURNAL.


REMARKS ON TOOTHACHE WORTH
KNOWING.
’l‘he,causes of this disease are numerous and
aytnongy them may be mentioned scurvy. catarrh,
gout rhnimatisiu the hysterical disease dyspepsia .
and pregnancy The proximate cause, when the
disease is not purely sympathetic, is an inﬂam-
mation of the vascular membrane, which lines
th.e.cavity of the tovvth, or of the vessels which
enter at the extremity of the roots.
It is utter madness to have a tooth extracted
before you know, and know for a certainty, that
it is the cause or seat of your pain.
Such is the dread in which this complaint is
held, that m-my unthinking people rush to a
dmggist or dentist to have he aching member
extracted. Should the operator not understand
well the diseases connected with the mouth (on
inspecting the tooth), he acts as desired, he gains
afee, the victim loses a tooth. and when too late
ﬁnds it is a rheumatic toothache, which a little
proper medical treatment would have remedied,
without having the tooth out at all; and thus
have many acted. neither wisely nor well, but
from an erroneous conviction that nothing less
than extraction would bring relief or cure.
THE USE OF MERCURY ON THE TEETH
AND GUMS.
The use of this medicine leads to some of the
most fearful disasters which can befall the dental
,n:~gtans.
The folloivin‘g*-may .111‘ read, as highly useful
observations, on Ptyalism; the "effects of.mercury
on the masticatory system : - M
As soon as the system becomes affected the
saliva is secreted in unusual quantity the gums
are sore and turgid, and the breath fetid.‘ This
is what is called a ‘state of sallvation If the
mercurial action be kept up, all these symptoms ..
will become greatly exaggerated: the saliva f‘
pours from {he mouth incessantly; the gums
swell to theft p of the Teeth; the Teeth them-
selves are loosened by athickening of the alveolar
periosteum and rendered so extremely tender
that mastication becomes extremely painful.
One of the most remarkable facts connected with ‘-
the exlcibition of mercury is, that in some 5
constitutions a single dose will produce decisive,’-'?
although mild, symptoms of salivation. MR.‘
JORDAIN has aremedy which will counteract
‘the effects’ produced bythis deadly medicine.
and cause the gums to become healthy in a very
short space of time. Loose Teeth from the same.
cause made firm, by the same treatment. V
CHILDREN'S TEETH.
Almost every one is aware that, from about the
age of six or eight years children begin to lose
their temporary and acquire their permanent
teeth.
There is a veer xmroantrr period as to its
consequences with the after part of life, and
parents can scarcely perform a greater service to
the persons of their children, than by having
their teeth frequently inspected, in order to
correct, WHILST rosunna, any irregularity of
formation.
TIODOLOREUX.
This complaint, or, as it is more properly
called, Neuralgia. is a painful affection of one or
more nerves 00-curing in some particular habits
but more generally arising from cold in a carious
tooth. The pain attending the disease is. at
times, most excruciating, causing, at the moment
great irritability of mind and body. It comes on
with a. sudden and shooting pain, and whichas
suddenly subsides, to come on again with greater
force. All those who may be so aﬁiicted consult
MR. J ORDAIN. -
ADVICE TO THOSE WHO WILL TAKE IT.
Persons with decayed teeth should never drink
anything too hot or too cold, as either will attack
the nerves and bring on toothache.
To prevent the formation of tartar, rub the
teeth on going to bed, and also the ﬂrst thing in
morning. Pvy particular attention to the
stomach, and when-you ﬁnd the $O3BllB furred,
tahe some properpmediciggefw i —. 4
And lastly be it obferved, that the future per~
faction of the teeth depend upon the attention
bestowed upon them in youth. Parents canggt
strongly impressed of the importanc . 1’
use advice; nor can youth be too frequently
reminded of any carelessness or neglect tto
themselves. V »
’ L SUCH IS THE ADVICE or‘
. - ,J'OfR.ID.AIIN',
, , ,S_urgeon'Dentist,&c.,'&c., p _
.103, COLLINS STREET,‘**‘;«
1" , ‘ MELBOURNE. ‘ ’ -%»
In conclusion, Mr. J ordain begs to inform the Public that he has been
in constant practise for 14 years, in England, Ireland, and Scotland, as Well as
the Australian Colonies_, during which period ﬁve years has been devoted in
studying the Dental Diseases of this climate, which will be explained in the
next number. V . Q '
Mr. J ORDAIN’S Fee§"f are within the reach of all
classes. No Charge for gdviee.
4
MR. JORDAIN’S DENTAL JOURNAL.
Abbott 8: 00., Printers, Mulbu’lime,Lßaeo‘hworth an7<7l7Yachandandah.
