



r 5 ?/' syi
# /7L
J
JOSIAH WEDGWOOD
ON THE
CLAY OF SYDNEY COVE,
BY
FREDERICK RATHBONE.


Edward Ford, M.D.


JOSIAH WEDGWOOD
ON THE
CLAY OF SYDNEY COVE.
IOTiHE illustration above is a facsimile of a very beautiful
llli Bil Wedgwood medallion, presented to the Cook Museum,
Sydney, by Richard and George Tangye. The subject
is an allegory of “ Hope addressing Peace, Art, and Labour,”
modelled, in 1789, by Webber, one of Wedgwood’s celebrated
designers. The medallion has the words “Etruria, 1789,” with the
inscription on the reverse.
The clay from which the medallion was made was sent home
from Botany Bay by Sir Joseph Banks, who obtained it during his
(H { ' M/) . A/\ •'.
s\v tLfclt £; .. WT&4J) 0, UtV
• ■ .T. • *** ...IF
■P ■ 16. -
4( ¥ *
cUr P' X*


examination of the country, as Naturalist to the expedition commanded
by Captain Cook. The material appears to be similar in quality to
the well known “black basaltes ” in which much of Wedgwood’s fine
art work was produced. The clay in question would seem to be of
a more dense texture than the basaltes, for every line of the relief
is as sharp as if struck from a die. Black in colour, with a slight
tint of brown, probably from the presence of iron.
Wedgwood’s account of his experiments is buried in the
Transactions of the Royal Society of Arts Volume for i79°-
It occupies fifteen pages in the Journal, and is probably now
first extracted for the consideration of Australian readers. The
experiments made by the great potter and chemist" at that early
date should be of interest, and show that the clay of the district
is worth examining, and may prove a source of future wealth
to the Colony, the material for art work, and an important article
of commerce.
The extract is taken from Sir Joseph Banks’ own copy, still
bearing his book stamp, a facsimile of his signature, “Jos. Banks.”
It is in every way a most complete and exhaustive narrative of
Wedgwood’s labours. This alone would show his careful attention
♦ Professor Church in his “English Earthenware,” 1884, makes the following statements, page 78 :
“The notion which has been industriously spread by his biographers, that Wedgwood was a good chemist,
and that he applied his knowledge of chemistry in the improvement of his wares is not correct, * * * *
The trial of recipes (for bodies, colours, and glazes) gathered from all quarters, and repeated modifications
of the materials and proportions, constituted Wedgwood’s experimental work.” It would seem to any
biographer who is continually meeting with evidence of Wedgwood’s skill and devotion to the science
nearly all his busy life, that the above criticism is not borne out by facts. The opinion of the writer,
who is an admirer of Wedgwood but knows nothing of chemistry, is that this one single paper is a
sufficient answer. That the universal tribute given to Wedgwood, by all his contemporaries, as one of
the leading scientific men of his time is more likely to be correct. —F. R,


to details, illustrating the saying that “ Genius is but an unlimited
capacity for taking pains.”
This medallion was afterwards copied and altered about 1796,
in the French porcelain manufactory of Sevres. The figure of Hope
was removed, and another substituted—a female holding in her
hand a cap of Liberty; a pedestal was also introduced into the
composition, bearing the French shield of three fleur-de-lis.
Dr. Erasmus Darwin, Wedgwood’s friend, in “ The Botanic
Garden,” says— y
“And pleased on Wedgwood ray your partial smile,
A new Etruria decks Britannia’s isle.
Charm’d by your touch, the flint liquescent pours
Through finer sieves, and falls in whiter showers;
Charm’d by your touch, the kneady clay refines,
The biscuit hardens, the enamel shines;
Each nicer mould a softer feature drinks,
The bold cameo speaks, the soft intaglio thinks.
* * * * *
Or with fair Hope the brightening scenes improve,
And cheer the dreary wastes at Sydney-Cove;
Or bid mortality rejoice and mourn
O’er the fine forms on Portland’s mystic urn.” -
To this poem Darwin puts a note to say he “ alluded to a
cameo of Hope, attended by Peace, Art, and Labour, which was
made of clay brought from Botany Bay, to show the inhabitants
what their materials would do to encourage their industry.”
X-1/Vu ihA-f jl 0 /Wv/tVVWV
tr" hiUksV)
1 ; X,


From Philosophical Transactions of the ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON.
Vol. LXXX., for the year 1790.
XVII. On the Analysis of a Mineral Substance from New South Wales. In a
Letter from Josiah Wedgwood, Esq., F.R.S. and A.S., to Sir Joseph
Banks, Bart., P.R.S. Read April 15th, 17go.
ETRURIA,
March 12th , 17 go.
Dear Sir,
I have the pleasure of acquainting you that the clay from Sydney Cove,
which you did me the honour of submitting to my examination, is an excellent
material for pottery, and may certainly be made the basis of a valuable manufacture
for our infant colony there. Of the species of ware which may be produced from
it, you will have some idea from the medallions I have sent for your inspection.
The other mineral, which you favored me with a specimen of, seems to me to
contain one substance hitherto unknown, and another not known in the state of
purity in which it is here found. I shall, therefore, take the liberty of stating, as
concisely as I can, the principal results of the experiments that have been made
upon it by myself and my assistant, Mr. Chisholm ; submitting it to your judgment
whether any of them be of importance enough to be laid before the Royal
Society.
I have the honour to be, &c.,
JOS. WEDGWOOD.


ANALYTICAL EXPERIMENTS ON A MINERAL FROM
SYDNEY COVE, IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
This mineral is a mixture of fine white sand, a soft white
earth, some colourless micaceous particles, and a few black ones,
resembling black mica or blacklead; partly loose or detached from
one another, and partly cohering together in little friable lumps.
None of these substances seem to be at all acted upon by the
nitrous acid, concentrated or diluted; nor by oil of vitriol diluted
with about equal its measure of water; in the cold, or in a boiling
heat; the mineral remained unaltered in its appearance, and the acids
had extracted nothing from it that could be precipitated by alkali.
Oil of vitriol boiled upon the mineral to dryness, as in the process
of making alum from clay, produced no apparent change in it; but
a lixivium made from this dry mass with water, on being saturated
with alkali, became somewhat turbid, and deposited, exceeding slowly,
a white earth in a gelatinous state, too small in quantity for any
particular examination ; but which, from its aspect, from the manner
in which it was obtained, and from the taste of the lixivium before
the addition of the alkali, was judged to be the aluminous earth.
The marine acid, during digestion, seemed to have as little
action as the other two; but on pouring in some water, with a view
only to dilute and wash out the remaining part of the acid, a re-
markable difference presented itself; the liquor became instantly white


as milk, with a fine white curdly substance intermixed; the strong
acid having extracted something which the simple dilution with water
precipitated.
The white matter being washed off, more spirit of salt was added
to the remainder, and the digestion repeated, with a long tube inserted
into the mouth of the glass, so as nearly to prevent evaporation. The
acid, when cold and settled fine, was poured off clear; and on diluting
it with water, the same milky appearance was produced as at first.
The digestion was repeated several times successively, with fresh
quantities of the acid, till no rnilkiness appeared on dilution. The
quantity of mineral employed was twenty-four grains; and the resi-
duum after the operations, washed and dried, weighed somewhat more
than nineteen grains; so that about one-fifth of it had been dissolved.
In some parcels of the mineral, taken up promiscuously, the proportion
of soluble matter was much less, and in none greater. It is only
the white part, and only a portion of this, that the acid appears to
act upon; the white sand, much of the white soft earth, and all the
black particles, remain unaltered.
To try whether this tedious process of solution could be expedited
by triture or calcination, some of the mineral was rubbed in a mortar;
and in doing this, it appeared pretty remarkable, that though the
black part bore but an inconsiderable proportion to the rest, yet the
whiteness of the other was soon covered and suppressed by it, the
whole becoming an uniformly black, shining, soft, unctuous mass, like
blacklead rubbed in the same manner; with a few gritty particles
perceptible on pressing hard with the pestle. A pennyweight of this
mixt, spread thin on the bottom of a porcelain vessel, was calcined


about an hour, with a fire between thirty and forty degrees;* it
became of an uniform, dull, white, or grey colour, excepting a very
few, and very small, sparkling, black particles, suspected to be those
which had eluded the action of the pestle; it lost in weight six
grains, or one-fourth.
The mineral thus ground and calcined, was found to be just
as difficult of solution as in its crude state; with this additional
disadvantage, that the undissolved fine particles are indisposed to
settle from the liquor.
In all the experiments of dissolution, as often as the heat was
at or near the boiling point of the acid, frequent and pretty singular
bursts or explosions happened, though the matter lay very thin in
a broad-bottomed glass. They were sometimes so considerable as
to throw off a porcelain cup with which the glass was covered, and
once to shatter the glass in pieces. In a heat a little below this,
the extraction seemed to be equally complete, though more slow;
but a heat a little below that in which wax melts, or below 140
degrees of Fahrenheit’s thermometer, appeared insufficient.
To determine the degree of dilution necessary for the precipita-
tion of the dissolved substance, and whether the precipitation by
water be total, a measure of the solution was poured into a large
glass, and the same measure of water added repeatedly. The third
addition of water occasioned a slight milkiness, which increased more
and more to the sixth. The liquor being thus filtered off, another
measure of water produced a little fresh milkiness; and an eighth
* By degrees of fire, or of the heat above ignition, I mean those of my thermometer, and some
idea may be formed of their value, by recollecting that they commence at visible redness ; and that the
extreme heat of a good air furnace, of the common construction, is x6o°, or a little more.


rather increased it, a ninth and a tenth had no effect. The liquor
being now again passed through a filter, solution of salt of tartar did
not in the least alter its transparency, so that after the solution had
been diluted with eight or nines times its measure of water, there is
nothing left in it that alkali can precipitate.
From the manner in which the solution is necessarily prepared,
it cannot but contain a great redundance of acid; for the small quantity
of acid, sufficient for holding the soluble part suspended, would be
soaked up or entangled by the undissolved part, so as scarcely to
admit of any being poured off; and it cannot be diluted, or washed
out, but by the strong acid itself. The solution with which the above
experiment was made was reckoned to have only about six grains of
the soluble matter to three ounces of spirit of salt, having been
prepared by digesting that quantity of the spirit by half an ounce
at a time on thirty grains of the crude mineral.
A saturated solution was obtained by digesting, in a small portion
of the solutions thus prepared, the precipitate thrown down by water
from the larger portions till the acid would take up no more. A
solution thus saturated cannot bear the smallest quantity of water,
a single drop on the first contact producing a milky circle round it.
Examination of the above Substance , Extracted from the
Mineral by Marine Acid , and Precipitated by Water.
This substance, washed and dried, is indissoluble in water, as
indeed might be expected from the manner of its preparation.


Nor is it acted upon by the nitrous or vitriolic acids concentrated
or diluted, cold or hot; nor by alkaline solutions, mild or caustic, of
the volatile or fixed kind.
It is dissolved by strong marine acid, but not without the assist-
ance of the same degree of heat that is necessary for its extraction
from the mineral. From this solution it is precipitated by water;
and after repeated dissolutions and precipitations, it appears to have
suffered no decomposition or change.
Spirit of nitre added to the saturated solution, makes no pre-
cipitation ; and if the quantity of nitrous acid exceeds, or at least
does not fall much short of that of marine acid in the solution, the
mixture suffers no precipitation from water. Nor does any pre-
cipation happen, though the nitrous spirit be previously mixed with
even a large quantity of water, provided the quantity of solution
added to it does not exceed that of the nitrous spirit in the mixture.
The appropriate menstruum for this substance (that is, for keeping
it in a state of dilute solution) appears, therefore, to be aqua regia;
and the due proportions of the two acids, of any given strength,
might be determined, if necessary, with greater accuracy and facility
for this than for any other body I know of; because if there be even
a very minute surplus of marine acid in the solution, that surplus will
instantly betray itself on dropping a little into water, all that was dis-
solved by it, and no more, being precipitated by the water. It may
be observed, however, that where an addition of nitrous acid is used,
a saturated solution cannot be obtained (unless by subsequent evapora-
tion), the same quantity of marine acid being necessary with as without
that addition; the change, or modification, which the nitrous acid


produces in the marine, serves, in the present instance, not for effecting
the solution, as in the case of gold and some other metals, but merely
for enabling it to bear water without depositing its contents.
Oil of vitriol, dropped into the saturated marine solution, occasions
no change till its quantity comes to be about equal to that of the
solution; a considerable effervescence and heat are then produced,
the liquor becomes milky, and the marine acid is extricated in its
usual white fumes. The mixture, heated nearly to boiling, becomes
transparent, and afterwards continues so in the cold. This vitriolic
solution is precipitated by water, and the precipitate is re-dissolved
by marine acid.
The saturated marine solution is indisposed to crystallize. By
continued evaporation in gentle heat, it becomes thick and butyraceous,
and in this state it soon liquefies again on exposure to the air.
The butyraceous mass, in color whitish or pale yellow, is not corrosive,
like the similar preparations made from some metallic bodies; nor
is it more pungent in taste, but rather less so than the combination
of the same acid with calcareous earth. In a heat, increased nearly
to ignition, the acid is disengaged, and rises in white fumes, which,
received in a cold phial, condense into colourless drops, without
appearance of sublimate. From the remaining white mass, spirit
of nitre extracts so little as to exhibit only a slight milkiness on
adding alkali; a proof that nearly all the marine acid had been
repelled, for while that acid remains the whole is dissoluble by
the nitrous.
The substance in question is not precipitated by Prussian lixivium.
A drop or two of the lixivium do indeed occasion a little white or


bluish white precipitation in the saturated marine solution; but in
the more dilute no turbidness appears till the quantity of lixivium
is such as to produce that effect by its mere water; and when the
precipitate has at length been formed, it re-dissolves in marine acid
as easily as that made by water; whereas the precipitates resulting
from the union of the Prussian matter are not acted upon by acids till
that matter has been extracted from them by an alkali. For further
satisfaction in this important point, the experiment was repeated with
a solution in aqua regia. Here the Prussian lixivium, in whatever
quantity it was added, occasioned no precipitation at all (only the
usual bluishness, arising from the iron always found in the common
acids); and pure alkali, added afterwards, precipitated the original
white substance unchanged.
The following experiments of precipitation by alkalies were made
with the marine solution, before the effect of an addition of nitrous
acid had been discovered; and they were made with so much care
and attention, that it was not thought necessary to repeat them
afterwards. To obviate, as much as possible, the equivocal results
that might arise from water contained in the precipitants, the different
alkalies were applied in the,dryest state I could reduce them to, viz.,
pure salt of tartar , kept for some time in a heat just below redness;
crystals of marine alkali , melted and dried in the same manner;
volatile alkali in crystals, a little surplus acid being, in this instance,
previously added to the solution, to counteract the water of crystal-
ization in the alkali; salt of tartar causticated by quicklime, and hastily
evaporated to dryness; the marine alkali causticated in like manner;
and the vapour of caustic volatile alkali arising with a very gentle


heat from a retort into a phial containing the solution. All these
alkalies occasioned copious precipitations. All the precipitates, after
washing and drying, were found to re-dissolve in marine acid ; and
from all these solutions the original substance was precipitated un-
altered on diluting them with water.
In strong fire, from 142 to 156 degrees, this substance discovers
a much greater fusibility than any of the known simple earths. In
a small vessel, made of tobacco pipe clay, it melted and glazed the
bottom; and on a bed of powdered flint, pressed smooth in the man-
ner of a cupel, it did the same. Magnesia, or chalk, would indeed
vitrify in the clay vessel, but on flint no one of the known earths
shows any tendency to vitrification in that heat.* In a cavity scooped
in a lump of chalk, this substance, in the heat above mentioned, ran
into a small round bead, smooth, whitish and opaque, not in the least
adhering to the calcareous mass. On a bed of powdered quicklime
it formed a brownish scoria, which in great part had sunk into the
lime, and seemed to have united with it. On Mr. Henry’s magnesia,
uncalcined, it melted and sunk in completely, leaving only a light
brownish stain on the surface, where it had lain. On the beds of the
baroselenite and barytic quicklime, it likewise melted and sunk in,
leaving a discoloured spot behind; but whether it really united with
* It may be proper just to mention, that I find this to be a very commodious and sure method of
trying, in small, whether any given earthy body be fusible with other earths. If the body is disposed
to vitrify with any proportion of clay or flint, for instance, it will equally vitrify when a little of it is
applied, or even dusted only, on the bottom of a small cup made of clay, or on a smooth close bed of
finely powdered flint. The body, in this mode of application, seems to unite with only just so much
of the matter of the substratum as is requisite for their most perfect fusion together, and has nothing
else in contact with it, so that no deception can arise; whereas, if mixed with the same matter, there
might be no appearance of fusion, unless certain favourable proportions of the two should chance to be
hit upon ; and even then, if the quantity be small, it would not be certain but that the fusion might
have originated from the matter of the crucible.


the substrata, or only penetrated into their interstices, could not be
determined with certainty, on account of the smallness of the quantity
of the mineral I had to work upon.
On a bed of powdered charcoal, in a crucible closely luted, this
substance likewise melted; and, therefore, it may be presumed not to
have owed its fusion, in the above experiments, to the same cause to
which some of the common simple earths, in certain circumstances, owe
theirs, namely, their union with the matter of a vessel or support— that
is, with an earth or earths of a different kind from themselves; but
to possess a fusibility strictly its own, which takes place in a fire
of 150 degrees, or perhaps less.
As charcoal in fine powder assumes a kind of fluidity in the fire,
similar to that which powdered gypsum exhibits in a small heat, its
surface had changed from concave to horizontal, and the bead had
sunk to the bottom ; it was rough and black on the outside and whitish
within. On repeating the experiment, in a cavity scooped in a piece of
charcoal, the result was a blackish bead like the former, only smooth
on the outside, with something of metallic brightness, not unlike that of
black-lead. Both beads were very light, and had a considerable cavity
within. All the internal part was whitish, without the least metallic
aspect; and the external glossy blackness appeared to be only the
stain which charcoal powder communicates, in strong fire, to some
earthy bodies that have a tendency to vitrify. By boiling in con-
centrated marine acid, a part of the beads was dissolved, precipitable
as at first by water; but an accident prevented the process from
being continued sufficiently to determine whether the whole could be
dissolved or not.


By this fusibility in the fire; solubility in one only of the common
mineral acids, and parting with the acid in a heat below ignition ;
precipitability by water and non-precipitability by Prussian lixivium;
this substance is strongly discriminated from all known earths and
metallic calces; and, as it suffers no decomposition from any of the
alkalies in any of the usual modes of application, I presume it cannot
be considered as a combination of any of those earths or calces with
any of the known acids; for all the combinations of this kind would,
in one or other of the above methods of trial, have had the earth or
metal disengaged from the acid.
Whether this substance belongs to the earthy or metallic class I
cannot absolutely determine, but am inclined to refer it to the earthy,
because, though brought into perfect fusion, in contact with inflammable
matter, and in close vessels, it does not assume the appearance which
metallic bodies do in that circumstance.
Examination of the Black Particles.
These particles, which bore but a very small proportion to the
other matter, were in form of scales, very thin, and very
light. One grain weight of them, carefully picked out, exposed to a
fire which was gradually raised to about ninety degrees, and continued
in all about forty hours, in a vessel loosely covered, was almost wholly
dissipated, and what little remained was perfectly white. Marine acid
had no effect on it.
Fifteen grains of the entire mineral lost, in the same fire, three
grains. After separating from another portion of the mineral, by


washing and otherwise, a considerable quantity of the white matter,
fifteen grains of the remainder, containing of course more than its due
proportion of the black, lost five grains; so that it seems principally to
be the substance on which the blackness depends that is destroyed or
dissipated by fire. The same quantity, fifteen grains, of common
black-lead lost in the same fire above fourteen grains, the residuum
weighing less than one grain. Though no conclusion can be drawn
from these experiments respecting the comparative loss of black-lead
and the pure black matter of this mineral, on account of the hetero-
geneous parts intermixed with the latter, the colour of the residua
seems to afford a sufficient discrimination between them ; that of black-
lead being dark reddish brown, but the others purely and uniformly
white.
As this substance could not now be supposed to be either iron
mica, or the common kind of black-lead, suspicion fell upon molybdaena.
I had not, at that time, had an opportunity of procuring a specimen of
molybdaena to compare it with; but from the singular and strongly-
marked properties of the molybdaenic acid, discovered by Scheele,
it was judged that a very small quantity of it, when disengaged
from the sulphur with which it is naturally combined, would easily be
distinguishable.
HJELM’S process for disengaging the sulphur, by repeatedly
burning linseed oil upon the molybdaena in a crucible, and afterwards
abstracting successive quantities of the same oil from it in a retort, was
tried on a portion of the Sydney-Cove mineral, from which much of the
white matter had been separated as above mentioned. The black coal,
remaining in the retort, became yellow by calcination, as that of


molybdaena should do; but in this yellow powder, no vestige of
molybdaenic acid could be discovered.
Another quantity of the mineral was submitted to Scheele’s own
process, viz :—repeated abstractions of diluted nitrous acid ; but, instead
of becoming whiter every time, and at length white as chalk, which
molybdaena should do, the blackness of this matter continued unaltered
to the last.
There is one circumstance in Mr. Scheele’s experiments, which,
though omitted by those who have given abstracts of them, may
deserve, on the present occasion, to be more particularly noticed. He
reduced the molybdaena into fine powder, and poured upon it concen-
trated nitrous acid; “the mixture,” he says, “was hardly lukewarm in
the retort, when it passed all together into the recipient with great
heat; ” and it was for this reason that he afterwards used diluted acid.
Presuming that this violent action of the concentrated nitrous acid
might afford a decisive criterion of molybdaena, I had the black
residuum, after five or six abstractions of the diluted acid, ground fine
upon a levigating glass, and returned into the retort, with six times its
weight of smoking spirit of nitre. The heat was increased cautiously
far beyond lukewarm, but no commotion could be perceived, except the
the explosions already mentioned, which always took place when the
mixture was near boiling. The distillation was continued to dryness,
and repeated five times with the smoking acid; but the mineral
remained just as black as it was at first.
Now as Scheele’s molybdaena is slowly decomposed by the
diluted nitrous acid, and rapidly acted upon by the concentrated acid,


while the black part of the mineral obstinately resists both, I think we
cannot hesitate to conclude that this black substance is not Scheele’s
molybdaena. There are some other circumstances which confirm this
conclusion, although, taken singly, they would not, perhaps, be of
much weight, considering the great proportion of other matter here
mixed with the black. The principal of these circumstances are, that
it yields no flowers before a blow-pipe, and that its particles seem
to have no flexibility or elasticity, the only difficulty of reducing
it into fine powder arising from a property of another kind,
unctuosity.
The difference, above taken notice of, between this black matter
and common black-lead, consists only in the former leaving on cal-
cination a white substance, seemingly siliceous, and the latter a brown
ferrugineous one. In their aspect, unctuosity, resistance to acids,
and the volatility (in open fire) of that part in which the blackness
consists, they perfectly agree; and they appear to agree also in the
nature or constitution of this volatile part; for the Sydney-Cove
mineral, as well as black-lead, deflagrates and effervesces very strongly
with nitre, produces an hepatic impregnation on fusion with vitriolated
alkali, but none with pure alkali, and is manifestly rich in inflammable
matter, without sulphur.
It seems, therefore, that this substance is a pure species of
plumbago, or black-lead, not taken notice of by any writer I have
met with. Fourcroy, in the last edition of his Chemistry, looks upon
iron as an essential component part of black-lead, to which, accordingly,
he gives a new name expressive of that metal —carbure de fer.
Lavoisier, in his Elements of Chemistry, lately published, mentions


a cai'bure of zinc also, and says that both these carbures are called
plumbago or black-lead. The quantity of mineral I had been furnished
with was too far exhausted before I met with this observation to
admit of any further experiments, for determining the presence of
zinc in it; but those already stated, with the recollection of some
circumstances attending them, persuade me that that metallic body
has no share in its composition. Neither before the blow-pipe, nor
in calcination, was there any appearance of the peculiar flame, or
flowers, by which zinc is so strongly characterized : if any such appear-
ance had taken place, it could not have escaped notice, as some of
the calcinations were particularly attended to during the process,
though with a different view, the discovery of sulphur or arsenic.
The white matter which remains after the calcination is certainly not
calx of zinc, for it was not acted on by spirit of salt, cold or hot,
while the calces of zinc are dissolved rapidly by that acid, even in
the cold.
This was not the first experiment Wedgwood made upon clay
brought from other countries. As early as 1766 he was importing
clay from Pensacola, in the Gulf of Florida. In 1768, through
the agency of a Manchester merchant, he procured other clays
from Ayoree, “in the country of the Cherokees,” 300 miles
west of Charlestown. He was continually experimenting upon
clay, spar, and other minerals brought from Derbyshire, Cornwall,
and other districts. By such methods, he found out the best


material for the improvement of his useful and ornamental pot-
tery ; and, as his epitaph says, “ Converted a rude and inconsider-
able manufactory into an Elegant Art and an important part of
National Commerce.”
In conclusion, the writer hopes that consideration of this paper
will stimulate enquiry into the mineral wealth of the country, that
it may result in new Art productions, and that in the future
Australian Art will not be unknown to fame.
“Behind us in our path we cast
The broken potsherds of the past,
And all are ground to dust at last,
And trodden into clay!”
FREDERICK RATHBONE.
20, Alfred Place West,
South Kensington, London, S.W.


One of the first ships that returned to England took a sample
of potter’s clay out of Sydney Cove, from which Mr. Wedgwood
modelled a fine medallion, representing Hope encouraging Art
and Labour, under the influence of Peace, to pursue the employ-
ments necessary to give security and happiness to an infant
settlement. Upon which some beautiful verses were written by
the Dr. Darwin whose illustrious grandson afterwards visited the
Colony with Captain Fitzroy, for the purpose of scientifically ex-
amining the fauna of Australia. The verses, which are curiously
prophetic, run as follows: —
Where Sydney Cove her lucid bosom swells,
Courts her young navies, and the storm repels;
High on a rock amid the troubled air
Hope stood sublime, and wav’d her golden hair;
Calm’d with her rosy smile the tossing deep,
And with sweet accents charm’d the winds to sleep;
To each rich plain she stretched her snowy hand,
High-waving wood, and sea-encircled strand —
«Hear me,” she cried, “ye rising realms! record
Time’s op’ning scenes, and Truth’s unerring word—
There shall broad streets their stately walls extend,
The circus widen, and the crescent bend;
There ray’d from cities o’er the cultur’d land,
Shall bright canals, and solid roads expand.
There the proud arch, Colossus-like, bestride
Yon glittering streams, and bound the changing tide;
Embellish’d villas crown the landscape-scene,
Farms wave with gold, and orchards blush between,
There shall tall spires, and dome-capt tow’rs ascend,
And piers and quays their massy structures blend;
While with each breeze approaching vessels glide,
And northern treasures dance on every tide!”
Then ceas’d the nymph—tumultuous echoes roar,
And Joy’s loud voice was heard from shore to shore,
Her graceful steps, descending, press’d the plain.
And Peace, and Art, and Labour, join’d her train.


PRINTED BY T. H. LAKINS, EDMUND STREET, BIRMINGHAM.




i
m
&
\
I I
l
DIRECT descendant
of Josiah Wedgwood,
Geoffrey W edgwood,
and daughter Judy
study their family tree.
HOPE ATTENDED BY PEACE, ART AND LABOUR
Designed by Henry Webber, and modelled fly William Hackwood, 1789.
f Or with fair Hope the brightening scenes improve\
And cheer the dreary wastes at Sydney-cove *
Erasmus Darwin
DESIGN and also the reverse side of the
“Sydney Medallionswhich have been miss-
ing , with the exception of one , since 1789.
-p- «■
Fe«.
n T
per.
pa
pair
inj.
Mystery
of missiny
cameos
• Somewhere in Australia
there may be 199 rare collec-
tors’ “finds” unrecognised.
W'W'W'W'W W'W'W'W
THEY’RE Governor
Phillip’s cameos. Their
whereabouts is a mystery
that has baffled their
makers, the Wedgwood
family, for generations.
Hoping to solve it is Bris-
bane man Geoffrey Wedg-
wood, great-great-great-grand-
son of the master potter Josiah
Wedgwood (1730-1795), of
the Churchyard Pottery s , Bur-
slem, Staffordshire.
The mystery, he says, has
baffled his family more than
anything else which has hap-
pened in their 10 generations
of potting.
Mr. Wedgwood lives at
West End, Brisbane, where he
operates a “Wedgwood
Centre.”
He said, “Two hundred
beautiful cameos made in
England from Sydney Cove
clay —were sent to Governor
Phillip in Sydney about 1789.
They were all believed lost,
in a shipwreck, possibly.
“But a world authority'
named Harry Barnard, who,
wrote ‘Chats on Wedgwood,’
saw' one of the medallions in
Sydney in 1914.”
Harry Barnard w r rote: “The
fact that there is one remain-
ing suggests that others may
also be hidden away. Any of
the 199 would be a FIND.”
The design on the missing
cameos, or medallions, is one
of the most beautiful ever
“thrown” by Josiah Wedg-
wood I.
The cameos were made
from clay scooped from Syd-
ney Cove and sent by Sir
Joseph Banks to Wedgwood.
Geoffrey Wedgw'ood says
there are many branches of
the Wedgwood family in Aus-
tralia, but he believes his is the
only one descended directly
from “Old Josiah.” He has a
son, Peter, and daughter, Judy.
Josiah I was the 13th child
of Thomas and Mary Wedg-
wood, of the Churchyard Pot-
tery, Burslem, Staffordshire.
The exact date of his birth
is not known, but he was
christened on July 12, 1730.
Geoffrey Wedgwood said
Josiah evolved his famous
“Jasper” (blue) pottery after
10,000 trials.
In those old days Wedg-
wnod w'as the most expensive
pottery'. Plates sold at 5/- a
dozen, twice the price of other
brands of plates.
Josiah married his cousin,
Sarah Wedgw'ood. Their eld-
est daughter married Dr. R. W.
Darwin, F.R.S., and became
the mother of Charles Darw'in,
the famous scientist.
Famous work
With his wife’s fortune and
his own, Josiah moved from
the Churchyard Pottery to a
splendid new Staffordshire site.
Here, in the 17605, he
“threw s ” his choicest works of
art, with his new' partner,
Thomas Bentley, turning the
potter’s wheel.
The most famous piece of
the blue “Jasperware” is
Josiah I’s replica of “The Bar-
berini,” or Portland Vase.
Nowadays Wedgwood
makes a specialty of “build-
up” sets. Breakages may al-
ways be replaced.
Every time Geoffrey Wedg-
wood’s shop-bell rings and he
hears the words, “Can I see
Mr. Wedgwood personally,
please?” he has a stirring hope
that tissue-paper w'ill rustle
and a long-lost “Sydney
Medallion” will be produced.
“It was Josiah’s last w'ish
that they wnuld one day be
found,” he said.


