

jieuiy
ItmiOHAMItO nv II Al.'Alll




JOTTINGS & SKETCHES
(AT HOME AND ABROAD).
“THE AUSTRALIAN SILVERPEN’’
Silverpen Sketches—“A Trip to Warrnambool, Tower Hill, and
Belfast;” “Ye Chronicles of ye Rechabites;” “Victorian and
Tasmanian Dew Drops;” South Australian Preachers;” “Old
Times in Ballarat;” “Thistledown, or Jottings from My
Note Book;” “The Rainy Day, and How to Prepare
for It;” “By Road and Rail Through Victoria;”
“History of a Gold Mine,” and other papers.
SECOND ISSUE.
Belfast:
PRINTED BY H. ADAIR, ARTHUR STREET.
AUTHOR OF




LITTLE DAISY:
“ NOBODY’S LITTLE GIRL.”
CHAPTER I.
THE CHILDREN SUFFER BY THE CURSED TRAFFIC.
f’ T was only the reply of a poor, half-starved, sickly-looking
little child in one of our Australian police courts, who was
found sleeping under a bench in a rickety old shed, as the
kind-hearted sergeant of police, by direction of the magistrates,
asked her whose little girl she was ? The wee speck of humanity
looked up into the officer’s face with big wondering, lustrous
eyes, and said, “ P’ease, sir, Pm nobody’s little dirl.” “ Where
is your father, my child ?” said he. “Me doesn’t know where
papa is ; poor papa det drunk, and go away.” “ Where is your
mother, then ?” Oh ! p’ease, Mr. Peeceman —mammy ? She
sick, and naughty men put poor mammy in big hole.”
Poor little waif! Ho wonder the big salt tears chased each
other down the policeman’s face as he involuntarily took the
weeping little one up in his arms and kissed her, at the same
time asking their worships to allow him to adopt the pretty
blue-eyed little darling.
This touching incident is but one of the many, daily cropping
up at the different police courts throughout the Australias, in
connection with the drink curse, and with trumpet-sound re-
echoes in our hearts the London missionary’s prayer —God pity
the starving, homeless children of our big cities and towns who
have drunken fathers.
When the sergeant had carried the timid weeping child
outside the court, he felt anxious to know what to call her, and
said, “ What is your name, my dear ?” “Oh ! p’ease, sir, don’t
take me away —I’m only ‘ Little Daisy.’ ” “ ‘ Little Daisy,” ’
did you say, my child?” “ Yes, p’ease—mammy always tailed
me her ‘ Little Daisy.’ ”
The man was greatly affected. His whole soul was touched
with deepest sympathy, as he said, “ And you shall be my Little
Daisy in the future,” and as gently as a loving woman he carried
her in his arms to his home.
As he entered, a cleanly-dressed woman of middle age, with
sad, yet cheerful face, met him, and wonderingly enquired —


whose child he had with him ? The big, burly sergeant, who
had in his time grappled with many a strong convict prisoner,
sat down in the chair by the fire, quite overcome, and as he held
the child on his knee, he wept.
“ Come Dan,” says the good wife, “ what has touched you
so ? I have never seen thee weep since our ‘ Primrose’ died.
Cheer up, man ! Thou wilt have the little one crying too!”
The Sergeant looked from the child to his wife and from
his wife back again to the child, and said, “ Martha, my dear,
God has regarded the prayers and tears of His servants, and
has this day sent us a ‘ Little Daisy’ in return for our * Little
Primrose’ He took to Himself two years ago. Did I not often
tell thee, lass, He was too wise to err and too good to be unkind.
Here, mother, take her, and train her for God, as thee did ‘ our
lost one.’ ”
The good wife took the child from her husband’s arms,
and with weeping eyes and uplifted heart to Heaven, she kissed
the little waif; then turning to her husband, she only said,
“ God bless thee, Dan, and God bless the child !”
CHAPTER 11.
It took but a few days in that once quiet and lonely, but
now cheerful and jo\ous home, to tidy up the little waif.
The frocks, pinafores, shoes, stockings, and toys of the lost
“ Primrose” seemed to just fit the adopted “ Little Daisy
so great was the change in the child’s appearance, that even the
kind second mother would look at “ Daisy” again and again,
and wonder was this picture of prettiness sitting in her rocking
chair by the cosy fire, the dirty, ill-clad, half-starved street
child her husband had picked up at the police court and brought
home so recently to brighten her dark days and cheerless nights.
For ten happy months little “Daisy” was the light of the
kind sergeant’s home, but the former exposure to cold and wet,
and the lying on damp shavings in an old workshop—where she
had ci’ept in from the wintry blasts on the cold frosty nights—
told on the weak little frame of the now comfortable, but once
wee ragged child, and on the policeman’s return off his beat
one beautiful moonlight night, the pale face and anxious look
of his wife told him plainly enough that something was wrong.
“Daisy is ill, Dan,” she said, “and several times to-night,
while I sat by her little bed, she seemed to be fearful lest some
imaginary person was going to take her away from us.”
The big tender-hearted sergeant followed his wife into
Daisy’s little room. Everything was still; no sounds were
heard, save the ticking of the clock and the heavy breathing of
the child.
The big blue eyes looked lovingly at the weeping pair—


the kind couple who had rescued her from the cold charity of
the world—and she said, “Don’t cly for Daisy—me soon be
better dain —Dod make Daisy well.”
“ Daisy, my dear,” said the sergeant, “ Do you know me ?”
“ Know 00, did oo say ? Yes, Daisy knows oo—oo are
Daisy’s dood peeceman —Daisy loves oo.”
The tears rolled down the cheeks of the sergeant and his
wife, and they wept over the little cot so soon, alas ! to be
empty.
For days the child lingered between life and death, and
each day she became, if possible, more dear to the worthy
couple. But the end came at last, and as it drew near gleams
of the Holy place seemed to peep out of the over-shadowing
gloom.
The dying child would often say, “ Desus loves oo; Desus
loves Daisy; don’t cly, I’m do-ing to see Primrose, and tell her
about my dood peeceman, and oo too,” pointing to the good
wife.
CHAPTER 111.
It was just such cold bitter weather as the first night Little
Daisy was housed with them, when the anxious watchers who
had been sitting by the little cot saw the tiny lips move, and
stooping down, the sergeant heard the child say, “ Dood-bye,
I’ll see Primrose soon,” and that very night the “ Daisy” and
the “ Primrose” met each other in the glory-land, and the
following afternoon the little grave in the cemetery was re-
opened and the two little coffins were laid side by side till the
morning of the resurrection.
As the stranger wends his way along the winding paths of
the B Cemetery he may see in the Wesleyan portion a tiny
“ in memoriam” tablet, with the following inscribed thereon
“ Our Primrose and our Daisy , both transplanted into the garden
of the Loving Father.'”


THISTLEDOWN:
OR JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK
A CHINESE PREACHER.
»S I made mj way up Bridge Street, Ballarat East, a few
days ago, I met two well-dressed Chinese. In the per-
son of one of them I recognised the Rev. Ah You,
Presbyterian missionary, whom I had previously interviewed
away up in the north-eastern portion of Victoria, among the
mountains.
Mr. Ah You and his friend informed me that they were
just then coming from the Benevolent Asylum, where they had
been reading, singing, and praying with their countrymen.
I am sure The Star readers will be pleased and amused as
well, to read a sermon of the missionary’s taken down by me as
delivered by Ah You at one of the Chinese camps.
Talk about The Hon. J. L. Dow, M.P.’s, Backwoodsman’s
Leadsville Sermon—it is not a patch on the following, but I will
leave my readers to judge.
“ The Story op the Prodigal Son”
(As preached by the Rev. Ah You, Presbyterian Missionary.)
My fiends—One man —farmer —he hab two sons. Big son,
he farmer. Beetle son, him no good; he no work; he too muchee
lazy. He say to him fader, “ Fader, gib me my share of money.
Igo away.” Him fadder—him welly good fader —he no doss ;
he no angly. He say, “ All-li, my son, me gib you your share.”
And he gib him money in big purse.
The bad son, after he got him money, he stay two, tlee
weeks longer. Then he go away —a long way.
After he go away he no cly ; he dance and shout for iov :
plenty money.
He soon meet too many good fiends, who help him spend’em
money. When he hab plenty money, all a same plenty fiends;
dey come see him, welly often, get welly good dinner, welly good
chow-chow, welly good dlink, welly good bacco, welly good sing
song, welly good eberyting.
By-em-bye money no more; no more good fiends; all go
way ; him no good now ; he poor Chinaman ; after fiends go way
he find tucker too dear; no more eatem, no more bacco, no more


new clothes. Den he get welly solly, he get angly ; him say I
hungly ;I no chow-chow; what for all my good fiends shun me ?
Ah, yes! I know lam poor Chinaman; no money, dat’s it. Den
he tink to himself, me must work or me starve.
Him go out to seek for work along Melbourne road after
long time, with sore foot and sore heart. Him find one master,
but him Bungaree farmer say, I no want anyone to work to-day;
but he (good Ilishman) pity poor Chinaman, and he say, “ You
may go look after pig, if you like.”
Master he no ask him he hungly, no ask him hab dinner ;
and he (poor starving Chinaman), he cly welly much. Him go
out back yard, and look at pig, and see pig eat pea. Him like
eat pea, but him aflaid of master getting angly.
Him den go to master, and him say, Please master, I
hungly; me likee dinner.” Master he tink he too much
gammon ; too much all-a-same rogue; he angly. Him say,
“ You want dinner ? You no work; you go get dinner along a
pig ; you eat him pea out of trough.”
Now he welly welly solly, and him cly welly much. No
more money; no more dinner; no more pea —pig eatem all.
Den him sit down, and tink of him fader, and say to himself
(insidel —“ O, me welly bad boy; me spend my fader’s money;
me break my fader’s good heart; me like to die.” But den he
say, “ what for I die ? My fader, he hab plenty workmen, good
tucker, good clothes, good boots, good eberyting. Better me go
back quick. Me be all a same workman —“ and he go, fi, fi.”
Him fader no see him so long time. He too much solly,
him flet. He tink p’raps my son he die—p’raps he neber come
back again. Poor fader ; he so solly ;he cly, and ebery day he
go look see, from de door, hoping to see him son come back
ober de hill.
One day him son come back. He see him fader long way
off. Fader see him long way off too. When fader see him,
him run quick (fi, fi), and hold him neck and kees him, and cly
welly much with joy ; him heart glad.
Son say, “ Oh, fader, I hab been welly bad to you, welly
bad boy to God. Me lose your money. Me all welly bad ;me
play fan tan ; me gamble ; me cheat; me steal; me do all bad
tings. You no more call me son ; call me your workman.”
Dey good loving fader him smile while him cly, and him say,
“ All-li, my son ; me no more solly you lose my money, since
dat has made you tink of your old fader. Now you come back
me welly glad. You all-ee same die ; you lib again.”
Fader den gib him ling and put it on him finger, change
him clothes, gib him good shoe. Him so glad. Him callem
workmen ; tell ’em kill ’em fat calf, kill ’em fat lamb, get him
good dinner, call all ’em servants togedder, him so glad him
come back again.


Now him big son farmer come home from field, and listen
outside. He hear inside too muchee noise, he don’t know
what’s de matter. He call one workman out, and ask him
what’s de matter inside. Him say—“ Sir, your young blodder,
he come back. Your old fader, he so glad, he want to kill ’em
fat calf, kill ’em fat lamb, gib him good dinner; him welly
hungly and sick.”
Now, when big son hear this, him welly doss, him talk no
more, him sulk. By-em bye he say, “No good man, my young
blodder, he welly bad; he go away, spend him fader’s money in
living bad life; he almost break him good fader’s heart; den,
when he comes back, fader makes him good dinner, and too
muchee glad. Ino likee this—too muchee kind heart.”
Bey fader hear him all-a-same talk, and him come out. He
see him big son, whom he loves, standing sulking. He say to
him—“ You no doss my good son; your blodder, him come
home again. Him all-a-same die; him lib again. Now, me
always love him when him away; now he come back, me want
him get good dinner, good clothes, good eberyting. Me welly
glad.”
Big son, him still welly doss. Him say—“ My fader, me
lib ebery day along-a-you. Me no spend your money along bad
people ; me no gamble ; me no play fan-tan. You no more good
heart to me.”
Fader say—“ Oh, my dear son. You always welly good
boy. Me watch you ebery day, and love you welly much. Me
always good heart to you. Come, now, be no more doss.
Come inside and see your long lost blodder and kees him. He,
poor boy, welly solly. He welly hungly. Him no more go
away. Me want you all togedder to be happy. Me welly glad.”
Then, big blodder, he take him fader’s hand, and go in
and see him blodder and kees him, and dey be all welly happy.
Application.
Dey great God who lib’s above, He all-a-same dat fader.
Ebery one of you, Him sons, who go away and leave Him. He
good fader—welly solly. Ebery day He look see His sons come
back ; dey stray far away long time—welly bad boys. By-um-
bye He see you come over hill—Oh, Him so glad. He put Him
hand to Him head to shade Him old eyes. He look once, twice,
tlee times; He shout out—“ It is he, it is he, it is my son.” He
throw away him stick ; He run an’ catch him neck, an’ kees him.
He get him new clothes, new shoes ; put ling on him finger ;
bring him into house, and say to ebery one, My son lost, My son
found. Den they be all welly glad, and have joy togedder; and
all the workmen sing round the fader and sons, hi-ge-lah, hi-
ge-lah. The dead alive, the lost found. Amen.


THISTLEDOWN :
OR JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK.
The Deink Fiend : oe, Please, Don’t Take Mammy Away.
SOW is it that the pleadings of a little child touch so keenly
the tenderest feelings of some natures, and open the
flood-gates of sympathy in the hardest hearts ?
I have often found big, burly fellows, whose fists would
knock an ox down, unconsciously shedding tears when reading
a touching story of some poor child’s infantile sorrows, or look-
ing on the tearful, eloquent pleadings visible in the face of a
child street beggar.
After all said and done, we are, every one of us, strange
combinations of good and evil, sympathy and callousness. Let
us hope, however, that the good outweighs the bad in our
individual cases.
Years ago, before Melbourne, Victoria, had taken its place
among the cities of the world as an important location, when
Colliugwood Flat was but sparsely populated, and big ruts along
the route were the rendezvous at night as sleeping places for
the vagrant loafers who then, as now, infested the city—in
those early days it was not an unusual sight to see drunkards
of both sexes going through the street in charge of Policeman
X and XX, screaming, kicking, and cursing as only mad drunk
people can.
It was a scene of this kind, leaving out the three last named
vices, that attracted my attention one Saturday afternoon, as
my old friend Philip Price and I were out for a stroll, and
caused me on returning to my lodgings, the “ Wesleyan Home,”
to jot down the particulars in my diary for future use. Poor
Philip Price, good old man, wept like a child as he looked on,
and for many a day after he would refer to the subject as one
of the most painful he had ever witnessed in his long life.
The place was the corner of Little Collins Street, just by
the old Police Court, where John Thomas Smith, ex-publican,
presided as chief magistrate: the time, about midday: the
season, when cooling drinks were in demand, and “ brickfielders”
a daily luxury (?) for a week or more at a stretch.
After all, it was only a woman who was in the clutches of


the police ; and drunk enough she seemingly was. One of the
onlookers said she had been “ out in the sun ” and got sunstruck
—a simile often used in those days for drunkenness.
A crowd had gathered round the policemen and their
charge, and, strange to say, a good deal more than usual of
sympathy was evinced for the poor unfortunate female. A.s I
pushed aside one or two of the onlookers to get a good look at
the face of the drunk woman, I was somewhat startled in recog-
nising her as a saloon passenger, who had landed in Victoria
some years previous from the good ship “ Phoenix,” in which I
had journeyed to the colony.
But what attracted me most was a pretty dark-eyed child,
who, clinging to the drunk woman’s skirts, kept crying and
sobbing, as she pleaded with the constables: “ Please, don't take
mammy away.”
The cries of the child and the remarks of the passing crowd
seemed for a moment to sober the inebriate, for suddenly she
twisted her head round, and, with a loud scream, fell as if dead
on the pavement.
I have heard of rough, unfeeling policemen —fellows who
seemed to have no natural feeling in them, who cared not for
tears or cries, but took any demonstration of this kind as a
matter of course.
The two, however, whose duty called them at this time to
interfere were not of that class. Kindly and tenderly they
stooped down, gently raised the poor inebriate, and, amid the
sobs of the child and the sympathetic utterances of the crowd,
carried their charge through the gateway leading to the watch-
house cells.
A doctor was quickly sent for, and, when he had diagnosed
the case, a cab was called, and poor Mrs. R. was conveyed to
the hospital, where for four long weary months she lay a
blighted being, at times seemingly never to come out again alive.
But good attendance and medical science, with God’s blessing,
conquered; and when she left the building she did so a new
woman in Christ Jesus. But lam anticipating my story.
As the cab drove away with its load to the hospital, the
child stood crying her one and only plea: “ Don’t take mammy
away,” while the constables inquired of the inspector what they
should do with her ? “ Oh, bring her up to-morrow as a ne-
glected child, and let her be sent to the schools,” he replied.
“ In the meantime, let her stay with the female searcher for
the night.”
And this really did take place. “ Little Bess,” the loved
and only child of the poor drunken but educated mother, was
sent weeping from the court to the “ schools,” where we will
leave her for the present, learning to forget both father and
mother, and for a long time after only known as a child of the
State.


“ But where was the father all this time ? ” asks somebody.
Oh, my masters, ’tis a sad, sad tale to relate, so we will let the
now resurrectionised mother tell her own story, as we are seated
in her neat cottage home, while “ Little Bess,” now a fine young
woman, is getting the tea-table laid, and the smile of a soon-to-
be husband, sitting closely by, lightens up her young life.
A Sad Story.
“ I don’t mind telling you, Mr. Silverpen, the sad story of
my life. It is just possible the relation may be a warning to
my own sex to ‘ beware of strong drink; ’ and if some erring
sister be but warned in time, then I shall be amply repaid.
“ Seven years before my admission to the hospital, of which
you are aware, my William held a leading position in one of the
best business houses in Melbourne. ’Twas there I first saw him.
I had heard him talked about as a staunch total abstainer and
Good Templar. He soon became on visiting terms with my
father’s family, and in a few months the betrothed of myself,
Ethel E., then the pride of my mother, and the loved child of
my fond father.
“ It was at a family ‘ social ’ in our own home that he was
first induced to take only a single glass of light wine.
“ But that glass decided both his own and his betrothed’s
fate. He did not again refuse. JSTight after night we sipped
the iced nectar out of the same goblet, till at last we found it
difficult indeed to pass an evening pleasantly away without
having recourse to the wine cup.
O, what a devil thou art,
Thou insidious manslayer, drink !
“We were married. Our wedding day was one of gaiety
and pleasure. The drink passed round, and all was happiness
and good fellowship, both William and myself vieing with each
other as to who could make our guests most happy.
“Our new home -Was well furnished. Wedding presents
filled the side tables, our friends and relations in this way
showing their good wishes for our future wedded life.
“ Oh, sir, it really was a happy time. The church pew in
the little Methodist Chapel was always occupied by both William
and myself on the Sabbath day, and the members of the chuich
and congregation would often say, ‘ What a happy pair!
“ And so we were, so far as this world goes. Everything
looked prosperous, and fortune seemed to smile upon us. In
the evenings, as a seeming necessity, we always had our suppei
beer, and often a few glasses of wine after, and thought
in thus doing. This grew upon us. Our wine merchant s bill
quite surprised us the first six months ; but we did not cease
drinking the wine and beer ; and so things went on.


“ Two years after our marriage my husband was discharged
from his employment for drunkenness.
“ For whole twelvemonths he could not get a situation.
The furniture gradually disappeared in order to keep pace with
the house expenses. All the wedding presents I named to you
one by one had been either sold or pawned to get cash to pay
for the drink.
* Little Bess was born. We dearly loved our little child.
The father in his sober moments would kiss and fondle the
infant, while the big tears of remorse would roll down his
cheeks. He saw the pit into which he had fallen, and dragged
us after him, but he seemed unable to extricate himself.
“ But row the demon appetite mastered him. He must
have drink at any price. ‘ Who cares,’ he would say, as he
swallowed glass after glass of the poison. ‘ A short life and a
merry one’ is my motto — 'begone, dull care!' And so the
months and the years rolled drearily away.
“ One morning a paragraph appeared in the Melbourne Argus,
describing the appearance of a man found drowned in the Yarra.
William had been away on the plea of looking for work for a
couple of days. The description of the dress tallied with that
he wore. I hastened to the morgue, and there on the cold slab
saw my husband stretched dead. This intensified my misery. I
seemed to wish to die, but could not. My child I loved, but the
drink I seemingly loved better.
“I felt forsaken by God and man. My husband dead
scorned and shunned by those who used to sing at our evening
parties, ‘ He is a jolly good fellow,’ and speak flatteringly of
our hospitality.
“ My near relations away from the colony, I drank again,
and tried to drown ray sorrow in the cup, and thus sank lower
and still lower in the grade of human degradation. Every time
I swallowed the fiery poison, I prayed to God it would kill me,
but still I lived on. Oh, God, it was pitiful to hear my moans
and cries when sober, as I thought of the past and looked forward
to the future!
My life was gradually wasting away. I abhorred myself;
and it was while thus going about the streets * drunk,’ with my
child by my side, that I was arrested and taken to the hospital
as one dead.
“ the cry of my little child, ‘ Don't take mammy away,'
burned into my brain, and for weeks I could hear it day and
night; in fact, all through my delirium it seemed to haunt me.
But when the storm was fiercest, and my poor body torn with
agony and pain, another sound reached my ear—’twas that of
‘ mercy.'
“ A godly nurse whispered in my ear the blessed words of
Jesus: ‘ Daughter, thy sins, which were many, are all forgiven


thee.’ I kept repeating them over and over again till the light
shone in upon my soul, and I saw Jesus as my Saviour. Since
then I never doubted my acceptance, and am trusting Him
to-day.
*• I need not tell you more, sir. My great desire now is to
do good to others, and especially to my sisters who are on the
slippery paths of evil and drink, and to this end I live and will
die.”
Mrs. R.’s sad tale I have given as she told it to me, in
broken utterances, while every now and then the tears rolled
down her cheeks. Her daughter, “ Bessie,” has within the last
year married a fine young fellow, a “ Christian worker,” and is
doing well.
Little do the people with whom Mrs. E., as I have called
her, labours and associates imagine that the almost saintly face,
and silvery-haired lady, who is going about among the poor,
visiting the widows and orphans in their affliction, is the poor
drunken woman whom I have pictured going to the hospital
from the Melbourne watchhouse cell. Or the now happy wife
of the “Christian worker” and skilled mechanic —the little
“ Bessie,” who in the street and at the watchhouse on that hot
summer’s day, in the year 18 —, held on to her mother’s skirts,
crying to the policemen, “ Don't take poor mammy away."


SPEAK A KIND WOKD WHEN
YOU CAN.
SHEEE is nothing gets so near the inmost heart as a kind
word fitly spoken. I have often seen the big tear come,
the breast heave, and the whole frame tremble, when the
kindly voice of a godly man or woman spoke lovingly to hard-
ened men and women in our Australian prisons, and reminded
them of home and mother, and then talked of the loving Saviour
who had so long borne with their waywardness and sin.
“ Ah, yes ! it was that broke me down,” said a condemned
prisoner to the writer, who, with a good minister of the Austra-
lian Methodist Church, visited him in the condemned cell the
morning before his execution. That hind word brought me to
God.
Warrenpoint, that seaside town of beauty, is where I am
ruralising for a few days. Eo wonder my niece, Miss Lillie
Palmer, who is with me from the big city of London, exclaimed
a day or two ago, “ Is not this heavenly ?” as we walked along
Sea View, and gazed with wonder and astonishment on the sea-
girt shore, the little Irish mud-cabins dotted here and there over
the mountain side, the old castles and landmarks cropping up
on every hand, and the steamers ploughing their way to us noise-
lessly outwards and inwards, while on the “ O’Meath” side of
the water a panoramic view of grandeur spreads itself out unsur-
passed for beauty and loveliness.
And it is really heavenly! How I envy the dwellers in this
lovely spot during the summer months their enjoyment of all
these delightful pleasures, and call to mind my strolls along the
shore 36 years ago with Thomas Guard (the late Dr, Guard),
the afterwards greatest of America’s orators, but now gathered
to his fathers.
It was just after a delightful promenade along the esplanade
the other day that I heard the story that I am about to relate,
and it more than ever convinces me that it is . a good and a holy
thing to speak a kind word when you can.
About 26 years ago a young lad was bidding farewell to
his friends at Portadown, leaving for America. A Miss M. was
at the time one of the party. She spoke a few loving Christian
words to the lad, and, having cast the bread upon the waters,


no doubt imploring God’s blessing on the effort, the incident
nassed from her memory. Not so the young lad. Twenty-six
years after in the city of New York, America, we find the then
lad a Christian man, full of faith and good works, engaging in
all the active duties of life, in the establishment of the great
Stewart & Co. during the six days, and on the Sabbath, from
early morn till late at night, going about doing good in the
Church, Sabbath School, and other institutions in connection
with the Methodist Churches of the city.
One day in a Belfast newspaper he sees the name of one he
remembers well—the lady who spoke the kindly word of warn-
ing and advice to him 26 years before at Portadown. Acting
on the impulse of a grateful heart, he writes to Warrenpoint to
inquire if it is the same Christian lady, and, when assured that
it is, writes a letter by return, but for its length, worth publish-
ing in the Advocate . In this he states that the words then
spoken have influenced his life, and under God led to his devot-
ing himself to the Saviour, and that he is now travelling along
the high road to the New Jerusalem above, whose maker and
founder is God.
Miss M. of 26 years ago is now the wife of Mr. R. A. Jones,
of Warrenpoint, one of the leading men of the Methodist Church,
and has a large family of sons and daughters, all following in
the good Christian mother’s footsteps.
The incident of speaking to the lad, when called to her
mind, she remembers well; and it is no wonder she, after read-
ing Mr. B. J’s. letter, thanks God that she has been the instru-
ment in His hands of helping, in her feeble way, to build up the
kingdom of His grace by—in her early life, if nothing more-
speaking a kind word, and recommending Christ, to a lad leaving
his home for the Great Western world.


AUSTRALIAN VISITORS’ IDEAS OF
TORQUAY.
To the Editor of the Torquay Times
fIR, —Will you kindly permit the undersigned, who are just
now on a visit to your lovely and picturesque location,
to say a word or two through the colums of your excellent
journal anent the different organisations at work, and the various
public institutions we have visited within the last few days.
And first, let us premise by saying that in no part of the
world in which we have been, have we seen greater loveliness of
landscape and seaside scenery.
The town of Torquay as a health resort should be, and in
our opinion is, unrivalled. Abounding as it does with every-
thing in architectural beauty to please the eye, and gratify the
artistic taste of the most fastidious.
The churches, with their lofty spires, are beautiful in design,
both exterior and interior are as creditable to the townsfolk as
they are to Torquay.
We are pleased to find that the town is well supplied with
newspaper literature. Both the local papers are well got up and
edited, and do credit to the editors and publishers. The Torquay
Times of Friday was a very excellent issue, full of interest to
the residents of the town and neighbourhood as well as visitors.
We are glad to find that the Times is on the side of right
against might, with regard to the persecution of the Salvation
Army, who are doing so much, not only in Torquay, but all
over the world, to assist the masses to rise from the torpor of
drunkenness and evil, and shake themselves clear of the sins of
the age.
The obnoxious 38th clause of your Harbour Act should be
at once repealed, and we believe it will be. It is, to our minds,
most iniquitous and arbitrary, more fit for the days of the
thumb screw and the rack, than the 19th century. In our free
country (Australia) such a clause would be a dead letter—law
or no law—and if such a contretemps, as that of Thursday last
at your police court, took place, our Government, through our
representatives, would at once step in, and prevent either Local
Boards or magistrates infringing the liberty of the subject, by
acting in the persecuting spirit in which, it appears to us
strangers, the authorities of Torquay have done.


The Government of Victoria not only look upon the Salva-
tion Army as a band of Social Reformers, but they aid them in
their work by placing on the estimates <£l,ooo per annum in
order to help the Army and push along a most commendable
go-a-head Christian movement.
The “ Big Drum ” has no terrors for our legislators. If
the other churches disturb (?) the community with “ Bell
ringing,” why not the Salvationists with “ Drum beating,”
They both are means employed to an end, and that is the
gathering together of people to worship God.
The Salvation Army are doing good work in the reclamation
of the down-trodden, sin-debased masses, a work up to the last
few years entirely neglected by the church organisations of the
world.
Your lovely terraced hills must be the admiration of all
visitors. If lit up by electricity they would be a sight worth
coming to see from the most distant part of Europe. The
electric light question has now passed the theory stage. Messrs.
Elwell & Parker, of Wolverhampton, whose establishment and
manufactory we visited last week, are about to despatch to
London an instalment of 10,000 incandescent lights for one
portion of the great city.
You have, we see by your news columns, a gentleman
amongst you who is an enthusiast in electric lighting, and
deserves the sympathy and aid of the monied classes in bringing
to a successful issue his electrical schemes. We wiU be very
glad indeed, during our stay in Torquay, to give Mr, Radcliffe,
M.1.5.E., the benefit of the experience we have gained in our
travels, anent this most fascinating and soon to be world-wide
known scientific discovery. There can be little doubt electricity
will be the great motor power of the future, and will be em-
ployed by manufacturers and professional scientists in a thousand
ways, to help on the “ juggernaut” of scientific research and
advanced thought throughout the English speaking world.
As strangers, we would presume in suggesting to wealthy
residents of Torquay, to try the experiment of electric lighting
in their palatial residences. This new lighting power is less
risky, more convenient, and much healthier than coal gas as a
lighting medium. It can be made pleasant to the eye and
luxurious to the artistic taste. The risk of fire is minimised in
comparison to gas. Fitted up in the most fantastic shapes any-
where, it can be made highly attractive. It does not contaminate
the atmosphere by sulphuretted hydrogen and carbonic acid, thus
destroying the air’s life-giving element. In short, electric
lighting is as much superior to gas as sunlight is to moonlight.
The buildings in Torquay and neighbourhood, both private
and public, and especially the latter, are on a scale of magnifi-
cence and grandeur unsurpassed by any sea-side resort in the


world, and we are not surprised that Her Grace the Duchess of
Sutherland prevailed on their Eoyal Highnesses the Prince and
Princess of Wales, to locate for a time in this charming locality,
and see for themselves the natural beauties of the town and
district.
This is the place for the overworked merchant princes of
our cities and towns to ruralize and gain new life. This is the
place where the quietude of the old Roman walks, surrounded
by perfumed hedge rows, may be enjoyed ; where, in the rusti-
city of country life, the seeker after geological and astronomical
study, and the diver into the antiquities and book lore of past
ages, may spend their leisure hours to advantage.
The* grand old castles in the neighbourhood are all worthy
of a visit. Torre Abbey, with its iron prison bars, bolts, and
dark dungeons may be viewed. The old barn where during the
the French invasion the prisoners of war were confined, and *tis
said fed like wild beasts on horse beans and oil. The walls are
mostly overgrown with ivy, and stand as a memorial of an age,
full of darkness, bigotry, and cruelty.
Let these ruins, as well as many others in the neighbour-
hood, remind the authorities, of the past, and cause every honest
man in Torquay to pray that the enlightenment of our day
may never be obscured by deeds of bitter religious persecution,
coupled with —as they always are—infamy and wrong-doing of
the most painful kind.
We are, sir, yours very truly,
James Oddie,
H. Glenny,
Fellows of the Royal Geographical Society and the
Geological Society of London.
Residents of Ballarat, Victoria, Australia,
Torquay, June 26th, 1888.


SILVEEPEN IN THE OLD COUNTKY.
From “ Melbourne Temperance News.”
jr HAYE had, since I last wrote you, a run through the gin
W palaces of London, and have seen sights that would make
you Victorians turn sick. Only fancy seeing twenty-two
young men and women under the age of twenty years sitting
drinking gin in a low pub ; cursing and swearing, and using the
most filthy language, and nearly all drunk. Then “ move along,”
says my detective friend, “ just let us look in here.” Well, in
a room 10 x 8, a blind fiddler sits in one corner ; the place is
reeking with the fumes of stale beer and tobacco, and on a form
round the walls eight or ten young girls are drinking from
pewter pots, while as many young blackguards are dancing
round the room with several other young females in an almost
state of nudity.
Old and young seem to be the slaves of this frightful
monster, strong drink.
The “D ” asks one of the girls, the most sober, why she
does not give up the awful life. “ I would have to do it or
drown myself, sir, but for the beer and gin. X drinks to drown
my sorrow.”
I have the jottings for a few chapters on my night s visit to
the “ slums ” that will electrify Australians. The drink curse
is seen everywhere you go about England, Ireland, or Scotland.
All nations seem to suffer from the cursed traffic.
The Temperance Book Depot in the Strand has the large
steel engraving of the victims of Bacchus exhibited in the win-
dow, and I have never passed the place without seeing a big
crowd looking at it, and yet, they drink and swallow the “ pisen.”
Teetotal lectures and sermons are as plentiful as blackberries
just now in London at nearly every church, but it is useless.
Take away the grog shop temptations, and you do some
good, but not unless. I firmly believe that the drinking of
intoxicants is a disease.
In Liverpool, a few days ago, I heard of a sad case. One
of Liverpool’s richest merchants was a victim of intemperance.
He knew he was ruining himself body and soul, but as he said,
he could not resist drinking if he caught sight of the liquor.
Well, he voluntarily had himself shut up in an inebriate asylum
for twelve months, and after six months he felt he was cured;


wrote the most pleasing letters to my friend, H. Baird, Esq.,
telling him how he loathed himself as an educated gentleman,
when be thought of his past folly.
The time came for his release. He stepped out, as he
thought, a new man. On his way home, every five minutes the
puhlichouse comer temptingly met his gaze. He smelt the
liquor, and, although trying hard to resist, he rushed in at last,
and never left till he was carried out a corpse.
And yet these brewers, these publicans, these grog-sellers,
are elected to our seats of honour and trust, and never a batch
of magistrates are made in our colony, but their names are in
scores, while poor water-drinkers are excluded. “Is it not
strange ? ”
Let me tell you a secret, ye readers of the “ Temperance
News.” Ihe majority of magistrates of this class appointed
are nominated by teetotal M.P.’s. Now, don’t tell Munro,
Baker, Jones, Russell, or Dow this, or there will be a row.
Do you ask me why are there in the streets of London this
cold, bitterly cold, weather thousands of miserably-clad men
and women, and tens of thousands of starving children, shoeless,
and almost naked, without a bed to lie down upon at night P
Then, I will tell you. “ Drink is the cause.” You don’t believe
me. I only wish I could take you down to the old Grecian
Theatre, now occupied by the Salvation Army, and let you hear
the testimonies of the rescued. If I could only take you into
the “ Old Bailey,” and see the victims there in the dock, charged
with robbery, murder and arson, I would convince you. Why!
they carry the brand in their faces, the red ensign, the bleared
eyes, the scared face and broken nose. All tell of the gin and
its doings. May God forgive the “ Tempters.”
Your old friend, “ Wm. Noble,” is doing good work here;
he is a genuine fellow—not a money grubber—so I was told the
other day.
It is strange that of all the five millions of people in this
big city, I have not seen twenty out of the number wearing the
“ bit of blue,” Why is it so ? I fear all the bunkum we heard
about this matter in Australia was, like the beer, “ frothy.”
I have been to Wales, visited the gold mines there, and
heard a good deal of the sober Welshman, and I believe a good
deal of it is true. I have seen less drunkenness in Wales than
any part of Europe I have yet visited. The Welsh men and
women, one place I visited, spend their evenings practising
singing, and attending musical unions, instead of going to the
puhlichouse. Well done, “ Taffey.” There is hope for Wales.
I stayed at a first-class hotel in Blaneau Fetiniog, Wales, and
if I had not been told that there was grog sold on the premises,
I would not have known from the indications inside.
I will have something to say of “Quid Ireland” in my next.


I expect the Australian photographers will have a surprise
soon. Mr, Mayall, the eminent scientist and photographer, has
just patented a process of taking photographs in their original
colours. I attended, by invitation, the opening lunch and cere-
mony—a grand affair, I was quite astounded with the beauty
of the process. “ The swipers better look out in future; groggy
noses are taken in their natural colour
I append the following, taken from one of the London
evening papers:—A new discovery is advertised which may have
an important influence on our natural habits. It is a cure for
the liquor appetite, and the advertiser declares that once the
system is impregnated with it, the appetite cannot any longer
exist. If this statement is true the teetotallers will no longer
have to mourn over so many lapsed disciples. When a drunkard
signs the pledge, a good stiff dose will be administered to him,
and henceforth he will regard alcohol with as much aversion as
a mad dog shows to water. But this is not all. The advertiser
says ‘ it can be given in a cup of coffee or tea without the know-
ledge of the person taking it,’ and that ‘ thousands of
drunkards have been made temperate men who have taken
the cure in their coffee without knowledge, and to-day believe
they quit drinking of their own free will.’ What a boon
to the wretched fiends of men —wife-beaters ! What a surprise
to the man who drinks his coffee at breakfast, and at night
turns with unaccustomed disgust from the convivial glass !
Who knows but that some inventive genius has at last found a
solution of the drink question, which will make a prohibitory
liquor law superfluous ? The temperance advocates have only
to organise a series of gigantic free teas, and put a sufficient
supply of the decoction into the milk jugs in order to secure the
great end they have in view. Should the discoverer only make
good his claims, the fall in brewery shares will be tremendous.
We confess that we are sceptical; but the alleged discoverer
might be allowed to make his experiments on the inmates of a
Home for Inebriates, and if he be successful, a national grant
should be made to such a benefactor of the human race.”
My friends in Victoria will sympathise with me, I am sure,
by hearing that my poor old father, eighty years of age, the
chaplain of the Warrenpoint Lodge of Good Templars, Ireland,
is dying. Just as I had finished the last page of my present
article, I received a message to that effect. My father had been
almost a life-teetotaler; but all have to bow to the inevitable
decree. lie has been over sixty years a consistent Christian
worker.
Since writing the above, the good old man has “ gone
home,” to be for ever with the Lord.
Far from a world of grief and sin,
With God eternally shat in.


“OLD JOHN SMITH AND THE GOLD
MINE.”
SKNOW perfectly well I am venturing outside the ordinary
groove of contributors to the Spectator by introducing the
story of “ Old John Smith and the Gold Mine,” into my
“ Thistledown.” But then, I may be in part forgiven, when I
state, as a fact, that the dividends from the mine of which I am
about to write have brought joy and comfort into many a
Methodist family, and have been the means of adding many a
name to the list of contributors to the funds of Methodism, and
not a few (to my own knowledge) subscribers to the Spectator.
“ The turning of a straw sometimes influences the future of
men’s lives.” It was the eve of a bright Summer’s day, about
eighteen years ago, when a very foot-sore old “ swagman” sat
down to rest himself on a little rise within sight of Bealiba
Ranges, near Dunolly, after a long day’s tramp across the
country. He was almost penniless, but had a fixed notion that
some day or other a rich find would amply repay him for his
frequent roving about the country on foot as a “ prospector for
gold.” He had been for many a year, in the old land, a class
and prayer leader in connection with the Wesleyan Methodist
Church. Being what is called a shrewd, far-seeing old fellow,
and a practical miner, he somehow instinctively formed an
opinion anent the likelihood of rich gold deposits being scattered
over the flat on which he was camped, both in the quartz and
alluvial.
At last he saw a few specks of gold and determined to mark
out a claim and test the reef from the surface.
The spot he chose upon was in after years, and is now, part
of one of the grandest gold-producing mines in the colony. Old
John Smith (or better known all over Victoria as “Daddy
Smith,” for he it is of whom I write), on the 24th of May, the
Queen’s Birthday, put his “pegs” in, and after doing so,
trudged into Dunolly and interested some others in the claim
he had taken up, telling them of his find, and assuring them
that where golden quartz cropped out on the surface it was very
probable something much better might be found deeper down.
I need not dwell on the first struggles of the little company,
nor need I inform my readers that “ Daddy Smith ” christened


the venture “ The Queen’s Birthday Company,” as it was on the
anniversary of her Majesty’s birthday he had found the golden
quartz. The company was duly formed ; but, notwithstanding
the pluck and energy of the little band of workers, bad luck
only seemed to recompense them for their outlay. The manager
and directors, however, had the right “ grit ” in them, and evi-
dently believed in the old proverb, “ Perseverance in laudable
pursuits will reward all our toil, and produce effects beyond
our calculation.”
A time came when the funds were exhausted; no money to
pay wages ; all the first capital gone ; and, ’tis said, even “ Old
Daddy Smith ” was disheartened. The bank manager positively
refused to advance a penny. What was to be done? The
directors met, and, amid a chorus of grumblings and growlings,
a motion was carried—“ That, in the event of the reef not being
struck before that day week, claim to be abandoned, company
wound up, and all hands discharged.”
“ Daddy Smith ” told me he prayed night and day, and
believed something would turn up before the time fixed.
On the very day settled upon as the last to work, “ Cold
was struck.” It is true it was but a patch, but it cheered “ Old
John,” and tided over the company for twelve months.
Dark days returned again; the bank refused supplies;
writs were issued; firewood men refusing to supply another
stick. But the manager, Mr. W. T. Hansford, now J.P., Mayor
of Dunolly, would not allow the workings of the mine to be
stopped. He gave his own bond that all should be paid, ordered
fifty tons of firewood for the mine, and paid for it out of his
own pocket. This he had to do on three different occasions ; but
“ The darkest day will pass away.”
One morning the mining manager arrived with the joyful
news, “ Gold in the shaft.” Again all debts were pa : d, and
everything looked bright and promising for a while.
"But clouds were seen in the horizon once more. A writ
was avoided through the directors and manager paying the bill.
The wages men were grumbling, having received no money.
The manager, Mr. Hansford, was despatched to try and quiet
them. He assembled them round the shaft, and, mounting a
stump, delivered himself somewhat as follows:—“ It is true,
working miners, we owe you too much, but it is hard times with
us all just now. I believe the mine will pay. Only let a drive
be put in east. A lode, in my opinion, will assuredly be found
in that direction ; six or seven weeks will do it. We guarantee
you half wages meanwhile; and when gold is struck, full pay.
Now, I wait for your answer; will you do it?”
This must have been an anxious time for the energetic
manager, for on the miners’ decision then come to, rested the
future working of the “ Queen’s Birthday Mine.”


After a confab among themselves, one rough-bearded fellow
threw up his cap, and shouted, “ Here’s one will do it boys.”
The act was contagious ; all agreed, and away they worked like
Britons until the ninth week, when the Eastern reef was struck ;
gold seen in every stone, and, as the result, 200 ozs. of the pre-
cious ore obtained from the first fortnight’s crushing.
It was told the writer one day when he was exploring the
400-ft. level, and had finished singing, in company with Mr.
John Little, of Ballarat, a verse of the “ Sweet by-and-by,” that
about the time named above, there was a large muster of
Methodist Oornishmen working in the mine. One day as they
were hard at work driving through the reef, one called out—
“ Book here, boys! gold in the face.” No sooner was the news
telegraphed through the workings than all the “Methody crowd”
assembled, and, with uncovered heads, there, in the bowels of
the earth, 400 feet below the surface, lustily sang, “ Praise God,
from whom all blessings flow,” and one of the number offered
up thanks to God for the prospects of brighter days. This act
may be laughed at; but the fact was, most of these poor fellows
were shareholders, and had been living up to almost starvation-
point in order to keep their calls paid. Since then gold to the
value of £300,000 has been obtained from the mine, and
£208,000 paid in dividends.
Old John, who came originally from Cumberland, England,
was ever repeating the fact that there were tons of gold under foot
on their lease. Some laughed at him, others said the old fellow
was cranky, but the sequel told that his words were prophetic.
The following doggerel was written by the old man as he sat
one evening in his bark hut, and thought over the troubles and
difficulties overcome by the “ ould ” Birthday, as he called the
Mine. I reproduce the poetic acrostic here to let the reader see
the admixture of piety and faith in the old veteran’s composition.
QUEEN’S BIRTHDAY.
Q uite noiselessly its course began,
U ptaken by an aged man;
E agle visioned be saw its worth,
E ’en in the moment of its birth.
N or in its struggles or distress,
S werved from his faith in its success.
H efore the Lord in ceaseless prayer,
I ts claimants spread their interest there,
R elying on His secret might,
T o bring its treasures to the light.
H e heard their cry, put forth His power,
D isclosed at length the golden shower
A ppointed for His people's store.
Y e blest ones praise Him more and more.


THE FINDING OP THE WELCOME
STRANGER NUGGET.
MOLIAOUL, DUNOLLY, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
From the “ History of a Gold Mine.'’
SHE Queen’s Birthday Reef, was now the absorbing subject
of conversation all over the colonies—its yield of over a
thousand ounces a fortnight was regularly telegraphed
to each city in the Australias. An eager crowd at the Ballarat
Corner or Mining Exchange on each alternate Saturday evening,
awaited the writer’s wire of the number of ounces obtained,
and when the result was much over the thousand, considerable
excitement was occasioned, and a brisk demand for shares
ensued. The writer was offered and refused <£B2 per share for
500 shares in one line.
The Birthday line of reef was considered of such importance
by the Government as to cause an official survey. It was proved
by this, that the line of reef trends towards Mount Moliagul, a
spot from which tons weight of the precious metal have been
obtained, as well as a great number of large nuggets, chief of
which was the “Welcome Stranger,” found by two miners
named Oats and Deason, at the time of the find, in very poor
circumstances. The weight of this monster nugget was 2,248
ozs. of pure gold—value in cash, £9,634.
The incidents attending the finding of this mass of precious
metal are worth recording.
“ EUREKA,” —A FORTUNE IN AN HOUR.
Oats and Deason had been working as mates for a con-
siderable time, residing with their families near the side of
Mount Moliagul. For a long time before they unearthed the
“ Welcome Stranger,” they had had a weary spell of bad luck.
The families of both men had lived on credit, as they were
getting no gold, and had been told by the storekeeper at
Dunolly, that he, Mr. 8., could give no more goods without
cash—he likewise suggested that both the men, who were really
hard working estimable fellows, should try their luck elsewhere
This they decided to do on the very day before the big find.


On that day they took their picks and shovels out for the last
time, to try and get a little gold in the shallow sinking on the
face of the hill, in order to enable them to shift their tents and
belongings to a more likely spot. The man below had sunk
only a few feet when the pick struck against something very
hard, and as he raised it to again descend, the point seemed as
if gilt with shining brass. At first this passed unnoticed, one
of them saying to the other, that there was a big boulder on
the bottom. After picking round it, they soon found out that
the supposed boulder was a monster nugget of gold. It would
be useless to try to describe the feelings of these lucky gold
seekers. One moment almost penniless, the nexb, worth nearly
=£lo,ooo of golden ore. They soon had the mass of gold and
quartz out of the hole, and set to work to cut firewood in order
to make a big pile and put their rich treasure on the top, then
setting fire to the wood, thus burn away all the debris. You
may be sure there were no sleepy eyes that night in their little
bush domiciles, but great was the rejoicing. Early next morn-
ing, having borrowed a horse and cart, they took the now
purified golden lump, and spreading old sacks on the bottom of
the cart placed it therein, covering the “Welcome Stranger”
up with a further supply of old sackcloth, away they started for
Dunolly, with lighter hearts than they had had for many a
long day.
ARRIVAL AT THE LONDON CHARTERED BANK.
It was early when they arrived opposite the London
Chartered Bank, in fact before banking hours, so that Broadway,
Dunolly, was but sparsely peopled, only a few stragglers about.
While Oats knocked at the bank door, Deason kept guard on
the cart, the knocking was answered by a servant who inquired
his business.
“ Want to see the manager,” says Oats.
“ At breakfast,” says the maid.
“ Tell him,” said Oats, “ we want him at once.”
The bank official, Mr. Buckle, J.P., fearing it might be
bushrangers, soon made his appearance and demanded their
business at this early hour.
“ Wan’t to sell a bit of gold,” says Deason.
“ Well, then, come in bank hours,” says the angry manager.
“ Can’t,” says Deason, “come and have a look.”
When the manager saw the lump of shining ore, he no
longer hesitated as to the purchase. Soon they had it on the
bank counter, and by this time the news began to spread, the
bank was beseiged with onlookers, outside the door was like a
fair, crowds of old and young gathered round the front, all
anxious to have a look at the big nugget; the news was wired
all over the colonies by press correspondents as well as to the


Government. Instructions soon came flashing across the wires,
that a model was to he taken before the shape of the nugget
was interfered with. In the meantime, the two fortunate
miners insisted on having their prize weighed. The Bank
Manager at his wits’ end declared he had no scales to weigh such
an elephantine mass, and with that one of the men repaired to
Mr. D. B. Watson’s store opposite, procuring cold chisels and
hammers, and soon had several slices cut from the “ Moliagul
golden cheese .” The weight was after some time ascertained to
be, as I have before stated, 2,248 oz. pure gold, valued at ,£9,534.
GREAT REJOICINGS.
Congratulations all round hailed the lucky finders, who for
the time were the heroes of the hour. During the day crowds
assembled round the bank. At the hotels the champagne
flowed freely, the lucky Cornishmen shouting for all hands.
Such was the excitement created that it was days before people
stopped talking and dreaming of mountains of gold, valleys of
hank-notes, and cart-loads of big nuggets ,


AN HOUR IN AN ARTIST’S STUDIO,
LONDON.
A Great Picture —Wesley and Whitfield.
rTfi-T AYING a letter of introduction from my friend, James
Wl Oddie, Esq., J.P., E.R.G.S., F.G.S., of Ballarat,
Victoria, now visiting this country, to E. Goodwin
Lewis, Esq., the celebrated artist, known all over the world as
the painter and composer of the pictures, “ The Last Supper”
and the “ Baptism of Christ in Jordan,” both made popular by
the magnificent steel engravings of them issued by the publisher
who bought the pictures from the artist, I one day last week,
accompanied by Miss Edith Turner, a lady artist of Torquay,
and Mrs. Turner, of Bradford, made “ tracks” for 21 Eitzroy
Street, Eitzroy Square, London, and was soon found pulling the
studio bell and as quickly admitted by Mr. Lewis to his
artistic sanctum sanctorum.
On our entering we were somewhat nonplussed at a dressed
figure of a man, full-sized, right before us, but as we went nearer
we found he ran on wheels, and was but a lay figure, upon which
the painter had placed the drapery and outward adornment of
an old Roman.
My visit with my friends was specially to see the large pic-
ture just finished of the “Introduction of George Whitfield to
John Wesley” by the latter’s brother Charles. Once I got my
eyes on the beautiful painting it was with difficulty I could
leave it. The likenesses are wonderfully characteristic of the
members of the “ Holy Club,” and especially those of the
Wesleys—John and Charles—and George Whitfield. The scene
is purely imaginary, and yet realistic, for a circumstance of this
kind did really occur.
Mr. Lewis has taken two years at this great work—a work
of art and artistic genius that will be by-and-bye one of an his-
torical character. I may say, en passant, that a note from Mr.
Lewis this morning informs me that the picture has been sold
since my visit for considerably over £ 1,-500, and will soon be
placed in the engraver’s hands. I would also say that the Rev.
Dr. Kilner, of the Mission House, London, and a large number
of Wesleyan Methodist ministers here, had a private view of the
picture, and all, it is said, expressed their delight with the
artist’s great effort.
The scene represented is a street in Oxford by night; the
old-fashioned oil lamps lit, the link-boys throwing the glare
of their lighted torches from the footpath on Mr. Wesley’s and
Mr. Whitfield’s faces, and in the street two other link-boys are


in the act of extinguishing a torch ; this serves also to light the
shady side of the street and the figures of the passers-by, as
well as the back portion of Mr. Whitfield’s dress. The moon
is shedding a subdued light over the scene.
To the left of the group of Methodies two swell under-
graduates, with their gold tasselled caps and gowns, are passing
arm-in-arm, and are seemingly in the act of sneering at the
introduction taking place on the other side of the street. A
lady is just behind them in a sedan-chair, with her bearer or
chairman. Both lady and bearer catch the reflection from the
half-extinguished torch of the link-boys in the street.
Just in front of Mr, John Wesley is a little girl, looking
intently at the group, with her basket on her arm, as if she had
been going a message. This serves the artist (as he tells me),
to introduce a little colour into the foreground, to relieve the
sombre dresses of the groups. The little girl thus introduced
was so placed from the following incident: —Mr. Lewis had read
somewhere of a venerable old lady who lived in the time of the
Wesleys. She died at a very old age. A friend, before she
died, was asking her about incidents that occurred and people
who lived in her young days, and how long she remembered ?
“ Well,” said the old lady, “ I remember distinctly meeting Mr.
John Wesley in the streets of Oxford.” The artist, as I before
said, has introduced the little girl of the time to represent the
incident narrated.
The style of buildings are what you would suppose old-time
houses were. The artist having spent much time and thought
in the construction of every detail; living for weeks in Oxford at
a time in order to be better able to build up his great “Art
Study.” Even the gowns on the under-graduates are copied
from preachers’ gowns of the period, lent by the owners for the
purpose ; and the costumes worn by all represented are correct
in every particular.
The old-time sign-boards swinging from the houses are very
suggestive of 100 years ago or more. Rev. Er. Osborn and
Rev. G. S. Rowe lent the artist old pictures of John Wesley. The
latter gentleman has, it is said, the best picture of Wesley extant.
This beautiful art picture will surely be a favourite in
every Methodist, as well as every Nonconformist family, and
may act no small part in the future in assisting to unite in holy
brotherhood all sections of the Christian Church. The Rev.
John Wesley, M.A., was, there can be little doubt, the greatest
Church-organizing genius of the last century; and there is no
questioning the fact that the Rev. George Whitfield was the
greatest preacher of his time—the “ Boanerges” of the pulpit of
the period.
The ragged lads extinguishing the torch, the artist thinks,
are a good sample of the “ gamins” of the town of Oxford in


those days before Raikes and Sunday-schools were heard of.
Ragged, shoeless urchins, ready for anything “from pitch-and-
toss to manslaughter,” as an Irish judge said to a comical,
more-sinned-against-than-sinning prisoner brought before him.
The size of this picture is 9 feet by 7. Every Wesleyan
Methodist and Nonconformist of to day should make it a point
to see this last great work of Mr. E. G. Lewis, the artist; and if
possible an effort should be made by the Connexion, after it is
engraved, to have it in th« Methodist Mission House as a
triumph of 1888 art, and at the same time a life-like scene in
the history of the two great leaders of the people “ Christian ”
of the last century.
I have very little doubt this picture will cause a great
sensation among the churches, and still further endear to future
posterity the names of John and Charles Wesley and George
Whitfield.
Mr. Lewis’s graphic extempore sketch of the make-up of
the picture and the personages therein given us, as he pointed
out one after another of the special features of his work, was of
such an interesting kind that I fain would have taken it down
from his lips verbatim. The outlines I will try and give.
The Wesleys were, when at college, poor, but they were
gentlemen born; in fact cousins of the great Duke of Wellington
(he originally came from the Wesley family). When John and
Charles had fully entered into the evangelistic work, the “ Iron
Duke’s ” ancestor offered to make Charles his heir to the title
and estates, provided he would give up preaching. Charles
Wesley refused to do this ; although poor he preferred helping
his brother John out in the great work of evangelizing the people
of his day.
George Whitfield was the son of a poor widow, who kept a
public-house. George acted for some time as bar-tender.
Anxious to learn, and becoming seriously inclined, he wished to
go to college, but had not the means ; he thereupon took the
position of servitor at the college in Oxford, and in this way
paid his fees. During this time the Wesleys started the “ Holy
Club.” Whitfield hearing of the student Methodies and their
goings on was very anxious to get introduced ; but, as a poor
scholar, he felt too shy to make any advances. An old apple
woman, who used to supply the under-graduates with fruit, lay
ill, and Whitfield wrote to John Wesley asking him to visit her,
but not giving the name of the writer. The Brothers Wesley
were struck with the tone and diction of the letter, aud by a
good deal of persuasion got from the “ bearer” the name of the
sender. Charles Wesley soon after waited upon George Whit-
field, and the result of that visit was the “introduction,” the
subject of this admirable picture.
189 Brecknock Road, London, N.W.


A PLEASANT HOUR IN CITY ROAD
CHAPEL AND WESLEY’S HOUSE,
LONDON.
a wonderful influence Wesleyan Methodism has
on the minds and hearts of English speaking people
all over the world ? No other section of the Christian
Church to-day speaks out more plainly anent the cardinal
doctrines of the Old and New Testament, and certainly no church
that I know of has the reputation of being less tainted with evil,
error, and superstition.
What mighty intellects the Wesleys had ? For generations
the seeds of intellectualism and godliness seems to have been
propagated in every section of the Wesley family. Sound
common sense, clear Scriptural views of Holy Writ, a firm and
solid faith in God, coupled with holy living, marked nearly every
member of their different households. Poetry, prose, and devout
sayings seemed to be part of their very existence. Men and
women alike were gifted with the divine genius of the sacred
muse, and struck the key-note of their lives in prayer and praise.
My readers may be sure—as a returned Australian colonist,
after an absence of 34 years—l was anxious to see for myself
the land-marks and sacred spots where the “Wesleys” located
in London and other parts of the old country, and may also
imagine the great pleasure it gave me to be one of a select party,
headed by our old Australian veteran, the Eev. J. S. H. Royce,
to spend an hour or so sight-seeing in City Road Chapel and
Wesley’s House,
James Oddie, Esq., j.p., p.e.g.s., f. 0.5., of Ballarat, Victoria,
Australia —one of our wealthiest citizens, the “ Whittington ” of
Ballarat City, and promoter of almost every private and public
institution in both city and town, having for their aim the
public weal, and whose last munificent gift to the people of
Ballarat, Oddie’s Observatory, Mount Pleasant, will ever endear
him to future generation of Australians. Mr. Oddie was one
of the first Wesleyan Methodists on the Gold Fields, and has
always been a princely giver to the church. The gentleman of
whom I thus write accompanied us.
By previous arrangement Mr. Oddie and the writer met our
friend, the Rev. J. S. H. Royce, at the Book Room, City Road,
and crossing over the street we soon found ourselves inside


“wesley’s house.”
The building is alongside the entrance gates to the chapel. It
was here where John Wesley lived and died. No wonder we
felt small and insignificant as, with heads uncovered, we stepped
over the sacred threshold, where so many of Wesley’s con-
temporaries, a hundred years ago or more, walked in, to he
welcomed by their friend and counsellor, John Wesley, and
where we were told many a high-born gentleman and gentle-
woman came in “ Sedan chairs ” to seek advice from the open air
preacher, as to their way to the Kingdom of God, by the
Methodist route.
The Eev. J. M‘Kenny, the superintendent minister of City
Eoad, gave our little party a hearty greeting, and soon in-
troduced us to the different rooms in the house.
I would say here, en passant, that our entertainer, Mr,
M'Kenny, is of the patriarchial stamp of an old time Methodist
preacher. From our entry to our exit he kept us delighted
with stories of the old house, Wesley and his preachers, and the
good old times. Several of these stories are too good to remain
untold, and I therefore, for the benefit of my readers who
peruse my sketches, transcribe them.
The rev. gentleman has in his possession an old account
book of the Wesley period wherein is the following entry:
“ The Eev. H. D. Low—Annual payment for shaving the
preacher, £5 sterling.”
“ Ditto—For shaving the Conference, £7 10s.”.
Oh ! shades of Adam Clarke and Billy Dawson only fancy !
£7 10s. for shaving a whole Conference.
If the Methodist preachers of those days were like our John
Watsfords or James Bickfords, of Australia, and the poor
“barber” held under penalty to keep his contract, no wonder he
would die young and in debt.
Another equally good story. The principal personage in
which is still living. One of the old venerables of the present
day, who now glories in a snow-white beard of amazing length,
but was in those days of “ shaven-faced Methodism,” terribly
incensed at one of the younger preachers appearing in Con-
ference with a full-groAvn beard, determined to give him a
“ Eoland ”if chance occurred. The venerable referred to was
then as now “ witty.” In rising to congratulate his esteemed
brother, anent something good he had said, the Eev. Dr. 0
spoke thus—“l heartily agree with all our good brother has
said ; hut,” —then looking with an eye full of witty humour at
the hairy-faced pi'eacher, he continued, —“ But brethren, I regret
exceedingly that we shall 7io more see his face in the flesh.”
Yet another and 1 have done—A good old preacher, visiting


at Wesley’s house during the reign there of a superintendent who
had a number of children, was very fond of talking to the little
ones, and they always ran to him for a kiss. He had been some
time away, however, and in the meantime had allowed his beard
to grow. The little maid of the parsonage did not as usual run
to meet her old friend, but rather shied off. “ What is the
matter, my dear child,” said the preacher, “ that you do not
come and kiss me ? ” The little maid, with a good deal of
hesitance, replied, “ I would, sir; I would, indeed. But I don't
hnow where to find your mouth.”
These amusing stories are but a sample of the many we
were told by our entertainer. But now for the house. On the
outside, over the door, is inscribed in block letters “ Wesley's
House.”
The parlour we were ushered into is in good repair, and but
for the renewed wall-paper, just as it was in Wesley’s time.
THE UPPER DEAWING-EOOM
is the place where Wesley interviewed his preachers and friends
There stands the book-case in splendid condition, from which
the good John Wesley so often took and replaced his favourite
authors. There the same mantel-piece, against which he, no
doubt, often leaned when talking to one and another of the
early pioneers of Methodism. In the passage is the same clock,
with its long coffin-like case, from which he took the correct
time and frequently set his chronometer. There it stands, still
going tick-tick-tick, and striking out the hours as it did in his
hearing more than a century ago. It has not stopped, like other
clocks we read about—never to go again since the old man died
but is still true to time as St. Paul’s, its big brother.
THE ROOM WHERE WESLEY DIED.
This room, so sacred to every Methodist, is a very small
one for a bed-room. The bod, Mr. M‘Kenny informs us, was
placed across the room, showing by this it was not a long one.
As we stood in this room where this God-man (or good man if
you like), died—for he was both—feelings of a strange kind
wound their way round our hearts, and we mused thus: Here
left earth for heaven, one of God’s elect, the man whom our
father’s grandfathers and great grandfathers, and thousands of
the human race all over the earth, loved and honoured, and still
continues to do so. Many have with him, and by his teaching,
reached the glory land, and millions to-day are following in
their steps.
Here stood the holy men and women, whose names are re-
corded in the history of Methodism, who surrounded his dying
pillow, and heard him utter the last breathings of his Ivy heart
—‘ The test of dll is God is with us,'


’Twas here the hind heart of John Wesley ceased to beat,
the eye closed, the tongue ceased forever to tell the story of a
Saviour’s love. ’ Twas here the sorrowing company took a long
farewell of the aged saint, and saw the earthly termination of
the greatest Christian reformer and teacher the world ever had
since the time of Christ. 'Twas from here loving hands carried
him to the grave, and left him sleeping peacefully till the great
resurrection morn.
How often in my own drawing-room in Victoria, Australia,
have I looked upon the steel engraving representing the death
of John Wesley, little thinking that some day I should stand
in the very room, and almost feel the angels near, while the
story of his death was told by one of his preachers.
There is the study—small but compact, in which he worked
out his 1 life thoughts.’ There is the small secretaire on which
many a sermon and many a poetic composition was written. It
too shows what a medium-sized man he was.
I could not resist the temptation of writing on a slip of
paper —which I will always keep—the name of John Wesley
and the date. This upon his own desk.
There is in one corner of the bed-room the chair (now called
Wesley’s chair) he sat upon. We all reverently took our turn
in sitting for a moment, where he so often, possibly after a
toilsome journey, rested his weary body.
It was deeply interesting to us Australians to hear from
Mr. M‘Kenny that he had an order from Adelaide to have made
and sent out to that city a facsimile of Wesley’s chair for the
use of the presidents of the Wesleyan Conference in South
Australia, a lady from there defraying the cost. The order had
been duly executed and the previous week shipped for Adelaide.
In the corner cupboard of the study we saw the Wesley
teapot, and, although against orders, handled it. I remember
many long years ago re-photographing a photograph of this
precious relic. On the one side is— ‘ Be present at our table,
Lord,’ etc,, and on the other— ‘ We thank Thee, Lord, for this
our food,’ etc.
I am sure we all felt greatly indebted to the Eev. J.
M'Kenny for his attention and courtesy during our visit, and if
he should ever visit Victoria we will not forget his kindness.
If he had but added to his hospitality by giving us a cup of tea
out of Wesley’s teapot we should have fasted all day after, and
sung the Doxology to hoot.
CITY ROAD CHAPEL.
Australia crops up everywhere you visit. If in a railway
train or a commercial room only begin to talk of Australia and
its gold, and you soon have a crowd of listeners.
At a Manchester hotel a few nights ago I had a difficulty


to get away to bed from a crowd of commercials wbo wanted to
know— you know —all about the Australias. Even in City Road
Chapel, Australia is represented. As we entered the side door,
how the compactness, cleanliness, and order everywhere im-
pressed us.
There was the pulpit where Wesley stood and preached
from, to the listening crowds, and the reading desk, where it is
said, his brother Charles sat.
The stained glass windows at the end of the building be-
hind the pulpit, at once strike the visitor as beautiful. One of
these is a memorial window to the Rev. John Waterhouse, the
ex missionary, a name honoured and loved by all Australians,
and seemingly by Englishmen too, for, in our great Southern
land to-day, have we not two or three generations of the ex-
missionary and Methodist pioneer preachers’ family ?
Who from Australia can ever forget the late Rev. Joseph
Waterhouse (the good) and his tragic end on board a New
Zealand mail boat; or his brother, the much-loved but long-
afflicted Rev. Samuel Waterhouse, sons of the ex-missionary ;
or Mr. Wm. Waterhouse, of Hobart, another son, or many
others of the family in Victoria, New South Wales, South
Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, and the South Seas —all
staunch Methodists.
The works of art in the shape of ornamental stained
windows to Methodist worthies is a splendid way of commemor-
ating their memories. We were told by Mr. M‘Kenny that the
one vacant window has been applied for by the American
Methodists, so that Australia, America, and England may join
hands in City Road Wesleyan Chapel, London, as elsewhere.
Need I say anything of the life-like marble busts of Dr.
Punshon, Dr. Adam Clarke, Dr. Wiseman, Gervase Smith, and
others—all splendidly executed; standing out, as many do, in
bold relief, as kindly remembrances to all who look and admire,
of men, who were great in talents as preachers of the Gospel—
noblemen of the Methodist peerage of Heaven —and Christians of
whom every church in Christendom ought to be, and are, justly
proud.
THE PIOUS ILLUSTRIOUS DEAD.
The burial ground around the chapel is full of mournful
interest to the visitor. ‘Wesley’s tomb,’ Whitfield’s ‘in me-
in oriam stone,’ Dr. Adam Clarke’s, and hundreds of others,
whose names are as household words in all Methodist families.
The monument of the mother of the Wesleys no one can pass
by unnoticed.
Each stone, both here and across the road in Bunhill Field,
tell the story of the escape from earth to heaven of men and
women of valour, who braved the sneers, frowns, buffetings, and


persecutions of an ungodly age. Many of them, with their lives
in their hands, preached a free salvation to the people of their
time, and planted deeply and well a system of religious teaching
that will go on so long as there is an unconverted man or woman
on the face of God’s wide hemisphere,
I am sure I can say for myself and party that our visit to
Wesley s house and City Road Chapel will ever be a red-letter
one in our lives, and when far away in our homes, in the sunny
Southern land, we hear of all the good accomplished by the
Methodist Church in Great Britain, and all over the world, and
have our little ones crowding round our knees, listening to
stories of our trip to Europe, and what we saw there, no story
we tell will be more interesting than the recital of our morning’s
visit to City Road Chapel and Wesley’s house, London. —The
Christian Advocate.


THE METHODISTS AND THE
EEY. DEAN BAGOT.
To the Editor of the Newry Telegraph.
SXR, The Christmas hymn published in your issue of
Saturday last, and to which the name of Dean Bagot is
attached, called to my mind an incident worthy of record.
About forty-five years ago the writer and a number of
other Newry boys now aged men —were collecting the Christ-
mas Juvenile Offering, having printed forms—pink coloured
they were— authorising us to do so. A number of us were
going out the Downshire Hoad, when in the distance we saw the
Kev. D. Bagot, then known to us lads as “ Dan Bagot.”
One of the boys suggested an appeal to the big Churchman,
as a good lark, and I was chosen as the victim who was to stand
the cuffing “Dan” was sure to give whoever asked him for
money for the missionaries: as one of the boys said his
father told him —Dan Bagot hated the Methodies.
With fear and trembling I approached the seeming tyrant.
Never will I forget that moment: and often have I related the
incident to Sunday-school children in Australia.
The good Dan Bagot placed his hand on my head in a
kindly way, and said, “ Little boy, why are you so frightened ?
What were your little friends saying?’
I told him that one of them said his father told him Dan
Bagot hated the Methodists. He smiled, took me by the hand,
led me back to his house, and said, “ People frequently make
mistakes, my boy.” I will be glad to put my name down upon
your list. He there and then handed me a five shilling piece,
the largest subscription I had ever received, as pennies were,
as a rule, the amount given. He himself opened the door and
shook my hand, as he said good-bye, with a kindly pat on the
bead lhave lived in the Australian Colonies since then—over
thirty-three years—and in other parts of the world; but the
good “ Daniel Bagot’s” kindly word and big subscription to the
Juvenile Missionary Offering I have never forgotten nor ever
will. You, sir, will think it no wonder, therefore, that i at


once cut out of the Telegraph the hymn for Christmas day, in
order to take it to my children’s home and place it in the scrap-
book, first telling them over again “the old story,” and that the
writer of the beautiful verses is no other than the same Eev.
Daniel Bagot of my boyhood, who gave me the five-shilling
donation for the Wesleyan Missionary Society, and at the same
time encouraged me to “ never judge a clergyman by heresay.”
I am, sir, yours, &c.,
H. Glennt, J.P., F.E.G.S., F.Q.S.
(from Australia).
Warrenpoint, December 26, 3887.


A SUNDAY IN NEWEY AFTEE
THIETY-FOUE YE AES.
tKIND invitation from my brother-in-law, Mr. J. K. Todd,
J.P., T.C., and his good lady, to spend a Sunday in my
native town, decided me to arrive on Saturday night, so
that I could have the opportunity of listening twice, at least,
to sermons from Newry ministers, and judge for myself between
the old and the new order of things in the churches of the town.
During the early part of the week I had in my rambles
around the neighbourhood, slipped quietly into the Sandy Street
Methodist Church (chapel it was called in my young days), and
once more sat down in the very same corner of the pew where I
so often as a child sat by my now sainted mother’s side, and
listened to the old pioneers of the Methodist Church preach a
full and free salvation,
I have heard in that church Revs. Bunting, Newton, Dr.
Gather, Dr. T. A. M‘Kee, John Nelson, John Carey, R. T.
Tracey, Thomas Meredith, Edward Harpur (the boy preacher
“ Byrne”), Nash, Wallace, Thomas Moran, Dr. Thomas Guard,
R. Jessop, Fossey Tackaberry, Daniel MAffee, John Nash, and
many others.
What memories the few minutes sitting there all alone
recalled. I could, in my mind’s eye, see dear old John Anderson
(one of Wesley’s local preachers) in the pulpit, and hear him,
with quivering, feeble voice, giving out the well-known hymn—
“ A charge to keep I have,
A God to glorify,
A never-dying soul to save,
And fit it for the sky.’ J
Old John! his good old Methodist wife and aunt Betty Best,
who all, I believe, heard John Wesley preach, have, scores of
years ago, entered into the rest of God’s elect.
I could, as I looked round the church, point out the different
places where a venerable and godly Kinnear, an old-time
Methodist Byron, a good, kind, much-loved, and respected
Robert Anderson.* A sainted old father in God —Richard
Harcourt, sen.—acknowledged by folk in those days to be the
prince of class-leaders; an excitable, but fine old English
Methodist, Nathaniel Holmes ; an Edward Baird, of pious
of Professor Dr. Anderson, J.P.


memory ; a Charles Little—whose son to-day, I am pleased to
hear, ranks high as a young preacher in the Wesleyan ministry;
an eccentric but godly Paul Irvine; a quiet, unassuming but
genuine Methodist, Solomon Kernaghan and his friend, Jessie
Holmes, my old school-fellow; a great prayer-leader, little
Thomas Boyd, and a host of others, all good Methodist worthies,
who have long since joined the church of the First-Born. All
these good men lived, laboured and loved the Methodist Chapel,
and made their voices re-echo around the sacred walls as they
sang aloud the praises of their God and King, in words and
tunes still echoing in my ears.
I really think a little reverie of this kind once in a life-time,
and especially about this glad festive season of the year does
the heart good. It seems to bring you face to face with the
loved and the lost, and almost links you for the time with
friends gone before. As Wesley beautifully puts it: —
One family we dwell in Him,
One church, above, beneath,
Though now divided by the stream—
The narrow stream of death,”
But I must cease soliloquizing and proceed with my sketch.
As my host and his family belong to the Presbyterian
Church, Downshire Eoad, I, as their guest, attend with them
that place of worship in the morning. And here I could recall
memories of the godly late Eev. John Dodd, so many years the
loved minister of this church, and president of the Total
Abstinence Society, but my time and musing space is gone.
The minister who succeeded the late Eev. John Dodd was
the preacher and well pleased was I to hear from that pulpit
such a very practical, able, and interesting discourse. The Eev.
William Wylie has a fine manly appearance, his language is
choice, and illustrations apt. He tells touching stories in such
a way as to make you feel with himself their force. He is an
earnest preacher, would make a capital evangelist, plenty of
magnetism about him, speaks from heart to heart, no formality
in his style, gives you the feeling that he means every word he
says, and you soon discover that the preacher is not talking
anent what he knows nothing about. There is life and power
in his words and an amount of intellectuality running through
his rounded periods that catch the attention and rivet you to
the preacher during the delivery of the discourse.
It is good to write thus of our Presbyterian friends as I
am not one of that communion.
In my young days, Presbyterianism was looked upon as a
formal, cold, meeting-house-kind of worship; “go to meetin’-
and-your-right” kind of religion. But now there is enthusiasm,
earnestness, Methodist fire in the services in Ireland I notice


as in Australia. This, no doubt, is partly due to the evangelistic
efforts of the “ age,” and the great Irish Revival and its after
effects; so that had I not known that I sat under a Presbyterian
pulpit, I doubt much whether I could have discovered the fact
from the sermon preached or the preacher.
The rev. gentleman’s discourse was exceptionally excellent,
eloquent, sympathetic, and telling, full of apt illustrations, and
all so well given as to make you feel that you could listen again
with pleasure to their recapitulation.
The sermon was, as the rev. gentleman informed the con-
gregation, one expressly for the Sunday-school children, and
was well adapted to create in the minds of the hearers a desire
for more Bible information of a similar kind conveyed to them
in plain and simple language.
I hope, however, to have the pleasure of again hearing the
Rev. Wm. Wylie.
EEV. WM. CROOK, D.D.
In the evening, accompanied by my host, I hied away to
the Sandy Street Wesleyan Church, and in the same pew where
my sainted uncle, Edward Baird, and family once sat, now
occupied by my friend, Mr. Geo. Kinnear, and sister, I had the
pleasure of hearing from a Methodist worthy in the person of
Dr. Crook, a memorial sermon for the late Sir William M'Arthur,
so well known in Newry and Warrenpoint.
In the Australian colonies, when we hear a doctor of divin-
ity is to preach, we at once jump to the conclusion —why I know
not— that the doctor must be physically a fine, tall, powerful
man. This may be partially accounted for, by the fact that
nearly all our Australian D.D.’s are inclined to be great in
stature. But if Dr. Crook is wanting in height and weight—
he is certainly not in facial and phrenological development —no
one can look upon the fine nervo-intellectual forehead and
misjudge the characteristics of the man.
The service and discourse were both interesting above the
ordinary kind. The life and happy death of the late much
lamented and mourned over Sir Wm. M'Arthur was particularly
referred to—and here I should like to say en passant , that in
Australia as in his own green Isle of Erin the sad and mournful
event is deplored.
Dr. Crook, in opening, went into no vague preliminaries,
but at once like an old King’s warrior, rushed into the gap, and
marshalled his forces for battle. He seemed burthened with a
sorrowful yet joyous story, and told the narrative of the early
history, commercial life and peaceful death of the great Metho-
dist Irishman, with such fervour and sympathy as made the tear
start from many an eye.
How the good doctor dwelt upon the fact that Sir William’s


father was at one time Superintendent of the Newry Circuit,
of which he, Dr. Crook, was now the Superintendent, and lived
in William Street. The kindly feeling to the preacher shown
through life by the dead knight and statesman was touchingly
dwelt upon, and why ? because they both were sons of Methodist
preachers.
Though high in authority and power —a head and shoulders
above his commercial peers—the foremost citizen of England’s
greatest city (London), yet he was always the Methodist
preacher's son, and never ashamed to let everyone know it.
His death—so sudden, yet so peaceful—was touched on
with great feeling. No less than three separate engagements
ready in hand, and all connected with the Methodist Church,
he, on the way journeying, fell peacefully asleep. “ Thus it
was he closed his eyes on earth to open them in heaven.”
The hymns chosen by Dr, Crook were most appropriate.
One old favourite went with a swing (as we say in Australia),
everyone seemingly joined in the singing—
How happy every child of grace,
Who knows his sins forgiven,
This earth, he cries, is not my place,
I seek my place in heaven.”
Every fact and incident of the brilliant discourse told, and
the words of wisdom and counsel spoken, were worthy of publica-
tion in their entirety.
Dr. Crook’s name is familiar enough to Australian Method-
ism. His words are pure Anglo-Saxon, his diction perfect, his
pronunciation and acceutation musically Irish, if I may be
allowed this phrase, so that, whatever part of the globe he visits,
there is no fear, of any one putting him down for aught but an
educated son of the emerald isle.
I hope soon to have the pleasure and privilege of hearing
the worthy doctor again.
Dec. 23rd, ’B7.


STORY OR THE EARLY DAYS OE
AUSTRALIAN ENTERPRISE.
Y little nephews and nieces, after reading No. 1 in the
Telegraph, have been urging me to tell them through
the same source a ‘ Christmas story’ of the ‘ Biggin's,’
and how we spent the ‘ big day’ of the year on the gold fields ;
and, in acceding to their request, I must first say, for their in-
formation, that our hot season begins about November. When
I first arrived in the colony, October was what I would describe
as a ‘ scorcher,’ but it is not so now. December is generally
pretty warm ; and, if we escape hot winds and ‘ brickfielders’ in
December and January, we think ourselves lucky.
New chums from the old country arriving in the colonies
during our hot season feel the heat severely, but after a few
seasons you take the weather as it comes without murmur, and
generally can tell what is looming ahead by the atmospheric
signs apparent round the rising or setting sun, so that you are
in part prepared for hot or cold and wintry weather.
It is something to look at, to see Melbourne on a hot wind
day, heads down, people moving about listlessly, a general
thirstiness over every one, public-house bars and wine saloons
filled with drouthy colonists, the coffee palaces well patronised
with tea and coffee drinkers, and yet, notwithstanding the fierce
heat, the innured colonial can eat and sleep with any man in
the world ; and just here let me say ‘ That the Melbourne Coffee
Palace, Collins Street, is a credit to the city—a magnificent
building, with sleeping accommodation of the most superior
kind for over 300; drawing rooms, reading and music rooms,
dining and breakfast rooms, all magnificently furnished. Mrs.
Dudley, the model Lady Superintendent, presides as house-
keeper, and Mr. J. W. Small as manager. These coffee palaces
are an off shoot of the great temperance movement, and are
doing more than any other thing in Victoria to cause this lovely
southern land to bud and blossom as the rose.
But now for my story. It was Xmas Eve, 185 —. What
a stirring time it was to be sure. Everyone had money, or if
not the coin, fine, or nuggety gold in wooden match-boxes—a
favourite way of carrying a few ounces.
Bill Edwards, of Bakery Hill, manager for Wymond &


Vasey, storekeepers, came down to the Flat, and after unlocking
the door of Harry’s tent by simply untying a string, in he walked^
I think I should describe the tent for the sake of young
Newryites. The material was grey calico; the roof ditto; said
calico thrown over a ridgepole; height, about 7 feet, or less.
Over the ridge another pole or sapling placed, and over it again
what we call a ‘ fly.’ This is really a second roof, about 18
inches from the other, so that the air gets free passage through,
and thus keeps the tent pretty cool in the heat of the day.
Inside—lf the proprietor or proprietors, or, as we called each
other, ‘ mates,’ had enough of the ‘ dust ’ we would have the
tent lined with green baize, and maybe in addition, from the
floor up three feet—all round, 36 inch matting. This made the
interior snug and comfortable. The fire we always had outside,
by the end or middle of a big log, so that once set a going it
would burn for weeks without much replenishing.
Our furniture consisted of a gin-case or two, for a table, as
they were always to be had handy, a couple or three blocks of
wood for seats, and at each side two long (6 feet) saplings, with
cross ditto top and bottom, on four stumps ; a couple of sacks
nailed across them narrow way, and you had as good and com-
fortable a ‘ bunk ’ as you would wish to sleep in on a hot or
cold night.
Then we had Gin-Case No. 2 for cupboard, where the
pannikins and tin plates were kept, and outside on the branch
of a tree hanging by a piece of hoop-iron a bag or something
else with our butter (if any) and meat; these procurable only
one day in the week. The great trouble during the hot weather
was to keep the blow flies away, for if one got inside your bag
in half an hour the meat would be a putrid living mass. Every
tent had a dog chained up in the front to warn the insiders of
the approach of strangers at night, and no tent was without a
six-shooter—from a pepper box to a Colt’s or Manton’s revolver.
We made our own candles, and when too lazy to do so, or
not having enough fat, we had an old sardine tin filled with
frying pan refuse, and in it we put a rag, and from the light of
this bush lamp we read, told stories, sung songs, and eat our
‘ tucker.’ ’Tis wonderful how soon you suit yourself to circum-
stances. Things that would seem impossible to you who live in
comfortable homes in Newry were not only possible but really
luxurious to the diggers of 185—.
Well, here I am rattling away and forgetting the thread of
my story.
‘ I left Bill Edwards a while ago with the string undone,’
walking into the tent:
‘ Harry,’ said he, ‘ I want you to come up Bakery Hill to-
morrow (Xmas Day) and have a blow out in our tent. We are
to have roast mutton and ditto potatoes, baked in hot ashes


(natural style), and a genuine plum-duff for a wind up. As you
are a teetotaller we have lemon squash well sugared, but Jack
says Kinahan’s LL. is more in his line. Now, old matey, don’t
disappoint; twelve o’clock is the time.’
As the accepting of the invite would save my mate and self
a considerable amount of bother I promised, and after bidding
my friend good-night I returned to the Calico Castle, tied the
string of the door, and soon fell asleep, dreaming of Xmas in
Newry and all my dear friends there.
The morning was one of the most beautiful. The sun
shone out in all his splendour. From every tent the happy
voices of the diggers might be heard, talking of old times and
associations in the far away country ; where it may be, sweet-
hearts and wives, fathers and mothers, sisters and brothers,
were just then thinking of their loved ones in Australia, little
dreaming of the way Christmas is spent here.
Before ten o’clock in the morniag a cheery voice I knew
well, hailed me as I sung out in answer to the dog’s bark
‘ Whose there?’ ‘ Only a Warrenpoint old pal,’ said he, and in»
walked poor Jack D , got up to kill—as spry as a digger,
with a fifty pound swag of the precious metal.
Jack’s first stave was about his old home. It ran something
to this effect:—
“ Along Rostrevor’s woods and dales
My name is scratched on many a tree
My barque is on its homeward course,
And here, old chap, is he.'’
With a good deal of trouble I persuaded Jack to come to
Edward’s tent to dine, and after we had spruced ourselves up,
away we started along the Red Hill, down the Main Road, and
up Bakery Hill, past Dr. Wills’, and here let me say —The Dr.
Wills named was no other than the father of John M. Wills,
the explorer, who with R. 0. H. Burke, whom I knew well,
perished at Lake Carpentaria, after successfully crossing the
great Australian desert from sea to sea.
Arrived at the tent we found Bill’s mate outside doing the
cooking, and if we were to take the savory aroma all round as a
good omen of things to come, we might look forward to a big
spread. Warrenpoint Jack smacked his lips in anticipation,
and so did I. Soon the pipes were lit, and a babel of voices and
laughter proclaimed the fact that it was holiday time and knock
off day with every one.
Just as the hour arrived, the ‘ doctor’* sounded the ‘ gong ’
(a tin dish), and announced dinner ready. The seats were not
too many, but five minutes with the axe outside soon provided
a couple or three extra, and soon we were surrounding two or
three empty cases, all of us in the very best of Xmas humour.
*F. Cook.


One thing was wanting, but soon provided, to wit a table cloth.
I had that morning received from Newry a couple or three
Newry Telegraphs , and a lovely table cloth they made. The
boys, as they eat, reading an advertisement or a par, where a
well-known name was noticed. Rowan M‘Naughten I remember
Jack picked out, and John O’Hagan, Sinclair, of Sugar Island,
and Greer’s, the booksellers. (In parenthesis) I would here say
that now on my return to Newry very few of the names men-
tioned are to be seen. All dead, I suppose.
Well, to resume, the ‘doctor’ soon brought in the roast
mutton and potatoes, done to a hair, on a big piece of wood
scooped out, which he had prepared during the week. The tin
plates were arranged all round, and the pannikins for the drink,
and Jack having said the gold digger’s grace :
‘ Lord bless the grub that now we take,
And give us good appetites for any sake.’
Off we started I should say after much trouble. John, alias
the Chinese storekeeper, lent us a few old knives and forks, and
the table condiments, consisting of pepper and salt, were in bits
of the Telegraph, and the pickles and Lee and Perkins’ sauce
were in their own bottles. ‘ Don’t be frightened to eat, boys,’
says Bill, ‘ there’s plenty and to spare; and if we don’t eat it
you know it won’t keep. So go ahead, my hearties, and be
j oll y-’
This advice was hardly necessary, as we all brought good
appetites with us, and dreaded nothing more than not having
enough. How we laughed and talked and joked that blessed
Xmas Day inside the tent—while the dog, barking for his share
outside, and the laughing jackasses on the trees, kept us as
lively as fleas in an Irishman’s jacket.
When the roast mutton and potatoes had disappeared, then
for the plum-duff. Jack gave the word of command, and in an
instant every tin plate was upside down, and we had the clean
bottom for the pudding. This hint I give for nothing to
bachelors who don’t like the washing-up of plates when one
will do.
How the Newry chicken and the Warrenpoint boy yearned
that day over Cloughmore Stone, Omeath, Captain O’Hagan’s,
Narrow-water Castle, Major Roger Hall’s, and Corry’s Monu-
ment, all places we knew as the scenes of our early days. Ivy
Lodge, Ashgrove, where we took our sweethearts after Sunday-
school to gather primroses, the Bell Man’s Loanen for blue
bells and butter cups. And there we chatted and talked till
the doctor introduced the pannikins filled with scalding tea,
post and rail squash, as it was called, on account of the number
of stems swimming on the top, plenty of sugar, but, as Jack
said, ‘ The devil a drop of milk.’ This he and others soon made


up for, by a fair quantity of Irish whiskey, and if I am to believe
the funny rascals, the LL. brand made a splendid substitute for
cow’s milk.
That Xmas dinner I won’t forget while I live, for not one
of the Newry party now live to tell the story but the writer, and
if I drop a tear over the old time of long ago, and often think of
those happy days on the gold fields, surely no one will grumble
or feel vexed when I tell them that in Old Ballarat, as each
Xmas Day comes round, I somehow or other find myself in
some part of the day driving up to the old cemetery, and stand-
ing bareheaded very near the spot where five out of the six of
that Xmas Day party lie sleeping till the morning of the resur-
rection.
Two of the poor fellows were killed at the Eureka riots,
one of them died of fever, another of pleurisy, and poor Warren-
point Jack, only three years ago, died, happy enough, of that
great scourge to both Australia and this country —phthisis.—
‘ May they all rest in peace.’
Even now as I go about the old spots in Warrenpoint and
Newry I remember so well, I cannot but think of the Christmas
day we spent on the diggin’s, and the rare old pic-nic we had in
Bill Edwards’ tent on roast mutton and potatoes, with plum
pudding and tea, as happy and contented as if we were in a
lordly mansion, although we were only inside a digger’s tent,
seated on blue gum logs.


MANCHESTER and ROCHDALE JOTTINGS.
vjjf) ELIGIOUS revival progression, by what many describe
as “ outre non-orthodox" exertions, seems, in this year
of our Lord 1888, to be the recognised order of the day
in the Methodist organisations of England.
The Established Church, with all its formality of worship,
has of late years, like their so-called dissenting friends, stepped
into the revival gap, and now, by its lay leaders and special
evangelists, cries aloud to all men, “ Repent, for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand.”
The Rev. Charles Garrett, of Liverpool; the Revs. Mark
Guy Pearce and H. P. Hughes, of London; the Rev. Thomas
Champness and his working band of evangelists and others, of
Rochdale, and elsewhere; the Rev. S. Collier, of Manchester,
and a host of other clerical and non-clerical agencies—male and
female—in connection with Methodism—go about from house
to house, and village to village, proclaiming, “ Liberty to the
captive, and the crucified Christ, as the Saviour of the world"
The Salvationists, under General Booth, over 20 years ago,
struck out for themselves a new railway track to the heavenly
Jerusalem, with an electric-power motor, filled with Holy Ghost
enthusiasm. They crowded the advance saloon carriages of
their Royal Line to Heaven Railway with performers on brass
and string instruments, backed up by the sound of cornets,
beating of drums, clashing of cymbals, and tinkling of tarn-
bourines, deftly handled by their soldiers—lads and lasses, set
on fire by the Holy Ghost’s influence—as workers for God.
Without fear of either men or devils, they thus awakened
the drowsy and slothful sinners of the day to the fact that “to
be a child of God did not require the wearing of a black broad-
cloth suit or a silk velvet mantlette and gorgeous headgear,” for
they declared God was no respecter of persons ; but to all, rich
and poor, learned and ignorant, a merciful, loving Father, waiting
to take the vilest outsiders into His fold, whether they took free
tickets on the “ line ” by the company’s first, second, or third
class carriages.
The good Methodists of Oldham Street, Manchester, were
no doubt imbued with this “ evangelising influence ” when they
pulled down the old chapel, and erected in its place the now
comfortable and commodious Central Hall, with a free-to-every-


body-sitting accommodation, and a right hearty welcome and a
good seat to the poor and needy, who might come, it may be,
out of curiosity, or a desire to have a rest in the comfortable,
snug-roofed building out of the cold.
It must be cheering for poor, penniless, shivering sinners
to listen to the preacher, as he tells them the story of the Cross,
and points out that
“ Repentance is the station, then,
Where passengers are taken in ;
No fee for them there is to pay,
For Jesus is Himself the way.
I can well picture to myself, as I write, the cheering look
that would light up the poor, half-starved (it may be) features
of the listener while the easy plan of salvation was thus explained,
in an understandable manner, by a man who, like themselves,
had been brought low by sin, but had come to the fountain and
washed, and was made clean ; and the interest the poor man or
woman would feel, as different parts of the preacher’s testimony
dove-tailed exactly with their case; and then the I-will-venture
though I perish, feeling coming over them, as they, with weeping
eyes and bowed heads, made their way to the penitent form or
inquiry room to be told of the great Healer and Saviour “Jesus”
“ Who loved them so well
As to lay down His life
To redeem them from hell.”
Or I could fancy the poor blackslider drinking in every
word, and thinking of the days long past, when He (this Jesus)
was to him the Fairest among ten thousand, and the altogether
lovely. The aching void he feels only can be filled by Jesus.
Then, as the tears trickle down his face, he would sing—
Return, oh, Holy Dove, return,
Sweet Messenger of rest;
I hate the sins that made Thee mourn,
That drove Thee from my breast.
V\ hat peaceful hours I once enjoyed,
How sweet their memory still ;
But they have left an aching void
The world can never fill.
On the evening of my visit to the Central Hall the snow
was coming down in great white flakes all over the city. The
streets were covered with a white mantle, the footpaths showing
the imprints of the feet of the passers along, each foot-mark
soon to be re filled with the falling snow-flakes. The air was
bitterly cold, and the absence of the every-day bustle and throng
gave the streets a deserted appearance.


Notwithstanding these drawbacks to a good congregation,
the “ Hall” was crowded by a most interesting assemblage of old
and yonng, rich and poor.
A brass and string band of musicians occupied the platform
at the back of the reading desk, and to my utter astonishment
they struck up as the opening number, before the service, a
well-known sprightly march. It certainly went well, notwith-
standing my feet would keep moving to the time, and for a
minute or two I was wondering had I run by mistake into a
theatre or a concert hall.
The appearance of the young minister, the
REV. S. F. COLLIER, AND MRS. BURGESS,
of India, soon dispelled that idea, for while they knelt in silent
prayer a pin might have been heard drop.
The first hymn went with a swing—a real congregational
go about it—everyone singing, and all seemingly devout. The
prayer was solemn and simple ; no wandering all over the earth
and back again for subjects to pray about, but, past mercies and
present blessings, the former thanked for, and the latter
implored.
Mr. Collier said he had with him that evening on the plat-
form a lady from India—Mrs. Burgess, wife of the Eev. Wm.
Burgess, the orator-missionary. He (Mr. Collier) wished the
congregation to have the benefit of an address from the lady
named, who had spent a number of years in India as mis-
sionary’s wife and helper, and who had a story to tell of the
mission work out there, which he had little doubt they would
be only too glad to hear. He would, however, first call upon
Mrs. Burgess to sing a solo, entitled “ Calvary.”
I am not going to criticise my good friend, Mrs. Burgess,
as a soloist, further than to say her singing was sweet and
harmonious, her accentuation clear, so that every word sung was
distinctly heard, and at times the weird plaintiveness of the
song of the sorrows and sufferings of Christ on Calvary’s
Mount was touching and very effective.
No wonder a young lady who sat next me said, “ Isn’t
it lovely?” as the tears rolled down her face.
Sing on, Mrs. Burgess, there is power in your Hospel songs.
The address by Mrs. Burgess was specially interesting.
“ Incidents of my life in India,” might well have been the title.
The death-bed scenes of the converted women of the Hyderabad
Mission were given with touching simplicity. The cruelty of
heathen mothers and fathers to their children who had forsaken
the religion of their country, the endurance of the persecuted
converts under pain and suffering, and the joy they experienced
as they clung to Christ amidst it all, even to the death, left im-
pressions on the minds of those present with regard to the labour


of love engaged in by the missionary and his wife that will not
easily be effaced.
THE REV. S. P. COLLIER,
whose address (as he called it) was delivered with great effect
and power, was based on two verses—Mark hi., 3rd verse, and
Luke xii., 8-9 verses. The reverend gentleman is a very effective
speaker, and one eminently calculated to impress a mixed
audience. He has a conversational style of preaching, appeal-
ing, as he does, every now and then, directly to his auditory.
His remarks anent the man with the withered hand, referred to
in the first part of the text, were unmistakably lucid and clear,
anent the duty of acting up to the commands of God ; or, in
other words, God doing nothing for a man that he can do for
himself; hence the poor fellow with the withered hand was first
commanded to “ stand forth,” and then “ stretch forth his hand .”
The rev. gentleman’s illustrations were apt and telling. In
themselves they were sermons on the subject of discourse. I
was not surprised when told that Mr. Collier is a popular
preacher, and one who attracts the “ crowd.” There is an easy,
racy style about his sermonising attractive to outsiders, and
specially interesting to church-goers. He must be a favourite
with the young people, as I specially noticed that in no Method-
ist Church I have visited in England since my return from the
Colonies have I seen such a splendid gathering of young, well-
dressed lads and lasses, nor, indeed, could any minister wish
for a more attentive crowd of listeners; even at prayer-time the
young people seemed devout and solemn. The whole demeanour
of the large congregation was that of worshippers full of sincer-
ity and simplicity. „ . . -
I seldom have heard a more one-and-all shout ot praise,
notwithstanding the noisy music of the orchestra, as the con-
gregation joined in the well-known, good old Methodist tunes.
freedom in singing helps amazingly the devotional
feeling of the people, as they not only hear the hymns read, but
heartily join in the harmony.
I am not surprised to hear that the congregation ot the
Eev Mr. Collier has become too large for the hall, and that
another branch of the Mission meet at a building—St. James’s
Hall I believe —more than twice the size of the “ Central.”
The life-work of Mr. Collier is a very important one, gather-
ing in the non-churchgoers of a big city. he have very
great success and an abundant harvesting.
THE REV. THOMAS CHAMPNESS OF “JOYFUL NEWS ” FAME.
By an arrangement kindly made for me by Mrs. Burgess, I
met by appointment on the Monday the Eev William Burgess
and the Eev. Eobert Stephenson, 8.A., both on their way to


Rochdale to see the Rev. Thomas Champness. Leaving the
Central Station, Manchester, we were not long in reaching the
town known all over the world as the abiding place of the Hon.
John Bright, M.P. r
A hansom cab, after we alighted at the Rochdale Station,
soon took us through the snowy streets to the Joyful News
Office, and here let me express my surprise, when entering a
seemingly quiet private residence, to find inside a very
complete and compact religious book depot, where we were
able to pick up hymnals and other books, beautifully
bound, of the choicest kind, and at as cheap a price
as at any of the London houses. The whole interior is
“ Methodistic ’’—plainness, neatness, and excellence is visible
everywhere. Mr, Champness’s secretary, the Rev. , gave us
a hearty greeting, and the head of the Joyful News staff of
publishers joined in. Had he, poor fellow, but known that an
old “ Ink Slinger ” was there to “tak” notes he might have
been more chary and guarded in his conversation. However,
ten or fifteen minutes and we were off again to the home of the
“ Joyfuj News ” originator, editor and proprietor— in fact, the
“boss” of the Joyful News establishment, when Mrs. Champness
is not at home-, for Mr. T. C. confessed privately to us that his
wife was the better preacher of the two. One thing we soon found
out, that they were an exceedingly “joyful” couple. Mrs.
Champness joined in our friendly chat with all the enthusiasm
or an evangelist, and finished by marching us right through the
house from top to bottom, even into the sleeping apartments of
the young “ workers,” where beds were as thick as in manv a
a good-sized hospital.
, cleanliness of everything was pleasant to look at, so
that when these young preachers by-and-bye get wives and
homes of their own they can talk to their « better halves” of the
good times they had, and the cleanliness and comforts they
enjoyed, at the hospitable camping grounds of Mrs. Joyful Hews
Champness, of Rochdale.
Out of the many incidents connected with his “ life work ”
related to us by Mr. Champness, I will only give one. He said—
Oentlemen, I never asked a man for a cent for this work in my
ire, nor ever will. The money comes in—in littles sometimes ;
but it comes, I have now 54 youngmen to support, clothe, and
teed, my expenses are over «£SO per week, and I hope to soon
double the number I employ.
I never was short but once since the Joyful Hews work
egun. In fact, I may tell you that, so far as keeping accounts,
i am not in that respect fit to keep a “toll-bar,” and as a conse-
quence I got muddled, and found I was behind at the bank.
I said to Mrs. Champness, « Lass, this won’t do. How, if
this is the Lord’s work the money will come in ; if not, it


won’t.” Then, said he, I went straight to the Lord and told
Him all about it, after this fashion : Now, Lord, Thou knowest
lam Thy servant; if this is Thy work, Thou wilt provide the
needful, and if it does not come, I’ll take it as a sign that it’s
time for Thomas Champness to withdraw, and I’ll take it as
such.
I had, said Mr. Champness, to go away the following day,
and told my wife if the cash came to wire me at once. I felt
sure the Lord would answer somehow.
On the Wednesday morning a letter came enclosing draft
for <£loo from a good medical gentleman I had never heard of,
saying he was anxious to help on the Lord’s work, and thought
£lOO would be needful at the Joyful News home.
Thus, said Mr. C., the Lord found the money for His own
work, and from that day to this I never doubted, nor will I ever
ask, a copper from any man living. All that comes is welcome,
hut no ashing or begging for the Lord’s work. It comes in
stamps, in coin, in all sorts of ways, from poor and rich. A
poor widow sent 6d, all she had. I felt as proud of that coin
(said he) as if it had been a sovereign.
“YORKSHIRE PUDDING.”
We were invited by Mrs. Champness to stay to lunch, and
down we went to the long dining-room, where, seated round
the table there were four ministers (the Rev. Mr. Howarth had
joined the party), seven or eight young evangelists, and several
members of the Champness family. It was my first experience
of “ Yorkshire Pudding” before meat. I was reminded of
Bobbie Burns’s grace before meat, as the currant pudding was
placed before each visitor as a first course—-
“ Some hae meat who canna eat,
And some haven’t meat who want it ;
But we hae meat, and we can eat,
. And so the Lord be thank-et.”
But where was the meat here? Yorkshire pudding, says Ito
myself, in Australia would not be considered meat. However,
I was on my good behaviour before the four parsons, or I should
have certainly said something funny. The pudding over, the
meat, potatoes, and vegetables followed, and, notwithstanding
the oddity of the set out,l for one thoroughly enjoyed pudding
before meat, and would not mind on some other occasions lunch-
ing with Mr. and Mrs. Champness at the Joyful News Home,
Rochdale.
I notice in the Methodist Recorder and Methodist Times, of
London, Mr. Champness has sent out two young men for Africa,
and others to different parts of the world. This of itself should
be to all Methodists “ Joyful News.”


A SUNDAY WITH THE METHODISTS
IN LIVERPOOL.
SEAELY forty years ago, when the American revivalist,
Caughy, was electrifying the crowds of people who
thronged Pitt Street Chapel, Liverpool, the writer, then a mere
stripling, attended night after night, and viewed with awe and
astonishment the scores of men and women who, as if shot with
an arrow, dropt down in different parts of the building during
the excitement of the services, and were by the stewards and
friends carried outside to the open air till they revived, and able
once more to re-enter the chapel and sit out the proceedings.
After such a long series of years, no wonder I felt anxious
to have a look at the old spots of the city associated with
Methodism, and especially the preaching places where my good
father’s dearest friend, the late Mr. Wm. Baird, so often took
me with his family to hear the old Methodist worthies hold
forth.
Being on a visit to my friend, H. Baird, Esq., of Leeces
Street, 1, on Sunday morning, February sth, hied away to the
Templar Hall (now one of the Eev. Charles Garrett's mission
stations). And here let me say, in parenthesis, that I had
special instructions from my old and faithful friend (Mr.
Matthew Burnett), the Social Eeformer, before leaving Australia,
to be sure and see and interview Mr. Garrett—a name honoured
and loved in the Australias for his great work among the out-
casts of Liverpool, and the noble efforts he has put forth in the
temperance reformation of the people addicted to the too free
use of “ England’s curse.”
The outside of Templar Hall, Mill Street, Toxteth Park, is
not very inviting. As we made our way up the narrow staircase
a queer feeling came over me —I thought a thief would likely
say, “ What a capital place it would be, on a dark night, to
throttle a stranger,” if a fellow was inclined to go “ a-burgling;”
and again, if it were an evening service, and the cry of “ fire”
was raised, how difficult it would be to escape! But that, I
understand, is soon to be attended to.
Mr. Garrett, in his opening remarks, said that the services
that day were really the opening services of the hall, as it had
now become the property of the mission, the deeds having been
signed and property handed over during the week.


The congregation, as they gathered, were just the class you
would expect to meet at a mission hall—every one neat and tidy
‘but no silks and shining broadcloth “ get-ups” of an extrava-
gant nature to be seen about.
I could best reckon up the assembly as an auditory of
earnest men and women, who were Gospel-greedy, come out
“ a-purpose” to be fed with the Bread of Life, anticipating no
disappointment.
There was a good sprinkling of fine young fellows of the
artisan class —men whose faces betokened honesty of purpose
and anxiety to be useful, several of these, as they entered, mak-
ing their way to the ante-room, where they seemingly had a
consultation anent the arrangement of the hall and the accom-
modating of the congregation.
About 11 o’clock the local missionary, Mr. Dobson, arrived,
and although quite a stranger to me, I could see by the kindly
greeting and friendly glances of the congregation that “ their
friend” had come. I would venture the opinion that the
majority of those present were, not long ago, non-worshippers
at either church or chapel. But there they were, devout and
solemn— mothers with their little ones, fathers smiling as they
placed little Tommy or little Mary alongside mother on the seat,
children neatly dressed and happy. If I could have but heard
the testimonies of these people, what a story it would have been
to take back to my Australian home !
The change in many, I was told, was wonderful. The dirty
attic—the comfortless room—the empty cupboard—the swearing,
drunken father and mother and starving children changed for
the pleasant cottage—the well-furnished, tidy rooms—the well-
provisioned larder —praying parents and happy childien.
Oh, Mr. Dobson, you will have your reward. Every kind
word of yours has been like balm to the hearts of these poor
sinful Liverpudlians. The out-door services you here held, at
first, I heard, so stormy and objectionable, have now merged
into’the comfortable hall, filled with devout worshippers. Surely
God will reward and deal kindly with the man who has been the
instrument in His hands in accomplishing this great work of
reformation.
But I must proceed. About ten minutes past eleven a gray-
haired man makes his way up the aisle. This is the
EEV. CHARLES GARRETT,
the much-esteemed and world-wide-known ex President of the
English Conference, and equally well known as a social reformer.
Mr, Garrett is, I should judge, a man of, say, sixty years, hale
and hearty, with light, elastic step. ,
As he takes his stand on the platform pulpit he looks as
straight as a dragoon guard. He has a phasing smile, a
countenance kind and expressive, looking round the hall with a


searching glance, as if he had. been seeking for certain indi-
viduals, noticing those who were present, and mentally noting
the absent ones.
As my friend and I were in rather early, I had the oppor-
tunity of seeing the faces of the congregation, and, judging from
the devout looks and anxiety depicted thereon, I should opine
they had all come thirsting for spiritual food, and expected to
be satisfied.
The reverend gentleman’s style is demonstrative and tell-
ing. His preaching is conversational and instructive, so that,
while he is pegging away at the subject of discourse, he is
quietly working his way into the inmost recesses of the heart,
and fixing truths there that will be sure to bring forth fruit in
years to come.
As in preaching so in praying—he seems to be talking to a
kind Father, a confiding Friend, who is attentively listening and
noting every request. How the good minister prayed for the
poor and needy, the sick and dying, the destitute and afflicted ;
and with what depth of feeling the congregation bore him up,
and wafted the petitions to the Throne with vollevs of
“ Amens.”
ihere was a heartiness about the prayers of the minister
and people and a solemnity about the younger portion of the
congregation highly commendable. Young men were there in
the heyday of youth, who, as they entered and took their seats,
reverently bowed the knee in prayer. And when the Lord’s
Prajer was repeated by the minister, every one of the congrega-
tion seemingly took it up, and, as if with one voice, re-echoed
the sublime petition.
The text was, “ And he thanked God and took courage.”
Throughout the forty minutes Mr. Garrett expounded, every eye
was fixed upon him, and as he from time to time made “ good
points” by way of illustration, a smile and a slight laugh
relieved the facial expression of the auditory. “ Heart kindlings”
was the theme mostly dwelt upon; mercies, past and present,
called to mind, and future blessings prayed for. All these
points had their fair share of attention, illustrated as each one
was by some apt and appropriate story.
Mr. Garrett is, I should say, a wise sermoniser. Ho hard-
headed platitudes for unsophisticated folk to work out were
introduced into his Gospel story. But simple strips of Gospel
tinder-wood, gently applied to hearts fitful and feverish, or
clogged up with earthly cares and anxieties, so that every one
had a spark for “ kindling” purposes ; and as they were indi-
vidually applied so deftly by the reverend preacher, the fire
burned (in Methodist phraseology) all over the hall, and God
had the glory.
As a stranger, 1 am convinced it is this style of old-time


Methodist preaching that will once more revive the churches,
and cause the good influences of the Gospel to spread from home
to home, and from circuit to circuit.
The Rev. Charles Garrett has set himself to a great work,
and I firmly believe he is just the man, in God’s hands, who
will do it successfully and well. May he have great successes
and a big reward.
In the evening I accompanied my host’s family to Pitt
Street Chapel. The great change in the appearance of the
interior is noticeable. The top storey and seating are floored in,
leaving the ground floor for class-rooms, etc. As it now is, the
interior is comfortable and snug. The style is certainly worth
imitating in new churches, as the congregation cannot be in-
commoded by having to stretch their necks to see the minister
in order to look over the high hats and feathered furbelows now
the fashion. The preacher on the occasion was the
REV. GILBERT MINEDEW,
superintendent of the Pitt Street Circuit, and assistant minister
to the Rev. Charles Garrett. Mr. Minedew is a good hymn-
reader, and prays with great fervour and deliberation. His
appearance in the pulpit is that of a much-in-earnest and zealous
young minister of the Gospel. His face is intellectual, his fine
forehead denoting mental vigour and thoughtfulness, and the
contour of his face sympathy and kindness. If the face is an
index of the heart, I should take the young minister to be “ one
to be trusted.” As Shakespeare puts it, “ What his heart thinks
his mouth speaks.” There is a kindly expression about the eyes
sufficient to make you feel that the young people of his congre-
gation would have in him a valued friend and a much-loved
pastor.
The subject of discourse was one of peculiar interest—viz.,
Jacob’s dream, and the ladder reaching from earth to heaven,
with Christ on the top rung. The new and living way opened
to all believers.
The reverend gentleman made the Bible story even more
attractive than it really is, by the way in which he dwelt upon
the different phases of the characters of Jacob and his brother
Esau. Every step in the ladder seemed to be full of meaning,
from the bottom to the top, so that as he proceeded the way of
Life was cleared up and intercourse opened between God and
man. , , „
The preacher clearly pointed out that through the death of
His Son, Jesus Christ, God the Father opened up this new and
living way to the kingdom of His grace: the new Jacob s ladder
to the celestial city. . .
The Rev. Mr. Minedew has a good voice, a lucid, clear way


of explaining Scripture history, and powerful magnetic influence
over his auditory.
The divinity of Christ, signified by the foot of the ladder
let down from heaven, shewing that it is by this way only man
can be reconciled to God the Father, was forcibly put and logi-
cally dwelt upon. Inasmuch as each upward step taken by the
Christian on this divine ladder of communication draws him
nearer to the great and loving Father, and at the same time
unites us to His Son Jesus Christ,
The communion service was held at the close of the preach-
ing service, upwards of seventy-five persons staying to partake
of the emblems of Christ’s death.


A RAMBLE ROUND BEAUTIEUL TORQUAY
WITH A ERIENH.*
fCENE after scene ©f wondrous beauty meets the eye
On every side. The placid bay bears on its peaceful
Bosom tiny boats and yachts for pleasure taking,
In variety endless.
While ships propelled by steam, both large and small,
Are waiting, ready to convey the seekers after healthful
Breezes to spots of “ Eden loveliness ” along the coast;
Where, wafted by the winds, the “ Ozone ” giving life abounds
in plenty.
Around the sea-girt shore, the rarified pure breathing
Atmosphere is everywhere ; and softly like the whispering
Of angels, steals on city or on inland dweller with
Soothing calmness, giving to those o’er-worked
In body or in brain, new life and strength,
Speaking them young again.
The sea along the pebbly beach at early morn,
Or noon, or dewy eve, glitters with gladsome beauty
In the sun. The terraced hills, rise in majestic
Grandeur all around, tinted with colours of the
Rainbow hue, and carpeted with flowers wild.
Each high projecting cliff is spotted here and there
With palaces princely ; called, as they are, by names
Of those who revelled, in their day, in mysteries
Of Science, Husbandry, and Art.
The lime and chestnut avenues speak out with
Silent voice of Love’s young dream ; reminding
Those advanced in years, of days gone by,
When arm in arm they strolled along beneath
The sylvan shade of trees gigantic, and told
Their tales of love to willing listeners.
But, above all, how deftly does the soul inspiring
Sights of “ picturesque Torquay ” and its surrounding
Beauties, of both sea and land—draw imperceptibly
The mind and heart away, with speed “ electric ”
To Him, the loving Father, the First Great Source of all.
*James Oddie, Esq., J.P., F.G.S., F.R.G.S,


Who in His mighty, matchless, wondrous skill, and
Wisdom infinite, made the wide world, and all
That is therein for man.
The people of Torquay, judging by numerous lofty
Spires, are Christian. And yet, most strange anomaly,
The freedom of God’s worshippers is questioned, and men
Who love the Saviour of mankind, the Jesus whom we
All adore and trust, are placed like criminals vile
Beneath the “ ban ” of law, suffering imprisonment and
Fines, for calling to the House of Prayer, with sound
Of cornet, and with beat of drum, the wanderers
From God.
Shame, shame upon such acts called lawful.
Let every man, whose heart beats loud for liberty
Of conscience, whose ire has risen, when reading,
How, in ages dark, the pillory and stake attested to
The martyr’s faith. Let all, we say, cry for
* Repeal of the iniquitous, obnoxious clause
In Torquay Harbour Act.
Thank God! for a Miss Eva Booth, and her
Brave followers processioning the streets.
They do but follow the “ Exemplar” Great, the Meek,
And lowly “ Nazarene,” compelling men and
Women, who worship nowhere to come in. That
Filled may be His House, and glory be ascribed
Unto His name.
The time is coming fast. The sun already peeps
Behind the distant hills, when those who now
Are persecuted oft, for conscience sake,
Will have their great reward, and Local Boards
The wide world o’er, shall help to push along the
Gospel-car, and feel in doing so, they honour
Christ, the Judge of all. Before whose throne
Salvationists and Magistrates, alike will soon appear
To meet their just award.
June 22nd, 1888.
* Since repealed by Act of Parliament


WRITTEN ON THE
DEATH OF MR. JOSEPH GLENNY, SEN.,
Who escaped from Earth to Heaven April 21st, 1888,
At Warren point, Co. Down, Ireland.
(jyg) RING out the burial clothes, and wrap him in his shroud,
jfepS The dearly loved old friend of young and old is dead.
Dead, did you say: aye dead,
But strange anomaly to all but those who have believed in Jesus:
The righteous dead —they live for evermore.
What pain and agony he to the last endured,
And how tenaciously he clung to life;
And yet, his feeble lips and throbbing heart would echo
The sweet words of Jesus in His greater agony —
“ Not my will, hut Thine he done, 0 Lord.”
’Tis good to watch beside the dying saint, and hear him testify
How great a Saviour is the crucified Redeemer of the World,
And listen, while to those around his dying bed he tells
The story of the keeping power, through a long life,
Of Him who came to earth to save the lost and ruined of our race.
Then sorrow not, but scatter wreaths of Spring flowers
On the new-made grave in old Clonallon Church-yard.
Dry up your scalding tears, dear friends and relatives bereaved,
The good Joseph Glenny whom you mourn,
The happy-faced old man, with snow white hair,
Has joined the throng of angels round the throne,
And is this lovely Sabbath morning praising with all the glorified,
The conqueror over death.
Oh, for a country where King Jesus reigns,
Where every tear is wiped away for ever,
And no sound but that of praise is ever heard in any of the
many mansions,
Where sorrow, sighing, care and sin,
Ne’er mar the bliss and joy of God's elect.
What comfort to those left behind to know,
That over sixty years ago or more, the sainted dead,
While yet a boy, with his companion, Robert A.,
Strayed out into the fields to pray;
And there and then, they both, with simple childlike faith,
Took Jesus at His word, and trusted to the saving of their souls.


So truly did he Christ the Lord accept,
And live the life of faith while here below,
That doubts and darkness fled away, like dew before the sun,
And nothing came between him and the loving father
But Christ, the sinner’s friend.
Hope, joy, and aspirations for the rest of Heaven,
Were present with him ever.
How wise it is to settle when in health,
The question of the “ after-life,”
And lay the burden of our sins with all simplicity and trust,
On Him , who on the cross of Calvary bore them for us there
In His own body on the tree.
Oh, that this quiet musing,
O’er the change of hiding-place—from earth to heaven—
Of our loved aged father, counsellor and friend,
May so impress our minds and hearts,
That it may draw us nearer to the friends beloved,
Who’ve crossed the river death,
And now surround the great white throne of God, the Judge
of all.
On April 21, 1888, at his residence, Warrenpoint, County
Down, Ireland, Mr. Joseph Glenny, sen., aged 78 years, the
beloved father of Mrs. William Orr, of Newry, and Mr. H.
Glenny, J.P., P.R.G.S., F.G.S., of Ballarat, Victoria, Australia,
and brother of Mr. Isaac Glenny, sen., Newry.
“ And so He giveth His beloved sleep”
Warrenpoint, April 29th, 1888.


WRITTEN ON THE EIRST ANNIVERSARY
OE MY DEAR MOTHER’S DEATH.
She fell asleep May 6th, 1883, at Warrenpoint, Ireland.
-ZEtat 71 Years.
tNLY a year ago to-day !—My loving mother died.
Twelve months this day she reached the heavenly shore,
Where, with the saints and angels glorified,
She dwells with Christ, her “ King,” for evermore.
Only a year ago, to-day ! — She fancied she could see
The absent “ wandering boys ” she loved so well—
And, doubtless, saw them kneeling at her knee,
Listening intent, to Bible stories, she would tell.
Too weak to speak, she lisped, “ God bless my boys ”
Far, far away across the ocean sea,
And may they ne’er forget whose hope and joy
And comfort, I oft prayed that they might be.
Only a year to-day !—Her Spirit winged its way, and fled
To Jesu’s arms, where all life’s troubles cease.
Her race was run —she bowed her weary head,
And slept the sleep of everlasting peace !
* * # # *
Could I but once more see that loving face
And whisper in her ear —my purpose now—
How cheered she would be in that holy place
To hear and register the Sacred “ Vow."
Father resignedly awaits the call the whispered voice of many
years of love,
When both shall sweetly re-united be, in that thrice blessed
happy home above,
There sisters, brothers, kindred, meet again, when sordid earthly
ties are snapped and riven,
And the exalted Saviour smiles to see whole families at home
with Him in Heaven.
SILVERPEN.
Hobart, Tasmania,
May 6th, 1884.
r *


“SILYEEPEN’S SOLILOQUY”
jjfar reading in tie Melbourne “ Wesleyan Spectator ” tie
Obituary Notice of tie late Mrs. Higgins, of Beecl-
wortl, Victoria. JEtat 68 years.
tXJR aged Christian mother dear and friend,
Tired, weary, with long climbing up life’s mountain side,
Has reached the crown at last.
His rod and staff she all the way did lean upon;
And, when the beauties of the glory-land
Spread out before her wondering eyes,
She sweetly entered into rest.
Looking from earth to heaven,
Through God’s clear telescope of faith and love,
I see her pleasant smile, and seem to hear her say,
“ Home— Heaven, at last with Him I love—my Saviour-Jesus!”
How Christ-like was her life !
Her every word well chosen, pure, and good.
She is not dead, but lives, for ever blest.
Saints never die. The old and young, alike,
Seemed drawn to her by ties of love.
And when she, with a loving mother s heart,
Spake of the coming resurrection morn,
The most obtuse could not but feel that she,
Our aged friend, was one of God’s elect.
Even now, this early Sabbath morn,
Away from home and all I hold most dear,
While musing on this sad record of death,
I picture to myself the kind, yet sad
And thoughtful face, whom all who knew
Could not but love. And as my pen indites
This mournful eulogy of heart-felt sorrow —
Not unmixed with joy—l pray to God,
Through Jesus Christ His bon,
That when my call does come,
I may, like her, my sainted sister friend,
Be watching, and be waiting, for the Master’s-
Come up higher!
Adelaide, May 22, 1887.


“ SILVERPEN’S SOLILOQUY,”
After receiving a letter from Ballarat, conveying the sad news that our much
loved niece—ROSE BLANCHARD—had died of Typhoid Fever, at
Avoca, Victoria, on the evening of her 20 th Birthday, May 27th, 1887.
ujfO EAD it again, my love, the sad news flashed to you
Across the wires, on Friday eve. Surely there must
«' c ' Be some mistake ! It cannot be that she, the youthful,
Happy, merry girl, until a day or so ago, so full of
Healthful life, has gone from us for ever.
Alas ! Alas ! It is then true, Dear Cousin Rose is dead!
Lizzie, pull down the blinds, that no light shine within
Our hearts and home to-day, except it come direct from
Heaven, Let mourning, crape, and sighs be everywhere.
Ho wonder that the big tears start, and chase each
Other down the face, while reading o’er and o’er
The electric message sad—
“ Dearest Rose Blanchard died upon her natal day."
Only twenty ! just blooming into lovely womanhood,
And dead ! Great source of life, why is it thus—
That those who long have sinned are spared,
And she, our much-loved darling Rose,
Just pushing out her tiny bark into the stream
Of life, is by dread “ typhoid ” dashed against the
Breakers, and is gone ?
How hard it is to feel that we must give her up,
And know that death and the cold icy grave
Have claimed her for their own ?
But God’s ways are inscrutable, past finding out.
He knoweth best! For is He not, too wise to err,
Too good to he unkind!
Is it surprising that my thoughts of the Avoca home
Are sad, when death, grim monster, tapping at its
Inner chamber, enters, and takes away with him
The earthly casket of our favourite —Rose P
Or is it strange that
I should gather up the memory petals left behind,
And form a precious relic cluster thus ?


God pity and console the dear bereaved ones,
In their trying hour. They need so much
The succour He, the great Heart-soother, only gives.
But look ! I see by faith beyond the river death
Where she has crossed, a goodly number
Of the angel-band, waiting to welcome her;
And there, the first to greet her, one whose face
We all remember well. And as they gather
Round their sister newly-glorified, the Father
And the Child are once more re-united in the glory-land,
Where parting is no more, and sorrow is unknown.
Then as I sit and muse within myself, another
Telegram arrives, but this time from the Great Eternal Throne
“ Be comforted, ye weary, hrolcen-hearted ones.
She is not dead, hut liveth ever hlest:
God’s children never die.”
'Tis thus we part, and bury up our precious dead,
Adding another link to golden chains that bind us
To the skies.
Farewell, dear sainted Rose; thou canst no longer come
To us, but we may go to thee.
And in the coming years, when little prattlers
Gather round our knees, we’ll whisper to them,
In sad accents low, how upon thy birthday eve
God took thee to Himself.
Adelaide, South Australia,
May 30, 1887.


TO MY DAUGHTER LIZZIE.
AWAY FROM HOME—A REVERIE.
jjjtffif Y darling little “ Posy ” oft I see
As thoughts of home —in dreams —appear to me
And Willy with his childish lisp I hear,
Filling the room with little words of cheer ;
Then Violet, tiny beauty full of love,
Smiles on me like an angel from above ;
As George with slippers down at heel runs by,
With Lizzie after him —just then I sigh
And wish so much that each would love the other
As loving sister should and loving brother.
But stay! there’s Harry far away from home,
Away in the North-East—the absent one—
Surely I must include him in the fry
Of faces in my visions as they fly—
For was he not the first to cheer and bless
Our wedded home, and fill with happiness
My young wife’s loving heart with gladsome joy,
While gazing on her first-born baby-boy.
But hark! I hear dear Emma say, “My love,
You won’t forget the little ones above,
Who’ve joined the angel-band and dwell on high,
Waiting up there, to meet us in the sky
When chains and earth-bound ties are snapt and riven,
We meet as one whole family in heaven ?”
N.B. Just then the parlour maid knocks at my bedroom
“ Please, sir, breakfast’s ready,” and I snooze no more.
Gould’s Country, Tasmania,
July, 1883.
door.


A DEATH-BED SCENE
In the Adelaide Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
“THE DYING YOUTH’S LAST WORDS.”
££ OME near to me, kind nurse, this lovely “ Easter ” morn,
And whisper once again into my ear of Jesus
And His love.
How sad and lone
I often feel when lying here upon this couch of pain,
Trying to while the weary hours away, by thinking
Of the past, and wondering if death is drawing near.
’Tis strange,
Since early morn to-day, my thoughts have wandered
To my childhood’s home. That much-loved home, where
Father, Mother, Joe , Charlie , Annie and
Dear Lillie dwelt.
Yes, kind nurse, I know full well,
Three of the loved ones named have gone from earth
To Heaven, and now are safely housed in realms
Above, where none but God and sainted angels dwell.
But, tell me, nurse ?
Do I dream F or am I quite awake ? Is that
My father loved I see so near my bed ? And
Look ! that shadowy form, close by his side. Why ! ’tis
Dearest mother, whom the angels took away so long ago.
Oh ! do not for
A single moment break the Heavenly spell,
Kind nurse, if love is in your heart. Stoop down and
Kiss me, Mother mine. It seems so long, so very long—
Since those dear lips touched with a loving pressure
Your own darling boy’s and said—God keep you,
Jaclc! —good bye —and died.
And now, I fancy,
I can see another face or two— surely my eyes
Deceive me not ? There’s our loved Annie, and
In the “ shadows” brother Charlie moves about.
Yes ! yes ! ’tis so.
Just now, dear nurse, I feel my heart
In touch with loved ones gone before, and know,
Without a doubt, Death has no sting—Grave no Victory.


Please turn the light
Still near, to my eyes, it seems
So dark. Be sure and keep the flame
Alight, and let me not again be left
In misty gloom, when you are here.
There’s no night there,
Sayest thou ! How lovely ! Evermore to be where
Jesus, the great Light of lights, with all His glorious
Brightness, shines resplendent.
Ah, yes ! dear nurse, my mother taught me,
When a little child to pray —that simple prayer —
“ Gentle Jesus, meek and mild.” And now I know
He must have been both kind and good as well, to
Suffer, bleed, and die for sinful man.
Look up
Yes! I’m looking up, and see before my dying eyes,
O! wondrous sight! the Cross on which the Saviour of the
world was nailed
For me and all the human race.
But see!
His brow is pierced with thorns. His hands
And feet are bleeding from the imprint of
The nails. His blessed side is open wide,
And from it gushes forth, as from a mountain stream,
Both blood and water,
I know, dear lady friend,*
It must he Jesus whom I see. Though sinful and polluted as
I am,
Dear Christ, I come to Thee. I will helieve Thou art
My Saviour, Prophet, Priest and King.
* *
Hush ! tread lightly o’er the darkened room,
Lear Jack is dead, the spirit of the youthful trusting lad
Has gone to God who gave it.
Let us not sorrow
O’er the earthly casket made of clay, now tenantless. His race
Is run. The loved ones gone before have met
Him on the other side. The Palace of our God
Is his abiding place for ever.
John Wilson Palmee, son of the late Mr. John Wilson
and Mrs. Mary Jane Palmer, grandson of the late Mr. Joseph
Glenny, of Warrenpoint, and nephew of Mrs. Joseph Speer,
London, died April 10th, 1887, 21 years.
* Miss Robinson.


WEEP NOT.
(Written to my dear Father when on his death-bed.)
BATHER! the Lord has counted all your tears,
And from His heavenly throne above appears
To bid you drive away your idle fears—
Weep not!
Can you not in your loving Saviour trust?
Is Jesus not the Good, the Kind , the Jihst,
And merciful High Priest ?
Weep not!
He will while crossing “ Jordan ” be your friend,
Your staff and rod—Himself on you attend,
His wings surround you even to the end—
Weep not!
Dear mother waits you on the other shore—
Weep not!
She landed safely,* all her warfare’s o’er
Weep not!
Your children, too, wait by the river side,
They’ll welcome you, another glorified,
And you shall ever with them all abide —
Weep not!
A mansion is prepared for you above—
Weep not!
Do you not hear them singing, “ God is Love ?”
Weep not!
Christ Jesus is the dying sinner’s friend,
The only hope he clings to, to the end—
Oh ! let the Holy Ghost just now descend.
Weep not! Weep not!
* May 6th, 1883.
London, Feb. 12, 1888.


“ SILYERPEN’S ” EULOGY ON A ERIEND
(James Oddie, Esq., j.p., e.g.s., f.r.g.s., p.e.s.,
Ballarat, Victoria, Australia).
SCIENCE and Art and everything that’s noble pure and good
Are hound up in his blameless life. The Pioneers of far
famed
Ballarat, included an Oddie baptised James among their number,
And in the City’s history, written by scribe called Withers,
recorded
Is the fact, that the first Mayor in Embryo, was Oddie James.
The Institutions Charitable and Hospital, with Churches,
Christian
Many, Owe no small debt of gratitude to Preston, Lancashire,
The Town that gave our golden City the gentleman of whom
we all
Are proud, and whom my “ Silverpen ” tipped as it often is, with
Point of steel, this faint attempt at Eulogy indites.
On Mount named Pleasant, near the point called Golden, may
Be seen Oddie’s Observatory, where Captain, surnamed Baker,
Genius of Telescopes, presides, and gladly gives to all
Who visit there, both rich and poor, both young and old,
Such glimpses of God’s wondrous starry firmament
As makes them feel, how great is He who fixed the Planet’s
course,
And bid the revolving Orbs pursue through ages countless
Their due velocity of speed ; each in itself a world.
The School of Mining lore, but infantile as yet, is spreading
Knowledge everywhere. The youthful genius finds that here
The hidden secrets lie; where Chemicals and Crucible and Fire
Unite, to open lay before the world of Scientists as clear
As noonday Sun, the mystery so longed for by the Ancient Seers
Of days gone by, who in their caverns dark, recesses secret,
And mountain dens, lit up by lamps of oil, spent their long
Days and nights, seeking to find the Stone Philosophers, by
Brooding o’er their Alchymistic lore, until their fires and
Lives alike, went out, in darkest blackness


Who would have in the days of tented diggerdom foretold, that
After but a span of years or so, a city would arise on Gold
Fields Ballarat, and such a one as strangers from afar
Would come to see and to admire, and as they sped from
Street to street, and crossed our lovely lake called Wendowree,
And walked beneath the willows green by waters’ edge, and
sauntered
Through the Eden bowers, and tripped it lightly o’er the winding
paths
On either side, adorned with marble statuary from sunny skied
Italian studios, and heard the English thrush and blackbird
Warbling in the trees and shrubs, and saw our fernery, and
Splendid growth of fragrant flowers, and watched beneath
The shady oak and other English trees, the yachts
And boats, both large and small, many propelled by steam,
And gazed with joyful pleasure at the crowd of well dressed
folk
Of every nation under heaven, hurrying to and fro.
No wonder they (although from distant climes) exclaim!
This Ballarat, this Mushroom City of Australia Land,
Is wondrous ! beautiful! and fair to see !
And still they wonder, as they hear from those in civic power,
While going round the city and surroundings, that love of art
should hand in hand
Advance with commerce and with trade, that citizens so
Fond of golden coin should beautify their city thus, and
In its very centre build a Gallery of Art, where may be seen
Pictures of value rare, where connoisseurs with judgment most
Mature and cultivated taste, may view the works of Masters
old,
And those of modern school as well, where youthful aspirants
For artistic fame, seeking for excellence in breadth and
Depth of nature’s colouring, may so be charmed and profited,
that
They themselves, gaining proficiency by studying the works of
Limners old, may one day burst upon the Southern world, as
Austral’s
Gifted Children, students in whom the love of art, the sacred
legacy divine, exalted is.
All praise to “ Premier ” of Victorian Ministry,
Duncan Gillies —Honorable—for thus remembering Ballarat
In Estimates of 1888. Apportioning, as he did, to
Gallery of Art, ten thousand golden sovereigns, and
School of Mines, three thousand coin of equal value
At the mint.


No wonder that the news was hailed with joy, on
Every English speaking shore, by old time “ Sons of
Diggerdotn ; and that the language of our hearts
Re-echoed in our words—“ Right nobly done,” Sir Knight
To be : “Mayest thou have blessings plentiful, as
Grains of sands upon the pebbly beach, and a long
Happy life! ” This loyal, princely act of thine to
Science and twin sister Art, deserves a record
Bright on Austral’s roll of fame, shining out lustrous clear
As time rolls on.
It seems like fairy tale, to thus descant on city’s progress and
Activity in science and in art, but no less strange it is than
true,
And we who hail from dear old Ballarat, and have our homes
And hearths within its boundary lines, feel proud of all its
greatness,
And love to talk and write re city’s many wonders, and pleased
We are to hear it called (in this our mother land), the premier
golden city of
The Sunny South, the place where scores of tons of precious ore
Were raised from virgin soil, rejoicing as it did, when
Issued from the mint in legal coin, Anglo-Australian
Homes, as well as those in every foreign land beneath the sun.
And here once more the subject of my eulogy stands prominent,
For was James Oddib not among the first to strike the match
that
Kindled into life, the people’s taste for cultured art ? and by
his homely
Voice, and ever ready help, fostered and reared the one time
Tender plant, so flourishing a tree of art to-day.
Need I say aught of 1854 Eureka Riots, or the diggers rising in
Rebellion ’gainst red-tape officialdom, and Government iu-
capables,
In order thus, to claim their rights as Englishmen. Or need I
say
As one who lived in those good days of olden time, and grumb-
ling plenty,
How men, most loyal of the Queen of England’s sons were
forced by
Cruel botched-up mining laws (now obsolete), to strike for
liberty and freedom
From galling licence fee, collected as it was, by snobbish mob
of well paid


Hirelings, dressed for the time in brief authority, with golden
stripes
Upon their coats and pants they should have had, with whips,
upon their backs.
No wonder that our diggers bold, faced Red Coats many, on
that 3rd
December morn, showing to all the world, the spirit of their
forefathers
Rested on them, that no coward blood or sycophant obse-
quiousness
Had place within the hearts of loyal men, though rebels called
in law.
In that day’s record, now preserved by state, a noble son of
Erin’s
Isle, stood forth in stockade rude, Commander Chief of sturdy
rebel gang,*
Falling wounded early in the fight, and to this day with armless
sleeve,
He, in Victoria’s Senate house, upholds the people’s rights, and
Shows, like Roman warrior of old, his scars and wounds
As proof of what he suffered in a righteous cause.
’Tis wondrous strange, that ■ this brave Irishman of whom I
write, like
Many of his predecessors, has since that day, risen high
In councils of the State, and also acted Speaker of Victorian
Parliament,
And yet, this very man, was hounded down by old-time tyrants,
And hundreds five, of sterling pounds, offered to him who
would
Return with Peter’s head, alive or dead.
And here again Jambs Oddie to the fore, as sympathiser with
the
Horny handed sons of toil, establishing their digging-rights,
even at
The bayonet’s point.
* The Hon. Peter Lalor, M.P.


The grand finale of the battle—fought on that bright Sunday
Morning long ago, by trained and well armed soldiers of the
Queen, ’gainst crowds of diggers true (brave men more used to
pick and
Shovel, or the pen, than instruments of war) —was this,
Officialdom caved in ; and to this present hour the blood
Then spilt in cause most just, and equitable, stands out on
History’s page, as beacon light of warning, to those who guide
Affairs of State. A most inhuman act of butchery, towards
More true to Queen’s authority by far, than any who the orders
Gave to slaughter and to kill!
Then ring the Town Hall Bells, apd let the bunting fly from
Flag pole high, Ballarat City rau4h-advance ;
Her mines of gold be still the wonder of the world;
Her scientific schools, Gallery of Art, and God like Charitable
Institutions
Be heard of everywhere ; her founders’ names
Be written in letters gold on History’s page ; her care for
Widows and the fatherless recorded be in Heaven ; and in
The ages yet to come, her noble citizens will all (like him of
whom I write),
Be lovingly embalmed in memory’s vault, as men who did their
duty
Well to God and fellow man.
London, July 12th, 1888.


A TEETOTAL WEDDING*
From “ Temperance News," June, 1887.
BRO. HARRY JOSEPH GLENNY, Grain Merchant, &c.,
P.C.R., of the Numurkah Tent, eldest son of our old
veteran teetotaller, “ Silverpen,” Bro. H. Glenny, J.P., of
Ballarat, has taken unto himself a wife. The wedding was
conducted, as might be expected, on purely total abstinence
principles, not a drop of anything intoxicating was indulged in
at the wedding feast except mirthful good humour, of which
commodity the company had plenty and to spare, showing that
the mocker and “ big curse” of the Australias is not required
or necessary on such happy occasions as the one referred to.
Another out-and-out total abstainer performed the ceremony—
the Rev. R. C. Flockart, of Ballarat East. We wish our young
brother and his partner every happiness and prosperity. Br.
H. J. Glenny is, like his father, a life total abstainer, having
graduated from the Juvenile branch into the Adult Tent, and
he since then has been three times C.R. of his Tent. The young
couple left Ballarat on the evening of their marriage by express
train for Melbourne, scores of friends showering them with rice
as the train left the station. The bridesmaids were Miss Sophy
Cutter, Miss Lizzie, Rose May, and Yiolet Glenny. The grooms-
man, Mr. John Bryant, of the Union Bank of Australia. The
marriage ceremony took place at Downshire Villa, Ballarat
East, the residence of Mr. H. Glenny, J.P.


“THE TEMPERANCE NEWS.”
October ls£, 1887.
*BO. H. GLENN Y, J.P., of Ballarat. —The mail steamer
Borne will, we believe, have on board on her homeward
passage one of our most trusted and respected I.O.R’s
and I O.G.T.’s. Bro. H. Glenny, J.P., is known all over the
Australias for the last thirty-three years as a staunch teetotaller
and friend of the good cause. His writings as “ Silverpen” are
always interesting and enjoyable, and his good work in the
cause of Temperance deserves the thanks of all teetotallers. Bro.
Glenny has been entrusted with a very responsible mission to the
old country, viz., the floating on the London market of the Queen's
and North Birthday Companies, Dunolly. From the first-
named Mr. G. had, it is said, a few years ago, a large fortune
in dividends. We wish our good brother a pleasant voyage and
great success in his undertaking. We understand Bro. Glenny,
who has been so many years identified with the National Mutual
Life Association as Superintendent of Agencies, has been granted
six months’ leave of absence. We heartily recommend Bro.
Glenny to the friends of the Temperance movement all over the
world as a man and a brother who has done much in these
colonies to push on the good cause, and chase intemperance
from the land. Our readers, we are sure, will anxiously look
out for “ Silverpen’s ” jottings from the u old country.”






