

JOTTINGS IN AUSTRALIA:
• <•*
NOTES ON THE FLORA AND FAUNA
OF VICTORIA.
WITH A
CATALOGUE OF THE MOKE COMMON PLANTS, THEIR HABITATS,
AND DATES OF FLOWERING.
SAMUEL HANNAEORD, ESQ.
* AUTHOR OF “FLORA TOTTONIENSIS,” AND LATE HONORARY SECRETARY
OF THE VICTORIA HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY,
■I *
MELBOURNE:
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & CO., 44 COLLINS STREET WEST.
1856.
**S.






JOTTINGS IN AUSTRALIA:
NOTES ON THE FLORA AND FAUNA
OF VICTORIA.
WITH A
CATALOGUE OF THE MORE COMMON PLANTS, THEIR HABITATS,
AND DATES OF FLOWERING.
SAMUEL lIANNAFORD, ESQ.
AUTHOR OF “FLORA TOTTONIENSIS,” AND LATE HONORARY SECRETARY
OF THE VICTORIA HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY.
/ /O *7 ■ /
“ He, whose heart will bound to mark
The full bright burst of summer morn,
Loves too each little dewy spai'k
By loaf or tlow’ret worn:
Cheap forms, and common hues, ’tis true,
Through the bright shower-drop meet his view;
The colouring may be of this earth,
The lustre comes of heavenly birth.” — Kehle.
MELBOURNE:
JAMES J. BLUNDELL <fc CO., 44 COLLINS STREET WEST.,
18 5 6.




Walker, May & Co, Printers and Stereotype
1(I t Oollui* flti'iint Wnet
aiiver, way ci e>o , miners aim n
19 Little Collins Street West,


TO MY VALUED FRIEND,
JOHN MILNER BARRY, ESQ., M.D
“jottings xrtr , j ATJS'X':R,J^X j I.A.”
ARK INSCRIBED AS A
MEMORIAL OF PLEASANT SUMMER RAMBLES.
WaRRKAMBOOL, ISSC.


ERRATA.
At page 4, read currmte for currento.
At page 7, twelfth line from top, read variifolium.
At page 13, third line from bottom, read graminifolii.
At page 21, sixth line from bottom, read odoratm.
At page 80, fifteenth line from top, read Durham for Murray.
At page (13, read Onopordurn Acanthhira.


JOTTINGS IN AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.—INTRODUCTORY.
The following “Jottings in Australia” have been published at
intervals in various periodical works, and are only re-published in
this, we hope, more convenient form, from the want, which we feel
assured others have felt in common with ourselves, on newly arriv-
ing in this country, of a work which would afford some informa-
tion relative to the more common Birds, Insects, Plants, &c., met
with in their daily rambles. All that is published on the Natural
History of Australia is scattered through the writings of travellers,
or written in the Latin tongue, which, however familiar to a skilled
botanist, is rather apt to damp the ardour of the young student.
In ornithology, Goold’s is the only work, but far too costly for the
general reader. In algology, Professor Harvey’s “Nereis Australis ”
is much to be commended, as it contains the whole of the sea-weeds
of the Southern Ocean. First and foremost among Botanical
Works is the “ Prodromus Floras Novae Hollandice, ” by Robert
Brown, “ that most illustrious of living botanists, and the man
who first opened out to science the richness and singularity of the
Australian Flora.”*
So closely have we adhered to our title, “ Jottings in Australia,”
that we might almost say with Montaigne, we “ have here made a
nosegay of wild-flowers, and have brought nothing of our own but
the string which binds themfor other avocations occupy our time
and forbid our rambling “ ancle deep in flowers,” or chasing the
“ Insect crowds
That make the sunshine populous.”— Bryant.
* Lecture by Edward Forbes, F.R.S., on the knowledge of Australian rock*.
M 3155/ nosi)


Yet do we delight to saunter forth at the commencement of a new
day, amidst the beauty and peacefulness of nature, when the dew
is glistening on the grass, and listen to the song of some of our
native birds, which a later riser misses altogether. There is always
something to cheer and gladden the heart, even in the midst of
affliction ; and when we remember that “ ilka blade o’ grass keps
its ain drap o’ dew,” we are enabled with much more fortitude to
bear up against the little adversities which beset us in this world :
truly, indeed, we may at all times find
Some shape of beauty to move away the pall
From our dark spirits.”
Who is there that does not love flowers ? The ancients prized
them highly, as we find in the writings of Herodotus, Theophrastus,
Anacreon, etc. The misseltoe and vervain were worshipped by the
Druids ; and Plutarch tells us that the lovely Perigune, in child-
like simplicity, addressed her prayers to the plants and bushes as
if they were sensible of her misfortune. On the Continent the
Hdichrysum is used to decorate the graves of the young, as an
emblem of immortality. The Irish, too, have their floral super-
stitions; the St. John’s wort (Hypericum) being used as a charm
against evil spirits; and on May eve the young girls gather the
yarrow ( Ahi-hallune ), and place it under their pillows, wrapped in
the stocking of the right foot, confidently expecting that during the
night they will obtain a sight of their future spouses. We all know
what exquisite flowers are reared by our Spitalfield weavers, and
the magnificent double wallflowers and stocks which are seen in
the gardens of our peasantry at home. All our poets loved flowers.
Spencer thought the man who could not enjoy the “ felicitie” of
roaming amidst “ flowers and weeds of glorious feature,” was well
worthy to taste of wretchedness; and the writings of Cowper,
George Herbert, Wordsworth, Langhorne, Shenstone, Hartley
Coleridge, and that noble soul, Keats, teem with fresh descriptions
of wild flcrwers. Some time before the death of Keats, he said to
his faithful friend Severn, who had done so much to soothe his
sick bed, that “he thought the sincerest pleasure he had received


in life was in watching the growth of flowers again, after lying
awhile still and peaceful, said
“ I feel the flowers growing over me.”
He delighted far a\vay to leave
“ All moaner thoughts, and take a sweet reprieve
From little cares, to find, with easy quest,
A fragrant wild, with nature’s beauty drest.”
But our chief object in writing this little book is to induce every
one, particularly those of sedentary habits, to take proper exercise.
We all know how necessary air and exercise are to our well being,
yet how prone we are to neglect it on the most trifling excuse.
No matter what the inducement is, whether roaming after plants,
or shells, or sea-weeds, so long as the mind is thoroughly and pleas-
antly employed; and to prove this, we cannot do better than
insert here a few extracts from the “ Journal of Health,” shewing
how necessary recreation is to keep the brain healthy and unim-
paired.
“It is very generally recognised and admitted that deprivation of air and
exercise is a great evil; but it is not so well known that abstinence from occa-
sional recreation or amusement is an evil of no slight magnitude. It is, however,
a primary law of the human economy, that no organ can maintain its integrity
without regular recurrent periods of activity and rest In the case of the muscular
system, if any muscle, or set of muscles, cease to be used, it wastes and dis-
appears; but if it be used too much, it becomes strained, and loses its power. It
is the same with the nervous system; if the brain be never exercised, its energy
is impaired; but if it be over-exercised its energy is exhausted. If, when a person
takes a very long -walk, he returns home fatigued, and finds that his muscles are
temporarily thrown into a wrong or disordered condition; and if he continues this
process of fatiguing himself every day, after a certain time he becomes thoroughly
knocked up, ill, and incapable of undergoing even a common amount of exertion.
So it is with the brain. If an individual keep his attention upon the stretch for
an undue number of hours, he experiences, at the expiration of his task, brain-
fatigue, loss of mental power, and a sensible necessity of rest; and if this indi-
vidual persevere, day after day, month after month, year after year, in subjecting
his brain, without intermission or repose, to extreme fatigue, he will end by
setting up a peculiar state, which is, unhappily, excessively common in these
times, and is known by the name of congestion of the brain. The activity of any
organ causes a flow of blood towards itself. If a person raise ins arm by the action


of deltoid muscle, that action or contraction of the muscle produces a determina-
tion of blood to its interior, and if a person think, the act of thought causes a flow
of blood to the brain; but if a person think intently, this flow of blood is often very
perceptible, for the head becomes hot, and a sensation of throbbing about the
temples, or in the head itself, is experienced. Now, when a man undergoes too
much brain-work, a constant and considerable flow of blood to the head occurs,
which may become chronic or permanent, and produces that condition which is
called determination of blood to the head, which not' unfrequently ends in appo-
plexy or paralysis. Congestion of the brain is one of the most prevailing diseases
that torture humanity.”
We have thought it advisable to shew how great a number of
plants may he obtained with ease, almost at our very doors ; to give
an index of the more common Phtenogamous or flowering plants
and ferns, with their habitats and dates of flowering, from speci-
mens in our own herbarium —referring our readers for more full
information, to the reports of our esteemed Mend, Dr. Ferdinand
Mueller, the Government Botanist, on the Vegetation of the
Colony; and, at the same time, notice such shells, insects, and
fossil remains, as may have come under our immediate notice,
trusting that those with more leisure than we have been able to
afford the subject, will, at some future time, improve considerably
on these few pages written currento calamo.
We do not, in these “ Jottings,” intend to confine ourselves to
Botany ; but, whilst we introduce such plants as are common, and
easily recognisable by externals, we shall have a few words to say,
en passant, on such of our native birds and insects as may be
likely to interest the scientific and unscientific of our readers, and
pave the way for a more enlarged study of them. We much regret,
for the sake of the less scientific, our inability to give popular
names of plants,—in fact, there are none, either English or Native,
except in a very few instances, —but where practicable they will be
given ; and we will do all in our power to make them easily known,
even to the merest novice in Natural Science.


CHAPTER 11.
“ To him who, in the love of nature, holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks
A various language: for his gayer hours
She has a voice of gladness, and a smile
And eloquence of beauty; and she glides
Into her darker musings with a mild
And healing sympathy that steals away
Their sharpness, ere he is aware.”— Bryant.
There are few things, in this world of ours, more hallowing and
more purifying than a love of wild-flowers—“ those terrestrial stars
that bring down heaven to earth, and carry up our thoughts from
earth to heavenand never were we more struck with this feel-
ing than on sailing up the beautiful river Yarra Yarra one bright
summer morning, after a tedious voyage of nearly four months,
and seeing around us on every side something new to cheer and
awaken our affections for our adopted land: new plants—new
birds—new insects—with our favourite, the swallow, “ cheeping
and twittering” as of old, endeared to us ever by Tennyson’s beau-
tiful lines :
“ O Swallow, swallow, flying, flying south,
Fly to her, and fall upon her gilded eaves,
And tell her, tell her, what I tell to thee.
“ O Swallow, swallow, if I could follow and light
Upon her lattice, I would pipe and trill,
And cheep and twitter twenty million loves.
“ 0 were I thou that she might take me in,
And lay me in her bosom, and her heart
Would rock the snowy cradle till I died."
We take it for granted that our readers will not inquire, as
many have done, “ What is the use of studying flowers, and what
is gained by it ?” Is this the spirit in which we should look on the


productions of our Creator ? and should we value them only as they
are a source of profit to us ? “ God Almighty first planted a garden,”
says Lord Bacon, “ and, indeed, it is the purest of all human
pleasuresso have we ever felt in our communion with nature,
and our happiest hours have been spent abroad in the fields and
hedgerows, for nothing
“ Bears the impress of Almighty power
In characters more legible, than those
Which he hath written on the tiniest flower,
Whose light bell bends beneath the dew drop’s weight”
How sincerely do we hope that the following “ Jottings” may
induce many, who now complain so bitterly of ennui, and want of
that amusement which older countries afford them, to embrace
that delightful study in which there is always
“ Something to please, something to instruct
Never was there a wider field for such pursuits than in this
country! We remember, on going into our native town, some few
years since, after a long absence, and collecting the indigenous
plants of the district, to the number of five or six hundred, within
a range of four miles, being asked by some friends, to whom the
treasures of our herbarium were “Did all these grow
here?” “Yes,” we exclaimed, “and many more!” In a few
months there were twenty enthusiastic botanists, who felt then, and
then only, that he “ misses one of the best blessings of life who has
not made to himself friends of the wild spring flowers.” Think,
then, my dear readers, of the treasures awaiting you in this land,
where some ten or twelve thousand plants are indigenous ; whilst
those of our British isles do not number two thousand! How
many a happy day have we spent on the banks of the river Yarra
Yarra, one of the most charming, perhaps, from its many windings,
and the beauty of the vegetation covering its banks, in the country.
Some short time since, wishing to “ possess ourselves in much
quietness,” we rambled from the bridge at Eichmond as far as
Dight’s Mill, some five or six miles on its margin, bearing in mind
honest old Izaak Walton’s saying—“ When I would beget content


and increase confidence in the power, and wisdom, and providence of
Almighty God, I will walk the meadows hy some gliding stream,
and there contemplate the lilies that take no care, and those very
many other little living creatures that are not only created, but feed
(man knows not how) by the goodness of the God of nature, and,
therefore, trust in him.” At this season of the year, the flat
grounds are one vast swamp, yet even here springs up the simple
little Claytonia Australasica ,* and the surface of the water is
covered with the minute inconspicuous flowers of Ranunculus in-
undatus (water crowfoot). Many aquatics may he secured now
for the herbarium— Potamogeton natans — P. obtusifolium (gramineum
of 11. Brown)-A/ yriophyllum varriifolium (Hooker)-and the Dama-
soniutn, with its many floating leaves, at first sight, resembling those
of a Potamogeton, but differing from them in the venation, and its
beautiful white Nymphcea-Wkn flowers, crimson at the base, is a prize
indeed, even though you, my readers, may get a ducking, as was
our lot, in your endeavour to obtain it. Overhanging the river
the pendulous flowers of the various formed Acacias (wattles)
drooped most gracefully, emitting a most delicious perfume, inter-
spersed here and there with the delicate spike of pink flowers of
Indigofera sylvatica; and the beautiful, almost transparent,
flowers of Sida pulchella, nearly hidden amongst its rich green
foliage. Everywhere the ground was studded, as with snow, with
that little exquisite gem Anguillaria dioica (Star of Bethlehem),
its petals circled on the interior with a band of brown; and various
species of Drosera (sundew); D. Whittakerii (Planchon), with
radical, rosulate leaves (which impart a reddish dye to paper when
pressed), and large white flowers; D. Plunchonii (J. Hooker),
figured in Hooker’s “leones Plantarum” as D. Menziesii, from
specimens found at Swan Eoot, on the east coast of Van Diemen’s
Land, easily distinguished from other species by its long, slender,
prostrate peduncles, and three leaves springing on slight petioles
* This plant is beautifully figured in Hooker’s “leones Plantarum.” — Vol.
tab. 293. It grows in tufts, with elongated linear, somewhat spathulate leaves,
from two to four inches long, generally alternate, peduncles flowered; petals pure
white, obovate, four times as long as the calyx.


from one point of the stem ; and D. peltata, (Smith), also figured
in the same work, vol. i., tab. 54, as D. lunata, from specimens
sent from Yan Diemen’s Land by Mr. Gunn; leaves alternate,
those of the stem peltate ; radical ones uniform, cordate ; flowers
pink, in terminal racimes. Mark the beauty with which Clematis
microphylla “twines airily” around all the shrubs in her vicinity;
and further on how lovingly she embraces the trunk of that venerable
Eucalyptus , as a daughter her aged parent, comforting and protecting
him, in the decline of life, for the care with which he sheltered her
in youth. Now descend this dark hollow by the river’s edge, observe
that little “ queen of secrecy,” the violet, Erpetion hederaceum,
linked hand in hand with her two graceful handmaidens, Adiantum
assimile (maiden hair), one of the loveliest of our native ferns, and
a small Hypnvm. What handsomer carpet would ye have than
Kennedya prostrata, with its bright red pea-shaped flowers, and
the splendid spreading blue clusters of Hardenbergia coccinea,
mantling the ground on all sides. Listen to the sweet plaintive
note of that little red-breasted robin, perched fearlessly on yonder
Eurybia! —the shrill note of the kingfisher, as he skims up the
stream! Watch the bright-eyed lizards as they creep hastily by!—
the splendid plumage of our feathered friends! Mark well all
around you ! —and then let us ask, is there not religion in nature ?
Can ye not here look from nature up to nature’s God ?
“Hero amid solitude and shade I wander,
Through the green aisles, and stretched upon the sod,
Awed, hy the silence, reverently ponder
The ways of God.”
“ There is no telling” (says Cheever, in his earnest, thoughtful,
little book, “ Wanderings of a Pilgrim,”) “ how much more per-
fectly man communes with nature—how much more deeply, and
without effort, he drinks in the spirit of the meadows, the woods,
the running streams, and the mountains, going by them and among
them, as a friend with a friend. He seems to hear the very breath
of nature in her stillness ; and, sometimes, when the whole world
is hushed, there are murmurs come to him on the air, almost like
the distant evening song of angels. Indeed, the world of nature is


filled with quiet soul-like sounds which, when one’s attention is
gained to them, make a man feel as if he must take his shoes from
his feet, and walk barefooted, in order not to disturb them.”
On the high banks, near Hodgson’s punt, the Grevillea Latrobei
may be obtained; and about the same locality various Orchideae.
Diuris maculata (R. Brown, prod. 315) its pretty yellow flowers,
richly marked with dark brown spots ; D. sulphured; D. aurea ;
Caladenia earned; C. ccerulea; C. alata; C. pulcherrima (spider
orchis). Pterostylis cucullata (hooded orchis), the entire plant
green, found at the foot of trees in shady places ; and Glossodia
minor. Of the Asphodeleae, Coesia corymbosa, with blue flowers, and
yellow anthers, is, indeed, a bright star. Stylidium graminifolium
(N. 0. stylideoe) is much too exquisite a flower to be omitted, with
its grassy leaves, and pink petals ; and Stackhousia monogyna
abounds everywhere. Mosses, which are so plentiful at home, are
less so here, but the following may be gathered without much
searching for: — Hypnum recognitum (Hedwig); Dryptodon Africanus
(Mueller): Funaria hygrometrica (Hedwig), a species of Fimbriaria;
Dicranum purpureum (Hedwig); and the handsome lichen, Cetraria
aculeata (Fries.)
We were amused one day, as we lay in contemplation by the
river’s side, in watching a nest of ants. Pliny tells us of ants
which entered the bowels of the earth, in search of gold ; surely
this must have been an auriferous district so busily were they all
engaged. After observing our little companions for some time, we
placed a small pebble at the entrance of the nest, jusfr blocking it
up sufiiciently to allow of only one of the community being admit-
ted at a time. There were no ants near at the time, but presently
one advanced to the mouth of the hole, and, on observing the ob-
struction, endeavoured with his fore feet to dislodge it; finding it
resist all his efforts, he crept into the nest, first removing a portion
of the earth to admit of freer ingress or egress;—we anticipated his
intention—in a few seconds he returned with a comrade, and they
both applied their whole strength;—in a moment the pebble moved,
and it was apparent there was some force applied underneath,
which was quickly proved by its being rolled gradually away, and
about twenty little fellows emerging, each applying its tiny back to


it. They succeeded very soon in getting it off the hole, and the two
first mentioned with great ease pushed and pulled it (for one was
pushing and the other pulling) to a distance of about three inches
away; and, as if to prevent its again annoying them, placed a
smaller one before it to keep it stationary. Let Mr. Swainson say
what he will about its being “ absolutely derogatory to the superior
nature of man”* to admit any amount of reason in animals, but
what could man have done more suitable to the circumstances
than these little creatures? Truly we may say to many, “Go to the
ant, consider her ways and be wise.”
* Habit* and Instincts of Animals, p. 2.


CHAPTER 111.
“ When the sun smiles on thee, why, thou art glad;
But when on earth he smileth, she bursts forth
In beauty, like a bride, and gives him back,
In sweet repayment for his warm, bright love,
A world of flowers ”
“ The poetry of earth is ceasing never,” says one of our sweetest
poets ; and day by day, as we wander forth amidst nature’s haunts,
to enjoy the freshness and beauty of the “leafy spring,” do we find
something new to make us cling more fondly than ever to those
pursuits which tend so much to contentment and happiness, and,
more than this, to health also. How many there are who neglect
to take that proper exercise which is so necessary for the health
both of body and mind, solely because they have no object in view;
and, even “if they do force themselves to take, daily, what is
called a constitutional walk, too frequently they derive little benefit
from it, in consequence of the mind not participating with the
body in the imposed task, but still recurring to the occupations at
home.”* What food is to the body, change of scene and amuse-
ment are to the mind; and nothing can have so soothing an influ-
ence as the wandering in the woods and fields, amongst the flowers,
and birds, and insects, with their endless variety of form, of habit,
of colour. “ Mere communion with nature,” says Humboldt, in
his great work, the “ Cosmos,” (Int. p. 3., Bohn’s ed.,) “ mere con-
tact with the free air, calm the stream of passion, and soften the
heart, when shaken by sorrow to its inmost depths. Everywhere—
in every region of the globe—in every stage of intellectual culture—
the same sources of enjoyment are alike vouchsafed to man. The
earnest and solemn thoughts awakened by a communion with
nature, intuitively arise from a presentiment of the order and
harmony pervading the whole universe, and from the contrast we
* Observations on Natural History, by the Rev. Leonard Jenyns.


draw between the narrow limits of our own existence and the
image of infinity revealed on every side ; whether we look upwards
to the starry vault of heaven—scan the far-stretching plain before
us—or seek to trace the dim horizon across the vast expanse of
ocean.”
Leave for awhile, some of you, my dear readers, the smoky city,
and ramble with us along the seashore; cease, for a time, your
pursuit after gold, which makes
“Black, white; foul, fair;
Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant—
Timon of Athens, act iv., sc, 8.
and feel “ how sweet it is to breathe the pure and open air of
heaven.” O, if ye have souls at all, the golden flowers of that
little Ranunculus , (repens), looking up as an old friend, reminding
us of home, and a thousand delightful associations, will surely give
you more real pleasure than the brightest golden visions you can
ever realise. A short walk through this noble forest of Eucalypti
and Banksias (Honeysuckles, with bottle-brush-shaped flowers),
and Casuarinae (she oaks), brings us to St. Kilda. Here we get a
beautiful view of the sea, and Hobson’s Bay crowded with shipping
of all descriptions and of every nation. Prom this point we will
skirt the seashore, white as the driven snow, with the pretty Cor-
allina , and covered with various beautiful Algae. In the
salt marshes, near the sea, we cannot but notice Mesembryanthemwn
aequilaterale (pigs’ faces—fig marigold or canagong), with its
green fleshy leaves, and pink star-shaped flowers; the seed vessel,
which is about an inch-and-a-half in length, of a reddish-green
colour, as well as the leaves, is eaten by the natives with their
fish, in lieu of salt, and also makes an agreeable pickle. Just now
the little scarlet-breasted robin ( Petroica multicolor) is rearing her
first brood, in a beautifully made nest of grasses, mosses, etc.,
lined with feathers. It delights, principally, in common with our
own “ plaintive warbler of the ruddy breast,” in places near dwell-
ings, and its song, though not so loud, is yet very sweet. The
male bird has its head, throat, and upper parts, black ; forehead,
white; a longitudinal, and two oblique bands of white in the


wings ; breast and under part of neck, scarlet; lower part of belly,
white ; bill and feet, black. The breast of the female is also red;
but the whole of the plumage of a brownish tinge.
On the cliffs we shall find now, in full flower, the beautiful
Leucopogon Richei (N. 0. Epacridese), or native currant, a large
dense shrub growing only by the sea, and attaining to a height of
from four to six or eight feet; the berries are white, small, and of a
herby flavour. In D’Entrecasteaux’s voyage, in search of La
Perouse, a French naturalist, named Richb, was lost for three days
on the south coast of New Holland, and supported himself princi-
pally upon the berries of this plant, in commemoration of which
circumstance, it has received its specific name.* Another smaller
species, L. virgatus, the petals of which are very minutely fringed
is also common on sandy soil. When mentioning the elegant
Stylidium graminifolium (grass leaved jack-in-the-box) in our last
chapter, which may be easily known by its numerous grassy-like
radical leaves, and pretty pink flowers, on a long naked stem, we
omitted to mention a peculiarity in it, which is said to afford much
amusement to the aborigines, who are, generally speaking, fond of,
and have a name for, many of the plants common in their own
territories. The stigma lies at the apex of a long column, sur-
rounded and concealed by the anthers ; this column is exceedingly
irritable, and hangs down on one side of the flower, until it is
touched, when it suddenly springs up and shifts to the opposite
side of the blossom or calyx.f Brown, in his “ Prodromus Florae
Novce Hollandice,” p. 423, thinks that this irritability exists in all
the species (forty-five in number) in different degrees and we
have also observed the same in the labellum of Pterostylis,
(hooded orchis,) which is so common under Eucalypti.
That rustle in the grass, by yonder swamp, reminds us that
“ It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
And that wares many walking;” —Julius Coesar, act. ii. sc. X.
• Backhouse.
t Lindley’s Vcg. Kingdom, 2nd ed. p. G 96.
t “ Columnas irritabiiitas, qua?, in Stylidii graminiifolii quindecim oirciter
abhinc annis a D. Paterson et Dav. Burton visa est, et quam nuper ia pluribivs
speciebus observavimus, forsan in omnibus licet gradibus divcrsis, existit.”


but snakes are timid creatures, and may, with ordinary care, be
avoided. They are rarely met with near towns, and we imagine
the cause to be, that the intense heat of the memorable “ Black
Thursday ” completely destroyed their haunts. Much as we have
traversed marshy lagoons, and places where they are likely to
obtain their prey, in search of fresh water mollusca and plants, we
have never, after many years’ residence in the colony, seen a single
live individual. Yet we know of many places where they are often
very unwelcome guests, and frequently notice instances of parties
being bitten by these reptiles; and we, therefore, do not hesitate
to devote a short space to a few simple remedies, to be applied in
cases of emergency. First and foremost, then, we recommend
promptitude ; the moment the bite is received, tie a handkerchief as
tightly as possible between the wound and the heart, to impede the
circulation, and prevent the poison being diffused through it; then,
with a sharp knife or lancet, scarify the flesh through and around
the wound, until blood flows freely; then, pinching up the flesh,
suck it powerfully for some time, (the poison is perfectly innoxious,
provided the mouth and throat of the person sucking are free from
sores, etc.); the juice of any stimulant plant, (^4 ristolochia) common
salt, or even lime, may then be applied. It is, probably, advisable
to give to the patient some stimulant as soon as practicable, to
prevent his falling into a comatose state; and, above all, avoid
frightening him. In other countries various remedies are employed.
A preparation of the root of Simaha cedron (Zool. Soc. Trans., 9th
Nov., 1853). In the Brazils, an infusion in brandy of Simgunha
versicolor (Lindley’s Veg. King., p. 476), and ipecacuanha
poultices, arc often used with success; but the “ simple method
above mentioned is practised with the most decisive success
among the Parinagotos, Macosics, and other tribes inhabiting the
mountains of Sibaroni and Parime, against the bites of the Crotalus
or rattlesnake, and the more deadly Quaima and Haimararia
Turning aside from the seashore, let us strike through this beau-
tiful scrub of Riccinocarpus sidaeformis (a useful purgative), with its
snow-white blossoms, around which is twining the pretty dodder-
* Remarks on Snake Poisons and their Remedies.—Hancock, Cor. Mem. Zool Soc


tlements, their appearance and their habits from actual experience.
The scientific name of this extraordinary animal is Phascolomys
Wombat; and we would here remark how much we approve of the
native names being used specifically as in this case, for it facilitates
conversation with the aborigines, when wishing to learn from them
any particulars relative to indigenous animals or plants.
The wombat belongs to the Marsupial family (having a pouch,
from which we have ourselves taken the young); a thick, short,
clumsy-looking quadruped, about four feet in length, and weighing
nearly a hundredweight (to which our shoulders have often borne
witness).* It is covered with a thick coat of strong, stiff hair, of a
light brown or grey colour, the back broad and flat, legs very short,
the belly almost touching the ground; in fact it has, as Swainson
describes, “ a shapeless body ;”f yet his drawing is that of an arched
barrel-shaped animal, higher from the ground than is natural.
The toes in the fore feet, five in number, are all clawed; but in
the hind toes four only are clawed, the fifth assuming a tubercled
or rounded appearance. The eyes very much apart; head flat,
covered with a very thick skin, as is the hinder part of the body,
which is in great repute for saddles.
Unattractive as these creatures are, they are perfectly harmless,
and social in their habits, feeding on grass; and from the immense
number of wombat holes on the sea-coast, seem to have some very
extensive settlements “ under the sod.” They burrow through
masses of the shelly sandstone peculiar to this place, being furnished
with strong nails; —and during the breeding season we have never
seen the male in the same hole with the dam.
There is something particularly exhilarating and inspiriting in,
the shooting of wombats: the stealing out at dead of night with
stealthy footsteps, now and again stopping your breath almost to
listen for the sound of the animal grazing, or scratching to rid him-
self of the enormous ticks by which he is tormented; the stalking
* Mr. Swainson, in his “Classification of Quadrupeds," p. 339, says, “ Its size is
that of a rabbit;’’ and Bulwer, in his clever novel, “The Caxtons,” p. 414, speaks
of it as “between a miniature pig and a small badger."
t “ Swainson’s Classification of Quadrupeds," p. 338.


on hands and knees, or crawling along on face and hands, as you
near his subterraneous abode. A treacherous twig snaps, and away
he scuttles with a motion peculiar to himself to the mouth of his
hole, where he remains for a few moments with ears erect, until
fear gives way to hunger, and he again makes his appearance.
Anxious moments these for the sportsman! The heart beats high
- —one single rustle and all hopes are gone—but gently, and more
gently still, the gun is brought to the shoulder, cocked noiselessly,
but not before the timid animal has observed the glittering of the
moonbeams on the barrel, and off he scuttles again; but too late
this time, his head being pierced through by a bullet, and the
sportsman just manages to rush to the hole in time to prevent his
crawling into his burrow to die.
In every adult individual we have seen, the spinal extenuation—a
tail to all intents and purposes —has been between three or four inches
in length. We have skinned several, and noticed the almost entire
absence of fat, particularly in the female; and the idea of boiling
down and making candles is really too absurd to notice. So far
from being “very slow in its motions,” its pace when disturbed is
remarkably rapid, so as to defy a flying shot; and one old fellow,
almost white with age, for some considerable time eluded us by his
agility.
We cannot reconcile the statement of Mr. Blandowski (“Phil.
Soc. Trans.,” vol. i. p. 687), that “ the natives object to skin this
animal, owing to the pernicious effect which the fat in its raw state
has on the phosphorus of the bone of the hand,” with our own
experience. The blacks have always an objection to skin any
animal whose flesh they use as food—simply, we imagine, because
the skin is used to protect the flesh whilst cooking—yet, as far as
our own observations go, confirmed by those of others even-better
able to judge than ourselves, they never manifest any reluctance
to skin it when required.
These animals are very numerous on the coast about Warrnam-
bool, Port Fairy, etc.


Spine-tailed Swallow. Hirundo caudacuta.
By the seashore at Brighton, on 28th January, 1854, wind N.,
thor. 93° in shade at eight a.m., observed several specimens of the
spine-tailed swallow; an individual of which was shot by our friend
Mr. F. C. Christy, at Richmond, from a flock of some hundreds, on
10th December, 1853. The following is a pretty accurate descrip-
tion ; but our readers may find a plate of this bird in the “ British
Birds,” by the Rev. F. O. Morris, vol. ii. page 86, figured from a
specimen shot in England, on 9th July, 1846, in the parish of Great
Hakesley, near Colchester, in Essex: —
Length from tip to tip, seven and a-half inches; expanse of wing,
nineteen inches; upper side of wings steel black; the back between
the wings dusky brown, approaching to buff; two last minor
feathers of each wing, next to body, half white; head dusky black,
with metallic hue; rump darkening until it reaches the tail, which
is quite black; throat dirty white, extending one inch and a-half;
tail feathers ten in number, “ the shaft of each feather projecting
beyond the web, forming a row of spines about an eighth of an inch
long from the middle feathers, and gradually shortening on the
side ones.”
It is indeed an unaccountable circumstance (as remarked by the
Rev. F. O. Morris) why and wherefore this bird should have thus
winged its way to so remote a part of the earth, our very antipodes.
The length of the wings, and the rapidity with which birds of this
genus fly, will easily account for the how it winged its course
thither, particularly when we remember that the common swallow,
Hirundo rustica, is able to traverse the distance of three thousand
miles in three days, and that the spine-tailed swallow is able to
sustain itself in the air during the entire day without cessation. The
flight of the eagle has been said to be so rapid that it would be able
to go round the world in nine days. As to the 11 why” and the “where-
fore” this bird paid a visit to the British shores, we can only attri-
bute it to that curiosity which all animals have, more or less (for
which, by the bye, it paid dearly), and a desire to see a little more
of the world.
This bird is sometimes called the “needle-tailed” and “pin-tailed
swallow.” ,


Do Hawks Drink ?
We observe that information is solicited on this subject by some
of our English naturalists, and we lay the evidence, pro and con,
before our readers, trusting that they will favour us with their
opinions, where they result from actual experience.
Audubon, in his “Ornithological Biography,” vol. i. page 89,
speaking of the Great-footed Hawk, (Falco peregrinus), says,
“Many persons believe that this hawk and some others never
drink any other fluid than the blood of their victims; but this is an
error. I have seen them alight on sand-bars, walk to the edge of
them, immerse their bills nearly up to the eyes in water, and drink
in a continued manner, as pigeons are known to do.” A writer in
vol. iv. page 138 of the “Naturalist,” corroborates Audubon’s asser-
tion—at any rate with regard to the kestrel and the merlin.
We are of opinion that the hawk tribe do not invariably drink,
particularly those of this country. A young sparrow-hawk was
brought to us about two years since, which was kept in a garden for
six months, without having access to any fluid whatever beyond
that obtained from the raw meat given him for his morning meal.
To test his powers of abstaining, we placed before him one sum-
mer’s morning a pan of water, into which he plunged instantane-
ously, and remained standing in it, on one leg, for a considerable
time, without attempting to drink. As the winter approached the
bath was neglected altogether.
Thus far our own opinion, confirmed too by the fact, that Aus-
tralian birds are enabled to exist with the smallest quantity of
water, often indeed without any; in confirmation of which we cull
from “ The Dovecote and the Aviary,” before mentioned, which no
naturalist’s shelf should be without, some interesting facts on the
power which the pigeon and kingfisher possess of abstaining from
water; and the author remarks that “a similar power of abstinence
is to a degree enjoyed by other inhabitants of the same terrible
wastes —for which the words arid, desert, inhospitable, are far too
feeble epithets. The Talpero {Hapa tolls Mitchdlii ), an animal
with many of the habits of our rabbit, but not much larger than a
mouse, must live for many months together without water, feeding


on the tender shoots of plants; and the bronze-wing (Phaps chalcop-
tera) and harlequin pigeon ( Phistrionica ) just take an evening sip
of the muddy pool they have flown so far to taste, and are off
again to their parching haunts, after having only just wetted their
bill:” and Captain Sturt remarks, “It is astonishing indeed that so
small a quantity as a bare mouthful, should be sufficient to quench
their thirst in the burning deserts they inhabit.”
Mr. Darwin, in his “Journal of the Voyage of the Beagle,” page
2, says, “It had not now rained for an entire year in St. Jago.
The broad, flat-bottomed valleys, many of which serve during a
few days only in the season as water-courses, are clothed with
thickets of leafless bushes. Few living creatures inhabit these
valleys. The commonest bird is a kingfisher (Dacelo Jagoensis )
which tamely sits on the branches of the castor-oil plant, and
thence darts on grasshoppers and lizards. It is brightly coloured,
but not so beautiful as the European species; in its flight, manner,
and place of habitation, which is generally in the driest valleys,
there is also a wide difference.”
Mr. Goold, too, in his very beautiful work on the “Birds of
Australia,” to which referenae may be made either at the Museum
of Natural History or the Public Library, speaks of kingfishers
which appear to be endowed with the power of sustaining and
enjoying life, without the least supply of water, and believes too
that it is not essential to their existence.
Strange indeed, as Mr. Dixon remarks,* “that amongst creatures
so closely allied, and bearing such a striking family resemblance as
the kingfishers do to each other, one species, our own (Alcedo
hispida ) should be almost bound to the vicinity of brooks and
streams; whilst others, equally occupying their allotted place in
creation, and fulfilling the office assigned to them by Providence,
should be able, in order to perform that task, to dispense with what
is usually considered the necessary element of water, except just the
few thimblesful of liquid contained in their living prey, that are
absolutely requisite to keep their animal fluids circulating.
“ Dovecote and Aviary,” page 310.


To conclude, we earnestly invite our readers to communicate
with us, not only on this, but on every matter connected with
natural history, and they may rest assured, not only of our co-ope-
ration, but of our imparting to them the little knowledge we pos-
sess in exchange for their ideas on subjects with which we are not
conversant.


A CATALOGUE
OF THE
|lants ramman in i\t Cnlnng at iidarin,
WITH THEIR HABITATS AND DATES OF FLOWERING.
[Those marked * have been introduced.]




DICOTYLEDON EiE;
[or plants having two seed lobes or cotyledons.]
THALAMIFLORAS, CANDOLLE;
[[Flowers having both a calyx and corolla, the latter consisting of
distinct petals. Stamens always hypogynous, or united to the
sides of the ovary.]
JUSSIEU.
Clematis microphylla—Candolle.
Has. Abundant around Melbourne; climbing gracefully on shrubs in its
vicinity: Sand hummocks at Warrnambool.
FI. Spring.
(Name —from clema , a vine branch.)
Clematis appendiculata—Ferd. Mueller
Has. Mount Disappointment.
Ranunculus pimpinellifolius—Hooker.
Hab. Scrubby places.
FI. December.
Figured in “leones Plantarum,” vol. iii. tab. 260.
Ranunculus inundatus-—inundate’d crowfoot.
Hab. Swamps around Melbourne.
FI. November.
Ranunculus sessiliflorus—R, Brown. Sessile-flowered crowfoot.
Hab. Marshy places, Melbourne, Warrnambool.
FI. September
(Name of this genus from t ana, a frog—from many of the species growing in
swamps infested by that animal.)


DILLENIACEiE, CANDOLLE.
Pleurandra sericea—E. Brown. Silky pleurandra.
Hab. Scrub near Liardet’s Beach, Melbourne.
(Name of genus from pleuron, a side, and aner, a male —the stamens being all
inserted on one side of the flower.)
Hibbertia pultenseiformis—Ferd. Mneller.
Has. Delatite.
Hibbertia fasciculata—K. Brown.
Hab. Sandy scrub land towards Brighton.
FI. October.
Hibbertia prostrata —Hooker.
Hab. In sandy soil near Liardet’s Beach.
FI. December.
(Genus named in honour of George Hibbert, F.R.S., F.L.8., a great lover of
botany,)
CRUCIFEILE, JUSSIEU.
Nasturtium terrestre—E. Brown.
Hab. Banks of the Yarra Yarra.
FL January.
(Genus named from nasus, a nose, and tortus, distorted,)
Cardamine remotiflora —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. On the Yarra.
(Genus named from cardia, the heart, and damao, to strengthen )
Capsella Australasica —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Sandy cliffs by the sea near Brighton.
FI.
Figured in “leones Plantarum," vol. iii. tab. 276, and there named Stenopeta
lum incisifolium.


* Cap sella bmrsa-pastoris—Moench.
Has. Waste ground, common.
FL the whole year.
This plant is the “common shepherd's purse,” or “fairy pouches," so common
by road sides in England; deriving its name from the triangular obcordate
pouch: very variable both in size and foliage, probably introduced. It
was formerly called “shepherd’s scrip,” “ case weed,” “ St James’ wort,”
and “poor man’s parmacetic,” it probably being of some medicinal value;
and, in France, “Fleur de St. Jacques.”
* Sisymbrium officinale—Scopoli.
Hab. Waste places, common.
The “ hedge mustard,” so abundant in waste places at home—introduced.
The origin of its name is doubtful Some believe it to have been taken from
the name of some Greek aquatic plant, which had an agreeable smell; and
Ovid recommends as a propitiatory offering to Venus, garlands of myrrh,
roses, and Sisymbrium.
*Senebiera didyma—Persoon.
Hab. In waste places.
A little plant very common in Ireland, with white flowers, with two and often
four stamens.
Genus named after an eminent botanist, M. Senebier.
*Lepidium ruderale —Linne.
Hab. About Melbourne, frequent.
FI.
The “ narrow-leaved pepper-wort of England.”
HYPERICINE-iE, CANDOLLE
Hypericum involutum—Candolle.
Hab. Dry places, Melbourne, Warmarabool.
FL November to ApriL
Saint Jehu’s wort.”


DROSERACEiE, CANDOLLE.
Drosera Whittakerii—Planchon.
Hab. Swampy places, common.
FI, September, October.
Leaves radical, rosulate, imparting a reddish dye to paper when pressed.
Drosera peltata—Smith.
Hab. Boggy places.
FI. September, October.
This plant is figured in Hooker’s “leones Plantarum,” vol. i. tab. 54, as D.
lunata, from specimens sent from Van Diemen’s Land by Mr. Gunn.
Leaves alternate, those of the stem peltate; radical ones, reniform, cordate.
Flowers pink, in terminal racemes.
Drosera Planchonii —J. Hooker.
Hab. Hills around Melbourne, in shady situations, common.
FL September, October.
Figured in Hooker’s “leones Plantarum” as D. Menziesii, from specimens
found at Swan Port, on the east coast of Van Diemen’s Land. It is very
easily distinguished from the other species by its long, slender, prostrate
peduncles, and three leaves, springing on slight petioles from one point of
the stem.
(Genus named from droseros, dewy, the glandular hairs with which all the
species are covered appearing as if tipped with dewdrops. The leaves of
many, perhaps all the species, are supposed to contract when touched,
and to retain insects which alight on them, hence the English name,
“Venus's fly-trap.”)
Drosera binata —Labillardiere.
Hab. Goulburn Ranges.
VIOLARINEA3, CANDOLLE.
Hymenanthera Banksii—Perd. Mueller.
Hab . Muddy banks of Yarra Yarra.
FL November.
(Name from hymen, a membrane, and anthera, an anther; the anthers being
terminated by a membrane.)


Erpetion hederaceum—Candolle. Ivy-like erpetion.
Hab. Banks of Yarra Yarra, Warrnambool.
FI. December.
The difference between this genus and Viola consists merely in the absence of
the spur. Name from erpetos, creeping, and ion, violet. Flower* white,
streaked with lilac.
Viola betonicifolia—Smith. Betony-leaved violet.
Hab. Hilly pastures about Hawthorne and Warrnambool.
FI. December.
Flowers, purple.
POLYGALE.®, JUSSIEU.
Comesperma calymegum—Labillardiere.
Hab. In the scrub towards Brighton.
FI. January.
Large-calyxed comesperma. Flowers purple.
Comesperma linariaefolium—All. Cunningham.
Hab. Scrub near Brighton.
FI. November.
Comesperma retusum—Labillardiere.
Hab. Mount Aberdeen.
Name from Icome, the hair of the head, and sperma , a seed; the seed* being all
furnished at their base with a tuft of hairs.
Poly gala veronicea—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. King River.


PITTOSPORE.E, R. BROWN.
Bursaria spinosa—Cavanilles.
Has. Around Melbourne, Warrnambool, very common.
FI. December to February.
May easily be recognised from its similarity to the privet (Ligmtrum vulgar?)
so common in the south of England; sometimes forming a tree of ten to
fifteen feet in height, with rough bark—but generally only a bushy scrub.
Various species of Hemiptera feed on this plant. The little blue-headed
tit builds in it. The seeds resemble a small pouch, hence its generic
name. In autumn their rich brown contrasts very beautifully with the
bright green foliage.
Rhytidosporum Stuartianum —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab Gipps Land.
Billardiera scan dens?
Hab. Twining around shrubs on the Yarra banks, opposite the Lunatic
Asylum.
FI. September.
Well figured in Sweet’s “Flora Australasica,” pi. 54.
DIOSMTLE, JUSSIEU
Zieria lanceolata —R. Brown.
Hab. Sealers’ Cove.
Boronia dentigera—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Latrobe River.
Boronia tetrathecoides —Candolle.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory, Buffalo Ranges.
Correa Latrobeana —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Delatite.
Calyx of a rusty brown colour. Flowers pale yellow.


Correa virens—Smith.
Hab. Pastures at Prahran, St Kiida, Banks of the Hopkins at Warmam-
bool, etc.
Ft January to May.
This pretty plant will easily be distinguished by its long, pendulous, greenish
corolla, an inch or more in length, and the four acute teeth of the calyx.
Correa alba—Andrews.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
Leaves obtusely ovate; under surface, as well as the calyx and corolla, nearly
white.
Correa cardinalis—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Port Albert, Portland.
Foliage less beautiful than the preceding, but amply compensated for by the
scarlet, yellow-tipped flowers. Calyx rusty brown.
(Genus named after Joseph Correa de Serva, a Portuguese botanist)
TREMANDREiE, R. BROWN.
Tetratheca pilosa—Lahillardiere.
Hab. M'Crac's Island.
Flowers light pink colour.
Tetratheca ciliata —Lindley.
Hab.
Flowers deep rose colour.
This plant is figured, from specimens found at Westhead, near the mouth of
the Tamar, by Ronald Gunn, Esq., in “leones Plantarum,” voi, iii tab-
-268, and thus briefly described: —“Ramis elongatis snbhirtis, foliis alter-
nis oppgsitis ternisvc rbombeovatis subciliatis subtus pallidioribus, racemis
terminalibus foliosis, pedicellis nutantibus calycibus ovariisque glauduloso
—setosis, pctalis obovatis basi attenuatis, autheris fusifonnibus.”


BUETTNERIACEiE, R. BROWN.
Thomasia pctalocalyx—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
MALVACEAE, R. BROWN
Sida pulchella—Bonpland.
Hab. Banks k of Yarra Yarra, Merri River near Warrnambool, etc.
FI. November, December.
A very elegant shrub, with cordate-lanceolate, crenated leaves, of a delloato
transparent green, and white flowers.
*Malva vulgaris—Fries.
Hab. Waste places, Melbourne, Warrnambool.
FI. Spring.
Introduced. Decoctions of the leaves of this plant are useful in dysentery;
and the whole plant, in common with other species, yields a tasteless,
colourless mucilage hence its generic name, from the Greek word,
malache, soft.
GERANIACEHS, CANDOLLE.
Geranium potentilloides—L’Heritier,
Hab. Delatite, etc.
Geranium parviflorum—Willdenow.
Hab. Scrub near Liardet's Beach.
FI. December.
Geranium erodioides—Hooker.
Hab. Sandy soil in scrub near Liardet’s Beach.
FI. January,


•Erodium moschatum —L’Heritier.
Hab. Common near the sea coast.
FI. October to February.
The “ musky stork's bill,” which is a rare plant in England, has found its way
here, and covers the cliffs near the sea between St. Kilda and Brighton;
and the Flagstaff Hill at Warrnambool. A large form is also common
in waste soils. The whole plant is hairy and clammy, exhaling a musky
smell. Flowers rose-coloured, in stalked umbels.
Pelargonium Ilodncyanum—Mitchell.
Hab. Rocky places.
FI. Summer.
Leaves radical, serrated. Flowers rose-coloured, in umbels.
Pelargonium Australe—Willdenow.
H ab. In grassy situations, common.
FI, December.
This elegant little species blooms almost the whole year, shedding its grateful
perfume far around, disproving the frequent assertion of English writers,
that the flowers of Australia have no smell. Flowers pink, two superior
petals, spotted.
(Generic name from pelargos, a stork; the head and beak of which bird the
carpels somewhat resemble.)
LINErE, CANDOLLE.
Linum marginale—All. Cunningham.
Hab. Banks of Yarra Yarra and Hopkins rivers.
FI, December.
OXALIDEjE, CANDOLLE.
Oxalis microphylla—Poiret.
Hab. Grassy places, common.
FI. December.
A small trefoil, with yellow flowers.


STACKHOUSI ACEAS, R, BROWN,
Stackhousia monogyna—Labillardiere.
Hab. Grassy situations on the Yarra, banks of Hopkins,
FL October, November.
Flowers in dense heads, light yellow.
CARYOPHYLLEHS, JUSSIEU
*Silene gailica—Linnd.
Hab, Waste places,
FI, Spring.
Stellaria multiflora—Hooker,
Hab. Rocky places near St. Kilda.
Fl.'September, October.
Stellaria pungeus—Duperrey,
Hab.
* Stellaria media—-Yillars. Common chickweed or Stitchwork
Hab. Waste places, everywhere.
Fl. September to March.
•‘‘Cerastium glomeratum—Thuillier,
Hab. Dry banks.
Fl. Summer.
*Sagina apetala —Linne.
Hab. Sandy soil, walls, etc.
“ Small annual pearl wort;” petals often wanting.
Polycarpon alsinifolium —Candolle,
Har Waste soil near Cremome Gardens, argillaceous plains near Brighton,
Fl. January.
“duckweed leaved all-seed." Generic name from poly, many, and karpoe,
a seed.
*Spergula arvensis—Linne.
Hab. Sandy soil near Dight’s Mill, on the Yarra.
FL August
“ Corn spurrey," Generic name from spargo, to scatter; the seeds being
spread in all directions on the bursting of the capsule.


CALYCIFLOILE, CANDOLLE.
[Flowers having both calyx and corolla; the latter usually con-
sisting of distinct petals. Stamens always perigynous, i. e. inserted
on calyx.]
CRASSULACEE, CANDOLLE.
Tillaea verticillaris—Candolle.
Hab. Dry places, common.
FI. January.
Figured in “leones Plantarum,” vol. Hi. tab. 295.
Tillasa purpurata—J. Hooker,
Hab. Sandy soU, Brighton.
FI. January.
Tillasa macrantha—J. Hooker.
Hab. Moist places.
FI December, January.
A small inconspicuous plant, growing in tufts; stems much branched, twice
or thrice; leaves opposite, oblong, acute, fleshy. Flowers terminal, soli-
tary on the ultimate branches or peduncles. Calyx of four, nearly erect,
acute, cHiated sepals, streaked within and without with numerous black
lines. Petals four.
Figured in “leones Plantarum,” vol. iv. tab. 310.
Tillaea Stuartii—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Moist situations.


PORTULACEAS, JUSSIEU.
Claytonia Australasica—J. Hooker,
Hab. Swampy situations.
FI. November, December.
This delicate, graceful little plant, figured in “ leones Plantarum,” vol. iii.
tab. 293, ornaments the moist ground around Melbourne, nearly the whole
season, with its white flowers, which are larger than in other species. It
varies much in size, from two to six inches in height; growing generally,
as far as our own observation goes, in rather a straggling manner, with
creeping stems, but said by Hooker to grow in “rather dense tufts."
Leaves alternate, from two to four inches long.
Calandrinia calyptrata—J. Hooker.
Hab. Granite rocks near Fiery Creek.
FL
We received a short time since a specimen from our friend, C. D. Aplin, Esq.,
who gathered it in the above locality, and at once recognised it as the
Calandrinia calyptrata. (“leones Plantarum," vol. iii. tab. 299); but
have never observed it growing.
Annual. Stem much branched, with widely-spreading branches; leaves
linear, spathulate, the upper ones gradually becoming bracteiform; pedun-
cles axillary, deflexed after flowering; petals united in an extinguisher-
shaped corolla. Seeds very numerous.
Tetragonella implexicoma—Miguel.
Hab. Seashore near Brighton.
FI. November.
MESEMBRYANTHEMEAS, FENZL.
Mesembryanthemum asquilaterale—Haworth.
Hab. Salt marshes, common.
FI. Spring.
This plant is called by the colonists, “pigs' faces,” “fig marigold;" and
“canagong” by the natives, by whom the fleshy leaves and fruit are
eaten.
Dr. Mueller mentions other two species, M. Australe and M. sermentosum.


HALOEAGEiE, R. BROWN.
Myriophyllum variifolium—J. Hooker.
Hab. Lagoons about Melbourne, common.
FI. December, January.
Figured in “leones Plantarum,” vol. iii. tab. 289.
Myriophyllum heteromorphum—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Lagoons, frequent.
FI. December.
Meionectes Brownii —J. Hooker.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
FI.
Figured in “leones Plantarum,” vol. iv. tab 306.
ONAGEEiE, JUSSIEU,
Epilobium vanescens ?
Hab. Grassy places, frequent.
FL Summer.
LYTHRARIEAS, JUSSIEU.
Lythrum salicaria —Linne.
Hab. Banks of Yarra Yarra, lagoons, common; Merri River, Warrnambool.
FI. December, January.
All “ brothers of the angle ” will recognise the tall spike of pink flowers of th«
“purple loosestrife,” which ornaments our river banks in England.
CUNONIACE.iE, R. BROWN.
Bauera Billardierii —Don.
Hab. Buffalo Creek.
FI. February


EUPHORBIACEA3, JUSSIEU.
liicinocarpus sidaiformis—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Scrub near Sandridge, St. Kilda, and Brighton.
Trachycaryon Klotzschii—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
Amperea cuneifolia—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab.
Phyllanthus Guunii—J. Hooker.
Hab. Mount Hunter.
FI. April.
Leaves obtusely ovate.
Phyllanthus hirtellus —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Mount Hunter.
Leaves cuneate or wedge-shaped.
Micranthea hexandra— J. Hooker.
Hab. Buffalo Ranges.
FL February.
uanthera annua—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Melbourne, Warmambool.
FL January.
A small, inconspicuous plant, with white flowers.
Halothaxnnus microphyllus—Ferd. Mueller,
Hab. Port Gawler.
RHAMNACEAi, R. BROWK.
Pomaderris parvifolia —Hooker.
Hab. Banks of Yarra Yam.
FL August.


Pomaderris
Hab. Banks of Hopkins River, near Tooram.
Discaria Australis—Hooker.
Hab. Loddon.
MYRTACEiE, R. BROWN.
Bseckia utilis—Fcrd. Mueller,
Hab. Mount Aberdeen.
“This plant,” says Dr. Mueller, “might serve travellers in these desolate loca-
lities as tea; for the volatile oil of its leaves resembles greatly in taste and
odour that of lemons, not without a pleasant, peculiar aroma.” —First
General Report. 1853.
Camphoromyrtus crenulata—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Mount Aberdeen.
The stem covered with very small roundish leaves in pairs.
Fabricia Itevigata—Gaertner.
Hab. By the sea near Brighton.
FI. August.
A small fasces-shaped cocoon is common on this plant. Singular enough, it
appears to be much fancied by that curse to all herbarium formers—the
cockroach, —and above all others.
Leptospermum grandiflorum— Loddiges.
Hab. Mount Aberdeen, banks of Yarra.
FI. January.
Leptospermum flavescens—Smith.
Hab. Ovens.
Leptospermum grandifolium—Smith.
Hab. Mount Aberdeen.


Leptospermum lanigerum—Aiton.
Hab. Banks of Yarra.
FI. January.
Kunzea peduncularis—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Granitic summit of Mount Aberdeen.
FI. March.
E ucalyptus rostrata —Schlechtendal.
Hab. Common.
“ Red gum.”
E ucalyptus globulus—Labillardiere.
Hab. Abundantly in some of the forest districts, principally of the south.
FI.
The blue gum. “It is already well known for its colossal size; of the circum-
ference of the stem instances are on record by which this tree ranks only
second to the famous Boabol from the Senegal.”— Mueller's Second Report,
1854. The wood is valuable for ship-building.
Eucalyptus sacchariflua —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Common everywhere.
The “manna” tree, which produces a sweet substance (“not a true sugar”)
called Mannite.
Eucalyptus odorata—Behr and Schlechtendal.
Hab.
The “peppermint” gum.
Eucalyptus fabrorum —Schlechtendal-
Hab. Common.
The “ stringy bark.”
Eucalyptus resinifera —Smith.
Hab.
For the other species, we refer our readers to Dr. Mueller’s Reports on th
Vegetation of the Colony, and Mr. Swainson’s “Botanical Report,” 1853.
The leaves of some of the eucalypti present a dotted appearance, which is
caused by the presence of numerous cells or cavities, containing essential
oil, which with the gum which exudes from their stems, considering their
vast number, must render them very valuable.


Melaleuca squarrosa—Smith.
Easily distinguished by the small, ovate, acute leaves, which lie like scales on
the stem.
Melaleuca Gunniana—Schaucr.
Hab. Very common around Melbourne.
Melaleuca paludosa—R. Brown.
Hab. Loddon.
The long lanceolate leaves must decide this species at once.
ROSACE.®,
JUSSIEU.
*Rosa rubiginosa—Linne.
Hab. Near houses, occasionally.
“ Eglantine or sweet briar."
Rubus macropodus—Seringe.
Hab. Common everywhere.
FL December.
The “ wild raspberry ”of the colonies. The fruit, though smaller, is scarcely
inferior in flavour to the cultivated raspberry. It is ripe about January,
and affords a most grateful treat to the botanist when parched by the
intense heat of summer.
Potentilla anserinoides—Raoul.
Hab. Abundantly on the banks of the Merri, near WarmambooL
*Alcheinilla arvensis—Scopoli.
Hab. Moist situations.
FL October, November.
“Parsley piert.”
Acaena sanguisorbas—Yahl.
Hab. Near the Yarra, Hopkins, common.


Acacia armata—R. Brown.
Has.
Acacia cuspldata—All. Cunningham,
Has.
Acacia verticillata—Willdenow.
Hab.
Acacia Oxycedrus —Siebcr.
Hab.
Acacia Latrobei —Meisner.
Hab.
Acacia suaveolens—Willdenow.
Hab. Comer Inlet.
FI. April.
Acacia retinoides —Schlechtendal.
Hab. Rivulets towards Bacchus Marsh.
FI. April.
Acacia pycnantha —Bentham.
Hab.
Acacia aspera —Bindley.
Hab. Forest'Creek.
Acacia stricta —Willdenow.
Acacia vestita?
FI, July.
EEGUMINOSjE, JUSSIEU.


Acacia mollissima—Willdenow.
Hab. Everywhere, common.
FI.
Acacia Mitchellii —Bentham.
Hab. Ovens.
Acacia paucijuga—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. King’s River.
Acacia cephalobotrya—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. On the Wimmera,
Acacia longifolia—Willdenow.
Hab.
It would be impossible -to enumerate all the species, sixty in number, men-
tioned by Dr. Mueller in his reports; but we recommend our readers to
visit the Botanical Gardens, where nearly the whole of them may be seen;
and, we feel sure, our valued friend, Mr. Dallachy, the able superinten-
dent. will afford to all true lovers of botany any information they may
require.
Gompholobium Huegelii—Bentham.
Hab. Forest Creek.
Viminaria denudata —Smith.
Hab. Near the Eumerella River
FL January.
Daviesia corymbosa.
Hab. Hawthorne.
FL July.
Daviesia umbellulata —Smith.
Hab.
Lanceolate-leaved Daviesia.
Daviesia latifolia—R. Brown.
Broad-leaved Daviesia.
FL September.


Dilwynnia cinerescens—R. Brown*
Hab. Hawthorne.
FI. July
Long ensifonn leaves, and yellow flowers
Dihvynnia hispida—Bindley.
Has.
Sclerothamnus diffusus —Ferd. Mueller.
hab.
Aotus villosa—Smith.
Hab. Scrub near East Brighton, St. Kilda.
Fl. October.
Spadostylis ternata —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Buffalo Ranges.
Fl
Three cuncate leaves, abruptly acuminate, embrace the stem.
Spadostylis pimeloides—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Mount Pleasant.
Bossirea prostrata —R. Brown.
Hab. In moist grassy places around Melbourne.
FL October.
Bossisea cinerea—R. Brown.
Hab. Liardet’s Beach.
Fl. August.
Korea linearis—R. Brown.
Hab.
Hovea gelida—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Mount Buffer.
Platylobium cordifolium —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Trunks of the eucalyptus.


Platylobi um m acrocalyx—Meisner.
Hab. Trunks of the eucalyptus.
*Melilotus officinalis—Desrousseaux.
Hab. In William Street, Melbourne.
FI January.
We have only noticed one specimen of this English trefoil, found in the above
habitat.
*Trifoliura repens—Linne. Dutch Clover.
Hab. Occasionally in pastures
FI January.
*Trifolium procumbens—Linne'. Hop Trefoil.
Hab. Occasionally in pastures.
FI. January.
*Trifolium filiforme—Linne.
Slender Yellow Trefoil.
Hab. Occasionally in pastures.
FL January.
*Medicago sativa —Linne.
Hab Pastures, not common.
FI. January.
*Lotus tenuifolius —Pollich.
Hab. Pastures.
FI. January.
* Lotus corniculatus —Linne'.
Common Birds-foot Trefoil.
Hab Pastures, common.
FI. January.
Psoraleopsis simplicicaulis—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Broken River.
Indigofera sylvatica—Sieber.
Hab. Yarra, Merri River.
FL August
This is without exception one of the most beautiful shrubs in the colony; its
delicate rose-coloured spike of flowers hanging over the Yarra, as it glides
slowly along It is common above Hawthorne Bridge.


Swainsona ?
Has. Near Grasmere, on the Morri.
FI. December.
*Yicia augustifolia—Roth. Narrow-leaved Crimson Yetch.
Hab. In pastures.
FI. December.
*Ervum hirsutum—Linne. Hairy Tare.
Hab. Pastures.
FI. January.
Desmodium Tasmanicum —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Forest Creek.
Zichya Latrobeana—Meisner.
Hab. Near Saltwater River, Survey Paddock, Richmond, etc.
FI. January.
Zichya augustifolia—Lindley.
Hab. Climbing gracefully around the common brake fern, Melbourne and
Warmambool
FI. January.
Hardenbergia monophylla—Bentham.
Hab. Near Gardiner’s Creek on the Yarra.
FI. January.
This plant will easily be recognised by its dense clusters of rich blue flowers,
and deep green leaves, encircling many of the larger shrubs.
Kennedya prostrata—R. Brown.
Hab. Common everywhere.
FI. September.
A beautiful scarlet-flowered trefoil
DMBELLIFERAS, JUSSIEU.
Hydrocotyle tripartita—R. Brown.
hab. About Melbourne and Warmambool
FI. September.
Beautifully figured in “leones Plantarum,” vol. iv. tab. 312.


Trachymene myrtifolia—Sieber.
Hab. Mount Aberdeen.
Trachymene crassifolia—Bentham.
Hab. Gipps Land.
FI.
Fleshy-leaved trachymene.
T r achy men e diversifolia—Mueller.
Hab. Scrub near St Kilda.
FI. January.
Didiscus pilosus—Bentham.
Hab. Near Liardet’s Beach.
FL December.
“leones Plantarum,” vol. iv. tab. 807.
Eryngium *• ?
Hab. Richmond Paddock, near the Yarra, Warrnai
FI. January.
f Helosciadium prostratum —Bunge.
( Petroselinum De Candolle. Parsley.
Hab. Common by the sea.
FI. December.
Daucus brachiatus —Sieber.
Hab. Survey Paddock, near Yarra, etc.
FI. January.
RUBIACEiE, JUSSIEU.
Galium Australe —Candolle. Bedstraw.
Hab. Common.
FI. November, December.
Asperula oliganthema —Mueller.
Hab. Survey Paddock, Richmond.
FI. January.


Caprosina microphylla—All. Cunningham.
Hab, Muddy banks of Yarra.
FL October,
Opereularia caprosmoides—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Sealer’s Cove.
Pamax hirta—De Candolle.
Hab. Mount Aberdeen.
LORANTHACEAS, DON.
These are beautiful parasitic plants, resembling our English Viscum (misseltoe),
They are found, as their specific names denote, on the Eucalyptus (gum).
Casuarina (she oak), Exocarpus (cherry), Melaleuca (tea tree).
Loranthus eucalyptoides—Candolle.
Hab. Common.
FI. January.
Loranthus Exocarpi—Behr.
Hab. Common.
FI. January.
Loranthus melaleuca—Lehmann.
Hab. Common.
COMPOSITE, VAILLANT.
Eurybiopsis Hookeri—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Melbourne.
PI. December.
Eurybia linearifolia—De Candolle.
Hab. Coast towards La Trobe River.
FL


Eurybia glandulosa—De Candolle.
Hab. Dandenong, River Plenty.
FI.
Eurybia ciliata —Bentham.
Has. Botanic Gardens, Melbourne.
FI. July.
Eurybia myrsinoides—Nees.
Has. Delatite.
Eurybia Gunniana—De Candolle.
Hah. Buffalo Ranges.
These are the exquisite daisy-like plants, with
flowers, common almost everywhere.
Brachycome heterodonta—De Candolle.
Hab. Delatite.
Brachycome graminea—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. On the Yarra banks amidst Juncace®,
FI. January.
Also, var■ humilis, in same locality.
Brachycome angustifolia—De Candolle.
Hab. Marshy places near Brighton.
FI. August.
Brachycome linearifolia—De Candolle.
Hab. Pastures near Richmond.
FI. August.
Brachycome multicaulis—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Mount Buffer, 5000.
Brachycome dirersifolia —Fischer and Meyer.
Hab. Grassy ridges on the Yarra.
FI. November.
Siegesbeckia orientalis—Linnp.
Hab. Melbourne, Warrnambool
FI. April, May.
sometimes


Cotula coronopifolia—Linnd.
Hab. About Melbourne, Warrnambool.
FI. The whole summer.
Cotula anthemoides—Linne.
Hab. By waysides and in grassy places.
FI. The whole summer.
Gymnogyne cotuloides—Steetz.
Hab. Muddy situations near Brighton.
FI. October.
Skirrhophorus Fuemrohrii—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Sandy pastures around Brighton.
FI. November.
Strongylosperma Australe —Lessing.
Hab. About Melbourne, moist situations oa the Yarra.
Leptinella intricata—J. Hooker.
Hab. Shady banks of Yarra. ,
FI. January.
Myriogyne minuta—Lessing.
Hab. ICing’s River.
Myriogyne Cunninghamii—Candolle.
Hab. Banks of Yarra Yarra.
FI. January.
Calocephalus lacteus—Lessing.
Hab. Amongst Juncaccsc at St. Kikia, etc.
Craspedia alpina—J. Hooker.
Hab. Mount BuUer.
Apalochlamys Billardierii—Candolle.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.


Ozothamnus obcordatus—De Candolle.
Kab. Forest Creek.
Ozothamnus turbinatus—De Candolle.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
Ozothamnus ferrugineus—De Candolle.
Hab. On the Yarra and Hopkins rivers.
FI. January-.
Tetrachseta perennis—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Near St. Kilda.
Pumilo argyrolepis— Schlechtendal.
Hab. Grassy places near Melbourne.
FI. October.
Millotia tenuifolia—Cassini.
Hab. Near Richmond.
FI. September.
Millotia myosotidifolia—Steetz.
Hab. Glenelg.
Chrysocephalum flavissimum—Steetz.
Hab. Near the beach, Melbourne, grassy places on the Yarra.
FI. December.
Chrysocephalum semipapposum—Steetz.
Hab. Scrub near Brighton.
FI. October.
Phacoleuca obtusifolia—Ferd. Mueller.
Helichrysum bracteatum—Willdenow.
Hab. Yarra banks, near Dight’s Mill, etc.
FI. December.
This plant, the “large golden everlasting," will be easily recognised
bright golden scales.
(Also, v. angustifolium )


Heiiclnysum scorpioides—Labillardiere.
Hab. Near the Yarra.
FI. December.
Helichrysum leucopsidium—Candolle.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
These plants will be easily recognised by those who know the “ Immortelle "
of the French.
Genas named from Helios , the sun, and chryson , gold.
All continental tourists are familiar, we think, with the use of the “immor-
telles;” for who, in visiting churchyards in France, has not been struck
with the beauty of the wreaths placed over the graves? Truly a sweet
tribute to the memory of dear relatives or friends—more touching far than
the most costly monuments; for in these simple wreaths there is no osten-
tation. There is much sweetness also in the distinction made in the gar-
lands according to the age of the departed: those intended for the graves
of the young and unmarried being composed of the purest white, whilst
for persons of more advanced age the yellow are used.
Helipterum brachyrrhynchum —Sender.
Hab. Argillaceous dry hills near Forest Creek.
FI. December.
*Gnapbaliam lateo-album —Linne'.
Hab. Common, Yarra banks, Warruambool, etc.
FI. January.
This plant, the “Jersey cudweed,” is marked as '•'■very rare ” in England, by
Babington, in his “ Manual of British Botany.”
Gnaphalium indutum —J. Hooker.
Hab. Dry pastures near Brighton and Warrnambool.
FI. October.
(Name from gnaphalon , soft down.)
Erechtites hispidula—Candolle.
Hab. Grassy ridges on the Yarra.
FI. September.
Senecio rupicola—Lesson and Richard.
Hab. Sandy soil on sea-coast, St. Kilda, Warrnambool, etc.
FI September.
Senecio Macquariensis—Candolle.
Hab. Muddy banks of the Yarra.
FI. November.


Senecio odoratus—Homemann
Hab. Banks of the Yarra.
FI November.
(Also v. angustifolius.)
Hab. North side of the Yarra, near the old slaughter-house.
FI. January,
Cymbonotus Lawsonianus—Gaudichaud.
Hab. Sandy cliffs by the sea near Brighton.
FL August,
*Silybum Marianum—Gaertner.
Hab. Common everywhere.
FI.
The “milk thistle,” which has become so widely diffused throughout the
whole colony as to call for an act to be passed by the Legislative Council
to make its destruction imperative.
♦Centaurea solstitialis—Linne,
Hab. Uncultivated lands.
FL January.
The “ yellow-star thistle.”
♦Onopordnil Acantbiura—Linne.
Hab. Near Mount William.
FI. January.
The “ cotton thistle.”
♦Hypochseris glabra—Linne.
Hab. Sandy places, frequent.
FL
“ Smooth cat’s-ear,”
♦Taraxacum officinale —Weber.
Hab. Common.
FI. Summer.
“ Common dandelion.”
Picris angustifolia —Candolle.
Hab. Banks of Yarra.
FL January.
♦Sonchus oleraceus—Linne.
Hab. Waste places.
FL Summer.
•' Common sow thistle.”


*Sonclius asper—Hoffm.
Hab. Waste ground.
FI. Summer.
Scorzonera Lawrencii —J. Hooker.
Hab. Near the sea at Brighton.
FI. August
“•ffhe root of this plant is a favourite food of the natives, and would form, if
enlarged by culture, an agreeable substitute for Scorzonera Impanica , or
asparagus.”— Mueller's Report.
*Erigeron Canadensis—Linne.
Hab. Near Melbourne.
This plant, the “Canadian fleabane,” which was brought about a century
since from Canada, has become disseminated nearly over the whole world.
In England, France, Germany, Holland, Italy, Sicily, it is found, and is
frequently mot with in this colony.
GOODENIACE-dS, R. BROWN.
Scsevola stxaveolens —E. Brown.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
FI.
A very pretty plant, with spathulate leaves^
Goodenia ovata —E. Brown.
Hab. Banks of Yarra.
FL December.
Flowers yellow, leaves ovate, dentate.
Goodenia humilis —B. Brown.
Hab. Broken River.
Flowers yellow; a very slender plant.
Goodenia cordifolia—Eerd. Mueller.
Hab. Mount Buller.
Goodenia lanata —E. Brown.
Hab. Brighton.
FI. January.
Rather a diminutive plant, with yellow flowers-


LOBELIACEiE, JUSSIEU.
Isotoma axillaris—Lindley.
Hab. Futter's Range.
“ This plant surpasses all other indigenous Lobeliac-eas in its intense acridity,
and can be therefore only cautiously employed instead of Lobelia inflata .”
— Mueller's First Report.
The tube of the corolla is remarkably long in this plant-
Laurentia platycalyx—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. In grassy places, Melbourne.
Lobelia hydrophila.
Hab. Banks of Yarra, Hopkins River at WarrnambooL
FI. December.
Lobelia aiata —R. Brown.
Hab. On the Lagoon near Liardet's, etc.
FI. December.
Lobelia
Hab. Near Warrnambool
FI January.
CAMPANULACEiE, DUBY.
/ Campanula gracilis -E. Brown.
( Wahlenbergia . Dc Candolle.
Hab. In pastures, common.
FI. December to March.
The “blue bell,” so abundant everywhere. There is a variety with tour-fid.
flowers, C. quadrifida, whilst C. graeilis has the flowers five-fid.
STYLIDEiE, R. BROWN
Stylidium graminifolium —Swartz.
Hab. In pastures; a long spike of pink flowers, with long, radical, grassy
leaves.
FI. August.


EPACRIDEJ3, R. BROWN.
Leucopogon virgatus —E. Brown.
Hab. Liardet’s Beach, near Melbourne.
FI August
Leucopogon Eichei—E. Brown.
Hab. On the coast, Brighton, WarmambooL
FI. August
Acrotriche prostrata— Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Delatite.
Melichrus glaucifolius —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Loddon.
Lissanthe montana —E. Brown.
Hab. Mount Buller.
Lissanthe Cunniughami —De Candolle.
Hab. Loddon.
Sprengelia incarnata- —-Smith.
Hab.
Epacris impressa—Lahiliardiere.
Hab. Brighton, St. Hilda, sandy places.
Epacris lanuginosa—Lahiliardiere.
Hab. Wilson’s Promontory.
These elegant plants are commonly known as “native heaths,” and will be
easily recognised.
E. impressa is well figured in Sweet's “Flora Australasica,” p. 4; and the
scalo-like leaves clothing the stem will at once decide this species.


COROLLIFLORiE, CANDOLLE.
[Embracing all flowers furnished with calyx and corolla, the petals
of the latter being united.]
MYRSINEjE, r. brown
Myrsine Howittiana—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab, Gipps Land.
Named In honour of Dr. Godfrey Howitt of Melbourne, a true lover of natural
science. It may be seen in the Botanical Gardens, near the old swan
enclosure.
MYOPORUGE, R. BROWN.
Myoporum pentandrum—Ferd. Mueller.
Gab.
FI. September.
With drooping flowers.
Myoporum tuberculatum—R. Brown.
Hab. Melbourne, Warmambool,
FL September.
Myoporum humile—R. Brown.
Hab Lagoon near St. Kilda, Pertobe Lagoon, Warmambool.
FI. December.
A handsome trailer, with pink flowers, and green, fleshy, spathulate leaves.


VEEBENACE-®, JUSSIEU,
Verbena officinalis—Linne.
Hab. Common in waste places.
FL January.
“Vervain."
LABIATE, JUSSIEU.
Lycopus Australis —R. Brown.
Hab. Common in waste places near water.
FI January.
“Horehound," or “gipsywort.”
Mentha Australis —R. Brown.
Hab. Banks of Yarra, Hopkins, etc.
FI. December, January.
common.
Mentha gracilis —R. Brown.
Hab. Common.
FL December.
Mentha saturejoides—R. Brown
Hab. Bacchus Marsh.
*M arruhinm vulgare—Linne.
Hab. Banks of Yarra, Port Fairy, common.
FL February.
Scutellaria humilis —R. Brown.
Hab. Grassy situations, Warrnambooi, Melbourne.
FL January to March.
(Name from scutella , a little vessel.)
Prunella vulgaris —Linne.
Hab. Grassy situations,
FL January.
The “self-heal,” or “all heal."


Westringia senifolia—Ferd. Mueller.
llab. Buffalo Range.
Ajuga Australis—R. Brown,
Hab. Grassy places.
FI. July.
The “common bugle flower.”
BORAGINEiE, R. BROWN.
Myosotis Australis—R. Brown.
Hab. Banks of Yarra near Gardiner’s Creek, and abundantly about wombat
holes in the neighbourhood of Warmambool.
FI. December to February.
“ Forget-me-not”
Cynoglossum Australe —R. Brown.
Hab. About Melbourne, etc.
FI. December.
Cynoglossum suaveolens —R. Brown.
Hab. Batman’s Hill, Melbourne, Warrnambool.
FI. December.
“Sweet-scented hound’s-tongue.”
Name from cyon, a dog, and glossa, a tongue.
CONVOLVULACEJS, JUSSIEU-
Calystegia sepium—R. Brown.
Hab. I know of no more beautiful habitat for this large and elegant convol-
vulus than the Merri River, near Grassracre, where the stream is choked
with rushes, which are nearly hidden by the clusters of flowers encircling
them.
FI. Summer.
Convolvulus erubescens —Sims.
Hab. Grassy pastures, common,
FI. January.


Dichondra repens—R. Brown.
Hab. Generally at the foot of trees.
FI. September.
Wilsonia rotundifolia—Hooker.
Hab.
Cuscuta Australis —R. Brown.
Hab. Goulbum Elver.
FI. February.
BIGNONIACEiE, E. BEOWN.
Tecoma Australis—R. Brown.
Hab. In sandy ground, not common.
FI.
A creeper called the “ trumpet flower."
GENTIANEHI, JUSSIEU.
Gentiana Diemensis—Griesebach.
Hab. Snowy tops of Mount Buller—ssoo.
FI.
Dr. Mueller thinks this plant as valuable as the officinal Gentiana lutea.
Sebtea ovata —R. Brown.
Hab. Warmambool, Melbourne, etc., common in meadows.
FI. October to January.
Flowers quinque-fid., yellow; leaves ovate, nerved; has important medical
virtues-
Sebtea albidifiora—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Low marshy ground near Brighton, near Pertobe Lagoon, 'Warmam-
bool.
FI October, November.
This species, which is particularly fine In the latter locality, growing to the
height of six to eight inches, has white flowers, four-fid., and fleshy
leaves, not nerved. It is a valuable tonic.


Erythrsea Australis—R. Brown
Hab. Sandy soil near St. Kilda,
FI. December.
Valuable for its bitterness.
Mitrasacme paradoxa—R. Brown.
Hab. Grassy situations at Richmond and Brighton.
FI September, October.
A very small, elegant, little plant, often not more than an inch in height, and
its stems smaller than the finest hair.
SOLANACEiE, JUSSIEU.
Solanum nigrum—Linne.
Hab. Waste places about Warmambool and Melbourne.
FI. January to March.
“Common nightshade.”
Solanum laciniatum—R. Brown.
Hab. Common everywhere.
FL January to March.
“Kangaroo apple.” The radical leaves are generally slashed, hence its spe-
cific name; but we have observed many plants with the leaves quite
entire.
Solanum Hystrix—R. Brown.
The whole of this plant covered with spines; very elegant.
Nicotiana suaveolens—Lehmann.
Hab. On the high Yarra ranges near the Lunatic Asylum.
FL November.
This very beautiful tobacco was at one time common in the above situations,
but on our last visit we found that sheep had sadly cropped it The
flowers are white, stem herbaceous, nearly simple; leaves subpetiolate, or
lanceolate, undulated. Tube of corolla cylindrical, much longer than the
calyx, segments of limb rather unequal, roundish, obtuse. Stem villous
at the base, smoother at top. Leaves with a few scattered soft hairs on
veins and midrib; radical ones sub-spathulate, bluntish, rosulate. Calyx
deeply five-cleft; segments acute, unequal.


ACANTHACEiE, R. BROWN.
Basileophyta Friderici August!—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab.
A jSirasite on the fern tree.
SCROPHULARINjE, R. BROWN.
Mimulus repens—R. Brown.
Hab. Swamps near Melbourne, Warrnambool, etc., common.
Fl. January to April.
Mimukis gracilis—R. Brown.
Hab. Marshy ground near Pertobe Lagoon, Warrnambool.
Fl. November.
Mazus Pumilio —R. Brown.
Hab. Dandenong.
Gratiola latifolia —R. Brown.
Hab. Banks of Yarra, Macdonald’s Creek, Warrnambool.
FL December.
Glossostigma Drummondi —Bentham.
Hab. Ovens.
Veronica gracilis—R. Brown.
Hab. Pastures.
Fl. August.
Veronica calycina —R. Brown.
Hab, Mol Swamp.
Fl. April.
FI. on lateral racemes, few flowered, leaves ovate, unequally
stem creeping.
donate, hairy


Veronica labiata—R. Brown.
Hah. About Melbourne.
With long axillary racemes of white flowers; leaves elongate, lanceolate,
mlnate, unequally serrated.
Elatine gratioloides—AlL Cunningham
Hab.
VERBASCEA3, BARTLING.
*Verbascum Blattaria—Linne.
Hab. In waste places, occasionally.
FI. January.
Moth mullein.”
*Verbascum virgatum—Withering.
Hab. In waste places, occasionally.
FI. January.
“Large-flowered primrose-leaved mullein.”
LENTIBULARINAS, RICHARD.
Utricularia lilacina—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Brighton.
FI.
“ Bladder-wort ”
PRIMULACEAS, VENTENAT.
Sarnolus litoralis—R. Brown.
Hab. Amidst rushes in marshy grounds, Melbourne, Warrnambool,
Fairy. „—..
FI. December to April


*Anagallis phcenicea —Lamarck. Red Pimpernel.
Hah. Cultivated places, occasionally.
FI. December.
*Anagallis coerulea —Schreber. Blue Pimpernel.
Hab. Cultivated places, not common.
PLUMBAGINE.dE, JUSSIEU.
Statice Australis —Sprengel.
Hab.
PLANTAGINEiE, YENTENAT.
*Plantago lanceolata —R. Brown.
Hab. Waysides.
FI. January.
“ Ribwort plantain,”
*Plantago Coronopus—R. Brown.
Hab. Waste places, Warrnambool, not common.
FI. January.
“ Bnck’s-horn plantain.”


CANDOLLE.
[Embraces those plants which have no corolla, and occasionally
not even a calyx.]
JUSSIEU.
Cassyta glabella—R. Brown,
Hah
FI.
Stem glabrous.
Cassyta pubescens—R. Brown.
Has. Near St. Kiicla, Brighton, Warmambool, twining on Riccinocarpus, etc.
FL February.
Stem pubescent.
PROTEACEiE, R. BROWN.
Persoonia juniperina—Labillardibre.
lIAB.
Persoonia suff'ruticosa —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Ballaarat, Buffalo Ranges.


Hab. Buffalo Ranges.
FI.
Grevillea Dallachiana—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab.
FI.
Named after Mr. Dallachy, the superintendent of the Melbourne Botanic
Gardens.
Grevillea chrysoph tea — Ferd. Mueller-
Hab.
FL
Grevillea Latrobei —Meisner.
Hab, High banks of the Yarra, etc
FI. August.
Lorn atia longifolia — R. Brown.
Hab. Helatite.
FI
Hakea parilis—Knight and Salisbury-
Hab. Gipps Land.
FI.
Hakea trisecta.
Hab.
FI.
Grevillea Victorias —Ferd. Mueller.
Hakea brachynvhynca—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab.
FI. July.
Banksia Australis- —R. Brown.
Hab. Common.
FI. February.
This (with four other species) is designated the “native honeysuckle.” It?
bottle-brush yellow flowers will at once enable the student to distinguish
this plant.


THYMELEiE, JUSSIEU.
Fimelea elata—Ferd Mueller,
Had. Wilson’s Promontory.
Fimelea glauca—R, Brown.
Hab. Lagoon near Liardet’s Beach, etc.
FI. December-
Fimelea phylicoides—Meisner,
Hab,
Ft
I'imelea curviflora —R. Brown,
Hab. Hilly pastures near Hawthorne.
FI. September.
f There are eighteen species of this very beautiful genus common in Victoria.)
AMARANTH AUEiE, JUSSIEU,
Alternanthera denticulata —R. Brown,
Hab. Banks of Yarra, moist situations, common.
FI. January.
Hemichroa pentandra—R. Brown,
Hab. M‘Crae’s Island.
SALSOLACE/E, JUSSIEU.
RhagodLa nutans —R. Brown.
Hab. Banks of Yarra, Hopkins Kiver, etc.
FI. February.
Rhagodia Billardierii—R. Brown.
Hab. Sandy soil near St. Kilda, Warrnambool.
JF I February.


*Chenopodium murale—Linne.
Hab. Marshy ground near YaiTa.
FI. January.
“Nettle-leaved goose-foot.”
Blitum ?
Hab. Warrnambool, Melbourne.
FI. February,
Atriplex paludosum —11. Brown.
Hab. Port Albert.
Atriplex cinereum—Poiret.
Hab. Sea coast
FI. August
Chenopodina Australis— Moquin.
Hab.
POLYGONEjE, JUSSIEU.
Polygonum prostratum—E. Brown.
Hab. Yarra banks.
Fl. January.
Polygonum minus—Hudson.
Hab. Moist situations.
Fl. January.
Polygonum glandulosum—R. Brown.
Hab. Shady banks of Goulburn, Broken River, King, Ovens,
Leaves elongate, lanceolate, acuminate, underneath glandulose.
Polygonum subsessile—E. Brown.
Hab. Goulburn, King, Broken River,
Fl.
Leaves elongate, lanceolate, somewhat sessile.
Murray


Polygonum gracile—R. Brown
Hab. Lagoons near the Yarra,
FI. January.
Polygonum strigosum—E. Brown.
Hab. Shady grassy banks.
FI
Stem erect, bracteas ciliate, leaves hastate, branches with recurved sirigce , or
sharp, closely-pressed hairs.
*Polygonum aviculare—Linne.
Hab. Waste places.
“Common knot grass.”
Muehlenbeckia complexa—Meisner.
Hab. Banks of Hopkins, at Brighton, etc
FI. August
This is frocprently called “sarsaparilla,” and used in the same way.
Rumex Brownii —Campdera.
Hab. Yarra banks.
Rumex spinulosus.
Hab. Yarra banks.
FL January.
"‘Rumex crispus—Linne.
Hab. Waste places.
FI. January.
“ Curled dock.”
*Rumex Acetosella—Linne'.
Hab. Waste places.
FI. November.
“Sheep’s sorrel.”
SANTALACEHS, JUSSIEU.
Exocarpus cupressiformis—Labillardiere.
Hab. Common everywhere.
“Native cherry tree.”


Exocarpus stricta —li. Brown.
Has. Common,
URTICEyK, JUSSIEU,
*Urtica urens —Linne,
Hab. Waste places.
FL January.
I'rtica dioica—Linne.
Hab. Waste places,
FI, January.
The leaves of this plant instead of being cordate, as In the English specimens
in our berharinm, are elongate, lanceolate.
CASUARINE/E, MIRBEL
CasuarSna rigid a—Miquel.
Hab. Gipps Land-
FI.
(There are four other species, C. Uptoclada, pwrdla, quadrioaicis, and cristata,
all known as the “she oak.” We may refer to Mr. Swainson’s report on
these plants, and to the seeds and cones collected by him, which may be
seen at the Botanical Gardens. He has named 213 species}! I)


MONOCOTYLEDONEvE.
[The plants of this class are also called Endogens, and
differ from Exogens, or Dicotyledonece , in their parallel-
veined leaves, the absence of concentric rings, and the
seed containing an embryo with only one cotyledon.]




ORCHIDEA2, JUSSIEU.
Thelymitra pauciflora—R. Brown.
Hab.
Diuris maculata—Smith.
Hab. Stony places near Dight’s Mill.
FI. September.
Diuris aurca—Smith.
Hab. Common about Melbourne.
FI September.
Caladenia ccerulea —E. Brown.
Hab. In pastures about Melbourne.
FI.
Caladenia carnea—R. Brown.
Hab. Shady places at Brighton under Fabrkia loevigata , sand hummock-,
at Warrnambool.
PI. September, October.
Caladenia alata—R. Brown.
Hab. Pastures at Hawthorne, eta
FL September.
Caladenia pulcherrima—l3drd. Mueller.
Hab. Common in pastures about Melbourne and Warrnambool.
FI. October, November.
The “ spider orchis.” Varies much in the colour and size of its flowers; but
under any circumstances, it is indeed one of the “most beautiful” of our
native orchidca;.
Glossodia minor—R. Brown.
Hab. About Richmond.
FI. August, September.


Pterostylis cucullata —R. Brown.
Hab. Common in pastures.
FI. August, September.
“Hooded orchis,” of which eight other species are common in Victoria.
( Dipodium punctatum —E. Brown.
( Dendrobium . Smith’s “Exot. 80t.,” i. page 21, tab.
Hab. Near Gardiner’s Creek.
FI. January.
HYPOXIDEAS, ENDLICHEE.
Hypoxis vaginata— Schlechtendal.
Hab. In pastures, common.
FI. Spring.
Hypoxis glabella—R. Brown.
Hab. Pastures.
FI. Spring.
LILIACEiE, CANDOLLE.
Bulbine bulbosa —Haworth.
Hab. Pastures near Hodgson’s Punt.
FL August.
Dichopogon humilis —Kunth.
Hab. Pastures.
Fi. November.
Dichopogon leimonophilus—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Pastures.
FI. November to January.
Ceesia corymbosa—E. Brown.
Hab. Pastures.
FI. Spring.
Thysanotus Patersoni —E. Brown.
Hab. Twining around plants in the scrub near East Brighton.
FI. October.
Flowers pink.


Tricoryne graminifolia.
Hab. Pastures.
FI. December.
Flowers yellow.
Dianella coerulea—Sims.
Hab. Amidst rushes about Brighton and St. Kilda.
FI. October.
Flowers blue.
(The natives use the leaves of this and D. revoluta for making baskets.)
Xanthorrhoea minor—R. Brown.
Hab Near Portland.
F Spring.
Xanthorrhea Australis—E. Brown.
Pad. Near Cape Otway, Portland, etc.
FL Spring.
“Grass trees." A species of bee is said to bore into the stem* of
plants, and deposit honey therein.
MELANTHACEAS, R. BROWN.
Burchardia umbellata—E. Brown.
Hab, Pastures.
FL September.
Flowers white.
Anguillaria dioica—R. Brown.
Hab. Pastures, abundant.
FI. September, October.
Flowers white.
XEROTIDEA3, ENDLICHER.
Xerotes collina—E. Brown.
Hab. Richmond, Survey Paddock, pastures.
FL August.
Nine other species common in Victoria.


JUNCEA3, CANDOLLE.
Juncus maritimns—Lamarck.
Hab. Warmambool, Gipps Land.
FI. February.
Juncus effusus—Linne.
Hab. Moist situations.
FI. February.
Juncus bufonius—Linne.
Hab. Marshy ground about Warmambool.
FI. February, March.
Juncus pallidus—R. Brown.
Hab. About Melbourne.
Luzula campestris—Candolle.
Hab. Pastures.
FI. July.
RICHARD.
Triglochin nanum—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Brighton.
FI December.
Triglochin decipiens—R. Brown.
Hab. Lagoons about Warmambool, etc.
FI. December,
Gycnogeton Huegelii—Endlicher.
Hab. In the Yarra and lagoons.
FI.
■J Actinocarpus minor—R. Brown, Prod., p. 199.
( Damasonium Australe—Salisbury in “Hort. Trans.,” i. p. 368.
Hab. This rare plant we discovered in lagoons near the Yarra, and havA
never noticed it in any other localities. Carpels, nine in number—R.
Brown mentions eight only.
FI. April or May.


Alisma Plantago—Linne.
Had. Marshy places, rivers.
FI
“ Great water plantain.”
’’ * HYDROCHAKIDE/E, JUSSIEU.
{Damasonium ovalifolium—R. Brown, Prod., p. 200.
Ottelia ovalifolia—Lindley.
Hab. On the Yarra and lagoons.
FI. January.
This elegant water-plant ■will easily be detected by its large potamogeton-
like leaves floating on the water, on long petioles. The flowers are white,
crimson at the base, and appear just above the surface. The stem is
round, but in some specimens we have observed it triangular.
LEMNACEriB, LINK.
Lenina minor—Linne.
Hab. Lagoons, common.
Lemna trisulca —Linne.
Hab. Lagoon at Lcura near Belfast.
{A species of Physa. is commonly found on this duckweed.)
TYMPHACEA2, JUSSIEU.
Typlia Shuttleworthii —Koch and Sender.
Hab. Lagoons.
FI. December.
“Cat’s tail,” or “ bulrush.”


POTAME-®, JUSSIEU
Ruppia maritima —Linne.
Hab. In salt water, Warmambool, etc
FI. March.
“ Sea tassel grass.”
Potamogeton natans —Linne.
Hab. Lagoons, rivers, common.
F). December,
Potamogeton obtusifolius —Mertens and Koch.
Hab. In swamps, common.
FI. January.
(This is P. gramirmm of Robert Brown. “ Prodromus,” p. 199, “ Miis lima-
ribu-3 obtusis.''
DESVAUXIEA3, BARTLING.
Desvauxia tennior —R. Brown.
Hab . Moist, grassy situations about Melbourne.
FI. September.
(Named in honour of D. Desvaux, the author of a work on the Junuoe, i
“Journal de Botanique.”)
Aphelia cyperoides —R. Brown.
Hab. Swamps about Melbourne.
FI. September.
Aphelia pumilo —Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Grassy places about Melbourne
FI. October.
(These plants are very like minute Scirpi or Cyperi.
RESTIACEA3, R. BROWN.
Hypolsena fastigiata —R. Brown.
Hab.


Restio lateriflorus—R. Brown
llab. Gipps Land.
Restio tetraphyllus—Labillardiere.
Hab. Gipps Land.
JUSSIEU.
Cyperus lucidus —R. Brown.
Hab. Banks of the Yarra, etc.
FI. January.
Cyperus laevis —R. Brown.
Hab. Ovens.
Isolepis prolifera—R. Brown.
Hab. Yarra banks, Warmambool.
Fimbristylis brachytricha—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Goulburn.
Scirpus raaritimus —Linne
Hab. About Melbourne.
FI. December.
Scirpus leptocarpus—Ferd. Mueller.
HAb. Ovens.
Chapelliera loculata.
Hab. Yarra banks.
FI. January.
Cbsetosp'ora axiftjtris—R. Brown.
Hab. Moist situations.
FI. September.


Schoenus pogonolepis—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Yarra.
Gahnia sulcata—Ferd. Mueller.
Hab. Muddy Creek.
Carex pseudo-Cyperus—Linne.
Hab. Goulbum.
C. in versa , chlorantha, appressa , vulgaris, brevie ulmis, longifolia, and Utoren
may occasionally be met with.
GRAMINEHS, JUSSIEU.
Sporobolus Matrella—Nees.
Hab. Salt marshes.
Sporobolus iudicus —R. Brown.
Hab. Lagoons near the Murray.
FI.
“ Pauicula coarctata cylindracea e spiels imbricatis divisis simplicibusve ”
Agrostis parviflora—R. Brown.
Hab. Banks of rivers and lagoons, Goulbum, Delatito.
‘ Panicula effusa capillari, glumis aequalibus, perianthii valvula exterior! trun-
cata: interior! minutissima.”
Agrostis temula —R. Brown.
Hab. Banks of Yarra.
1 Panicula capillari, glumarum carinis denticulatis, valvula exteriori perianthii
longitudinalitcr pubescente bimucronata: arista dorsali glumis duplo
longiori, setula villosa ad basin valvuloe interioris, foliis planis.”
Agrostis scabra—E. Brown.
Hab. Near Sealer's Cove, Buffalo Range.
FI.
“ Panicula capillari, glumarum carinis lateribusque scabris, valvula exteriori
perianthii glabra; apice denticulata; arista dorsali inclusa, setula villosa
ad basin interioris, foliis planis vaginlsquo scabris.”


/ Agrostis ovata~R. Brown.
( Cinna . Kunth.
Hab. Yarra Banks, Wamuunbool.
FI. January.
“Panicula ovata vel oblongo spicifonni, arista glumis longiori, sctula ad basin
valvulas intcrioris."
Agrostis quadriseta—R. Brown.
Hab. In grassy places.
FI. Common.
“Triandra, panicula cylindracea; rands ramulisque imbricatis, glumis acu-
rninatis, valvula extcriori perianthii glabra; arista infra medium dorsi
glumis duplo longiori; apice quadridentata dentibns setaccis intcriorihus
brevioribus.”
Agrostis lobata —R. Brown.
H AB. On barren lofty places.
FI.
“Panicula subspioata docomposita lobata,”
Polypogon imitans—Fcrd. Mueller.
II ab. Darebin Creek.
Stipa semibarbata —R. Brown.
Hab. Near Brighton and the Yarra.
FI.
“ Aristis a basi ad geniculum plumosis; supra Undis, perianthii? sericeis,
glumis coloratis scabriusculis.”
Stipa flavescens—Labillardiere.
Hab. In sterile places, not uncommon.
“Aristis nudis perianthiis pubescentibus, glumis setaceo-acuminatis, folds in-
volutis, geniculis vaginisque inferioribus pubescentibus, ligula brevissium
ciliata.”
Stipa macrantha—Cavauilles.
Hab. On mountains near Wilson’s
Promontory, particularly in granite
rocks, and near the Loddon.
“ Aristis nudis, perianthiis glabris subsossilibus, glumis mucronatis, panicula
effusa, culmo ramoso vaginisque isvibus, foliis planiusculis soabris.”


* A vena fatua—Linne.
Hab. Generally in cultivated places.
The “wild oat:’’ too well known to need any description.
Yulpia
Hab. Lonsdale Street, Melbourne.
FI. February.
We found a single plant growing in the above locality in 1853, but cannot
decide the species with any accuracy.
Glyceria fluitans —R. Brown.
Hab. Bacchus Marsh, Black Forest, Deep Creek, Loddon, and lagoons near
the Plenty.
*l)actylis glornerata—Linne.
Hab. Waysides.
“ Cock's-foot grass.”
Eragrostis parviflora- Trinius.
Hab. King’s River.
Poa Australis—R. Brown.
Hab. Often in elevated places.
“Panicula effusa v. subcoarctata, spiculis 5,6, floris lanceolatis, glumis scabris,
perianthii valvula exteriori basi lanata, foliis setaceo-involutis scabris;
ligula brevissima, culmis catspitosis.”
*Poa annua—Linne.
Hab. Waste places.
“Annual meadow grass.”
“ Spiculis ovatis, 5 floris.”
*Briza minor—Linne.
Hab. Waste and cultivated places.
FI October.
“ Lesser quaking-grass.”
“Spiculis triangularibus, 7 floris.”


Arundo Phragmites—R. Brown.
Has. Banks of Yarra.
“Gluma multiflora, bivalvis.”
Cynodon Dactylon—Richard.
Hab. Meadows near the river Ovens,
“ Spicis 3-5 digitatis, periantliiis glabris subciliatis gluma longioribus, setula
imberbi ad basin Valval® interioris."
Chloris truncata —R. Brown.
Hab. In moist grassy places near St. Hilda.
“ Spicis 6-8 digitatis divaricatis, glumis bifloris subulatis, periantliiis trun-
catis compressis glabris, arista valvulam bis superante.”
*Phalaris minor—Retz.
Hab. Waste and cultivated places.
“ Small canary grass."
*Alopecurus geniculatus—Linne,
Hab. Moist places.
“Floating fox-tail grass.”
Anthistiria Australis—R. Brown.
Hab. Common.
Fl. October.
“Kangaroo grass.”
“Glumis involucrisque imberbibus
strigisve paucissimis, foliis vaginisque
glabris, culmo tereti.”
Tetrarrhena acuminata—R. Brown
Hab. Goulburn River.
“ Floribus glabris, periantliiis nervosis; exteriore acuto; valvula altera inte-
riori parum breviori; altera longiori acuminata, foliis vaginisque glabris.
culmo ramoso.
*Lolium perenne—Linne.
Hab. Cultivated places, etc.
Fl.
“ Common Rye-grass.” “Red darnel.”


*Lolium temulentmn—Linne.
Hab. Generally in cultivated land.
FI.
“The bearded darnel.”
Seeds said to cause intoxication.
*Hordeum murinum—Linne.
Hab. On walls and waysides.
FI.
“ Wall barley,” “ way bennet.”
*Holcus lanatus —Linne.
Hab. Grassy places.
FI.
“ Meadowsoft grass.”'


ACOTYLEDONEiE.
[Plants which have no Mowers, but are multiplied by
spores, which answer the same purpose as seeds.]




FILICES, JUSSIEU.
Notholcena distans—R. Brown.
Hab. Dclatitc.
“Frondibus bipinnatis lineari-lanceolatis setoso-hirsutissimis, foliolis oppo-
sitis deltoidibus distantibus, pinnulis oblongis; inferioribus incisis, radii
stipiteque setosis.”—R. Brown’s
Prodromus,” p. 2 (146:)
Grammitis Australis—R. Brown.
Hab.
“ Frondibus linearibus vel lanceolato-linearibus obtusiusculis integrS glabris;
marginibus simplidbus.”— Prodromus , p. 2 (146.)
Polypodium Billardierii—R. Brown.
Hab.
“ Frondibus integerrimis pinnatifldisque glabris coriaceis lanceolatis; margine
incrassatis; venis anastomozantibus, sons solitariis subsaccatis, surculo
squamoso radicante.”— Prodromus, p. 3 (147.)
(Name from poly, many, and pous, afoot —referring to the foot-like divisions
of the caudex.)
Aspidium proliferum—R. Brown.
Hab.
“Frondibus bipinnatis apice proliferis, pinnulis ovato-oblongis glabris crenatis
indsisve; inferioribus basi pinnatifidis lobulo antico dilatato obtuso, sti-
pete rachique scarioso-squamosis; squamulis sctaceis basi dllitata fim-
briata.”— Prodromus, p. 3 (147.)
Asplenium flabellifolium—Cavanilles.
Hab. Rocky situations near the Yarra.
Fr. January.
“Fan-shaped spleenwort.”
“Frondibus pinnatis, pinnis orbiculato-rhombeis antice crenato-dentatis,
radii hevi apice filifonni nudo radicante.”— Prodromus, p. 6 (150.)


Asplenium obtusatum —Forster.
Hab. Shady situations near springs, Buffalo Ranges.
“ Frondibus pinnatis coriaceis, pinnis oblongis obtusis acutiusculisve grosse
serratis hasi subattenuatis, rachi marginata.”— Prodromus, p. 6 (150.)
(Name from asplenon, some species having probably been used as a cure for
spleen.)
Bleclmum striatum —Swartz.
llab.
“Frondibus pinnatis lanceolatis, pinnis lineari-ensiformibus acutis serrulatis
opacis venoso-striatis; inferioribus suboppositis, rachi nuda, stipite semi-
tereti.” — Prodromus, p. 8 (152.)
f Stegania procera.
(Lomaria . Sprengel.
Hab. Banks of the Yarra.
‘Frondibus pinnatis oblongo-ellipticis, pinnis sterilibus lanceolato-ensitormi-
bus acuminatis serratis basi subcordatis, fertilibus (ejusdem vel diversse
frondis) linearibus; costa subtus paleacea, involucris sub-intramargiu-
alibus.”—Prodromus, p. 9 (153.)
Pteris esculenta —Forster.
Hab. Common everywhere.
Fr.
This fern needs no description, it is the common bracken of the colony. Mr.
Backhouse, in speaking of the root, says, “Figs feed upon this root, where
it has been turned up by the plough, and in sandy soils they will them-
selves turn up the earth in search of it. The aborigines roast it in the
ashes, peel off its black skin with their teeth, and cat it with their
roasted kangaroos, and in the same manner as Europeans eat bread."
(Name from pteron, a wing—probably from the expanded appearance which
this fern presents.)
Adiantum assimile—Swartz.
Hab. Abundant on the banks of the Yarra, and in shrubby places about
Warmambool.
Fr. January.
This, the most elegant of our native ferns, will be at once recognised from its
similarity to the Adiantum capillus-veneris, or “true maiden’s hair,” so
rare in England. Whether our plant possesses the extraordinary virtues
which are attributed to it we know not, but it is a gem in every way;
and we recommend it to our fair readers as a great improvement, inter-
mingled with a white rosebud, on the trashy artificial flowers so com-
monly worn in the hair.


Cheilanthes tennifolia—Swartz
Hab. Rocky places on the Yarra, and near Saltwater River.
“ Frondibus subtripinnatis glabris, pinnulis oblong’is incisis pinnatifidisve soris
contluentibus.” — Prodromtis, p. 12 (156.)
Trichomanes venosum—R. Brown.
Hab. Gipps Land.
“Frondibus pinnatis, pinnis linearibus venosis crenato repandis; inferioribus
basi lobatis vel pinnatifidis intusque unifloris.”— Prodromus , p. 15 (159.)
(Name derived from trichos, a hair, and mania, excess—in allusion to the
exserted hair-like receptacles. “ Receptaculo capsularuin plerumque ex-
serto, elongato.)
Ilymenophyllum nitens —R. Brown.
Hab.
“Frondibus tripinnatifidis lanceolatis glabris, laciniis linearibus obtusis sub-
emarginatis integris, involucris terminalibus, valvis oblate orbicularibus.”
— ProdromUs , p. 15 (159.)
(Name from hymen, a membrane, and phyllon, a leaf—from the membranous
character of the fronds.)
Gleichenia microphylla—R. Brown.
Hab. Bunyip Creek.
Fr. April.
“Frondibus dichotomis, divaricatis, ramis pinnatis, pinnis pinnatifidis glabris
lobis subrotundis margine recurvis, capsulis 3-4 exsertis, rachibus hirtis.”
Prodromus, p. 17 (161.)
Ophioglossum gramineum—Willdenow.
Hab. Near Prahran.
We are indebted to our friend, Mr Carl Wilhelmi, for numerous specimens of
this elegant and minute species (one to two inches), which he found in
swampy ground in the above locality. Those of our readers who are
familiar with the “common adder’s tongue” (0. vulgatum), which,
according to Gerard, “yeelds a balsame for greene wounds,” will have no
difficulty in determining this plant.
(Name from ophios, a serpent, and glossa, a tongue—from the resemblance
which the fertile fronds bears to the tongue of that reptile.)


Gleicbenia dicarpa—R. Brown,
Hab. Buffalo Ranges.
“ Frondibus dichotomis, ramis pinnatis, pinnis pinnatifidis, lobis orbiculatis
subtus concavis latoque margine cinctis, capsulis binis, rachibus pubes,
centibus.”— Prodromus, p. 17 (161.)
Schizaea fistulosa—Labillardiere.
Hab. Gipps Land.
Fr.
“Frondlbus indivisis teretiusculis antice sulcatis, appendice pinnata sub
12 juga, involucris citiato-laceris.”— Prodromus, p. 18 (162.)
Sehiztea bifida—Swartz.
Hab,
Fr.
“ Frondlbus sterilibus dichotomis, fertilibus bifidis v. semel dichotomis aspens,
appendicibus 10-16 jugis adsccndontibus, involucris crinitis.”
Botrychium Australe —R. Brown.
Hab. In swampy ground near Richmond.
Fr.
The only specimen of this plant found in Victoria, we discovered in August,
1853, in the above locality; and, although wc repeatedly explored the
neighbourhood with much diligence, could never obtain a second.
“ Scapo subradicali, fronde ternata, foliolis bipinnatis, piunuiis cunfiuentibus
incisis.” — Prodromus, p. 20 (164.)
MARSILLEACEiE, R. BROWN.
Azolla pinnata—R. Brown.
Hab. Goulbum River.
“ Fronde circumscriptione triangulari pinnata, foliolis superiovibus papulosis,
radicibus longitudinaliter pluinosis.”— Prodromus , p. 23 (161.)
Azolla rubra —R. Brown.
Hab. On a swamp near Gardiner’s Creek, Botanic Gardens, Melbourne,
Merri River, Warrnambool.
“Fronde circumscriptione orbiculata, lobis palmatis lobulis indivisis bifidisve
foliolis superioribus Isevibus, radicibus extra medium plumosis.”
Very small plants, swimming on the surface of the water, covering it as with
velvet. Very like Jungermannia.


TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
|)jjilosojjjjital #atiftij of iutoria,
Including the Papers and Proceedings of the
Society.
VOL. I. —Bvo, pp. 290, —with Plates and Plans, Price ONE GUINEA.
CONTENTS:
Capt. Clarke’s Inaugural Address.
Dr. Mueller on Rare and Undescribed Australian Plants.
Mr. R. B. Smyth on the Value and Durability of Building Materials.
Mr. Blandowski’s Excursion towards the Central Parts of Victoria.
Mr. C. Hodgkinson’s Rules and Tables of Railway Earthworks.
Dr. Davey on the Construction of an Instrument for Ascertaining
the Mean Temperature.
Mr. Becker’s Meteorological Observations at Bendigo.
Mr. B. Stewart on the Influence of Gravity on the Physical Con-
dition of the Moon’s Surface.
Mr. B. Stewart on the Adaptation of the Eye to the Nature of
Rays.
Dr. Mueller’s Descriptive Characters of New Alpine Plants in
Australia.
Dr. Wilkie on the Failure of the Yan Yean Reservoir.
Dr. Davey on the Meteorology of Melbourne.
Mr. C. Hodgkinson on Evaporation of the Yan Yean Reservoir.
Messrs. Acheson & Christy’s Report on the Yan Yean.
Mr. R. B. Smyth on the Influence of the Physical Character of a
Country on the Climate.
Mr Blandowski’s Description of Fossil Animalculse in Primitive
Rocks.
Mr. C. Ilodgkinson’s Practical Remarks on Hydrometry.
Mr. Blandowski on the Primary Upheaval of the Land round
Melbourne.
Dr. Wilkie on the Water Supply of Melbourne.
Mr. C. Hodgkinson’s Remarks on the Geological and Chemical
Nature of the Primary Rocks of Victoria.
MELBOURNE
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & Co., 44 Collins Street West.


TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
|l|ilosoplm:il of
Including the Papers and Proceedings of the
Society.
VOL. I. —Bvo, pp. 290, —with Plates and Plans, Price ONE GUINEA.
CONTENTS:
Capt. Clarke’s Inaugural Address.
Dr. Mueller on Rare and Undescribed Australian Plants.
-Mr. R. B. Smyth on the Value and Durability of Building Materials.
Mr. Blandowski’s Excursion towards the Central Parts of Victoria.
Mr. C. Hodgkinson’s Rules and Tables of Railway Earthworks.
Dr. Davey on the Construction of an Instrument for Ascertaining
the Mean Temperature.
Mr. Becker’s Meteorological Observations at Bendigo.
Mr. B. Stewart on the Influence of Gravity on the Physical Con-
dition of the Moon’s Surface.
Mr. B. Stewart on the Adaptation of the Eye to the Nature of
Rays.
Dr. Mueller’s Descriptive Characters of New Alpine Plants in
Australia.
Dr. Wilkie on the Failure of the Van Yean Reservoir.
Dr. Davey on the Meteorology of Melbourne.
Mr. C. Hodgkinson on Evaporation of the Yan Yean Reservoir.
Messrs. Acheson & Christy’s Report on the Yan Yean.
Mr. R. B. Smyth on the Influence of the Physical Character of a
Country on the Climate.
Mr Biaudowski’s Description of Fossil Animalcule in Primitive
Rocks.
Mr. C. Ilodgkinson’s Practical Remarks on Hydrometry.
Mr. Blandowski on the Primary Upheaval of the Land round
Melbourne. *
Dr. Wilkie on the Water Supply of Melbourne.
Mr. C. Hodgkinson’s Remarks on the Geological and Chemical
Nature of the Primary Rocks of Victoria.
MELBOURNE
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & Co., 44 Collins Street West.
