



Mr. JOHN CALVERT, F.Z.S.


JOTTINGS
REFERRING TO THE
EARLY DISCOVERY OF GOLD
IN AUSTRALIA
AND SOME REMARKS RELATIVE TO THE
VETERAN GOLD MINER
JOHN CALVERT
BY
ALBERT WALLACE
SYDNEY
G. MURRAY AND CO., PRINTERS AND STATIONERS
/P^O




JOTTINGS
REFERRING TO THE
EARLY DISCOVERY OF GOLD IN AUSTRALIA
®ERHAPS few men, if any, can claim the extraordi-
nary historical career of one whose life has been
spent in exploring and travelling over every part of the
globe. His thirst for scientific research, together with
the possession of an adventurous spirit, has led him, on
and on, to compass in his long life of active industry
what it would take volumes to chronicle; and now,
approaching as he is the venerable age of four score, his
body healthy and his mind as vigorous as ever, while
still climbing the ladder of science and still struggling to
feed his insatiable thirst for discovery and exploration
which he appears to have inherited from his ancestors,
a race of men who for generation after generation have
been foremost in the ranks as voyagers, discoverers, and
pioneer colonists. Amongst the vast collection of
ancient books, manuscripts and curios he has inherited,
are some interesting volumes illustrating the voyages of
several of the earliest Dutch navigators, and one special
manuscript shows a fair map of the N.W. corner of the
Australian continent together with some of the islands
intervening between it and Java proper. It relates how
the leader of the expedition, Van Cal Verte, claimed to
be the first man who jumped on shore on the great
southern land. Decending from this early Dutch navi-
gator, we have the family of the Calverts settling in
Yorkshire, and Sir George Calvert, holding royal


appointments, was created Baron of Baltimore, and
obtained a charter of Avalon, and was one of the very
early colonizers of part of Newfoundland. He built two
men-of-war to defend his newly acquired territory from
the inroads of the French, and although he had granted
to him a Royal charter allowing him to take all French
cruisers in certain seas, yet the gallant Anglo-Dutchman,
after spending large sums, sought, away from the broils
and wars, a more peaceful hunting ground further south.
He obtained from Charles I. a charter for a large territory
running inland from Chesapeake Bay, which he called
Maryland. He did not live to take possession, but his
son Cecileus, the second Lord Baltimore, enjoyed the
rights his father had obtained, after which there was a
succession of the Lords Baltimore until the last
Frederick who died in 1769, leaving at Altona one male
survivor, Roland Calvert, the grandfather of the subject
of this sketch. This gentleman has in his possession,
together with the Royal charters, a series of trinkets,
watches and seals, all family heirlooms, but one seal in
particular he, with pardonable pride, pulls out of its old
shagreen case, it being no other than a present from
Richard Cceur-de-Lion to one of his ancestors, who
accompanied that monarch to Jerusalem, and being a
knight, the shield on the seal bears the three scollops,
whereas the ordinary pilgrims bore only one as a sign
of their holy errand.
Before Mr. John Calvert had ( arrived at the age of
twenty he had made several excursions with one Henry
Healand, a celebrated miner and mineralogist, who
during their visits to various mines initiated him into
the subtle art of gold-mining and metallurgy. He, Mr.
Calvert, then wrote his two early books entitled, “ The
Solvent of Matter and Motion,” and “ The Universal
Distribution of the Metal Gold over every part of the
Globe.” The first of these two books, illustrating as it
did that all metals reached the upper crust of the earth
in a state of solution, and that life has its origin in
chemical action, so offended the clergy, that they waged
war against his works and destroyed them whenever


they could reach them. He, partly to escape their
maledictions, and partly to get a wider field for observa-
tion, sought the gold and silver mines of South America.
Having made a series of commercial experiments and
investigations for the discovery and extraction of gold
from its ores in order to verify the doctrines laid
down in his book, he crossed from South America to
Australia, reaching Sydney about the year 1834.
Here he immediately commenced exploring for gold
and silver, occasionally helping himself to pockets of the
former metal. About this time Mr. Calvert met with
Count Strelezki, and the latter accompanied him to the
Australian Alps, where he showed the Count gold, and
gave him samples of auriferous quartz to carry away
with him.
He afterwards met the Rev. W. B. Clarke, to whom he
also gave a small piece of gold quartz, which the
reverend gentleman carried about with him for many
years. On several occasions they journeyed together,
and Mr. Clarke was very eager that Mr. Calvert should
explain to him his theory—and practical results—for
finding gold; also the laws which governed nature in
developing the metals in the earth’s crust. He did not
at once accede to this proposal, but afterwards a deal
of friendly correspondence passed between them for
many years in which a great deal of valuable infor-
mation, relating to the laws affecting the deposition of
gold, tin, and other metals, and some of the actual
localities of gold and tin, was entrusted to his keeping.
The whole of this correspondence will, I believe, shortly
be published.
After visiting New Zealand on the same errand, he
returned to England, wrote several of his thoughtful
works on science, and then made his second visit to the
Australian continent, revealing the presence of copper
to the half-sceptical South Australians. He next made
several attempts to induce the New South Walers to
join him in working their gold mines, but without any
success ; and Sir Thomas Mitchell, the Surveyor-
General, in inviting him to supply the Government with


a very careful map that he had compiled of the five
northern counties—in answer to a letter from him dated
March, 1845, stating that most of the localites contained
gold, silver, copper, tin, and other metals, he, Sir Thomas
Mitchell, wrote saying that “ It was an agricultural and
pastoral country, and they did not want any invitation
or encouragement held out to dig holes for the sheep
and cattle to tumble into.” Having accumulated a good
deal of gold, a portion of which he had years before sold
to Mr. Cohen, of Sydney, who exhibited it in his
shop-window in George Street, to which fact many old
colonists now Jiving can testify, he turned some of that
gold into specie. He had ample means, and purchased
and fitted out the yacht “ Scout,” with which he cruised
about the coast of Tasmania and Western Australia on
his favourite pursuit of gold-hunting, making some very
important discoveries: one of the principal amongst
which was in the western range of Tasmania, where he
found some enormous masses of chlorides and other
silver ores. He marked his tracks so that he should
know his way to those places again. He also discovered,
for the first time, some very rich gold in ironstone near
a spot now called Mount Lyell, and a little further on
found gold in combination with bismuth. Before leaving
that district he ascertained that the basalts had over-
run some very valuable beds of rich gold stuff, and his
assertion is that the basalts of Australia, Tasmania, and
New Zealand are, at present, covering over many
millions worth of treasure, and that they ought to be
pierced and driven through without any loss of time.
He next journeyed north-westward from Tasmania
and explored many portions of Western Australia, making
excursions inland, where he found some extremely rich
gold and silver ore distributed over a very large area of
that neglected country. This was in the year 1847. He
next, with great difficulty, penetrated into the interior
of New Guinea, and cruised about the islands of the
Pacific. Towards the beginning of the year 1849 he
visited London and made fruitless attempts to float a
company to work the virgin gold and silver mines of


Australia. Disgusted with the short-sighted policy of
the Britishers, he returned to the Colonies, settling near
Bathurst, towards the end of the year 1849. During
his visit to England he had made a very heavy bet that
he would amass a ton of gold in Australia within three
years. He then commenced this laborious undertaking
on William Wentworth’s land—the exact spot he had
pounced upon the precious metal in the year 1834,
and from the extraordinary surface evidences and out-
crop, he considered it one of the most valuable and
extraordinary gold mines in all New South Wales ; also
at the Lousia and Meroo Creeks. Success soon crowned
his efforts, and he buried some large boulders, weighing
some hundredweights, nearly half of which was pure
gold, while he brought down as much of the precious
metal as he could conveniently look after on a couple of
pack-horses. He left Sydney ex “ Dorset,” for Adelaide,
to fetch the gold-saving machinery that he had sent out
from England. But before leaving Adelaide for Sydney
he washed gold in South Australia, and a few of the
leading men followed him into the field, which formed
subject matter for the Adelaide papers of that date, and
a full page engraving was given in one of the illustrated
papers entitled “ The run for gold,” and some of the
gold : saving machines he had brought out from England
were depicted in that illustration. Before the end of
1850 he was busily engaged to the west of the Blue
Mountains doing his best to win his bet. The last
ounce of the ton was made up towards the end of 1852,
and he arrived at Liverpool in the ship “ Falcon,” on
the 21st of March, 1853, with a ton of pure gold.
He occasionally employed white and sometimes black
labour, and it is more than a singular coincidence that
the exact spot which he had stopped at to pan gold on
Summer Hill Creek was the identical place the party
who had observed him led Mr. Hargreaves to on the
memorial occasion of 1851.
Meanwhile Mr. Calvert had not forgotten his early
mineralogical researches at home, and he paid a visit to
the ancient site of Sir Bevis Bulmer’s gold workings in


the Lead Hills in Lanarkshire, also visiting the gold
bearing districts of County Wicklow, in Ireland. He
subsequently read a series of papers before the British
Association at the Hull meeting of 1853 upon The pro-
duction of Gold in the British Isles, on The Physical Laws
Governing the Geological conditions of the Globe, and on
The Zones of the Earth's Crust and the Economy of their
Workings. In the course of the first paper he joined
issue with Sir Roderick Murchison, who, he said, had
neglected to notice the occurence of gold in Wales,
although he had put forward a claim to the discovery of
gold in Australia, based on the comparison of the Silurian
rocks of that country with those of the Ural. Sir
Roderick replied that he did not expect to find gold under
our very noses in Wales, and he accordingly left it un-
mentioned in his work Siluria. He, moreover, challenged
Mr. Calvert to show him gold broken from the solid rock
in Wales, a challenge which was readily accepted. “ I
met Sir Roderick,” says Mr. Calvert, “ with a number of
geologists in Wales, and taking them to Clogau, I broke
native gold from the solid rock in their presence, while
they all followed suit, carrying off good specimens for
themselves.” The Press seemed to give much
prominence to the battle between Calvert and Sir
Roderick, and Colburn's Magazine, then a more
influential publication than it is now, in summarising
the controversy, said : “ Mr. John Calvert now turns
the tables upon Sir Roderick and English geologists
generally for neglecting their own primary or paleozoic
and auriferous rocks. His reason for believing that gold
will be probably abundant in England is founded on the
fact of the similarity of the structure and position of
British rocks to those of the Australian regions.”
Shortly after this Mr. Calvert published his well
known work entitled The Gold Rocks of Great Britain
and Ireland, which comprises also a general outline of
the gold regions of the world.
He then went on with a. series of experiments for
developing the precious metal from its natural salts.
During his many years of experience as a gold miner in


Australia and South America he had discovered that by
far the largest portion of gold lay undeveloped in the
parent rock in a state of solution, having been arrested
and hermetically sealed before precipitation, so that
gold, recoverable by mechanical treatment in its pure
native state, was but a small percentage as compared
with the vast mountain masses that were saturated with
the undeveloped solution.
By a series of most exhaustive experiments and
laborious and expensive investigations, Mr. Calvert set
to work to unravel nature’s modus operandi , and discover
her treatment, also whether it was not possible, by using
more powerful agents, to accomplish in a few days the
same results which she required several thousand years to
effect. He at last discovered that the electro-chemical
decomposition of the matrix under certain conditions
would cause the gold which was in a state of natural
salt to precipitate and take the form of native metal.
At Los Angelos, on the Upper Amazon, in South America,
Mr. Calvert is now extracting gold on a large scale by
this process, and with reservoirs or tanks holding 500
tons of gold rock, and powerful dynamos driven by
water power at hand, he is treating the vast mass of
rock consisting of millions of tons. We have Mr.
Calvert’s assertion that in the ranges and mountains of
Australia, New Zealand and Tasmania, the same class
of rock exists, awaiting the treatment that shall render,
what is now passed over as refractory and worthless, a
vast source of profit, giving the bullion that would be so
welcome at the present time.
Nearly sixty years ago Mr. Calvert inherited the
museum and collection, formed by a succession of Lords
Baltimore. Many choice curios, and valuable historical
art relics had been gathered together, and no doubt gave
an impetus to an already inherited love for collecting.
His opportunities for adding to the splendid gatherings
of his ancestors were not wanting, as his extraordinary
career as a traveller, together with ample means, allowed
him to grasp that which would have been out of reach of
the ordinary museum curator. In every quarter of the


globe his energetic research brought forth to daylight
treasures that frequently had been hidden, lost or
neglected, and whenever there was a grand sale, dis-
persing the labours and treasures of some industrious
collecter, he was either there in person or by representa-
tive, bidding bid after bid till at last the choicest
varieties fell to his lot.
It is not to be wondered at that after so many years
the outcome of so much energy and enterprise should be
the production of what may be termed, a very fine
museum and library.
In the library are some of the earliest manuscripts
on vellum, illuminated in the most gorgeous and high
art style. These are not by ones and twos, but by
hundreds. The printed books commence with the first
printers, viz., Fust and Schoeffer, Mentilin, Ulrickzel,
Colard Mansion, Gerard de Leu, Caxton, Wynken
de Worde, Pynson, and thousands of others that would
take a thick volume to enumerate.
As to the scientific portion of the library it is as
complete as money could make it, and in most instances
the illustrations have been coloured by special artists.
The travels are very numerous and comprehensive, and
the library may be summed up by speaking of it as
hundreds of thousands of beautiful volumes in the finest
possible condition. Every book, page, and pamphlet in
connection with the history of the Australian colonies is
there to be found.
The Lords Baltimore collected at various periods
the superb high-art china of the middle ages, some of
the Dresden vases nearly three feet high have gems of
paintings cosily encircled by the most exquisite of
flowers. A series of Etruscan vases have been very
well preserved and were gathered together two hundred
years prior to the cunning forgeries of the present day.
Seals and gems are numerous, costly and finely engraved.
Ethnological specimens, mostly very carefully collected
by Mr. Calvert himself, number over a million sped-,
mens, three thousand of which he obtained during his
visit to the Nim-Nam country in central Africa.


In 1853 he invited the scientific elite of the world to
inspect a few of his treasures which he exhibited for
about two months, in what may be termed a scientific
conversazione, and the old traveller shook hands with
thousands of fellow workers and sympathisers who
thanked him for so generously displaying his treasures.
Amongst other royal visitors was Albert, the Prince
Consort, who was so enraptured with what he saw that
he made more than one visit to the museum. It would
be impossible within the limits of these few pages to
attempt to do justice to this extraordinary collection.
Some attempt was made in 1854 to enumerate the
number of articles, but after reaching the count of
twenty-six millions there were still boxes unpacked and
uncounted. Since that date it has been growing year
by year. In the conchological department there are
many specimens which no other collection possesses,
and Stevens, the great natural history auctioneer, can
seldom complain of the absence of our inveterate enthu-
siast when the sales are of sufficient importance to
claim his attention. But if there was one department
more than any other in which he could claim to outstrip
any collection in the world it would be in his minerals.
Few persons can imagine what minerals ought to be
unless they see his vast series of perfect crystallised
specimens: in matchless and superb colours whole
regiments of emerald, topaz, sapphire, and other
precious stones, and a fine series of crystallised
diamonds. His beautiful Siberian minerals and
Chessy coppers, both collected in company with
Henry Heuland, have never been matched up to the
present day. He has many thousands of agates and
Mocha stones showing the most perfect variations of
natural colours. They must be seen to be appreciated.
Amongst his collections appear the most extraordinary
freaks of nature, termed lusus naturce, in which the
celebrated likeness of Marie Antoinette can only be
approached by that wonderful likeness in jasper, of
Rameses 11, the Pharaoh King of biblical history, both
belonging to this collection; also the Mocha stone


exhibiting the two lighthouses with the reflection of
light accross the water, and another Mocha stone in which
nature’s accidental markings depicts a fleet of ships at
anchor in the bay ; also the quaint and unique collection
of lusus nature? of some hundred diversified forms and
pictorial illustrations which once belonged to the Duchess
of Portland, an enthusiastic collector of the last century.
Several geodes, perfect almond in shape, some of them
two feet long, containing internal caverns of crystallisa-
tion which will almost carry the admiring spectator
into the dreams of Fairyland. There are also a couple
of hundred thousand, carefully named, fossils from every
part of the world, many unique and of great value.
A large collection of portfolios containing some of
the choicest engravings, prints and drawings, from
Albert Durer down to the present day, and a few paint-
ings and choice water colour drawings are there to be
met with. Ornithology is represented by a very com-
prehensive and extensive collection of specimens.
