



WAGNER BROS.,
BOOKBINDERS,
196 KING STREET,






JOURNAL OF A TOUR
ROUND THE ISLE OF WIGHT, &c.
MADE IN AUGUST, 1840,
by
THOMAS DIXON RIDLEY, SARAH DIXON RIDLEY, ELIZABETH
RIDLEY and WILLIAM RIDLEY.
By WILLIAM RIDLEY, M.A.
SYDNEY:
FREDERIC J. N. RIDLEY, PETERSHAM.
1892.


JOURNAL OF A TOUR
ROUND THE ISLE OF WIGHT, &c.
MADE IN AUGUST, 1840,
BY THOMAS DIXON RIDLEY, SARAH DIXON RIDLEY, ELIZABETH
RIDLEY and WILLIAM RIDLEY.
AUGUST 17 (Monday)—Three of our party rode over to Paslow Hall,
and there passed the night, ready to go on to Londorf early the next
morning.
18 (Tuesday)—These three went on by railway from Brentwood to
London, where we were joined-at the station by the fourth of our party and
all went together to Vauxhall, the London and South Western Railway
Station. We had to while away an hour in pacing the somewhat dull
streets about here before the train started; but by 11 o’clock we were
seated ready, and within a minute of the time the train moved on with a
crowd of passengers. On coming out from the houses we passed along
meadows by the side of the Thames, and as the train moved steadily on we
had leisure to observe the appearance of London and its outskirts, which
in this quarter are green and wooded. As we went swiftly on our journey
through Surrey and Hampshire there was little to attract our attention, and
less that made any impression which the subsequent part of our journey
did not efface. The high chalk hills and the large commons (among which
we particularly noticed Woking Common) diversify the road, and we found
some amusement in learning the names of the several towns by or near
which we passed—Farnborough, Odiham, Baningstoke, Andover, Win-
chester —and in watching for the tunnels through which the train passed.
There was not time for anything more, except a hasty and distant sight of
the Cathedral at Winchester.


About 2 o’clock we reached Southampton, found the way to our Inn
(The Dolphin), and after preparing for going on further by a dinner, set
out for Netley Abbey. This fine ruin lies some way down by the left hand
or east side of Southampton water, the narrow bay that receives the waters
of the Tees and the Itchen; the way by land is 3 miles and by water is
2\. We took a sailing boat from the pier, and as there was a brisk wind
from the west (we were going S.E.) and the tide running out carried us
down, we were soon landed at Netley fort, which stands just below the
abbey, close to the water’s edge. Our boatman told us that there would
not be enough water to take us back if we stayed more than half-an-hour,and
not liking to be restricted to time at such a place as this we determined to
walk back to Southampton. The fort which was built in the time of
Henry VIII. having fallen into a partial decay, was about the latter end of
the last century repaired and ornamented with a tower by the owner of the
estate in which this and the abbey stand. It is surrounded by trees and
has a picturesque appearance, which has been sought after by tlxe owner in
the addition made on the recommendation of Sir H. Walpole. A small
path leads up to the abbey which, until we get almost to it, is concealed
by the thickly planted oaks that grow round about it. These ruins have
been so often and so highly praised that it is difficult to express one’s
opinion of them, except by repeating the terms that have over and over
again been applied to them.
We entered by the Southern gateway, first into a large square called
the Fountain Court; before us was the chapel, the soath wall of it forming
the north side of the Court, on the left a wall lower than the rest enclosing
the Court from the outside, and on the right several other rooms supposed
to be the remains of the chapter house, parlor and refectory, while beyond
the rest from the S.E. corner of the Fountain Court stretch out the kitchen,
buttery and cellars. Each of these we examined separately and traced out
the remains of several ancient windows and arches ; but what attracted
most of otir attention was the chapel, by far the finest part of these ruins.


The east end of the wall, including the stone framework of a beautiful
wheel window, is nearly entire, and is partly Covered with ivy ; the
northern transept is fallen, and it is difficult, amid the abundance of vege-
tation that has sprung up on the site of the old abbey, to distinguish even
its foundations ; but the south transept is left standing. There is an arched
gateway in it from the Fountain Court and a window above ; at the
corner of this transept nearest to the east window is a narrow winding
staircase, leading to the top of the wall ; half way up is a gallery round
the transept, protected and ornamented with small pillars and arches. At
the west end is another window, not equal in size, beauty, or preservation
to that at the east end, but good enough to add to the beauty of the whole.
Tall vigorous young ashes are growing about in every part; and altogether
this is among the most solemn and beautiful remains of what the religion of
our ancestors once raised.
We walked back along the water’s side till we came to the river Itchen
which runs into the bay just below Southampton ; a little way up this
river we found a floating bridge, a raft moved by steam and paddle wheels
across the river, furnished with two short pieces of road for the carriages and
horses that pass over by it, and kept in a direct line across by two iron chains
firmly fixed at each end, on which it slides. We were just in time to meet
this machine on its arrival from Southampton at the other side, and taking
our stand were soon conveyed over.
In the evening we walked far enough to find that Southampton contains
at least oue long broad and well lined street, and many very good shops,
some admirable.
19 (Wednesday.)— At 9 o’clock we went on board a steam packet bound
for Cowes and Ryde from the pier, a convenient piece of work, but small
in size and not remarkable for elegance or neatness ; and landed at Cowes
at half-past 10. Cowes is built on the two high points of land that run out
on either side of the river Medina; the houses are of white stone, and being
backed and in some parts surrounded by trees, have a pleasing appearance.


We landed at West Cowes and walked round a kind of terrace by the castle,
a modern fort bearing more the appearance of a dwelling house, except that
before it runs a low stone wall with a few small cannon mounted upon it.
Just after we had passed, one of these was let off, and at the signal three
schooners, which had up to that moment been moving into their places
ready for starting, set off in a race for Portsmouth, thence to return to
Yarmouth (a small town near the western part of the north shore of the
Isle of Wight) and back again to Cowes ; the cup being 100 guineas. This
reminded us of the account given us by the boatman who took us in his
boat from Southampton to Netley, of the last boat race here. On Monday
(Aug. 17) at the Regatta held on that day at Ryde an unfortunate sailor
lost his life in circumstances which must rouse other feelings than those of
mere pity and regret towards some of those concerned.
Although (he weather was very rough, far too much so for the unguarded
and hazardous sailing which it is natural to adopt in eager contests of the
kind, three yachts according to appointment, started in a race. Two were
soon baffled by the heavy swell and gave up all hopes of victory, and in the
other, two seamen, in making those exertions to which the superiority of their
vessel was owing, were dashed overboard. Intent only on the golden cup,
the master of the vessel, a man whose rank in society is a very false indi-
cation of his real standing in the scale of humanity, refused to stop for
them, and hurrying on was able to maintain his position ahead of the other
two, to the end of the race.
While he was winning the cup his two men were struggling for life
with the waves. The crew of the second yacht on coming up to them used
every endeavour to save them : one they brought ashore still living, and
when we heard last of him he was in the hospital with fair hopes of re'
covery ; the other was drowned.
At Cowes we took a small sailing boat, and went up the Medina to
Newport. There was just enough wind to move us along, and as it was
favorable we got up without much tacking, though at last getting quite under


shelter of some high trees the sail was no longer any use, and our boatman
had to take the oars. The country near the river is rather flat, but the
hills, at no great distance on our left, were prettily diversified. Our boat-
man had with him a little boy, whom he seemed to have taken under his
own care, one of the children of the poor man who was drowned at the
regatta. He spoke of him and treated him with great kindness.
From a narrow and black quay we entered Newport, and passed
through several poor streets corresponding with it into the upper part of
the town which is remarkably clean, most of it rather old, and apparently
still flourishing ; for its shops are numerous, and the people on that day
(cattle market day) were busy. One old building we took particular
notice of ; it is the Grammar School, which is built in an old style, and is
known to have been the place where Charles I. met the Commissioners of
Parliament at a conference.
At Newport we hired one of the flys common in the island, a four
wheeled chaise with a covering supported by four posts, like a bedstead only
smaller; and set out in it to make our tour round the island. And first
we went up to Carisbrook Castle, which stands in a very commanding
position on the top of a high hill. After a long ascent by the narrow road
leading up to it we entered by the western gateway, and getting on the
top of it by means of an old staircase against the wall inside, had a most
extensive view of the country round. Just below us at the foot of the hill
stood the village of Carisbrook, small, but ornamented by a church with a
tower, higher, and from its antique appearance more picturesque than most.
Beyond this village a high chalk hill bounded the view, but more towards
the north, between this hill and Newport, we could see the Solent Sea. In
other directions was a succession of hills with now and then a wood on the
south, or a peep of the sea on the north side of us. The castle itself covers
a great deal of ground. We looked down inside the gateway upon a
court marked out with the foundations of numerous apartments, in
one of which Charles I. was confined and endeavoured to escape


by the window which is still shown there; then there is a large space
partly covered with modern buildings, erected for the accomodation of
the garrison, that till within comparatively few years was stationed there,
and partly taken up with a large kitchen garden and a paddock; a high wall
nearly in the form of a square encloses the whole. At the north-east
corner of the wall, directly facing us as we stood on the wall near the gate-
way, is the keep, the highest part of the castle, and as to its shell, in good
preservation. The castle, as included in this description, covers a large
extent of ground, and walking round on the top and on the sides of the
hill we find the remains of walls and embankments, which show that the
fortifications once extended much further.
From Carisbrook Castle we rode on through a country varied with hill
and dale, green with pleasant pastures and sometimes ornamented with
woods to Freshwater Gate. During the latter part of the ride we had on
our left the high smooth Downs of Alton ; and had a sight of Yarmouth,
with the Solent Sea and the river Yar.
We were just in time to see the beautiful Bay of Freshwater with its
cavern and arched rock by day-light. The tide was low, so that we were
able to visit the cave on foot; but the water coming up we were obliged
to hasten away without looking through it so fully as we wished. From
this, which is at the western extremity of the Bay, we crossed quickly to
the other, where two large pieces of rock—one a rough pyramid, the other
as rough an arch —are left standing out in the sea at some small distance
from the cliff which has receded from the violence of the waves. We
watched the waves dashing up under the arch an.l then returned to the
hotel. In the evening we went out to see this scenery by moonlight, but
the moon was low and a few clouds collected before it, so that we were
disappointed.
20th (Thursday.)—This morning we went out early while the tide was
low to look again at the cave and the two rocks. The entrance to the cave
is a large irregular arch, on the inside of which may be observed the dis


tinct layers of stone of which the cliff is composed: there is a hollow
extending back 120 feet, but a heap of shingle rising from the entrance
leaves but just room to creep under the rocky ceiling into a chamber about
6 feet high, and 4 wide, one end of which reaches 12 or 15 feet into the
cliff at right angles to the principal cavity. Round about the outside are
thrown fragments of the cliff, which make it difficult to enter the cave
in a boat, except at high water and when it is very calm, but serve as
stepping stones to those who go on foot.
After breakfasting at the hotel, which we found comfortable though small,
we set out in a boat for Alum Bay, a distance of five miles by sea, round the
Needles. The weather being rather rougher than usual we had four boatmen
to row us. Johnson, the owner, was one of them, and after we had landed
we were so pleased with their services that we told him as we might probably
have a brother and sister travelling there next year we would recommend
his boat. We were now just setting out to see what we had been eagerly
looking forward to ever since our journey was planned, of which we
had, since we arrived on the island, heard more to make us long to see
it: something different to all we had seen before ; and then it was new,
to be rowed through a heavy sea in a small boat along a cliff rising perpen-
dicularly out of the sea, and had we depended on our own exertions in such
a situation, the novelty might have been enough to frighten or at least
deter us. But the boatmen were all confident in their own strength and
experience, in high spirits at receiving a task of the kind, and pulling
cheerily out of the little sheltered bay, bore up steadily against the wind
which blew strongly from the south-west. Just as we came out of the
bay another boat put off to follow us, containing a lady and gentleman with
two boatmen. YY e learned that they intended to go round to Cowes, and,
seeing the difficulty our four men had in pulling their boat round this
formidable looking passage, we felt some anxiety to know of their safety.
Accordingly we watched them as they were tossed about on the waves,
sometimes quite losing them behind the waves that rolled between us till


winding round the cliff we lost sight of them altogether. Our boatmen
thought it very doubtful whether two men would be able to pull a boat
against the wind all the way to the Needles such a day as this ; our fears
magnified the difficulty of going on into a danger of destruction without
the possibility of advance or return, a danger which it was very easy to
imagine while riding as we were in a little boat over rolling waves without
a possible landing place in sight, but with a perpendicular hard cliff and
numerous rocky fragments all along the coast, and a strong wind blowing
us hard towards them. In reality the swell which appeared so irresistible
was little compared with what our boatmen have often to encounter, and
as the waves striking against the cliff rebounded outwards again, there is
a backward swell all along which would be sure to keep a boat from
being dashed on the shore even if left to itself.
We had leisure, however, as we passed along to observe the grandeur
of the lofty cliff and the different smaller objects which are regularly
pointed out to the curiosity of the visitor. Among these are several smaller
caves and some of large size. The finest is called Lord Holmes s 1 ai lout,
from the circumstance of that nobleman having frequently used it foi
dining himself and his companions in his excursions in sea-fowl shooting.
It is a large smooth hollow, rather flattened at the top, with a floor of
shingle, sloping up from the water above the high tides, and capable of
holding 200 persons ; though as we were at this part of the passage nearly
half a mile off shore we could not judge accurately of its size, and thought
it a small dining hall. A little way from this is a smaller cave called Lord
Holmes’s kitchen, from its use during the same excursions.
Besides the caves the cliff as it rises gradually till it is considerably
more than 600 feet above the sea, presents many objects of interest; in
several places we could see where great fragments had within a few years
fallen down, sometimes disappearing altogether, sometimes left resting on
a projecting piece of the cliff just above the waves, which chafed and
foamed against them as if mad with rage against intruders whom they


were too weak to remove. We passed by great fragments left hanging to
the main cliff by a narrow piece, apparently cleft almost from it, and in
one spot is a piece of this kind separated from the main cliff by a huge but
regularly shaped wedge of rock. In calm weather it is common for visitors
to land here and climb up to this wedge, to prove to themselves by actually
entering the fissure beneath it, what the size of this curious fragment is ;
but we were unable to do so.
As we continued our way we saw several sea gulls soaring along by the
shore or over our heads, their long pinions stretched out and apparently
motionless, or flitting over the waves so close as to be hid by them and
heavily flapping their broad wings. From these birds we learnt to form some
opinion of our distance from the shore, for the change which appeared to
take place in their size as they moved backwards and forwards between us
and the cliff was remarkable. In the eai’ly part of the summer when these
birds have laid their eggs on the sunny shelve* in this cliff, which faces the
south, men .are let down by ropes tied round them (not as we had supposed in
baskets) to take them. For this difficult adventure they receive a reward
of ss. a dozen eggs. It is hard for those who are not accustomed to such
sights to think of anyone swinging by .a single rope outside these tremen-
dous cliffs without shuddering ; yet we were assured that to those who are
trained to this kind of exertion there is little danger. When an accident does
happen destruction is inevitable, but by ordinary care they may be pre-
vented, and it is only once in about 30 years than any accident is heard of.
There are three particular spots along this shore where the waves
always run higher than at the other parts of it; these are marked by a
blackness at the bottom of the cliff: the boatmen told us when we should
come to these, and just where they had pointed out these places the waves
did begin to run higher: and here while they came rolling on from the
horizon gathering force and growing in size as they approached and then
rushing to the foot of the cliff melted before it, it was a noble sight to see
with what steadfast and well regulated energy the boatmen pulled through


the heaviest of them, skilfully turning the boat’s head whenever one larger
than the rest was coming, so as to cut directly across it and prevent its
falling on her side; and how the boat under their powerful and well
directed efforts made her way briskly and steadily over all the waves till
rock after rock was left behind, and we came again into smoother water.
At last, turning round a high projecting corner of the cliff we came in
front of Scratchel’s Bay, a sheltered recess of fconsiderable extent, affording
room for a beach of shingle, all we saw in our way from Freshwater to
Alum Bay. And the end of the bay furthest from the Needles, and in the
side of the projecting cliff is a large and smooth hollow extending* 150 feet
back, and 200 feet in height. The lines of flint between the different layers
of chalk are here distinctly and beautifully visible, and it was chiefly by
these that we were enabled to perceive the hollow, as there were no strong
shadows this day, and it was not calm enough for us to land.
After passing this bay we soon came up to the Needles : within a few
yards of the extreme point of the main land rises a high spiral rock, and from
this a low line of rock, partly covered and in part just at the surface of
the water, runs out to sea almost as far as the second large rock, which is
the largest of the three, and like the third is far too massive and long to
correspond with the name given to them all, when even at the end of them,
however, we found they both had a very sharp edge, resembling more
hatchets than needles. Through a gap in the low ridge a little way on the
landside of the largest rock we had to pass, there was but just room enough,
and the boatmen had to struggle for some time with the heavy waves
before they got the boat turned in the proper direction ; as soon as this
was done they pulled briskly and earnestly through, and the boat shot
forward into a clear sea again. The rest of our way we had the wind
behind us, and with light labour they brought the boat up to the shore.
There with the usual hurry of landing amid breakers we got a little splash-
ing, and hastened along the beach to get a sight of the many coloured cliff
before the tide came up too high. Immediately after getting through the


Needles Alum Bay was before us, and we could see the different hues
of the clay and sand streaking the cliff and washed down to the beach—
red, pink, purple, green, yellow and light blue succeeding one another with-
out any regularity. When we came up to it we found the coloured earth
to consist chiefly of a light sticky clay, that crumbled when a little dried.
From the bay we ascended a steep path over a rabbit warren up to the
Alum Bay Hotel whore our car was waiting for us. Here we bid good
morning to our boatmen and set out to walk over the downs to Freshwater
Gate Hotel again. At a little distance before us we saw the beacon and
directed our steps towards it: wishing however to get a sight of the sea as
soon as possible we turned to go over the highest ridge of the down,
and found that disappointment which persons in going over rounded hills
like this always experience ; the top seemed to get further and further as
we toiled up. When we did get over and upon the opposite slope we were
amply repaid by a fine view of the sea, its boisterous waves appearing at
the height from which we looked little more than rippling, and the shadows
of clouds, small dark spots, resting upon it, and approaching nearer to the
edge we again saw part of those stupendous cliffs which we had passed in
the morning. On the other side we had a good view of this end of the
island, a valley of cultivated fields and scattered farm houses, and beyond
them another ridge of high downs; then further to the east a portion of
Solent Sea and the creek of the Yar opening into it with Yarmouth spire
and houses oil its bank.
This scenery was soon for a time almost hidden from us by light clouds
which came driving over the down and across the valley below us,
sometimes coming directly upon the part where we were and chilling us
with its damps. The short grass here was delightfully soft to walk upon
and without much toil we reached the beacon. This consists of a stout
tall pine fixed upright on the highest point of the hill, secured by four or
five others leaning against it, with a frame somewhat in the shape of lantern
on the top. After we had passed this the sky brightened up a little and


during the rest of our walk down to the Freshwater Gate (altogether it is
about three miles from Alum Bay), we had spread out before us, as well as
the sea and the hills similar to that on which we were that rise the other
side of Freshwater Gate, the plain in the interior of the island.
On our return we arranged to go on to Black Gang Chine directly, in-
tending if possible to go on to Sandrock Hotel this evening. Before we set
out again we saw our boatmen who had walked over from Alum Bay in
hopes of persuading a party to go there by land and return in their boat
when it should be a little calmer. They told us that they had seen the
other little boat safely through the Needles, and added that now all their
way to Cowes would be easy and safe.
We went over the Alton Downs, obtaining as in the morning extensive
views, then through the villages of Brook, Mottestone, Brixton, Shorwell
and Chale, through a country prettily diversified, but tame in comparison
to what we had seen. In the churchyard at Chale we saw from the road
the tombstone erected there to several of the unfortunate persons who
perished at the wreck of the Clarendon in the winter of 1830.
About half-past five we reached the head of Black Gang Chine, and
while our dinner was getting ready walked round on the top of the
cliff that forms the eastern side of the Chine Down at a great depth below
us we saw the waves beating up against the beach of a reddish colour
different to any we had seen before, which we afterwards found to consist
of small pebbles. Opposite us on the other side of the Chine stood the
other cliff rising by successive stages to a great height ; and from this
to the horizon we could trace a continued line of coast with cliffs of
different heights and dark colour divisified with woody chines, till the
white and lofty Freshwater Cliffs now at a great distance, with the
Needles at the end completed the line. After dinner we descended to the
bottom of the chine between these two cliffs, which appear to be bound up
and supported by several lines of hard freestone in regular squares resembling
vast courses of masonry built at different heights to sustain the mouldering


hill. On the ledges formed by these courses grows a little grass and a few
bushes here and there, but so small as not to be observed when taking a
view of the whole from below. After crossing a road which seemed from
above to run along at the bottom of the chine, and descending still further
we stood in the centre of a semi-circular cavity of dark rock about seventy
feet in height : the curve is remarkably smooth and even ; the upper part
all round projects beyond the lower ; and from the middle of it falls a small
stream of water which descends through the middle of the chine above.
The sides of this singular hollow are in many places yellow from the oxide
of iron contained in the water that oozes through them, and which in
containing this mineral resembles most of the spring water about here.
This evening a mist, which on our arrival at the head of the chine we
observed forming round the tops of the highest hills, spread rapidly over
all the cliff and reached down almost to the beach so that we could only
see the lofty sides of the chine very indistinctly. Even this indistinctness
however contributed to their grandeur; and as we returned the next
morning to view it more at leisure and in a better light, we did not by any
means regret the accident of the fog.
We had a rough strange ride of about two miles in the dusk before we
rested to-night. We could see through the fog that there was an high
perpendicular cliff almost over our heads on one side, a deep valley below us
on the other, with here and there a huge fragment of the rock lying close
against the road ; and that was all we could see till we reached Sand Rock.
We found the hotel was full, but we were accommodated with very
comfortable and pleasant rooms in a cottage belonging to it close by.
21 (Friday).—This morning we rose refreshed and ready to go over
again the scenes we had gone so hastly through the evening before. Our
car was sent on to the head of Black Clang Chine to wait for us, and we
went down to the beach in search of a boat. Our cottage was situated a
little east of the principal promontory in the undercliff, Rocken End, and
we walked still furthur from Rocken End into a kind of bay, when we


found two fishermen willing to row us in their boat round to Black Gang
Chine.
1 he water was low and calm, and we could very distinctly see what is
called the race, that is, the tide running over some low rocks which lie
from Rocken End out in a south-westerly direction. The edges of this race
ai e marked by breakers.
We landed near the chine, went up through it again, and then kept on
our ascent till we reached the top of St. Catherine’s Hill, which rises imme-
diately behind the chine, and is the highest ground in the island, being more
than SOO feet above the level of the sea. The day was very bright, and we
here had the best views of the Isle, and the sea around it. Looking westward
we saw the coast already described from Black Gang Chine to the Needles ;
the plain and downs north of this with the Solent Sea, and further still
part of Hampshire, and St. Albans Head in Dorsetshire stretching out
southward beyond the Needles ; northwards the full breadth of the island,
containing many remarkable objects, the Alexandrine pillar raised by a
private gentleman in honour of the late Emperor of Russia, at whose court
he had resided much gratified and full of respect for the monarch who
entertained him, and several landmarks are near, and quite in the distance
the keep of Carisbrooke Castle on its green hill, which looks an almost
inperceptible mound from here, is just visible. On the east Niton, a
picturesque village, stands just at the foot of this hill, and along the sea
side in the undercliff with its rich variety of woods and rocks, the high cliff
above it and the Downs beyond, with the white Culver clifls in the distance
stretching far out into the sea. Like a cloud we could trace beyond this
the coast of Hampshire. On the top of this hill stands the shell of a light-
house, built there several years ago and abandoned because it was found
that the fogs which almost always surround the hill rendered it useless,
and a small tower, the only remaining part of a chapel said to have been
built there during the Anglo-Saxon period ; this tower appears wonderfully
strong and compact; indeed there seems no prospect of its falling within


any calculable period.
Coming down from this hill we rode on to Sandrock Hotel by the road
which we had passed the evening before. The scenery by daylight was
rugged, but had lost a little of the grandeur which seemed to belong to it
in the dusk. We stopped on the way to taste of the Chalybeate spring ;
and if its excellence is to be measured by its disagreeable taste we can
recommend it. We left our car again before reaching the hotel to go down
to the lighthouse, which stands below the road and near the extreme point
of Rocken End, which has always been considered a very dangerous pro-
montory for ships passing near the coast. The building was begun about
two years ago, and finished last March. It is built of the light coloured
freestone that abounds in the island, with turrets of Portland granite, and
finished with a precision that gives it an appearance of great strength as
well as beauty. The height of the tower (without the lantern) is upwards
of one hundred feet; the lantern is twenty or thirty feet more and is a cast
iron frame glazed with ninety-six panes of plate glass. We ascended by
a winding stair-case of stone, fitted with an iron railing, and on reaching
the lantern were joined by a very intelligent man, who is stationed here to
keep the lighthouse in order. He explained to us the various parts of the
lantern. In the middle is one burner like those in common use, except
that it contains three cottons one within another, altogether being about
twice the diameter of a parlour lamp ; in semi-circles about this are many
rows of reflectors one above the other, each row at a different angle to the
light from the rest, and altogether containing one hundred and twenty
reflectors : some are above, some below the flame, but all so placed as to
send off the light to the horizon, and such is their power, that a flame of
about six inches in length appears when viewed through them at a little
distance to be one entire blaze of five or six feet in height. \et in foggy
weather this strong light is sometimes quite imperceptible at the short
distance of half-a-mile.
The burner is kept supplied with oil by means of two shallow cylindri-


cal vessels underneath contrived so that the air is compressed in the lower
one by pouring in the oil, and then forces the oil up in a constant flow into
the burner. The temperature is kept within certain limits in order to
preserve the oil at a proper fluidity; and for that purpose a thermometer
and an Arnott’s stove are kept constantly there, and blinds are hung round
to keep off some of the sun’s heat. The lantern appeared to be about ten
feet in diameter, and there is a small iron gallery round it, from which we
had a good view of the undercliff and Culver cliff's. The object of this
lighthouse is by throwing light round in a semi-circle from a point a little
off the Needles, and across the sea at a convenient distance from the coast
of the undercliff to keep vessels from coining too near the'shore within the
limits to which its light reaches ; so long as the helmsman sees this light
he knows that he must be out far enough from the land to be safe, and as
soon as he loses sight of it, knowing that he is too near land he steers out
again till the light reappears.
We learnt also from this man that a few months ago, about an acre of
land in the undercliff (a little above the lighthouse and plainly seen from
it), slipped from its place from a similar cause to that to which the great
landslips are ascribed ; and that on this occasion the whole ground from
some distance, including that on which the lighthouse stands, moved
forward some inches towards the sea, though no injury was done. In
order to prevent as far as possible the recurrence of such a dangerous
accident, a deep drain was dug to convey from the upper parts of the
underclift' to the sea, the water flowing from the various springs there,
which if left to itself caused the landslips. In digging this drain there
was found at the depth of ten feet, petrified and in a state of perfect
preservation, an oak with its leaves still upon it. Upon being exposed to
the light and handled it soon crumbled away ; but its preservation entire
is of itself a very remarkable circumstance, as far as we could learn from
enquiry there and from the guide book this part of the underclift' is not
included in the landslip of 1799, and consequently there is no occasion on


which we can suppose this tree to have been buried within the time of
record; not since the time of the .Saxon’s rule, at least. Therp is some
little variation in the explanations given of the manner in which the water
springs occasion the landslips : that given by the keeper of the lighthouse
appeared the most reasonable. It is this: under the rock (freestone) of
which the cliff is composed, and which does not extend very far below the
surface, is an extensive bed of blue clay, so stiff as to resist the water
which comes down upon it through the earth and rocks above. The
water just moistens the surface of the clay so as to make the rock move
easily over it, and then the rocks, having nothing to hftld-them up on the
inclined plane of the clay surface, slide down with all their load of trees
and buildings.
On our return to the hotel we found a room in it provided for us to
take our last meal in, and leaving our cottage we walked up by the side
of a beautiful sloping lawn to the hotel, which is pleasantly situated high
up under the cliff. Along the front is a beautiful verandah covered with
traveller’s joy, over which our window (on the first floor) looked out upon
the undercliff and the sea. While waiting for our dinner we were amused
with looking round on the paper of our room, which represented several
scenes on the island of Calypro during the visit of Telemachus.
The elegance of the figures, the beauty of the luxuriant foliage, and
above all the accuracy of the perspective were so much above what it is
usual to see in workmanship of this kind that we were agreeably surprised
at it. In the afternoon we left Sandrock well pleased with the accommoda-
tion we found there, and delighted with the grandeur, the beauty, and the
variety that we had witnessed during our stay hereabouts ; and proceeded
on our way to Ventnor.
The car with the two ladies kept along the road, and presently after
leaving Sandrock entered a beautiful wood, thickly shaded by trees of many
kinds and different autumn hues, while the other two of our party climbed up
a very steep hill by the “ Cripple path,” a narrow foot path along the edge


of the high cliff, from which we had a beautiful view of the woods and
pastures below, with the road seen here and there winding among them
and houses scattered along its side. The sun was getting low in the west,
and throwing a mellow light over this lonely scene, gave a finish to its
beauty by imparting to it the richest colouring.
After a walk along here for a considerable distance we descended
(by the only path) between a great mass of rock, almost split off from the
rest and the main cliff, through a cleft so narrow (though neither of us is
remarkable for breadth) we were obliged to squeeze through sideways, and
then had to walk down by a narrow path in the side of the precipice with
nothing to keep us from falling over, until we reached some bushes which
grew about half-way up the cliff, and then our descent was easy enough,
and indeed when we came to look back cooly on the path we had come
down by we agreed that the real danger was very small, there being a firm
and tolerably broad footing all the way.
The next place of which we took particular notice was St. Lawrence,
where we stopped to look at the small church by the roadside. This is
said to have no rival in the kingdom in point of size except one (which
certainly may contest the palm with it) atFrinton near Walton on the Nazi,
Lssex. St. Lawi ence Church contains at least five or six times as manypew3
as Frinton Church, and appeared to tne to be longer, but Frinton has larger
pews and is, I think broader. But leaving to others who may be inclined
to measure the task of finding which is the smallest, we may observe that
St. Lawrence Church is certainly far more picturesque and contains more
objects of interest. Inside are several marks of its great age. Its little
spire supports in the open air a bell it is too small to inclose. The church-
yaid of a coiresponding size contains tombstones 1o the memory of many
whom have died while visiting the island for pleasure or for health ; most
of them young, several quite children; some who came, worn down
with sickness in hopes of recovering in this beautiful island their long lost
health, and returning once more to the joys of life, but were doomed to


sink lower and lower till at last their faithful parents or friends had to
find a grave for them far away from their homes and the resting place of
their families ; some there were too, that in the midst of joy and hope were
suddenly cut off by unforseen accidents, and never again saw those whom
they left with happy hopes of a bright return. A little beyond the church
is St. Lawrence’ Well. There is a stone wall from the middle of which the
mouth of a dolphin pours a plentious stream of clear water, the whole
covered by a kind of porch. We could hear of no old legend connected
with this spot; but found a recent poem by a native of the island who has
invented a new legend. At Steephill, the next place distinguished in the
undercliff, is a modern castle built in ancient style. Being built of white
stone and with considerable taste it forms a conspicuous ornament on the
face of the cliff which in this part is of a dark brown colour ; it stands in a
garden and is surrounded with trees. From the foot of the castle we found
a narrow path down to a waterfall ending on the beach ; the stream is
small and the fall a good deal broken by the rugged cliff; but as a waterfall
of considerable height it is, of course, beautiful. From the beach here we
toiled up a high hill just by, fiom the top of which we had a good view of
the undercliff for some distance both ways. It is laid out in pastures,
intermixed with coppices, above which the cliff appears at intervals in the
form of old battlements. Before us, in a sheltered valley, shut in by high
hills on three sides and a quiet bay on the other lay Ventnor, with its
tapering white spire. This wastheplaceof our destination for the night, andnot
seeing any way down from the hill we had mounted we continued our walk
along the top of it, till close to the town, where we had come down through
a private garden. We took, up our abode for the night at Wilde’s Family
Hotel.
Ventnor from its sheltered position is a very good place for invalids in
winter. There is a fine sand beach, to which however it is rather a tiresome
descent from the town, and there are many shops and bazaars containing
varieties for the convenience and pleasure of visitors. But whether it was


that there was not the same attention paid to our comfort by the people at
the hotel, or whether the air is from the situation of the place confined as
well as mild, and rendered worse by the extensive traffic in fish both fresh
and salt here carried on, we were neither of us much pleased or refreshed
by our stay here, and left Ventnor the next morning (22nd, Saturday) with
little regret, in a fresh car. Passing out we observed several houses build -
ing, all of the white stone found in the island, which has a very clean
appearance, and the church built about two years ago of the same material
by means of the liberality of—Hamborough, Esq., owner of Steephill Castle,
is a large and elegant building.
Soon after leaving Ventnor, we passed through Bonchurch, a small
and scattered village in the most beautiful dell of the underclifF. It is
thickly wooded, and ornamented with a piece of water ; there are several
pretty villas about it, and more are rising, almost too many for the beauti-
ful retirement of the place. From this dell we went up a long and steep
hill till we seemed to be getting nearly up to the edge of the high cliff'
round which the road led along at an even height for some distance, and
here Thomas and William getting out of the road towards the sea ran down
two or three fields on the steep to the path through East End. Along this
path we passed through fragments of rock piled in the wildest confusion,
just as they were left by the great landslip, then through a thick coppice
of underwood till we came out into the fields near Luscombe. There we
rejoined the car and rode on round the valley of Luscombe and over a
slight hill to Shanklin, where we designed to spend the next day, Sunday,
and completely recruit ourselves after the fatigues of the week, reserving
P-ast End for a full examination on Monday. We arranged, just before
entering the village, to ride past both the hotels of which we read some
account in our guide book and remain at that which pleased us best;
however, as soon as we turned the corner from which we get a sight of the
village, before hid by a high hedge, and came close upon the old hotel
(Williams’s), a cottage-built, thatched house with a little green lawn in


front and flowers trained up over it, we all at once decided that this must
be the best; we did ride on past the other, but returned to the first, and
never had reason to repent of our choice. There was such an air of
retirement and repose about it, combined with cheerfulness and comfort,
that we were delighted with it. About 1 o clock Thomas left us, for Ryde,
intending to go thence to Southampton the same evening and on to London
early Monday morning. The rest of us were content to go no further than
the beach. We went down to it by a winding path, from which we now
and then caught a glimpse of a deep shady dell on our right hand, and
when we had reached the shore we stood just at the foot of Shanklin chine.
The cliff which is here 200 feet in height, appears to be rent asunder, and
a chasm left 100 feet wide on either side of which it rises almost perpendi-
cularly covered with wood (chiefly low alders). At the foot, close to the
shore, is a fisherman’s cottage, on the right, to one looking up the chine are
a cottage in a garden of flowers, honeysuckle growing over the door and
beautiful hydrangeas before it, and a public house nearly above the cottage,
also a picturesque object. Directly facing the sea on the edge of the cliff,
which about eighty yards from the beach turns and with it the course of the
chine at right angles to the lower part of it, stands a villa from which there
must be a delightful prospect. We ascended the chine by a path winding
along near the bottom of the left-hand cliff, and after turning under the
villa lost sight of the sea and the entrance. We were now completely in-
volved in this wild and beautiful scene. Our path was cut in a high and
in some parts barren cliff, though at a little distance before us
we could see this side as well as the other covered with verdure ; below us
ran a small brook, winding through a rugged channel, sometimes in the deep
shade of trees that hung over a turn of the stream, sometimes running
exposed to the light and murmuring over stones ; on the other side at the
distance of a few feet rose an equally high cliff, more luxuriantly and com-
pletely covered with underwood and young trees. Below these and near
the water grew a plant new to us, with a large smooth dark green leaf,


that added to the general beauty of the chine. After winding along this
path for a short time we came in sight of a waterfall which forms the head
the chine; a thick shade surrounds the deep narrow hollow, where the
stream falls perpendicularly down thirty feet, between the spot were we
stood when first we saw the fall and this shade is an opening through which
the light of day pours full on the naked cliff on the left, while the trees
and underwood on the other side, and growing up from the middle of the
watercourse complete this beautiful combination of variety. We went
forward to look more closely at the fall, and standing at the foot of it
saw several hollows one behind another, which the water in wearing
its way back seemed to have cut out. The opening for ten or twelve feet
s very narrow, and we were informed that during ten years, the fall had
receded ten feet, until some harder stone was fixed for it to fall over, to
prevent further encroachments which might destroy the beauty of the
chine. We then ascended a staircase cut in the bank to the top of the
fall where the different hollows are more distinctly seen ; and then left thi s
lovely nook by a gate of oak boughs well suited to its place. On the
opposite side of the chine to that by which we went down is a narrow
path along the edge of the cliff from which we obtained one or two grand
views of the scene below.
23rd (Sunday)—We found that Archdeacon Hill preached this morning
at Bonchurch and this afternoon at Shanklin Church ; sowe determined on
going to hear him in the afternoon. The morning was fine and quiet, and we
found a pleasant retreat in the chine. In the middle of the day, just as we
had returned to the hotel, we were startled by the sound of several loud
voices which suddenly broke in upon the quiet of this retired spot, and in
a few seconds a car containing the noisy party drove up to the door. A lady
and three gentlemen who stepped outwerewelcomedbyanother who seemed to
have come forward by arrangement to provide for the party. As soon as we
could distinguish any words from the jargon of voices, we discovered that
they were French people. They knew enough of English to tell the land-


lady what they wanted, and on her proposing that they might lunch on the
lawn, they appeared delighted with the thought, and ran stepping out to
talk together in their native language. After a meal as hasty as all their
words and motions, they jumped up and again paced the lawn conversing
with the livliness characteristic of their nation.
The archdeacon preached to us a plain sound sermon, there was not
much vivacity or energy either in his manner or thought, but his views
were clearly expressed, and with an appearance of sincerity. The little
church with its old and scanty fittings appeared to correspond better with
what may be supposed to be the congregation, whose fixed abode is round
about it, than with the company who attend it during a great part of the
year—was crowded.
(24th Monday)—This morning we went according to our intention to
East End. We hired a boat at the fisherman’s cottage at the foot of the
chine and were rowed along the coast through a very calm sea to the
beginning of Bonchurch. We landed near the old Saxon church here, but
could not gain admission to it, so weie obliged to content ourselves with
looking over the churchyard wall. The church is small, built in very rude
style of common stone in unshaped pieces just as it came from the
Close to the church is East Dean, a picturesque and pleasant villa, wel
surrounded by trees and furnished with a clear smooth lawn in front>
sloping down towards the sea. From this spot after taking another look
at part of Bonchurch from the road, we returned through East End. Our
path at first led over several grassy hillocks where cattle were grazing. The
sun shone down upon this ground with melting heat; it was near 10 o’clock,
the cliff faces the south, and the grass under our feet was parched up so
that the sun’s rays from one side, the reflected heat from another, and the
dry burnt path beneath made our walk somewhat toilsome. We had indeed
been assured by our boatman as we came, that we should find it, (as he said in
his Hampshire brogue “ rayther werm” on the cliff. We soon came to the


part where fragments of rock, some of immense size, are scattered about in
the wildest confusion. We spent about two hours rambling among these
climbing from one rock to another to get every variety of view of them
and taking the outline of those that appeared n ost fitted to form sketches.
In some places several square piles of the rock o ? the height of the cliff have
fallen a little forward and sunk without breaking to pieces, so as to preserve
the trees that grew on them; in some we could trace the remains of separ-
ate piles, the masses which formed them being distributed nearly in a line
stretching from the high cliff towards the sea ; in others it was impossible
to make out any order among them. As we advanced we found more and
more underwood growing about the rocks, and in every little dell left by
them, till at last our path was enclosed on both sides by wood so thick
that we lost sight of everything else.
Before leaving the mention of this spot I would take notice of some
remarkably large ants which crossed our path ; they were of a dark brown
colour, their hinder part equal to a good sized hemel of wheat, and their
forepart almost equal to another; we could not perceive that they were
carrying anything. At the end of the wood we found a small gate leading
into a private garden. Having had permission given us to go through here,
we saw that the house was a large and to all appearance very pleasant
residence, the garden extensive, well supplied with shrubs and flowers, and
rendered more beautiful by the irregularities of the surface which extend
thus far, and no further ; for this garden is the termination of East End.
As soon as we entered the field next to this garden we saw Luccombe just
below us ; we crossed by the head of the chine which resembles Shanklin
chine, only that it is very inferior in size and grandeur. It is more thickly
wooded, both sides being clothed with bushes and low wood that quite
cover up the whole chine ; there is no waterfall of any great height. A
house here, as at Shanklin, stands quite at the head of the chine,
with a pretty garden and a good view of the sea. We returned to
Shanklin over the hill and soon after set out to pursue our journey.


Having egaged the same boat as we had in the morning, we went to
White Cliff Bay, a small bay just beyond the Culver cliffs, which have
been already mentioned as forming part of the prospect from St-
Catharine’s Hill, and from that place till we had visited and afterwards
left them behind us, were the boundary of our land view. The bay is but
small, but contains a fine piece of sand over which, as it was low water, we
walked. There is a brick-kiln about half-way up the hill inside the bay,
and a small vessel was lying on the sand ready to take in a load of bricks ;
the other side of the bay are low irregular hillocks stretching out to Bem-
bridge. We climbed the hill above the kiln up to the Bembridge Down
(over Culver Cliffs); and there had a good view Sandown Bay, the water
we had just crossed from Luccombe Chine to Culver Cliff, which takes its
name from the village of Sandown standing in the angle of the coast that
runs in a straight line from Shanklin, and on the other side from Culver
Cliff, to this point which is about half-way between the two last mentioned
places. Coming down to the boat, we passed the outermost point of the
white cliff into Sandown Bay again, and in so doing had to move over some
rocks, which lay only a few feet and sometimes less below the surface : on
one of these the boat scraped a little, and this slight circumstance, though
in reality nothing more uncommon or shocking than the scraping of a boat
in shallow part of the Chelmer against the stones of the bottom, made a
great impression on one of our party noted for her powers of imagination,
as being in fact similar in every respect, except that the vessel should be
larger and the wind more violent, to the founder of a ship in storm. As
we went alongside the coast, we observed in one place that the earth was
coloured something like that of Alum Bay ; the colours were fewer,
fainter, and covered less space. We landed at Sandown where our
boatman, one of whom had enlivened us with his account of the employ-
ment and occurrences of the island, turned to the King’s Head, and we to
a car which was waiting there for us to take us to Ryde. We stopped at
Brading on our way to look at the oldest church in the island, the church where


the firstcon verts to Christianity there were baptized in the year—when Leigh
Richmond preached for seven years, and where his little scholar, Jane, the
young cottager, is buried. There are some old inscriptions in the church, the
earliest whose dates we could make out were however in the fifteenth
century. The surplice worn by the Revd. Leigh Richmond hangs in the
church, and is shewn by the sexton who takes care to point out the
patches at the bottom where Leigh Richmond, being a lame man, used to
tread on it, and appears to expect that those who visit the church will
esteem it a relic.
The tombstone of little Jane stands near the church at the S. E.
corner, it bears inscribed on it the verse quoted in the life of the young
cottager by L. Richmond. Further from the church, in the same direction,
is the stone bearing the epitaph, “ Forgive, blest shade, the transitory
tear.” As we looked at this, we could not help observing how much more
defaced by time and weather the one next to it, though of later date,
appeared to be than this. The well-known epitaph is on a stone erected to
the memory of a lady whose husband is buried under the next and died
after her : the explanation given by the sexton of the difference in the
appearance of the two was, that some relatives of the lady having come to
live near the spot had repaired her tombstone, but having no particular
regard for her husband, who was no relation of theirs, had left his untouched.
We found many old tombstones and many epitaphs that interested us
beside these, and then once more entered our car, passing at the gateway
many a disappointed little face, and many a soliciting curtsey of a party of
of children whom we found on our first coming here ready to shew us the
way to “ little Jane’s tomb,” and strangely put out that we chose to find it
for ourseives. Here, as in other parts of the island, we regretted the
universal habit in which the children are trained, almost before they are
taught to speak, of watching to get a half-penny of every visitor, taking
hold of gates that stood open of themselves, shewing the way where there
is a path that one cannot miss, and pointing out objects that it is


impossible not to notice. In a subsequent part of our trip we had a
curious example or two of the same disagreeable feature in the character
of grown up children. VVe were not struck with anything remarkable in
our way to Ryde : as we approached the latter place we came up to some
fine plantations and ornamental grounds ; and in Ryde are many elegant
houses. We went first down towards the water till we reached Yelf’s
hotel where we intended to stay : but as that was full turned up again to
Kent’s ; hearing the same story there, we went further up still to the
Crown, and finding accommodation there dismissed our driver and walked
about the town. There was too much of the forms and ceremonies of the
artificial amusements and real languor of a fashionable watering place to
please us who had just come from wandering through the wild parts of the
Isle; but we could not help noticing the elegant and neat appearance of
the town, its pier, its hotels, its shops and houses, though the sight of
these gave us little pleasure, we were willing to let them have their due
praise. What perhaps tended to make us dislike Ryde was that the inn at
which we took up our abode for the night was one where the bustle of
receiving an overflow of visitors and the effort to provide for them all so
expeditiously and so cheap as to allure others, prevented that comfort and
quiet which we had experienced pre-eminently at our last place of abode,
Shanklin Hotel.
25th, Tuesday. We left as soon as we could the next morning, and
that was by steamer from the pier at nine o’clock for Portsmouth. The
passage took us about an hour, there were as many passengers as could
with pleasure ride upon the deck, about fifty, and the captain told us that
he usually passed across six or seven times a day with a greater number :
this is one evidence that there is a great number of visitors to the island
daily.
We landed amidst a great bustle of passengers and porters, and
having safely deposited our luggage at the King s Arms, Rroad Street (the


booking office for the Southampton packet) walked round to the dock yard.
This is a busy populous town, and the poorer parts of it are not as might
he supposed, a match, in point of cleanliness and neatness, for a country
village like Felstead: yet there was none of the wretched squalid
appearance so common in cities. The shops contained many kinds of
provisions piled up together, and the people in some parts seemed stowed
rather too closely, but all were active, and the general appearance was of
happiness. lly the dock yard we took a boat to visit the principal objects
in the harbour ; there were a great many large vessels lying about, and the
hulks stationed in different parts attracted our attention. Our boatman pointed
out to U 3 the van across the lower windows,just above water, through which
alone the convicts could see what passed ; and gave us some account of the
manner in which they are employed. Some are led out daily to work at the
walls of the dock which often need repair, some are employed in rowing about
the different officers who superintend the men in the harbour ; and for
every public work requiring hard labour they are called out. They are
marked by a particular light coloured dress and cap and strictly watched.
Three or four passed us in a boat, rowing an officer ; they appeared dejected
and steady enough. In our way across the harbour we had to pass a smab
island covered with grass, called by the boatman “ Rat Island, from th®
very large rats that infest it. Here, all convicts who died at Portsmouth are
buried, and our boatman, who seemed to take pleasure in relating anything
revolting, told us that, as soon as the burial is over these immense rats
break into the coffin and devour the corpse. To feed on the sweet grass
that grows here the general’s cows are carried over every morning and
returned at night. Some way further up than we went in the harbour a
ship was moored where all the sailors who have newly entered the navy
learn the art of gunnery. A target is fixed on the mud up the harbour
and rewards are given to the to the best marksmen. A flag is kept flying
during all the time the firing is going on, and when it commences a bell is
rung; yet notwithstanding these precautions, an unfortunate boatman


about a week before this day, remained so near that his arm was taken off
and he was otherwise injured by a ball, and was lying in the hospital at
the time we were there. Behind the target there are always a number of
boys and old men watching for the spent balls. They look for them as
hey come along the mud, and dig them out as soon as they stop : they
afterwards get a farthing a pound for them at the Government Casting
Office.
Among the other vessels collected in the harbour, a Spanish brig
was pointed out, of slight make and said to be the fastest sailing vessel
ever built: it was employed in the slave trade and long escaped all its
pursuers till at last it was caught in a narrow bay and brought to England
as a prize. It is now the property of a nobleman, whose ship it was that
succeeded in catching the slaver, and is for sale.
The first object we visited was the Victualling House of the British
Navy, a large red brick line of buildings, where provisions of different kinds
are laid in and prepared for the Navy. Having obtained permission as
“natives of this land,” (from a well fed police officer, a fine specimen of
“ the natives” of John Bull’s land) to look over the establishment, we went
to the biscuit manufactory. This is a long high room where the force of a
powerful steam engine is applied to the performance of the various
operations. In a covered kneading trough is awheel similar to those inside
a drill, that is to say a long axis from one end of the trough to the other
with pegs sticking out from it at regular intervals ; this wheel being
turned by the machinery mixes up the meal and water that are put into it
into a dough of proper consistency, which is then flattened by a succession
of rollers moving also by the steam power, till it is thin enough, when it is
put under a cutting frame divided into about twenty hexagons to which a
slow motion perpendicularly up and down is given. When divided by this
the biscuits are ready for the oven into which a man is constantly
employed in putting them. In this manner, five tons (or a hundred bags
each equal in size to half a sack of flour) are made and baked in a day.


From the bake-house we passed to the mill, where ten pairs of
stones are turned by two upright shafts also set in motion by a steam
engine. There was nothing uncommon about them that we noticed. The
corn chamber is very extensive ; there were five hundred quarters of wheat
lying in a shallow heap on the middle of it. The strength and regularity
apparent here and in every part of the establishment are worthy of
separate mention. In the same building with the mill are three large
rooms, one containing the biscuits piled up in bags of one hundredweight
each, another tubs of salted beef and pork, and the third tanks of water.
There is a large building at present not applied to any use. It was the
brewery for the Navy: but by a regulation lately introduced, rum and water
have been substituted for beer, the use of which is entirely given up.
From this place went to the Queen’s yacht which was then lying a
little further up the harbour. This is the vessel in which all sea voyages
by the Sovereign are made. It was built for George the Fourth, and
bears on its bow a figure of that monarch with two negroes kneeling, one
on either side of him. The present Queen has not yet made use of it-
The rigging was in beautiful order, the deck perfectly clean, and the
interior, neatly but not at all splendidly fitted up. There is a small library
in the state drawing room; among the books we observed one entitled.
“Essay on Old Maids.” The steward who shewed us round talked of his
labour in cleaning up every article of the furniture witli his own hands, and
indeed it was, as one might except, well rubbed up. Still these cabins
would look very dull compared with the brilliant ones in some public
steam packets.
On our way back we passed near the Britannia and the Qwt.n, the
latter is not quite finished, but is the largest vessel in the Navy ; both, it is
said, are being fitted out for an expedition to China if they should be
needed.


We now came to the principal object for which we set out on the
water, the Victory, which is moored in the middle of the harbour in
memory of the great admiral who fell and died upon it. It is half-rigged
(as the seamen term it “jury-rigged”) and manned with a crew who are
kept in readiness for any call to service in other vessels. There are some
marines on board, and a great number of boys training for the service,
who here learn the sword exercise and the various operations of managing
a ship : here they furl sails without climbing the mast, and fight battles
with harmless cutlasses. There are cooks, carpenters, tailors, and all the
usual attendants on a man-o’-war, altogether 200 persons and upwards.
There .are three gun decks, only one of which is kept provided with guns.
We entered by the middle gun deck, and went up to the upper deck.
Here a small circle of bras nailed to the floor records that “ Here Nelson
fella wreath of laurel surrounding the words. As we went down
through the three gun decks, the sailor who accompanied us pointed out
the way Nelson was carried down, mentioning as he went the circum-
stances attending his death ; his covering his face and epaulets with a
handkerchief immediately after receiving the wound; his pointing out to
the helmsman that the rope by which the tiller was moved was wearing
out; and the reproof which he gently applied to an officer who in his eager
attention to his admiral negligently ran against a poor sailor whose leg
was amputated ; these and many other particulars told with the very
floors and beams where they occurred before our eyes brought before us a
more vivid picture of this fatal event than we could ever gain by the mere
perusal of a written history. When we went, the inhabitants of this little
town were sitting at their tables after dinner, during the quarter of an
hour allowed them for amusement before they are sent to their work again.
Some were reading newspapers, some talking with their wives, some
mending their own clothes and the boys playing at snap-apple.
At two o’clock we went on board the Southampton packet and
amused ourselves till half-past, (the time for starting) with watching the


passengers who came on board and the boats moving about the harbour.
Just before the vessel started a party of gentlemen came on board whose
appearance immediately led its to believe them to be dissenting ministers,
and we soon recognized among them Mr. Knibb, the Baptist minister,
from Jamaica, whose unflinching attacks on the treachery and the cruelty
of the slave holding planters have gained him.such well deserved honour
among his countrymen here. There was a strong south-west wind which
made the Solent Sea, notwithstanding its sheltered situation, a. little rough;
but only just enough so to be agreeable We touched again at the end
of Ryde pier on oar way and took in a few more passengers. Nothing
occurred worthy of notice on our away : the “ oriental” steamer was lying
close to the town, and we landed about twenty minutes past five. We
had very little time to spare before we had to take our seats in a railway
carriage for Winchester, where we arrived about half-past six. Having
been told by the guard of the railway train that the “ George” was the best
inn, we got into a chaise belonging to that inn, and well pleased with the
appearance of the place took up our abode there. We found several
letters for us at the Post Office, as we had told our friends at home that
we expected to reach this place on Saturday : and with reading these and
writing answers we occupied the evening.
26th, Wednesday. This morning we went first to the Cathedral
looking on our way at the city cross, a piece of architecture resembling
Tottenham and Waltham crosses, and said to have been erected in the
reign of Edward VI.
The outward appearance of the Cathedral has nothing imposing
about it. It stands on low ground, and the height of its tower is
inconsiderable compared with those of many other cathedrals. The interior,
is grand indeed ; the groined roof, the central arches, the east window
and the length of the whole edifice (the longest in England) are al]
magnificent. In the aisles are some very old tombs and inscriptions of


prelates and others ; and on the great beams that support the roof near
the east end are six mortuary chests said to contain the remains of several
of our Anglo-Saxon monarchs, Edward and Emma and others. There is
also the tomb and several other relics of William Rufus ; among other
memorials a wooden bust painted with a glaring red and white. The
chapels or shrines of Cardinal Beaufort and Bishop Gardiner are very
ornamental ; but the monuments of several of the prelates have been
sadly defaced by the disrespetful hands of the republican soldiers.
Cromwell here, as in so many other of the costly and much adorned
temples of our land, has left the tokens of his abhorrence of the ornaments
with which religion had been loaded.
The college which we next visited is a place where curiosity if not
taste may be gratified. The chapel, to one who had not come from
viewing a cathedral might seem beautiful and solemn. Ihe cloisters
contain inscriptions and monuments to many friends of the institution
bishops and patrons. The schoolroom and the outside of the kitchen are
ornamented with appropriate emblematical paintings and inscriptions: in
the schoolroom is a large board containing the words “ aul disce ” [either
learn] with a mitre and croisier painted beside them, indicating the
reward held out to learning : “ aid dinczdt” [or go away] with an inkstand
and a sword, supposed to refer to the professions of law and the army
which the scholar may prefer to the study by which the bishop’s honours
are to be attained ; “ ter da sors manet caedi” [the third choice is left, to be
Hogged with a scourge.] Outside the kitchen door a figure with the body
and dress of a man, the mouth of a pig, the ears of an ass, a lock upon his
jaw &e., &c., presents the model of a faithful and good servant, whose
palate is not dainty, whose will is obedient to his master’s and his tongue
careful not to tell his master’s secrets. William of Wykeham, founder of
New College, Oxford, who lies entombed in the Cathedral at Winchester
also founded this college and a statue of him in his episcopal robes stands


over the door of the schoolroom, his head, as well of that of his patron,
King Edward 111, are represented over the principal entrances to the
College.
We heard of two castles, the Royal castle and the Bishop’s (or
Wolverton Castle), ruins which we much wished to see, but the coach to
Oxford started at eleven, and we could not stay to see anything more. The
ride from Winchester to Oxford, 53 miles, is hilly and diversified. The
grounds of the Earl of Carnarvon, surrounding Highclere House, which we
passed on our left near Whitway, first attracted our attention by their
beauty. Not far beyond these we passed on our right another beautiful
seat, though smaller than Highclere, called Sandleford Priory. About
three miles further on, we noticed on a hill to our left the remains of a
castle, which we found on inquiry to be Donington Castle where the poet
Chaucer resided.
Nothing else that we passed was striking enough to be remembered
till we came to the Ilsley Downs which are extensive and hilly, so as to
present good specimens of this class os scenery. At Ilsley, a village close
to the downs there happened to be a sheep fair as we passfed through, and
a large busy fair it was. About ten miles from Oxford we crossed over the
Great Western Railway at Steventon. Here and near Oxford they were
levelling the road by cutting down steep hills and tilling up the valleys.
Turning down one of the hills we came all at once in sight of Oxford. For
some distance round the country is flat and rather low ; the river Isis
winds slowly by the city in its way through the plain ; and the towers
domes, and numerous spires clustered together there, are well calculated to
excite a calm admiration of the entire collection, which is afterwards
exchanged for wonder and delight when we view one after another the
results and the memorials of those labors of intellect and genius which
render this place, perhaps, the most venerable in the land. Finding we
had not much time to look about us while daylight lasted, we hastened to


the theatre, where the principal public meetings of the University are
held. Tha great extent of this building, its painted ceiling representing
the Assembly of the Arts and Sciences and the descent of Truth upon
them ; and the thought of the vast assemblies consisting of the noblest,
the most learned and eminent of the nation make it a grand sight. We
were too late to see distinctly the various likenesses that are hung in this
building, and on returning from it retired to our inn, the mitre to
prepare by reading our guide book for seeing to advantage what we had
before us for the morrow.
27th, Thursday. This morning we went first to the picture gallery
in the schools.
The beautiful models of ancient buildings placed along the middle of
the gallery we could not fail to admire. The parthenon, with its forty-two
pillars and elaborate frieze, the circular temple of the Sybil at Tivoli, and
the Pandroseum of Athens, the last chiefly from its resemblance to St.
Pancras Church which was copied from it, more especially attracted our
attention. Among the very numerous portraits we were most pleased with
those of Charles XII of Sweden, of Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia, Flora
Maclvor, Rembrandt by himself, Garrick and Addison : and of the other
paintings, two boys stealing fruit from the basket of a Flemish peasant,
and Cardinal Langton presenting to the barons at St, Edmund’s Bury the
great Charter of Henry I. afforded us much gratification.
From this gallery we went into the Bodleian Library. We could
hardly, in the short time we had to dispose of here, even form an idea of
the number of volumes in this library ; we could only look with vacant
wonder on the vast piles of books around us and examine one or two
curiosities laid out out in a case for the amusement of visitors : such as a
writing book of Queen Elizabeth containing Latin exercises in her own
hand : an Anglo-Saxon New Testament used by some of the Anglo-Saxon
kings : a Syriac Bible was one in the Javanese character.


New College Chapel, which we next visited, we admired for its
architecture and organ as well as the sculpture and painted windows. The
sculpture, alto relievo, by Westmacott, represents the salutation of the
Virgin Mary, the Nativity, the Descent from the Cross, the Resurrection,
and the Ascension. Among the most striking of the painted windows are
seven, representing the four cardinal and three Christian virtues : Temper-
ance, pouring water from a large to a smaller vessel, with a bridle at her
feet: Fortitude in armour, a lion crouching beside her: Justice with (lie
steelyard and sword : Prudence with a mirror, aud on her arm an arrow
denoting swiftness and a remora (a fish which by fastening itself to the
bottom of ships retards their motion) the emblem of delay : Faith with a
cross ; Charity surrounded by children ; and Hope with her anchor. Near
the altar at the north-east corner of the chapel, in a case fixed to the wall,
is a crozier or pastoral of Wykeham, the founder of the college, who has
been already mentioned. This staff though massive with the silver that
ornaments it bears seme resemblance in form to the shepherd’s crook.
We had not time to see the the hall and library of this college, but
hastened to Blenheim in a tty which we hired for the occasion. It is eight
miles from Oxford to Woodstock, we had another good view of this vener-
able city as we went, but the country round we thought flat and uninteres-
ting till we came near the end of our ride, where the trees and grounds
round about Blenheim altered the scenery. At Woodstock, a neat white
stone village, we stopped to buy gloves and work bags of the famous Wood-
stock leather, and immediately entered the park by a gateway close to the
end of the village. As we came out from under the trees planted about
the entrance, we obtained a beautiful and extensive view of the park. On
the left the view was shut in by trees through which we could see a small
building called the China Gallery and part of the garden : the house was
directly before us, spacious and adorned ; from this the park sloped down
to the lake, which unfortunately for us was dry ; so that besides losing the


cascade we were deprived of that reflected picture which adds so much to
the beauty of the real scene : still the clumps of trees, cedars, sycamores,
ashes and oaks intermixed, and the extensive woods beyond which they
come down to the banks were very beautiful. The other side of the lake
the park rises gradually before the eye : on the top is a monument 134
feet high, being a column with a colossal statue of the great Duke of
Marlborough, and round its pedestal a history of his most brilliant
actions, and a copy of the act of Parliament by which this estate was
secured to him. Riding down towards the monument we crossed the
water by a bridge with a remarkably fine arch. Near this is Fair
Rosamond’s well ; we tasted the water, and then rode up to the mansion.
We went into the garden first, and round over soft lawns and long
winding paths, through a succession of beautiful scenery, formed by a
large variety of trees and shrubs, with a few flowers. We passed through
a suite of rooms hung with tapestry and paintings, which it would be
impossible here to enumerate. We were most pleased with the three
beggar boys by Murillo ; our Saviour blessing the children by Rubens;
the three graces or Rubens’ three wives by the same artist, and the
assembly of various nations by La Guerre round the wall of the saloon.
The height and extent of the rooms, their ornaments and the beautiful
views of the garden from the windows combined to give a general
impression of grandeur and loveliness, but we could not stay as we wished
to examine them in detail, and on the whole were rather disappointed in
our visit to Blenheim. The chapel which we visited last stands at one end
of the building, is very plain inside with the exception of a monument
which occupies a most unreasonable space, to the great Duke, his Duchess,
and their two sons, who died young. On our way out of the park we
stopped to look at a very curious collection of rare china, in which is
Oliver Cromwell’s teapot, some old Roman vases, and specimens of the
earliest earthenware manufacture from China.


On our return to Oxford, we went over the hall and chapel of
Christ Church College; the former is a lofty and spacious room, with a
numerous and valuable collection of portraits; the latter being the
cathedral of the diocese as well as the chapel of the college is very grand.
The antiquity of its architecture and of some monuments it contains
render it interesting independently of the beauty of its building and
modern embellishments. The oldest of all, if the common opinion be well
founded, is the tomb of St. Frideswide who was the patron taint of the
priory to which this chapel formerly belonged, and who died in the year
740, on the 19th of October, which day is still commemorated by a fair
before the gates of this college. Over the tomb is a gothic shrine, and on
the face of the tombstone the marks of two figures, now torn off, probably,
like other old devices of this kind, of brass. Among the most remarkable of
the more recent monuments is that of Robert Burton, the author of Ihe
Anatomy of Melancholy,” who was a member of this college. There is a
small painted bust of him with this inscription underneath : “ Panels notis,
pauciosihus ignotus, hie jacet Democritus, junior, cui vitam (/edit et mortem,
Melancholia. [Known but to few, unknown to fewer, here lies Democritus,
the 2nd, to whom life was given and afterwards death by melancholy.]
obiit vui Id Jan. [7th Jan.] A.C. mdcxxxix.
The painted windows are numerous and richly coloured; many of
them very old, and some of the newer ones containing pieces of the
old glass whose brilliant colours form a contrast with the weak dull hues
of modern manufacture, not very advantageous to the hitter. Perhaps the
most attractive object in this beautiful chapel is the marble statue of Dr
Cyril Jackson, Dean from 1783 to 1809, which stands near the west
dooi’s. It was executed by Chantrey from a likeness which hangs in the
hall of the college, Chantrey himself never having seen Dr. Jackson ; yet
the verger who showed us the chapel in the warmth of his admiration of
the statue, at which he was accustomed to look till he could almost fancy


his old master was again smiling at the approach of a successful pupil with
his performances, told us that it was a better likeness than the painting
from which it was copied. He is represented sitting in his gown, with his
college cap in his hand, and a smile upon his countenance, the expression
of which is highly intelligent and pleasing. It was growing dusk before
we had seen all over this chapel, and after a walk round the close
belonging to this college, along the banks of the Isis and the Oharwell, we
returned to the mitre, and arranged our plans for the morrow.
28th, Friday. Our first walk this morning was to Magdalen
College. We entered by a gateway massive and antique into a court
before the chapel remarkable as being the place where, till within a few
years, on the feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, an annual
sermon used to be preached from a small stone pulpit in one corner ; on
these occasions the court was ornamented with branches of trees to repre-
sent the wilderness. The stone work with which the choir and the inside
of the wall above the altar are lined is quite modern, having been finished
only in 1833. This work is very elaborate, and the perfection with which
the lilies (the distinguishing flower in the arms of William Waynflete, the
founder) are cut out, when the difficulty of hollowing out the solid stone
along which they run is considered, must excite admiration. The organ is
cased with stone wrought into figures of musicians playing a number of
different instruments above which is gothic work corresponding to that
round the choir. But our attention was soon riveted to the paintings and
sculpture above the altar which exceeded anything of the kind we had seen
in our tour.
The sculpture which is high up on the wall, is by Chantrey, and
represents the appearance of Christ in the garden to Mary. Jhe
painting by Morales, El Divino, a Spanish artist,_of the 10th century,
represents Christ bearing his cross. It is vain to attempt describing the


beauties of this painting to those who have not seen it. To begin with
what is perhaps its least valuable but not least striking merit, the lights
and shades are so skilfully managed that the cross beam appears to project
from the shoulder, and the whole figure to be coming out from the canvas ;
then the hand, the foot, and the drapery are worked up to the finest degree
of imitation, as if by a life of study and labour an artist had at last
succeeded in painting a hand, another a rope, another the folds of a gar-
ment, so true to nature that they might readily be mistaken for realities.
To crown the whole, the expression of the countenance and the attitude
(for the expression is not confined to the features of the face, the weariness
and suffering, the meekness and compassion faithfully pourtrayed in this
exquisite work, is such as might hold in silent admiration for hours even
those who have not learned to take delight in, nay who despise the art of
which this is a specimen ; and surely may fill those who cultivate it, with
the most exalted notions of its nature and purposes.
At Merton College we had only time to look at the eastern window
of the chapel, one of the kind called Catharine wheel windows, large and
composed of a variety of rich and bright coloured glass. There are in the
floor of this chapel several very old monumental crosses of brass let into the
stone. The most celebrated is about eight feet long, consisting of a thin
stem with two small figures standing on a cross piece at one end.
We then went to the chapel of All Soul’s College, noticed in our
guide book as the most generally admired of all in Oxford, and justly
so. The painting over the altar, the “ noli me tangera” (touch me not) Of
Raphaello Mingo, though well executed, is by no means equal to than we
had so lately seen in Magdalen chapel,"and the painted windows,' though
finished with more regard to proportion than is commonly thought requisite
are too modern to have the brilliant colours of the very old windows, and
represent merely separate figures of saints. There is a great deal of Corin


thian architecture, round the altar, and supporting the organ, which does
not so well suit the character of the place as the gothic: but it is the
general appearance of the whole, the dim religious light, the groined roof,
and the well arranged ornaments that have procured for this chapel its
high name.
The short time that remained to us after leaving All Soul’s College,
we spent in looking over the Radclift’e Library. This is a high domed
building : and outside round the bottom of the dome is a stone gallery
from which we obtained the best view of Oxford. And here especially did
the superiority of this University over Cambridge appear. On all sides
for a long distance there seemed to be nothing but the minarets of colleges
and the towers and spires of chapels.
This grand assemblage of seats of learning in the middle of a large
plain, combining variety with majesty unparalleled by anything we have
seen.
In the interior of this library are a great number of very valuable
busts and statues, chiefly casts from the antique. The Laocoon, the Apollo
Belvidere, Diana and her stag are the most remarkable.
It was 20 minutes past eleven when we left this library, the coach
was to start for Steventon at half-past, and we were soon on the Railway
coming to London.
Printed by F. J. N. Ridley, Crystal-9treet, Petersham.






