

JOURNAL
(WITH PLANS)
OF THE
Government Prospecting Expedition
TO THE
SOUTH-WESTERN PORTIONS OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY,
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY
F. R. GEORGE;
AND TO THE
BUXTON AND DAVENPORT RANGES,
BY
W. R. MURRAY.
Minister Controlling the Northern Territory — HON. L. O’LOUGHLIN, M.P.
Adelaide:
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE
1907.




JOURNAL
(WITH PLANS)
OF THE
Government Prospecting Expedition,
TO THE
SOUTH-WESTERN PORTIONS OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY,
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY
F. R. GEORGE;
AND TO THE
BUXTON AND DAVENPORT RANGES,
BY
W. R. MURRAY.
Minister Controlling the Northern Territory — Hon. L. O’Loughlin, M.P_
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE.
1907.




PREFATORY NOTE.
In September, 1905, the Government decided to send a prospecting party to the south-
western and western portions of the Northern Territory. Mr. F. R. George, of the Mines
Department, was appointed leader, and it was decided to first prospect the Petermann Ranges,
regarding which area little was as yet known, and then proceed by way of the Treuer
Ranges to Tanami, near the Western Australian border, where Mr. A. A. Davidson in 1900,
after a hurried examination of the country, reported the occurrence of gold.
In addition to the leader, the party consisted of W. Hutton, A. E. Treloar, H. Fabian,
and T. W. Hall, prospectors; G. Edginton, camel-driver; and two blackboys.
Unfortunately Mr. George contracted a fatal illness before the trip was concluded, and
was succeeded by Mr. W. R. Murray, also of the Mines Department. Mr. George’s journal
was very full} r written up until .within four days of reaching Alice Springs, and forms part
of this report. As some condensation of the journal was deemed necessary, the task was
undertaken by Mr. Murray, and the particulars have been reduced, probably to the same
extent as if Mr. George had re-written them. Perusal of the journal shows that the party
encountered excessive summer heat in a waterless area and underwent hardships such as
have fallen to few. The hardships and privations were borne by the party with a forti-
tude for which they are deserving of praise.
Previous travellers to this region have always availed themselves of the cooler months,
and all have reported considerable hardships, even under comparatively favorable conditions.
The experience of Mr. George’s party makes it clear that the attempt to exploit the country
along the Western Australian boundary line in the heat of summer, and particularly following a
period of drought, must result in failure. Away from the ranges useful waters are rare and
feed for camels scarce, and the extra travelling incurred in search for water results in loss-
of condition to the animals and is detrimental to effective prospecting.
F. E. BENDA,
Secretary to tlie Minister Controlling the Northern Territory.


Adelaide, South Australia, February Ist, 1907.
Sir —
I have the honor to forward journal and plans in connection with the recent prospecting
expedition to the Northern Territory.
The particulars contained in the notebooks of the late Mr. F. R. George, which were
handed to me by your secretary (Mr. F. E. Benda), comprise the first portion of the journal, and
are followed by a resume of my own notes regarding the country examined north-east and south-
west from Barrow’s Creek.
In preparation of these notes brevity has been largely studied ; but I think they will be
found as full as occasion warranted, as much of the country traversed has already been reported on
by the Government Geologist (Mr. H. Y. L. Brown), and in respect of a portion, Mr. Allan A.
Davidson’s journal is very full and complete.
Some regret was felt by the party that the Tanami country, near the Western Australian
boundary, could not be reached; but the prolonged drought prohibited any useful work being
done in the country between the telegraph line and the Western Australian border, and the oiiginal
scheme had to be abandoned.
On handing over these records and returning to my usual duties, my thanks are due to
Mr, Benda and his officers for their courtesy and assistance whilst I was employed in Jsorthein
Territory Department.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
W. R. MURRAY.
The Honorable L. O’Loughlin, M.P.,
Minister Controlling the Northern Territory.


DIARY
OF THE
GOVERNMENT EXPLORING and PROSPECTING EXPEDITION to the SOUTH-
WESTERN PORTION of the NORTHERN TERRITORY—I905-1906.
By F. R. GEORGE.
September 11 th, 1905.—Left Adelaide.
September 13 th, 1905.—Arrived Oodnadatta.
September 14 th to 22nd. —Packing up, arranging loading, &c.
September 23 rd and 24 th. —Travelling to Todmorden Station. Found that no cattle would be available
for killing until night of Tuesday, 26th, when killed two cows, and on 27th boned and salted the meat.
September 28th.—' Travelled towards Alleumba, about 12 miles. Camels travelled well with their heavy
loads, but had to stop frequently to tighten up the ropes, which, being new, stretch very much. One of
the dogs caused cow Lubra to start bucking and she got rid of her load, causing delay of an hour. Camp
No. 1.
September 29 th. —Travelled to Alleumba Waterhole, which was nearly dry. Camped here as I could
not make arrangements to have next mail carried after me any further. At sundown blackboy arrived
from Todmorden with mail. Camp No. 2.
September 30 th. —Finished correspondence in morning and started messenger back to Todmorden at
10 a.m., and travelled to Lambinna. Very warm day ; plenty of water in well and fair feed for camels ;
flies troublesome. Camp No. 3.
October Ist. —Travelled to Warrungudinna Waterhole, which was quite dry. Good feed in patches,
some of the stony rises being quite red with parakylia bloom. Thence along south side of Alberga Creek
for seven miles. Camels travel very well, indeed. Some of the loading is very awkward, and in travelling
through thick scrub gets shifted and requires repeated adjustment. Camped on a patch of excellent feed—
parakylia buckbush, billy-button, cress, and other animal herbage. Consider it inadvisable to make long
stages, unless necessary, until the camels are thoroughly accustomed to their loads. Most of them have
had over a year’s spell, and their backs are necessarily tender. Judging by the herbage only light rains
have fallen here this winter. Fairly warm day. Camp No. 4.
October 2nd. —Travelled along pad on south side of Alberga for 15| miles. Country similar to yesterday,
portions ablaze with parakylia bloom. Cow Eba unwell. Camp No. 5.
October 3 rd. —Continued along pad to Ewintinna native well. This creek has not run since we were
here in September, 1903, as the well which we then sank in the creek bed had not been filled in. Sank a
further 4ft. in dry sand and then tried the boring rods. Got down another 2ft. and bottomed. Country
getting drier ; there has not been much green feed for past 10 miles. Travelled about 17 miles. Eba
very seedy ; other camels travelling very well considering their heavy loads. Very warm to-day ; regret
I cannot now record temperatures, having broken thermometer at Todmorden. Rabbits not very numerous,
although large burrows are occasionaly seen. Camp No. 6.
October 4 th. —Travelled to Indulkana. Found plenty of water of fair quality. Good camel feed for
five miles down the creek. Camels travel splendidly with their heavy loads, but the saddles have settled
down and require further shifting. Bull Yarrow has carried 4561b5. on each side, not counting a heavy
saddle, since leaving Oodnadatta. Rabbits fairly plentiful and tracks of dingos numerous. Camp No. 7.
October sth. —At Indulkana. Cleared out spring. Prospecting gullies for alluvial gold. Stuffiing
saddles with grass and rushes. Thunder clouds and promising rain. Camp No. 7.
October 6 th. —Steady rain at daybreak, which continued until 10.30 a.m., when high wind from south
arose. Filled kegs and arranged loading. Camp No. 7.
October Ith. —Travelled along pad to within two and a quarter miles of Moorilyana. Country dry along
here, no green herbage ; rabbits numerous in places. Dogs getting sorefooted owing to prickles and rough
stones. Cool day ; travelled about 20 miles. Camp No. 8.
October Bth. —Passed Moorilyana at two and a quarter miles ; a little water in soak ; thence along pad
towards Flat Rockhole for 15 miles. Had a big misfortune to-night. When unloading a pair of water
kegs the ropes jammed and then suddenly slackening one keg fell, with result that the end burst out; took
off the hoops and found that the inside of the keg was quite rotten, only about one-third of the wood remain-
ing, the rest having rotted away. The kegs look quite sound outwardly, and I trust that the others are not
whited sepulchres. Dogs very footsore and unable to hunt; will have to carry them in turns. Camp
No. 9.
October 9 th. —Followed pad towards Flat Rockhole; country very dry. Lost half a keg of water at
lunch-time through camel rolling and bung coming out of keg. Saw five kangaroos. Rabbits numerous
and dogs caught seven. Fairly cool until 2 p.m., when it got very hot, and heavy thundery clouds worked
up from the west, and at 5 p.m. loud peals of thunder and few drops of rain. Sky clear at 9 p.m. Camped
at 17 miles. Camp No. 10.
October 10 th. —My riding camel had strayed, so left saddle and started without him, leaving Punch to
bring him along. Reached Flat Rockhole at seven miles. Cleared out rockhole, but after half an hour’s
work for four men found soakage was too small to warrant much work on it, so started again and travelled
towards


towards Giles’ west camp on bearing 340°, and made 10 miles through dense mulga, low sandndges, and a.
quantity of fallen dead mulga. Had to clear a passage for camels the last five miles. Noticed poison-
bush, “ myoporum.” Heavy thunderstorm at 6 p.m. and light rain when bedtime arrived. Camp No. 11.
October 11th.— Wet night; a terrific thunderstorm all night; had over lin. of rain. The country here
is sandy, but after the rain the going will be heavy. Feed very scarce here, the mulga being mostly dead.
Shot two wallaby and one rabbit. Thunder at intervals until 10 p.m. Camp No. 11.
October 12 th. —Steady rain nearly all night, with three heavy showers ; rain quenched the fire and had
difficulty in starting one this morning. Steady driving rain until 11.30. Very cold day. This splendid
rain has taken a lot of anxiety off my mind. The fall appears to be general and we should have good green-
feed in a month. Too wet to travel. Camp No. 11. . .
October 13th.—' Travelled on a bearing of 340° amongst low rounded gneiss hills, with dionte intrusions,
sandy flats between hills and ridges ; good pastoral country, mulga, open patches of saltbush, and number
of good fodder plants and grass. Heavy travelling, camels’ feet sinking down 6m. On reaching Tietken s
Creek at 3.30 p,m., steady rain set in, so we camped on sandhill. Fresh native camp here. CampJSTo. 12.
October 14th— Continued on bearing 340° to about one mile past Fig Tree Gully, then bore 287° to with-
in three miles of Mount Cuthbert, along north side of Musgrave Ranges. Fair bush feed, with geranium
and saltbush. This country appear to have had a good rain about two months ago. A good site for a well
about eight miles east from Mount Cuthbert. Dogs caught a kangaroo. Camp No. 13.
October 15 th. —Travelled on bearing of 240° until our outgoing pad of last trip, and followed this to about
two miles S. 60° E. from Michell’s Nob. Recent native tracks. Passed several small clavpans contain-
ing water. My birthday, and am now 32 years of age. Camp No. 14.
October 16th.—' Travelled W.S.W. to Whittle’s Creek. Travelled over a sandy loam flat from one to
four miles across, subject to inundation after floods. Patches mulga, prickly acacia, and giant saltbush ;
• would make a good cultivation paddock. Followed creek to its most southern bend and here found pools
of rainwater. Continued W. 2° N. for four and a half miles over low-rounded rises and hollows of granite,
dense mulga, and few large mallee. Patches open and growing excellent saltbush and cottonbush. Good
pastoral country if water could be obtained. Rabbits numerous on creek flats. Camp No. 15.
October 17th.— Travelled W. 2° N. for six miles; fair pastoral country. Just before noon noticed a
large mob of crows, an almost infallible sign of proximity of natives. It did not fail this time, as we soon
heard a call, and shortly two men and one boy appeared. These followed us and were later joined by others,
until at night about 30 were camped near us. They appear very friendly, and seven of them I recognise
as old friends. I took several photos, of them when here before and had copies with me, which I showed
them to their huge delight. They stated there were more natives at Operinna, and that the natives west
of Operinna would spear white men and camels and eat them. This is what we heard on a previous trip,
so we shall have to be particularly careful in the Petermann Ranges. Camp No. 16.
October 18th.—' Travelled on general bearing of 291° through low, rough, stony hills of granite, with sandy
flats between, similar to that crossed yesterday; very fair pastoral country. Some of the natives followed
us all day ; one of the women had a breast burned off ; all are fat and healthy. Travelled 16 miles. Camp
October 19th.— Travelled six miles N.W. and two miles W., then six miles S. up Operinna Creek to the
spring. Had to dig in the bullrushes to get water—about 240 galls. per hour. Camp No. 18.
October 20th.— Self, Hutton, and Fabian went to top of Mount Woodward to take round of angles.
Found it, by aneroid, 1,050 ft. above its foot and 1,200 ft. above Operinna Spring. Treloar mended broken
keg with mulga and made fair job of it, but had difficulty in fixing end in ; nailed canvas on, but am afraid
it will not be a success. Camp No. 18.
October 21,<?£.—Observed to-day as Sunday. Washing, boot-mending, &c., Re-arranged loading and
filled kegs. Hot day ; strong wind from N.W. Camp No. 18. _
October 22nd. —Left Operinna, bearing 96° for three and a half miles, 254° for one and three-quarters
miles, 261° for one and a half miles, 291° for 12 miles. Camels repeatedly breaking nose-lines, and travelled
very badly. Good feed and parakylia along to-day’s traverse. Saw few rabbits and kangaroo. Took
round of bearings from hill near camp. Camp No. 19.
October 23rd.— Travelled 291° for half a mile, 245° for half a mile, 268° for two and a quarter miles, 320
for one and a quarter miles, 293° for three and a half miles, and 338 for three miles. Undulating san y
country between low isolated groups and detached hills of gneiss and gneissic syenite, with intrusions o
pegmatite, and occasionally diorite. Climbed Feltham Hill and took a round of angles. Camp No. 20.
October 24th.— Continued bearing 338° over undulating sandy country timbered with open forest oaks
to five and one quarter miles, then stunted broad-leaf mallee and spinifex to six and three-quarter miles,
when low rough spurs of gneiss from Gordon Hill commenced. On entering these Treloar went ahead to
find soak, whilst I piloted camels through the rough country. At nightfall Treloar and Tommy, the black-
boy, had not turned up, although I had sent up a number of smokes, and was very anxious regarding their
safety. Camp No. 21. ,
October 25th.— Up at dawn and started a big smoke. Missing men turned up at 7.30 a.m. ; they Had
camped at a small rockhole, so were not without water as I had feared. Travelled on bearing of 305 or
two miles, then got through a gap in quartzite on a low ridge and travelled on bearing of 300 towards t e
north end of Butler’s Dome Range for 12 miles. Numerous quandong trees with quantity of ripe fruit, the
largest and best flavored I have seen anywhere. Bull camel Percy unwell and lay down three times. Camp
No. 22. „ , _ .
October 26 th. —Continued bearing 300°. Numerous quartz blows. Travelled until a soakage was
struck in a small gum creek. Stevenson’s Peak here bears 323|°. Dollied a number of samples but found
no gold. Am somewhat disappointed with the Petermann country so far as I have yet seen it. Camp
October 27 th. —Prospecting country in vicinity of Butler’s Dome. Found several small rockholes.
None of the quartz samples showed any gold. ...
October 28 th. —Observed to-day as Sunday. Washing, mending clothes, adjusting instruments, <fec.
Observed for latitude, which make 25° 34' 30". Camp No. 23. October


October 29th. —Followed around foothills of Butler’s Dome to about two miles west of same. Found
two large rockholes near camp No. 23 and brought in samples of quartz, fine-grained talchose schist
probably phillite —and garnetiferous mica schist. Bad travelling underfoot for the camels. The rocks at
Butler’s Dome are coarsely crystalline white feldspathic granite, with mica schist capped by schistose, or
gneissic quartzite, parts highly micaceous, 150 ft. thick at thickest part. Quartzite bed flatly undulating
but dipping away all around the dome. Camp No. 24.
October 30th. —Prospecting and built pile and took angles from Butler’s Dome. Observed for latitude
of Butler’s Dome —25° 36' 27", and also observed true meridian line.
October 31s£. —Travelled around south side of Butler’s Dome and thence across desert to Foster Cliff,
and camped amongst a lot of quartz reefs. Camp No. 25.
November Ist. —Prospecting Foster Cliff range. Noticing a fairly well beaten natives’ track, I followed
it. It ran past several old camps, and then up the side of a foothill to the foot of a cliff just below a gap,
and here, at the junction of the granite rock with the quartzite capping, I found a very small spring, or
rock soakage. I mention this, as I consider the water is permanent, being, as it is, so sheltered from the
sun’s rays. Camels cannot get within five chains of it, and a broad-shouldered man could not get at it.
It occurs in a small fissure. Got no colors of gold, but Hall once thought he had carbonate of bismuth.
November 2nd.— Dollied a large number of samples to-day, and one of them showed colors of gold.
These were very small indeed.
November 3rd.—Prospecting locality where colors were obtained yesterday. After working out a
quantity of stone, found that it was a piece detached from a reef (a floater), so prospected about in vicinitj
and obtained a fine color from each of two samples. Blackboys found two rockholes, with considerable
quantity of water. Camp No. 25. .
November 4 th. —Watered camels at rockhole. Had to make a track for about 10 chains. Climbed
Foster Cliff and took round of angles. Dollied numerous samples, but only one contained a color of gold.
Foster Cliff is about 760 ft. above plain. Rocks here are gneiss and schist, capped by a bed of quartzite,
forming cliffs from 50ft. to 250 ft. high. This quartzite bed is considerably altered in parts. It consists
of dense, hard, amorphous quartzite, in part highly micaceous and fissile, whilst other portions are almost
a mica schist, and contain, in the planes, short, irregular and lenticular seams of very dense, hard, white
quartz, the latter portions being lowest. Latitude 25° 34' 37". Depot No. 1.
November s th. —Could not raise a color from numerous samples. Ido not like leaving this little patch,
having got colors here ; but the colors have been very small and infrequent. The veinstone carrying it
is small, both in thickness and laterally, and the whole exposed patch is only two and a half miles long
by three-quarters of a mile wide, extending N.E. and S.W. There are numerous quartz reefs running
about E. and W., but they are very dense and hungry-looking. The prospectors are almost satisfied that
nothing sufficiently large or rich exists here. Will stay and prospect until Thursday next. Tied camels
up for first time, and will make a practice of this for future.
November oth. —Prospecting, with similar results to yesterday. Could not obtain a color from 40 sam-
ples, and had no success dryblowing fqr alluvial.
November Ith.— No likely country seen to-day. The outlying isolated hills to S.E. and S.W. are gneiss
capped by quartzite. Several large reefs of dense white quartz were tested, but proved barren.
November Bth.— Got one fair prospect early in day, but could not raise a color afterwards from same
vein. Noted a native well in creek running N.E. from Foster Cliff. It was Bft. deep, and dry.
November 9th. —Opened on several reefs to about 2ft. deep, and dollied numerous samples.
Fabian got a few fine colors from one sample, but could not raise any more from same spot. This has
occurred with every sample that has shown colors. No other gold can be obtained from samples around
on the same reef. The gold is very fine, and requires very fine crushing and careful panning to detect.
Have decided to leave this locality. Reefs, so far as sunk on, get smaller, and, in some instances, cut out
dead, as if faulted. Tried small gutters for alluvial, but had no success.
November 10 th. —Observed to-day as Sunday. All hands to rockhole for bath and washing clothes.
November 11th.— Travelled 320° for half a mile, 273° for one and seven-eighths miles, 303° for one and
one-eighth miles, and 292° for six miles. Travelled over low ridges from Foster Cliff range. At camp are
some outcrops of vein quartz, very dense, and apparently of little value. Dollied several samples, but
could not rasie a color. Self confined to camp, having a very sore eye, which has troubled me for 10 days
past. Am afraid cow Eba will die before long. She has had good feed and plenty of water, and should
be improving instead of falling away. She has been frequently dosed with sulphur and fat for tumors.
Very hot day followed by cold night. Camp No. 26.
November 12 th. —My eye very sore, and had to rest them to-day. No gold obtained from any samples
obtained to-day. All the prospectors are of same opinion as myself, that no gold will be found in this
locality. Quartz veins are fairly numerous, but are all white or glassy, and not at all likely looking. Camp
No. 26. ,
November 13 th. —Followed our pad to Butler Dome soakage. Surface water gone, but got ample supply
at 2ft. Watered camels, and continued to Stevenson’s Peak, passing between it and another hill almost
as high to the south. For four miles travelling was good ; then dense mulga thickets and stone underfoot
made travelling slow and painful for the camels. Saw no good prospecting country. Camp No. 27.
November 14 th. —Went to top of Stevenson’s Peak and took round of angles. A painful job, with my
sore eyes. A dozen natives visited camp, and were quite friendly. Prospectors saw no good country to-
day. Observed for latitude 25° 30' 18". Camp No. 27.
November 15 th. —Examining country outlying hills and ridges to S.W. and N.W. Prospectors saw
no good country. Blackboy shot a kangaroo, half of which was given to the wild natives. Hot day, and
flies are very troublesome. Camp No. 27.
November 10th— First one and a half miles undulating sandy loam, open scrub, mulga, corkwood, iron-
wood, grevillia, acacia, green herbage, grass, and little spinifex ; then low, stunted mallee desert oak, &c.,
for one mile to foot of hill; then turned 257° for one and a half miles along foot of hills ; then turned 7°
and from north round to west and south, around a large hill; and thence up a rough gorge to where our
native


native says there is water. It is a small spring, in quartzite. Gave one camel a partial drink, and, after
considerable trouble, nearly filled one pair of kegs. Cleaned out hole to 3ft and bottomed on micaceous-
schistose quartzite, in which occurs a small underlying joint through which the water rises. Could only
get about 6galls. per hour. The natives call this “ Murdithalgodinna.” Saw no good prospecting country.
G * m \ovember llth —Went on bearing 300° for five and three-quarter miles. Hutton and Fabian, who had
gone out westward, rejoined us here, having found water about three miles away. Unloaded and took
camels back for drink, and filled kegs. The water is in a large rock basin, under a fall 20ft. deep. It is
circular in shape, about 40ft. in diameter, and, when full, would be 10ft. deep above the sand, which is
several feet deep. I fancy this is Giles’ “ Glen Wyslaskie,” as Giles’ and another general plan I have are
at variance. Twelve natives visited the camp at sundown. They call this water Enungaderrma
Hutton found a soakage about four miles west from this in a gum creek, which empties out on a bloodwood
flat. The creeks here generally die out about one mile from the ranges. There are a few quartz blows m
these hills ; but they do not give much promise, being very white and glassy. Had a slight shower at noon.
Clear sky at night. Camp No. 29. , xn-ii-
’ November 18th.—' Travelled 315° for three miles ; then 3381 for nine miles ; then towards Mount Phillips
for six miles. Saw no good prospecting country. Natives followed for about 12 miles, and then returne .
Ten more were seen in evening. These were very friendly and very dirty. Gave them several small presen s.
Ascended hill and took round of angles. Could see Mount Gosse from here, and can determine longitude
of this spot very closely. Built a pile on hill. Prospectors brought in some fair looking stone, but it con-
tained no gold. Too cloudy to observe for latitude. Camp No. 31. .
November 20th. —Observed to-day as Sunday. Did usual bathing, washing, &c. Prospecting in after-
noon The natives who followed us left to-day without word of farewell. They were probably disap-
pointed at not getting food. The Petermann Ranges are here hardly worth their designation and are very
disappointing, being low rounded hills and spurs, from 50ft. to 200 ft. above plain level, with higher isolated
hills—Mount McCulloch and Mount Phillips. The hills to westward appear higher, but no portion of them
compare with the Musgrave, Mann, or Tomkinson Ranges. The low hills are syenite, with large feldspar
crystals and a few large blows of dense white quartz. The larger hills are more schistose or gneissic in
structure, but apparently the same rock. Mounts McCulloch and Phillips are capped with about 50ft
of quartzite. Northerly from both hills are ridges of quartzite, dipping vertically and at high angles, both
N. and S., aithough only a short distance away—the farthest being only about three miles. The planes
of the gneiss and schist conform generally to those of the outlying quartzite. My eyes are almost righ
again but Hutton and Fabian are similarly afflicted. One of the natives, with much whispering an s ow
of mystery, and injunctions to let no boys or women see it, presented me with a large bull-roarer. Camp
N °’ 21st.— Shifted to Winter’s Glen. Prospecting low hills and ridges of gneiss, syenite, and
mica schist between Mount Phillips and this place. There are numerous large blows of barren quartz
some pegmatite intrusions, and diorite. Some promising quartz reefs, but they showed no gold. _ Hot and
sultry until 4 p.m., when had thunderstorm, about one-tenth of an inch. This is a fine watering p ace,
easy of access, and there must be thousands of gallons conserved in the sand and rockholes The mam
water is contained in the creek channel, with water showing here and there above the sand for a distance
of 10 chains. Saw an ibis here. A little blackboy has made himself quite at home, and when ram was
falling he sought shelter under our tarpaulin. Camp No. 32.
November 22nd.-ln easterly gap of the two north of Mount Phillips there are rockholes. One at base
of fall, which is about 50ft. high, and three others higher up. A stone here is marked J. Tregurtha 1896.
The gaps are three and a half miles apart. The top rockhole is a very fine one, about 40ft by 50ft and
20ft deep judging by color of the water. Left depot in company with Treloar and blackboy, with five
camels and provisions for eight days. Left instructions for prospectors to scour country to southward
The native who has been christened Bobby told our blackboys about a party of white men who visited
the locality a long time ago. They had camels, and went to a big rockhole here. They made marks on
the stone, and then travelled south to near where we are camped, and at that spot shot several black-
fellows. They lost four camels here by poison. They then travelled west, and were consumed by fire by
the devil blackfellows. They tried to shoot the “ Marmos,” but the bullets took no effect. As this rockhole
was close to us, decided to visit it, and went that way on journey to McNicholls Range. Here I found the
rockholes and inscription mentioned above. Camp No. 33. TT
November 23rd.—' Travelled on bearing 10° for 14 miles. Undulating sandy country, spimfex. Here
reached a low range, about 60ft. high, of quartzite. In a gap was a small native well—dry. Then travelled
nine miles on bearing 335° over undulating sandy loam, with waterworn fragments of quartz and quartzite
scattered on surface. Very fine pastoral country. Then seven miles of desert country to McNicholls
Range. This is a disappointing range, and had I known it was so low I would not have travelled out to it.
A high imposing range lies westward. Very hot day. Camp No. 34. <
November .-Went to highest point of range. Here I had an extensive view, except to west where
Blood’s Range intervenes. Saw what I took to be Lake Amadeus. Travelled from west end of McNicho llb
Range along foot of Blood’s Range to its west end, where the highest point rises. This range and McNicholls
Range are composed entirely of quartzite. This range is about 800 ft. high, and McNicho s ange t.
Saw several natives here. One lubra was very alarmed, and ran away directly she saw our b ackboy. Ob-
served for latitude, 24° 40' 10". Giles’ fixings for these ranges are much m error. Very hot day. tamp
November 25th. —Travelled back towards depot on bearing of 160° for seven miles; then noticed a
low range and altered course to 193°, reaching same in seven miles. It proved to be quartzite and sand-
stone with large blows of dense, waxy-looking quartz, also some argillaceous and arenaceous greenstone—
v ’ ° probably


probably a glauconitic sandstone. Found three small and narrow but deep, rockholes. A native was
here dining on three iguanas and two lowan’s eggs. His method of obtaining water was to tie a bunch
of grass on a spear, dip in the water, and squeeze same into a coohman. He told my blackboy
before seen white men, but he evinced little surprise at our appearance. Gave him some bread and jam,
of which he was suspicious until my boy had eaten some. Very hot again, and camels are feeling the fast
travelling and long stages. The native said there was very little water to westward Travelled on bearing
of about 155° about 15 miles, towards Mount Phillips, when camped. Camp No. 3b.
November 26th.—' Travelled bearing 160° for three and a half miles, south-west for half a mile, to a granitic
outcrop, with a small native well containing a little water. Here was a native camp, with large numbe
of implements and weapons, and fires still burning. Disturbed nothing, and left a red handkerchief as a
present. Continued bearing 160°, and in three miles saw two native women, who ran away. On reaching
depot, found all safe. The prospectors had examined all the country around depot, and the low rough
ranges to the south. These are composed of a coarsely crystalline porphyntic rock, large feldspar crystals,
with a few small blows of white quartz. . ,
November 21th.— Observed to-day as Sunday; washing clothes, &c., plotting up courses, and comb -
iner plans Found that a range which I had taken to be Bowley Range was Blood s Range, of Giles,
sWsTvery much out of position relative to Mount Phillips Early this mormng the were
camped near cleared out accompanied by Punch and Tommy, the two camp boys. In the afternoon Pune
came back with Barney, the little native boy. He was in gTeat grief at departure of his friends, and was afra d
to follow them alone. Let him stay all night, as they will probably hunt him up before we leave to-
He is a nice little fellow, and I would like to attach him to the party as he would be valuable in show g
waters to the westward. There are a large number of natives in this locality, and I would n °t be surprised
if we were attacked at any moment. However, we have given them no cause to do so. Weather very
hot ’ Nommber^ttZ— Travelled in a general direction of 305° through and over low rounded granite hills
and loamy flat covered with mulga, prickly acacia, beefwood, bloodwood, &c., with several kinds of grass
and patches of saltbush. Good pastoral country if water available Crossed five
on eastern end of a high quartzite hill, which I will fix to-morrow, a large gum creek The little black boy
is still with us. He is afraid to search for his people alone, so I must give him food and water until we meet
some natives. He seems inclined to adopt us as his guardians. Treloar unwell with rheumatism an
unable to walk. Camped on south side of quartzite hill, having travelled about nine miles. Observed
latltU Novelber 9 2M.—' Took round of bearings and built pile on hill connecting with meridian observations.
Saw Mount Gosse this time, and as it was so indistinct think that I did not see it from Mount Phi p» ,
mistook a solitary hill lying some distance N.W. from the west end of the Mann Ranges for it. On descend-
ing hill travelled a general W. 20° N. direction through and over low gneissic hills with flats between Very
fair pastoral country in and around these ranges. Travelled eight miles. Boy Barney is stall vn , >
in reply to questions when he was going back, said he was going to stay always Evidently he likes our
food better than his own. He helps our blacks with the camels, and is very useful. The hill ascended 1
1S caravan with others travelled W.N.W. towards a high cone about 20 miles distant.
Self and Hutton travelled S.W. through low ranges. At three miles spent a couple of hours on a Promising
looking quartz and fluorspar reef, with traces of copper and galena. Could see no gold, and could find no
other reefs, although several short blows of very white dense quartz were seen. The reef strikes . .
and about two chains S.W., and parallel to it is a dyke of hornblende. Got through the hills at four miles.
They consist of porphyritic gneiss and short intrusions of pegmatite and hornblendic dykes. Ihe gne
is also hornblendic, and is probably syenite. Followed southern foot of hills in a westerly direction o
about two miles. Here are a series of dry rockholes, small and dry. Westerly from rockholes there is a.
gap in the low ranges, about one mile wide, extending N.W. and m direction of a high double-topped cone,,
so travelled on a course of 314° for 15 miles and reached same. It is the western end of a high range, six
miles long, composed of quartzite. Thence N. 15° W. through a gap in range down a large gum creek.
Expected to see the camels about here. Went northerly two miles but saw no sign of pad, and getting no
reply to several shots camped supperless and thirsty, having finished our water at 3 o clock. I his mg
cone I take to be Mount Curdie. Camp No. 38. , , ■ *
December Ist.— At daylight observed a smoke to east, and at one and a half miles reached camp. A
the cone is the highest and most prominent hill around here decided to take round of angles from l . ampe
half a mile west from hill. Prospectors saw no promising reefs here, and report only short blows of dense
white quartz. Very hot again to-day. Fabian saw about 20 natives, who all ran away. Ca ™P °' *
December 2nd. —Late 'start owing to camels making straight away when let loose at daylight. y
are getting thirsty. Travelled to a soak found by Fabian yesterday. Watered 10 camels when found
supply was nearly exhausted, and only half-filled one pair of kegs. Returned down the creek to the Hat
and thence along foot of low hills in a N.W. direction for three mdes and camped on a patch of burnt sp n
fex country, with some splendid parakylia. Whilst at the water heard some natives calling. Punch replied
and shortly two lubras appeared. They were very frightened and did not stay long, and would nei e
nor drink. Before leaving we saw seven more natives, but they would not come close up. ihese low a g
are about two miles through, with sandhills to the south. At dark, when the camels were being broug in,
natives were heard calling, and on Punch replying one man and four lubras came up and camped iUUyds.
awav. They were very nervous, and got up to run away when I went across to them. Dave them some
beads, lollies, and tobacco. The man explained that Barney was an orphan and told me I could have him.
He is very happy and contented, and they seemingly wish to be relieved of the trouble of finding food
December 3rd—Found on arising that the natives had cleared out. After loading up, Punch came in
accompanied by three men and three old women. They were painfully frightened, two of the men holding
Punch’s arms and the others walking close behind. Offered the men some tobacco, which they declined.
B IJiey


They said there was water to the westward. Expected these blacks to follow us ; but after going about
100yds. the old man gave a cry and they all ran back, splitting up singly, and availing themselves of all cover ;
I fancy they have been shot at before. Followed along north edge of low rough hills of gneiss and joined
the Hull Creek. Followed this for one and a half miles, where it junctions, one branch coming from N.W.
and other from S.W. Followed north-westerly to what I take to be Hull Spring. This proved to be dry.
There is a fine rockhole here. Continued towards Ruined Rampart, over and through low rough hills of
gneiss, and at one mile south of Ruined Rampart struck a gum creek and met the prospectors, who reported
plenty of water in two rockholes about one mile down creek, but difficult of access. Passed over good pastoral
country to-day. Saw three euro to-day and numerous tracks of same. Comp No. 41.
December 4th. —Observed to-day as Sunday ; washing, &c. Nearly had a mishap to-day. Owing to
rough approach I did not water camels last night, and this morning when they were let go they were not
headed up the creek but allowed to go down. When I found this out, hurried down to the water. The first
rockhole is bad to get to, as all around the top and sides it is bare, smooth, water-worn rock, sloping for about
25ft., and camels would be sure to slip on it. Found we were too late, the camels having been in and watered
and continued down the creek. Found that two camels had fallen over the side into the water, which was
about sft. deep. This broke the fall, and they escaped without injury. These are fine large rockholes,
and about a mile further up the creek is a small soakage. Take this spot to be Mcßain’s Springs (Giles).
Ruined Rampart is well-named. It is a high rough quartzite range, with two large breaches in it that
suggest to the imagination the results of a titanic siege on a giant fortification. The rocks consist of por-
phyritic syenite, with epidote and blue quartz. Camp No. 41.
December sth. —Travelled down creek in N.W. direction and camped again on western end of Ruined
Rampart on a patch of schistose country with numerous quartz reefs. Very rough travelling for about
four miles, when camped. Ascended highest part of Rampart, the summit of which is about 700 ft. above
base, with precipitous sides for 400 ft. Could not see Mount Gosse, and could only see the western end of
the Mann Ranges indistinctly, and could not identify hills as a duststorm was raging in that direction.
Waited on top until nearly sundown in hopes of better light. Saw an unarmed native who came up without
fear. He had a large open sore above the ankle, which he said was caused by fire, and a long scar on top
of right shoulder. He is a fine big man, about 50 years of age, but looks a dangerous character. Just after
dark Fabian saw something move about 50yds. from camp. It proved to be two fully-armed blacks, so I
sent Punch down to warn them. Hot sultry day. Tracks of emu and knagaroos are numerous, but have
not noticed any rabbits for past two days. Observed for meridian. Camp No. 42.
December 6th. —Attacked by natives about 10.30 p.m. last night, Hall being seriously and Fabian less
seriously wounded. Hall received a spear in the eye, which penetrated to below the barb to a depth of about
3Jin., the poiht going downwards towards back of neck. Fabian was wounded in the chest just below the
breastbone, the spear entering one and a half inches. I had observed for meridian, having instruments
some little distance south of camp. Hutton was assisting me, and we had walked about with a lighted
lantern a good deal. On completion I went to bed, and shortly after heard Hall call out. I grasped my
revolver, and as I jumped up heard a spear rattling amongst the boxes, and saw what I took to be four
natives running away. Fired four shots, and several shots were fired in the air by the others, who did not
see any natives. Set the others to patrol and watch the camp whilst Hutton and I attended to the wounded
men. Hall having the spear imbedded in his head, gave him first attention. He was in great agony, and
kept asking us to pull the spear out. Found it had sunk into the eye socket, right below the barb. At
first I thought the spear was not barbed until I found, after pulling it out, about lin. of barb was over the
eye and through the top lid. The attempt to cut the barb gave so much pain that I had to release it by
cutting the eyelid with a razor. Although in great agony, he bore it manfully. On reaching Fabian I
found he had fainted. He complained of severe pain in the left side, and had difficulty in breathing. Bath-
ing with hot Condy’s fluid gave Fabian some relief, but Hall was in great pain. At daybreak our
blackboys examined tracks around camp and said there were none beyond the three who were at camp
yesterday. Hall stated he was fast alseep when the handkerchief was pulled off his face, and on looking
up he saw a native on each side of him. He grasped his revolver and was immediately stabbed with the
spear. His cry awoke Fabian, and he, too, saw a native standing over him and was instantly stabbed. It
was a most daring and determined attack for three natives to attack a party of eight in bright moonlight,
in a very open camp, not half an hour after the last man had gone to bed. Each of us has slept between
a pair of boxes, with a camel saddle at the head, for weeks past, and the camels are brought in at night and
tied up around the camp. Our dogs are of no use. Not one of them barked even when the camp was aroused,
nor did any of the camels jump up. The attack was in no way to be accounted for except by the savagery
of these natives, who have a bad reputation. All the natives seen have been kindly treated and have not
been molested in any way, and those that have been induced by our blacks to come near have received
presents of knives, handkerchiefs, looking-glasses, &c., with a little food and lollies. In case of attack I
had expected that spears would be thrown from a distance, and never anticipated that they would walk
right into camp unobserved by dogs or men.
December Ith. —On examining Hall’s wound more closely conclude that the eye has not been ruined,
though badly hurt. Have kept down the inflammation by use of continuous hot fomentations. Watered
camels and exhausted supply of water close at hand. Very hot day.
December Bth. —Attending wounded men, and sent camels to water. No further signs of natives. My
eyes are getting bad owing to heat and want of sleep. Hall sleeps a little during day, but has little rest
at night.
December 9th. —lnflammation very acute in Hall’s face, but his appetite somewhat better. Have used
poultices, in addition to hot fomentations, with good results. He is more hopeful, and can notice the light
with wounded eye. Fabian much better, and was up and about all day, but is.very weak and stiff. The
country here is a schistose syenite with short quartz blows; the quartz in some instances being schistose in
character. It is very white and glassy, and, except for some spangles of finely laminated micaceous iron,
appears to be barren. At 5 p.m., thundery, with few drops of rain.
December


December 10th. —Hall had better night, and seems brighter. Sent some of party to see if they could
locate Mcßain’s Springs, as the water here appears to be too close to the range to agree with Gile’s position
of the spring. May have to stay here a considerable time on Hall’s behalf, and am afraid of running out
of water before he is able to travel. Fabian is out of danger, but very sore and weak. Men found a good
soakage about three miles away, but eight miles by road travelled. Half a mile below water they found a
marked tree, partially grown over. They had no tomahawk to clear inscription, which showed —
NAN Sd
HS
OLGARDI
7-1-97.
December 1 Ith. —Very windy night, and gale until noon. Hall passed a good night, and is more cheerful,,
and his wound is suppurating freely. Found no further water to-day. High ranges 12 miles north, with
sandy country intervening.
December 12 th. —All hands had a good night. Very hot day. Except to get supply of water nothing
was done —except attend to wounded men. Observed for latitude last night, and plotting up to-day-
Find we are still 11 miles from the West Australian border.
December 13 th. —Prospecting round foot of Ruined Rampart. Both wounded men had a bad night-
I wish I could get them shifted to another camp, as they seem very nervous here, and the water is not very
good. Fabian is not so well, and has developed a nasty cough, and his left lung appears to have been hurt.
My eyes are giving considerable trouble too.
December 14 th. —Wounded men had a better night, but Fabian seems very depressed. Self, Hutton,
and Punch went west over loamy flats for seven miles to near the foot of a range of quartzite running N.E.
and S.W., of which Mount Deering is a southerly point, then southerly and south-westerly along a creek
for about seven miles over roughly undulating country with numerous small creeks and watercourses.
There were sundry holes containing rainwater, and saw seven ducks, one crane, and a water-hen, and near
by a mob of five emus. These waters are not permanent, but would probably last a long time. Good
pastoral country here. The rocks are granitic schists, striking E. and W., and dipping S. There a,re a
number of quartz and pink feldspar veins and much shed quartz. Will move camp here when Hall is fit
to travel. Saw tracks of two natives, which Punch said were those of our assailants, so on way back followed
one to where it came within three miles of camp, and then turned and followed Docker Creek, in a northerly
direction. The two largest waterholes seen were 48yds. long, 15yds. wide, and from 15in. to 18in. deep :
and 2 chains by 12ft. wide, and 2ft. to 3ft. 6in. deep respectively. Fairly cool. Prospects of thunderstorm.
December 15 th. —Hall not yet able to get about, and Fabian no better. We can do very little until
they are able to shift. All the surrounding country has been examined, and there is nothing worth pros-
pecting.
December 16th.— Both patients good night. Fabian much easier. This he attributes to the
vinegar and salt embrocation I have been using on him. Had to poultice my own eyes, in addition to using
a lotion. They are very painful, and troubling me very much.
December 17 th. —Being somewhat cooler last night, both patients slept better. Self and Hutton visited
water found by Fabian on sth inst. There are two rockholes of about 200 galls. each, and the rock soak
I consider is a spring with a small supply. Camels could be taken within 100yds., but bucketing down is
difficult and dangerous, the rocks being very steep and smooth. Walked about eight miles over very rough
steep hills and flats covered with loose waterworn boulders. Numerous quartz blows, very white and
dense, but carries foliated pieces of hard micaceous iron. One reef looked promising, so took samples for
dollying. Very hot, clear and still.
December 18 th. —Both patients had good night, but Hall complains of more pain than of late. What
appears to be proud flesh is growing, and, at Hall’s request, ground up some white sugar and sprinkled on
wound. This made the eye run copiously, but eased the pain. Thundery weather with few scattered
drops of rain.
December 19 th. —Hall had a bad night, and says his eye is more painful than ever. He persists on-
having the sugar put on the lid. Hoped to have moved to-morrow, but am not hopeful now. Fabian
much better. Three of our camels are not benefiting much by the spell here. Eba, who was bad when we
started, does not pick up in condition, and Kitty has also got the same disease ; Cables is very lame, the
shoulder being affected.
December 20 th. —Hall got up to-day and sat in the shade until sundown. He is very weak and shaky.
Got three rock pigeons, which we stewed for him. These birds are unfortunately very scarce. Fabian
much better, but has difficulty in breathing after any exertion. Cow-camel Kitty quite unable to get up
to-day, having lost use of of her hindquarters : lam afraid we will soon lose her. Intensly hot with strong
N.E. gale. Make latitude here 24° 55' 30". Got things in readiness for a fresh start.
December 21 st. —Cow Kitty died this morning. Left an unfortunate camp, fervently hoping never to
see it again. Travelled westerly seven miles and camped near the water found on 14th inst. Hall too
weak to travel far. Had no sleep myself last night, and feel completely knocked up. Heavy thunder
with terrific gusts of wind at night.
December 22nd. —Followed up Jessica Creek to its divide, and travelled about 10 miles. Despite the
fierce heat the invalids travelled well. The water here is slightly brackish and weedy. Camped near
Mount Deering. The scrub along foot of range is very dense. Prospected some quartz reefs, but the stone
is very barren. All feed is very dry in these parts. The rock formation here is quartzite, gneissic quartzite,
and schistose micaceous quartzite, a few quartz reef and pegmatite.
December 23rd. —Went to top of Mount Deering and got round of angles. A hard climb, there being
three terraces, nearly perpendicular, of quartzite, and day very hot. Thunder, but no rain, in afternoon.
Hall seems to be improving better than Fabian, who has bad headaches. From top of Mount Deering
could see Mount Gosse, frig, hill, with certainty, and, as I have connected these angles with a true north
observations


observation at camp, I am certain of my longitude, and the positions of the chief features of all the Peter-
maniDeb2r 2ith,— Prospecting around camp and looking for water that we are on being very bach After
examining a lot of country turned to the waterholes, where I had left a pair of damaged kegs to soak. O
“found that 11 of our camels had walked seven miles in hopples and were bathmg m the water.
Tightened hoops on kegs and took camels back, being completely knocked up when I arrived at 8 p.m.,
having had nothing to eat since 5 a.m., and being out in a terribly hot sun all day. Had customary peals
of thunder about 4 p.m. Hall and Fabian improving. , , o m
December 25^.—Christmas Day broke clear and hot, and no prospect of a cheerful time. Aftc .p. .
very cloudy and thundery, and I would be pleased with a Christmas box of several inches of general rain.
Celebrated the day by making a plum pudding, which was not an entire success. Fabian still complaining
of violent headaches, and his stomach is also upset. , .
December 26^.—Invalids better, but not well enough for me to attempt the desert country r between
this and the Treuer Ranges. The water here is evaporating fast, so I cannot stay long, and[must fin
quarters unless rain falls soon. lam afraid to tackle the 100 miles of desert between here and Thomas s
Reservoir in such hot weather over heavy sandhills and two wounded men to care for ,
December 21th.— Cloudy all day. Both patients regaining their appetites I shall be glad to get awaj
from these ranges. We have seen no likely country since leaving Mount Phillips. Have seen no signs o
3117 Had a light rain last night-too light to be of service Went to water and fixed up
leaky keg which I trust will stand. Observed for latitude 25 0 56 , also for true meridian.
December 29fft.—Travelled down to Livingstone Park, and sent camels back to fill up before taking on
drv Hall and Fabian improved, and better able to travel. r ~ , i
7 December dOth.— Started for Warman Rocks, bearing 333°. Met South s Range earlier than expected,
according to Tietken’s position of same. Here Barney said there was water on the north side dose to our
course Found a good passage through. This range appears to be a continuation of Blood s Range, it
is of quartzite; much disturbed in places. At 3 p.m. had customary thunder and enough ram to damp
US but not enough to benefit. Travelled until noon, when turned camels out until 4 p.m and travelled
until 7 p.m. This gives the camels the best part of the day for travelling, but as they are tied up most of
the night they do not get much of the cooler portions of the day for feeding. m,
December 31st. —Continued bearing 337°, and at one and a quarter miles cleared the range. Then
358° the first four miles over flat sandy country with good camel feed. This was followed by sandh
country about 30chns. apart, Spinifex predominates. Mulga thickets on flats. Few poplar and eser
oak Very slow travelling ; the camels having had no sandhill country for some time did not travel well,
and stoppages were frequent. At starting sent Hutton and Treloar with Barney to the water which the
latter had spoken about. After going five miles saw their smoke. They report a rockhole called Gnu lan-
noorina, which may be useful if Warman Rock is dry. T j t f
January Ist, 1906.—Continued bearing 358° over sandhills and desert country. Turned out at 12 mle
on patch oHair feed, but being so hot camels would not feed. On resuming at 4.30 p.m. sandhills cease
at one and a half miles, and undulating sandy country followed. Few patches of gypseous At
three and a half miles there are some small salt lakes and swamps, desert oak, teatree, mulga, quon ong,
™* ;r h p :rtL tt “e g dby rain. Got everything stacked and covered when rain
ceased These small showers, which have occurred frequently of late, are very annoying, as much time
h lost in stacking and re-arranging loading. Left camp at 6.45 a.m. Very heavy trave ling. At one
mile Mount Harris bears 1314°. At four miles a salt lake could be seem seven mdes to west a
about 30 miles distant to W.N.W. At six miles cow Eba had to be left, as she had fallen several times,
nnd was with difficulty got on her feet. I was loth to leave her, but she has been a hindrance for some time,
although only carrying an empty saddle. The camels have had a bad time since leaving Livingstone Park.
Theirffiads are stffl heavy, and the travelling has been exceptionally so, and the heat very oppressive
wh“t they have had no water and but scanty feed. Did not hopple out at mid-day as wanted to push
on to Warman Rock as fast as possible. Was compelled to camp at 4.30 as severe of the heaviest laden
camels were frequently lying down. If I am unable to locate Warman Rock or if it is dry I shall have
difficulty in getting back. Had usual thunderstorm but no ram at 5 p.m. Found latitude -4 030
about. nine miles south from latitude of "Warman Rock. .. •
January 3rd.—Self and Hutton, on riding camels, went ahead to reconnoitre, the caravan following
more leisurely; travelled eight miles over jumbled sandhills, and at nine miles saw Mount Leis er a hig
bold bluff facing east, and a round-topped hill in a distant range, Mount Mem. Magnetic bearings 23 ai
39° so that Warman’s Rock, according to Tietken’s latitude and relative positions is 30 miles east from us.
Also saw tops of a low range bearing about 345°. Could not estimate we 1 owmg to intervening sandhills,
but took it to be about 12 miles away. lam now in a bad fix. The camels will not go much further, War
man Rock is 30 miles away and water doubtful there and no prospect of any in this vicinity and the nearest
knownwater is *56 miles back over very heavy country. Returned to caravan which had only travel ed
four miles when some of them lay down. Took their loads off and stayed when
back for rockhole, leaving Fabian, Hall, and Barney to look after the camp with 30gal early
S 3? anxious them back to where
not sleep on that account. Camels arc fighting for the shadiest spots and would
if nermitted lam exceedingly fortunate in the members of the party. They dl recognise we are in a
tightplace and do their utmo” without any murmur. Hall and Fab.au elected to stay m camp, asthey


thought it would be better for themselves than the enforced travelling, The blackboys, too, are very g°od
and willing. Started again at 6.40 p.m., the camels being in a pitiable condition. Kooditchie is especially
bad, staggering like a drunken man. Heavy thunder clouds worked up about 6 o clock, but it soon
got calm and stifling again. Punch led the team for some time but eventually lost the pad so I took team
on south course whilst he went to find it. After an hour, Punch not having turned up, sent Tommy, who
found it 20 chains to east of us when we followed it by aid of a lantern. Kooditchie has gone quite mad,
and lam afraid there is no possibility of getting him through to water. Kept them going all night, giving
about half an hour rest at midnight. , , ,
January sth.— Travelled all night, the camels going fairly well considering the perish they had had.
At 7 a.m. gave them half an hour rest whilst we snatched a little breakfast. Gave four camels half a bucket
of water each, leaving one bucket for ourselves. Resumed the struggle at 7.30^ and reached the water at
11 30 a.m. Three bulls and two bullocks were terribly shaky, and were with difficulty persuaded to drink ;
none of them drank well. Blackboy Punch was still missing, so after camels were watered started back to
find him and if possible save Kooditchie. After going five miles I was relieved to meet Punch, who was
very exhausted. I had left food and water for him at our breakfast camp and he had found that. He says
he got bushed and went a long way east. On his way in he had seen Kooditchie, who was nearly dead. He had
tried to get him up but without avail, so I decided it was of no use to take my wearied camels 15 miles in hope
of saving him; and I have to save the others so as to rescue Hall and Fabian. The cows came through
better than the others. We were thoroughly done up, having walked for two nights and the intervening
days, being too hot to rest. This is certainly the wrong time of the year for this country, but being here we
must try and make the Treuer Ranges. Whilst watering camels our daily thunderstorm arrived with a
sharp shower for about ten minutes, which ran a little water into some small holes easy of access.
January 6th. —All hands in bed until, it became too hot; freshened up after a bath and breakfast. The
camels looked wretched and like starved kaffgaroo dogs. On starting the return journey I did not think
the camels were so much distressed, and my intention was on reaching water to return to our loading and
resume journey to Warman Rock ; otherwise I would not have left Hall and Fabian. This is now out of
the question and I must bring them back here. ,
January Ith. —At 6 p.m., with Edginton and Tommy, started back to loading to rescue Hall and
Fabian, travelled 30 miles. Another very hot day.
January Bth. —Travelling at sunrise, and at 6 o’clock hoppled out. After breakfast got a little sleep
but the flies were very troublesome. Camels camped at 7 a.m. and did not move all day except to seek
further shade. Day fearfully hot. At 5.30 p.m. saddled up and continued along pad, travelling all night.
January 9 th. —Reached loading at 9.45 a.m. ; camels on being turned out sought shade and camped all
day. After breakfast we lay down, and despite the heat and flies got about four hours of uneasy sleep.
Put out about a fortnight supply of rations. Sent Edginton, Hall, and Tommy back to the water, and at 8 p.m.
I and Fabian, with two riding and a water camel, started for Warman Rocks. Went north five miles
on bearing of 88° magnetic ; travelled until 1 a.m. All sandhill country.
January \oth.— Continued from 2 until 4, and being very tired and sleepy, unloaded and slept until
7 o’clock, being much refreshed as the morning was cool. Travelled from 7.5 until 9.10 when found a native
well on a mulga flat; this was dry. Resumed at 9.30 bearing 70° towards a prominent cliff, which we
reached at 1.15. The cliffs are ferruginous sandstone facing east and dipping west at an angle of 20 . They
run about one and a half miles in aN. 25° W. direction, and are surrounded by sandhills. Mount Leisler
bears 350° ; other low sandstone ridges N. 35° W. about five miles. East two and a half miles are three
low hills, and south three miles are other low hills, being nearly bare. Could see the Cleland Hills. At
5 p.m. brought camels in. They had eaten little, seeking the shade all day. Travelled down to the scrubby
hills, which°we reached at three and a half miles. Here found a grassy glade as described by Tietkens, and
found several dry rockholes but no reservoir. There was a small native well sft. deep, with moist sand m
bottom ; numerous native camps but none of recent date. It was now dark, and as the camels had been
three days and nights without water considered it advisable to strike for camp. Warman Rocks are 25
miles east of our loading. Travelled on bearing of 210°, travelling at first very slow through low sandstone
ridges with dense mulga for about three miles, then high E. and W. sandhills with intervening sandy flats.
Leaving Warman Rocks at 8 p.m. we continued until 1 a.m. We tied the camels to two quandong trees
and had a feed ourselves, the first since this time last night. All day a strong hot gale from the east
prevailed, this was very trying and caused a painful dryness in throat and nostrils which water —we had to use
it sparingly —would not relieve.
January 11 th. —Continued at 1.30 a.m. and travelled over sandhill country until 4.30, when stopped
and rested until 7.30 a.m. Started again at 8, and at 10 striking a patch of fair feed turned camels out.
They soon satisfied themselves and sought the shade. Resumed at 5.30 p.m. bearing the same 210 , and
at 11 p.m. crossed lake country and gypsum for about half a mile.
January 12 th. —At 1 a.m. gave the camels another respite and started again at 2 a.m., and at 4.30 a.m.
cut the pad about 12 miles from camp. Reached camp at 12.10, camels and selves thoroughly done up.
Found that Edginton and the others had got back at 8 a.m. yesterday morning. All the party was safe
now, but we were two camels less, and most of our loading and personal belongings 56 miles north with
hideous desert between. The camels require a few days rest, and I also require a rest after the travelling,
anxiety, and trouble of the last 10 days. After having a feed slept until sundown.
January 13 th. —Slept until 9 o’clock and arose tired, stiff, and sore and little refreshed by the long sleep.
During the day going over plans and Tietkens’ journal, &c., trying to find other places mentioned by him
which are likely for water. Making waterbags and watered camels. Natives’ smokes three miles to west
January 14 th. —At daylight Hutton and I went to top of range above rockhole ; it is about 400 ft. high.
Mount Cowle bears 57°, Mount Harris 86°, Ruined Rampart 157°, Livingstone Gap 172°.
January \sth. —Spelling all day ; late in afternoon mustered and watered and filled kegs. At moon-
rise, 10.45 p.m., Hutton and I started north for the lake country to look for water. Fabian and Treloar
went to South’s Range and then to Tietken’s sandstone and Pine Rock reservoir on same quest, both parties
taking


(aking a camel with full kegs and provisions for a week. Self and Hutton went for locality where smoke was
noticed on 2nd instant. Left camp at midnight following along on our own pad all night.
January 16 th. —Camped at 10.15 a.m., and after breakfasting put up a shade but did not get much
rest owing to flies and an aching tooth. Travelled about 28 miles last night. Camels camped until nearly
sundown when they started feeding ; at 8 p.m. tied them up for night.
January 17th.— Started at 2 a.m. following pad ; at 4 a.m. struck salt lake country and let camels feed
whilst we had breakfast and waited for daylight. Started again at 5 a.m. following a series of salt flats
for eight miles on general bearing of 260°. These flats are about half a mile wide bounded by sandhills.
At five miles found a cluster of four small mound springs about Ift. high and 2ft. diameter ; water salt as
brine. At eight miles a ridge of jasper quartzite nearly covered with sand. From here noted a fairly ex-
tensive salt lake extending N.N.W. and W. about one mile distant, Made a big smoke ; this was answered
by another about 15 miles to S.W. As it was getting very hot camped until sundown. Got but little
sleep ; my aching tooth has given me agony all day and most of last night. Range distant about 30 miles
bears 308° from jasper ridge. Resumed at 6 p.m. in N.N.W. direction along the eastern side of the low-lying
country. At five miles was some parakylia not quite withered, so camped for night. One camel who was
none too well was given two buckets of water from the kegs.
January 18 th. —At daylight noticed the lake depression made again about one and a half miles west-
ward, it having ceased where we camped last night. Travelled down to it and followed its eastern side
northerly for three miles when it took a sharp turn westward. As there appeared little likelihood of getting
water here I went on bearing 35° and travelled until 9.30 over very heavy sandhills. Our camels were now
seeking the shade of every tree passed, so camped during the heat. My aching tooth very troublesome and
affected throat glands, ear and eye on that side, and lam afraid lam in for a painful time. Camels felt
heat very severely to-day. On plotting up I find lam still 20 miles from our loading ; this, with 60 miles
back to water, if it does not prove too much, will give them a gruelling. Decided it would be best to travel
back to water, so on bearing 145° returned to where the pad crosses the lake country, reaching there at
1.30 a.m.
January 19 th. —As there was still a little parakylia here, hobbled the camels out until 3 a.m., and then
resumed until sunrise. Camels then fed for an hour and sought the shade. After a very hot day started
again at 6 p.m. along our pad.
January 20 th. —At 1 a.m. reached a few mulga bushes; they seemed inclined to feed, so gave them
half an hour, and then resumed until 3 a.m. They then seemed very tired and inclined to rest, so stopped
until 5 o’clock, and Hutton and I had two hours of much required sleep. On again at 5, and reached
camp at 8.30 ajn. —all knocked up. Found that Fabian and Treloar had only managed to get as far as
South’s Range, as their water camel got sulky and refused to travel. At the range they found several
rockholes and a native well, all dry. This range runs about N. 86° E., and is brown, yellow, and white
sandstone dipping flatly to north, and with a line of cliffs to south about 200 ft. above plain level. I have
come to the conclusion that it is impossible to cross the desert at this time of the year, and must beat a
retreat eastward to better watered country. Warman Rocks are dry, and, from Tietkens’ description of
Mount Leisler and other ranges in that direction, it is too risky to push on there, and I have no hope of
water between. lam very loth to retreat, but for the safety of all it has become necessary.
January 21st. —Another very hot day. Watered camels and filled kegs.
January 22nd.— Self, with Hutton, Tommy, and Barney, left at 3.45 a.m., and went easterly along
the range for nine miles. Here we saw a solitary blackfellow. He did not notice us until Barney called
out, when he came up, evincing some fear of the camels. He showed the way to the water. It was in a
very rough gorge, and as it could not be reached by the camels was of little use to me. Gave the black
some food ; he was glad of it, being very poor, and evidently having a bad time. Hobbled camels out, as
it was getting very hot, on a patch of nearly dry parakylia, which they ate eagerly for an hour, and then
sought shelter. At sundown travelled back to camp.
January 23rd.—As it is necessary to retreat, I have decided to start camels back for loading. In after-
noon watered all camels except four cows, which were missing. Started Edginton and Treloar with bulls
and bullocks at 6 p.m., carrying three pairs of kegs, two to be left for a partial drink on return journey.
Just before dark the native we saw yesterday, with an old man, called out. I met them and told them
they were not to camp close.
January 24 th. —Started blackboys after cows at dawn, and they returned with them at 7 a.m. Sent
on Hutton and Tommy to follow the others. Cooler day than usual. Did not go back myself, as a rest
was imperative. The two blacks did not move all day except to go to the water. Punch was with them
for a while, and on his return he said that the old man with the scar, who was the instigator of the stabbing
affray, had also come up, and had gone over to the water. Fabian and I went up to give him a friendly
hint to leave the locality. On return found the other two had cleared out. Not knowing how many might
be in locality, kept a careful watch both day and night.
January 25th.— Dogs barked furiously during night, but in morning Punch could see no fresh native
tracks. Had a fairly cool day, and got a good sleep.
January 26 th. —Waiting for camels to return with loading. Did nothing but rest all day.
January 21th. —Expected camels this morning, but they did not arrive. Our food supply is running
short. Dogs very restless all night, but found that they had been barking at a kangaroo which had been
feeding round the camp.
January 28th.— Camels returned this morning. Satisfied all the camels with water by noon, and then
the tired men had a rest.
January 29 th. —Gave camels another drink, and at 5 p.m. made a start eastward, following range to-
close to the rockhole located on 22nd inst, and camped at 10.45 p.m. Flat sandy country, patches stony,
spinifex, few red and black mulga, bloodwoods in watercourses, little parakylia.
January 30th.— Cleared a road for camels to water. They are not thirsty, but I must now water them
on every possible occasion. They have fallen away considerably, and their saddles requiring more stuff-
ing are cutting most of their backs. Whilst at the water the native whom we had met here before arrived,
and


and promised to show us another big water further east along the range, and another permanent one north
of Lake Amadeus. Promised him several presents. Very hot day.
January 31s£.—Started at 6.15 a.m. easterly along north side of range. At four and a quarter miles
crossed a large gum creek running N.N.W., which I think is the Hull (Giles). It does not run far, I fancy,
as the banks are very low. It comes through a gap about two miles wide. At seven and a quarter miles
a small gum creek runs north. Our guide says there is a rockhole near its head, but now nearly dry. At
seven and three-quarter miles another gum creek running from the range in N.W. direction ; followed this
to eight and a half miles, when camped, as it was getting hot. The creek here turns and runs from Sto N.,
and on following it southerly for about one mile came to a fine rock water. When full it would hold water
60ft. long, 15ft. wide, and 10ft. deep in deepest, but about all over. It is in a creek channel, with
cliffs 90ft. to 100 ft. high on either side. It is now half full, and, although the creek bed is rough, it is ac-
cessible for camels with a bit of clearing of boulders. At 5.30 p.m. travelled N.W. one and a half miles
to clear hills, and then eastward along N. side of range. The creek on leaving hills runs N.E. for two miles
and then dies out. Travelled until 10.45, and camped on some dry buckbush, having made 10 miles. Hot
close night. Local black says all the creeks running N. through and from this (Blood s) range soon die
cut.
February Ist. —Continued along foot of range over similar country to yesterday. Crossed several
small creeks. At 10 miles there is a gap in the range. Went to a waterhole on N. side of range, about
one and a half miles W. of Mount Harris. It is in a rough gorge, with but little water at present, and of
no use to me. Blacks call this Warlpunya. Very hot afternoon. Camels started feeding at 5 p.m. Started
at 7.20 p.m. ; bearing 75°. At five miles found our native guide had failed us and deserted. At seven
miles sandhills running S.E. ; these were high, close together, and steep on N.E. side, and getting camels
over in dark was slow and risky work, so at eight miles camped, and as there was no feed visible tied camels
up, and all hands slept till 4 a.m.
February 2nd. —Started at 5.50 a.m. on bearing 75°. The sun rose very hot, and after two ana a half
miles over high sandhills three of our best camels refused duty, and would not attempt to climb them.
As we should be within six miles of Pine Reservoir (Tietkins), I sent caravan along flats, whilst Hutton
and I pushed on to 12 miles without seeing any sign of the rock. Here, from a high sandhill, could see it
a long distance off on bearing 93°. Reached it in eight miles. Searched, and found the reservoir and
several smaller holes, but all dry. Gave the camels a chance to feed, and started back for caravan at 6.15
p.m. to about where I reckoned they would have reached. After going eight miles saw their beacon fire,
and reached them at 12 miles just at midnight, very tired, hungry, and thirsty. This is a terrible country
for animals. Feed is very scarce, in addition to water being so, and they cannot travel far minus both.
We are now 56 miles from Ardoonderrina, which I have decided to make for, as its position is known a,nd
water is certain. I cannot reach there without another drink, so will send camels back, and leave loading
here.
February 3rd. —Self, Hall, and Barney stayed to mind camp whilst remainder of party took camels
back to water. At plans, journals, &c. Very hot.
February ith. —Mending my own and blackboy’s boots and sundry odd jobs. Read several papers,
which I have carried so far without having time to glance at them. Another scorching day.
February sth. —Making waterbag and mending clothes. Had novelty of a cool breeze last night, but
by noon a real hot gale was blowing from east. Shot a crow, which cooked for the dogs, who refused to
eat it.
February 6th.— Reading over journals and writing up abstract. Moderately hot. Observed for lati-
tude, and make it 24° 36' 40".
February Ith. —Went to low ridge, 180 ft. high, of quartzite, from which I could see Mount Curdie,
bearing 222° ; Mount Bowley, 206° ; Mount Cowle, 2991° ; Mount Harris, 264° ; Pine Ridge, 73°. Camels
returned at 11.30 p.m., and as there was no feed tied camels up and all turned in.
February Bth. —Started at 7 easterly along N. side of the quartzite ridge until I should get some camel
feed ; this I got at three miles, so camped for the day. They ate well for two hours, and then sought shade.
Their backs are getting very bad, but I can get nothing to stuff saddles with. Started again at 7.40 p.m.
along N. side of quartzite ridge. At seven miles the end of ridge was one mile south. Then travelled on
bearing of 105° until sunrise, having travelled 21 miles.
February 9th. —Sun rose very hot, and heat must have been nearly a record. Camels ate but little—
£here was not much for them—and soon lay down in what scanty shade they could find, and did not shift
all day. Started again at 7.30 p.m. ; bearing 105°. For 13 miles along sandy flats between sandhills.
Then broken sandhills to 19 miles, at sunrise, when we struck a patch of quondong and camped.
February 10 th. —About half a mile back from camp the blackboys, who were some distance behind,
set fire to the spinifex. I was not aware of this when we camped, but luckily Edginton woke up, and saw
a large fire not more than 20chns. from camp, and about one and a half miles long. Battled with it for
a while, but directly I had the camels saddled I travelled N. 50° E. for one mile, to get behind it, and then
continued on our course one and a half miles, when I had to camp again owing to the heat. At 6.15 p.m.
started again ; bearing 105°. The night was dark, and travelling very difficult. The camels were much
distressed and weary, and some laydown occasionally, so, at 11 p.m., having come nine miles, gave them
a rest. Resumed at 12, and travelled until 2 a.m., and gave them another hour’s rest, whilst we our-
selves had something to eat. Continued from 3to 5 a.m. and camped. Having come 53 miles I knew
we could not be far from Ardoonderrina, and climbing a high sandhill, I was relieved to see Mount Currie
and Mount Olga on nearly the bearings given by Mr. Murray; so after breakfast self, Hutton, and Barney
rode on, and found the well three miles further. Made a smoke at 11 a.m., and dug out the well. As the
camels would not travel in the heat, it was sundown before they arrived. This spot is a perfect little oasis
in a terrible desert. There is plenty of water and a patch of very good camel feed, making it a veritable
paradise for camels that have had the hardships ours have had for months past. I will spell them here
for a week, whilst I scout ahead for a good track and more water. I was greatly relieved to reach this water.
There is great difficulty in keeping a course at night time in such country as this, and, from several remarks


I overheard, I know the men fancied I was going wrong, as the local blackboy had informed them that
Ardoonderrina had been passed, and was far to the south. Lack of sleep is very trying, and whilst travel-
ling I and others of the party used at times to see visions. Once I saw a tiger come out of the scrub; at
another time some sheep ; and also fancied I was guiding my camel through a lot of camp equipment and
camel kegs, which appeared to be scattered about the ground. Camped under a large desert oak, where
Messrs. Maurice and Murray camped some years ago, when they discovered this spot.
February \2th Have no hesitation in saying this well is permanent. Rested all day, but it was too
hot to sleep. The fire lit by the blacks is still burning, and the reflection lit up the western sky last night.
Camels around water all day.
February 13 th. —One camel being very lame, roped her and extracted a mulga stake, am afraid she
will have a very bad foot. Hall complains that his eye is not so well and has now lost all sight in it. Re-
pairing saddles, &c. , . , , ~
February 14 th. —Repairing waterkegs, saddles, &c. Blackboy tells me there is a water just to north
of Lake Amadeus. I will try and cross lake and visit this on road to George Gill’s Range.
February 15 th. —In company with Hutton and Punch started at moonrise, 2.30 a.m., and went on bear-
ing 10° to Lake Amadeus. The attempt to cross failed, and found it wider than anticipated, what appears
like the opposite shore being a succession of islands. As there was no prospect of getting laden camels
over, returned to southern bank and camped at 10.30 a.m. Had another dry thunderstorm. This happens
nearly every day. At night returned to camp.
February 16^.—Heavy thunder a,nd few drops of rain in afternoon. Looking promising for a heavy
rain, stacked and covered equipment. . . . ,
February 17 th. —Somewhat cooler to-day ; repairing saddles, &c. The camels are improving on the
good feed and unlimited water. This is a splendid well, and we make no impression on the supply.
February 18 th. —Repairing equipment, &c., and preparing for start to-morrow.
February 19th — Bore 105° over jumbled sandhill country for 10 miles, and then high sandhills for 14
miles. Here was a narrow arm of the lake running N. and S., and opening out at its N. extremity to a salt
lagoon about one mile in diameter. Here saw a dead camel, which appeared to have died from want o
water, as it was not bogged; apparently it died last winter. Camped until 5.15 p.m. and resumed, same
bearing. At 15 miles Ayers Rock bears 1734° ; at 17 miles camped.
February 20 th. —Started at sunrise; bearing 105°. At 20 miles crossed an arm of Lake Amadeus,
attempted to cross another arm at 24 miles, but found it too boggy. Camped at 10.45 a.m., having travelled
nine miles ; on good feed, but camels would not eat. Resumed at 5.15 p.m., bearing about 100 along south
shore of lake. . Caught two rabbits here ; they were very poor. Camped during heat of day until 5.15 p.m.,.
and then followed lake to within about three miles of Gosse’s Crossing, miles from Ardoonderrina.
February 21st. —Went N. 60° E. for three miles and saw Gosse’s wagon track, with tracks of numerous
camels. Found it boggy and impossible to get loaded camels across just here, so left caravan in shade of
some desert oaks, and Hutton and I went on to Kamaran’s Well. There were seven blackfellows here who
knew the country to eastward. They said the well gave plenty of water. On return to camp found that
Edgniton had discovered a better crossing only about eight chains across.
February 22nd. —Followed south shore of lake for one mile and got caravan across. Had dimculty
in keeping camels moving until well was reached. Whilst the well was being cleared out I went with b ack-
boy to visit another well to the west, called Piggina. Travelled 10 miles, when native was at fault, so had
to camp for night. . ... ,
February 26rd.—kt daylight blackboy took me four miles m S.W. direction to well. Ihis is in a cork-
screw-shaped funnel hole about 12ft. deep. The two camels I had nearly exhausted the supply, so returned
to Kamaran’s Well. This I found had been sunk to 20ft. from surface, through gypsum, and was drier at
bottom than higher up, and only making about a gallon per hour. The natives were surprised at this.
The camels have now been five days in excessive heat without water, and are very distressed.. Kings
Creek is 40 miles distant, and some of them would hardly get through. On further conversation with
the local blacks I learned of some other native wells not far eastward. Taking rations for a week, I
started at 5.15 p.m., taking only the water kegs and rations. Left Hall, Fabian, and Barney to look after
the loading, the natives assuring me that this well never goes dry. There is a risk in leaving them, but
they accept it voluntarily, as some of us must stay with the loading. Hutton, self, and Tommy went ahead,
with local native to open up well before arrival of team. Bearing about 60 , travelled until 1.30 a.m.,
when black said he could not find well at night, so camped, making a large fire to denote our where-
abouts. Team arrived an hour later, and tied animals up until daylight. .
February 24 th. —Native took us easterly along S. side of stony ridge, and in three miles reached a small
creek, in which is the native well. After much labor got 60galls., being 3galls. for each camel. There is a
little withered parakylia here which they will eat if picked and given to them, but they are too distressed
to feed themselves. Well is called Kooleenee. Started again at 5.15 p.m. for aother native well, in seven
miles along south side of stony ridge reached it. It is called Albergunna. It was similar to the last one,
and 12ft. deep. After a deal of hard work found we could only get 4galls. per hour, so concluded it was
best to strike for George Gill’s Range, where the natives say there are horses running. .
February 25th.— Found well had made three buckets of water during night. After some trouble in
moving boulders crossed the stony ridge, which is about 140 ft. high, and went on bearing N. 30 E. towards
a distant range. At seven miles camped owing to heat. Started again at 4.30 p.m. and travelled un i
midnight, when we rested for an hour. Continued at 1 a.m., and at one and a half miles on met a sandstone
ridge running E. and W., about 50ft. high, with cliffs to south. Could not cross it in the dark, so camped.
February 26th. —Started at daybreak, bearing N. 30° E., after finding a crossing over stony ridge.
Sandhills and sandy flats for six miles, when we reached Bagot’s Creek (Wonmurrina). Here was a beautiful
spring, with abundance of water and plenty of acacia. Camels, as usual, drank but little at first, but in an
hour’s time returned and drank freely. I was relieved to get them all through, as they have had a bad grue -
ling and are very leg-weary. The water is as good as rainwater. There are bullrushes and the smaller
variety, and it is undoubtedly permanent. As Tempe Downs Station is only about 20 miles away decided


to go on there for meat, and send advices to Adelaide of our safety. At 4.30 started, following a well-beaten
horse pad up Bagot’s Creek, and after four miles up a rough gorge reached the summit of the range. It
being now dark and apparently another gorge ahead, camped and had a full night s sleep.
February 27th.— Started at daylight, and in a few chains was on an open plain between ranges, t oilowed
pad in an easterly direction, and in seven miles met Mr. Coulthard, of Tempe Downs, who was taking some
horses down to Bagot’s Creek. As I could not get meat until he returned to the station, which had been
shifted to the Palmer Creek, turned back with him to Bagot’s Creek. The new station is 40 miles east from
here. Had a fairly cool day. , m _ a , ~
February 28th.— In company with Hutton started with one pack camel for Tempe Downs fetation ;
the others, with remainder of team, went westward along the ranges for Kamaran s Well to bring on loading.
Mr. Coulthard says they have had no rain for two years, and the country is very bare of feed. Camped one
mile west of Mount Levi. ~ . . . ,
March Ist.— Started at 5.50 a.m. and reached station at 2 p.m., where we were hospitably received by
Mr. Miller, Mr. Coulthard’s only white companion. Were supplied with all we wanted, and got back news-
papers from the time we left Oodnadatta. .. .
March 2nd, 3rd, and 4th.— At Tempe Downs. On Mr. Coulthard’s return killed and salted a bullock.
March sth, 6th, and 7th.— Travelling back to King’s Creek. Fabian and Hall had had a bad time at
Kamaran’s Well, as it fell in twice and had to be dug out and timbered, and as the water was very bad
Fabian contracted dysentery ; he is very thin and not fit to travel. Cow camel Spinna is very lame.
March Bth and 9th.— Washing, mending, and correspondence,
March 10th— Started a native, who had been a police tracker, to Tempe Downs with our letters. Could
not get a connection from any of the high ground here between Mount Olga and the ranges to the north.
The range here is ferruginous sandstone and grit bedded nearly horizontally, and cleft by mnumerab e
canyons through which flow creeks making into large channels towards the southern flank. The plateaux,
owing to the flatness of the bedding of the rocks, are in terraces ending in cliffs, the whole forming a curious
and beautiful landscape. . 11T , ,
March 11th. —Six months ago to-day since we left Adelaide. Then I thought we would have reached
Tanami and made some sort of a find before this ; but I little anticipated the drawbacks and dangers w e
were to encounter. The soakage did not make sufficient during night to water all the camels, so sent most
of them to Reedy Creek for a drink. Started at 1 p.m. for one mile on bearing 300° to clear range, and then
N. 34° W. for 10 miles between ranges about five miles apart at S.E. end, but narrowing to three miles at
camp. Good pastoral country.
March 12th. —Resumed over similar country, with ranges narrowing until at eight miles they were
only quarter of a mile apart. At seven miles bore 307° for four miles, and then bore 27° towards high bluff.
Sandhills for one mile and sandstone ridge for half a mile followed by sandhills to camp at seven and a half
miles.
March 13th.— Continued bearing 27°. At 15 miles got a good view of ranges ahead and altered to 18°
towards a gap in nearest range. Lost my dog through snakebite here. At 21 miles left sandhills and crossed
a gum creek running about westerly ; this I take to be Deering Creek. Camped.
March 14 th. —Bearing 18° followed a stony watercourse. Got on the north side of what appears to be
the main portion of this end of the Macdonnell Ranges. They are composed wholly of quartzite, almost
horizontally bedded, and, as far as observed, not traversed by any quartz reefs or any veinstone, and there
is no shed quartz in creeks and gullies. Worked easterly up a stony creek ; reached a divide, where Haast s
Bluff bears 51$°, Mount Heughlin 54£°, Mount Sonder 62°, and Mount Giles 76°. From divide travelled
on general bearing of 78° for three miles, 35° for one mile, and 50° for two miles when camped.
March 15 th. —Continued, bearing 50° toward Haast’s Bluff, and camped two and a half miles S. 23 W.
from the bluff.
March 16 th. —Hutton went through the gap below Haast’s Bluff to traverse the north side for water.
Caravan went east along south side of range. Travelled around the east end of the range, which is locally
called Haast’s Bluff, but from the position given by Gosse I consider he named the high bluff 10 miles further
west. When nearly dark, with no prospect of water, tied camels up on getting to north side of range. Tra-
velled 13 miles. Hutton saw spring, but it was dry. There are some horse tracks here several weeks old.
March 17th.— Followed horse tracks westerly for several miles, but no sign of water, so, as our camels
had been seven days without a drink, decided to push on to Glen Helen. Camped at 18 miles, the camels
being much distressed and staggery.
March 18 th. —The moon being up at 1.40 a.m., reached Glen Helen to find that there was no water
there, and matters looked very serious. The soakage well was dry, and I had confidently expected water
where a station had been formed. Followed a comparatively fresh horse track northerly for four and a
half miles, and here got a pool sufficient to give our camels two good drinks. lam very thankful for this,
as I am certain that few, if any, of the camels would have travelled another 10 miles had it been necessary.
Poor brutes, they have had several very rough times this trip. Luckily we have had some cooler weather
lately, but the past two days have been very hot. They drank but little at first and swallowing seemed
painful to them. Gave them a small drink and tied them up in the shade, and at noon gave them a full
drink and turned them out, but being thoroughly tired out they soon lay down. Hutton in his travels
found a good soakage in a gum creek running south past the west end of Mount Louder.
March 19th.— Gave camels a rest. There is some promising country in the Mount Razorback Range
which I intend leaving the prospectors on whilst I take Hall to Alice Springs. From station Mount Razor-
back bears 362£°, Mount Louder 88^°.
March 20th.— Camels left to go back for loading, self, with Hall, Fabian, and Punch, remaining.
Examined surrounding country and searching for further waters.
March 21st. —Self and Fabian prospecting. Camels returned with loading at 5 p.m.
March 22nd. —Took camp down to two miles S.W. from Mount Sonder. Had three hours’ work making
a road to the water, and had a difficult and dangerous job watering animals. Here saw Mr. Raggatt, who
arrived with some horses. He said there was plenty of feed and water at old Glen Helen Station.
March
C


March 23rd —Travelled down Redbank Creek to the Finke Gorge.
March 24th —Made preparations for splitting up party to-morrow. Washing, mending, &c.
March 25th. —With Edginton, Hall, and Punch, nine pack camels and four riding camels, started for
Alice Springs so that Hall may catch coach to Adelaide and get medical advice, his eye giving him much
troublef Remainder of party to prospect Mount Razorback and Mount Sender ranges during our absence.
Travelled N.E. half a mile, then 95° up Pioneer Creek to its head at about 14 miles, and on to Ellery s Creek.
The valley here is between high quartzite ranges from one and a half to two and half miles apart. ihe
southern one contains Finke Gorge, Goyder’s Pass, and Stokes’ Pass, and continues west to Mareena ihe
northern range is a continuation eastward of Mounts Sonder and Razorback, and the rocks on its south side
are quartzite, slate, and dolomitic limestone in almost vertical beds. The rocks on the north side of the
south range are quartzites. Travelled 18 miles ; partly very dense scrub.
March 2 6th. —Travelled on general bearing of 95°. At 12 miles a large gum creek runs south cutting
through both north and south ranges. Went up creek one mile and watered camels at a fine rockhole ,
then down creek again, and on bearing 95° along valley for seven miles. Turned north through a gap in
range four miles on bearing 93° and camped, having travelled 25 miles. Country here gneiss and meta-
morphic schists, quartz reefs, and diorite dykes. , ~ ,
March 27th.— Continued bearing 93°. At 10 miles crossed the Hugh. Followed a small gum creek
to 13 miles and over low gneiss hills and spurs, crossing several small gum creeks running b.E. At 23 miles
camped near Jay’s Creek.
Mr George’s journal ends here. Alice Springs was reached on March 31st. Unquestionably he was
worn out with anxiety regarding the safety of his party and the hardships they had undergone ; but he was
in no manner daunted, and was full of hope that their troubles were past and success still lay before them.
As is so often the case after a hard trip, the change of water and diet induced inflammation of the bowels
and caught him so much run down and unfitted to withstand further strain that it had a fatal ending, and
he passed away quietly in his sleep on the morning of April 4th. Being in the prime of life, but 32 years of
age a promising career was cut short, and the Government lost a servant than whom no one wa,s more zealous
and enthusiastic in his work. It was a great shock to the other members of the party, who all spoke of him
in terms of high affection, and paid tribute to his unfailing courage and indomitable energy.
As only about half the period for which the party was equipped had expired, it was decided to send
Mr. W. R. Murray to continue the work, and he left Adelaide by next mail, having arranged for a message
to be sent to the party to come in and meet him at Alice Springs.
RECORD


RECORD
OF
PROSPECTING OPERATIONS in COUNTRY SOUTH-WEST from BARROW’S
CREEK and the DAVENPORT RANGES—I906.
By W. R. MURRAY.
April 9th, 1906.—Left Adelaide, accompanied by M. Colley, who takes T. Hall’s place, he returning
for medical attendance. . . . . . . r
April 22nd.— Arrived Alice Springs after a tedious drive, the mail horses being very weak from lack of
feed. Found that the party, with equipment, had arrived a few days before. The camels bore signs of
the hard usage during the past severe summer months, most of them being leg-weary and foot-sore, several
very lame, and the pack camels generally sore-backed, and they were badly in need of a prolonged rest.
After obtaining further stores and getting supply of meat from Undoolya Station, took camels to north of
Bond Springs, where there was some claypan water and fair feed, to await arrival of next mail with sundry
necessary arrived without parcels, and found they were coming by camel team. Leaving Hutton
and Fabian to bring them along on arrival, started to take remainder by easy stages to Anna s Reservoir.
The camels have benefited by their spell, but their feet require a lengthy rest to give them a chance. One
cow, Lubra, is a pitiable object, and I only take her along in the hope of getting good feed and water at some
place where I can give her a thorough rest. 11 _ . . , , , ~r A
May Uth.— Branched off telegraph line near Mount Boothby and camped at near head of Woodiorde
Creek. Cow Lubra died near Hann’s Ridge. She scoured very badly, did not feed, and gradually faded
away, and was latterly too weak to carry an empty saddle. . * . . . . ~,
May 15 th —Travelled to Anna’s Reservoir. The water is very low, being 15ft. below level when full.
No stock water here, so, allowing about 6ft. per annum for evaporation, it has not been filled for two years.
May 15 th to 11th. —Prospecting country around Anna’s Reservoir and N.E. from Mount hreeling.
Some large quartz reefs and blows occur in the micaceous schists, but none could be proved to carry any
gold and no success was met with in dry-blowing the creek beds. Two blackfellows are camped here. They
say there is no water to north-west. Hutton and Fabian arrived; so filled casks and watered camels,
this reducing the supply considerably. One more drink for the team would finish it.
May 18 th —Travelled round south side of range and camped one mile east of Mount b reeling.
May 19th. Travelled along south side of range. A little stagnant water was seen up the 20-Mile Creek,
at which four head of cattle were watering. It will not last many days. Prospectors could find no traces
of gold in any of the reef outcrops. . . . , .
May 20th. Reached 30-Mile Creek at six and a half miles. The waterholes here, marked permanent
on plan were quite dry. Camped four miles up the creek, where there is a soakage in sand. Obtained
one bucketful for each camel, when supply gave out. The prospectors tested a number of reefs in the granite
and micaceous schist country, but without success. Tourmalines occur in some of the quartz, but they
are poor in color, being much iron-stained. A small vein of galena was noticed a little north-east from the
old 30-Mile Station. The country here carries fair grass in a good season. Old dry grass is now fairly
May 21st. —Headed for Mount Thomas over open mulga country and red loamy soil. A little mallee
and spinifex near hills. Camped two miles S. 7° W. from Mount Thomas. The range here is quartzite,
and in general appears very barren. About one mile south from the mount is a large ironstone reef, but
could neither speck nor dolly a sign of gold. The view from Mount Thomas is extensive, and the country
to west and north-west looks desolate, and no smokes from natives’ fires were to be seen.
May 22nd. Followed south side of range for 16 miles. Noticed granite intrudes at nine miles at base
of main range ; with that exception country appears to be mostly barren quartzite. .
May 23rd. Followed south side of range for two miles, and rounded end of mam range, there being
no likelihood of any water around here, headed for Teatree Well to try the Lander en route. Some small
hills which are a continuation of the Ernest Giles Range, are slate and clay sandstone, with frequent quartz
reefs. These looked promising but gave no result. Camped on the Lander, Mount Gardiner bearing 2H
mag. The rockholes in the Lander, marked permanent on plan, were quite dry, and have been for a long
time. The alluvial flats along the Lander are heavy travelling, being a network of ratholes and burrows.
May 24 th. Leaving the Lander, passed through granite country with little slate sandstone. A few
large white quartz blows occur in the granite, but they carried no mineral lAA^+ o AA * +
May 25 th —Travelled easterly through broken granite country, the hills being from 100 ft. to. 300 ft.
high. The weather has been quite warm of late, and the feed being very dry camels are showing signs of
thirst when let out wandering for water. Very dense mulga thickets
May 26th. Travelling east crossed the Hanson, a wide sandy-bedded creek, at three miles, and reached
Teatree Well at 14 miles. The camels drank heavily, and as there is a patch of good saltbush and other
feed to west of well I will give them a few days here. The water is excellent, and there is a large supply
at shallow depth. M -


Mav 21th. —Washing clothes, &c. . -. , •
May 28th. — Re-adjusting, loading, and altering oases. Most of the cases nere are wrongly made l having
the length horizontally instead of vertically. A lot of the sore backs are attributable to this a S rt puts too
much weight on the hips and behind the hump, where there should never be an excess. Fixed side-rails
to cases, by which means they could be fixed higher up, farther forward, and could be unloaded by one
man— a great desideratum. The straps which were in use to connect the side-loads were an abomination,
and the strongest of men could not undo them without aid. . , i , 1A c.
May 29 th and 30th— Prospecting low hilly country N.E. of Teatree Well. One large reef, about .
wide, was traceable for half a mile. This strikes about N.W. and dips N.E. nearly vertlcal R ®“ u , th ; w , eS *
from this, about half a mile, several small reefs cross a foothill parallel to the larger reef. Beyond a few
copper stains nothing was found. About 30 blacks are camped here They say there are no blacks out
to the north-west. Will go out so far as Mount Peake, and then in to Barrow s Creek for the stores sent
May 31s(.—Bore 338° for hills westward of Central Mount Stuart. At five and a quarter miles crossed
the Hanson ; reached hills at 10 miles, and camped at 12 miles There is a large system of quartz reefs
here, their persistent parallelism being very marked. I noted 17 of them from one rise ; they strike 320
and dip N.E. nearly vertical. As is general with such large outcrops, they were very glassy and ba
They can be traced for fully a mile. . . , ~ , 11
June Ist. —Excitement ran somewhat high as Hutton raised a color of gold from a small reef to east of
camp, this being the first gold seen on the trip. This was in a group of low hills of decomposed granite
from which Central Mount Stuart bears 70°. Thought we had discovered tin m the black residue from the
dolly, as the magnet did not take it up very readily; but unfortunately it proved to be iron. Spe
dav here, and prospectors decided there was nothing to wait for A little copper was^seen.
' June 2nd.— Bore about 320°, following a run of low detached hills from 100 ft to 200 ft. m height. These
are of decomposing granite capped by 50ft. of quartzite, dipping about 45 to N.E. and presenting a per-
pendicular face to IW. At six miles hills are 350 ft. to 400 ft high. Here there are some immense quartz
reefs traceable for miles, and apparently a continuation of those previously referred
of the country rocks has sometimes left these standing like a huge wall 10ft. to 20ft. high and lOlt. to
through. They are very barren so far as we could test them. The rocks here are chiefly granite and micaceous
schists with quartzite/ One hill, about 150 ft. high, consists entirely of quartz.
June 3rd. —Same bearing ; for three and a half miles hills of quartz and granite. At six miles
and quartz with outcrops of diorite. This was followed by a run of barren quartzite hills to camp about
nine miles from Mount Peake, where some low ridges of siliceous ironstone gra\el are met w ith.
June 4th. —Went 7° for five miles and 16° for four miles to Mount Peake, passing a few ndgessc )f algous
ironstone. There is fair bush country for several miles around Mount Peake. It is a small lull to be digmfiec
by name of mount, being only about 350 ft. above base. It is of quartzite and quartz of barren appearance;
Magnetic bearings :-Mount Denison, 233|° ; Barkley, 2551°; Rennie, 336 ; CentraiMcmn
Finniss 1861°. Had hoped to have obtained sufficient water somewhere m these parts to keep most of
party whilst the stores at Barrow’s Creek were obtained, and then make for the Tanami country
country to the west is so hopelessly dry that a team of fat camels would have a >f r * J re are
with this team would result in many of them and their equipment being left on the road There are some
who would say these camels, having had frequent long periods without a drink are well trained for deset
marches. I join issue with them, as the result is always loss of condition, which is the reserve force drawn
on in the strain of long stages. Camped in very dense mulga scrub about seven miles, a little S. of E. from
“XmeSA-Travelled easterly, reaching low sandstone and quartzite ridges at six and
miles • barren Continued east for nine and a quarter miles through dense mulga, with patches of good
grass country, and camped on bank of large creek coming from south about 10 chains wide Ithe bed timbere
with teatreef Although winter time, night was so warm that bedclothes were not requisite. Camels stray
ing »st ! P rt four miles low quartzite ridges with small area of decomposed granite country.
At 114 miles more quartzite hills, about 200 ft. high. Tried several quartz reefs here, but they appear very
barren a little iron oxide being the only metal seen. At 14 miles a few limestone outcrops and gran te
boXs Mulga scrub very dense and tangled with old dead and fallen scrub, and wants burning badly.
X would tes g ult in growth of plenty of young edible bush Camel Smller breaking.down; he hasa
hideously sore foot, the nail having gone and the front part of the foot worn away. At 17 miles ca p
WeS '7A-Went north two and three-quarter miles, along foot of quartzite range. Central Mount Stuart
here bears 213°. Then E.N.E. for three miles, and followed a track leading into Barrow s Creek telegraph
ftt BaWs Cree k; having had great difficulty in getting the cripples along
The three worst I will leave here to recuperate; Mr. Scott having kindly promise o' see a
watered whenever they came in. Telegraphed to Hon. Minister recommending that idea of visiting lanami
be at present abandoned, and suggesting operations somewhere east of the line, where sufficient wa er or
camel purposes was obtainable. . . ~, ,
June llth and 12th.— Washing clothes, plotting up work, repairing saddles &c bere-on
June 13 th and HA-EUed bullock, and salting meat. Fired one of th e carols I.amlea g
Edginton’s recommendation-as he seems to have rheumatism Kackboy Tommy remains le .
j une l§th. —Travelled to Limestone Well, Watts’s Range. This is good water and being used by the
telegraph station, as they are short of rain-water. ~
g June 16th. —Light drizzling showers ; ground very slippery, and had to cover all gear.
June llth. —Thundery, with light showers from N.E. . ,
jZe 18th —Having received instructions to try the Davenport Ranges, proceeded up telegraph me
Had about |in. of rain, fnd as it came from direction of country we are to visit, anticipate no further trouble


re water. Camel Wallis, hitherto apparently all right, fell down in a fit. Suspected he had found some
species of poison plant, but the symptoms are not those following “ gastrolobium ” poisoning.
June 19th to 22nd.— Travelling to Davenport Ranges, north of Murray Downs old station. Wallis very
staggery and has to be assisted to rise and lie down. The country to south of ranges is generally poor
pastoral. The outlying hills from the main range are quartzite, from 100 ft. to 200 ft. high, with occasional
intrusions of granite.
June 23rd. —Camped at waterhole on Murray Downs Creek. There is water here tor several months,
the recent rains having replenished supply. The Murray Downs Hill, the most prominent part of the ranges
in this locality, bears 352°. The latitude here is 21° O' 50", and the Murray Downs Station is five miles
W.S.W. The plan I have shows it four miles to north. The flats between ranges here are medium pastoral
country. The ridges generally have little but poor spinifex.
June 24^.—Obtained no promising results from country prospected around here. No gold could be
detected in any of the stone. In several instances green carbonate of copper was noted.
June 25th. —Travelled up to near head of Murray Downs Creek ; poor prospecting country : quartzite,
conglomerate, and little granite.
June 26th. —Attempted the divide at head of Murray Downs Creek to get short route to Kurinally.
Could not get camels through, and returned to near last night’s camp. Noted little ironstone, but it carried
no gold. . .
June 21th. —Travelled to head of Skinner Creek, and as the gorge here is also prohibitive I must get
to the north side of ranges by way of the Frew. The country here looks promising, there being silicious
slates, abundant ironstone, quartz, copper stains ; but no gold was detected.
June 28th. —Travelled down Skinner Creek country : low broken hills and slopes, quartzite, diorite,
diabase, ironstone, silicious slate and limestone. Frequent quartz reefs and little copper ore. Although
country looks promising, prospectors not much impressed by it, and could see nothing to warrant spending
much time over. Crossing a small creek, Wallis collapsed and could not rise, so ended his misery, with a
bullet. Latterly he had been a source of trouble, as he blundered aimlessly into bushes, camp equipment,
or whatever was in his road, and it appeared as if his eyesight was affected. A 'post-mortem examiantion
showed abscess of the liver as the cause.
June 29th. —Followed down Skinner Creek to its exit from range and camped on branch creek, about
five miles southerly from Murray Downs Hill.
June 30th. —Treloar finding some promising stone tried the granite country here for tin but had no
luck. Quartz veins here are usually very small. The dolly showed a few colors but no alluvial was obtain-
able from the creek beds. Some of the quartzite ridges here are capped by a conglomerate with very large
pebbles, the capping being about 30ft. thick. Some of the stone here shows a small percentage of copper.
Juty ls£. —Travelled southerly five and a half miles to waterhole visited on 23rd inst; thence south to
Spence’s Creek, four miles, and followed creek on various bearings nearly easterly for five and a half miles.
The waterhole —known as “ Johnson’s Hob”—was dry. Low hills of quartzite sandstone and conglomerate,
with few barren quartz reefs. ~ ...
July 2nd. —Followed up Spence’s Creek. Towards its head, before reaching the divide between it and
the Frew, diorite flanks the main range to the eastward for several miles. The pass through the range is
easy. Followed the Frew down to site of the old station, where there is a good waterhole in a gorge.
July 3rd. —Followed down Frew; track very rough and stony. Camped on strip of fair bush feed
about five miles S.W. of junction with Hatche’s Creek. Poor quartzite country.
July 4:th. —Left Frew and went easterly over open flat country, with low quartzite ridges, and camped
on Hatche’s Creek. There is a considerable area of eruptive country here, designated “ Brown s Belt,
by Mr. A. Davidson. Diorite outcrops for four miles east of the creek. Here a large quartz reef, Bft. wide,
is traceable for upwards of one mile, striking magnetic north and dipping steeply to west. From surface
indications it is very barren. Noted a number of small leaders carrying specks of blue carbonate of copper.
Colors of gold were obtained from small vein about 6in. wide and three-quarters of a mile southerly from
Davidson’s shaft, and a small vein of galena near the shaft. The prospectors did not enthuse over this
country. Saw the volcanic ash-beds which were noted by the Government Geologist when he visited this
part. Noted a pile on hill east of creek, which I presume was erected by Mr. Davidson as indicating approxi-
mate boundary of one of their blocks.
July 6th. —Followed down Frew River to the station waterhole, which is a large sheet of water, but
rather shallow at present. Large flock of ducks and some pelicans. Constant climbing rough hills and
gullies have made me very foot-sore. The old station buildings are all loop-holed in case of attack by natives,
and the palisade erected around the buildings to hamper their approach is still standing. They do not
appear a numerous tribe in these days, as we have seen none since leaving the telegraph line, and there are
not many indications that they often visit this country. Pie melons still grow in the old garden. Latitude,
20° 45' i 0".
July Ith. —Followed down Frew valley for five miles, and struck west for five miles, to Tarragon water-
hole in Lennie Creek. A little water was showing in the sandy bed, at which an old horse branded lUI
was watering. This waterhole is where the general southerly course of the Lennie is deflected to the east on
•encountering a run of low hills of quartzite and quartzose sandstone.
July Bth. —To Kurinally, and camped at Davidson’s old depot. Kurinally Hill is the most prominent
feature of these parts out from the main range, and has a pile 6ft. high on top. The first stone picked up
at the depot contained visible gold, and this was looked on as a happy augury. The workings at the north
reef bear 334° from Kurinally Hills, distant one and a half miles. Obtained few very fine specks by dry-
blowing near north workings.
July 9th. —Dry-blowing. Obtained but few fine colors.
July 10 th and 11 th. —Dry-blowing, north from old workings. Most obtained was a few fine colors to a
dish—generally blank. Colley had similar experience at southern reef. The ground is generally very
shallow, the diorite bottom being close to surface.
July


.July \%th. —Hutton trying some reefs to S.W., remainder dry-blowing near old workings, but with even
poorer results than before This is a great disappointment, as Mr. Davidson had found .. shoot;of rich
stone at the north workings,‘and, as the country had extensive untried alluvial flats, o r chance a.
good one. Outside three chains from the old workings not a color could be found, and other likely localities,
from one and a half to one mile distant, proved blank. , , j j t . •„!
July mh.— Tried for alluvial to S.W. of camp, where Hutton had found decomposed reef material.
Another blank. Hutton descended south shaft to get some candles, &c., which had been stored m the
drive by Mr. Davidson. He had a livelv time with a five-foot snake.
July l\th. —Shifted to east of Kurnially Hills. Indications of copper m several reef formations, but
could detect no gold and no success in dry-blowing. . £
July lOth.—l Self and Hutton travelled up to near head of Lenme Creek. Several fair waters towards
head, but country not interesting from prospecting point of view. Saw one blackiellow. p
July 17th. —Returned down Lennie and followed round mam range to Whistleduck Creek. Country
all quartzite, sandstone, and conglomerate, and noticed no eruptive areas. .
q j u ly ISth. —Travelled down Whistleduck Creek and round north side of hills out from mam range.
Camped nine miles north of Kurinally. Country here is sandstone and sihcious slate, with quantity ot
unpromising quartz^ E^ami^ out l y i ng hills and ridges N.E. from Kurinally. Slate, sandstones,,
cellular quartz, and iron oxide, jasper, ironstone, and outcrops of dionte occur, with the
On return found remainder of party had met with no success, and were anxious to try some other local ty..
One cow-camel had a calf and another is about due. Five blacks showed up a few days back : two men
and three women. They were poor specimens and appeared to have had hard times.
d July 20th. —Travelled to Whistleduck Waterholes. There is water for several months yet, and the
pools contain fair-sized fish, but most of them are locally called “ bony bream, and are not very palata e.
and beds of creeks. Prospectors cooldflnd
nothing went t 0 head of Whistleduck Creek to examine country and see if the
caravan could get through on to the Bonney fall, should I wish to return that way. Kemamder preceeded
to Coodinga. There is a considerable area of eruptive rocks along the creek valley chiefly on the west sic e
Tested numerous reefs ; results, nil. Several small reefs showed a little iron oxide, but little of the at.one-
in these parts shows metal of any description. The creek has cut its way m the past through a senes of
parallel quartzite ranges, forming an interesting series of picturesque
is a fine sight; very narrow, the cliffs rise on both sides perpendicularly from 200 ft to 300 ft. m height, lhe
highest part of the range is here, and is about 560 ft. above base of hills at outside of range Under foot
it! very rough, but it is possible to take camels through on to the southern mam branch of the Bonney
GTee] July 25th. —Rejoined party at Coodinga. No alluvial gold could be raised m this locality, and only very
finest gold could be detected in any of the stone tested. At Davidson s old camp were some fragments oi
opal of good quality, and evidence that attempts had been made to polish them m camp. One of the blacks
here said he knew whence it was obtained, and Treloar and Fabian, following him had not got back when
we returned. At nightfall they returned, dead tired, he having taken them to the Coorundie workings.
Although Mr. Davidson mentions opal in his journal m several instances, he always said it was of no value
and it was considered probable that these fragments were not of local origin. We afterwards heard this
WaS Juhr26th and 27th.— Travelling round to Coorundie and fixing up camp, as I purpose giving this part
a thorough trial. The water at the Coorundie Spring was still showing above the surface. Fixed camp
about three-quarters of a mile southerly from water. _ , , .. .. ~ . ,
July 28th to August 10th. was spent at Coorundie south generally m search of alluvial gold. The al uvial
flats are extensive, and an immense amount of work would be necessary to prove the whole area. Ju gmg
by our experience in picked likely spots, payable results are hardly to be expected here unless from the reefs
at a depth. From the start fine colors were obtained, but these even were few and widely distributed.
They were generally obtained in the drift at from 2ft. to sft. deep Two days work resulted m6O minute
colors being obtained. These would go on the point of a penknife. As it was thought some of this fi e
sold might be lost by dry-blowing, several loads were carted to the water. Similar results were ob c
by washing, and but went to show that the dry-blowing was carefully and effectively done. The result
was very disappointing and discouraging, as much was hoped for from this and the Kurinally locality.
The prospectors being unanimously of opinion that they wished to give it no further trial, decided to try
COO T^/i°i to 2.2nd. —Prospecting gullies, Coorundie North. Most of the gullies tried proved barren,
and not a color could be raised from the main Coorundie Creek. Hopes were raised by the finding o specks
up to a grain weight in the narrow gullies leading from the reef described by Mr. Davidson in page 10 of
hfs journal, as a “contact reef.” The ground here is shallow, and there has been no run o gold far from
its source Cleaned one gully up completely for about four chains from this reef, occasiona yge mg ne
specks but nothing couWbe got lower down. The bottom is decomposed dionte. If prospects warranted,
this reef could be economically worked on an open cut. We blasted out a face about 10ft. deep to give
it a good test, but it is decidedly unpromising, and'probably would not go ldwt to the ton over all. The
quartz is very dense, and some of it shows nice specks of native copper. After a few days here it was practi-
cally certain that we would get no payable gold ; but whilst we were getting the fine stuff I did not feel
justified in leaving the spot without giving it a fairly thorough test A small deposit of flint occurs in a
branch of Coorundie Creek. Noticed where Mr. Davidson’s party had been testing by dry-blowing. As
he makes no mention in his journal of any successful results, except in the tracing up and location of reefs,.
he presumably had no better luck than we had. August


August 23rd. —All hands entirely satisfied that the chances of getting any payable alluvial in this part
is a remote one. As there is an area of granitic country to the north I will try it for tin during the short
time remaining to us. Travelled to Mosquito Creek ; found the waterhole at Davidson’s Depot was dry.
The rains of last June did not affect the creeks on the northern slopes of the ranges, and was not general.
August 24 th and 25th. —Travelling to Livingstone’s camp on Turkey Creek. Found the Boxer dry.
There is a patch of good bush feed here, and sufficient water to last several weeks. The large flocks of galahs
and other birds watering here lead me to suppose that this is one of the few surface waters left in country
out from the main range.
August 26 th to September 4 th. —Examining country around Turkey and Boxer Creeks, chiefly with a
view to discovery of tin in the granitic areas. No reefs suggestive of its occurrence were seen. One out-
crop showed considerable amount of tourmaline in the quartz, the crystal being small, iron-stained, and
much matted and cemeted. The creek beds also proved barren, the wash only resulting in ironstone gravel.
Fine colors of gold were obtainable froifi some of the reefs, and one sample of the cementing medium of the
conglomerate in the creek bed at Turkey Creek showed gold when dollied. Numerous other sample, how-
ever, failed to confirm this. West from Turkey Creek some extensive outcrops of ironstone flank the main
range. So far as the surface is concerned they are poor. On Turkey and Boxer Creeks are frequent out-
crops of flint, which the natives have drawn on considerably for their weapons and implements. Nothing
approaching in quality the fragments of opal picked up at Coodinga could be seen anywhere. My eyes
having been very sore for the past fortnight, sextant and compass work was nearly impossible, and I took
the opportunity of proximity to Tennant’s Creek to ride in there and report and get more meat, that we have
in stock having been very “ gamy ” for a long time past. On the road in, Hutton and I tried some of the
gullies in the MacDouall Ranges, and raised fine colors of alluvial gold. There are immense outcrops of
magnetite here, and the alluvial seems to be derived from quartz reefs associated with this ironstone. The
prevalence of slate formation makes this country at first sight appear a more promising prospecting area
than the quartzites to the south.
September sth to 10th.— On return to Turkey Creek, I decided to try the Munadji locality for a few days
preparatory to starting down the telegraph line on road home, our stores being now nearly expended, and
a fortnightly train leaving Oodnadatta on October 25th. The small outlying hills and ridges from the
Murchison Range along its eastern flank are chiefly quartzite, jasper quartzite, and sandstone, and the
country generally is not very promising. Fabian, having previously seen four wild cattle towards the head
of the Boxer Creek, camped there one night in hope of getting a shot at them, but found we were a few days
too late, as they had finished the water they were on and had headed down towards Munadji. Apparently
they were suspicious of the narrow gorge at entrance to Munadji Rockhole as they did not water there but
followed foot of range towards the McLaren Creek. Munadji is a fine rockhole, well-sheltered, and probably
permanent, unless stock were put on it. Visited Mr. Davidson’s workings here; and the prospectors were
not surprised that not much had been done. Quartz veins are frequent in this area, and ironstone and
pyrites are often present in the stone, which, though very promising, generally proved barren so far as
we were concerned. Following down to where the McLaren runs through the main ranges we struck for
Bonney Well; all the ridges passed on the journey being barren quartzite. The telegraph line was reached
on September 9th and followed to Barrow’s Creek, where several days were spent searching for two of the
three lame camels which were left there to recuperate. The tracks of these two were seen about 40 miles
S.E. of Barrow’s Creek, heading S.E., and as it was probable they had got down to the Arltunga district,
further search was abandoned. On road to Alice Springs the western side of John’s Range was examined.
To south-west of Central Mount Stuart about two miles is exposed country, carrying outcrops of quartz
with copper carbonates, and there is room for much more prospecting in this locality in the future.
September 30 th. —Reached Alice Springs. Sent five best camels and some equipment back to Mr.
L. A. Wells, who is surveying on Victoria River country.
October 24 th. —Arrived Oodnadatta. Arranged Edginton and Hutton to take team to Mount Serle
depot, remainder of party going to Adelaide per train.
GENERAL REMARKS.
On completion of the trip all hands were somewhat disappointed that no good fortune had been met.
The season was not in their favor, and, in general, the country traversed was not favorable to successful
prospecting. The only locality in the Petermann Ranges where gold could be discovered was the Foster
Cliff, but it was not in payable quantities. Eruptive rocks comprise but a small area of the range country,
springing from the desert towards the West Australian border, and the major portion of the country
is alluvial flats and sandhills. The experience of this party, with that of others, goes to show that this
country should not be attempted in the summer time. Men can stand it, as they have food and carry
sufficient water for requirements. The animals frequently lack either, or both, and consequently fail, and.
effective prospecting is out of the question. A comparison of the heat in these latitudes with that to south
may not be amiss here. Down south men are prone to grumble when several consecutive days occur, show-
ing a temperature of over 100° in the shade. At Charlotte Waters —about the same latitude as that the
party was in—the thermometer showed from 102° to 112° for 95 consecutive days, the average being 105°,
and it is extremely unlikely that it was any cooler in the sandhill country to the west. For myself, I still
hold the view I always did—that the Tanami area should be exploited from the north coast, that being its
geographical outlet, and it can be reached with comparative ease from the Ord or Victoria Rivers in a favor-
able season and prospected with more facility with horses than with camels, the country not being suited
to the latter. Although fortune did not crown our efforts, when it was decided not to attempt the desert
journey to Tanami but to try watered country in the ranges N.E. from Barrow’s Creek, I am entirely satis-
fied that it was the best course to pursue, as we saved the animals and were able to work, instead of being
constantly hunting for water. By careful usage and frequent water the camels had gained in condition
when I returned, and, although a lengthy spell would be required to make some of their feet sound again,
Edginton had, by constant attention, cured their backs and hips of most of their sores. This was largely
. aided


aided bv making it a rule never to travel them beyond their natural walking pace. They were watered
whenever it was possible-every day if it was available and they would drink. It is argued by some that
they benefit by being kept without water. My experience has always been quite the reverse especially
when feed is dry. Had they been fat at the start the desert journey from the telegraph line to Tanami
might have been entered on ; in their then condition it would have been courting disaster. It must be said
for the prospectors attached to the party that they worked hard and keenly, and I do not think much was
missed in the country examined. So far as the latter portion of the journey was concerned it will be noted
that search was generally in the direction of finding alluvial gold. This was for the dual rea-son that t e
discovery of payable alluvial is at present of more importance than the locating of low-grade reefs, and
would probably aid in the discovery of payable reefs. Our time, also, was too limited to give reefs a thorough
test, unless the surface indications were distinctly good. Unfortunately, this did not prove to be the case,
and the gold in this country takes a deal of finding. . ~
Latterly I had no difficulty in getting water frequently, but more trouble was met m getting suitable
feed and the country was badly in need of a good soaking rain; those of the past two years haying been
too light at any one time to be of much service. If the average of about four inches for the past two years
had occurred in two falls per annum the bush feed would have benefited largely, and there would be good
patches of grass, edible, if dry. This is shown from the fact that much of the grass grown in the good season
of three years ago still remains, but valueless, being black and rotted with age. Much of the country west
from Barrow’s Creek is covered with particularly dense mulga thickets. It would benefit if a bush fire
swept the lot, as it is noticeable that where fires have been made by the blacks, when hunting, the result
is a subsequent growth of edible bushes and more plentiful grass. .... ~ , ~
But few natives were seen in country back from the telegraph line, they being mostly on the wells on
the line, or in vicinity of the stations where rations are available. All told, we only saw ten men and women,
and no children. Dingoes are numerous in the ranges, and must have largely helped m keeping down the
rabbits—signs of which were seen as far north as Coorundie—but no living rabbit was seen north of Barrow s
Creek. Game is scarce. A few euro, generally very wild, are to be seen m the hills and an occasiona
emu or bustard on the plains. As waters dry up, fairly large flocks of duck congregate on the waterho es
on the Frew and Whistleduck Creek. Galah parrots are plentiful at times, and make good stews and a
welcome change from constant salt meat. Some of the waterholes here contain fish up to Bin. in length,
WlU< A parts in the cooler months is not without its pleasures. The climate is splendidly
healthy, and pleasant interludes are the visits to the telegraph stations I and the other
party, can hardly sufficiently thank Mr. T. Bradshaw and family, of Alice Springs Mr. Scott of Barrow s
Creek and Mr. Field, of Tennant’s Creek, and their officers for much kindness and hospitality. In these
journals brevity has been aimed at, and, largely aided from the fact that much of the country traversed has
already been reported on by the Government Geologist, whilst, m addition, Mr. A. Davidson has fully recorded
the result of his operations in the Davenport and Murchison Ranges; the journals being available o
application to the Department of Mines. Much matter collected, extraneous to the actual result of pro-
for latitude and meridian were taken and are recorded for
future reference. The methods whence deduced are given, so that their comparative values may be judged .
OBSERVATIONS FOR LATITUDE.
Latitude.
Locality.
Whence Deduced.
Meridian Altitude of—
21° 36' 57"
21° 0' 50"
20° 45' 10"
20° 37' 54"
20° 47' 26"
20° 30' 0"
20“ 31' 18"
20° 30' 41"
20° 19' 3"
20° 2'42"
20° 19' 44"
20° 26' 40"
3 Leonis, « Crucis, 3 Crucis
ot Bootis, 7 Bootis, 3 Centauri, 3 Crucis
a Bootis, 7 Bootis, * Centauri, 3 Centauri
a Bootis, 7 Bootis, ot Centauri, 3 Centauri
* Bootis, a Centauri, 3 Centauri
* Bootis, £ Boctis, a Centauri, 3 Centauri
a. Bootis, « Coronae, ot Centauri, 3 Centauri
: Bootis, a Coronae, ot Centauri, 3 Tri. Aus.
* Ophiuchi, oc Pavonis
oe Ophiuchi, ot Tri. Aus.
ot Lyrae, of Aquilae, of Pavonis
ot Lyrae, ot Aquiiae, ot Pavonis
OBSERVATIONS FOR MERIDIAN.
'Variation.
Latitude.
Longitude
(Approx.).
Whence Deduced.
4 n 0' E.
4° 15' E.
3° 5'E.
3° 40' E.
3° 25' E.
3° 22' E.
3° 5'
1
22° 7' 45" (near Teatree "Well)
21° 0' 50" (Murray Downs Creek)
20° 37' 54" (Kurinally)
20° 30' 4 i" (Coorundie)
20° 26' 40” (Bonnev Well)
133° 26' E.
134° 40' E.
134° 57' E.
134° 36' E.
134° 14' E.
134° 15' E.
134° 12' E.
Elongations of ot Argus and ot Tri. Aus.
Sun’s azimuth
Elongations of ot Pavonis and 9 Argus ,
Elongations ot Pavonis, ot Toucan, a Crucis, 3 Crucis
Elongations 3 Centauri, ot Centauri, and ot Eridani
Elongations of « Gruis and 3 Centauri
Elongations of ot Gruis and 3 Crucis
20° 56' 0” (south from Wycliffe Well)
Observations taken with Survey Department theodolite, No. 111.
January 31st, 1907.
W. R. MURRAY.
PLANS


GEOLOGICAL SKETCH PLAW
PETERMANN AND BLOOD'S RANGES
SURVEYOR GENERAL'S OFFICE. ADELAIDE. A.Vaughan. Photo-lithographer


GEOLOGICAL SKETCH PLAN
Of Country
WEST AND SOUTH-WEST OF BARROW’S CREEK
SURVEYOR GENERAL'S OFFICE. ADELAIDE. A.Vaughan. Photo-lithographer


GEOLOGICAL SKETCH PLAN
Of Portion of the
DAVENPORT AND MURCHISON RANGES
SURVEYOR GENERAL'S OFFICE. ADELAIDE. A.Vaughan. Photo-lithographer






