

B.W [?]
JOURNAL
OF A
VISIT TO THE LOYALTY, NEW HEBRIDES,
AND BANKS’ ISLANDS,
IN THE MELANESIAN MISSION SCHOONER THE
SOUTHERN CROSS,
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE WRECK OF THAT VESSEL.
BY THE
REV. B. Y. ASHWELL.
AUCKLAND:
PnOTTBD BY W. C. WILSON, “ NEW-ZEALA.NDBR” OFFICE.
1860.




JOURNAL
OF A
VISIT TO THE LOYALTY, NEW HEBRIDES,
AND BANKS' ISLANDS,
IN THE MELANESIAN MISSION SCHOONER THE
SOUTHERN CROSS
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE WRECK OF THAT VESSEL.
BY THE
REV.B. Y. ASHWELL.
AUCKLANDs
MINTED BY W. C. WILSON, “ NEW-ZBALANDER” OBLIGE.
1860.




JOURNAL OF A VISIT,
BY THE REV. B. Y. ASHWELL,
TO THE LOYALTY, NEW HEBRIDES, AND BANKS’ ISLANDS, IN THE
MELANESIAN SCHOONER, THE “SOUTHERN CROSS,”
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE WRECK ON THAT VESSEL.
It will be necessary, in order to hare a correct view of the nature of the
work among the Melanesian Islands, to classify them.
First —The dangerous; or where risk is incurred in visiting.
Secondly —Those where the natives are in a wild, savage state; but
who are acquainted with the Mission vessel, and some advance towards a
friendly communication has been made.
Thirdly —Those with whom a friendly intercourse has been established;
the parents having committed their children to the Bishop to be taken to
spend the summer months in New Zealand for instruction.
My Journal refers more particularly to the last two classes of Islands.
With respect to the first class, the manner of visiting is as follows:
The whale-boat is manned with four good rowers. The Bishop and Rev.
J. C. Patteson keep a good look out whilst approaching the island. The
natives having previously shewn their willingness for communication by
lighting fires and calling. If, as the boat approaches, a part of them
retire into the bush with their bows and arrows, and send their women and
children away, it is a bad sign—mischief is intended;—but if all remain,
together, the Bishop and Mr. Patteson generally swim through the surf to
the beach, leaving the boat at a short distance—the risk being lest the
boat touching the shore, the natives might detain it for the sake of the
iron, which they are anxious to obtain. After the party have landed,
they distribute fish-hooks, beads, &c,, to the chiefs, exchange names,


write them down, &e. After staying;® short time, they swim bach to the
boat: thus an intercourse is begun. These preliminary visits are some-
times perilous. I know of two instances in which they were shot at—one
at Santa Maria, the other at Malllcollo,—but a kind Providence has
always kept them from harm.
The’seoond class, some of which I have visited, are to be approached
with caution. But very little danger is incurred, although the natives
are’wild—cannibals—and mostly, fighting with one another. They know
the Mission vessel, and that Pisopi ( i . c. Bishop) is their friend.
The third class are those friendly, which can he visited at any time, and
are prepared for Missionaries. In the preceding voyage above sixty
•islands were visited, by the Bishop and Mr. Patteson, and about forty
Melanesian scholars were brought to the Institution at Kohimarama, near
Auckland,“for the summer months,
I now-proceed with my Journfd.
April 282/i, 1860.-—,After the Bishop had commended ns to the pro-
tecting care of our Heavenly Father, we went from the chapel to the
schooner, the Southern Cross , a vessel of about seventy tons, admirably
.fitted up for the boys. Our party consisted of, the Eev, J. C. Patteson,
Messrs. Kerr and Dudley, members of the mission, myself, New Zealand
Native Teacher, school-boy from my station, and thirty-seven Melanesian
scholars, viz., six from Solomon Isles, twenty-one, from Banks’ Isles, four
from Loyalty Island, six from New Hebrides.
April 29*6, Sunday.—r After service on hoard, .wo -lost sight of the
shores of New Zealand at Cape Brett. The wind increased to a gale. All
the boys were very sick; but cadi bad his hammock and many comforts
on board. The gale continued a whole week, .and-wo -were-obliged to
Hie-to.with close-reefed sails; it was not till
May 7th —That the merry laugh of the Melanesian boys was heard,
and that they again ventured on deck. During this .gnle the sea was
running*very high, and as I observed an expression of fear on the face of
the Mew Zealand Teacher, I said to him “Nana te moana” (“the sea is
His”). These three words were of great comfort during our fearful
shipwreck. With regard to the Melanesians, I must say I never met with
a more cheerful, good-tempered, happy set of boys; although from several
Islands, each of a different language, there was no .quarrelling as among
English hoys. Their love to their Teachers is quite remarkable: X think
they, would do anything for. Mr. Patteson, who speaks the language of
nearly all of them. ,
On May 11th, we fell in with the. S. E. trades, -and in the evening were
22° .13’-E,, long.>l6B ° 56’,, and on. Saturday,. ,
Map j.2th, we were off Nengone, one of the coral islands of the
Loyalty Group, where we landed at 8 a. in., and proceeded immediately to


the Mission station of the Rev; Mr. Creagh, of the London Missionary
bociety, where we received a most hearty welcome. They were in great
affliction, having just buried their youngest child. The devoted Earatonga
native teacher, Mark and his companion, were the first to carry the Gospel to
the degraded cannibals of these Islands. They were protected, under God,
■by a great chief, who would not give them up to the heathen priests; and
■alter his death his son Nysohim. took care of them. In the meantime the
.) ven ot the Gospel was silently working, and, e’er long, a great number
■received the truth. About this time the Bishop of Ndw Zealand visited
■the islands, and the people desiring a missionary, lie sent the Rev. W.
iMinil and his wife, who soon acquired a knowledge of their language
If * , of the Scriptures. A large chapel was built, and
the Word of God grew and was multiplied.” A short time after this
'the Bon don Missionary Society sent out missionaries, who, on arriving at
Nengone, found fb» the Rev. Mr. Nihill h a dxheen,,remo,v.6d».V,death
His widow remained with them till the return of the Bishop, who has
never re-oocupied the station, although repeatedly requested to do so. I
was much pleased with the congregation here on the Sunday: between
dOO and 000 natives were assembled in the chapel, all clothed, and clurino-
■service the greatest attention prevailed ; the singing was excellent, and my
heart was filled with gratitude to God, while hearing these so lately
heathen, singing the praises of the Triune Jehovah. After service we
accompanied Mr. and Mrs. Creagh to their hosnitable home. Whilst
-conversing on the nature of the work, I observed that the whole weight of
the service rested on the missionary, which must be very fatiguing, whilst,
among the New Zealanders, a part was borne by them, and they enioved
the responses. My Christian friends thought with me that responses
would enliven the services, and were better adapted for converts
from heathenism. We enjoyed social prayer and communion with each
other in a strange land, and at the request of my Christian brother, I told
000 natives of iNengone what God had done for New Zealand, he inter-
preting for me. They were exceedingly interested, and on our leaving we
iomid piled up presents of yams, too, cocoanuts, &o. Being Sunday we
-did not like to take them, but left them, for the Native Teachers of the
island, who took them away on the following morning. While returning
to our vessel more than 500 natives lined the beach, crying “Aloha!
aloha!'' («. e. “Love! lovel”) which is also the meaning of the New
Zealand The Rarotonga teachers had taught the Nengonese this
mode of salutation. The New Zealand and Earatonga languages are so
similar that the New Zealand Teacher could talk with Mrs. Creagh who
was a Miss Bugacott, from Earatonga. What struck me was the great !
difference at once discernable in the heathen .and Christian natives as they
■stood together; the former naked, with painted bodies, and weapons in
•their hands,; the latter clothed, and the countenance altogether different
It is most remarkable how the reception of the Gospel changes and softens
a fierce and savage expression. This beautiful coral Island is considered
healthy: groves of cocoa nut and other tropical trees render the scenery good
but it is tame when compared with the New Hebrides and Bank’s Isles
temperature about 74° Farm; length of island, about 20 miles; breadth!
30 miles,; population, between ©OOO and ?00U, two-thirds of whom are


Christians. There are eleven whites on the island besides the mission-
aries. We said farewell to our hind friends and sailed for Llfu Island,
about 60 miles north of Nengone, where Christianity has made great pro-
gress. It is to be regretted that the French claim these Loyalty Islands
as appendages to New Caledonia, and have sent a Eomish priest to Lifu,
quite against the consent of the majority of the people. Ihe wind was
contrary, and blowing a gale; we could not reach the isle, although
three attempts were made, therefore, to the regret of all, we were obliged
to continue our course without visiting it. We called, however, at the
beautiful island Toka, 20 miles from Nengone. Mr. Patteson was anxious
to seek a stray sheep, one of the Melanesian scholars, a young man who
had not been going on satisfactorily ; the lost one was found, and accom-
panied us to the vessel. Most of the Natives of this Island are well dis-
posed to Christianity. The principal chief of Lifu, “John Cho,” had
been to New Zealand with the Bishop, who baptized him there as well as
the daughter of the principal chief of Toka to whom he was married .after
tbeifi'baptisns. This union strengthened Christianity both at Lifu and
Toka' and John is using his influence to keep the people from Popery,
We now sailed for Mai (or the Three Hills), an Island dreaded by the
sandal-wood traders, but where the Mission vessel is always most warmly
welcomed, and where the Bishop is anxious to form a Station which shall
take in many of the neighbouring Isles.
May 16/A. —Trade winds light ; thermometer 80 ° . S. Latitude
20 ° 34” E. Longitude 167 ° 50”. Lightning vivid.
May llth. —lnstead of the trades we had a strong westerly wind.
Sighted Erroraanga, where the Missionary Williams was murdered. We
also passed the S.W. coast of or Sandwich Island, which has a bad
name, nevertheless two Samoan teadhers are living here. This beautiful
Island is richly wooded to the summit of its lofty hills, which are from
2000 to 3000 feet in height. Fearful atrocities have been committed here
by the sandal-wood traders, one of which I will mention After pur-
chasing a cargo of sandal-wood and getting it conveyed to the vessel they
sailed away without paying the Natives, consequently when another vessel
visited the Island one of their men was murdered by the Natives. To
revenge this, several vessels joined their crews, and after firing upon the
Natives followed them to a cave where they had taken refuge with then-
women and children. These white savages piled up brushwood at the
mouth of the cave, fired it and smothered them all. Can we wonder that
they are not willing to receive the white Missionary. Phe Bishop has
landed here several times. In the evening we reached Mai, where we had
to leave four Melanesian boys. When we landed, the cry was “the
vessel of Pisopa, and our children.” We had a most hearty welcome, the
excitement was very great, running from the villages, assembling to see
their children and the white Missionaries, bringing yams, cocoa-nuts, &c.
At last the Chief, by smacking his lips, enforced silence, and Mr. Patteson,
in their own language, pointed to the “ Lamb of God who taketh away
the sins of the world.” Mr, Dudley, who understands the language
of Mai, also addressed them ; the greatest silence and attention prevailed,


atul when we all knelt in prayer with these poor heathen, who, for the first
time, bent the knee to the true God, I could say “ My soul doth magnify
the Lord and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour” • it was an
earnest that these Isles should see the “salvation of our God.” The
Natives were anxious that one of us should remain with them, and when
wo told them that possibly a Mission Station might be established among
them they were much pleased. At 11 p.m. we reached our vessel; I felt
thankful for this happy day.
May 19 th. —“ Sunday services on board, with Europeans and Melane-
sians, our little schooner ran close to the shore of Tasiko where, with a
glass, we counted more than 100 natives, in the short space of about half
a mile, who were calling us to visit them, but it being Sunday the boat
Was not lowered as no one could speak their language, and we feared least
any might be tempted to trade on the Sabbath. From Tasiko we crossed
to Arabrim (where there is an active volcano), Lupavi, Whitsuntide, and
Aurora, islands of from 20 to 30 miles in length. Of the scenery, I can
only say the grandeur and beauty of creative goodness here, is over-
powering. Never did I witness elsewhere, such a rich verdure, very much
superior to Sierra Leone, although its scenery is grand: the most beautiful
parts of New Zealand are tame when compared with these splendid
islands 5 the rugged broken character of Whitsuntide and Aurora, with
their immense chasms, so densely wooded that no naked rock nor spot of
earth can be seen, groves of lofty cocoa-nuts, the beautiful bread-fruit
tree, the jack-fruit, and palms, lofty and huge banians forty yards in cir-
cumference was so magnificent a sight, that we felt sad to think that
“ only man was vile,” but when once the Gospel has won its way, how
Wonderful the change. Grace and Nature can rejoice together,
" Oh God, Oh good beyond compare,
If thus thy meaner works are fair—
If thus thy beauties gild the span
Of ruined earth, and sinful man—
How glorious must that mansion ho
Where thy redooemod shall dwell with Thee.”
As our little vessel ran along the eastern side of Aurora, on a fine
moonlight night, we heard the voices of the Natives, and the beating, of
their tom-toms, over, perhaps, some cannibal feast, which gave a painful
and vivid reality of our proximity to, the darkness of heathenism. My
soul yearned that these our poor benighted brethren might soon rejoice
in the beams of the Sun of Righteousness.
May 23rd.— In the morning we landed at the north end of Aurora, and
left two of the Melanesian boys. Mr. Patteson addressed the Natives, all
of whom were armed, and looked very wild : they were attentive. Afc
4 p.m. we drew near Mara Lava, an island about 12 miles in circum-
ference, with a population of 600; it consists of a large volcanic hill
about 1800 feet above the sea, very beautiful; here we landed two other
of the scholars, and again Mr. Patteson addressed the Natives, speaking
of the love of Christ, and shewing them that war and bloodshed was
wrong, this they all acknowledged $ every man and bey was armed with


bow and arrow; they wefe'rather noisy and clamorous, hut when Mr.
Patteson addressed them, quite quiet. They wanted the vessel to go’fer
Santa Maria in search of a boy, whom some sandal-wood trader had carried
away and left there. They feared he had been murdered and eaten, the
poor father was very earnest in his entreaties.
May 2 ith. —At 6 a.m. we came to the extent of our voyage, Amota;- a”
little Paradise, where the first Mission Station in Banks’ Islands was
formed ; about 8 a.m. we landed, the Natives shewed great joy at seeing
Mr. Patteson, and when we' began to land the boards for the Mission
House, and they knew that he and Mr. Dudley would remain- with them’
their joy was increased ; some carried the boards from the vessel, and’
others brought food of all sorts, bread fruit, co'ooas, yams, &c., for which
they would not receive any payment. When the house was landed, we*
sailed over to Vanilo Lava, a large and beautiful island only eight miles
distant, where the Bishop diseovered a short time ago a splendid harbour
which he named Port Patteson, here we let go our anchor. The scenery
most grand, hills 2000 feet high sending forth volumes of smoke from hot
springs 1 at their summit, the sides richly clothed with verdure ; two rivers-
run into the harbour, and a sandy beach nearly surrounds it. We filled’
our water-casks, these friendly Natives- standing- anxious to assist. These;
and those of Amota, were the only unarmed Natives which we saw. A
way for the gospel has been prepared under God, by our Missionary
Bishop, and a groat work commenced. The people of vanno Lava were
most anxious that one of us should remain with them, and each was
invited. This island is decidedly unhealthy. Elephantiasis is very preva-
lent ; there are also many Albinoes. Miasma prevails during the rains'
when the low lands are flooded. Thermometer in the shade 85 ° . On
AVhitsunday we partook of the Lord’s Supper on board the schooner, after
which, we all accompanied Mr. Patteson to the villages on the hcaen,
where he preached to and catechised the Natives, inviting them also to
ask questions ; all seemed interested, and again intreated for a Missionary.
I believe we all prayed most earnestly that a Pentecostal blessing might bo
given to these islands ; this was a day to be remembered, and which wo
closed with social prayer.
Whit Monday. —Messrs. Patteson and Dudley crossed iu a whaleboat
to Amota to see to the erection of the house. The Natives were very
anxious for barter, crying “Talle, Talle,” i.e., Iron, Iron; another cry
was “ Sim, Sim,” i.e,, empty bottles, which they break up and use for
shaving. They brought cocoa-nuts, yams, coral, bows and arrows, &c.,
&c., for sale. The wind springing up, but being light and against us, we
had to heat, and it was evening before we could near Amota.
Tuesday, we landed ; the house was nearly finished ; the Natives had
unroofed some of their own houses in order that the Mission house might
soon be covered, about 100 of them were at work. I walked alone, to
several villages, and everywhere received a welcome and their fruits offered
me. This lovely island is equal to Aurora in beauty; from the Mission
Station you see five islands—Vanna Lava., Bligh’a Island, Vanucollo,"


Santa Maria and Mara Lava ; the site of the Mission is well chosen, it is
surrounded by bread-fruit, cocoa, and jack-trees, and a hugh banian, which
we measured, was forty-five yards in circumference, a most lovely spot and
well shaded. Thus I had the privilege of seeing the first Mission station
in Banks’ island commenced. In the evening, Mr. Patteson preached to
the people, who were very attentive. Oh ! may the blessing of God
descend on the labours of his servants, and the leaven of the Gospel go
forth from this place, till all the isles of these seas shall rejoice in the
name of Jesus, and the faithful Missionary say,
“ I love the name of Jesus,
Immanuel, Christ, the Lord j
Like fragrance on the breezes,
His name abroad is poured.”
After mutual prayer, commending one another to the care of God, we
said farewell to our Christian brethren. More than half of the Melanesian
boys had been restored to their respective Islands, the remainder stayed with
Mr. Patteson at Amota, as the vessel will not go to the Solomon’s Islands
till the next voyage. Our party now consisted of Mr. Kerr, my two
Natives, and myself. Mr. Patteson requested us to call at Erromanga to
see if any of the Scotch Missionaries were in want of anything, or, if out
of health, they were welcome to a passage to New Zealand. The Rev.
Mr. Gordon, of Erromanga, told me how much he and his brethren felt the
disinterested kindness of the Bishop, whom he looked upon as a father in
the Gospel. After several days of light winds it was not till
June G ih, Tuesday, that we came in sight of Erromanga, a beautiful
coral isle ; we ran along its rugged coast, richly covered with trees,
amongst others the much desired sandal-wood, which has been the source
of so much misery to the poor Natives. One instance, which occurred a
few months ago, was related to me by Mr. Gordon. A man named Hears,
purchased from the Natives a quantity of sandal-wood ; he crossed to
Tate, a neighbouring island about fifty miles distant, and procured 200
islanders to accompany him to Erromanga, to carry his sandal-wood to the
beach ; he did not provide food for them, hut told them they must rob the
cultivations of the Erromangas. He accompanied them with his musket,
they destroyed four or five Villages, and took their food. After some
time a large party of Erromangas attacked the Tate natives and drove
them from their isle with the European ; many lives were lost on both
sides. Mr. Gordon assured me that this had hindered the reception of the
Gospel j many accustomed to attend the Sabbath and week day services
had been driven away, as those Villages which had been destroyed were
near the Station. They were now prejudiced against and determined to
resist the Gospel. One chief called a feast on the Sabbath in order to
desecrate it; mark the sequel, God removed two of his children by death
on that Sabbath, he acknowledged the finger of God, and said he could
not fight against him. We received a most he,arty reception from Mr.
Gordon ; the hours flew away in social chat and mutual prater. My
Native Teacher told the Erromangas of the progress of Gospel in
New Zealand, which interested them much. Mr. Gordon said that the


heathen Priests were doing all they could to oppose them, charging them
with being the authors of the epidemic which had prevailed there so fearfully,
and also at the neighbouring island of Tanna, where the Rev. Mr. Paton,
was labouring ; he had lost his wife and child about twelve months ago,
and as yet he has had no success to cheer him in his lonely labours ; the
Natives threatened to kill him, nothing softened by the sorrow which they
saw he suffered by his bereavement. The Bishop, in his last trip, begged
him to come to New Zealand for a change, but he declined, as he said he
was getting on with the Tannese language, and ho hoped ere long an
impression would he made. He had lately been joined by the Rev,
N. Heutson and wife. Very different is the account of the work at
Aneiteum, where the Rev. Messrs. Inglis and Geddie are labouring.
This island is a short distance from Tanna, and nearly the whole of the
people have received the Gospel. It was nearly midnight, before wc
parted, being moonlight; our Christian brother accompanied us to the
scene of the murders of the Missionaries, Williams and Harris, ho gave me
the following particulars :—Mr. Harris attempted to go inland, which the
Natives opposed, as there was some ceremony about to be performed j he
thought them friendly because they had given them cocoa-nuts shortly
before; ho persevered in going, was struck on the head, staggered to tin
river near tho beach where he fell; Mr. Williams hearing his cry, wont tc
see, and was met by the murderers, who threatened him—he fled toward
the boat, and was murdered on the beach. The Natives seeing the dis-
tress of the Europeans in the heat were quite softened, and if the bodiei
had been demanded then, they would have been given up ; this is Mr
Gordon’s account. The Bishop, with a Samoan teacher, was tho first t<
visit this blood-stained Isle after the murder j when he arrived at tin
spot they knelt down and prayed that the blood of the martyrs mlgh
make a path for the Gospel. We reached the vesselat 2 a.m.
June B th. —A strong westerly wind with a high sea, wind fair.
June 9 th and 10 th. —Gale continued. On this day we saw Norfoll
Island, but could not land, as we intended, the surf being too heavy. 1
felt much disappointed, having a great desire to see the state of the Pit-
cairn Islanders, who have had so much done for them. Tho gale con-
tinuing, we passed the Island, at 7 p.ra.
June 11 th. —The .anniversary of tho foundation of tho Melanesiai
Mission ; vve had special prayer for a blessing upon this great work. Wi
did not forget our friends at Amota.
June 18 th, 2 a.m,—Off the Three Kings, nearly a calm. We thankei
God for bringing us again in sight of our adopted land.
June 1 ith, —Very light wind at 4 p.m., whilst off Wangaroa the win<
changed to N.E. We could not weather Cape Brett; went out to sea a
we feared being too near the land ;it had now increased to a gale, Al
felt dispirited, as we had hoped (D.V.) to have been in Auckland the nes
day. Dark tempestuous night, gale very heavy.


June IB th. —Gale increasing, a very high sea. Our little vessel was
almost under bare poles, rising beautifully to the billows, and shipping but
little water. The constant rolling gave me much headache. I felt de-
pressed, but was much comforted by David's prayer, Psalm 6, v. 2.
“ Have mercy on me 0 Lord, for lam weak.” I felt weak in body and
weak in spirit; anxiety respecting my family, gloomy forebodings.
W ant of faith did not render my situation amidst this gale more com-
fortable. Great prostration of bodily strength, owing to want of sleep for
several nights made me feel really ill. The gale fearfully increased,
accompanied by thunder, lightning, rain, and hail; it was a dreadful night.
Ob ! how delightful to feel safe in a Father’s hand.
June lUh. —Earned In torrents, 4 a.ra., which caused the sea to go
down ; and at 12 we were becalmed. 2 pm., a Northerly breeze sprung
up, and we hoped to be in Auckland on the Monday.
June lltli. —Sunday, I had morning service with the sailors, and a
service with my Natives. I felt exceedingly oppressed with a sense of
impending calamity ; my anxiety was respecting my home, and district,
I reasoned with myself on the sin and folly of meeting troubles half way,
and dishonouring God by unbelief. I felt great comfort from that beauti-
ful verse :
“ Renew my will from clay to day,
Blend it with Thine, and take away
Whatever makes it hard to say—
Thy will he done.”
which remained on my mind the whole of that eventful day. The wind
continued fair, and 4.50 we passed the “Poor Knights”. The account of
the close of this day I copy from the Newspaper New Zealander , of
June 23rd, the following are extracts :
"At 4.50, we sighted the Poor Knights, having passed close to leeward
of them hauled to S.E., in order to pass Eastward of the “ Hen and
Chickens.” About this time the wind backed to the N.E. and increased to
a gale, with very thick weather and rain. At 10 p.m., we were surprised
by the report of “ land on the lee bow” ; by press of sail we were provi-
dentially enabled to weather a small islet, which, from the course we had
made, we supposed to be the Eastern Chicken. We now stood on
H.E. by S. intending when half way to Cape Rodney to wear and
stand to the Northward, having the harbour of Wangarei under our
lee, the wind now blowing a violent gale. At 1 a.m. land on the
lee how. About Patuwa Eiver we were to the Northward, the
wind shifting S.E. and blowing with redoubled violence soon after
we were round. In about half an hour we again saw land on the
lee bow, the South Head of Ngungum bay ; standing on we made
the Islet at the North Head of Ngungum bay, the same Islet we bad seen
at 10 p.m. ; the weather being so thick the hills were not visible. Finding
we could not weather that Islet, the helm was put up to to leeward ;
having again lost sight of land, thinking we had accomplished our purpose,
the ship’s head was brought up to North) we then took the ground oti.


wnae appeared happily to be a spot somewhat sheltered from the full
violence of the sea—the rang'e of our vision being the end of the breakers.
Imagining deep water to be beyond them, and with the rising tide the
ship being gradually brought nearer, we were alarmed lest we should be
carried right over and founder in the deep water beyond, for in less than
half an hour the surf had completely filled the ship, and we were all obliged
to take to the rigging. The masts most providentially not having been
cut away, although repeated attempts had been made to do so. The boats
were soon washed away, and with them our last hopes of getting to the
shore, and from 2 a.m, till daylight we remained at the mast’s head in the
most dreadful suspense. As day dawned we discovered we were in a bay,
and near the high-water of its low sandy shore, which the darkness of the
gale prevented our seeing ; we were also gladdened by the sight of Euro ■
penn houses. By nine o’clock the tide had so far left us that we were
enabled to get a line to the shore ; and through the mercy of God, after
seven hours in the rigging, we were all drawn through the surf safely to
land. We received a hearty welcome and every kindness and assistance from
Capt. Stewart and his guests, and the Europeans at Ngunguru. The
gale had now somewhat abated. We would beg to call attention to the
following remarkable Providences in answer to prayer, any one link
wanting all must have perished. While all was being done on deck that
men could do to keep us from a lee shore, I called my Native Teacher
Tauiora into the cabin and we engaged in prayer, my prayer was that
“as our blessed Saviour had manifested His power in saving His disciples
from shipwreck in the sea of Galilee—Fils hand was not shortened that it
could not save, nor His ear deaf that He could not hear. That it would
now please Him to appear in our behalf and save the lives of all in the
vessel,” Now mark the answer — First, If the wind had not shifted to
S.E. wc should have boon on the rocky beach to the north of Patawa.
Secondly, When the sea was making a clean breach over the deck, had
the masts not been standing to fly to, nothing could have saved us ; the
reason why the masts were not cut away was, that the captain having for
some cause laid down the axe. it was not again to be found ; further,
when the captain and mate with knives in their hands wore about to out
the lanyards some unaccountable feeling prevented them, which was no
doubt the finger of God in answer to prayer. Thirdly, If we bad
grounded a quarter of a mile further northward we should have been on
the rocks of the Ngunguru river. In conclusion, we would earnestly beg
the attention of your readers to the fact that our gracious God manifests a
special Providence to the answer of Prayer. It is not in vain to trust In
Him.”
(Signed) B, Y. Ashwell,
Thos. Keek.
I have only to mention a few additional particulars. When the ship
struck, all the seamen cried “We are lost, farewell Sir.” Mr. Kerr came
into the cuddy and said “we must trust in God, nothing more can be
done.” In a quarter of an hour after striking, the cuddy filled, and we were
up to our waists in water. We now went to the main cabin which we were
soon obliged to leave, for a sea broke over us, extinguishing the lights and


filling the cabin. We feared being swept off the deck, but wont forward
and got a little shelter under the lee of the anchor; we were,*f however,
soon obliged to take to the rigging. My own mind was calm, much
strength and comfort was imparted from the hymn,
“ Just as I am without one plea,
But that Thy blood was shed for me,
And that Thou hidst me come to Thee,
Oh Lamb of God I como.
Just as I am and waiting not,
To rid my soul of one dark spot,
To Thee whose blood can cleanse each spot,
Oh Lamb of God I come.”
This I begged all to use as a prayer, and repeated it aloud, reminding
each one that our time in all probability was short. I was so cold that it
was with difficulty I held on to the rigging; Mr. Kerr helped me greatly;
we both felt the privilege of Christian communion, partiou'arly under such
circumstances ; after again speaking to the seamen a silence of three
hours ensued, when I spoke a few encouraging words to my poor Natives.
Oh ! how welcome was morning light. Taniora was the first to try to
get a rope on shore, but tire drawback from the ebb tide was so strong
that he was glad to swim back to the wreck. After waiting another hour,
the tide had gone out so far that he, with one of the sailors, again tried
and succeeded. Thus, through the mercy of God, we were all saved.
We all knelt down on the beach and thanked God for our wonderful
deliverance. After remaining two days at Ngunguru we went overland to
Wangarei, where we were kindly received and welcomed by R. H.
Aubrey, Esq., Resident Magistrate ; the next day, June 22, we sailed in
the “Janet” for Auckland, where we arrived at 11 p,m. Nothing could be
kinder than the manner in which we were received by our Bishop, who was
thankful that all our lives were saved.
June 29 th. —I arrived at my Station.
Ist. The object of this journal is to make known the progress of the
Gospel in these seas, and to entreat the prayers of all interested
in Mission work for its success.
2ndly. To declare the goodness of God in our deliverance from ship-
wreck, and to solicit subscriptions to repair the loss this Mission
has sustained in the wreck of the vessel.
B. Y. ASHWELL,
Taupiri Mission Station,
Waikato River,
1 New Zealand.
