

' I' • V' '
.vV''V/ .
.-.A >
J V ■-' V y iV”>
, ' ft i " t
.■•'#- ‘S’’? jp •$'5k£:&&9-.$$ ■%'.£ J-K
■vif'. 1 : 'ft
■V;'''" ft
S'. ;
»= y
r< s
-srft
JOURNAL &&
'ft> Nyftf
• v ; ft
> c/gm
01 . ft
!ft>
i
■&> V)
<mp
0. WidMALD.I#
" A «, »> / 4
.■ - V.
', V ’ T-fa? \'^
' J V '■"N-ta/rO
V V‘ v" v~






''•IWK'
SjL








Melbourne k


-lor UN" A I.
ON AN
EXPEDITION PROM PORT DENISON
TO Til K
GULF OF CARPENTARIA
AXJ) BACK.
■Brisbane:
PUBLISHED BT GEORGE SLATER, QUEEN STREET ;
MELBOURNE : ft, RQBERTSON.
PRINTED BT T. P. PUGH, BRISBANE.
MDCCCLXV.
J. G. MACDONALD,




f r»
• V 1 1
Hrs Excellency
(Seorge ‘gxrfoo, $.C.p.
GOVEBNOK OF QUEENSLAND,
WHOSE ENLIGHTENED AND LIBEEAL SUPPORT
HAS ALWAYS BEEN BESTOWED UPON ALL PROJECTS
LIKELY TO FURTHER THE INTERESTS,
OB ADVANCE THE SETTLEMENT,
OF THAT NOBLE COLONY,
THIS WORK
Is Respectfully Dedicated
BY HIS MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT,
J. G. MACDONALD.
* -




EREFACE.
This journal is published not fi’om any desire that I have to
be considered the maker of that great bore, a “ big book,” nor
with the idea that I can base upon my brochure any claim to
authorship ; but simply in the hope that the “ plain unvarnished
tale ” of my doings in the bush will afford a hint to those who
may hereafter follow my tracks in the search for new country*
I wish it to be distinctly understood that a small party properly
organised can do the work of exploring with greater certainty
and ease than a large one. Expensive equipment is unnecessary
and injudicious; the great object of an explorer being,—not
ostentatious parade of men and horses, requiring heavy supplies
to be carried with them, and abundant grass and water at every
camping-place,—but celerity of movement, for which a light
party—whose needs are small, who can pass rapidly over diffi-
culties of drought or flood, and mark the topographical features
of the country, without any necessity for delay to enjoy the “ fat
of the land,” or to mourn over the absence of it—are especially
adapted.


Everything herein contained was jotted down at the time and
place stated, and, though appearing somewhat in the rough, I
give it for what it is worth. The best recommendation of the
journal is, that it illustrates the chart of my route, upon which
the greatest reliance may be placed; for I have had it care-
fully checked off and verified, and the mapping has been
tested by acknowledged scientific authority.
As subsequent travellers may desire some information upon
the geological features of the country, I have taken the liberty
to add Mr. A. C. Gbegoey’s summary of its characteristics in
this respect.
The Meteorological Observations at Port Denison are
appended to indicate the nature of the climate in the north.
They were regularly taken at my own residence, and may be of
some slight value in the absence of any other accurate record.
The average of the year was compiled from the daily tables by
my friend, Mr. Smalley, the Government Astronomer of New
South Wales.
JOHN GEAHAM MACDONALD.
Adelaide Point , Port Denison,
February, 1865.


JOURNAL
August 11,1861*. —Left Adelaide Point at 6.80 a.m.,
and at 8.80 got to Salisbury Plains, distance twenty-
eight miles, at which place I overtook the pack-
horses. Started again at 9.45, and at 7.45 p.m.
reached Inkermann; distance from Salisbury Plains,
forty-five miles; total distance this day, seventy-three
miles.
August 12 to 16.—At Inkermann, preparing cattle
and drays to start for the Gulf.
August 17.—Left Inkermann at 10.30 a.m., and at
6 p.m. got to the Ilaughton. Distance this day,
forty-two miles.
August 18.—Left camp at 7 a.m., and halted one
and a-half hour at a lagoon near the Fanning Range
to rest the horses. Reached Messrs. Cunningham’s,
Rurdekin Downs, at 6.10 p.m. Distance this day,
forty-six miles.
August 19. —In consequence of some of the horses
having strayed, I did not start till 8 a.m., and at 5.10
p.m. I arrived at Allingham’s Creek, at cross roads.
Distance this day, thirty-four miles. At this place I
overtook No. 3 mob of cattle.
August 20.—Proceeded at 6.5 a.m. At 12.5 p.m
encamped at Stockyard Creek. Distance this day,
twenty-four miles.


August 21.—0 n the move at 5.45 a.rn. At 9.30
crossed Perry’s Range. At 11.45 got to Clark’s
Creek, at which place 1 overtook Messrs. Jardine’s
party, and halted to rest. At 1.10 p.m. started again,
and at 0.5 p.m. encamped at a lagoon near Stenhouse’s
cattle station. Distance this day, forty-three miles.
August 22.--Started at 6.15 a.m. At 10 halted at
Christmas Creek to rest. At 12.5 p.m. again pro-
ceeded, and at 4.5 encamped at a lagoon near Messrs.
Firth and Atkinson’s. Distance this day, thirty
miles.
August 23.—Proceeded at 7 a.m., having been
delayed by shoeing horses. At 12.30 p.m. got to Old
Camp on Quartz Creek, at which place I intended
resting, but in this I was disappointed, in consequence
of there being no water. At 4.35 encamped at a lagoon
seven miles from M‘Kinnon’s station. Distance this
day, thirty-eight miles.
August 24.—Proceeded at 5.50 a.m. At 11 o’clock
halted to rest. Started again at 1.5 p.m., and at
5.45 got to Carpentaria Downs Station. Distance
this day, thirty-seven miles
August 25 to 30. —Engaged in station matters.
starting Point of Gxgrfittton.
August 31.—Carpentaria Downs, situate on eastern
bank of supposed River Lyud, but which situation
at present appears doubtful, as by observations taken
and kindly handed to me by Mr. Surveyor Richardson,
the position of the station appears thus: Latitude,
IS° 37’ 10” S. ; Longitude, 144° 3’30” E., showing it
to be different from what we had previously supposed.
From the position thus fixed I take my starting point.
Proceeded at 2 o’clock p.m., my party consisting
of Mr. Gr. Robertson, second in command; Robert
Bowman, horsekeeper ; Charley, an aboriginal black
boy of the Brisbane tribe; with seventeen horses, and
two months’ rations. Crossed the Lynd at 2.30;
in five miles crossed the Copperfield, and at 5.20


encamped on a western branch of it. Distance from
station, eight miles ; direction AV .
Sept. I.—Camp 1, situate on a branch of the Cop-
perfield. Proceeded at 6.45 a.m. At 8.15 made AAC
by S. three miles. At 9.5 W. by N. two miles, over
slightly broken country; then AV. one and a-half
mile to a spring creek; and at 1 p.m. AV. seven
miles, to a sandy creek, and encamped. Distance
this day, thirteen and a-half miles.
Sept. 2. —Camp 2, situate on right bank of Sandy
Creek. Proceeded at 7.30 a.m. At 9.15 made A\ .
by S., four and a-half miles, to broken country and
scrub, which necessitated our halting to ascertain the
best track, as our horses, being very heavily laden,
would not stand forcing through the scrub ; then SAV.
one mile, where I got a view, showing that I had a
dark, broken, scrubby ravine in my course. Returned
to party, and proceeded again at 11.30, and followed
down the ravine with some difficulty for two miles, at
which place it opened out for half-a-mile further, when
I found myself at the edge of an immense ravine, the
practicability of which, even for wallabies, I doubted.
I have named this ravine Torsach’s Glen, and as 1 do
not like retracing my steps, I inteed camping here, as
we can obtain sufficient water from holes in the rocks
for the horses by using the canvas bucket. Distance
this day, seven miles. Accompanied by Charley, I
proceeded to ascertain the best course. Steered SAV .
one mile through scrub ; followed the spur of a range
in a AVNAV. direction for two miles, until I was stop-
ped by its terminating abruptly. Prom this place I
got a view, and saw clear country to the westward, but
rather broken, probably quartz ridges, for which I
intend steering to-morrow by following down a glen
into which I noticed a passage. At six o clock
returned to camp.
Sept 3.—Camp 3, situate near Torsach’s Glen. In
consequence of the horses having strayed we did not
leave till 8.15 a.m. Made AV. by S. one mile, and
followed down the glen. At 10 o’clock SAV. four


Diiles, to a large deep sandy watercourse, in which
there were numerous oak and tea trees. At 10.30
came to quartz ridges, then changed my course to
WN W. one and a-half mile ; then over quartz ranges,
averaging WSW., till 3 p.m., when we came upon a
small spring, in which, by digging, we obtained suffi-
cient water for all purposes, and encamped. Distance
from last camp, about nineteen miles. After resting
an hour I, accompanied by Charley, ascended a high
range. At 5 o’clock, after some difficulty, obtained a
view. I saw a complete barrier of ranges and broken
country to the westward. Charley climbed a tree in
order if possible to get a further view, but said the
country was so bad it frightened him altogether.
“ Suppose we get in there,” said he, “ we never come
back again.” At 6.15 returned to camp.
Sept. 4.—Camp 4, situate at a spring. I, accom-
panied by Charley, started, steering NW. At 7.20
a.m. made four miles to a large watercourse, running
SW. through a gap in the range, and in which there
is plenty of water, with sandy channel about 150
yards wide. I have called this the Eobertson, in honor
of my partner, the Hon. John Eobertson, late Minister
for Lands, New South Wales. We then ascended a
range, from which I traced the course of the Eobertson
for one mile, running westerly till met by ranges,
where it turns WNW. for one and a-half mile, at
which place ranges and broken country interrupt a
further view, but I could see an apparent ojmning in
the ranges to the SW., through which I shall en-
deavour to obtain a passage. Eeturned to camp, and
led the party on to the Eobertson, at which place I
encamped, as there are plenty of green reeds on the
banks of the river for the horses, and I wish to have
the day before me in facing the ranges. To-morrow
I shall probably make the Eiver Gilbert, which, in a
straight line, I suppose to be not more than ten miles
from this. Distance from last camp, four miles.
Sept, s.—Camp 5, situate on right bank of the
Eobertson. Proceeded at 6.45 a.m. Followed down


the river one and a-half mile and crossed ; then over
ironbark ridges one mile, to a large creek, which I
had previously noticed joined the Kobertson below
where we crossed; then passed over miserable broken
country, of a sandstone formation. At 10.45 came
to a spring creek, with running stream ; watered the
horses and proceeded over almost impracticable glens,
both rocky and precipitous; in one of these the horses
had to jump from a shelf of rocks over six feet high.
At 1.15 p.m. made ten and a-half miles and struck
the Gilbert, at which place we had to follow the bed
of the river down, there being no practicable road on
either side. At 2 o’clock saw a strap lying partly
buried in the sand, and upon examining it found the
tree of a pack-saddle attached; maker’s name, “ Scar-
borough, Adelaide,” stamped on leather. I suppose
the saddle to be one of the articles left by Mr.
M‘Kinlay during his inward route from Carpentaria.
On the left bank of the river I noticed a gum tree
with a square patch taken out. lam rather surprised
that the natives have not interfered with the iron of
the saddle tree, as, judging from their tracks in the
vicinity, they must be rather numerous. Marked a
tree m, and proceeded down the river. At 3.15 made
three miles and encamped. Distance this day, fifteen
miles.
Sept. 6. —Camp 6, situate on left bank of the
Gilbert. Proceeded at 7.15 a.m., following the bed
of the river, and at 8.15 saw a creek coming in on
right bank, probably the spring creek which we
crossed in the ranges. At 8.80 banks becoming more
open, which enabled us iu places to leave the bed of
the river. At 12.15 p.m. river turned NE. by N.; at
1.30 WW. At 2 o’clock encamped on the left bank.
Distance this day by course of river, twenty miles. Of
the country over which I have travelled to-day there
is none available.
Sept. 7.—Camp 7, situate on left bank of Gilbert.
Proceeded at 6.45 a.m. At 7 o’clock passed a bluff
on right bank, the course of the river being NNAV.
b 3


.At 8.80 I left the party going down the river and
ascended a ridge, from which I can see a gorge, bearing
SE., through which I suppose the,waters of the
Robertson flow. At 9 o’clock made seven miles to
junction of a large watercourse, coming in on the
right bank of the river, which I suppose to be the
Robertson. Marked a gum tree mon the left bank,
opposite the junction, and proceeded with the party.
I now noticed the character of the river to change,
the banks being more thickly clad with trees, amongst
which the Leichhardt and fig were numerous, the
course of the river being NW. by N , but averaging
N. by W., till 1 o’clock, wßen we encamped. Distance
this day, seventeen miles. There is a mountain on
the right bank of the river, bearing SE. by S., which
I have called Mount Ross, after Andrew Ross, Esq.,
late of Brisbane. In the afternoon I sent Mr.
Robertson and Charley to Mount Ross, to get a view r
to the westward, and they report as follows :—“ As-
cended the mountain, from which cau» be traced a
large watercourse, distant about fifteen miles, the
direction of which appears to be about NW., and
coming first out of very broken country, which gradu-
ally gets more open until it becomes quite level; to
the NE. there is a range upon the right bank.”
Sept. 8. —Camp 8, situate on left bank of the
Gilbert. Proceeded at 6.40 a.m. In one and three-
quarter mile ridges close on the right bank, the river
running N. At 7.30 descried a number of natives,
who upon seeing us disappeared. We then crossed a
creek and followed the bed of the river down for one
mile, the banks being clear, without timber at this
point, but soon assume their old character. At 8.80
NW. by N., keeping out of the river to cut off a
bond; passing sw r amps, in which there are numbers
of ducks and other wild fowl. At 10.30 touched upon
an anabranch and followed it down for one mile, to
where it joined the main stream. A t 11.40 turned W.
by S., and at 1 o’clock came to a lagoon near the left
bank of river, where w r e encamped. Distance this


day seventeen miles. The country over which we have
travelled consists of open box flats, and in places
clear ridges, on which I noticed for the first time
triodia and salt bush growing together. The old
grass here has evidently been burned some time, as
the flats are getting green, and in places afford nice
feed for horses. I have also noticed to-day numerous
galars and cockatoo parrots. The only one of the
party who had previously been on this river has not
been able to recognise it, and he asserts positively
that the Gilbert is still 20 miles to the westward, but
his confidence in that opinion is becoming shaken.
Sept. 9. —Camp 9, situate on lagoon near left bank
of the Gilbert. Started at 6.40 a.m., following down
course of the river; in two miles crossed a watercourse
at its junction with an anabranch of the river. On
the left bank is a mountain, which I have called
Mount Single, after Mr. Henry Single, of Maitland.
At 8 o’clock passed three small lagoons, close to which
there were some clear round hills ; the course of the
river SW. by W. At 9 o’clock changed to NW. At
9.15 came to a large watercourse, at the junction of
which there is a splendid sheet of water. I have
called this the Langdon, after d. C. Langdon, Esq.,
J.P., of Ellendale, near Geelong. At 9.25 proceeded
down the river, crossing sandstone ridges for three
and a-half miles; the country now becoming more
open, but rather sandy for one mile, to where it im-
proves. At 11.45 crossed an anabranch. At 12.15
p.m. re-crossed, and halted 15 minutes to water horses.
At 12-40 passed a large lagoon under some stony
ridges. At 1.30 passed a number of natives, and
again crossed the anabranch, following down left bank
of river ; and at 2.30 camped. Distance this day, 24
miles. The country consists principally of box flats,
the first 15 miles over which we passed being the best.
The natives here appear rather inquisitive, and are
watching us from the opposite bank of the anabranch,
anxious apparently to come up.
Sept. 10.—Camp 10, situate on left bank of Gilbert.


In consequence of some of the horses having strayed,
we did not leave camp till 7.10 a.m. At this camp I
leave one of my favorite hacks, “Defiance,” on account
of his lameness, he having bruised his foot in crossing
the ranges. Followed down the left bank, and passed
over clear flats. At 10 o’clock made nine miles to
where we crossed the river at junction with the ana-
branch ; stony ridges coming close into the left bank ;
crossed to the right bank, the river becoming ap-
parently much wider. At 12.40 crossed an anabranch,
and at 1.40 made nine miles to a sw'amp, at which
place we encamped. Distance this day, 18 miles.
The country over which we have passed on this bank
is open and fairly grassed, similar to that which I have
seen on right bank of the supposed Lynd Eiver.
Sept. 11.—Camp 11, situate on right bank of
Gilbert. I buried some spare horse shoes. Proceeded
at 6.45 a.m., following down right bank. At 9.45
made nine miles, where we crossed the river. At
12.30 p.m. the country became very low, and subject
to inundations, the river here having several channels
and numerous anabranches. At 2.30 made sixteen
miles to a dry plain, where I encamped on the left
bank of an anabranch, a large watercourse coming in
on right bank of the Gilbert, the direction of which
was traced by Mr. Robertson and Charley, and which
I named the Byrnes, in honor of James Byrnes, Esq.,
J.P., Parramatta, N.S.W. Distance this day, twenty-
five miles. The river below the camp is running, and
considerably over half a mile in width.
Sept. 12.—Encamped, resting ourselves and horses,
Mr. Eobertson acting as cook in the pastry line.
Sept. 13.—Camp 13, situate on left bank of an ana-
branch of Gilbert. Proceeded at 6.40 a.m., passing over
plains two and a-half miles, to a large lagoon, near
which I saw a large native camp, with a round thatched
house, very neatly done. At 8.15 made two miles
WJN T W., having to vary our course in consequence of the
scrub being very thick. At 9.10 made three miles
WS W. At 10.30 W. by N., three and a-half miles, and


halted to adjust one of the packs. At 10.55 made one
mile to a watercourse, on the banks of which are pan-
danus trees. As I considered it doubtful whether we
should obtain water after leaving this within a reason-
able distance, w r e unpacked and rested the horses.
Proceeded at 12.15 p.m. WSW., and in one mile came
to thick scrub, in getting through which we had to
vary onr course WNAV. for two miles. At 1 o’clock
made W. by S. one and a-half mile. At 2 o’clock
three miles. At 3.10 WSW. three and a-half miles.
At 3.40 made two miles down a watercourse, passing
a swamp, in which there was grass ten feet high, and
near which we came upon a pond with a little water,
where we encamped. Distance to-day by these
courses, about twenty-five miles. I have called this
Pigeon Pond, from the great number of those birds
which have come here to water to-night. Charley
killed ten birds in two shots. There is not more than
three inches of water in the pond, and it has rather a
disagreeable taste, and a greenish color, from the
numerous wild fowl that frequent it. I find the horses
will not drink; but we are glad to put up with the
water with all its impurities, as I intend retaining that
which we have in the water bags as long as possible,
it being probable that we may require it more than
we do at present before we get a further supply. The
country over which we have travelled to-day consists,
with the exception of the first four miles, of poor
sandy soil, with scrub, quite unavailable; that near
the Gilbert consists of flat plains, fairly grassed.
Sept. 14. —Camp 14, situate on Pigeon Pond.
Proceeded at 6.30 a.m. At 7.10 made WSW. two
miles; at 8.15 four miles, skirting the scrub; at
9 o’clock two miles, to where we had to turn WNW.
for one mile. At 11 o’clock made W. seven miles, the
country becoming more open; at 11.30 three miles
to a small creek; followed it down W. by N. half a
mile, to where we found water and encamped. Dis-
tance this day, nineteen and a-half miles. Country
similar to that described in yesterday’s journal.


Sept. 15.—Camp 15, situate on right bank of a
creek, which I have called Astronomy Creek, on
account of one of the party volunteering a lecture on
astronomy. Proceeded at 7 a.m. SW., through open
scrub. At 8.30 made six miles, and crossed a water-
course, running WNW. At 11 o’clock made seven
miles to a fine chain of lagoons, and halted to rest.
Upon the bank of one of the lagoons I noticed a
number of fish lying, which had just been taken out
of the water by the natives. I have called these
Gray’s Lagoons, after Robert Gray, Esq., ot Ipswich.
Started again at 12.45 p.m. At 1.30 made two and
a-half miles to a w atercourse, in which there were
some large dry holes. At 1.40 crossed a dry creek,
running W. At 2.30 made two and a-half miles to a
swamp, where we encamped. Distance this day,
eighteen miles. The country passed over consists of
open scrub, wooded principally with tea and Severn
trees, the only clear parts being near the watercourses.
Sept. 10.—Camp 16, situate at a swamp. Pro-
ceeded at 6.40 a.m. At 8 o’clock made S.W. by W.
five miles to thick scrub, then turned W. by S. At
9.45 made five miles to a lagoon, near Avhich there are
ridges, grassed with triodia. At 10.15 came to a
river, which I suppose to be the Norman or Bynoe, in
wdiich there are large deep reaches of water. Ran it
up for one mile, to where we came upon a fine looking
native in the act of spearing a fish, and who did not
see us until we were within a few yards of him. He
appeared rather surprised for a few seconds, but
immediately seemed to gain confidence, for he coolly
advanced towards us a few feet, picked up his spears,
and walked away, looking back over his shoulder
at us. Charley, who at the time, I think, did
not believe in' my letting him pass, afterwards
expressed admiration of the native’s bearing, saying
he liked that fellow. Marked a tree si, and crossed
the river at a rocky ford, then up left bank. At 11.45
made three miles, averaging about SBW. ; then,
leaving the river, turned WSW., passing over scrubby


ridges. A t 8.10 made ten miles, at which place we
came to undulating rich country, some of the iinest I
have seen. At 4.15 made four miles to the Flinders,
ran it up for one mile, and there encamped. Distance
this day, thirty miles. The water here is quite salt,
being within the tidal influence, but we obtained water
(although rather brackish) for use in a creek near
the camp.
Sept. 17. —Camp 17, situate on right bank of
Flinders Fiver. Marked a tree m, and crossed the
river at a sandy ford. The river here is 300 paces
wide. Proceeded WSW., and at 10 a.m. made seven
miles over fine rich plains. At 10.10 crossed a water-
course, which I called Armstrong’s Creek, after Mr.
P. Armstrong, late of Greelong, and now of Queensland.
At 10.15 made half a mile, passing through a strip
of thinly timbered country. At 10.30 one mile to a
watercourse. At 10.40 plains extending N. and S. as
far as the eye can reach. At 12.45 p.rn. made seven
miles to a watercourse, at which I halted, and sent
Charley to look for water. He returned at 1.15,
having succeeded in finding some higher up the course,
in a rocky hole, one mile S. Upon moving up we
found a native camp, but the water being scarce -in
this locality, we took possession and pitched our tent.
Distance this day, sixteen and a-half miles. The
country over which we have travelled consists of fine
plains, which, however, in the wet season, must be
rather flat for sheep. Of the grasses I cannot give a
fair description, as there was scarcely a blade to be
seen, owing to the long drought and to their having
been recently burnt; but I imagine the country is
naturally heavily grassed, and that it would improve
much by stocking. Near our camp I observed a box
tree marked L, which I suppose to be one of poor
Leichhardt’s. It has evidently been cut a number of
years, and the mark is nearly grown out.
Sept. 18.—Camp 18, situate at a rocky pond. Pro-
ceeded at 6.30 a.m. ; made one mile through open
scrub. At 7.35 made two and a-half miles over fine


plains and a narrow belt of timber. At 7.45 crossed
a watercourse, running NE. At 8.30 made two and
a-half miles. At 9 o’clock one and a-half mile, passing
over country thinly timbered with broad-leaved box ;
then over line undulating plains. At 9.40 crossed a
watercourse, with large dry holes. At 10 o clock
made three and a-half miles. At 10.30 crossed
another large watercourse, with numerous reeds. In
one mile ascended table-topped ridges, apparently of
volcanic origin, being composed of scoria, on it a
frothy surface, rising abruptly from the plain about
forty feet. From the top of one of the hills I got an
extensive view. In this locality the scenery is truly
beautiful. I have called this Inverleigh, after a place
of that name in Victoria, which it closely resembles.
Proceeded again at 11, passing over stony ridges,
grassed with triodia. At 12 noon made three and
a-half miles, passing numerous conical-shaped ant-
hills, to a large creek, on which we halted to rest.
Proceeded again at 2.15 p.m., and at 3.30 made five
miles over similar country to last described. At this
stage I called a halt, to remove one of the packs.
Proceeded again at 3.40, crossing a rocky creek, with
a wide gravelly bed; and at 4.15 made two miles to a
■watercourse, in which there are some fine holes, and
encamped. Distance this day, twenty-two and a-half
miles. Direction, W. by S.
Sept. 19. —Camp 19, situate on watercourse. In
consequence of our not having a good camp, proceeded
at 645 a.m. Ascended a stony ridge, from which I
got a view of scrubby country to the westward, which
caused me to change my course to SW. At 8 made
three miles over triodia ridges; at 9.30 four miles
over similar country; at 10.20 three miles to a water-
course, then passing over fine plains. At 11 made
two miles to a large watercourse, bearing extensive
flood marks, and upon the right bank of which we
encamped. Distance this day, twelve miles. Direc-
tion, SW. In making up my bearing and dis-
tances, I bring myself to a point about two miles


south of Landsborough’s track, and four miles east
of the Leichhardt River; but as I have no means of
taking observations, my calculations are made by
dead reckoning, consequently I may be a little out.
Sept. 20.—Camp 20, situate on right bank of large
watercourse, a tributary of the Leichhardt. Pro-
ceeded at 6.40 a.m., and crossed watercourse; at
this point its character is similar to that of the Nogoa
River; then SW., over fine, rich plains, with salt
bush. At 8.50 made six and a-half miles, to where
we struck the Leichhardt, which is here a fine-looking
river, beautifully shaded by drooping tea, Leichhardt,
and other trees; then up the stream about SSW. for
nine miles, to a stony ford, where there was some fine
green grass, and encamped. Distance this day, fifteen
and a-half miles. Accompanied by Charley, I crossed
the river, and proceeded in a westerly direction,
passing over fine rich plains, of chocolate soil, and
returned to camp at 5.40 p.m. The country over
which we have travelled to-day consists of fine rich
plains, the varieties of the grasses on which are
numerous.
Sept. 21. —Camp 21, situate on right bank of
Leichhardt River. Proceeded at 6.80 a.m. Leaving
Mr. Robertson in charge of party, with instructions
to go up the western bank of the river, I, accompanied
by Charley, took a southerly direction, over fine
rich plains. At 8.20 made six miles, and touched
upon a watercourse, in which there was a fine
rocky lagoon. At 9.15 made three and a-half miles
over country similar to that last described; then
passing through a belt of timber, at 9.30 made one
mile to a watercourse, on the right bank of which I
marked a gum tree m- Proceeded at 9.40, and at 10
made one mile SSE. up watercourse, passing a belt of
boree scrub. At 11 o’clock made three and a-half
miles over the finest plains, with a great variety of
grasses, quite equal in richness to the far famed Cul-
linlaringo and Pernlees stations on the Nogoa River.
Next through belts of boree scrub, one and a-half


mile, to the top of a thinly timbered low ridge, from
which I got a view of the surrounding country, which
consisted of plains, extending from NE. to N., and
westerly and southerly to SE.; marked a tree m, and
proceeded at 11.50, in a westerly direction, over stony
country, for one mile; then over level plains for two
and a-half miles, to a belt of timber; and at 1.15
made one and a-half mile over plains to the river, on
the right bank of which I marked a gum tree m- The
river here has not the same character as it bears lower
down, the trees not having the same foliage, nor is the
channel so well watered. We crossed, and proceeded
upwards for half a mile, to where I found Mr.
Eobertson and the rest of the party encamped.
He reports as follows : —“ Course of river averaging
SW. by S. from camp 21 for six miles, to where we
touched upon a splendid sheet of water. Were it
not for the banks bein£ so steep, this would be a
capital site for a station. Next proceeded on for four
miles, the river still holding lai ge reaches of water;
for five miles further to the camp, where there are
only occasional ponds.” Distance by river, fifteen
miles. The country over which I have travelled
to-day consists of fine, rich, undulating plains, beiilg
some of the finest sheep country I have seen in
Queensland.
Sept. 22. —Camp 22, situate on left bank of Leich-
hardt Eiver. Proceeded at 6.15 a.m., W., over fine,
rich, slightly undulating plains. At 8 made four miles
to a watercourse. At 10 seven miles over similar
country to that last described; then passing through
a belt of box timber for one mile, again came to well
grassed plains. In one mile crossed a large, deep, dry,
sandy watercourse, shaded by Leichhardt and other
trees, from the character of which I should not think
that it is well watered; on the left bank marked a tree ji-
lts direction here appears to be NNE. Proceeded
ao-ain at 11.20. At 12.10 made three miles over fine
rich plains to a watercourse, in which there was a
pond, and encamped. Distance this day, 16 miles.


I have called this Consolation Creek, in consequence
of one of the party being of opinion that nine of the
horses will shortly knock up. At this camp Mr.
llobertson shot a pigeon of a kind I had never pre-
viously seen —a bronze-wing, with mauve colored
breast, light green back, slate colored body, a long
tail tinged with green, and a crest of black feathers four
inches long. It measured from beak to tip of tail 12
inches, and across the wings 18 inches.
Sept. 23. —Camp 23, situate on the right bank of
Consolation Creek. Started at 6.20 a.m. At 8.40
made seven miles to a shallow watercourse. At 10.50
seven miles further to a fine river, which I suppose to
be the Gregory, and which at this point is divided into
two channels, one of which has a rapid stream of clear
water. The country near the river is thinly timbered
with bauhenia, stunted box, broad-leaved Moreton Bay
ash, blood wood, and acacia. The banks of the river
are lined with pandanus and cabbage tree palms.
I noticed, also, a line of large dead tea trees. Crossed
river, and halted on left bank to rest. I, accompanied
by Charley, went out in a westerly direction. After
passing through a belt of timber extending one mile
back from the river, came upon fine plains, thinly
wooded with stunted box, excorecaria, and terminalis;
then turned in a northerly direction for one mile, and
returned to resting place; marked a tree m on the
left bank of the river, and proceeded, with the party
down the river. In one mile the two streams join,
forming a fine reach of water in a wide channel,
the banks of which are thickly lined with pandanus.
Then made by river MW. one mile, E. by IN’,
half a mile, then IST. one mile, at which point we
formed our twenty-fourth camp. Distance this day,
seventeen and a-half miles. The country over which
I have passed may be thus described: —Fourteen
miles to the river fine rich plains, on which are the
most fattening grasses; amongst them I noticed
salt bush, roley poley, and barley grass. The country
on this side of the river is of a similar description,


with the exception of that near the bank, which is
rather sandy, and not so richly grassed as it is
further away.
Sept. 24.—Camp 24, situate on left hank of Gregory
Eiver. Proceeded at 6.30 a.m., following down the
course of the Eiver; made N. one mile, NE. by E. half
a mile, N. two miles; then, leaving party, turned NV.,
over fine plains. At 8.20 came to a large watercourse,
running NE., with a wide, dry, sandy bed, having
numerous gum trees on its banks. I suppose this to
be Mr. Landsborough’s Macadam Creek. I followed
it down for a quarter of a mile, and came to a large
waterhole, at which I noticed numerous flock pigeons;
then turned W. by N. for one mile, over fine plains,
and from thence NE. to the river, and joined my
party. Mr. Eobertson reports the river as “ run-
ning in a northerly direction to this point. At
8.30 made two and a-half miles, to where the river
divides. At 9.40 four miles. At 10.5 crossed a
large watercourse, having been delayed by one of the
horses falling into a hole. At 10.30 made one mile.”
We then proceeded down the river. At 11 made
one and a-half mile, to where the banks become clear
about 40 feet above the level of the water, with
plains on each side. At 11.30 we made NW. one
and a-half mile, to a beautiful site for a station, where
the banks of the river are high, with clear thinly
timbered plains on both sides. There is a splendid
reach of water (the northern end of which is accessi-
ble), shaded by drooping tea, Leichhardt, and other
beautiful trees; a clump of prettily grown broad-
leaved Moreton Bay ash stands on each side of the river.
As the day was rather sultry, I halted to rest in the
bed of the river, and marked a tree on the left bank
m- Proceeded downwards at 2.30 p.m. by the course
of the river, and sent Mr. Eobertson and Charley
down the right bank. At 3 made NNAV. one and
a-half mile. At 3.50 NW. by W. three and a-half
miles, to a shallow anabranch. At 5 made two and
a-half miles, crossing several anabranches, the country


becoming low, and in places subject to inundations.
At this place we formed our twenty-fifth camp. Dis-
tance this day, twenty-one and a-half miles. The
watering-place being boggy, one of the horses got fast,
and we had some difficulty in hauling him out. The
country over which I have travelled consists of fine,
rich, thinly timbered plains, the timber in places only
showing a few feet above the banks of the river; though
here the vegetation is more abundant than higher up.
The channel contains long reaches of water, thickly
bordered with pandanus. I also noticed quantities of
the sweet smelling jasmine. The soil near the bank
of the river is not so rich as that further back. Mr.
Robertson reports that, “ in following down the right
bank of the river, he made three and a-half miles to a
tree marked by Mr. Landsborough Lcf under broad
arrow; in two miles crossed the river, and in two
miles further came to camp.” The country on the
right bank is similar to that on the left.
Sept. 25.- Camp 25, situate on the left bank of the
Gregory River. As the parched state of the country
is beginning to tell on the horses, I intend giving them
a rest on the first good grass I come to. Proceeded
at 6.45 a.m. At 7.10 made NW. one mile over.a
thinly timbered plain, subject to inundation, with
numerous holes —very bad travelling; then NW. by
W. two miles, over similar country, to where there
is abundance of green grass. Here I shall form a
depot, and spell the horses for some time. Distance
this day, three miles. On examining the river I
could find no watering place for the horses, without
the risk of their falling into deep holes ; but eventually
we succeeded in our search for a place which I thought,
with a little trouble, and the aid of our tools (toma-
hawk and shovel) we could make answer. Mr.
Robertson and I started our job as navigators at 9.45,
and at 10.45 we had the water running into a pond
near the bank; at 12.30 it was full, at which a hun-
dred horses could easily drink. In the afternoon I,
accompanied by Charley, proceeded WSW. one and
c 3


a-half mile, over low plains, crossing several water-
courses ; then over thinly timbered country, light soil,
not well grassed. Returned to camp at G. 15, and
ascertained that one of the horses, through the care-
lessness of the horsekeeper in allowing them to water
at a place which I had previously pronounced as
dangerous, had got hogged, and crossed the river.
After the trouble taken by Mr. Robertson and myself,
I certainly felt rather annoyed, and reproved the
horsekeeper sharply.
Sept. 26.—1, accompanied by Charley, followed
down the course of the river; in one mile came to
where it divides into several branches, the banks
becoming quite low, and the stream being almost lost
in swamps; tall trees, however, still showing along
the main channel. At 9.40 we made one mile and
tried to cross, but could not do so, the place being
too boggy; then half-a-mile, to where the left branch
turns SW. by S., but it shortly takes its old course.
After crossing several watercourses, some of which
I crossed yesterday afternoon, in half-a-mile further
we came to a beautiful reach of water, about 80
yards in width; the country on left bank becomes
here high and clear. At 10.20 we came to a fine
plain, on which I noticed a quantity of long grass
like young sorghum, which I suppose to be similar to
that spoken of by Mr. Landsborough, and of which I
believe, when green, the horses are fond; but as all
in the vicinity of Carpentaria is as dry and parched
as most of the other grasses, I cannot from my own
knowledge form a correct opinion of it. The river
again runs in a broad channel. I believe there is still
another branch to the eastward. At 11 made two
and a-half miles over rich plains, extending to the
NW.; then returned to camp.
Sept. 27.—1, accompanied by Charley, ran up the
course of the river five miles before we could cross,
the banks are so boggy; then travelled over fine plains,
made one mile, and crossed a shallow watercourse;
in one and a-half mile crossed a narrow deep creek, in


the bed of which were reeds ten feet high; then two
miles to a deep creek, shaded by tea and Leichhardt
trees, in which there is at this point very little water,
though it has the character of a creek in which
there should be permanent water. We ran the
creek up for a quarter of a mile, where I noticed
natives under the shade of some trees; we then
crossed and made one mile to a creek of a character
similar to that last described, but in which there is a
running stream. I suppose this to be Beame’s Brook,
probably the branch seen by Mr. Eobertson (whilst
Charley and I were out on an excursion to the west-
ward), leaving the Gregory about eighteen and a-half
miles above our present camp. Marked a tree mon
the left bank, and proceeded upwards for two miles in
a southerly direction; then, leaving Beame’s Brook,
steered W., and in one mile struck the creek which I
had previously crossed lower down, but which I was
surprised to find at this point running strong. I
have no doubt it is a branch of Beame’s Brook ;
crossed, and continued in a westerly direction to the
Gregory, where I saw a number of natives. The
place where we crossed the river was equally as boggy
as our crossing lower down. At 6.15 p.m. returned
to camp. lam afraid that when leaving this I shall
have to take the horses seven miles up the river before
I can cross them without the risk of their getting
bogged.
Sept. 28.—1 intended leaving here to-day, and pro-
ceeding on my journey; but as this can only be accom-
plished by going upwards for seven miles before
crossing, and thus working the horses an extra round
of fourteen miles, I have resolved upon giving them
another day’s rest on the green grass, from which they
are improving, and, with the assistance of our toma-
hawk and shovel, intend to make a bridge across
the river. I have selected a point near our camp
with good approaches, where the channel is deep,
and only twenty-eight feet wide. At 6.15 a.m. Mr.
Eobertson, Charley, and I started to work on the


bridge. At 9.301 noticed broken reeds and discolored
water coming down the stream, and, knowing the
horses were up the river feeding, we at once proceeded
to ascertain the cause. After going a short distance
we found two of the horses in the water swimming
about. I supposed that they had fallen in while
feeding too near the bank. With the assistance ot a
rope which I had brought for such contingencies, we
got one of them out quickly, but the other, being iu
low condition, wo had a great deal of difficulty with,
and it was not till 12.30 p.m. that we got him extri-
cated, and this was only done by main strength, the
poor animal being completely powerless from having
been in the water so long. This, of course, stopped
our bridge-making for a time. We rested for an
hour and a-half, and then resumed work at the
bridge, which was not very pleasant, for we had to be
most of the time in the water, while the sandflies
were severely punishing us. At. 5.45 we completed
the bridge, and crossed one of the horses which we
had previously pulled out of the river. I shall not
be sorry when we leave this camp, the mosquitos
allowing us but little sleep ; and what with watching
and rising at 4 in the morning, we require all the
rest we can get, without being troubled by them.
Sept. 29. —Depot camp 29, situate on the left bank
of the Gregory Eiver. At 7 a.m. crossed our bridge,
which answered well; marked a tree m, then pro-
ceeded north over fine plains, cutting the bend of the
river with a watercourse some distance on our right,
which I suppose, from the nature of the country, to
be an anabranch. At 9.15 made four and a-half miles
over rich plains, the grasses of which were rather
long ; also quantities of polygonum bush, and crossed
another anabranch. At 10 made two and a-half miles
over rich undulating plains, with a good description
of grasses and salt bush, and touched upon a fine
chain of lagoons, at which we watered the horses.
Resumed our journey at 10.10 and at 11 made three
miles over country similar to that last described;


then NNE. one mile by course of river; then NE.
seven miles to an anabranch, on the right bank of
which we formed our 30th camp. Distance this day,
eighteen miles. The country over which we have
passed is of the richest description, but only carrying
sufficient timber for a pastoral population; indeed,
such is the general character of all the finest country
in the neighbourhood of the Gulf. Near our camp
there are a few gum trees, which may do for slabs,
being the best I have seen for a long distance. In
the afternoon I left the party and proceeded in an
easterly direction, passing the end of a large lagoon
about one mile in length, in which the water was very
low, and in one mile further I came to a swamp, with
a number of green rushes in the middle, and along
the sides Leichhardt trees; it is apparently an old
watercourse, which I have no doubt is a branch of
Beame’s Brook. I tried to cross, but did not succeed,
the ground at the sides being very boggy; as I saw a
number of natives in the long reeds, and being alone,
I thought it better not to run the risk of losing my
horse. I then proceeded in a southerly direction for
two miles, passing over some thinly timbered country,
and from thence in a north-westerly direction. At
6.15 p.m. got back to camp.
Sept. 80. —Camp 30, situate on right bank of ana-
branch of the Gregory River. Proceeded at 6.30
a.m., by the course of river, NE. ibr four miles to
where the river turns for a short distance NW.,
and afterwards assumes a different character, caused,
I imagine, by its joining the Nicholson
down the plains five miles, where I turned in a
westerly direction and struck the Nicholson, which
at this point consists of four large sandy £ channels,
and in the eastern one of which is a running stream,
containing, I suppose, the waters of the Gregory ; the
banks are shaded by oak and drooping tea-tree.
Marked a tree m on the right bank, then leaving my
party I crossed the river, but after going a short dis-
tance returned. We proceeded at 10.30 in an


easterly direction, and in one and a-half mile touched
upon Beame’s Brook, at a point where the tide
reaches. Here I saw a tree marked Y under broad
arrow. Hollowed up the brook tor a mile above the
tidal influence, at which place I formed my 31st
camp ; time, 12 noon ; distance travelled eleven miles.
In the afternoon, accompanied by Charley, I pro-
ceeded down the plain in a northerly direction, and
struck the Nicholson at. a point about four miles
below my marked tree, at which place the river as-
sumes a different character, having only one broad
channel, containing a splendid sheet ot water shaded
by oak and tea trees. On the banks I noticed
numerous tracks of alligators. Hollowed down the
course of the river NE. by N. for two miles to where
it turns N. I then proceeded eastward over fine
plains, and afterwards in a southerly direction for
three and a-half miles, and touched upon Beame’s
Brook ; then up the brook to camp ; time, 6.15 p.m.
The country over which we have travelled to-day
consists principally of rich thinly timbered plains, on
which I noticed stunted box, excorecaria, and white
wood. The country between the brook and the
Nicholson at a point where they nearly meet is low
and in places subject to inundations. I have no doubt
that during heavy floods the Nicholson overflows, and
that its superabundant waters find their way into the
Albert hereabouts. On the eastern bank of the
Nicholson I noticed large quantities of roley poley,
also a few fine gums for building purposes. Whilst
Charley and I were away two of the horses got
bogged in the brook, having gone to a bad watering
place. Mr. Eobertson had great difficulty in getting
one of them out, it being as usual a weak animal.
The day has been rather warm—-to-night the mosqui-
tos very troublesome.
Oct. I.—Camp 31, situate on left bank of Beame’s
Brook. Proceeded at 6.50 a.m. in an ESE. direction
over thinly timbered plains, and at 8.10 made three
miles to a tributary of the Albert; ran it up for one


and a-half mile, and crossed at a point a little above
where the tide reaches. Here I formed my 32nd camp.
Distance this day, four and a-half miles. Mr. Eobert-
son and I proceeded down the plain in a northerly
direction; at 11.50 made three and a-half miles to
where we struck the Albert; then down right bank
to a tree marked broad arrow before YIC; then made
two miles to where the river turns eastward ; and in
two miles further crossed a narrow tidal creek; in a
quarter of a mile the river turns NW.,at which place
the eastern bank becomes low, apparently an ana-
branch taking its former course. At this place I saw
a number of natives, who upon seeing us made a yell-
ing noise and disappeared. Marked a tree m ; time,
2 p.m. We next proceeded in a south easterly direc-
tion over fine well grassed plains; afterwards in a
southerly direction over similar country, and then
westerly, and struck the river at the junction of
Beame’s Brook with the Albert, this being the highest
navigable point. I noticed many marked trees here-
abouts, one of which was Mr. Gregory’s, thus, —N.A.
EXPEDITION. Marked a tree jJ, time, 4.50, and
proceeded upwards, and at 6.15 made three miles
to the camp, near which there is a good site for a
station. The country over which we have travelled
to-day consists of rich plains clothed with luxuriant
grasses, but they are not so fine as those higher up
the river. The chief object of my expedition being
completed, I shall commence my retreat to-morrow as
quickly as the condition of the horses will permit, as
I expect the parties whom I started with the cattle
will be waiting at Capentaria Downs for further in-
structions how to proceed.
(iEomnwncment of Erturn .louvneg.
Oct. 2.—Camp 32, situate on right bank of a tribu-
tary of the Albert. Struck the camp and started on
our return journey at 6.30 a.m.; course SE. by E. E.
At 8.15 made five and a-half miles over fine rich plains,


thinly timbered with white wood and other trees, and
crossed a shallow watercourse; at 9.15 made three miles
and a-halfover more heavily timbered country; at 10.30,
four miles and a-half over fine plains to a shallow water-
course, along the banks of which there is a belt of ex-
corecaria; at 1 p.m. made nine miles over similar coun-
try to a watercourse like that last mentioned; then
six miles over unwooded plains; then four miles over
thinly timbered plains to a watercourse; at 4 o’clock
made one mile up the watercourse, where we came to
water and encamped, this being the first water we
have seen since leaving camp, and having been tra-
velling nine and a-half hours, the horses look rather
fatigued. Distance this day, about thirty-four miles.
The country over which we have travelled consists
principally of fine rich plains with salt bush, but very
dry. Nearly all the grass has lately been burnt off;
in fact, since we have left the Gilbert I do not re-
collect passing over five miles of country together the
grass on which had not been burnt.
Oct. 3.—Camp 1 (return), situate on watercourse,
a tributary of the Leichhardt. Proceeded at 6.15
a.m.; course, SE. by E. iE. At 6.40 made one mile
over a plain and struck the Leichhardt River at a flat
rocky ford; crossed and encamped on the right bank.
The scenery here is very beautiful: a rocky precipitous
fall of forty-two feet on the river, and in the imme-
diate neighborhood there are some pretty trees and
one of the finest sites for a station that I have seen.
Near the camp is a marked tree of Mr. Lands-
borough’s (camp 5).
Oct. 4.—Camp 2, situate on right bank of the
Leichhardt River. Proceeded at 6.50 a.m., and pass-
ing over a sandy flat, slightly wooded with fig and
other trees, made ESE. two miles to a large water-
course in which there is a splendid reach of water,
and although of a very different character here, I
suppose this to be the creek upon which I formed
my outward camp No. 20. I ran it up for two miles
to where it changed its character, and in one mile


further crossed at my marked tree, camp No. 20. I
have called this the Landsborough Creek, in honor of
the Hon. William Landsborough, M.L.C.,the explorer,
who, I think, crossed it near its confluence with the
Leichhardt, at which place it has a wide flat rocky
bed, without water. At 9.30 made ENE. three miles
over plains thinly grassed. At 11.30 made six miles
over barren ridges principally grassed with triodia, and
wooded with gum tree and Severn. At 12 noon made
one and a-half mile over a rich flat. At 12.30 p.m.
one and a-half mile over open country, with patches
of triodia, to a shallow watercourse; then one mile
over country thinly timbered to a watercourse, which
we followed down for one mile in a northerly direction
to water, and encamped. Distance this day, nineteen
miles. One of the horses, called “Earey,” is very
sick, and I am afraid I shall shortly have to leave him
behind.
Oct. s.—Camp 3, situate on left bank of water-
course, about eighteen miles E. by N. from camp 2.
Charley very unwell. Proceeded at 6.10 a.m.; made
one mile over an open flat. At 7.40 two miles over
ridges lightly timbered with bloodwood, and thinly
grassed with occasional patches of triodia, to where
we crossed a rocky creek, in which I noticed a spring.
At 8.20 one and a-half mile to another creek, bearing
high flood marks; in one and a-half mile passed a
large lagoon, on which I marked a tree m ; in a quar-
ter of a mile crossed a deep creek, the banks being
precipitous, near the western one of which there is a
chain of ponds. At 9.30 made one and a-half mile;
then descending the ridges to open country, being
the same valley that I named Inverleigh on my out-
ward journey. At 10.20 two miles over thinly timbered
country, where the horse that took ill yesterday gave
in. Leaving Charley and Bowman to bring him on to
the first water, I proceeded with Mr. Eobertson half
a mile, to where the country becomes more open, and
struck a watercourse, which I followed down in a
northerly direction in search of water; in doing so


we crossed our outward track. At 10.45 made three
and a-half miles, where Mr. Eobertson reported water,
near which was a patch of fine green grass. Unpacked
the horses with the intention of waiting for the re-
mainder of our party, but upon going down to get a
drink, to our surprise we found the water quite salt,
which was a great disappointment, as I wished to give
the horses the benefit of the green feed. Being very
thirsty we searched for fresh water, but without
success. I suppose this to be the head of Stokes’
Morning Inlet. We had no resource but to pack up
and resume our journey. At 1 p.m. proceeded in an
easterly direction, and at 5.30 made twelve miles over
fine country, previously described, to a watercourse
upon which I had formed my outward camp No. 18,
and within 100 yards of which I struck. Encamped,
Distance this day, 24 miles. At 6.10 Charley arrived,
having left Bowman distant three and a-half miles
from here with his horse knocked up ; reports having
found a small hole of water, near which he left Earey.
Oct. 6.—Camp 4, situate at Eocky Pond. At 7 a.m.
Bowman arrived. In consequence of his horse having
had little to eat last night, I delayed starting till 11.15;
course ENE., over fine plains. At 2.30 halted to
give horses half an hour’s rest on a patch of salt bush.
Here I was under the necessity of again giving
Bowman a severe reprimanding for his bad temper
and ill-using the horses. He certainly is the most
eccentric, ill-tempered man I have ever had dealings
with, and appears to delight in racing the poor animals
about without the slightest occasion ; he has already
knocked up every horse he has ridden. Should he not
improve speedily I shall be compelled to give him a
few days on foot, to convince him of his folly.
Proceeded again at 3. At 4 had to leave one of the
horses knocked up. At 5 struck the Flinders opposite
our marked tree. In crossing over saw numerous
tracks of alligators. Encamped at our outward camp
No. 17. Distance this day, sixteen miles; country
previously described.


Oct. 7.—lntend sending back for the horse that
knocked up yesterday, and remaining here to-day, as
some of the horses are looking very much fatigued;
having had little green food is telling upon them.
This day has been rather warm, but there is now a
cool breeze; in fact, since I have been in the vicinity
of Carpentaria we have had cool winds every after-
noon, and not unfrequently in the forenoon.
Oct. B.—Camp 5 and 6, situate on right bank of
the Flinders. Proceeded at 6.50 a.m. NE. three
miles, passing through occasional patches of scrub,
varying from ENE. to E. by N. At 12 o’clock made
fourteen miles to the Norman at a point immediately
opposite where I struck in my outward track, and
crossed the river. We here saw a native, who made
a great noise, shaking his weapons, and followed
us for some distance. At last I sent Charley to him
to endeavour to make him understand that I did not
appreciate his company ; he took the hint and
disappeared. At 12.30 p.m. made three quarters of a
mile to a lagoon, where I gave the horses a rest.
After unpacking, Charley observed a native watching
us at a short distance; upon finding that we were aware
of his presence our neighbour went away. At this
place I left the horse Champion quite knocked up. I
have called this place Champion’s Lagoon. Filled
our water bags and proceeded at 3.20. At 5.15 made
six and a quarter miles E. by N. to a round swamp, on
which I saw several emus; 1 named it Emu Swamp,
and encamped. Distance from last camp, twenty-
four miles; country previously described.
Oct. 9.—Camp 7, at Emu Swamp. Proceeded
ENE, and at 6.15 a.m. made one mile to a water-
course. At 8 six miles to a large dry creek; crossed
and struck my outward track. At 9 made three
miles to Glray’s Lagoons; halted to rest, and pro-
ceeded again at 11.40, and at 3.45 made thirteen
miles to Astronomy Creek; crossed, and encamped
near the right bank at a large lagoon. Distance this
day, twenty-three miles; country previously described.


!Ncar this Mr. Robertson shot a quantity of ducks.
Two natives came within sight of the camp, but upon
seeing Charley going towards them they ran off
Oct. 10. —Camp 8, situate at a lagoon, which I have
named Charley’s Lagoon, in approbation of his good
conduct during the expedition. Whilst Charley was
out in search of the horses this morning he suddenly
came upon two natives watching our camp from a
small watercourse. They were so much afraid on
seeing him close to them that, in trying to get away,
one ran against the other and both fell. Proceeded
at 6.30 a.m. E. by N. for about twelve miles, as I wish
to find water; then turned NE., passing through a
thick belt of scrub, in which one of the meat bags
got torn, causing us to halt. After repairing the bag
proceeded again; in two miles came to open country;
then four miles to a splendid sheet of water a quarter
of a mile long by 60 yards wide, at which we formed
our 9th camp. Distance this day, eighteen miles.
Oct. 11.—Camp 9, situate on a large lagoon, which
I have called Robertson’s, in approbation of my com-
panion’s readiness at all times to carry out my instruc-
tions. Proceeded at 6.30 a.m. At 8 crossed a water-
course. At 1.20 p.m. made about twenty miles to a
watercourse running WNW., in which there is a
splendid reach of water. I have called this Maclean s
Pond, in honor of Capt. John Maclean, late of Geelong,
but now of Melbourne, and master of the Alhambra
steamer. Halted to rest the horses, and proceeded
again at 2.55. At 3.10 made one and a-half mile to
a large lagoon on outward track. At 4 made E£vE.
two and a-half miles to old camp on Gilbert, and
encamped. Distance from last camp, twenty-four
miles. The country over which we have travelled
to-day is of two classes; the first six miles open and
fairly grassed; then thirteen miles oyer light sandy
soil, more thickly timbered, and occasional clumps of
pandamus, and patches of scrub; the last three miles
small plains fairly grassed.
Oct. i2.—Camp 10, situate on left bank of an ana-


branch of the Gilbert. Proceeded upwards at 6.5
a.m. I regret not having time to explore the river
coming in from the eastward, and which I named the
Byrnes on my outward track, as I have little doubt
that it is the supposed River Lynd, and consequently
the direct route to Carpentaria Downs Station; but
I am in search of a practicable road for drays, and
from a view obtained I believe the country some
distance up the Byrnes to be very broken and probably
unfit for that purpose, however suitable it might be
for a bridle track. At 11 made sixteen miles;
halted to rest in bed of river, near which place we
saw a number of natives. Proceeded at 1.5 p.m., and
at 4.10 made nine miles to outward camp No. 11.
Distance this day twenty-five miles. Country pre-
viously described.
Oct. 13. —Camp 11, situate on the right bank of
the Gilbert. Packed up the horse shoes which we
buried on the outward journey, and proceeded at 5.40
a.m.; at 8.30 saw a number of natives, who seemed
rather anxious to become better acquainted with us,
but their anxiety was put an end to by dropping a
Terry bullet within a few feet of their leading man,
who at once threw down his weapons and fell on his
face as if he thought that the safest position ; shortly
afterwards he got up and ran off. At 8.40 made nine
miles, crossed the river, then up left bank; at 12.5 p.m.
made ten miles to our 10th outward camp, where I
had left my riding horse “ Defiance.” Distance this
day, nineteen miles; country previously described.
In the afternoon busy shoeing horses. I had previously
sent Charley to look for “ Defiance,” whose tracks of
a recent date we can see near the camp. At 6.15 he
returned, having run the tracks to within a short
distance of this, and also the tracks of a number of
natives.
Oct 14. —Camp 12, situate on the left bank of the
Gilbert. At 5.15 sent Charley again on “Defiance’s ”
tracks; at 7.15 he returned, having found the skeleton
of the poor animal in the bed of the river, partly
d 3


covered by tea-tree bark. We picked some broken
spears out of the remains of the horse, which had
evidently been killed by the natives. Charley reports
having seen the remains of a large native camp of
recent date, at which place, he says, there are signs of
the occupants having had a great feast—l suppose off
the poor horse, for which, should I meet with any of
the party, I shall most assuredly chastise them. At
this camp we have buried, at a tree marked “ Dig five
yards S,” a packsaddle, spare horse shoes, a water keg,
and a few other things, as every lb. is an object now,
the horses being very weak. Three of them I intended
leaving here to be picked up by the stock party on
their way out, but having ascertained the fate of
“ Defiance,” I do not like the idea of leaving other
animals to share a similar one; consequently we
must take a little more time and endeavour to get
them in. Proceeded at 7 - 30 a.m.; at 1.30 p.m. made
seventeen miles to the Langdon, on the right bank of
which we formed our 13th camp. In the afternoon
shoeing horses. On our way we observed upward
tracks of a number of natives, who I suppose were
returning from the hippophagoua meeting.
Oct. 15.—Camp 13, situate on the right bank of
the Langdon, close to its junction with the Gilbert.
Proceeded at 5.50 a.m.; at 7.30 passed Mount Single;
at 8.30 made seven miles to outward camp No. 9 ; at
10 made five miles and halted to rest the horses, the
day being very warm. Shod one horse and proceeded
again at 2.40 p.m.; at 4.35 made five miles and
encamped. Distance this day, seventeen miles. Wo
still notice native tracks coming upwards.
Oct. 16.—Camp 14, situate on the left bank of the
Gilbert, near which there are some stoncy ridges.
Proceeded at 6.30 a.m. ; and at 8 came upon a num-
ber of natives, whose tracks I believe we have been on
since leaving “ Defiance’s ” camp, and to whom Charley
and I gave a fright. Proceeded again at 8.40„ and at
9.15 passed our outward camp No. 8, near Mount
Ross; at 12 noon one of the horses knocked up ;


leaving one of the party to bring it on, the rest of
us crossed on to the right bank of the river and
encamped. Distance this day, thirteen miles.
Oct. 17.—Camp 15, situate on the right bank of
the Gilbert. Proceeded upwards at 615 a.m.; at
7.45 made four miles to the junction of the Eobertson
and crossed ; ran up the left bank in a south-easterly
direction for one mile and encamped. Distance this
day, five miles. In the afternoon Charley caught a
quantity of fish for supper.
Oct. 18. —Camp 10, situate on left bank of the
Eobertson. Proceeded at 5.45 S. by E., cutting off a
bend of the river; at 6.20 touched upon it; at 6.45
made three miles and crossed on to right bank, the
river running NW.; at 7 made one mile to a moun-
tain, which I have called Mount Selheim in honor of
P. Selheim, Esq., J.P., of Strathmore, Kennedy District;
then by course of river; at 7.40 made three miles up
right bank to where a high bluff range comes in to
left bank; then three-quarters of a mile to a gorge;
then up bed of river E. by N. quarter of a mile, pass-
ing a remarkable pinnacle of white quartz on the
right bank; at 9 made four miles up left bank in a
south-easterly direction, at which place we halted
to rest. High broken ridges close in this side,
the river being about 200 yards wide, beautifully
shaded by tea, Leichhardt, fig, oak, and white cedar
trees. Shod one of the horses, and proceeded at 1.15
p.m.; in half-a-mile passed the junction of a large
creek coming in from ranges on left bank; at 2 made
one and three quarters of a mile; passed another large
creek with sandy bed; at 3 made two and a-quarter
miles to where ranges close in, consequently had to
cross to right bank, the river now assuming a different
character, the beautiful trees which I had previously
noticed having disappeared ; then up the right bank
SE. for one mile; then ENE. half-a-mile to our out-
ward camp No. 5. Distance this day eighteen miles;
general course of river NV.
Oct. 19.—Camp 17, situate on right bank of the


Eobertson. lam suffering from the effects of a fall
which I got yesterday in going through long reeds
down the river bank. Proceeded at 6.45 a.m. up the
bed of the river NE. through a gorge; at 7.25 made
two miles to where the river makes a short turn to
the eastward, but again turns quickly to the north ;
at 7.45 made one mile to where we crossed; then
steered NE., which enabled us to cut off a bend of
the river, and in one mile further again crossed ; then
over stoney ridges; at 9 made two and a-half miles
and crossed rocky watercourse; at 10.15 made two
and a-half miles to a watercourse similar to last; and
at 10.45 one and a-half mile to another watercourse,
at which w'e halted to rest, one of the horses shewing
symptoms of knocking up. Eesumed our journey at
12.30 p.m.; at 1.15 made two miles N. by E. to river;
ran it up for one mile in a north-easterly direction
and encamped. Distance this day, about fourteen miles.
Oct. 20.—Camp 18, situate on left bank of the
Eobertson. Still suffering from effects of fall. In
consequence of some of our horses having strayed did
not leave camp till 7.30 a.m.; then NE. by E., and
at 8 made one and a-half mile over stoney ridges; saw
a remarkably high bluff rocky mountain bearing E.
by S., distant four miles, which I have called Mount
Bonsey, in honor of W. H. Bonsey, Esq., P.M., of
Geelong; then down the ridges, crossed a branch of
the Eobertson coming from the SE., and in one mile
further touched upon the north-eastern branch ; ran
it up for half-a-mile to ranges, at which place it
divides, one branch coming from the north and the
other from the eastward; crossed the northern branch
and encamped, as I wish to ascertain if a practicable
road for drays exists from the head of this branch
over the ranges. Distance this day, three miles.
6.15 p.m., no possibility of getting a road up this
branch, as it heads out of very broken country with
gorges.
Oct. 21. —Camp 19, situate on right bank north-
eastern branch of the Eobertson. Proceeded at 6.35


a.m. in a southerly direction ; at 7.10 Mount Bonsey
bearing E.; at 8.30 made five miles over stoney
ridges to a rocky creek, and from thence by an east-
erly course up the creek, and ascended the range by
outward track ; at 10 made three miles to the top.
I have called this McKinlay’s Eange, in honor of
John McKinlay, Esq., the explorer, of Adelaide.
At 10.30, one mile passing outward camp No. 3, at
Torsach’s Glen; then up watercourse for half-a-mile,
and halted to rest; proceeded at 12.5 p.m., and at 1
made two miles through scrub to top of ridge; at
2.40, four miles to Sandy Creek, and encamped.
Distance this day, fifteen and a-half miles.
Oct. 22.—Camp 20, situate on Sandy Creek. Pro-
ceeded at 5.30 a.m.; in half-a-mile passed No. 2 outward
camp. At 8 made eight miles to Spring Creek, at
which place we found some fine grass, and we left two
horses, one of which we have had great difficulty in
getting so far. At 9 made three miles to a spring, at
which we halted to rest, and proceeded again at 12.
At 12.50 p.m. made three miles to No. 1 outward
camp, and at 4 eight miles to Carpentaria Downs
Station, from which we have made the trip out and
back in fifty-three days. Distance this day, twenty-
two miles.
At Carpentaria Do tons Station.
Oct. 23 to Nov. 13. —Engaged at Station mustering
and inoculating cattle previous to their departure
for the Albert Eiver, a large number of those which I
had previously started from the Lower Stations having
suffered very much on their way hither through the
scarcity of feed and water. lam leaving many of
them here, and replacing them by others. Mr. P.
Armstrong who, accompanied by Charley and Bobby
(black boys), had been sent out to improve upon the
track for drays over McKinlay’s Eange, distant from
here thirty miles, has returned, and reports as follows:
“ On going up a tributary of the Eobertson, saw a


number of natives camped on the water course, and
they, on seeing us, ran up the creek. We saw no
more of them until we arrived at a narrow gorge
through which we had to pass ; the first intimation we
had of their presence was a yell and a shower ot
spears. They had taken up their position behind
some large rocks, near which we would have to pass,
and finding it impossible to go on, we retreated down-
wards, and made for the gap in the range, at which
place we again found our progress interrupted. The
gap being very narrow and rocky, we again found it
necessary to retire. We then thought it better to
return quickly to the gorge, thinking that the blacks
had left it, but we found that there were still some of
them waiting, but not in such large numbers as at
first; and, after some difficulty and risk, we forced
our way through, several of their woomera-spears
passing too close to us to be pleasant. One spear
stuck in the limb of a tree close to Charley’s head as
he was passing beneath. Proceeding up the creek,
Charley drew my attention to the natives going along
the top of the range, and rapidly gaining on us.
They were making, as we supposed, for another gorge
some distance ahead of us, which caused us to increase
our pace, although we could not make much headway
in consequence of the numerous stones. Upon arriv-
ing at the gorge we found it extremely narrow, there
being barely room for us to pass, which we had no
sooner accomplished than we heard a frightful yell,
and upon looking back, we saw the rocks in the gorge
which we had just passed crowded with the natives,
who appeared very much disappointed at our having
escaped. Prom this the country became more open,
consequently we saw no more of them.”
Nov. 14. —Carpentaria Downs Station. Succeeded
in getting the stock started. In consequence of the
long drought, and the horses being very weak, having
done so much work of late, we have had great diffi-
culty in mustering cattle. lam now preparing to
start for Port Denison.


•Back to Port Dcntsan.
Nov. IG.—Started the pack horses in charge of Mr.
Keele, and at 8.15 overtook the party and encamped
near McKinnon’s Station. Distance this day, thirty
miles.
Nov. 17. —McKinnon’s. Proceeded at 5. 45 a.m.;
at 12 noon, halted to rest at Lucky Creek for one and
a-half hour ; started again at 1.30 p.m.; and at 5.30
encamped on the Burdekin, near Messrs. Pirth and
Atkinson’s station. Distance this day, forty-five
miles. Every appearance of a storm.
Nov. 18.—Eain commenced last night at 7.30, and
continued till 1.30 this morning, which will serve to
bring on the grass, which at present is much required,
the country looking dry and parched. Proceeded at
5.20 a.m.; roads quite heavy, but agreeable; it is
quite eight months since we have been visited with
sufficient rain to make the grass grow. At 10 halted
to rest for two hours at Christmas Creek; proceeded
again at 12 noon, and at 4.40 encamped on the Bur-
dekin. Distance this day, thirty-five miles.
Nov. 19.—Last night we were again visited with
rain; a heavy thunderstorm with vivid lightning
passed over to the north-west, and we had several
hours light rain. Proceeded at 5.30 a.m., and at 9.15
halted to rest at Clark Creek; at 11.15 started again,
and at 5.15 p.m. encamped on Stockyard Creek.
Distance this day, forty-two miles.
Nov. 20.—Proceeded at 5 a.m.; at 9 got to Ailing-
ham’s Creek, halted to rest tor two hours, and at 6.30
encamped at the Eeedy Lake. Distance this day,
thirty-eight miles.
Nov. 21. —In consequence of the horses having
strayed, we did not leave camp till 9 a.m.; at 11
halted to rest at the Burdekin for one and a-half hour;
at 4 p.m., made eighteen miles to Messrs. Cunning-
ham’s station, Burdekin Downs.
Nov. 22.—Proceeded at 4.40 a.m.; at 12 noon,
halted to rest; started again at 3 p.m., and at 5


made thirty-four miles and encamped at the Upper
Haughton.
Nov. 23. —Proceeded at 5.45 a.m. At 12 noon
halted for one and a-half hour to rest; then leaving
Mr. Keele in charge of party, I went ahead alone, and
at 5.30 p.m. got to Inkermann. Distance this day,
fifty-four miles.
Nov. 24. —Proceeded at 8 a.m. At 4.30 p.m. passed
Salisbury Plains, and at 8.10 made seventy-three
miles to Adelaide Point, having completed the jour-
ney to Carpentaria and back, exclusive of stoppages
at stations, viz., Inkermann Downs, and Lynd Station,
in seventy-one days, thirteen of which were princi-
pally occupied in examining country upon the Leich-
hardt, Gregory, Nicholson, and Albert Eivers.


APPENDICES.




APPENDICES.
APPENDIX X.
1. —Feom Carpentaria Downs (on supposed Eivee Lynd)
to the Albert Eivee.
.
'S a
P c 3
a^
O
12 . •
|| | |
NAME.
orj
©
a
From Carpentaria Downs Station to Sandy
Creek
Thence to head of Eobertson Eiver
99 99
99 99
99 99 99
„ Gilbert Eiver
99 99 5)
99 99 99
99 99 99
99 99 99
„ Junction of Langdon
„ Gilbert Eiver—Defiance — (Dig) ...
„ Junction anabranch
~ Swamp —Horseshoe Camp...
„ Last camp on the Gilbert —below 1
junction of supposed E. Lynd )
„ Eobertson’s Lagoon
right
left
]i°
9
Carried over


From Carpentaria Downs (on supposed River Lynd) to
the Albert River. — Continued.
NAME.
Brought over ...
From Robertson’s Lagoon to Charley’s do.
Thence to Gray’s Lagoon
„ Emu Swamp
„ Champion’s Lagoon
„ Norman Crossing ...
„ Flinder’s Crossing ...
„ Armstrong’s Creek...
„ Tree marked L, at Rocky Pond Ck.
„ Inverleigh ...
„ Table-topped Ridge
„ Chain of ponds—western bank of
Deep Dry Creek
„ Watercourse—rocky holes
„ Landsborough’s River
„ Leichhardt River crossing—rocky
falls —Floraville Station
„ Albert River —head of navigation
{.S | !
O ,|L . T 3 •
rS g £ g S g
f - c 3 -JS Sip S
right ... 8
!’.! .’.” "7
'right 17 5&6
left 18 ”4
left !” 3
right 20
„ ... 2
CO
O
I


2. —Outward Route from Head of Navigation, Albert
River, to the Landsborough River.
-S .
£ 5
O
r d
§ si % fi
| i 11
3 O 3 Q
M l -'
NAME.
CO
O
§
From head of navigation to camp up
tributary of Albert
Thence to camp on Beame’s Brook
„ Nicholson River
„ Up Gregory River
„ Depot
„ Camp
„ Tree marked Let under broad arrow
„ „ Q- site for station ...
„ Camp
„ Tree marked £2:
„ Consolation Creek —course east ...
„ Leichhardt River ...
99 99 99
„ Landsborough River
right
left
right
right
left
right


3.—Distances from Carpentaria Downs to Adelaide
Point, Port Denison.
Lucky Creek ...
Dry River
Turn off road to valley
Porphyry Creek
Head of Christmas Creek
Lower Crossing
Stony Creek ...
Old Camp
Clark River ...
„ Clark Creek ...
„ ~ „ Upper Crossing ...
„ Stockyard Creek (old camp)...
„ „ „ (last crossing)
„ Allingham’s ...
„ „ Cross Roads
„ Upper Burdekin
„ Cunningham’s...
„ Burial-ground on Haughton...
„ Inl(ermann
„ PoWell’s
„ Adelaide Point
From Carpentaria Downs to McKinnon’s
Thence to Western Range (top)
„ Quartz Creek ...
Note.— Total distance from Adelaide Point, Port Denison,
to head of navigation, Albert River, about 720 miles.


APPENTDIX IX.
1. —Reading of Thermometer, taken at Adelaide Point,
Port
Denison, Fifty Feet above the Level of
the
Sea,
from December 1, 1863, to November
30, 1864.
Bate.
9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m. Remarks.
1863.
Decern
1
81
83
77
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
99 ,
2
74
79
78
Cool southerly breeze—stormy.
99
3
80
83
79
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
99
4
80
82
78
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
5
78
82
78
NE. wind —fine.
99
6
80
84
79
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
7
80
84
77
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
8
79
85
77
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
9
79
85
77
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
10
80
83
79
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
99
11
80
83
77
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
12
82
84
80
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
99
13
83
85
83
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
14
85
93
80
NW. wind — fine.
99
15
84
87
85
NE. wind — fine.
99
16
83
87
80
NE. wind—fine.
99
17
86
88
84
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
99
18
86
88
85
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
99
19
86
88
84
NE. wind—fine.
99
20
86
85
82
Cool southerly breeze —stormy.
99
21
81
84
80
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
99
22
80
82
78
Cool southerly wind — showery.
99
23
76
74
72
NE. wind — stormy.
99
24
75
76
74
Cool southerly wind — stormy.
99
25
77
77
72
SE. wind—-showery.
99
26
70
75
73
SE. wind — showery.
99
27
73
77
75
SE. wind — showery.
99
28
79
83
78
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
29
77
79
76
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
99
30
78
81
75
NE. wind—showery.
99
31
79
80
76
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
1864.
January
1
80
83
77
NE. wind —fine.
99
2
79
83
78
NE. wind—fine.
99
3
80
84
79
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
99
4
78
83
76
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
99
5
78
83
79
Cool southerly breeze —stormy.
99
6
81
79
77
Cool southerly breeze—stormy.


Bate. 9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m,
January 7 76 79 76
„ 8 79 82 78
„ 9 81 83 79
„ 10 80 83 79
„ 11 81 83 80
12 82 85 79
13 83 86 78
„ 14 79 83 79
„ 15 80 86 79
„ 16 79 83 81
„ 17 83 85 79
„ 18 83 86 78
„ 19 83 86 79
„ 20 81 86 80
„ 21 82 85 78
„ 22 82 85 80
23 83 87 80
„ 24 83 87 78
„ 25 83 87 81
„ 26 83 88 82
„ 27 85 87 81
„ 28 80 82 79
„ 29 78 80 79
„ 30 77 80 76
„ 31 78 80 77
February 1 76 77 79
2 76 81 78
„ 3 77 82 83
„ 4 83 86 84
„ 5 85 86 83
6 84 85 81
„ 7 85 86 81
8 79 81 74
„ 9 76 77 76
„ 10 78 82 80
11 81 85 83
12 83 86 81
„ 13 83 86 82
14 81 85 81
15 81 83 77
16 77 77 76
„ 17 76 81 78
18 81 84 81
19 81 83 81
„ 20 82 85 80
„ 21 81 85 82
22 80 85 81
Remarks.
Cool southerly breeze —stormy.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —cloudy.
NE. wind —showery.
NE. wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine,
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NW. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly wind —showery.
Cool southerly wind —showery.
Cool southerly wind —showery.
Cool southerly breeze —cloudy.
Cool southerly wind —showery.
NW. wind—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —showery.
NW. wind —showery.
NW. wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze—cloudy.
Cool southerly wind—showery.
Cool southerly wind —showery.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.


Date.
appendices.
9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m. Remarks.
Feb.
23
81
85
81
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
}>
24
83
86
82
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
25
79
84
80
Cool southerly wind — fine.
26
79
80
78
Cool southerly wind — fine.
})
27
79
82
79
Cool southerly wind —fine.
28
82
83
79
NTS. wind —fine.
29
81
84
78
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
March 1
,81
83
79
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
))
2
83
82
78
Cool southerly breeze — stormy.
>>
3
79
83
77
Cool southerly breeze — showery.
4
80
84
79
NTS. wind — fine.
5
82
84
77
NE. wind — fine.
9
6
76
79
80
NE. wind — fine.
7
81
82
79
NE. wind — fine.
8
82
81
80
NE. wind — fine.
9
82
83
80
NE. wind — fine.
10
81
82
79
NE. wind — fine.
11
78
81
77
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
))
12
79
83
78
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
))
13
81
79
77
Cool southerly wind — fine.
5)
14
81
85
79
Cool southerly wind — fine.
))
15
82
86
79
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
)>
16
80
78
76
Cool southerly breeze — showery.
M
17
77
80
78
Cool southerly breeze — showery.
18
79
86
80
NE. wind — fine.
19
86
88
85
NE. wind — fine.
”
20
81
84
79
NE. wind — fine.
21
79
82
78
Cool southerly breeze — showery.
»
22
80
83
77
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
23
78
81
76
Cool southerly breeze — cloudy.
5)
24
76
81
76
Cool southerly wind — cloudy.
25
77
79
75
Cool southerly wind — fine.
»
26
77
80
76
Cool southerly wind — showery.
))
27
78
81
77
Cool southerly wind — showery.
))
28
77
82
78
Cool southerly wind — fine.
”
29
77
81
76
Cool southerly wind — fine.
30
78
81
77
NE. wind — fine.
31
80
82
78
NE. wind — fine.
April
1
76
82
78
NE. wind — fine.
})
2
80
82
77
NE. wind — fine.
3
79
81
78
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
4
77
81
77
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
>>
5
78
79
76
Cool southerly breeze — showery.
>)
6
76
8]
76
Cool southerly breeze — cloudy.
7
74
76
74
Cool southerly breeze—showery.
yy
8
76
80
74
Cool southerly breeze — fine.
yy
9
77
83
75
Cool southerly breeze —fine.


9 a.m. 3 km. 9 km. Remarks.
April 10
„ 11
„ 12
~ 13
„ 15
» 16
73 81 74 NE. wind—fine.
„ 18
~ 19
» 20
„ 21
„ 22
„ 23
» 26
» 27
» 28
~ 29
May 1
„ 2
~ 3
» 4
„ 5
» 6
„ 7
» 8
„ 9
„ 10
„ 11
„ 12
„ 13
» 15
„ 16
» iv
„ 19
„ 20
» 21
» 22
>, 23
» 25
~ 26
78 82 74 Cool southerly wind—fine.
77 83 70 Cool southerly wind —fine.
77 82 77 Cool southerly wind —fine.
77 81 75 Cool southerly wind—fine.
76 81 74 Cool southerly wind —fine.
72 78 72 NE. wind—fine.
72 82 75 Cool southerly breeze—fine.
77 81 76 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
75 82 75 Cool southerly wind —fine.
74 80 76 Cool southerly wind —fine.
75 80 76 Cool southerly breeze—fine.
76 81 77 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
75 81 76 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
78 81 75 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
71 77 71 Cool southerly wind —cloudy.
69 76 67 Cool southerly wind —fine.
67 74 69 Cool southerly wind —fine.
66 77 72 Cool southerly wind —fine.
71 75 72 Cool southerly wind —cloudy.
74 78 73 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
73 77 72 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
69 76 72 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
70 76 72 Cool southerly breeze—fine.
71 79 71 Cool southerly wind —fine.
71 78 72 Cool southerly wind —fine.
70 76 70 Cool southerly wind —fine.
70 76 73 Cool southerly wind —fine.
75 79 74 Cool southerly wind —fine.
73 77 73 Cool southerly wind —cloudy.
75 76 73 Cool southerly breeze —showery.
7-5 81 74 Cool southerly breeze—fine.
74 81 75 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
75 81 78 NE. wind—fine.
75 77 74 Cool southerly breeze—cloudy.
63 68 65 Cool southerly wind —cloudy.
61 68 59 Cool southerly wind —fine.
64 74 68 Cool southerly wind —fine.
64 72 68 Cool southerly wind —fine.
66 75 69 Cool southerly wind—fine.
72 76 68 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
71 75 69 Cool southerly breeze —fine.
70 75 71 Cool southerly wind —fine.
70 72 69 Cool southerly wind—fine.
69 74 69 Cool southerly wind—fine.
69 73 68 Cool southerly wind —fine.
69 73 68 Cool southerly wind —fine.


Date. 9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m.
May 27 70 74 67
28 68 75 70
„ 29 70 73 69
„ 30 68 73 67
„ 31 68 70 68
June 1 64 73 69
2 65 70 63
„ 3 61 70 63
4 57 67 65
„ 5 56 71 67
„ 6 60 73 67
„ 7 63 73 65
8 66 73 67
„ 9 65 74 66
10 68 69 67
11 65 69 61
„ 12 58 66 59
„ 13 57 67 64
14 60 69 63
„ 15 57 69 63
„ 16 62 72 69
„ 17 64 73 67
„ 18 66 75 65
„ 19 64 73 67
20 65 72 66
„ 21 66 68 65
„ 22 62 68 63
„ 23 55 64 62
24 53 66 63
25 56 69 64
„ 26 66 71 65
„ 27 57 68 63
„ 28 64 72 65
„ 29 65 72 65
30 66 72 66
July 1 69 73 65
„ 2 69 72 67
3 68 72 66
„ 4 68 72 67
„ 5 61 72 64
„ 6 57 67 63
„ 7 64 71 63
„ 8 63 71 67
„ 9 65 71 64
„ 10 70 72 65
11 69 73 69
12 72 70 65
Remarks.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind —cloudy.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind-fine.
NE. wdnd —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wdnd —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —cloudy.
NE. wind—cloudy.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —cloudy.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.*
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wdnd—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wdnd —showery.


Date. 9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m
July 13 61 67 59
14 58 67 60
15 58 60 61
16 60 66 61
17 58 64 59
18 56 65 59
19 54 66 63
20 60 66 60
21 58 70 59
22 62 69 60
23 57 67 58
24 62 69 63
25 62 68 60
26 59 69 63
27 58 68 62
28 59 67 61
29 60 69 62
30 59 66 61
„ 31 61 72 63
August 1 62 73 61
2 63 72 67
3 69 74 68
4 70 73 70
5 71 73 70
6 69 70 68
7 67 69 63
8 59 66 62
9 61 68 65
10 67 72 69
11 69 73 70
12 60 68 64
13 63 71 67
14 67 72 69
15 63 70 62
16 67 72 69
17 64 69 63
18 66 70 68
19 63 72 67
20 65 74 68
21 69 79 70
22 69 78 72
23 67 75 73
24 68 76 70
25 65 74 69
26 69 72 68
27 65 75 69
28 67 73 67
Remarks.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —cloudy.
NE. wind —cloudy.
NE. wind —cloudy.
Cool southerly breeze —cloudy.
Cool southerly breeze —showery.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.


Date. 9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m.
August 29 64 72 65
30 68 74 64
„ 31 69 73 65
Sept. 1 62 72 63
2 62 68 61
„ 3 65 69 67
4 62 71 65
5 67 72 68
„ 6 69 74 67
„ 7 70 73 65
8 68 76 67
„ 9 70 75 69
10 67 73 65
11 69 74 67
„ 12 72 75 69
„ 13 70 76 66
14 73 77 68
15 75 79 70
„ 16 73 78 72
„ 17 72 75 70
18 71 75 72
19 73 76 70
20 73 77 69
21 75 79 72
„ 22 72 78 70
„ 23 74 80 72
„ 24 76 79 73
„ 25 73 78 74
„ 26 72 79 71
„ 27 74 79 73
„ 28 76 80 76
„ 29 75 79 77
„ 30
October 1
„ 2
„ 7
„ 8
„ 9
» io
» 14
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
NE.
Remarks.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind—fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine,
wind —fine.


Date. 9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m.
October 15 79 82 80
16 82 84 79
„ 17 83 82 78
„ 18 81 83 79
„ 19 81 83 77
„ 20 80 83 79
„ 21 80 82 77
„ 22 81 83 79
„ 23 78 81 80
„ 24 80 82 78
25 80 83 77
„ 26 78 81 80
„ 27 81 83 79
„ 28 81 83 78
29 81 82 79
30 79 81 76
„ 31 77 80 79
Novem. 1 78 82 78
2 79 81 79
3 78 81 78
„ 4 79 81 77
5 79 82 78
6 83 83 79
7 80 83 77
8 79 80 77
9 79 82 78
10 80 82 79
11 81 84 80
12 79 83 80
13 78 81 79
14 76 83 79
„ 15 75 82 78
„ 16 76 80 78
17 78 82 79
18 74 80 78
19 74 81 77
20 80 83 79
21 80 85 79
22 82 83 78
23 82 83 79
24 79 84 78
25 81 84 81
26 82 84 81
27 83 86 79
28 81 83 78
29 81 82 79
30 80 82 79
Remarks.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —cloudy.
NE. wind —cloudy.
NE. wind —stormy.
NE. wind —stormy.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
Cool southerly breeze—fine.
Cool southerly breeze —cloudy.
Cool southerly breeze —cloudy,
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind—fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly breeze —fine.
NE. wind —fine.
Cool southerly wind —fine.


.—Monthly Mean
Poet Denison,
MONTH.
December
January
February
March ...
April
May
August,
September
October
November
Mean
Tempeeatuees
Queensland.
9 A.M.
3 P.M.
Geoege E. Smalley,
Government Astronomer,
at Adelaide Point,
9 P.M.
N. S. Wales.


APPENDIX XXI.
Geology of Noetheen Axistealia.—A Papee compiled
by Me. A. C. Gbegoey.
The following paper lias been compiled from my notes and
journals, during the period I was in command of the Expedition
which was despatched by the Imperial Government to explore
the N.W. portions of Australia, in the years 1855-6; and
although already in substance printed in England, by order of
the Parliament, has not been available to the Queensland
public. As the settlement of the northern portions of the
continent is a subject of great importance to this colony, it
appears desirable to facilitate the access to every source of
information which may exist with reference to its general cha-
racter and facilities for occupation.
The portion of the continent to which I purpose to confine
my remarks is that which lies to the northward of latitude
23£ deg., or in other words, tropical Australia, and this I shall
sub-divide into two portions, the eastern and western, divided
by the 143 deg. of longitude. The former consisting of a series
of elevated ranges of hills, in which the older rocks are largely
developed, and the latter an almost unbroken table-land of
sandstone, belonging to the upper series of the carboniferous
system.
The most remarkable feature of the western division of
tropical Australia is, that it consists of an elevated table-land
without a single known hill or range rising above the general
level of its surface, and though when traversing the wider valleys
they appear to be bounded by ranges of hills, yet on ascending
any of the higher ground it at once becomes evident that the
valleys are simply excavated, and that the whole has originally
been one vast plain, portions of which have been removed, and
the hills are only portions which have not yet yielded to the
action of the elements.
From Roebuck Bay on the N.W. coast to nearly the southern
part of the Gulf of Carpentaria, the country rises abruptly
within a few miles of the coast to an elevation of from 500 to
800 feet; beyond this the rise is so gradual as only to be de-
tected by barometrical observation, the greatest elevation being
in latitude 18 deg., where it is about 1200 to 1600 feet above
the sea level; to the south of this it gradually declines, so that
in latitude 20 deg. the general elevation does not exceed 1000 feet.
Thus the 18th parallel of latitude becomes the line of division
between the waters flowing to the coast, and those which
descend into the desert interior. It also appears to be the limit
of the regular tropical rains, which do not seem to extend their


influence further south; and this, combined with the level
sandy nature of the surface, sufficiently explains why the water-
courses descending into the interior never attain any consider-
able magnitude or importance.
The upper stratum of rock forming this level tract is a ferru-
ginous sandstone, the superficial beds of which are formed by
the aggregation of small concretionary masses, which are easily
separated, and form an ironstone gravel, which is remarkably
frequent on the western coast, gradually diminishing to the
eastward. This rests on a coarse sandstone, varying from 50
to 300 feet in thickness.
The decomposition of this rock has covered its surface with
sand of a red color, and the whole country would have been
one vast tract of desert had not the continued action of currents
of water excavated immense valleys, and thereby exposed the
lower rocks.
Immediately below the sandstone, thick beds of soft shale
exist, and these so readily decompose into soft clay, that when
once exposed to the action of the weather, by the removal of
the superincumbent sandstone, the whole bed is quickly washed
away by the heavy tropical rains, leaving many isolated portions,
which, being still protected by portions of the superincumbent
sandstone, form hills with steep sides and flat summits, surrounded
by low cliffs, giving a remarkably regular and monotonous
outline to the features of the country throughout the whole
tract where these rocks prevail.
Beneath the shales, beds of chert, passing into silicious lime-
stone, were observed wherever the upper beds were removed.
But though limestones are usually rich in fossil remains, I was
unable to detect any which would afford a clue to the relative
age of this rock. Near the Gulf of Carpentaria it approaches
so closely in character to the celebrated lithographic limestone
used for printing, that there can be little doubt that it is equal
to that procured from the German quarries.
The strata of this limestone are nearly horizontal, but not
always quite conformable with the upper sandstones, and in the
valley of the Victoria River it rests on, or passes into, a hard
jasper rock, veined with red and white, capable of receiving a
high polish.
The next rock in the descending series is a hard white sand-
stone, of so compact and even texture as to almost resemble
quartz. The stratification is so indistinct that it is scarcely
possible to ascertain the dip of the beds, but it seems to rise
unconformably through the upper rocks, and forms low ridges


of a very rugged character. No fossils were observed, but
veins of sulphate of pyrites were very frequent.
Basalt is largely developed in the valleys of the upper part of
the Victoria River; it also appears at the head of Sturt’s Creek,
which flows into the desert interior, and on the Raper River,
on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria. There are also small
tracks of basalt along the edge of the tableland towards the
Gulf, but not forming very important features of the country.
The relative ago of this rock is distinctly referable to the
period immediately preceding the deposition of the highest beds
of the upper sandstones, as it is often exposed as interstratified.
The lower beds, much altered by the contact of the melted rock
and those above, shew traces of being partly derived from the
decomposition of the basalt.
The beds of Basaltic Rock are nearly horizontal, and the
general form of the surface of the country does not indicate any
great change since the fluid rock filled the valleys.
No trace of slates or schistose rock of any kind was observed,
and in three isolated cases where granite was exposed it was in
immediate contact with sandstone.
After travelling over nearly 1000 miles of the tabledand just
described, the extreme monotony of feature is suddenly inter-
cepted at the 143rd meridian, and the eastern division of tropi-
cal Australia being entered, the boundless plains and sandy
deserts are exchanged for bold ranges of hills of granite, slate,
porphyry, and trap rocks, in the relative positions of which the
effect of great disturbance is everywhere evident, but the limits
of this paper will not admit of more than a general view of their
geological arrangement.
The ranges of hills are nearly north and south, the western
acclivity is usually easy, and the eastern slope abrupt, while each
succeeding range as we proceed eastward rises to a greater
elevation; thus the range between the head of the Lynd River
and the Gulf of Carpentaria is 2500 feet above the sea level,
that between the Lynd and Burdekin Rivers, or the watershed
line, is nearly 3000, while some of the ranges on the east coast
are 5000 feet in elevation, forming the boldest features of the
Australian coast.
Granite, though frequent, especially on the eastern slopes, is
not so largely developed as the supcrincuipbent slates, which
are so much disturbed that it is scarcely possible to generalize
the dip of their strata.
These slates are very variable in character, some parts a fine
blue roofing slate, with even and fine cleavage, while in other


parts it assumes more the appearance of a sandstone rock inter-
sected in all directions by thin veins of quartz.
Interstratitied with the slate there are thick beds of quartz,
which sometimes form small hills, but it is not a rock favorable
to the development of metallic minerals, such as gold, silver,
or copper, for though to the general observer there is no differ-
ence in the appearance of bed and vein quartz, they are geologi-
cally totally distinct, the latter being the description which
accompanies the gold of Victoria and New South Wales.
Vast masses of porphyry have been erupted through the slate,
and this rock frequently contains fragments of granite and slate
.embedded in it, clearly indicating a more recent date than
either of the rocks of which it contains the fragments. Like
most erupted rocks, it forms hills or groups of hills, without
any definite arrangement, on the slope of the ranges of older
rocks.
At a still later period there have been extensive outbursts of
basalt, which exhibits such a scoriaceous character that it might
be mistaken for lava. There is, however, strong evidence of
its flowing from fissures, and not being erupted from cones.
Overlaying these rocks is a bed of sandstone, full of water-
worn quartz pebbles, which appear to indicate that the whole of
the country was submerged at the time, or at least subsequently
to the last outburst of the basalt.
The sandstone is usually most largely developed on the sum-
mits of the ranges, or at least is most conspicuous in this position,
and as its character is very similar to the upper sandstone of the
western table-land, it may be referred to the same period, though,
there there being no fossils observed in either, it is not certain.
It was only after passing to the south of latitude 20 deg. that
there was any decided indication of the existence of coal, and in
latitude 23 deg, coal-bearing strata are largely developed, forming
the Peak Downs, from which this valuable mineral seems to
extend with little interruption southward to latitude 28 deg., a
distance of 350 miles.
As the most recent rocks which have yet been observed
belonged to the highest member of the carboniferous scries, or
new red sandstone period, and as this overlays all the higher
summits, yet examined it w'ould appear that the whole of
Intertropical Australia was submerged at a period immediately
subsequent to the carboniferous period. That before the de-
position of any of the newer series of rocks the whole of this
portion of the continent was raised above the ocean, that portion
westward of the 143 deg. meridian by an equal or neaily equal


force, which scarcely disturbed the strata, and thus formed a
vast table-land, the edges of which have since been segregated
by waters flowing over its edges, thereby forming the valleys of
the present rivers and creeks.
Eastward of the 143 deg. meridian the elevating forces seem
to have been much more active, the greatest intensity being
along the eastern coast, which would appear to have been raised
at first to a much greater height than it now retains, as the
entrances of some of the rivers indicate a gradual subsidence of
the land—a view which accords with the theory which has been
deduced from the coralline structure of the Great Barrier Reef
which fronts this coast.
Assuming the foregoing data to be correct, it would appear 1
that Australia is the oldest persistent continent in the world, as
every other country exhibits unmistakable evidence of one or
more submergences since the new red sandstone period, and it
is a remarkable coincidence that the existing animal and vege-
table kingdoms in Australia, approximate more closely to the
extinct fauna and flora of past ages than those which now exist
in any other country.
BRISBANE : PRINTED BY T. P. PUGH, QUEEN STREET.


3P1LA.ST
a sl j owing the track made
bv
f
tF ® C® ® MIA € 115 45 ?C A1L1 ®
J
4 o| *
1
from (A E PENT ARIA DOWNS STATION (supposed lead wato-s of IYND UIY “)
j
to the ALBERT K1VKR
J ' '
BEING THE RESULT OF A PRIVATE ENTERPRISE
V
III x
COMMENCED AUG. 3l” ENDED OCT. 24™
1
V .
MDCCCJiXI V .
Latitude* 17
U7 ‘“T*
V
K s ■
C, \ ° A/
s(#
\
\
\. *
G u 1 s
0 I
/ : n t N
V
>
\
\V
/
I
/ X \
X N
N
\
\
1
1
t
i
:
A/
NA
\>
N v<>
\^
V"
\ <1 , i/j
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
St
A '
J JU 4 *,
Xa«7< v
s
V
/ tj
4 /\
i »*
l
N/
\£> w
,4^rj ' N ES HUtR _ _
t/V * Jr V_
yT G° * / J
/ 4 C
/ffr'' * —rX (.v
.vj „i xT-*
>frrS
/ I v *r IoCamp xxxn
y\K f ><*. »**f
v ' # \ ; / /f
Latitude* ''' C ** r I *-*> "'\ J Xx -
/ r\-n
y r
i J^ 5
v,x
0
»
D |> Camp xvii
M » V-VI , ,
/(/1'<*/» yards
' N 4-
''t
. J-
.‘''Af
//^
V / /
Jb (. '«x-p ccT t
>5f - ° 7) ,;
'C'S I 3 no a, J, C
sJ"' X
/
r'F jOf-CAMP XVI
r 'n*c*r^
.isSIIT.
'~\D' ' 0 e yyiy— s
&► p<-3 1
7 U/ • V t* V y
Coton/tirg l OM .
e*c4-Uf
N \>\
\y,
ak Camp xi & xi.
\V S nr amp
1
[/•Ki
\ V
[ V \
-‘,V V 5.
Xi
Latitude 18
/7
ft
jt&!E
> W X
" (if y
y f v
MP XKVI-JCX1X , HX'XX*
otPOT //
'7%
Spl*rtchUi sheecof
■ f v>
Jr
J
CAMPXXIvr)
4
1
X attitude
/ j | Tvrvt* 7*t-a < iujs 1
Js h / *1 4 !
'' ' r * r <?o^ t 1 j- Ji ve/ Pia*->*r,s j
yJ&l' j ,1 I •<• -t /
/ 1 ' \ j
/ :! / -s 1 l
$i / \ * camp i V aUuui
1; / : Wigx
/ u &:
( ! \ .> !
<"P xxv j / \ (2. Find >'i c j''
\\
11 \ % k
% i 1 ' j
ttrm)£&S*0bJe/itl tvU. \
\( for cc Station.' v ,ly/
r ’ ' fix \ v-7
1 / .' -1, * \ //
//* * ,<•* \ 7/
V ruA J/
Afan , \ f 1 ®pCAMP XXI
[jWl * ; \ * u\ Stone*/ Forii
li ! ■ • >
If/ i '■ c-j' !
li**/ t SpLan/iui.ifMab /
IL/ i * JK I >
f 1 /U^
>, 1 v- s ,.»r . '
v'fjZ f *M* vr / y / a ’*>
J T <y /
ry 7x
1 4/ /V‘ v *»*•*
- A A 7 jrJL^r
j; . j
./ y >a,_
,/ V '^
Stahariyfirte, / / ! 1
l
X/A
-1 p xr^r^.^
1 a
I
f'4 W e -v
/ • 7A \V
d%
\ N °^n
\ V #
sysfdh?"**
"7 rtiy
••
.
RE MARK S
;
latitude* and/L onxjitade* of'bzrpentaruiJ)owns Station'estanatedTby H/T'Tricensed Surve/jor Jtichardson/ronvseveraL astrarvovrtical ohservcUunus
Do Du of Camp 32* oTotke* Aliertliaer takarv frorruA dmiralJy Ch/vrL Eati*buL> 17" S South* 139 PS fast*
One degree* of Lahtiu*de* egmals 69 05 Buglxsh/Miles
One degree ofhoTiqiiu.de on IS of .Latitude* equals 65.66 Eng lv Mlles
Distance* betife&h Carpentaria/Downs S/otron*and/Canip 3Z as (row tides is 304-i hn*g Mdes
OuiwarcLtra*ck markedthus
• Homeward* do do thus
A r 13. The general* course of the* Gilbert Riwer between* Camps VI. aaul XII. has been UudL down* tram* the* Latitudes and* I*ongdudes
shown on a* Idem* compiled* ui Melbourne of various explorations ui* this Dis triot-M r Mardonold not h/ivuig entered* the* cons
Lianous bearings of Ins track along this River m his notes refying upon zts course being ab'ecuhj known/
It WouLi appear that this River at Gimp XII. is placed* a* few miles too much to the Eastward* as on* cot rip a ring tins plan* With
M’ Macdonalds notes of the distance between* the above* Camp and*the* flinders fai'er "(the position*of whhh is fired*bg Bin*Ad*
-nnraUg Chart] there* is a discrepancy of d Miles orvthe outward* andthe* same on* the homeward track*.
The above point* on* the Gilbert River is probably situated* on* or about the* 142 Meridiem of longitude
With the* exception of the* above* mentioned discrepancy of 9 Miles, the total dhUaicc*outward (lh*p* ends of which arc fixed* hg
observation, and* the course checked id intecvals by the homeward* traok*) agrees, as here plotted, with the*distance* shewn* in*
M r Macdonalds notes within* two miles
Trees marked* by M r Macdonald on hi*s outward* journey thus Q
Do Do homeward do §\
Sunday Camps marked* with* star above m & numbers
Scale -10 Miles to 1 Incii
asaac — - —t a — m*
Vr A D-
\V
\ nth \
V ntw \
° X- \v\
■g CAMPy/fckVfAMPXM
® x-Ssf
*o xX
.5 1 '^
X % .
>. '-'V.TvA
* XfVrtuiu*
, ' J dM
C^CAMPXM>
»i
/
7 R_r_
JP iil% Sr, \
h<4 %nf' to
dp) '~4*
Open box flats \x \ Banl
> *
"X
■
c 0 -
Couwl r D 7%
v ,*
v 1
j . V %/
\»‘; yfo. % MaxarU. RjOSS
g<5^S^
*
•*■ i
■ S'XnXAMP XVI /fS
p\ 4J
irohew Country / A 7
--I m '%m^ M,Seituwn/ Camp xixq/». j/V
% W%<s* W$< //
Camp vn Camp ,a C,
''Vf y%C
w*‘ * 0
camp x.^
jc> a *V a
' \,
•
SA / #S#| l
N>.
0
Carpeutada Downs Station
-—- o I. AT, 18 At . JO s.
LON-H-tAAO'E.
Latitude 19
l4lo“ I
14
i° ti
14
3°
o
I4f
SI
L
k






