

■ .
:
.
:
V;;, T:
V. i \ - jp
1 m [ ‘ ■ ■'


JOURNAL
VOYAGE FROM PLYMOUTH
SYDNEY, IN AUSTRALIA,
ON BOARD THE EMIGRANT SHIP
ROYAL SOVEREIGN,
WITH A
SHORT DESCRIPTION OF SYDNEY.
J. S. PROUT,
ARTIST.
TO WHICH IS ADDED A
BRIEF ACCOUNT OF PORT PHILLIP,
Honbon:
SMITH, ELDER, & CO. CORNHILL.
1841.
Price Sixpence.




PREFACE.
The writer of the following pages, who is a man of education and an
accomplished artist, in consequence of circumstances which are glanced
at in the opening of his Journal, embarked with his wife and seven
young children as steerage passengers in the “ Royal Sovereign,”
Emigrant Ship, for Sydney ; the only distinction between them and the
emigrants on board being, that they had the accommodation of a separate
cabin; and considering the inconveniences which such a passage must
necessarily entail on a man of gentlemanly habits and feelings, the
tone of contentment, and comparative happiness which pervades his
narrative, proves at the same time, the goodness of his disposition, and
the excellence of the arrangements on board the ship in which it was
his fortune to embark ; the more especially as in consequence of calms,
and contrary winds, the passage of the Royal Sovereign was extended to
the unusual length of 136 days, although the same voyage has been
sometimes completed in 90 days, and seldom occupies more than 110
days in Emigrant Ships, which, on account of their being less deeply
laden, make their voyage on an average in about 30 days less time
than other ships in the trade.
The Journal was written for the amusement and information of friends
at home, without any view to publication, and is now printed by those
friends, in the hope that it may ho useful to others, who contemplate
emigrating to Australia, as exhibiting a true and vivid picture of life on
hoard ship, rarely to be met with.
The writer alludes, in his short description of Sydney, as he has done
more forcibly in subsequent letters to bis friends, on the want of labour,
and high rates of wages in Australia, and the consequent necessity for
the continuance of emigration at the public expense, which has been
discontinued during the last two years. It is therefore satisfactory to
know, that Her Majesty’s Government has recently sanctioned the
renewal of emigration, under the colonial bounties, and placed it under
the management of experienced houses at London, Liverpool, and
Glasgow.
Messrs. Carter and Bonus, to whom the Royal Sovereign belonged,
have been selected to manage the London portion of this emigration,
and they have announced their intention of despatching a ship from
the London Docks on the piesi of each month, for Svdnet, and the
sixteenth of each month for Poet Phillip. Several of these ships


are to call at Plymouth, and all of them at Cork, in order to afford
facilities of embarkation for passengers, from all the southern parts of
the United Kingdom. Extensive premises have been prepared as
“ Emigrant Depots” at Deptford, at Plymouth, and at Cork, in which
the bounty emigrants are received, a few days before embarkation, and
where the surgeon examines carefully into the state of their health,
so as to provide against the possibility of any infectious disease being
introduced into the ships; and they are kept there, free from the
contamination of public-houses, and low lodging houses, in which under
less perfectly regulated systems, the emigrants have been obliged to
reside while waiting for their ship.
The Depot at Deptford is under the immediate superintendence of
Messrs. Carter and Bonus themselves ; that at Plymouth is placed
under the charge of Mr. J. B. Wilcocks, whose zeal and efficient
services in the promotion of Australian Emigration, and attention to the
comforts of the emigrants, are well known throughout the West of
England; and the depot at Cork is superintended by Mr. John
Besnard, who is equally well known throughout Ireland as the most
active, and experienced Agent in Australian Emigration, and whose
uniform kindness to the people under his care, cannot he too
highly estimated.
All the advices received from Australia, concur in representing the
present as a peculiarly favourable period for persons with capital to settle
there, especially those who are qualified to undertake Sheep and stock
farming. In consequence of the severe commercial embarrassments
under which the colony has been lately suffering, the prices of land and
stock are greatly depressed, and consequently the capital of the newly
arrived settlers will purchase from five to ten times as much as it would
have commanded a few years hack ; and as there are already indications
of the return of that prosperity which cannot be long absent from a
country of such great resources as Australia possesses, there is a
certainty that the value of property now purchased will rapidly increase.
An excellent plan has been adopted by Messrs. Carter and Bonus for
affording to cabin passengers, the advantages of the first description of
passage on very moderate terms. A liberal table with live stock is
provided, with the best accommodation in the poop of the splendid large
ships, in which the emigrants are conveyed, at the low price of £45 each,
exclusive of wines, spirits, and beer, which articles are supplied to those
who require them at moderate fixed prices, and the great abuse is avoided
of making passengers, who use such articles moderately or not at all,
pay for those who are in the habit of indulging freely in them. This
system is also found to be the most efficient check upon the tendency to
excess in the use of intoxicating drinks, which has been too often
observed in long voyages at sea.


JOURNAL.
Avgust 1, 1840. About eight o’clock in the evening we left Plymouth; the sun had set
most delightfully; the new moon, red with the hues of evening, hung just over Mount Edge-
cumbe; twilight was gathering round us, and all nature was so beautifully still, that it appeared
impossible that causes to make man unhappy, could exist in the country we were then quitting,
perhaps for ever; but I had only to remember the continued difficulties and harassment of
mind we had experienced during the past two years, to enable me most cheerfully to part with
those of my family, then assembled on the beach, to see the last of us. The little group were
soon lost to our sight, and, in a few minutes, we exchanged this scene of repose for the bustle ever
attendant on a vessel’s preparing for sea, and particularly so in the case of an emigrant ship; we
soon had to say good-bye, to those of our friends, (Mr. and Mrs. R.) who came on board with
us, and then felt completely separated from home. The next morning, Sunday, about four o’clock
we were awoke by the noise of the sailors on deck, hoisting sail and raising the anchor; and
when I came on deck, at eight o’clock, we were outside the Breakwater, and, in fact, had
commenced our voyage, the wind very light from the N. W.; this, although rather against
us, did not prevent our making a tolerably good progress ; for at Six o’clock in the evening, old
England could scarcely be distinguished from the clouds lying along the horizon. After
breakfast there was a muster of all the children, and the surgeon (Mr. Jones) was most actively
employed in performing the operation of vaccination; this very necessary affair prevented
prayers being read in the morning; but at five o’clock this evening prayers were read by the
Surgeon, from the capstan; and at the same time, in the fore part of the ship, the catholic
service was read by one of the emigrants, in a voice so loud, that it quite disturbed, and in a
great measure tended to destroy devotional feelings in the party assembled at the cabin door.
At seven o’clock, we took our departure from the land.
Monday morning. Wind fair, hut very light; men actively employed in getting out the
studding sails; the day roost lovely. Shoals of porpoises and black fish blowing and rolling
close to our side; fishing lines in requisition, but no fish. Our deck presents a most motley
group, or rather groups. Most of the lot of emigrants, taken in at Plymouth, sick. One poor
girl, with her bonnet on hind part before; another with her gown brought over her head, and
looking the very personification of misery; children, some crying and some playing; men lying
in all positions, and in all situations. On the quarter-deck, ladies reading and working. The
vessel, like a beautiful bird, with her wings fully spread, is skimming the water most gracefully;
scarcely a cloud to be seen. Four o'clock; the log is just hove three and a half knots an hour;
but as we are steering our course, the sailors consider we are doing well, and are much delighted
with so favorable a commencement of our voyage. After tea, the catholic service was read by
the Priest; and, at seven o’clock, prayers by Mr. Jones, the Surgeon; immediately after
which, preparations were made forward for a dance: very soon a musician was found, and reels
became the order of the evening. What a strange contrast was the scene on deck to the solitude
of the vast ocean around us. Not a sail in sight; the sun, like a ball of crimson fire, sinking
beneath the horizon, and a beautiful breeze urging us through our pathless track ; it is a most
lovely evening. All appear happy; at least, if we may judge from the hearty cheer and laugh
which constantly arise, as the dancers perform any remarkable feat of agility. One poor Irish
woman has not joined this merry party, but kneeling on the other side of the deck, and quite
unaffected by the gaiety around her, is at her devotions; another hour and all will be still; then
the only occupants of the deck will be those to whose knowledge and good management we look
for the safe guidance of our “Sovereign” to port. Half-past ten, —The breeze has freshened ; a
most glorious canopy of stars, and our good vessel running on delightfully; thus ends the second
day of our pilgrimage.
Tuesday. Breeze beautifully fresh and fair, running six knots; the Bay of Biscay soon to be
entered; first death on board. Alas! poor duck, thou wert not spared to die nobly by the
steward’s knife, but thy vile companions, with perhaps the means of keeping thy body sheltered
from the chilliness of night, have squeezed thy poor little life out. The sickness appears to have
increased with the wind; still, with the exception of a few poor creatures, spread out on the
deck, little is thought of it. We (that is us and ours) are all well; not a wish for terra firma,
and if those were with us that we have left behind, we should not have an earthly desire


ungratified : the visual evening services, and afterwards dancing. The sunset, awfully fine—quite
Danhyan. We are now in the Buy; the mate has just come aft to announce lightning off our
weather bow; this is a bit of a damper, as it indicates a change of weather. Clouds rising to the
southward, the bursts of lightning seen through them, and playing along the horizon, brilliant in
the extreme. “All hands on deck." Studding sails taken in, and preparation made for what
may come. Went on deck the last thing before turning in; lightning still in a more extensive
sweep; wind completely lulled; a change of wind almost certain: thus we have entered the
“ Bay of Biscay, O.”
Wednesday. The expected breeze has not arrived; wind light, but very variable, having
blown from all quarters during the night, and now pretty well settled in our teeth; a little rain has
fallen in the morning; the sky looks rather wild and watery; an awkward swell; a few of our folks
a little qualmish; just had a visit from some of “Mother Carey’s chickens,’’ they are following the
ship, and fly and look very like swallows; three or four other birds they call “ sea geese,” have
flown by our stern, and at a short distance from us; a boat with her keel up has floated by, most
probably washed from some vessel; wind against us, S. W., still we are making some way.
I find myself getting quite learned in nautical technicalities, and can scarcely wonder at it, when
even Fred, and Vic. occasionally come to me with the intelligence, “ that they are going to brace
the yards,” or “ they are going to throw the log:” those boys are become capital sailors—hold on
by a rope as firmly as possible, and ascend and descend the ladders between decks, and to the
poop, fearlessly, and quite heedless of the roll of the vessel. The sun is again about to leave
us; the effect watery, but still very beautiful; indeed, from what I have seen, I should be
inclined to say, so are all sunsets at sea. And now for my sketch-book, that I may try to secure
a bit of the splendid effect forming.
Thursday. Rough night; wind still against us; children just come down for their books, school
having commenced on the quarter-deck; Mrs. Jones superintending the “delightful task,” &c.
weather thick and rainy, too cold to remain on deck; have just seen one of our bow ports floating
astern, set adrift by one of the Irish gentlemen on the fore deck. Cold and cheerless as all
appears to be now, warm weather is close at hand; to prepare for which, the boatswain is getting
ready the wind sails, and the necessary arrangements for spreading the awning being made.
Friday, Dead calm, but most lovely morning; the heavy swell gives the sea the undulating
effect seen on a field of corn when swept by the wind. Fish, called by the sailors “skipjacks,”
are actively amusing themselves around the vessel. Matilda has just come below to report—
“a whale and shark.” The harpoon got in readiness for the next sea lawyer, as they term him.
The increase of heat felt most sensibly, so that we experienced the comfort of the awning which
had this day been spread: towards the evening delightfully cool—all parties on deck; on the
lower deck dancing, singing, and practical jokes ; on the poop some admiring the beauty of the
evening; some playing chess, others dominoes, all wishing for a breeze, and which, apparently,
is all they have to wish for. The beautiful moonlight appears to have a charm for every one, and
our cabins are deserted; the water remains as still as a sheet of glass; and clouds, moon, and
stars are all reflected on it; probably, a knowledge of our being in the great Atlantic, with the
attendant circumstances of the case, may, in some degree, affect my feelings; but I never
remember seeing such solitary grandeur as appeared in the effect of this evening.
Saturday. Was delighted on coming on deck to see the studding sails set, so that, although
we have but little wind, that little is doing us good. Four or five “ stormy petrels” having
been following the ship for hours, we baited a small hook and sent it astern, but no go; they
were not 10 be taken in by taking in fat pork. Breeze has freshened a little, and we are now
leaving Biscay Bay behind us. Saturday evening on board, like a school-boy’s Saturday
afternoon, is considered a time rightfully set apart for amusement. On the lower deck, the
emigrants mixing with the ship’s crew, have formed themselves into divers parties; some
spinning yarns to their attentive and wonder-struck auditory; some most vocally chaunting the
misfortunes of a forsaken blue-eyed Polly; and others, although they were never in the ship
before this voyage, boasting of her powers, and of the certainty that we should soon “ pick up”
the “ Fairfield,” although she did leave Plymouth before us. We have now completed our
first week from home, and although, it is probable before our voyage is ended, we may find it,
as others have before us, rather monotonous; yet hitherto, the days have slipped by so rapidly,
that we appear to have had no time for anything but eating, drinking, admiring, and sleeping.
Sunday, Avgust 9th. Fine breeze from the N. E., making six knots an hour. Quite a
change in the appearance of every one on board. The dirty, but very picturesque, dresses of
the Irish are laid aside, and all are rigged out in their Sunday finery. Their usual occupations
are discontinued, and the consequence is that the deck, as well as themselves, looks clean and


comfortable. Prayers were this morning read in the cabin. Breeze freshened, and another
knot added to the log.
Monday and Tuesday, wind still fair. A large shark has been following the ship, and has
walked off with a piece of beef. We are now, four o’clock, abreast of Lisbon. Commenced a
sketch of the deck during the school hours.
Wednesday, a day of births. The Doctor has received notice that his peculiar services will
most probably be required; and much to his annoyance the steward (who had made use of the
hospital for his sleeping apartment and store room) has orders to shift his quarters immediately,
in consequence of which, hams, hammock, preserved tripe, and other epicurean dainties, are
walked off to the gun-room, and the mother expectant, with delectable Mary as nurse, occupy
the deserted quarters. Some one says, “ Man wants but little here below, nor wants that
little long;” and truly it will be a good thing for the poor woman, now below, if she can bring
her requirements into so small a compass. The little cabin in which she is lying is No. 1, of
those towards the stern of the ship termed the intermediates, and consequently immediately
joining that part of the ship fitted up as berths for the emigrants. No notice appears to be
taken of the circumstance by the surrounding crowd, some of whom are engaged in washing
kettles, others in scrubbing pans; and then the confusion of tongues rising from this Paradise
below—what a scene for such a circumstance 1 There now appears more than the usual bustle
about the door of the natal chamber. The charming Mary has issued her commands, and, presto,
the doctor appears. Half-past four; noisy as the surrounding multitude have been, and still
are, one little shrill cry has just issued from the quarter in question that has drowned all other
sounds, and we know that Mr. Agar is blessed with a son and heir.
Thursday. We still continue to have a splendid breeze. The subject of our usual moon-
light conversation this evening was the expected appearance of Madeira in the coming morning.
Friday. The first thing I heard this morning was “The Island is in sight.” But on
coming on deck was much disappointed to find it had come on so thick that nothing of it could
be seen. About ten o’clock we were abreast of it, and then most fortunately the mist cleared,
the curtain of clouds rose, and at a distance of twenty miles the beautiful island, canopied
with light fleecy clouds, was distinctly seen. A few flying fish have just passed.
Saturday. Running eight knots, which will soon bring us into the N. E. Trades.
Sunday, August 16th. This morning passed the Canary Islands. Teneriffe, at a distance of
about sixty miles, was seen at sun-rise by one of the men; but as it commonly happens, a mist
has risen above the horizon. lam disappointed, and sadly piqued at not having had a sight
of the Peak.
Monday. We are receiving the benefit of the N. E. Trades, and during the night in no
very agreeable way, having been awoke by a flight of furniture. Now flying fish are seen in
all directions: they rise from the water in shoals, and in their flight resemble sparrows; their
white bodies glisten in the sun-light beautifully, and after going a distance of a hundred or
hundred and fifty yards they drop into the water, causing an effect such as would be produced
by the glancing of shot from its surface. The fish appears to be (as far as I can judge from
seeing them at a little distance) about the size of a herring.
Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. Weather very sultry; close cloudy skies: but thanks
to these never-failing winds we are making good progress. We had lost sight of porpoises for
many days, but this afternoon were delighted to see our old friends surrounding the vessel;
word was sent aft that they were under our bows. The dolphin striker was manned. Every part
where a peep could be obtained was crowded. I was fortunate enough to get on the bow-sprit,
and just over the man with the harpoon; very Soon a fish presented his side, and the harpoon
was thrown but with no success. In a few minutes another monster came rolling towards us,
and in an instant the white spray from the bow became crimson with the rush of blood, and
we knew that this time the spear had done its duty. Now all was confusion. Some cheered,
others calling to the man at the rope to pull away,‘or the fish would get under the bow; whilst
many alarmed for the safety of those who, on the fish being struck, pressed forwards to the
most dangerous situations, were hallooing to them to get back in the ship. Amidst this
confusion the poor fish was soon brought to the edge of the water, the blood issuing in a flood
from the wound in its side; but although struck in so deadly a manner its strength was still
immense, and it was with great difficulty, and then not until a rope had been bound round the
body, that it was brought on deck. In less than ten minutes its head was off, and the greater


part of the skin and blubber removed from the body. All now were anxious to possess a share
of the spoil; so much salt provisions had made the poor porpoise quite an anticipated luxury,
and the carvers were besieged by a voracious multitude. In half an hour from the time of
its being captured, the tubs, basins, and other utensils of most on board, contained a portion of
the carcase.
Friday. Numerous were the frying-pans, stew-pans, and all other pans, that were this
morning put in requisition, and breakfast and broiled porpoise made all hearts glad. I think I
may safely say (perhaps from having of late suffered a few deprivations) that I never enjoyed
a beef-steak so much in my life as I did the slice of porpoise that graced our morning table.
Such I believe is the opinion of all, therefore woe be to the next lot of porpoises that show
their noses. We are now passing St. Antonio, one of the Cape Verd Islands, and about
twenty-five miles from it. It is rather misty, but still sufficiently clear to show that it is very
mountainous, and of a fine form.
Saturday. Odearame! deara me! as Mrs. Wilhelmi says, our good friend the north-
easter has left us. Here we are in the variables— the line fourteen degrees south of us, and no
grounds for expecting any thing but calms, squalls, and contraries, until we arrive within two
or three degrees of Father Neptune’s shaving shop. This is a tolerable blessing just now, as
the heat is pretty considerably increased, and if we are to bob about in these frizzing latitudes
for a month or six weeks, it will be any thing but agreeable. It is now three weeks since (to
talk grandly) we left Albion's rocky shores ; at half-past eight on that evening, then quite light,
we reached the vessel. This evening the sun set at a few minutes after six, and as there is
very little twilight here it became dark soon after. Such a change bringing (as far as the
absence of light is concerned) the long winter evenings on us, has a tendency occasionally to
make it appear a much longer period since we bade.adieu to those we left behind us. And it
does not do, in looking forward to the completion of our voyage, to compare it with that portion
past, and say we hope a.fifth is over. A sea voyage (after the first three or four days of
roughish weather are past) is, and indeed in most respects, can only be, very delightful. There
is such an absence of care, because there is an absence of money, and apparently its necessity.
All things are provided for you, and you have only to eat, drink, and be merry. Then whe-
ther in storm or calm, the sea and sky are ever objects either of grandeur or loveliness. The
interest you feel in the way of the vessel, particularly so when another is in sight, and as the
sailors say, going the same road, lest you should be compelled to acknowledge the superior
powers of your adversary. The change from one climate to another, and that so palpable
because so Sudden ; and the strange land you are to see, and the excitement felt when straining
your eyes at the given time with the hope of first seeing the “promised land.” These, and
many other sources of gratification, derived from your companionship with creatures strange and
beautiful that daily surround the ship, will always cause a sojourn on the ocean to be time
delightfully spent. Still there are here, as in every other case, drawbacks; and I dare say, four
months will be quite as much as we shall wish of it.
Sunday, 23 rd August. The watch-word appears to be prepare for squalls, and why ? The
morning is as lovely as morning can be ; the wind certainly is not as we could wish it to be;
yet we are going w'thin four points of our course, and we may fairly hope that a change of
wind will soon put us in a better way. Ah 1 but says the boatswain, do you see that dark
scud gathering towards the horizon ! “ Yes ; but what of that ?” Look again, you may see
the rain, it will soon be here, “Down with the jib—the mainsail, take in the royals, &c.”
These orders were almost as instantaneously obeyed as they were delivered ; and no sooner so
than.the wind whistled through the rigging. The sails, which before had been flapping about
as though in play were now strained to tbe bursting point; the ship lay on her side; and in
another minute all was calm and quiet as before. It has continued squally all the day. It is
now evening. An interested and pretty considerable group are from the main deck watching
the appearance of the sky, and making their nightly calculations accordingly. The rain has
re-commenced ; the vessel again trembles under the sudden gust; this, the mate says, will be
the worst, and, from his having seen a very brilliant star at the horizon, the last; in faith of
which all prepare to turn in.
Monday. In the middle of the night—that is, about three o’clock this morning, a most
unwelcome visitor intruded himself in our berth, and caused us much annoyance as will readily
be imagined, when;! declare the intruder to have been neither more nor less than a RAT! Maria
had, from the excessive heat of the cabin, been kept awake, and in consequence had thrown
aside the bed-clothes for the purpose of enjoying as much air as our opened ports would admit,
when this horrid creature selected her person for a foot-path, and had proceeded as far as her
face, before her alarm would allow her waking me. I need not here enter into particulars with


regard to the fright she experienced, it was just such as might be expected from so close a
companionship with so disgusting a creature. To get a light was, of course, the first thing to
be attended to. And here I would give a word of advice to those of my friends who may be
placed in similar circumstances. Be careful as to what lucifers you select, and mind you keep
them dry; I had not attended to either, and therefore had to be beholden to the binnacle.
Sunday, August 30th. During the past week we have had little else than a succession of
squalls, accompanied by the heaviest rain I ever witnessed. Wet decks, and wet berths, have no
tendency to raise the spirits; and the constant exclamation from all cabins has been, “ What a
wretched mess we are in 1”, The weather has been so bad, that there has been little opportunity
afforded for going on deck; and the heat below has been intolerable. I find this kind of wea-
ther is by no means uncommon in these latitudes. Three days since, we were immediately
under the sun, so that now it is north of us. We hope to cross the line about Tuesday, or
Wednesday, and then to be favoured with the south-east trades, then a little fait weather will
soon dissipate the blues.
A sail in sight; some say homeward bound, but if so, we shall not be able to send letters, as
it is too rough to put the boat out. They are preparing to have a little conversation with her,
through the medium of signals, but it is getting so dark, that I fear it will be useless. After
tea, went on deck, and found that we had got very near each other; it was then dark, but she
had hoisted a lantern, thereby indicating a desire to gossip a while: to enquiries made, we
learned that she was the “ Lascar,” twenty-five days from Greenock, bound to Batavia. After
comparing notes with regard to longitude, she gave us the go by.
Monday. Aggy’s birth-day, who, as well as the weather, is inclined to be squally; as from
the sudden lurches the ship gives, it is dangerous for the children to be on deck, they are all
ordered below, and are now stowed away in the berths.
Tuesday. A great improvement in the weather; for the present, 1 hope we may say, good
bye to squalls. A delightful breeze, but unfortunately from the wrong point, it being south,
and that is the direction we want to go.
Wednesday. News this morning; another increase to our number of passengers. An
unsuspected young woman, was taken suddenly hospital-sick during the night; and without
even disturbing her next-door neighbour, became elevated to the important rank of mamma.
For this event, some ladies consider a great deal of preparation absolutely necessary, and little
articles by little hundreds form an interesting exhibition to those who have been, or sincerely
hope to be, in a situation requiring such a stock of small clothes. Not so the lady in question,
she thought it quite enough to provide the child; and when she was put to bed, and undergoing
the usual formalities for introducing the little stranger, the nurse became dress-maker, and by
the time it was required, had converted a pocket-handkerchief into a cap and first frock. But
the mamma excuses this absence of preparation, by declaring the event is an affair entirely
without a cause; and like the lion that laid an egg, she does not at all understand it. However,
Messrs. Carter and Bonus, whose attention to the wants and comforts of their passengers has
extended to every point of detail, had been more prudent than she had, and from the ship’s
stores was soon selected all that was necessary in the way of apparel, for the great personage so
lately arrived. It is said of all children, that they must be wise who know their own father,
but what a Solomon must this little creature be, if it should ever find out its papa, when even
its mother affirms that no such being does, or ever has existed.
Thursday. Still a southerly wind; for the past three or four days, we have done nothing but
cruize from the east to the west, and from thence back again, without having made fifty miles
towards our true course. We are now more than three hundred miles from the line, and if the
wind continues to blow from the south, when we shall get there, no one knows. However, this
is better than being becalmed; for then, in our present situation, the heat would be intolerable.
As it is, the sky is clear, and the breeze delightfully cool and fre.h. One of those beautiful
little creatures, called by the sailors, “Portuguese Men of War;” (Paper Nautilus,) has just
passed our side; its gossamer-like sail of a delicious pink colour, filled with the wind, and
sparkling like a gem set in the deep blue sea.
The flying fish appear to have quite deserted us; and the dolphins that were to have been
caught, where are they ? I certainly have been very much disappointed in the fishing depart-
ment; indeed., so much, that the lines for some time past, have been put by as useless articles.
Friday. Wind still unpropitious; we are literally doing nothing. Blessed again with the
light of the moon, the evenings are most delightful. Twilight, which two or three weeks since,
was so very brief, is now become a period of considerable duration, and of exquisite beauty ;


the part of the sky towards the horizon is of a most delicious orange-grey, which passing through
orange, and then a most delicate rose colour and lilac, terminates in a deep warmish grey. The
moon, although but six days old, and having all this light and colour to contend with, yet bears
out most brilliantly. This is our background. In front we. have the poop of our vessel, which
with the mizen-mast, and its necessary cordage, together with the helmsman standing full against
the most luminous part of the sky, make a richly opposing mass; the middle distance is formed
by the sea reflecting the deep tones of the sky, and uniting most beautifully the foreground and
distance. Through the whole runs a chain of lights commencing at one angle with the moon,
which by light fleecy clouds is linked to its silvery ocean path, and terminating by the reflec-
tion from the binnacle light which falls full on a part of the seaman’s dress.
I this day commenced letter-writing to friends at home.
Saturday. A sail in sight, apparently homeward bound, but no hope held out that we should
near her sufficiently to send letters. To our great delight, when she came within hail, the
Captain, finding we had newspapers, expressed his determination to come on board. His inten-
tion was no sooner known, than there was a simultaneous rush below: pens, ink, and paper in
great request, and would have gone off at a considerable premium. Then came the questions—
where are we?—what is the day of the month?—how long shall we have to write? And over
the paper pens like lightning flew. The Captain was on board; and very soon word was
brought that he was ready to leave. Hasty terminations; blots and wafers; and the delightful
intelligence to friends at home that all was well with us, was completed. We found, on
delivering our packets, that since we had received the hurrying message, which had caused us
so suddenly to stop short in our epistolary correspondence, the two Captains had entered into
negociations in the way of barter; by which we learnt that a bullock was to be ours, and bully
soup theirs. As they would have to send to their vessel for the animal, we determined on a
second edition of letters, which to some we had time to complete. Many of the Irish who had,
or who could beg, borrow, or steal a sheet of paper, took advantage of the opportunity thus
afforded them of sending to the dear Island so green. One man brought an open sheet to the
Captain, covered with immense characters; no doubt his friends would understand it, but he
quite forgot to mention who his friends were, and had not its deficiency of a direction been seen
by some one standing near, poor Pat’s letter would have been of little service. The second batch
being ready for delivery, we again went on deck. The boat had nearly reached us, but where was
the bullock ? In my simplicity, I had not considered that there might be a difference between
African bulls and English ones; (by the bye, I should have said that the vessel in question was
the “ Naiad,” from the African coast, bound for Liverpool;) and therefore was a little surprised,
instead of a noble bellower, to see a little creature, about the size of a marketable calf, a beauti-
fully sleek hide, quite black, and most symmetrically formed. It certainly was a juvenile, about
fifteen months old; but when full grown, lam told, they are very small. Now all business-
matters were completed, and the stranger Captain went over the side. Presently another letter was
seen emerging from the hold ; this also was not directed. "You are too late, Pat,” was heard
on all sides; but Pat did not believe it; and amidst the cry of “ Make haste, my boy,” i’faith
he did not fail to make haste, and in a jiffy completed his task in a workmanlike manner; but
the boat was gone, poor fellow. A cry was heard, “ Fling it to them he did so, and, favored
by the wind, the letter dropped safely into the boat. Not one of the crowd that hung over our
side, but appeared delighted at Pat’s successful throw ; a hearty cheer rose from our ship, which
was answered by the boat’s crew, and we each went our own way. I believe, in a few cases, the
sight of this vessel and the circumstance of her boat being alongside, caused a little yearning after
home—it was of brief duration; the " Naiad” soon became grey with distance, and all were
again perfectly satisfied with their situation and prospects.
Sunday, September 6th. This morning poor little Africanus became a victim to our desire for
fresh provisions. At twelve o’clock a child of one of the steerage passengers died; it had been
ill about three weeks, so that it was not an unexpected event. It was to have been disposed of
to-morrow, but the father thought the sooner it was out of sight the better, and by his wish, about
seven o’clock this evening, we parted company with the poor little creature and its bag of sand.
The parents being catholics would not permit any service to be read; stating that it was not
usual with them, unless at the funerals of persons above the age of seven. To-day the wind is a
trifle more in our favor, and we have done a little belter.
Monday. Wind still improving. The Captain does not doubt but that we are in the trade-
wind, and that as we work away to the south, we shall have more east in it; then we shall in
our course run gaily. So be it, say I.
Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. The weather has been constantly fine, but the wind has
still a most obstinate preference for the south, so that, although we are moving on, we make more


west than is to be desired. We, this evening, crossed the line in twenty-four degrees. The
line to many on board had been looked forward to as a line most palpable, and they actually
asked for the glasses that they might see it distinctly.
Sunday, September 13f/i. The long-expected south-easter is come at last; a beautiful breeze;
six and seven knots an hour.
Tuesday. Breeze still holds; weather beautiful; at twelve o’clock nearly nine degrees south.
Thursday. This evening two unfortunate flying fish took refuge in our main chains, and were
very soon Waited on by the boatswain; one of them, not liking his appearance, contrived to
return to the place from whence it came, the other was captured. I had a great wish to preserve
it, hut its fate was decreed; and instead of its being sent home, a pickled curiosity, it was
handed over to the cook, that it might re-appear a broiled relish for breakfast. Fortunately it
was considered there would not be much picking about its beautiful fan-like fins, and they
became my share of the spoils.
Saturday. A brig in sight, homeward bound, most probably from.the Brazils. This is the
first vessel we have seen since we parted, a fortnight ago, from our Liverpool friend, the bearer
of our letters. What a change since then in the temperature; it is now getting quite cool; in
the night we find it add to our comfort if we close the ports. The moon has left us for awhile,
and we all appear of an evening to think our cabins more comfortable than the poop. Cards
and paper counters are all the go; round games, whist, and " Simons says whiggle whaggle.”
Sunday, September 20th. Wind south-east by east, and a stiff breeze. The old “ Sovereign”
has been playing pitch and toss all the day. We are now twenty degrees south, longitude about
thirty-four. In a few days we shall lose the trade winds, but with every hope that they will
be succeeded by winds from the west, and then we shall get off to the south-east as quickly as
possible.
Thursday. The flying-fish have quite disappeared, but in their stead we enjoy the com-
panionship of a few of those beautiful birds, Cape pigeons. Our good south-easter begins to
fail, and to-night, no doubt, will breathe its last.
Friday. Our friend expired early this morning, hut lam happy to say we have a stiff north-
easter instead; up go the almost forgotten studding sails, and away we go nine knots in the
hour; the weather most beautiful, all in high spirits, and delighted in the apparently well-
founded hope that in two months we shall arrive at the land overflowing with milk and honey.
This evening the breeze still continues, and, in fact, freshens; now and then we get ten knots out
of the old lady. ,
Saturday. Ob dear! oh dear! what a falling off is here; a change has indeed come o’er
the spirit of our dream; we have had a most blustering night, almost rolled out of our beds;
just as we were about to leave our uncomfortable nests, and look out for breakfast, t{ie boat-
swain, who turns in very near our quarters, was loudly and hurriedly called, and amidst a
sudden confusion of sounds on deck, caused by the running to and fro, and hallooing of the
men, I thought I heard some one say, “ the main topmast is gone;” in a few moments my toilette
was completed, and on hastening on deck found it was but too true. The wind had continued
to blow from the N.E. very freshly, but a sudden squall from the S.W. had taken us aback,
and sent the main topmast over the side; oh, what a wretched appearance we cut. The rain
coming down in torrents, the poor shattered fragments of mast, sails, and rigging, hanging in a
confused mass from the main top, the sailors drenched to the skin, and of all that was yesterday
so cheering and delightful, nothing now remains. .We found, on examining the fragments, that
the spar was a bad one, and, therefore, for a bad job, it might have bepn much worse; had it
happened when the men were reefing top-sails the loss would have been most serious; in addi-
tion to the poor fellows’ lives, we should have been minus their services, which would have left
us in a very unfit state to meet the rough weather we must shortly expect. After breakfast all
hands went to work in good earnest, to repair the damage done; the carpenter has selected, and
commenced operations on a spar that appears likely to do us more service than the former one;
the deck has been cleared of the wreck, and all we want is a little fine weather. I am, however,
sorry to say, we are more likely to want than to have it; the wind has got again to the S. E.
which prevents our making the course we could have wished—all is miserably wet and cold.
Sunday, September 27th. The wind has got hack to the N. E. blowing half a gale, and the
rain coming down in torrents; we are now, however, able to make our course, and though but


few sails are hoisted, going at seven and a half; this is the most wretched day we have had since
leaving England. All below is dark and uncomfortable, we being obliged to close our ports;
forward, the hatches are down, and but few of the steerage passengers venture on deck, most of
those who have been up have had to return with wet jackets, as the sea occasionally breaks over
the vessel; she is rolling tremendously, loose spars and other matters are changing places con-
tinually, so that it is scarcely safe to walk about.
Monday. We have passed one of the most miserable nights imaginable, the vessel rolling and
plunging, and consequently displacing all our as well as our neighbours’ valuables; water-
casks and boxes, fragments of bottles, dishes, plates, and cups, all rumbling and rattling about
in glorious confusion, a good holdfast being essentially requisite to prevent our rolling out of our
beds. Above us, in the cuddy berths, they have been worse off than ourselves, for in addition
to all our troubles, they have had the water in in such quantities, as to make it impossible for
them to remain in bed. To these accumulated comforts, add the almost terrific sounds occasioned
by the sea striking and breaking over the ship, and it will be more easily conceived how
anxiously all eyes were strained to catch the first indication of day-break. Misfortunes and
faces long are heard and seen in all directions; on deck every thing is equally dispiriting—
scarcely a person to be seen—heavy rain—the sea constantly breaking over the side—a cold
north wind rushing and whistling through the rigging, and chilling one to the very heart. From
there being so much motion in the vessel, the children are all kept in their beds, ports closed—
cabins wet—no prospect of getting any thing cooked. How very comfortable 111
Tuesday. The wind shifted in the night to the south-west, blowing great guns, but we have a
clear sky, the sun shining brilliantly on the spreading sea, which is roaring and rising around us.
Wednesday. A dead calm! Were it not for the swell which the wind has left, we might
almost imagine we had been dreaming of, instead of witnessing something like a gale at sea ;
but the employment of the sailors tells too forcibly of the days gone by. The carpenter has
completed his part to the main-topmast, and they are raising it to its place, so that we shall
soon be ship-shape again. If the preceding Sunday was noted down as the most miserable day
we have had, this may with equal truth be styled the most delightful. A dreamy quiet appears
to pervade all things around us. The temperature of the air warm, without being in the least
degree unpleasantly so. Cape hens, pigeons, and last, though not least, the stately albatross,
Hying, round and quite close to us; indeed so close, that a few of the poor unfortunate pigeons
received killing doses from the doctor’s fowling piece. One gentleman has gun and powder,
but no shot; however he supplied the deficiency by using split peas : and as wadding was not
at hand, some of the supply of tracts were used, thus, as he chose to state, providing the birds
with food both for body and soul. The sun has gone down rather mysteriously; more “ din”
to be apprehended.
Thursday. The old story again; wind and wet, and plenty of it. The barometer lower than
it has been yet, 29j. Throughout the day the wind has been very high, raising a constant
bulwark of water above our side. The seas long, and grand in the extreme ; some rising like a
pyramid, and crowned with a crest-like form of spray. The summit of the waves, as they
break, of a beautiful Emerald green, from which rises the snow-white spray; the wind sweeping
and eddying over the surface of the water most furiously. There is one great consolation for
us; we have a fair wind, and therefore must not grumble at its quantity. We are now, I
believe, in latitude 32 south, longitude 12 west; so that about ten days’ good sailing will
take us round the Cape.
Saturday. This evening being a most delightful one, I took advantage of the absence of our
neighbours from the poop, and enjoyed a solitary walk. It would appear that I was by no
means singular in my taste as regards this plan; for I had taken but few turns, when a slight noise
at my side announced the arrival of a new comer. I turned my head in the direction from
whence the sound came, and saw that my visitor was a beautiful bird. The poor little creature
appeared quite tired, and after several times approaching and flying from the ship, as if afraid
to trust itself in this strange resting place, it settled on the mizen-boom. I took the little wan-
derer very easily, and, much to the delight of the children, transferred it to a parrot’s cage. My
unfortunate captive proved to be a whale bird, its plumage of a beautiful grey, and in form,
though larger, very like a dove.
Sunday, October 4 th. This morning my little captive regained its liberty; it appeared
remarkably tame, but we could not induce it to eat, and therefore opened its prison doors.
Porpoises in abundance; one was struck and hauled to the bowsprit, but although wounded
most severely, the harpoon did not hold, and we lost our expected delicacy.


Thursday During the past three or four days, all has been flat, stale, and unprofitable, and
my Journal has been a closed book. We are now about thirty-five degrees south, and nearly a
thousand miles west of the Cape. The weather cold and miserable, baffling winds, and no
indications on which we can reasonably ground a hope of change.
Friday. Almost a dead calm ; and though an unprofitable, yet a very agreeable morning.
Our daily companions, the albatrosses, molly-manses, and cape pigeons, in abundance. The
fowling-pieces are again in request, and the doctor, after many an unsuccessful shot, has at last
given an albatross his quietus. It being so fine a day the boat was lowered, and this mag-
nificent bird brought on board; it is a young one, and only measures nine feet from wing to
wing, the common size being from fourteen to sixteen feet. Having made a slight sketch of the
bird, it was delivered into the hands of “ Bill, the cook,” who skinned it in a most professional
manner. Nine o’clock. I have just come off the deck; where, enticed out by the unusual
fineness of the evening, every one appears to be enjoying himself to the full. The moon is
shining most brilliantly, and the vessel almost still. On the poop the children have got up a
quadrille; whilst a continued promenade is kept up on the deck by those who “on gossip are
intent.” Between decks the catholics are at their evening devotions: this is a strange scene.
The lamp, suspended from the beam, throws its dim light on the countenances of the devotees;
who, kneeling around one of the mess tables, are apparently quite absorbed in the service read
by their appointed priest; before him is placed a small crucifix, and a tea-cup containing water,
which, from the eagerness displayed by the parties to get their fingers moistened by it, no doubt
is supposed to have derived some holy properties from the influence of the prayers read over it.
Immediately surrounding the little congregation, are those to whom the hour has brought duties
of a more domestic nature. Good wives are displaying their motherly qualities, and in most
cases vainly endeavouring to quell the hahy-lonish squalls of their appendages. From some of
the berths issue the night-capped heads of departed damsels; while here and there may be seen
the unblankeled lower extremities of couples, whom love and the law permit to repose on the same
pillow. Altogether it is a queer medley ; wonderfully social; indeed, in this respect most
Owenrlike: but I think the apparent comfort derived from' this odd mixture, would quite fail
in mUdi.g converts to the darling principle.
Friday, Oct. 16th. Another week has come to a close, and we are still on the wrong side of the
Cape; for the past seven days baffling winds, and cold and frequent rains have been our portion ;
added to which, we have daily, with melancholy interest, watched the progress of a disease
which had fixed itself on poor Kitty L , the young woman who had recently been confined,
and who from taking cold had not left the hospital since that event occurred; her history (at
least that part of it with which we have been made acquainted, and which is more immediately
connected with her being a fellow-passenger with us) is a most painful one. It appears an
attachment had taken place between her and some young man in Ireland, and which, as is
not unfrequently the case in that part of the world, led to an event that with much more
propriety might have occurred at a considerably later period of their acquaintance ; this was un-
known to her family, a portion of .whom, comprising her brother, two or three cousins, and an
aunt, had determined on emigrating to Sydney; Kitty was persuaded to accompany them, and
in the hope that the young man before alluded to, who could not then leave, would shortly join
them in Australia, she agreed to do so. Her stale being quite unknown to'any one on board, the
news of her confinement was received with much surprise, and great indignation, by her friends,
particularly by her brother, who on no account could be persuaded to see her. Weeks elapsed,
and Kitty could not leave her bed; she had taken cold, and an inflammation of the lungs ensued;
she could no longer nurse her child, and it was taken from her; her illness now assumed a serious
aspect, the brother was made acquainted with it, and 1 believe once, for a few minutes came to see
her. Day after day she gradually sank, all hope was at an end, and all that remained to be done,
was to afford her those comforts that would tend to soften the pangs of her last hours; still her
relatives visited her not—’tis true her aunt once sent to her, but it was to make the unfeeling
enquiry, if she had arranged respecting the few things she would leave behind her, as to
whom she would give them ; and horridly inhuman as it appears, this actually took place. The
painful character of her situation will be easily understood ; her death-bed side was only visited
by strangers, whilst her own brother and other members of her family were within a few yards of
her; still she was patient and uncomplaining, she knew she should die, and said she was anxious
for the hour, but she must have felt her deserted situation; indeed, a remark she made to the
doctor, shews it to have been the case. He had, I believe, been speaking to her on the subject
of her relatives, when she said, “ Oh, sir, mine is a terrible brother, if he were to see me dying,
and could save me, he would not hold out his hand to do so.” Yesterday it was thought she
was dying, and having expressed a wish once more to see those of her family who were near,
they were made acquainted with it, and the brother and a cousin came. I passed the cabin
where the poor creature was lying, but could discover no mark of feeling on their countenances.


I am told she had recognized them, but not a word of comfort was heard from either of their
lips. A young woman, one of the passengers, had been reading prayers, and now was reading
a chapter from the Bible, which the poor dying girl had selected. In the night I again visited
this' melancholy place; she was evidently sinking fast, and in the depths of the vast ocean,
whose waves were heard angrily roaring around us, would soon be hidden from our sight;
gradually getting worse, the poor girl lingered on until to-night, when apparently without any
pain, and surrounded by strangers only, she closed her eyes in death.
Saturday. Half-past five o'clock this evening was the time selected to perform the last
offices to poor Kitty’s remains, and accordingly at that hour, the body, encased in canvass, and
covered with flags as a pall, was brought on deck, and placed on a plank which had been so
arranged that it, should form an inclined plane, from the lower part of the main-mast to the
gangway, projecting over the side of the vessel; the bag of sand was attached to the feet; on
either side stood the mate and boatswain, with others of the crew, ready at the given time to
raise the end of the plank; amongst the surrounding persons stood the tearless, the “ terrible
brother it was a most affecting scene, and deeply felt; the funeral service was read by the
doctor, and at the appointed time the plank was raised, a deep, hollow sounding plunge, and all
that remained of poor Kitty L , was engulphed in the depths of the Atlantic. Some
albatrosses that had been flying round us, now hovered over the spot in our wake, and the sun,
which before had been beclouded,shone out most beautifully on Kitty’s grave. We looked on
it, and feelings of extreme pity for her sorrowful fate, rushed into our minds, but the sun itself
blazing in its evening beauty, caught our eyes, obliged us to look upwards, and then to feel
that though sorrow and misfortune may be the portion of many below, there is another state
above, where only happiness is known.
Sunday, October 18 th. Mr. Marsh’s birth day; this circumstance very naturally directed
our thoughts homeward; and anxiously did we wish, not that we should return there, but that
our friends might shortly come and be with us; we have now a fair wind and plenty of it, and
if fortunate, a few weeks will bring us in sight of the wished-for land.
This afternoon our little party occupied and pretty well filled the boatswain’s cabin, where a
bottle of good brandy, pipes, and cigars, enabled us, in a proper manner to do the birth-day
honours.
Monday. It has blown a gale of wind in the night, and being fair, I am happy to say, it
continues to do so : it is wretchedly cold, so much so, that one can scarcely remain on deck.
This evening we shipped two or three heavy seas, and had plenty of screaming thereat. We are
now in about 39 south latitude, and 20 east longitude, so at last, we have doubled the Cape.
Tuesday. Still plenty of wind, rain and hail.
Wednesday. A foul wind; we are rapidly going off to the westward.
Sunday, October 2 5th. Annie’s birth day; the weather miserably cold, wind against us, and
has been so for the past three or four days; continued rain, so that there is no getting on deck.
Soon after tea, and previous to our setting in comfortably for the evening, I took advantage
of the rain having ceased, and went to see how matters got on on deck. The wind had consi-
derably increased, every thing wore a most cheerless aspect, and a rough night was to be our
portion.
The sun had gone down, and now a lurid awful quality of light, issued from behind a heavy
mass of clouds, westward, spread its influence on the scene around, and became gradually
overpowered by the cold black character of the sky to windward. On this gloomy back ground
wildly formed pale leaden colour clouds had been accumulating, and rising rapidly from the
horizon, told most forcibly of the coming tempest. The order of “ all hands on deck” was
promptly attended to, and preparations to meet the gale instantly made. The darkness had
now materially increased; so that beyond the main-mast, all was gloom and mystery. The
wind roaring through the rigging, the groaning of the over-strained mast, and the hallooing to
the men engaged in taking in the sails, formed a fearful combination of sounds; anxious faces
might be seen on every side, for now we were to experience a real gale. All sails, save the
main, and fore top sails, were taken in; these being closely reefed, were again raised. Bill
Bonner’stop sail song led by himself, forming a most cheerful contrast to the surrounding
horrors. The force of the wind was now terrific, and a tremendous sea running. The phos-
phoric light of the waves, as they broke on, and for an instant, revealed the form of the bows, was
very fine, quite spectre-like; still, knowing we had a good sea-boat under us, and feeling every
confidence in our Captain and men, the tempest was shorn of its terrors, and the only alteration
we wished, was, that the wind had been from the right quarter, the quantity then, would have


been of no importance. Below in our cabin, where a few of our neighbours were assembled
a very different scene presented itself; here, though divided only by a plank from the strife of
the elements without, their roar was lost in the more pleasing sounds of the piano-forte. The
bottle, and it being Annie’s birth-day, were sufficient reasons why we should be comfortable.
How our friends at home would have been amused had they seen us in our ship-shape state!
Agsy, Fred., Vic., and Eddy, are sent to bed, but not to sleep; their little laughing faces
indicative of anything but care, shew that they quite enter into the spirit of the scene before
them ; and that their thoughts are not at all occupied with the storm which is raging without,
although the plunging of the ship, obliges them to keep a good hold fast in their bunks ; with
their five water grog they join in drinking Annie’s health, and that of all our friends at home.
Again on deck, eleven o'clock; the violence of the gale considerably increased. The fore top-sail
taken in, and we are now lying to, under a close reefed main top-sail. The night pitch dark;
the white foam on the tops of the waves as they wildly rush pass the vessel, only makes the
darkness more visible; but we are snug for the night, therefore to bed, perchance to sleep.
Ah, that is the question !
Monday. A most fearful night; sleep not to be named. The vessel pitched tremendously,
so much so that the captain was most unceremoniously thrown from his bed to the opposite side
of his cabin, and was severely cut and bruised. The gale, though more moderate, still con-
tinues—a fine bustling Stanfieldish sky and splendid sea—the vessel riding it out most
beautifully. Birds in abundance surround us. This evening we have shown a little more
canvass; and although we can keep our head right, the heavy sea prevents our making much
way.
Tuesday. Wind more moderate but baffling, which with the remains of a nasty sea keeps us
back most provokingly. In the afternoon a very large whale came close to us, and in the
evening we were quite surrounded by these delicate little fish—there were at least from thirty
to forty whales and fin-backs (a species of whale) blowing and frisking about the ship; the
weather exceedingly cold, sky gloomy, reminding us very much of a March day, with a N. E.
wind in England.
Wednesday, Still miserably cold, and making little progress.
Thursday. Almost a calm; beautiful clear sky, and the wind having changed to the N. E.
the weather much warmer. About ship. Breeze towards the evening increased a little, and
we are standing nearer our course; but’tis sorry work, and the only prospect we now have is
that of a long and tedious passage—our latitude 39 south, longitude 34 east.
Friday. Poor Kilty L ’s baby, deprived of a mother’s care, had been anything but
well for some time past; and this evening being supposed much worse, Mr. Jones was hastily
summoned to christen it. Such a christeningl Instead of the happy faces of the parents and
friends, assembled to join in and witness this mosfinteresting ceremony performed on the child,
for whom their prayers and hopes were offered that the life so lately commenced might be a
happy one, and lead to happy results hereafter —this poor babe, its little face already chilled
to marble by the finger of death, rested in the arms of a stranger; none but strangers stood
around, and sorrowful indeed were the faces that bent over it as the service was being read.
Most probably but a few hours would pass before another and most impressive ceremony would
take place, and the child be placed in its mother’s grave. A shark has just made its appear-
ance, and ’tis strange that previous to the former deaths which occurred sharks were seen. It
really would appear that those creatures are gifted with some exquisitely acute power of per-
ception, which directs them unerringly to their sepulchral banquet.
Saturday. A fine breeze from the N. W.; and we have been running throughout the day
eight knots. This evening the baby died.
Sunday, November Ist. The breeze continued till the afternoon; and then, as usual, a
provoking calm. In the evening, the body of poor little Catherine was disposed of.
Monday. Doing nothing till seven in the evening, when the breeze from the old quarter,
N. W., came freshly towards us, and we now bid fair to make up for lost time. Twelve o’clock,
midnight. I have just come from the poop, the breeze has become a gale; and, with yards
squared, we are running most delightfully before it. The moon, in its first quarter, beautifully
lights up the leaping billows; a broad sheet of spray is spread from off the sides of the vessel.
The waves following each other in rapid succession, come rushing after us, but in vain. With
the sails filled to bursting, we leave all behind, and apparently fly before the gale.


Tuesday. This afternoon the gale moderated, and we soon experienced the disagreeable
effects of a sudden calm. No wind, and a tremendous sea; the vessel almost rolling her yards
under the water, and displacing every moveable article in the cabins. Water barrels break
through their fastenings, and rolling from side to side, pour their liquid treasures on the floors,
and form a syrup with the emptied contents of dislodged sugar cans; candlesticks, work-boxes,
and writing-desks, hats, bonnets, bustles, and petticoats; together with the unfortunate wearers
thereof, are flying and reeling about in glorious confusion. Oh for a good sow-wester, that we
may not only be forced through the water, but kept steady thereon.
Wednesday. Awoke by the news that a ship was along-side. The Athenian, (American brig,)
a whaler, and now sailing under the Brazilian flag, from Rio Janeiro, out ninety days. Her
Captain had come on board, from whom we learnt that, in the previous gale, he had parted with
a bark, to which the brig was a tender; they had only taken two whales, and some black-fish ;
their last attempt had proved a very unfortunate one. The whale had broken the boat in which
the Captain and some of the men were, and, not content with that, had returned, struck the boat
to pieces, and passed completely over them ; one man was drowned; fortunately another of
their boats was near, and the others were taken up. The Yankee gentleman having calculated
that it was coming on to blow, we parted, he to steer his course to “ Desolation Island’’ we
to Sydney. This afternoon a little boy, cousin to Kitty L , who had been an invalid almost
ever since our crossing the Line, died ; this makes the third death in that family. Although I
have recorded all the deaths on board, I have quite forgotten to register the births. Within the
last fortnight there have been two little strangers added to our list of wanderers.
Thursday. The funeral of young D took place this morning. The weather wretchedly
cold ; vessel for the past day or two has been averaging six knots; we are to-day thirty-eight
south latitude; longitude fifty-six east, so that in a week we may hope to get a sight of
St. Paul’s. This was to have been a day of jokes, and many a Guy Fawkes was projected ;
but, considering that a good number on board are catholics, it was thought prudent to avoid the
chance of creating a bad feeling.
Wednesday, Nov. \ Uh. During the last four or five days we have been running before a splendid
breeze from the westward, averaging eight knots. The weather continues exceedingly cold, and
the deck seldom offers a temptation; in consequence of which we have been obliged to seek
amusement below. A whist party has been formed, and immediately after dinner we set to.
This afternoon we were disturbed in the midst of our tricks by the call of “Land! Land!”
We hoped to see St. Paul’s about six in the evening, but were far from being displeased at our
being summoned three hours earlier. It is near three months since we were blest with a sight of
our mother earth, and therefore it will be easily imagined with what a relish we enjoyed our first
sight of the island, which was then about twenty miles to the east of us. The day (for a
wonder) has been most lovely, and as we neared and passed the island we had a most excellent
view of it. It is considered to be of volcanic origin, indeed the crata may be distinctly seen
on the summit. A fine bold mass of rock forms a bluff headland to the west, and on the
eastern end there is an isolated rock rising to the height of about 300 feet, the top of which is
somewhat round, and by the sailors called the dome. A great many immediately traced a
striking resemblance in the rock to the real St. Paul’s. I cannot subscribe myself as one of
the number. Near this part is the only landing place on the island, which is seldom visited,
unless by the whalers that frequent these seas, and who go in there for water (which by the by
is seldom to be procured in any quantity) or for fish, an abundance of which may be easily and
quickly taken. Seals, and sea elephants, are also taken there. At seven this evening we
had run near twenty miles to the east of the island, and very soon it was not to be discerned
from the mass of clouds which rose from behind it.
Friday, Nov. 27 th. The making of St. Paul’s had been anticipated with much interest by all on
board, partly because we had had no sight of land for so long a period, but principally as it
was considered a sort of half-way house between the Cape and the distant spot to which we
were bound. Accordingly, on bidding adieu to this solitary island, all those hopes, desires,
and expectations, which had induced us to leave our native land, were most powerfully brought
into action; and our thoughts, conversation, and actions, have all tended towards one subject—■
our arrival at Sydney. Up to Saturday last the wind had been most propitious, and we had
almost named the hour of our passing Sydney Heads. In the evening of that day the wind
became unsettled, and on the following day (Sunday) we were becalmed and lying
“ Like a painted ship
Upon a painted ocean.”
The weather previously had been very cold, but on this day the transition was as from winter
to summer. The decks were crowded. Sunday clothes again adorned the fair, and we once


more cut the respectable figure we did at the commencement of our voyage. The western end
of New Holland lay just abreast of us, at about 200 miles distance, and we appeared at once
to have emerged from the Polar regions and their ice-chilled winds, and to be basking in the
genial beams of an Australian summer’s sun : a lovely sun-set, and then a gentle breeze —“ but
alas! alack a dayl from the east the zephyr flies.” At eight o’clock the order of “ About ship”
was obeyed, and we were steering nearly due south.
Monday morning arrived, and with it a gale from the east. A complete “Muzzier!” This
continued until last evening, when a sudden shift of wind to the S. W. took place. At first
it blew very strong, lightened a great deal, and rained tremendously ; the glass being very low
we anticipated a rough night, but the gale has settled down to a beautiful breeze, before which
we are running seven knots; our latitude to-day 41. 16 south, longitude 126. 40 east, on
Tuesday next we hope to enter Bass’s Straits.
Tuesday, Dec. B lh. On this day last week I find my former calculations led me to suppose we
should enter the Straits, but even now, seven days after the anticipated period, we are on the wrong
side of “King’s Island ;” a most unusual prevalence of easterly winds has kept us beating about
from the southward to the northward ; everything has tended to damp our spirits, and a most
miserable week has been experienced by all. Yesterday morning our hard-hearted easterly
adversary gave place to a gentle breeze from the N. W. which has enabled us to make our true
course, and we are now (this being twelve o’clock at night) nearly abreast of King’s Island.
Early this morning our attention was directed to the eastward, and our wishes so strengthened
our imagination, that a line of mist lying along the horizon, was declared to be none other than
the anxiously hoped for land. A few hours’ sailing, however, dispelled the illusion, and we were
reluctantly compelled to wait the result of the ship's reckoning, which made the land then
seventy miles distant. On Saturday last a beautiful little bird from the land flew on board, and
was taken: it died on the following morning, apparently from extreme fatigue; this evening a
butterfly visited us, but on being approached rather closely, preferred another ocean flight to
the honor of being impaled on a cork for the admiration of our friends at home. Several
branches of sea-weed have passed us, or rather we have passed it to-day, and as a token of our
near approach to land, were hailed with delight by our sea-sick community. The sunset to-night
has been the most magnificent thing I ever saw; to describe it I feel to be quite impossible; such
grandeur, such brilliancy, and such tremendously powerful colour, cannot be imagined. It has
been quite cheering to me, after so many disappointments as of late we have had, to feel that
we are approaching a country, where (if I may take the splendour of this evening as an earnest
of what is to come) I must receive so much professional enjoyment. I have just left the deck;
the full moon is shining most brilliantly, a steady breeze is taking us on from six to seven knots,
and in two or three hours I expect to be summoned to witness the sun rising on the heights
of Van Dieman's Land.
Wednesday. This morning at half-past four received the expected announcement that we
were off the land ; we had at last arrived at the entrance of the Straits ; the land we had then
made (and which was at some distance from us, and scarcely to be distinguished from a dark
mass of clouds which spread over it,) was Cape Otway, a part of Australia; King’s Island,
which forms the opposite boundary of the passage, lay too far to the south to be within our
range of sight; a beautiful breeze brought us at twelve o'clock at noon off Port Phillip. The
wind now began to freshen, and at two o’clock we were running in magnificent style before a
gale. We expected to make Wilson’s Promontory at seven o’clock, but before that hour arrived,
land was seen off our larboard bow ; it rose at a considerable height, in the form of a pyramid,
and was considered, without doubt, to be the promontory in question. We were now
about to enter that part of the Straits which, from the number of islands that are scattered about,
and the imperfect character of the charts of the Straits, would be attended with some risk to
navigate in the night; and after running until eight o’clock without seeing other islands which
then ought to have been in sight, the Captain most prudently determined to lay too until morn-
ing; it was then blowing tremendously hard; the ship was got in trim, and brought head to wind
for the night.
Thursday, At four o’clock this morning we were again on our way; soon after which hour
I was on deck. Sir 11. Curtis's Island was about ten miles distant, and, from its form, (allowing
for the difference of our position,) I have no doubt but that it was the same land we saw last
evening, and took for Wilson’s Promontory ; so that the strength of the gale must have taken us
considerably farther than we had calculated on. The boatswain who, in his own opinion,
(whatever he may be in that of others,) is no fool/ says he knew very well last night, that it was
no“ chronomety.” The breeze, though by no means so fresh as it was last night, was still
sufficiently so to send us on our way rejoicing, seven knots in the hour; so that we had scarcely


lost sight of Curtis’s Island, before “Judgment Rock” and “Kent’s Groupe” were seen,
cloud-like, emerging from the silvery mist which hung on the horizon. These Islands form the
northward side of the channel; to the southward are the Pyramid Island, and the Craggy Isles;
at twelve o’clock we had left them far behind. Soon after, at a considerable distance, we got
sight of the “ Great Furneaux’s Island,” which, like King’s Island at the western end of the
Straits, divides the two channels, Hunter’s and Nelson’s. At four o’clock we were again
surrounded by an unbroken horizon ; the Straits were behind us, and we had entered the Pacific.
This has been a most delightful day to us, full of interest, perhaps more so than any other day
since we left “ Home." Week after week, indeed, month after month, we had daily gazed on
the waste of waters, and had almost begun to doubt if such things as trees, rocks, and green
fields had (save in our imagination) ever existed. How inexpressibly delightful has been this
day to us will then readily be imagined, for we have actually seen land again; seen real rocks,
turf-covered slopes, and precipices huge, and all lighted up by such*a lovely sun—such colour—
such an atmosphere, and yet this is our cold raw month of December; well we may calculate
that, in a few days, we shall complete our voyage; but I must not be too sanguine, the fickle
wind has this evening been showing symptoms of a changeable disposition, and the studding
sails have been taken in. What will to-morrow bring forth ?
Friday. Our good breeze left us at six o’clock this morning, and a calm of two or three
hours has been succeeded by aN. E. wind, which to us is a complete “ muzzier.” Our plan
was, to have neatly rounded “ Cape Horn," and then to have run away for Sydney; instead
of which, we are running east by south.
Saturday. This hard-hearted wind still sticks to us, and we have done scarcely any better
than an eastward ly course.
Sunday, December 13th. Still practising patience; the wind most obstinately perseveres in its
foul course, and we of course do any thing but make the distance betwixt us and Sydney less.
Another death on board, and an abundance of disappointments. If hope deferred really does
make the heart sick, there will soon be no lack of sufferers. Not a peg to hang a hope on, that
the morrow will be more favorable to us—we shall see. Eleven o'clock. Since writing the
above, that is within the last half hour, a change has taken place; the wind has suddenly
dropped, and as we cannot have a worse one than that we have, for the past three days, been at
the mercy of, we may with reason expect the morrow will bring forth something more to our
advantage; at present we are quite becalmed. It is a lovely night, the stars, which in this
distant part of the globe, shine with such extreme brilliancy, that they appear to be our very near
neighbours, are shedding on us a deliciously softened tone of light; and the sea is teeming with
creatures emitting, and, in fact, which appear to be composed of, a beautiful glow-worm quality
of light. In form they are like the common green caterpillar, and about twelve inches long; a
darkish line appears to pass through them, terminating in a forked tail. From their
phosphorescent quality, we could see them very distinctly; they came close to our side, and
to a considerable distance, were seen in such numbers, that the sea had the effect of being
studded with gems.
Monday. All right; the much wished-for wind has arrived; we started on our true course this
morning at four, and, with our nose pointed Sydney-ward, have been doing eight and nine knots
throughout the day. At twelve o’clock we were off Cape Howe, two hundred and twenty-eight
miles from the Heads; and we are now, ten o’clock at night, going on as we ought to go.
Tuesday. A lovely morning and a good breeze still cheer us onward. During the past day
or two, the men have been engaged in scraping the masts, poop, &c.; and this morning the
decks were cleared of all lumber, the horse-house and cooking-apparatus have been shifted to
make way for the chain cable, which, from the depths below has been brought to light; and
a display of caps, ribbons, collars, &c. all most eloquently proclaim that it is our intention to
astonish the natives. About ten o’clock this morning we got sight of land; and hour after
hour, as we lessened our distance, the cliffs, and apparently thickly-Wooded country of
Australia, became more distinctly revealed to our well-exercised powers of vision. At four
o’clock we were off the mountainous district of “ Jervis’s Bay ;” from which a line of varied
coast, stretches to, and terminates in, the low land and sandy beaches of “ Port Jackson.” The
breeze unfortunately has to some extent lulled, so that we have been baulked in our hope
that we should this evening be safe by the nose in Sydney harbour. At half-past eight it had
become so dark that we could scarcely distinguish the coast. All were now on the look out for
the lights; and after a little eye-straining, the welcome beacon was discovered. Midnight.
Through the darkness of the night we have overrun the harbour. The ship has just been put
about, and in half an hour we shall be favoured by the light of the moon, when we shall run in


with more certainty. At one o'clock we were between Sydney Heads, but unfortunately the
night became cloudy, and consequently the moon was of little service to us. We had fired a
gun three times as signal for a pilot, and just before we reached the inner light, placed on a
group of rocks, known by the elegant name of “ Sow and Pigs,” a boat was seen approaching
us. The pilot came on board, and in a few minutes our Captain was no longer commander.
We were now in a narrow passage, high cliffs rising on one side, and apparently thickly-
wooded headlands on the other; but all was enveloped in gloom and mystery, and until day-
break we were all wondering and imagining what kind of world we had got in. In another
hour day broke, and the lovely harbour, beautiful islands, and distant town of Sydney, were
seen before us. After so long an absence from laud, the scene appeared one of enchantment.
We felt it quite rewarded us for all that had passed. Boats, with writers for newspapers, were
soon alongside of us, all anxious to get the latest intelligence from England for their day’s
paper; but as the board of health had not boarded us, they were obliged to keep at a respect-
able distance. Soon the healthy-men came on board; we were declared all right, and free to
go where we pleased.
SYDNEY.
As all friends at home must be very anxious to hear how the poor wanderers have got on;
how they are now situated in their adopted country; and what kind of country the said country
is, I shall commence such an epistle, as when ended, shall contain a little information on
every little subject connected with this no little colony.
With respect to our voyage I, at present, shall say nothing, as with this I intend to forward a
Journal which I kept on board; and although it is all in the rough, (it being the original and
uncorrected document) yet no doubt sufficient matter will be extracted from it to give a
tolerable idea of a five months’ knocking about on the brawling ocean.
Before I left England I was exceedingly desirous of obtaining every information (however
trifling its nature might be) concerning Sydney and the neighbourhood; and taking for granted
that all who may give themselves the trouble of wading through this elegantly descriptive—
What shall I call it? —of mine, will not find fault with me for being too minute, but rather, as
in my own case, will thank me for setting their imaginations in a right track, regarding this
very lovely place, I shall at once begin my pen and ink sketches of this portion of Australia.
My friends are all aware that the town of Sydney is situated in a harbour about seven miles
from the main sea. This harbour is considered the finest in the world, and is navigable
twenty miles beyond Sydney, at which part is situated the town of Paramatta. Its scenery is
the most beautiful I ever saw, consisting of a number of lovely creeks and deep bays, formed
by richly wooded points or bluff headlands, where masses of rock, and every variety of native
tree, mingling and contrasting with each other, form a succession of views the most picturesque
imaginable. In the harbour, on each side of the town, are several most beautiful islands, which
give a lake-like character to the whole scene, reminding one very forcibly of Killarney.
The town of Sydney, with its forts, public buildings, and streets, rising from the water and
over each other height after height; the bustle of the shipping, steam boats, &c. and the num-
berless beautifully situated villas in the neighbourhood, form, in my opinion, the most perfect
combination of picturesque and interesting objects I ever saw. The town itself is built on two
hills, the terminations of which toward the harbour are fortified, in one case by Macquarrie’s
fort, and in the other by Dawe’s battery. From the first commences the Government domain,
beautifully laid out in gardens and pleasure grounds (all open to the public), and on which
is built the governor’s house, or rather houses, as there is, in addition to the old residence, a
new and very elegant mansion being erected. From the other point commences the (own,
which extends full two miles, through the whole length of which runs George-street, (the
principal street). There are several other streets running parallel to it, intersected at right
angles by others. The streets contain, as will re.adily be imagined, specimens of every class
and style of architecture, from the first settler’s log hut, rudely constructed, and by no means
weather-proof, to the really handsome stone buildings of the wealthy colonial merchants.
George-street is a fine open bustling street of business—the shops quite English in their
appearance, and in many instances equally splendid in their fittings up; indeed, were it not


for the drays drawn by six or eight bullocks, and now and then the seeing a little knot of
natives, fantastically rigged out in such left-off finery as they may have been enabled to procure
from the town’s folks, it would be difficult to imagine oneself out of Old England. At present
trade is in a very depressed state, more so than has been the case since the formation of the
colony, owing principally to a recent mania that existed for speculating in land, by the bursting
of which bubble the solvency of many persons has been severely tested. This has caused a
temporary stagnation in business, and all more or less feel it. Still you cannot be an
observer of the number of first-class vessels, from all parts of the world, in and daily coming
into the harbour, the consequent bustle at the various wharfs, the business-like appearance of
the people, and lively character of the streets, without feeling that you are in a place where
prosperity, and the comforts of this life, are largely participated in by its inhabitants. The
people, generally speaking (although it is an expensive article here) dress remarkably well,
and scarcely in one instance do you see that which would remind you of the poverty and
distress so commonly and extensively experienced in the land we’ve left behind us. Of the
state of society I have as yet had but little opportunity of forming an opinion; but amongst the
upper classes ’tis here as at home very select, and of course very good. The style of the houses
lately, and now being built here, is quite English. Gardens are scarce in the town, from the
circumstance of ground being so very valuable; this, and the insufficient number of mechanics
in the place, causes house rent to be exorbitantly high. Scarcely any thing in the town, even
the houses occupied by the poorest classes here, lets for less than fifty pounds a year; and
nothing, commonly respectable, is to be had for less than from a hundred to a hundred and
fifty. The house we occupy has been recently finished, is situated in a retired and highly
respectable street, contains six rooms, kitchen, and cellar, together with a back yard. The
front parlour is about twelve-feet square, the drawing room about sixteen-feet, the other rooms
in proportion, and the rent I am to pay is only one hundred and ninety pounds per year.
There is one comfort, there are no taxes. At first, the idea of this enormous annual outlay is
fearfully startling; but you soon become reconciled to it, knowing that the incomes received here,
either through business or individual exertion, so far exceed any thing of the kind in a general
way in England, and your nerves gradually recover their usual state of composure.
The price of most articles of provisions is moderate; therefore, in this respect, as compared to
England, a saving may be effected.* Beef and mutton 4d. and 4£d. per lb.; bread about the
price it is in England ; tea (retail price) about 3s. per lb.; brown sugar 3Jd. white sugar Bd.
per lb.; coffee Is. Sd.perlb.; soap Old. per lb.; vegetables are dear, potatoes per lb.;
fresh butler 2s. 6d. per lb.; salt butter Is. 6d. per lb. The fish caught here consists of mullet,
schnapper (very nice eating), bream, and whiting; these are all moderately cheap. Servants’
wages very high, 16 to 18 guineas a year. So much for expenses, to meet which, mechanics’
wages are from Bs. to 10s. per day, in some cases more, and all other charges made for services
rendered by professional men, or others, are remunerating in the same ratio.
From what I have learned and seen since my arrival, I have not the slightest hesitation in say-
ing, that industry is sure here to meet with its merited reward. If disappointment be experienced
by any who come out, in almost every case it is to be attributed to the groundless expectations
and dissatisfied feelings that would lead them to suppose, in order to ensure wealth, it was
merely necessary to expose their newly arrived proportions to the gaze of the multitude, and be
immediately purchased at their own valuation. This is a place where a man, to do well, must
prove himself a useful member of society, and then his exertions (unlike the fact in England)
will be sure to meet with a proper reward.
Although it cannot be doubted that the constantly exerted energies of most persons here are
directed to the acquirement of money, yet plenty of time is found by them for all purposes
connected with necessary recreation; and pic-nic parties, boating, fishing, and horse-riding, are
constantly recurring amusements. For fishing it is a delightful place, as half an hour’s use of
the line, either in a boat, or from the rocks adjoining the town, will at most times provide you
with good sport, as well as materials for a delicious meal.
The bathing is excellent; there are baths erected, for the use of which you pay 15s. a quarter;
or which, in my opinion, is quite as well, there is a beautifully situated cove, overhung with a
profusion of trees, and having every accommodation in the way of seats, where the timid, on a
bed of sand, may gradually encourage an intimacy between themselves and the liquid element;
or if accomplished in the art of swimming, there are rocks from which they can fearlessly plunge
into the refreshing flood.
• The following prices are quoted in the most recent official accounts from Sydney, viz. Beef and Mutton 3d.
per lb. Flour. 2d. per lb. Tea 3s. per lb. Soap i ;d. per lb. Sugar 3d. per lb. Tobacco 3s. 3d. per lb.


The Sydney people are early risers, and it is a very common thing to see a number of livery-
altended turn-outs, raising the dust of the domain drives at six or seven in the morning; by the
way, this domain is one of the most beautiful spots imaginable; in some respects it is not unlike
Mount Edgecumbe, at Plymouth, but the ground is not so high; on it is built the Government-
house, the gardens of which are open to the public from sun-rise to sun-set; the flower-garden
contains, in a high state of perfection, varieties of every beautiful flower that you may have seen
at home, and numbers of those which are indigenous, and consequently new. The botanical
garden is also very delightful; here are all those plants and trees which cause one’s imagination
to take flight to distant parts; the air is loaded with a delicious perfume, and the only sounds
you hear, are those of the sea rippling on the neighbouring beach, and the constant song of the
myriads of locusts that occupy the surrounding trees and shrubs. Through another part of the
domain is formed a most excellent drive, and several beautiful walks, in extent more than three
miles; these are cut through the bush (or as we should call it in England, the wood;) delightful
peeps of the town and harbour, with its beautiful island, are constantly occurring. And here
are seen an immense variety of the most elegant wild flowers peeping out from the beautifully
broken ground, birds of lovely plumage seeking for food, and those exquisite insects which are
by the entomologist so highly valued at home.
The climate is very delightful, the glass throughout the summer usually standing at 75 in the
shade; during the hot winds, which, however, are of comparatively rare occurrence, the glass
has been at 110 in the shade. The heat is certainly greater than it is in England, but it is of a
different kind, and never causes that suffocating sensation so frequently experienced there.
The mornings and evenings are delightfully cool.
The country immediately around Sydney is, to a great extent, cleared of the trees; but within
a few miles, except those parts surrounding the settlers’ houses, the face of the country appears
covered with bush or wood. The roads, though not like those in England, are very good ; 1
of course, speak of those close at home, for, as yet, I have only wandered about six miles
from Sydney.
From what I have written, it will readily be seen that I am quite satisfied with Sydney as a
residence. There may be others, indeed I know there are, who would describe it with very
different feelings, and consequently would give a less satisfactory account of it than I have
done; I am, however, very thankful that I feel as I do, and trust that I shall always be con-
tented with such means of attaining a competency and comfort, as evidently are within the
reach of all here, who choose to exert themselves, and that I shall ever have an eye to see and a
heart to feel such natural beauty as here surrounds you on every side.


PORT PHILLIP,
The rise and progress of this district, called also Australia Felix, (or Happy) presents,
perhaps, the most extraordinary instance on record of rapid colonization—fostered by no
special legislative enactments in its favor, with little if any support from the British press, and
without the assistance which some of its sister colonies possess, of wealthy proprietary land
companies at home to diffuse by the powerful agency of the press a knowledge of their
advantages,—it has nevertheless, in the space of a very few years, by its own resources of colonial
wealth risen to a degree of importance, unparalleled in the history of colonization.
It was by the exertions of Sir Thomas Mitchell, Surveyor-General of New South Wales,
(whose important and well-known expedition of discovery was undertaken in 1834) that the
whole extent inland of this beautiful territory was laid open for the occupation of settlers.
Sir R. Bourke, then Governor of New South Wales, finding that the district was being rapidly
located and stocked with cattle and sheep, and the inhabitants daily increasing, proceeded to
the spot to take immediate measures for the formation of a town and port: The town was
Melbourne—the port, Port Phillip.
The district of Port Phillip, the official designation by which the extensive region named
Australia Felix has been proclaimed, is situated on the south-eastern coast of that portion of
New Holland, known as Eastern Australia, between the 141st and 146th degrees of east
longitude; is bounded on the south by Bass’ Straits, on the west by the province of South
Australia, on the North by the River Murray, in the 36th degree of south latitude, and on the
east by the Swampy river, in the 146th degree of East longitude.
The greatest extent of Australia Felix is from west to east about 260 miles, and from north
to south about 180 miles. It covers a space of thirty thousand square miles, or nearly twenty
millions of acres, and commands a navigable sea-coast of 500 miles, in a continuous direction
from east to west, including its numerous extensive harbours, capes, headlands, and inlets.
The aspect presented by this fine province is of the most favorable description; in a letter
which the writer has received from a friend at Melbourne, the country is described as resembling
Powderham Park, on the River Exe, in Devonshire, hut comprising millions of acres of beauti-
ful undulating thinly timbered land, the soil of the richest description, with the River Yarra-
Yarra (which in the native language signifies “flowing, flowing”) winding its way; the trees
are just sufficient for the purposes of ornament and shelter, no necessity existing to cut down
any to carry on the operations of husbandry. Lying to the south of Sydney, and the older
settlements, its climate and natural resources are superior; its climate, indeed, appears to be
one of surprising excellence—a clear sky, a warm sun, with a cool and refreshing breeze con-
stantly blowing from the south or south-west, renders it peculiarly bracing and healthful. This
district is described by Sir Thomas Mitchell “as of vast resources, and the most various and
fascinating description, more extensive than Great Britain, equally rich in point of soil, and
which is now ready for the plough, as if especially prepared by the Creator for the industrious
hands of Englishmen ; possessing a variety of every thing most interesting in a newly discovered
country, land which, for natural fertility and beauty, can scarcely be surpassed, streams of un-
failing abundance, and plains covered with the richest pasture, stately trees, and majestic
mountains, adorn the ever-varying scenery of this region, the most southern op all
Australia, and the best.”
“ It appeared that the land was every where alike good, alike beautiful, all parts were verdant
whether on the finely varied hills, or the equally romantic valleys which seemed to open in end-
less succession on both banks of the river, (the Glenelg.”)
The geographical position of Port Phillip is such as to promote the resources of colonial
wealth in no ordinary degree, not only from the proximity of its port to those of Sydney and
Van Dieman’s Land, but from its superior facilities of communication which so fortunately
exist between it and all the adjacent settlements, —the active and enterprising character of its
inhabitants has also done much for its advancement. The whole of its sea coast abounds with
gulfs, bays and creeks, forming safe, capacious, and convenient harbours, while its interior is
intersected by numerous rivers and lakes, which, by the abundant supply of moisture they
afford constantly (fertilise the land.


It appears also to be rich in mineral wealth, possessing seams of coal, as well as abundance
of iron,—the indispensable requisites for steam, —in addition to which it has quarries of granite,
hard sandstone, and limestone, near the capital Melbourne. The cultivation of the soil has
hitherto been limited to a small class; but its productive agricultural capabilities are most
favourably mentioned, —corn of every description has been grown and found to answer
excellently, yielding an average of forty bushels per acre from soil to which no stimulants had
ever been applied. All the culinary vegetables and herbs which are found in the English
kitchen garden are produced in the greatest abundance, and almost without cessation the whole
year round. Tobacco has been grown in sufficient quantities to supply the ordinary demands
of sheep dressing. The vine has been successfully cultivated, and in the district of Geelong, (%
portion of Australia Felix,) the Mulberry is so prolific as to admit the most sanguine antici-
pations of silk exports ere many years elapse. Every description of tree also which in the
older colonies has been turned to domestic purposes, is to be met with here in the finest state of
naturalization, yielding abundant materials for house and ship building, fencing, planking, and
for the purposes of the wheelwright, carpenter, and cabinet-maker.
The various species forming the animal kingdom of the district are the same as those com-
mon to the whole of Australia, and with equal truth it may be observed, there are no ferocious
animals, beasts of prey, or noxious reptiles in this favored land, —the wild dogs are the only
cause of annoyance, and they are timid, and easily soared away.
Melbourne, the capital town of the district, if advantageously situated on the banks of the
Yarra Yarra, which flows into the splendid bay of Port Phillip, at a short distance from the
town, extending along the banks of the river a length of between two and three miles by a
breadth of about a mile ; and as long since as 1840, contained with its suburbs, upwards of a
thousand dwellings, and a resident population exceeding 6000 inhabitants; its buildings, which
are concentrated more than is usual in colonial towns, are chiefly built of brick and stone, with
others of wood. It is copiously supplied with fresh water from the river, which runs through
the town, as it is also with every necessary of life, as well as its luxuries; it has the usual
public buildings and establishments, namely, custom-house, court-house, gaol, churches,
and other places of worship, club-house, numerous and well regulated inns, and houses of
accommodation, and shops well supplied with goods; banks, insurance companies, several
newspapers, charitable institutions, and literary societies. Port Phillip, the principal harbour
of the province, equally on account of its size, safety, and position, is centrally situated on the
coast of Australia Felix, in 144 degrees east longitude, and embraces in extent 875 square
miles of open water. Its breadth varies from 20 to 60 miles, and its depth from the beads
to the innermost anchorage is equal to 40; its expansive and sheltered character would enable
it to receive and retain in safety the whole mercantile and war navy of Great Britain.
The other settlements in the district demanding special notice here are Geelong, well adapted
by its situation for the emporium of trade for the central district of its province, and the outlet
for all its exports. The principal town is Corio, the seat of a magisterial bench, with a resident
justice of the peace; it has many public establishments, and a well-conducted newspaper
styled the “ Geelong Advertiser.” Portland Bay is also rapidly rising in importance, besides
which may be enumerated Williamstown, Mitchelstown, and a settlement in the Violet Ponds.
The whole territory is rich in fine plains, adapted to the depasturing of flocks and herds,
though all these are excelled by Gipps’ land, the splendid discovery of Count Strelenski.
This district is situated between the eastern coast of Australia and the harbour of Western
Port, and contains important lakes, rivers, and mountain ranges, with evidence of mineral
wealth ; though its most important features to a wool-growing country, like Australia, are the
magnificent prairies called Burney Plains, from thirty to fifty miles in extent, bordered by
copious streams.
Teape and Son, Printers, Tower-hill.
