

JOURNAL
OF RESIDENCE IN THE NEW HEBRIDES.
S.W. PACIFIC OCEAN.
WRITTEN DURING THE YEAR 1886,
Revds. C. BICE AND A. BRITTAIN.
TRURO:
NETHERTON AND WORTH, LEMON STREET.
1887.




JOURNAL
OF RESIDENCE IN THE NEW HEBRIDES,
S.W. PACIFIC OCEAN.
WHITTEN DURING THE TEAR 1886,
Revds. C. BICE and A. BRITTAIN.
TRURO:
NETHERTON AND WORTH, LEMON STREET.
1887.




PREFACE.
T have been induced to publish the following Journals at the
“ L request of some friends who have perused them, and think
they will prove interesting to others. The Journal of the Eev.
A. Brittain arrived too late for insertion in the ‘lsland Voyage’
for this year, and I have been requested by the Kev. William
Selwyn, the Secretary of the Melanesian Mission, to print it with
my own. Ido this with the greater pleasure, because his report
will not only supply me with a good excuse for rushing into print,
but will furnish others with a more full and complete account of
the work of the Melanesian Mission in the New Hebrides.
The three islands herein spoken of are the Northernmost of
the above-mentioned group—the New Hebrides—and form the
Southern boundary of the Melanesian Mission work in the islands
of the South-west Pacific Ocean.
Araga (or Pentecost) and Maewo for Aurora) are long and
mountainous islands running almost North and South, about forty
miles each in length, and separated by a narrow channel three
miles wide. Opa (or Leper’s Island) runs at right angles to these,
a broad, massive, grand looking country, resembling in appearance
a huge whale, the hump of which rises to a height of over
4000 feet.
Araga and Opa are thickly populated, but Maewo has a
scattered and sparse population. Opa is about sixteen miles from
Araga, but a channel of only five miles in width separates it
from Maewo.
The languages and dispositions of these neighbouring lands
are much more varied and dissimilar than would naturally be
inferred from their close propinquity. And the majority of the


Preface.
people, too, seem to prefer an inland situation, all which serve to
make the work of the Missionary the more arduous and difficult.
On these islands every outward prospect is pleasing, and the
inhabitants themselves not so far gone in vileness as to be inca-
pable of improvement, as I hope the following pages will show.
The work of the Melanesian Mission has been established in these
islands a good many years now, with more or less success, and
schools are in active operation as follows: —•
At Araga—Wonor, on the Southern face of the island, and
Lamoru and Qatvenua on the North.
At Makwo —Tanrig, Tasmouri, Tasmate, Mandurvat, Naruru,
and Uta. All these stations are on the North of the island.
At Opa—Tavolavola, Lobaha, Walurigi, the most flourishing
of which is that first mentioned.
With these few preliminary remarks and explanations I leave
the following simple pages to tell their own story.
CHARLES BICE.
N.B. —The vowels in the Melanesian languages are pronounced as
in Italian, a -ah, e- a, i-e.
The letter written n = ng in singer ; d = nd, b = mb.


JOURNAL.
Friday, 9th July. —The weather seaward looked very threat-
ening as we stood on the Pier at the Settlement in readiness to
embark. All the Melanesians, boys and girls, to the number of
about 50 had already gone off to the ship which lay tossing and
tumbling at her anchorage as if anxious to be let free. A
considerable number of Norfolk Island friends were on the Pier,
in addition to most of the Members of the Mission, to bid us
Farewell and wish us God speed. Many thoughtful little
mementos, too, found their way into our hands from our warm-
hearted and well wishing friends. The process of shaking hands
took some time in execution, but one could not but feel the
absence of many who were unavoidably absent on the occasion.
My own little ones were the last to bid me good-bye, and poor
little Walter (my youngest son) was very tearful. Shortly after,
we were all in the boat, and “let go” was called out. The
landing was very smooth, and we got out with very little
difficulty. Besides the Captain, Mr. Turnbull and myself were
the only passengers. It was close upon 5 o’clock p.m. when we
got on board, and some of the passengers had already begun to
feel the motion of the ocean. After things were put into some
order and the shore boat dismissed with Captain Bates and the
Norfolk Island crew, the command to “heave away” was given,
and then I saw for the first time the steam winch at work.
Before many minutes the anchor was in its place in the bows of
the ship, and the long process of raising the anchor in old days,
performed by manual labour, reduced to a minimum. We slipped


quietly down the leeside of the island, and had ample time to get
into some amount of order and readiness for a very dirty, rough
night. Opposite the Mission, the boys ashore had lit a large
bonfire, and we could hear their shouts, borne seaward by the
raging gale. As night closed in the sky became very dark and
lowering, and we knew full well what we w r ere to expect. We
had dinner while still under the lee of the island, but before the
meal was finished, we were knocking about in the heavy head
gale. Of course any where but at Norfolk Island, where there is
no certain shelter, it would be approaching madness to put to sea
with such a crowd of people in a small ship on a night like this,
but here there is no help for it. Perhaps had we not got away
as we did, we might have been detained another week, from the
uncertainty of wind changes and the insecurity of the anchorages.
All night it blew very heavily, with a nasty head sea. Of
course, the wind being very strong and dead ahead, we made
little or no progress, and were in fact hove to. Most of the
passengers spent a very unpleasant night, and the poor little
children, of whom we had four on board, suffered like the others.
The poor boys in the schoolroom had a disagreeable time, owing
to the large amount of cargo on board, in addition to their own
luggage. The Southern Cross, however, is a magnificent sea boat,
although slightly lively, and being at sea was, to me at least, the
worst of the evils we experienced that first night. Mr. Turnbull
is a good sailor, and he and I were alone in the saloon. Poor old
Manekalea I invited also to sleep there, on account of his
blindness, and I asked Silas Kema to sleep there and look after
him. Poor fellow, his sight seems quite gone, but he is wonder-
fully patient and resigned. 1 think now he begins to feel that
there is no hope of his ever seeing again, and he begins to try and
help himself and get about alone a great deal more than before.
The loss of so young, active, and intelligent a Teacher must be
much felt in the district of Ysabel, formerly under his charge.
Saturday, 10 1k —The wind had abated little, if any, this
morning, and the vessel was making little or no headway.
It rained a good deal throughout the day, and that allayed both
wind and sea by evening. Very few of the boys appeared on
deck, and I myself was quite hors dc combat. Mr. Turnbull
kindly offered to read prayers in English for me in the Evening,
and I managed the Mota with a few who were able to attend.
These first days on board ship are very trying, one feels quite out
of it altogether, and the sea legs arc somewhat long in returning


when one has been ashore for any length of time. Towards
evening the weather moderated a little, but there was very little
life about the ship. These unhappy days when one is the victim
of mal de mer leave a very unsatisfactory impression behind
them, and if any recollection is left, it is always painful. I was
not actually seasick myself, but I felt uncomfortable enough for a
time, and did not care for ship’s fare.
Sunday, 1 Ith. —The weather more moderate. I conducted
Morning Prayer both in English and Mota, and generally our
passengers were getting over their indisposition. It was not a
very profitable day however to me, for I could not settle to
anything: our Service hours on Sunday, at sea, are English
Mattins at 9 o’clock a.m. and Evensong at 7 p.m. Mota 11 a.m.
and 7.30 p.m. Our daily hours for meals are 8 a.m. breakfast, 12
noon lunch, 5 p.m. dinner. On Sunday this is slightly changed,
and. we dine at 1, and tea at 5 p.m. At anchor, too, the English
Morning Service is postponed to 10 a.m., and all the sailors
are enabled to attend. Usually only one watch can be present
while the vessel is at sea. This year we have a crew composed
entirely of Englishmen. We have generally had previously
a strong admixture of foreigners. The steward, indeed, is a
German, but he has been with us so many voyages, speaks and
reads English so well, that one quite forgets his nationality.
The crew are a very nice, quiet, well-behaved set of men, and
all look so respectable. I believe the Captain has many appli-
cations for billets on board the Southern Cross, she being a popular
vessel now-a-days, besides, a trip in her is a paying affair, for
I am told that sometimes the men realize from £lO to £3O and
£4O by the sale of curios alone. The great collector on board
now is John Brown the boatswain, and he has accumulated quite
a museum, which he meditates taking to England for sale next
year. Brown is an old Island Trader, and knows all the speci-
alities of the trade and what will captivate the native taste.
Penny whistles and half penny looking glasses, I believe, are the
line this trip. There is very keen competition too on board
when the curio fields are reached, chiefly at Santa Cruz and some
of the Solomon Islands. Sunday passed away somewhat profit-
lessly, and evening once more closed over a day past and gone.
I did not give the sailors a Sermon, but reserved my efforts for
the Melanesians, many of whom were able to attend. I naturally
chose the subject of the Gospel as the basis of my remarks, viz:
the recovery of the lost sheep and the piece of money, which


I applied to the condition of the heathen to whom we were
going, and our duty as seekers of those who were still wandering
upon the mountains and upon every high hill, with none caring
for them or seeking them out. We had some singing after the
service, and the termination of the day at least was pleasant, and
I hope profitable. One’s thoughts naturally wandered away back
to Norfolk Island, and one thought of the quiet peaceful Sunday
evenings there, and the love of those we had left. The vessel
was much more at her ease this evening, and we could undress
and rest in bed with more comfort.
It was a great pleasure to me from this time forward, to see
the boys dropping into the cabin one by one to say their
prayers, unbidden but none the less welcome.
Monday, \2th July. —This morning the wind has moderated
very considerably, and the sea is going down. The vessel
moving along much more gently and easily, sometimes towards
our destination. Life on board is almost utterly devoid of
interest or excitement. There is little or nothing stirring, and
out of our element we feel restless and not fit for much. We
begin now however, to fall into ship-shape ways, and things
begin to look a little straighten than they did. The boys are
divided into sets of cooks, and have to take their turn in order to
cook and keep the schoolroom clean. The Melanesians have
three meals a day, and they are supposed to look after their own
food, the cook giving directions as to what he wants doing.
After the misery and prostration of mal do mer have passed off, the
boys get very lively, and do not easily again succumb.
In the evening we had music. Brown the boatswain has a
most ingenious instrument called, I think, the “Cabinetto,”
which plays almost any tune; a piece of perforated paper is
turned over a sort of key-board, like a mouth organ, by means of
a handle, and the closed notes are kept silent, while the open
ones speak according to the length of the perforation. Its tone
is somewhat harsh, but the music is very correct, and there is
plenty of it. Brown bought this instrument, which cost him
some £ls or £IC, for the special amusement of his young
Melanesian friends. The girls never seem to tire of turning the
handle, and the more it is turned the better the owner seems
pleased. Forward there is a very good concertina, exceptionally
well played by one of the sailors, a banjo played by another, and
a tin plate beaten by a third makes a very fair tambourine.
Altogether, the hour between 5 and G p.m. is very lively with


strains of music and other enlivenments. The boys most thoroughly
enjoy the music, and are very attentive and enthusiastic listeners,
breaking in with a good chorus when they happen to know any
of the pieces played. At 7 p.m. English Prayers, a shortened
form of Evensong with a hymn, and afterwards full Evensong in
Mota with a good deal of singing. We have many nice voices on
board this time, and the singing is exceptionally good. Owing to
the crowded state of the schoolroom, service is held in the saloon,
which is inconveniently small for the large number who attend.
The girls who hitherto have been prevented from attending, by
reason of sea-sickness, this evening put in a very fairly large
appearance. Most Melanesian ladies are bad sailors, and some
never get over the inconveniences of the uncongenial sea element.
Tuesday, 13 th July. —The weather this morning was somewhat
finer, but still a good deal unsettled. We have failed as yet to
get hold of the S.E. Trades, but are living in hopes that a
favourable breeze will soon waft us onward to our destination.
The great excitement this morning was the smoke of a steamer,
which at first we wildly imagined must bo the vessel expected
from Sydney to meet us at Norfolk Island, giving us chase.
However, wiser heads, by the direction of the ship’s head and the
course of the smoke, made it out to be the Rochton or some
steamer from Fiji towards New Caledonia. Whatever ship it
may have been, the excitement all ended in smoke. Beyond this,
we have had nothing stirring all day. The moon at night
dispersed the clouds, and the concertina forward enlivened the
monotony of the evening. And so has passed another day,
leaving little record of any work done.
Wednesday, 14 th July. —We were to-day somewhere in the
neighbourhood of Walpole Island, a flat, uninhabited island lying
by itself in mid ocean, on which myriads of sea birds have their
dwelling, and lay their eggs and hatch their young. The weather
was somewhat hazy, so we got no sight of the sun although the
Captain was anxious to do so, not having been able to sec that
orb either to-day or yesterday. The 1 dead reckoning ’ alone
showed him our probable whereabouts, but he was not able to get
any definite position laid down. Shoals of fish were seen about
the ship to-day, and the boys perched on the bowsprit end suc-
ceeded in cleverly catching two fine skipjacks, one of which we had
cooked for dinner, and which was pronounced as very good eating.
No bait is required for these fish, a line, rod, and hook to which
a piece of red rag is attached, are requisite, and the motion of the


Vessel makes the tempting object skip along the surface of the
water, to which the fish rises and swallows hook and all. They
are large fish, and peculiarly strong, especially with their tails.
At times they breach out of the water to a great height, the
motive power being seated in their tails. One of the boys
unadvisedly took hold of one of those caught to-day too near the
tail, and the fish lashing out struck him on the forefinger, and at
first I fancied had sprained it, for the whole hand swelled, and he
was in considerable pain for some time. This evening it was very
quiet and pleasant, and the moon added to the pleasantness of the
occasion. It is wonderful to mark how the days lengthen as we
go further North, and how the weather grows warmer. Soon wo
shall dispense with waistcoats, and bye and bye coats will likewise
go, except at meals and at prayers. We saw nothing of Walpole
Island, and tho Captain got no sight of the sun again to day.
Thursday, \oth July. —This morning we were well up with
Anaiteum, the first of the New Hebrides group, and belonging to
the Presbyterians who have been established there a great number
of years. Soon after Tanna appeared in view, and later on in the
day Eromango. We could not see the volcano at Tanna, so that
wo cannot speak of its activity or otherwise. We passed close
under Eromango, and for some time the water was quite smooth.
We had a most beautiful wind all day, the real S.E. Trades,
and wo were enabled to make good progress towards our
first place of call. Everyone on board seems to have sprung into
life with the sight of land, and no doubt many see in the islands
we are passing tho anticipation of their own homes. Most of our
passengers are from the New Hebrides and Banks’ groups, of
which these three islands are the commencement. It was most
beautiful all day and the evening especially enjoyable; the Captain
wisely remarked that if it were always so fine, there would be
too many sailors, or at least persons who would want to go to
sea. Melanesian islands are disappointing as viewed at a distance
from the sea, for they are like any other place, but the great
beauty of them is seen on nearer inspection and ashore. These
three islands and the Loyalty group are not so thickly wooded
as some farther North.
Friday, July 16 th. —Strong S.E. Trades, and we moved along
rapidly all day, doing over two hundred miles. We found our-
selves in the evening running through the passage between
Ambryra and Pentecost at the South end of which we expected
to find Mr. Brittain, who had been left there when the ship went


back to Norfolk Island. We stood quite close into the place, but
receiving no manner of response from the shore we began to sus-
pect that after all the bird had flown. The vessel stood off and
on all the night, and it certainly was more comfortable than
usually is the case under the like circumstances. The vessel rode
very quietly all night, and on
Saturday, July nth. —We were early off our place of call, and
seeing no signs ashore the boat was lowered and I took the steer
oar in a furious wind and a heavy sea. The approach to and
departure from this place were as nasty as could be, and I was
not sorry to be on board all right again. Mr. Brittain had left
some time before, and our visit was futile except that we brought
off his things. The people were quiet and well behaved, and
Tom (the teacher) was in great form. Tom, having been edu-
catd in Sydney, speaks remarkably good English and is evidently
held in respect by his people. Their dress and appearance are
very like their neighbours of Ambrym, and the women wear the
flaxen petticoat also like the Arabryraese. Their language, too, I
believe, is akin, the distance separating the two islands not being
more than five or six miles. Tom is building a very nice school,
and there seems a large population. A big, chiefly looking man
was sitting on the beach as we were coming away, and Tom told
me that ho was the chief of the place. I had brought nothing
with mo from the ship, and the boys had nothing, so the best I
could do for the great man was to give him a tin of sardines which
I got out of one of Mr. Brittain’s boxes. I dare say he would
have preferred tobacco, but he seemed as satisfied as natives usually
appear to be, for they are not generally very demonstrative or
profuse in their thanks. The tide was falling fast so wo had to
beat a hasty retreat and got off with some considerable difficulty.
Poor Tom must find life at home somewhat of a change to
the ‘ easy life ’he enjoyed in Sydney. I believe ho was very much
scandalized when he first got homo at the outrageously indecent
dress of his countrymen. Ho himself still dons the Sydney cos-
tume, but minus boots. Poor boy ! I dare say he dreamed in
Sydney of the reforms he would endeavour to effect when he got
home, but the stern difficulties in the way he now begins to
realize. Oh! Missionary work seems easy enough when viewed
from an arm chair at a distance of many thousand miles, the
difficulties only become apparent when the man is brought into
close connection with his work, and has to grapple in a stubborn,
persistant hand to hand fight with the Evil one. Poor Tom! I


suppose lie will try a little at first to stem the tide, and failing
in that, will drift along with the stream. To a poor youth like
that the difficulties of his position must seem stupendous and in-
surmountable. Nothing but the grace of God is sufficient for such.
I dare say ere now his bright vistas and day dreams are being
only too rudely dispelled, for he will have to find out like all
other Missionaries that Christians are not made by machinery, or
believers made such in a day; it is a long and weary process, but
labour is not in vain in the Lord. Once more on board, the boat
was hauled up, and on we started for the North end of the island
where now we hoped to find Mr. Brittain. We saw a Labour
vessel at anchor along the coast, and got to our own anchorage
about 4 p.m. Mr. Brittain came off in his boat very sick, and
with some difficulty got on board. He has been ill three weeks
and was very anxious for the return of the vessel. During the
evening he brightened up a good deal and I dare say felt much
better for the society of his white brethren. He gave a very sad
account of the state of things ashore, great sickness and consider-
able mortality. We had a very quiet night at anchor, and deter-
mined to stay here till Monday. We had some boys to land, and
the boats were going forth and back all the evening. The clatter
alongside was fearful owing to the large number of canoes that
put off to the ship and every occupant speaking at the same time.
They used to be a very noisy crowd, but have much improved of
late years. It was a most glorious night at anchor and not exces-
sively hot. We consider that we have done very well to bo here
so soon with the bad start from Norfolk Island. How the boys
and girls did enjoy the fruits of their own islands again, especially
green cocoanuts and soft sugar cane! And how pleasing was it
too, as well as entertaining, as the shades of evening closed in, to
watch the coy and shy flirtations of the young married couples on
board; one or two were quite oldfashioned at the process, but
Charles and Monica especially were somewhat more bashful.
The young bridegrooms were most attentive to their respective
spouses on the voyage but necessarily lived apart. The boys and
men all live together in the schoolroom, and the girls and married
women aft. There are as yet no married people’s apartments, we
shall look for those when we get a bigger ship.
Sunday, 18 th July. —Quiet and peaceful day at Araga. The
natives regarded the observance of Sunday so strictly that they
troubled us very little with their noisy chatter, indeed very few
canoes came off at all to the ship, and we were able to have an


uninterrupted day of rest. Our services began at 10 a.m. with
English Prayers. We chanted the Yenite, read the Te Deum,
and sang the Jubilate besides singing the Glorias in the Psalms,
and two hymns. We had therefore full Matting with a short
address to which the men paid very good attention. I tried to
make the discourse as easy and lively as possible, and interspersed
a few anecdotes among my remarks, which I think, being appro-
priate, were appreciated. The service lasted just three quarters
of an hour so that the men were not wearied. It was not a very
hot day, hut beautifully bright and glorious. Shore wards it
looked most lovely, the bright sunshine lighting up the vegetation
with a silver sheen, everything seeming to catch the infection
from the King of Pay, who rejoiced as a giant to run his course.
On board a gentle breeze cooled the air, and under the awning
and down below alike it was bearably comfortable and refreshing.
At 11 o’clock we had service in Mota, at which we had the
attendance of all the Melanesians of both sexes in the ship, and
a very hearty, cheering service it was. I reserved my address to
them for the evening and before noon our religious duties for the
morning were over. We dined at 1 o’clock and in the afternoon
Mr. Turnbull and myself went ashore. This was his first ex-
perience in those islands and he was duly impressed with the
natural beauty everywhere apparent, and the good nature of the
people. It was nearly high water when we went in over the reef,
and the clearness of the sea, the beauty of the coral bod, the dear
little blue and vari-coloured fish which flitted about produced their
due effect on him. The white beach, too, with its background
of most luxuriant green rising from the base and clothing in
marvellous profusion the tops of the hills greatly delighted him.
The climb up the hill somewhat dispelled the fancy, but one could
well imagine oneself in some semi-fairy land so strangely beautiful
as it all looked. We were in a very liquid state when we reached
the school about three quarters of a mile up the hill, and green
cocoanuts wore very acceptable. Here we found in the midst of
all the loveliness a poor little child dying amid squalor and
destitution. The poor young mother was sitting over it and
crying her heart out. Her son had boon buried the day before
and there seemed not a particle of hope for the elder sister. I
said what I could to comfort the mother, but it was too late to
do anything for the child. The father with a third child was
walking up and down disconsolately outside. The sight had its
effect on me, for the father bears the honoured name of my great


friend Bishop Key of Kaffraria, the mother bears my wife’s name,
and the little dying one the name of my own daughter, the boy
too who died the day before was called “Bailey” a cognomen
revered by all Augustinians as the name of its late Warden.
Poor things! May God give them all the comfort of His
grace, the only balm for a troubled and afflicted soul.
We walked about the village for a time and everything being
utterly new and strange to Mr. Turnbull he was very much
charmed. We visited old Sarawia who was once, and I dare say
now is, the chief man in the place. He still looks much the same
as ever but professed himself to bo failing in health, and suffering
from a sort of paralysis in his left leg. It does not seem however
as if he intended to die just yet for he has lately taken two or
three additional wives. We also saw the great wind and rain
maker, but he said he had given up the trade now, and came to
school regularly. Formerly he used to derive a good income from
it I believe.
The houses and gamals (men’s quarters) here are most squalid
and wretched, but the people seem content, and don’t trouble
themselves much about their habitations, but what they shall eat
or drink is a prominent consideration in all their minds. Their
great treasures here are pigs and mats, and a man’s wealth and
standing is measured by his possession in these. After proceeding
through various grades if a man can kill one hundred pigs at a
feast he is looked upon as a man of importance and his name is
handed down to posterity as a great man, and I believe by that
means his fare is prepaid to the realms of the Blest. The reverse
I believe obtains with those who possess no treasures and kill no
pigs. Everyone therefore in the interval between his advent into
this world and his departure from it, endeavours to slaughter
according to custom one pig or more, or the consequences will be
terrible if not here at least hereafter.
This is a cheap way at all events of purchasing blessedness
and no wonder they are eager with the small price for it. A
fighting man formerly was looked upon as having more claim to
their Walhalla than a man who refused or who had failed to take
blood. This title certainly of late years has not been so eagerly
coveted, and so far it is, thankworthy, but “ when the wicked man
turneth aw'ay from his wickedness and doeth that which is lawful
and right he shall save his soul alive,” this last clause as yet is
omitted from their programme.
On our way back I could not refrain from paying another


visit to the dying child. There still sat the faithful mother, and
there still lay her pretty child, life was not yet extinct, and she
had turned since I saw her before. I determined when I got off to
the ship to try and get some medicine as a sort of dernier resort.
I doubt if medicine will ever more do any good. We got off to
the ship before 5 p.m., and at that hour had tea, bread and
sardines, and cake which the cook had concocted. The “Cabinetto”
was going most of the evening, Brown having thoughtfully
brought some sacred sheets for Sundays. At 7 p.m. we had Even-
song in English and afterwards in Mota with an address on the
Gospel, “Be ye therefore merciful,” “not only were we to ask
mercy for ourselves I said, but we too must extend it to others,
and we should find plenty of opportunity of doing so, in the places
to which we were going. If we only felt for a moment the mercy
of God towards us as revealed in Christ Jesus, we must be mer-
ciful to our fellows, and we must show them the same mercy we
had experienced and known in our Saviour’s dealings with our
own souls,”
We had great singing afterwards, which they always enjoy.
It was most resplendent on deck afterwards, and one was thankful
for the quiet and refreshment throughout of the day of rest.
Monday, 19 th July. —Mr. Brittain well enough this morning
to go ashore to collect his things and make arrangements with
his teachers. It is his intention if health permits to stay ashore
in Mr. Palmer’s district at Mota and the Banks’ Islands, but in
his present condition such a step would scarcely be wise. How-
ever, time will tell. While he was ashore Mr. Huggett, the mate,
always ready to lend a helping hand, and myself put the teacher’s
things together, and when he came off Mr. Brittain had nothing
to do but give them out according as they had been deserved.
Meanwhile there were crowds of people round about the ship,
and much trading was carried on by the boys and girls on board.
They use here canoes with outriggers, and the larger ones are very
clumsy, unwieldy monsters. The Captain hates the sight of them
alongside for they rub the paint off the ship, and sometimes even
damage the copper. In the Solomon Islands they have no out-
riggers, and the natives are much more expert in the management
of their canoes, both large and small.
Here at Araga they have a very large number of canoes, but
they are very bad.
We weighed anchor at noon and stood across to Opa and
were at anchor at Tavolavola by about 3.30 p.m.; a very nice


breeze took us across, and on arrival there we made preparations
for going ashore at once. I found matters satisfactory ashore,
and the school in full swing, the young teachers all neatly and
nicely dressed.
They were glad to have Charles back again and the women
walked off with his pretty wife, dressed in all her bit of best.
She had done a good deal of weeping between the ship and shore,
evidently being very reluctant to leave her friends on board.
Her eyes therefore were slightly tear bedyed, and her cheeks also,
before she got ashore. The school looked cared for, and I was
pleased to see a very nice new house built for me. The people
were very glad to have me back and received me in their usually
cordial fashion. An English Trader had built a house, and had
resided some months near the village, but had lately taken his
departure, why I know not, but I believe there was not trade
enough.
There are a number of white men now trading all over the
island, the mystery is how they can make it pay. Monica
was very tearful again when I bid her good-bye, poor girl I dare
say she will have a hard struggle at first among her own country
women, but I trust she may have strength given her to resist the
wiles of the Evil one and his agents among them. She is a pretty,
flighty girl, but much improved of late, and became a great
favourite on board. She has a most estimable husband and I
hope she will make him a good helpmeet.
We passed a very pleasant night at the snug anchorage and
all the boys came off to the ship next morning.
Tuesday, 20th July. —We weighed anchor and dropped down
to Lobaha, about four miles along the coast to the Westward.
Here we found Herbert Arudale well. He came off to the ship
with his wife Mary who was not well. They seem to live much
happier now, and both were beaming over with smiles. He gives
but a poor account of his work, which is much in statu quo.
The fact is his field is very limited if he must confine himself to
his own people, and it never suggests itself to a Melanesian to go
farther a-field. The mountain must come to Mahomet, for Ma-
homet never dreams of going to the mountain. However, now
with Didi and his wife, a most exemplary pair, and seemingly
very devoted, they ought to make a fresh start. Baitagaro I saw
ashore and he seems to have improved, but it must be heart break-
ing work to labour on year after year, and get little or no
attention to what you say, no appreciation of the message you


bring, and no interest taken in all you endeavour to do. However,
it is what the Man of Sorrows passed through, and it is what His
true followers have to experience also.
Here we almost filled the ship with fruit, especially a kind
ardently longed for by the Norfolk Islanders, which they call the
Vee apple, but which the Opa people term “Uhl” Some very
sweet oranges too were offered for sale, and the ship looked like
a fruit market.
We hoisted our anchor before noon and stood across to
Maewo where we anchored in the evening. No one being down
on the beach, I started off Arthur Huqe and Duwu to Tanrig to
tell the people to come down in the morning.
. The village is three or four miles from the watering place
and except the ship is there, the Tanrigese seldom come down to
this beach, the sea being nearer on the other side of the island.
Mr. Turnbull and I with some of the boys went in and had a most
delicious bath, after so many days privation all the nicer. The
river we found very full and the rush very great, but the water
was most beautifully cool and refreshing. This now is the chief
and best watering place in the islands, and the water itself is most
excellent. Late in the evening a boy arrived who had rowed a
long distance in his canoe, and he gave us the news, which was
good on the whole. He told me again the tragic story enacted at
Nadui, a village not far from the watering place. One Vulatewa
was a reputed disease-maker, and he resided there. Lately there
had been a great mortality at Maewo, and especially among the
still heathen people of Tanrowo, a coastal district bordering on
Nadui. The great man, Melkalano’s son died and his brother
and many others, and Vulatewa insisted that he had made the
sickness, and would kill many more except he were propitiated.
However, propitiation by the gift of pigs or money was not in
Melkalano’s line, and collecting his followers he made a raid on
poor Vulatewa and killed him and two others, cutting them into
small pieces, and leaving them as they were killed.
They then drove out the other inhabitants, or rather fear had
already lent them wings for flight, and destroyed the village.
The poor people left .everything they possessed behind, and took
refuge in all directions among their friends. The people at the
next village, where there was a flourishing school, took fright
also, and cleared out of their homes leaving a fine handsome
school-house and a new church almost finished. The boy added
that as soba as Vulatewa was dead the sickness was stayed. We did


no watering this evening as the tide did not suit. After a very
quiet night at anchor on
Wednesday, 21 st July.—We started watering ship. This is a
busy process and keeps everyone on board well employed. Two
large canvas tanks are fitted into each boat, and fastened under-
neath the thwarts. Into these the water is poured from buckets
until both are full, a suction pump and hose on board empties
these canvas tanks into iron receptacles under the floor of the
schoolroom, and one boatload fills about a tank and a half. Seven
or eight loads of water therefore finished the watering to-day.
When everything was finished, the boys and girls went ashore to
wash their clothes' and bathe, and this day here is always looked
forward to. The people came down from Tanrig in the morning,
and I was busy packing up my things. After lunch I went ashore
and started away the bearers with my belongings. How they
managed to carry all the heavy boxes and a big harmonium up the
hill and on for three or four miles, I don’t know, but they did it,
and did not think much of it. I went on board again, and thanks
to the Captain’s kindness, I got the loan of one of the ship’s
boats, my own having been stolen by a labour ship last year.
After an early dinner, escorted by Arthur, &c., I left for Tanrig.
It was just getting dusk when I arrived, and I had ho time to put
anything straight. We had Evensong, and after that I prepared
for bed. The mosquitos were somewhat numerous, but it was too
late to get out my net, and so I put up with their music, and soon
was oblivious of their singing or teasing. It seems quite natural
to be here again, and as is usual the place has not changed at all.
The boys however, have built me a beautiful new house, and I
shall live in great comfort. I miss several faces too from the
congregation, whom death has removed.
Thursday, 22nd July. —l left the Southern Cross last night
expecting to get away early this morning, which I suppose she
did. However lam so far away from the sea, that I have no
means of knowing what she did. Naturally too, I was very busy
this first day ashore. The first business after Morning Prayer,
was to start off Samuel and the Tasmouri contingent who had
spent the night here. They had a good many things to receive,
but they got away in time to reach home before night. There
were numbers of other things to be done also, such as putting the
new window in the Church, unpacking the harmonium, making a
platform for it, &c. The old mode of life seems to come back
wonderfully naturally to me. Breakfast of rice, with sugar and


cocoanut milk, and afterwards a cup of delicious Norfolk Island
colfee, for which delicacy I am indebted to my kind friends Mr.
and Mrs. Fletcher Nobbs. My midday meal is a bit of biscuit or
roasted yam, and I reserve myself for the great meal of the day
in the evening, not sumptuous but amply sufficient, fried rasher
of bacon, fried taro pancake, and most excellent potatoes, for
which I am indebted to Mr. Alfred Nobbs at Norfolk Island.
After this I have a cup of milkless tea, which I brew in that
charming teapot sent me from China by Dr. Codrington. They
say ‘ enough is as good as a feast,’ and I suppose this is why I am
perfectly satisfied with this rough meal. After dinner I have
nothing again till next morning.
Friday, 23 rd July. —A most superb morning, and the place
looks very charming early in the day and in the evening, at
midday there is a strong glare and it is almost too dazzling.
The church looks most picturesque and pretty, nestling in a
perfect forest of bright coloured shrubs, among which are many
European representatives, e.g. the Poinsettia, the Geranium,
Marvel of Peru, and others imported from Norfolk Island.
Arthur certainly has expended great pains and taste in the
plantation, and it amply rewards him. Outside the stone fence
is an orange grove, the dark green of which stands out in bold
relief against the bright colours within. The church is still in a
good state of preservation and will last for some time yet. It is
getting inconveniently small however, and will soon want en-
larging. It bears evident signs of being made good use of, and
they tell me the congregation morning and evening is never short
of 50 or 60. In a very short time I hope this will be a purely
Christian village, and that not only in name, but in deed and in
truth. I see considerable change here since I left in the number
of the new houses, and the care of the town, for such it now has
a right to be called. Before long the Church will be the centre
of a number of private residences, and the people begin to build
better houses. Arthur has constructed his like mine with high
walls caned all round, and made it very comfortable.
Except the ground floor my house is quite as nice as a one
roomed boarded house. The school and church are almost
contiguous, and both are strong, substantial buildings. There
are at present 80 names of scholars on the books, and these are
regular attendants. I hope before I leave, please God, to see
that number augmented. At present we are strong in teachers,
with the two Arthurs, Patrick, Harry, Duwu, Tilegi, Kate and


Agnes. This morning after service, a shortened form of Mattins
with a hymn, we had school, and I hope progress has been
made. I was pleased to hear the teachers questioning their
classes on the subject about which they had been reading. The
perseverance of the old men in puzzling out the dreary sheets is
perfectly astonishing, but they will not be denied. They have,
however, learnt much by heart, e.g. Lord’s Prayer, Creed, Te
Deum, &c. The women are quite as persevering, if not more so,
and I don’t like to damp their ardour by forbidding them to try
and learn to read. The first class of girls are far away ahead of
the boys, and know a very great deal. These same girls used to
sing very nicely, but they have got into the most disagreeable drawl,
and so far from following a leader, they take the bit between their
teeth, and sing as fancy dictates. This I shall try and remedy
before I leave again. We have now a harmonium for our services,
thanks to the very great kindness of my friend and benefactress in
England, Miss Mount, who is far more beneficent than I at all
deserve. The two Arthurs play very fairly well, but Arthur
Huqe is organist at present. After school I had visitors from
Golvanua, a populous district some ten or twelve miles from here.
They are very peculiar people and very wild, I am sorry to say I
have only been there once, and that only a flying visit. I told
them I was coming again soon, and they seemed pleased. I gave
the head man some tobacco, and he' said when I came to their
place he would give me food and take care of me. Our people
here are rather terrified of them, and the distance is so great that
very few have ever been there. There were two nice little boys
with them, and I asked them if they were not tired, but they
scouted the idea.
I was so busy all day that I did not get away from home,
and things begin to be a bit more ship-shape. I begin to feel
very comfortable in my new house, but I dare say if my friends
saw me, they would fancy it was far from comfort. However, I
have a continual feast in a contented mind. In the evening,
instead of school, we had singing, into which I endeavoured to
infuse some life and harmony, and partially succeeded, but not to
my taste quite yet. Then in the evening I held a teacher’s class,
and we had much profitable conversation.
Saturday, 24 th July. —This is observed by us as a whole
holiday, and after Morning Prayer nothing is required of the
school till the evening service. Arthur Aruduliwar decided to
have his house thatched to-day, and a large party assembled to


help him. Here they do everything by means of ‘Bees,’ (working
parties). ‘Bees’ dig the gardens, plant the crops, dig the food,
build the houses. The women do the cooking, and the owner of
the house makes the feast, this is all he has to do, he is not sup-
posed himself to do any work. Next week they are going to thatch
a gamal, more stupendous work, and a great many people are going
to be engaged, and there is to be much feasting, and I believe a
dance. Marvellous harmony prevails in this community at present,
and I never hear a harsh expression, nor witness a passionate
action. They are the merriest, happiest, most contented people
I ever saw, and I think the best natured. A party from Tasmouri
appeared during the morning, and Thomas Aruloli among them. I
asked him to stay the night, but he replied that it was his Sunday
at Tasmate to-morrow, and he would not like to miss. I was
pleased at this, for it showed the boy’s conscientiousness with
respect to his self-imposed duty. I gave him his goods, and he
and the others started again soon after for home. These natives
don’t seem to know what fatigue is, and this double journey, which
I should be sorry to undertake, they make nothing of it. After
a frugal lunch the boys and I went to Ruos, where we bathed and
washed our clothes. The river is certainly a boon and a blessing,
and a good bathe has a most invigorating effect on one. In the
evening the teachers came in and sat a long time with me, and we
had much suitable conversation. While they were sitting here, a
sound, which I had heard all day and couldn’t find the reason of,
kept going on continually, and I asked Arthur what it was. He
told me it was a bamboo placed high up on a top branch of a banyan
tree in front of my house, in which notches were cut below each
joint, and when the wind blew strong it sounded in the bamboo
with the same effect that would be produced by so many persons
blowing at once into the several orifices. This seemed to me
very ingenious, but Arthur Huqe tells me they have the same
practice at Opa. They say when the wind blows strong the
sound is heard a great distance off, and I can quite imagine it.
We heard this evening the reports of two big guns in the
direction of the watering place, so it is conjectured that a vessel
is at anchor there. However it was too late to go and see.
Sunday, 25th July. —First Sunday ashore at Maewo, and a
very quiet and pleasant day it has been. I think too, it has been
one of the most gloriously brilliant days I have ever seen. The
morning was beautiful, the midday marvellously, resplendent, and
the evening indescribably lovely. The place did look so beautiful


too. I told the people they ought never to cease praising God
for so beautiful a heritage as He had given them. They have
not a want or a care, but I fear they fail to appreciate the beauty,
according to the truth of the old adage which speaks of familiarity
breeding contempt. We had Sunday school very early, for two
reasons more especially, (1) because it is cooler in the morning,
(2) because we are not plagued with blowflies which appear in
untold numbers wherever there is any congregation of people.
After a short interval devoted to breakfast, we had Mattins,
and after this a short service and an address for the teachers. We
had a very few strangers present to-day, but all our own people
turned up. We did away with the great midday feast to-day for the
first time for many years, but some of the women cooked a large
quantity of food which was distributed to the boys in the usual
way. This food business had become too laborious, and too
much the chief part of the day, so that I fancied a relaxation for
a time would be beneficial.
Patrick went to Mandurvat to take service there, but I
stayed at Tanrig. At six different stations, school and service
have been held and the day duly observed.
Evensong was a pleasant service here, and the church looked
very nice lit up with the new lamps. The strains of the
harmonium too, gave an additional pathos and homeliness to the
occasion. I gave an address on the Gospel for sth Sunday after
Trinity, which I think was understood and appreciated. We had
much singing afterwards and the public part of the day ended
with the Blessing. May that blessing ever rest upon us here and
elsewhere, and may we always endeavour to do all to God’s glory.
Monday , 26 th July. —T reckoned without my host last night
when I rashly permitted Agnes and Kate to cook for me this
week at their own request. They made a tremendous fuss about
it, but the rice came to table uncooked, and in such a small
quantity that my breakfast was spoilt and the coffee was anything
but good. However they did their best and I dare say to-morrow
they will do all right. They were both wonderfully good, and
not only washed up for me but gave my premises a good sweep
as well. Poor Agnes, she is hideously lame, but she pretends to
the liveliness of a kitten. The fence around the school is rather
high and I watched her endeavours to get over with her lameness
and her petticoats. She managed better than I expected, but I
stood by in readiness to lend her a helping hand in case she fell.
She comes back fully impressed with a sense of her importance and


dignity after so many years absence, and her friends made a great
deal of her. To-day she is off with the other women on some
excursion or other, and is fully convinced that she is as active as
any of them. Before long no doubt she will fancy herself useful
and engaging enough to be the life partner of Tilegi, and to be
the faithful companion of his joys and sorrows. She is an intelli-
gent girl, and her long training at Norfolk Island ought to make
her useful here. She is perfectly charmed with her home, and
she sees very plainly the beneficial results produced by Chris-
tianity. When she left, she herself was among the few baptized,
now she comes back to the bosom of a Christian community with
a good church and school, daily Morning and Evening Prayers,
and perfect harmony and good will among all men. She will
miss little at home now of what she has grown accustomed to at
Norfolk Island, and it must be a pleasant realization to her. The
girls, too, with whom she will have daily association are all
Christians, and she will be spared the shock and repulsion of
heathen women’s talk and actions. Her father has died in the
interval, a truly godly man in his life, and a believer at the time
of his death.
There is no face I miss here more than that of James, a true
and faithful friend to me, and I firmly believe, too, of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ. Arthur tells me his death was per-
fectly peaceful and happy, and he desired at the last to depart
and be with Christ which was far better. His two children
followed him, and the three lie side by side in the quiet and rest
of the grave. A reputed mother, but one who is really an aunt,
Amina, takes charge of Agnes until Tilegi or some one else claims
her as a bride, for in spite of her deformity I suppose she will not
eschew marriage herself, or be allowed to remain in single blessed-
ness by her friends, for here young ladies are not over plentiful,
and to judge by the appearance of some already married there is
no accounting for taste among the men of the place. Elizabeth,
the wife of James, has found solace in another partner, but she
spoke of her former husband with a due amount of grief and
tears, and said to me, pointing in the direction of his grave, “ He
lies asleep over there.”
Yet there are here those who are * widows indeed,’ and good
old Dorcas is one such. This old lady well deserves her name,
for she is full of alms deeds, and kindness to all, and I firmly
believe is a true follower of Jesus Christ. She lives alone with a
little grandchild in her own hut and trains up dutifully the


child in the way she should go. Very seldom is old Dorcas away
from her seat in church, and she exercises a benign and gentle
influence over her own sex in the village. Anna, another good
old widow, has died in my absence, and the loss of such is much
felt. Among the younger women there is a perfect colony of
children, and this is most thankworthy as being a proof that
infanticide has been quite stamped out, and formerly it seemed
to be a sort of religious duty here. Children were looked upon
as being uncanny as well as a nuisance, and if the mother did
not kill her offspring herself, she found plenty of aiders and
abettors in the old midwives who attended her. The father
seemed utterly impotent to prevent the evil. Now the fathers
have turned head nurses and are abundantly proud of their
children.
This morning after Prayers and school I walked down to the
river side at Earava, whither almost the entire population had
preceded me, and where 1 lit upon a busy scene. It was a most
resplendent day, but the overhanging branches of the wide
spreading foliage lent a charm and grateful shade to the occasion.
The men were engaged in digging the ‘ taro ’ roots, from their
irrigated beds, and the women busy washing and preparing them
for culinary purposes. The ladies here, present no exception to a
proverbial excess in the use of the ‘unruly member’ as the
especially noticeable characteristic of the gentler sex in more
favoured parts of the world, and a Babel-like clatter of tongues
formed a striking accompaniment to the quietness and order of
the work in hand. The taro beds of course are mud, pure and
simple, and the taro when dug is a very dirty vegetable, it is
covered over besides with long tenacious feelers for roots, and
these are picked off with the fingers in the most skilled and
practised manner much after the fashion of plucking and pre-
paring a bird for table. When the cleaning and plucking process
is perfected, the long stalks are collected to a head and tied up in
convenient bundles with one of their own parts in the most
ingenious and knowing manner. Two bundles are then arranged
on one long pole, and carried by one bearer on the shoulder, one
bundle before and another behind their backs. The weight is
considerable, but here the burden is borne by the men, the
women carry the broad leaves and other concomitants of
native cookery. Beyond the cackle there was very much merri-
ment which all seemed in accord with the dancing sparkling
waters of the clear flowing river. The prospect around was most


beautiful and although not extensive the landscape was most
bewitching, and the eye was never tired with seeing.
These natives have great natural taste, which is displayed to
a far greater degree in the arrangement and beautifying of their
yam and taro gardens here, than in any other island I have seen.
The broad, handsome evergreen taro leaf spreads its verdure
right and left, and all around, amid the friendship of the gay-
leaved croton, the majestic dracsena, and the vari-coloured
hibiscus, while here and there, to vary the prospect, the graceful
cocoanut lends the beauty and elegance of its chastely spreading
branches; all this beauty is thrown into relief by a back ground
of the most marvellously beautiful bush, which shuts it in as with
a natural fence, and leaves the only wish and feeling with the
observer just to get for a moment a peep of what lies beyond.
Breaks here and there however, in the background, revealed distant
hills clad to their very summits with a richness and profusion of
vegetation such as always abounds in these lovely islands where
‘every prospect pleases.’ 1 could select so many subjects for
pictures here as almost to finish up all my dry plates, my only
hope is that I may meet with some measure of success when by
and bye I try my hand at photography. A header into the cool
waters and a swim up and down stream was very refreshing.
The boys enlivened the scene by their merriment and gambolling
in the water, and altogether it was an occasion of much delight,
and not the less so to me when 1 considered that all these people,
almost without exception, had passed before through the healing
waters of Holy Baptism. As possessing so much of the element, it
is perhaps only natural that these people should love the water,
and bathe a great deal more than their appearance would give one
reason to suspect. The boys, and more especially, 1 think, the
girls, are very fond of the water, and never seem tired of bathing
when near the river-side. ‘Tanrig’ is distant about two miles
from the river, and this distance, although inconvenient for many
reasons, is very convenient for others, and especially because of
the mosquitos which abound in the neighbourhood. Here some
times they are bad enough, but by the water-side they are, I
believe, unbearable. I know I find them troublesome enough
there by day, and I don’t care to experience the worry and misery
of them by night. They are called here ‘namu,’ and are said to
be particularly troublesome at a certain period in the growth and
maturity 6f the yam.
Any one who has not lived in a tropical country can have


very little conception of the discomfort and worry of these little
maddening tormentors. Yet there are others whose attacks
produce more serious consequences, and an illustration was
afforded this evening. “Kate Tevano” (Arthur’s wife) was
coming across to my house, and when almost at my door she gave
a scream of terror and retired at once back again. I rushed out
to learn the cause, and found she had been bitten by a centipede
in the toe. The blood was just oozing out, and there were the
distinct marks of his two fangs. In about ten minutes she was
in great agony, and in the course of the evening her foot swelled
and the pain was most terrible, and she couldn’t bear anything
near it. Poor child, I left her in floods of bitter tears before
going to bed, and she expected to be in pain all night long. The
natives have some antidote for it, and the women were applying
that all the evening, i I confess that I did not know myself what
to do, except to bathe it with hot water. There was a great hunt
for the venomous little reptile, but of course he had made himself
scarce. How he got on her foot, and why he bit her, no one
knows, but there are multitudes of the creatures here, and
perhaps the mystery is that people are not more often bitten.
They have scorpions too here whose bite is very venomous, but
one doesn’t often hear of their biting. There is a very large ant
here called the ‘ gandee ’ to which I have a great aversion, and its
bite is very sharp. Snakes here are not venomous, but the people
have an instinctive dread of them, but they do not trouble us
much. There is a hideous creature which lives in the thatch of
the houses, an ugly toad-like lizard, with large red prominent
eyes, which has such a tenacity of grasp with its feet that it
sometimes even sticks so tight to the person it attacks as to take
away the very skin in its grasp. Indeed, to me there are many
strange and uncanny creatures in these islands to which I give as
wide a berth as possible. Even in putting on your clothes you
may find that a scorpion or centipede have taken up their
quarters, in your hat you may find another monster, while most
likely your shoes will be the tenement of some hideous reptile.
Use and experience cannot rid one of a shudder when one thinks
what may be, and yet if one is always anticipating these evils
one’s very life becomes a burden.
Tuesday, 21th July. —l visited poor Kate this morning as
soon as I got up, and found her still in considerable pain and her
foot a good deal swollen. She had slept but little during the
night, and was still very tearful. However, her friends assured


her that the poisonous effects would soon pass away, and it proved
true, for I saw her walking, or rather limping about during the
course of the forenoon. I was anxious to see a centipede this
morning, and by and bye a man came bringing one which he
held tightly by head and tail. It was a pretty creature and not
so black as some I have seen, the legs indeed were of an orange
yellow colour. It tried very hard to riggle away, but the ruthless
boys soon put an end to its existence. How many legs it actually
has I did not stop to count, but I saw its nasty fangs and preferred
keeping a respectable distance from them.
A nasty lizard such as I have before mentioned was shortly
after discovered in the thatch of my house just over my head,
and captured after an exciting hunt. One creeps when these
creatures are brought so near one, and is thankful for daily
protection from them.
To-day has been the occasion of an important event here,
viz: the thatching of a gamal (men’s quarters). This, indeed, is
one of the greatest events known here, and there has been much
feasting and festivity. The men do the thatching, and neighbours
and strangers from a distance come to assist. There must have
been quite a hundred men at work to-day, and it was the part and
duty of the women to prepare food for them, and judging by the
quantity spread out to-night they must have been kept pretty
busy at work.
The house was a large one, and it took most of the day to
finish it. The roof when complete was most neat, and a perfect
protection from heat and wet for many years to come. 1 The
thatch is made from the frond of the sago palm and very durabla
Cocoanut fronds are sometimes used, but they do not make so
neat a roof nor nearly so lasting.
These native houses, although seemingly such poor structures,
take some time and skill in building, and are very fair habitations
when finished. They are rather low according to our ideas of
comfort, but the natives grow accustomed to a crouching posture
within doors, and they say the low roof does not catch the wind
so easily, nor is the interior so cold. This is a consideration for
people with no clothing, and I know myself from experience how
cool it sometimes is here. Indeed, this very year I have never
passed a night without being covered with a blanket, and even
then I have not quite kept the cold away. A native, however,
generally sleeps near a fire, and the interior of their houses are
very snug. After the work was done this evening there was a


great brew of kava, a drink made from the root of the kava
plant, but here called “ Malowo,” and highly intoxicating. There
is much ceremony in connection with the drinking of this
beverage, which as far as I have seen, if taken in fair moderation,
produces strong inebriation, but is not an excitant, nor does it
leave any ill effects when once the narcotic effects pass off. Any
one who drinks is supposed to do so fasting, in order, I believe,
that the draught may have the more effect. One or two cups are
enough to produce intoxication, but of course men will make
beasts of themselves in the drinking of kava, as well as of any
other strong drink. Here it is prepared from the green root, and
grated up with a rough, round coral stone, then squeezed into cups
made of the half of a cocoanut shell, strained and mixed with
water, after which it is ready for imbibation. To look at it is like
soap suds, and to the taste it is like what I should suppose that
compound resembled, with an. additional admixture of rhubarb
and magnesia, with a suspicion of strong senna or black draught.
Indeed I think it is about the nastiest potion conceivable, and no
wonder the drinker takes an unconscionably long time in
swallowing the compound, and when finished would almost rather
he had never drunk it. I was very glad to see most of our own
people at school and prayers, but I believe some have reserved the
‘nightcap’ till nearer bed-time. When the drowsiness is over I
believe a craving for food results, and then the appetite is
appeased even if it be in the middle of the night. Certainly,
however, a man is never quarrelsome over his cups, but a drowsi-
ness and torpor creep over the most quarrelsome and irrepressive
after the draught. The mode of preparation similar to that
practised here obtains in all the Northern New Hebrides, as far as
I know, but at Mota and the Banks’ Islands generally, and in Fiji
it is prepared by a process of mastication, and is not nearly so
intoxicating in its effects. At Santa Cruz and in the Solomon
Islands the use of the kava is unknown, but instead they chew
the betel nut.
I had the old men for school to-night, and very interesting it
was, old blind Sulu (Daniel) was among the number and paid the
greatest attention, assenting in a marked fashion when anything
especially pleased him. Poor fellow, he finds wonderful comfort
in his religion, and is a most regular attendant at all services and
at school. He gets about wonderfully in spite of his blindness,
and does wonderful things for a man so totally blind. His
patience and cheerfulness under his affliction are marvellous, and


he seems to live in hopeful anticipation of the time when he shall
see his Lord and Master face to face, Whom now he sees with the
inward eyes of his spirit. He is the only blind man here, and I
have never seen but one dumb man in these islands.
Wednesday, 28th July. —Our people had a great dance last
night after school which they kept up with great spirit and vigour
until an early hour this morning. The occasion was the thatching
of the new gamal, and a great many took part, and never once
intermitted their vigour from the start to the finish. The dance
is called a “ Sagoro,” but the chief part of it consists of singing
with a clapping of hands and peculiar dancing in time. It is no
easy work, and when I went to see them about the middle of the
performance the perspiration was running down their bodies.
Some of the songs are very pretty, but the movement of the
dance is not particularly graceful or elegant. The women stand
in a ring outside, and what is called “ weluwelu.” This ‘ weluing ’
consists in keeping the feet close together and moving the knees
from right to left besides joining in the chorus. Their shrill
voices sound quite weird along with the deep tones of the males,
but by no means discordant. Native songs have mostly an air
sung by one voice, and a chorus joined in by all, and these
Maewoese are noted for their songs. I did not attempt to go to
sleep before the performance was over, and the consequence was a
slight dilatoriness this morning, which as might be expected, was
not only manifest in my case. However, after morning duties
here I started with Arthur Huqe and Patrick for Mandurvat,
passing through the pretty snug little village of Naruru on the way.
Here we found a man by name ‘Tamaragai’ sitting with his
pretty wife and child in the neat enclosure in front of his house.
All the other denizens of the village according to the invariable
custom which prevails here, had scattered to the four winds.
After the dew is off the bushes here there is a general exodus
from all the villages, and at noon it is useless to look for any one
at home, for all are abroad. They are very industrious people
and find perpetual occupation in their gardens or elsewhere from
morning till evening. They say if they stay at home they do
nothing but sleep, and a native has not many resources for
occupying his time indoors. They have a great dread of the dew,
for they say it engenders elephantiasis. Cases of this unpleasant
disease are very prevalent here, and it looks very odd to see men
and women with great swollen legs and feet and monster hands
and arms. However, those afflicted with it do not seem to suffer
so much pain as discomfort,


We reached our destination after a'somewh'at weary walk on
account of the dampness of the roads after the heavy rain in the
night. I found a nice new school, and the teachers awaiting my
arrival. The population is small, but the people are well-
intentioned and anxious for instruction as exhibited by their
having built the school entirely themselves. The leading spirit
there and his wife came to-day and asked for Baptism, and desired
that they should at once be put under instruction for that sacred
Rite. This was cheering, and I hope the example thus set will
be largely followed. Food according to native custom had been
prepared, and green cocoanuts, and we spent some considerable
time with the kind hearted people. They have only an inferior
teacher, but he is very zealous to do his best according to the
amount of wisdom and knowledge he possesses. They have some
sort of daily service and school, but it must of necessity be very
elementary.
It is etiquette here for the host or someone appointed by
him to see you off the premises, and this afternoon we were
escorted some distance from the village by most of the male
population, and when at what was looked upon as a respectable
distance they stepped to one side, a sign that that was the last we
should have of their society, and calling my name the host said,
“lya, go sage,” which is perhaps equal to “There, you go up,” to
which I was supposed to respond calling his name, “ 10, go toga,”
“All right, you stop.” We then started for home. Arriving at
Na Ruru the major part of the population were awaiting us, and
Anthony the teacher with them, fear has driven him and his
little flock to take refuge here, the third exodus they have made
from their homes, and it is hoped that at last they will be safe
from the ruthless incursions of the heathen bushmen. Poor
fellow, he had begun to build a substantial new church, which
was left with the other houses in their precipitate flight, but
nothing daunted he has begun a third time to collect materials for
another building. Had they continued however where they were,
I doubt if they would have been molested. The only excuse for
so doing would have been that they were friends of the villagers
attacked by the bushmen. We sat for some time in conversation
with the friendly people until the sinking sun warned us to be up
and moving homewards. After prayers and singing, which we
always have by an unvariable custom instead of school on Wed-
nesday evenings, I received a request from some heathen strangers,
twenty in number, that they might dance before me. I assented,


and now at a late hour they are still at it, and going ahead with
such vigour that I do not like to stop them. This dance is a
piece of policy, for I am supposed to give them a handsome
gratuity at the end, and the request to night has been for tobacco.
I am supposed also to be very liberal on these occasions, and
certainly they have earned their wages. Their dance is very like
that of the Tanrig people, but of course the songs are somewhat
different, and to my taste not so pleasing. It is certainly curious
that people living really in such close proximity should speak a
dialect so utterly different that I can scarcely understand a word
they say. I always assent to their dancing for it brings them
here in large numbers, and for no ulterior purposes, and I like in
every way to cultivate all friendly feeling between ourselves and
our neighbours. Their powers of endurance are wonderful, there
were many small boys among the dancers to night, and the hands
of my watch pointed to nearly 2 o’clock a.ra. before they finished,
and previously they must have walked some twelve or fifteen
miles over very rugged country. It must be considered too that
these dances are performed without any intermission, and carried
through with great vigour to the very end. I believe they had
contemplated going on till morning, but that would be too
terrible. Now as I write this they are gone, and the place is as
quiet as if I were alone the sole inhabitant. I am now quite
ready for bed and have really been so for hours, but the din and
noise would render sleep an impossibility. God grant that in
time these heathen songs may be changed for Christian hymns.
Thursday, 29 th July. —My house has been thronged all day
with heathen visitors, and I have tried to say something about
our blessed religion. I hope they were duly impressed. They
certainly gave me a warm invitation to visit them which I shall
not be backward to accept, and moreover they promised to pick
me out two or three boys to go to Norfolk Island. One man was
most anxious to visit Norfolk Island, and I promised him that if
he were so minded when the ship came back his wish should be
gratified. I dare say 1 was quite safe in my promise, for no
doubt he will cry off at the last. However, I hope I may get the
boys. Everything was a matter of astonishment to these poor
people, who have rarely if ever seen a white man, and a trumpet
and pop gun which I gave a small boy produced the most un-
bounded delight. I wish my good friend Archdeacon Stock and
Miss Kreeft had been here to see what unfeigned joy their kind
gifts produced. A prettily dressed doll I brought with me, and


which came too, I think, from Wellington, has been the seven
day wonder during my visit. Yesterday one of the boys threw
it down by accident, and the frail waxwork fell to pieces. There
has been more lament over that lifeless toy than over half a dozen
ordinary female human beings. Agnes, however, this morning
disgorged a beautiful doll of her own, which she got from a
Christmas tree, carefully wrapped in ample folds of calico, and the
Bushmen I think will never lose the impression the revelation of
its beauty produced upon them.
How true it is that little things please little minds, and what
a boon it is that the adage is so true. To us, whom civilization
and the natural fitness of things have raised so far above nature,
it is a matter of a striking character to see these heathens on
their travels. They are burdened with absolutely nothing except
a club or bow and arrows in their hands. Their dress is but a
slight remove from the original fig leaf of the garden of Eden,
and they carry neither bedding nor food. They sleep anywhere
and eat what they can get. Their endurance in the matter of
food too is extraordinary, whether they eat or whether they eat
not does not seem to affect them, and in this way they beat us all
to fits on the march. These Bushmen tell me they prefer making
a journey in rain for it is cooler, and the only change of raiment
they need at the end is to dry nature’s clothing before a fire.
They are a very hardy race, I suppose from being inured to
hardship all their lives.
I missed poor blind Sulu from school to-day, and on enquiring
for him was told that his pet pig, whose tusks are getting long
and very sharp, importuned him beyond bearing, and that in
kicking out to get rid of him the tusk ran into his foot and almost
right through it. Poor old fellow, lam going by and bye to see
what I can do to administer comfort to him.
Arthur too is very much out of sorts, and could not put in
an appearance at school to-day. For some months he has suffered
from lassitude and weakness, and has been troubled with nasty
sores. Fortunately I have a bottle of Hop Bitters with me, the
effect of which lam going to try with him. Fancy the popularity
of this wonderful tonic when it even finds its way to these distant
islands 1 I have known it used with very beneficial results, and I
hope Arthur may improve under its influence and strengthening
properties.
Friday, July 30 th. —A somewhat idle and prurient curiosity
led me with some of our people to ‘ Uta’ this morning to witness


a sort of masked ball about which T bad heard a great deal, and
which was supposed to be something quite extraordinary. We
started fairly early in the morning, and arrived at the place after
a long, hot, and fatiguing walk. The ceremonies were not per-
fectly arranged when we got there, and we waited a long, weary
time. It was mainly through my urging that they began when
they did, and after all the affair was disappointing.
The initial performance was a song sung by four men to an
accompaniment beaten on bamboos, but that was by no means
impressive. The females during this performance advanced and
squatted around the performers and poor things were almost roasted
alive under the blazing rays of the midday sun. When the song
was finished the maskers rushed out, 17 in number with very
curious and savage-looking head pieces, and petticoats of long
sago palm leaves reaching almost to the ground, They presented
a very weird and uncanny appearance certainly as they danced
forth and back and uttered their gruff “Ugh, ugh, ugh, ugh.’’
I do not wonder at weak minded females and small children being
very terrified of them. The pieces were decided works of
art, and very well made. Thirteen were almost entirely of the
same make and pattern and are called “ Eauwe,” three were again
somewhat of a different shape and fashion called “ Tamate,” and
one very elongated and strangely devised mask also called a
‘ Tamate ’ completed the list. When the dancing was over which
was called ‘Welu,’ the Eauwes rushed flying about all over the
place, and the wiser course was to keep out of their way. In
former days I believe they carried heavy sticks, or even clubs, and
struck at anyone who failed to get out of their way. Boys and
females were the chief objects of their attacks, and sometimes
considerable injury resulted. Of course if any one retaliated and
gave blow for blow, a skrimraage of perhaps serious and general
nature resulted, and ended probably in lives being sacrificed.
To-day these rough maskers carried clubs and long handled
axes, and nothing was feared from them. The tamates were
much more quiet and danced quietly about like so many kiwis
(native New Zealand bird), and molested no one. They represent
a higher grade in the social scale and their intentipns are always
pacific. For some days after the ceremony they are allowed to
sail about the country and take what they please in the shape of
food, &c. if it happens to come in their way, indeed I believe the
people put it out for them and render every assistance to send
them away full handed. The tamate mask has no eyehole, but


the ran we head piece has every facility for observation to facilitate
its hilter skilter rush. The native idea of these things I believe
is that if anyone dies who has not paid for these masks, he is
haunted by them in the hereafter, at their places of departed
spirits, “Banoi.” The tamates protect the disembodied spirits
and conduct them safely to their final destination in Eanoi,
Moreover, I believe that those who die without propitiating these
tamates and rauwes by gifts of pigs and mats are transformed into
flying foxes, and adorn for ever the courts of an ill-fated Banoi.
When the ‘welu’ was over, great cakes of cooked food were
disgorged from their covering of leaves and distributed, the men
behind a very curious screen called “Bugoro” distributing to men,
and the women on one side of the village square distributing to
women. The busy and animated scene was often disturbed by
one or more of the rauwes rushing wildly about, and the women
utterly regardless of food or hospitality, tore hilter skilter in
screams of terror to some place of temporary security. It was
now getting late, and as we had a journey before us and the
performance was virtually over, except the kava drinking, we
wished our friend good-bye and started for home, getting here in
time for dinner, both by the time of day and by the condition of
an appetite which had not been appeased since morning. On the
whole I do not think the ceremony was at all worth the labour it
cost to witness, and having seen it once, one would scarcely care
to trouble about it a second time. However, it has its due effect
upon the natives of both sexes, and it is looked upon by many as
of paramount importance as regards both the present time and the
future. To the newly initiated it gives certain social rights and
privileges, but the strict observance with many is a thing of the
past. It has only to do with the males, females may enjoy no
special benefit from the practice except to assist as ornamental
observers, and to bring beast burdens of food for distribution.
What becomes of their poor souls hereafter is a matter for no
anxiety or consideration, indexed I suppose the doubt is as to their
possessing such things as souls at all, so that their final destination
can only be a matter of supreme indifference and of the most
insignificant importance. A hazy indefinite belief therefore these
people have in some hereafter, and they endeavour to make some
provision for it while they can, but they have no distinct form of
religion, nor any images to which they offer worship. They have
some kind of propitiatory sacrifice however of food and shell money,
and whatever prayer they have is made to the spirits of their


ancestors. Almost invariably a dying man calls to his father, and
we have frequently noticed that when a sick person arrives at this
stage of illness, his case is very bad indeed, if not hopeless.
Yesterday as we were waiting at the entrance to the village, the
people called my attention to a peculiar kind of red grass which
had been chewed up, and. the refuse strewn about all over the
path, aijd they told me that this was done by the master of
ceremonies to make the visitors take delight and interest in the
festivities, and to raise the wish in the minds of the uninitiated to
swell the ranks of those who had already taken the initiatory
steps in social rank. Like all natives of course these people are
utterly superstitious, and any little thing of a slightly extraor-
dinary nature serves to determine or deter their mode of action.
There is a certain class of persons among them who read these
signs and comment upon them, just as the ancient oracles, and
these persons are consulted in every matter of public or private
interest. No one takes a journey or engages in any matter
without recourse to this oracle, but as of old in case of failure, the
matter is explained ambiguously. Superstition indeed creeps into
almost every concern of daily life, and its effect upon one would
be very wearying and irritating, except of course that superior
mindedness ought to condescend and bear with such human
frailties when one considers the education under which these poor
folks have been brought up from generation to generation.
Much, I think, of this weak mindedness is passing away under
Christian regime, and more and more I suppose will it disappear
as the day breaks and the shadows flee away.
Saturday, July 31 si.—A peculiarly cold night, so cold indeed
that I could not sleep even under a blanket. The people all
experienced the same cold, and they said it was because of the
calmness of the night and the heavy dew. Had there been a fire
near, I could readily have got up to sit over it. The nights here
are generally cool, but last night was absolutely cold. What shall I
do when I go to England 1 This morning however, it is supremely
lovely, and the wind in the S.W. for a wonder, for the S.E.
Trades usually blow nine months out of the twelve. This
morning I tried a photograph, which I dare say will prove a
failure, from the extra care I took to prevent all mistakes. I
only attempted one, but I hope I shall gain courage and experience
as I go on and be able to reproduce some of these lovely views
here. Of course every view is shut in more or less by the density
of the surrounding bush, but this village has a considerable


clearing and a good long vista for a photograph. My first
attempt was on the church with some natives in the foreground,
but the view will miss a great deal in a picture, owing to the
absence of the beautiful colouring. It seems the fashion nowa-
days here to build houses, and large parties to-day were busy
thatching two new ones. I went with Patrick, Arthur Huqe and
some more of the boys to Euosi where we had a delicious bathe
in the river, washed our clothes, caught prawns which we cooked
very ingeniously in a bamboo. The prawns are put into the
bamboo with water, and then placed on the fire with the orifice
slightly elevated. It soon starts boiling, and to prevent the
bamboo (always a green one) burning through it is constantly
turned round and round, and in a very short time the prawns
come out cooked red, and ready for eating. Cooked in salt water
they are very nice, and they are looked upon as an especial
delicacy when eaten with cocoanut cream. It is perfectly
surprising what a number of dishes these natives wot of, and how
frequently they vary their menu. Here they are especially good
cooks, and I like most of their dishes very much. They are all
slightly indigestible, but that one somehow expects. In most
Melanesian islands the yam is the staple article of diet, but here
the taro has the preference, and is planted in larger quantities.
The yam likes a dry situation, but the kind of taro in common
use here flourishes in a damp soil, and this is prepared for it by a
neat and skilful system of irrigation. •
While we were sitting there at Euosi one of the men told
me a curious custom they have here. I knew him of old to be an
habitual and heavy kava drinker, now he told me he never drank
it and had not for months. It appears that persons who enjoy a
certain rank can deny the use of this beverage to any one they
like, and they place a sort of ‘tabu’ over the kava bowl, and this
tabu is not taken off again until a pig or its equivalent is paid.
A short time ago kava drinking became so general in the school
as to impede the working of it, for teachers and scholars drank
alike. The boys and young men therefore met together and laid
mutual tabus upon each other, and for some time past very little
kava has been drunk by those attending, and no one of those on
whom the tabu was laid has chosen yet to take it off.
This same man told me another curious custom they have
with respect to revenge. If a man has a grudge against another
and he wishes to kill him, or if he wishes to kill someone as a set
off against someone belonging to him having been killed, he


refuses to wash his hands until such time as they can be washed
with blood. He told me of three brothers, Bushmen, who swore
to kill a man apiece, the two younger brothers have already per-
formed their part of the contract, but the dirt is still thick on the
hands of the eldest, and he still means murder when he can get
the convenient opportunity. It does not matter much, I believe,
who the victim is as long as he has not many friends to retaliate.
Poor weak inoffensive mortals in this way often lose their lives,
innocent sacrifices to heathen brutalism and bloodthirstiness. We
came home in the cool of the most glorious evening, a strange
contrast in its peace and loveliness to the rage and horror of
savage brutalism. A quiet evening service and the song of melody
seemed more in tune with the scene without, and I trust that the
Peace of God which passeth all understanding may ever keep our
hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God and of His
Son Jesus Christ.
I gave notice last Sunday of Holy Communion to-morrow,
and this evening I held a Communicants’ class at which were
present the two Arthurs and Patrick. Anthony and Samuel are
too far away to be able no attend. I cannot but esteem it a high
privilege and blessing to be enabled to receive and dispense the
Bread of Life here in this once heathen village, and I pray that
we may be strengthened and refreshed for our work, and show
forth God’s praise not only with our lips but in our lives, and by
giving up ourselves more fully to His service. May the time too
be hastened when some of these good people may be permitted
to partake of the visible tokens of redeeming love.
It is now late, and except for the singing of crickets, perfectly
still, fit prelude, 1 trust, to a peaceful Sabbath.
Sunday, August \st. —Another peculiarly cold night, so cold
indeed that I could not sleep although I had taken care to make
proper preparations against it. How these poor ill clad, blanket-
less people fare I cannot make out, but no doubt they pile on the
wood. It was most perfectly calm all through the night, and this
morning there was a very heavy dew. The wind was blowing
from some westerly quarter, and it has continued there with
some strength all the day. We began our day very early with a
Celebration of the Holy Communion. The two Arthurs, Patrick,
and myself made up the quorum. It was a nice, quiet, refreshing
time, and a fresh and green oasis in a somewhat arid, spiritual
desert. 1 think, perhaps, it belongs to the native character and
disposition to do without certain things which are to us essential,


and the loss even of the Holy Communion is not so serious depri-
vation to them as to us. Native minds, I fancy, adapt themselves
too readily to the existing condition of things, and because they
live in the desert they must never even pine for the food and
water which is not directly attainable. Unless the Holy things
of our religion are kept before them in constant practice they are
too wont to dispense with them, and be content with the dry husks
such as their neighbours around feed upon. I shall therefore try
to keep up the regular administration of the Holy Communion both
for the present strengthening and refreshing of their souls, and
for a continual remembrance that the reception of it is necessary
to salvation. Easy native natures are too apt to float along with
the popular stream, and to be content with dry, dull teaching and
drier, duller services, and I sometimes long for the time when we
shall have a more ornate church and appointments, and a more
elaborate ritual. I firmly believe it would be helpful to the
congregation. Now we are too content with such things as we
have, and they are poor at the best.
After the Celebration we had school. We assembled first in
the schoolhouse, sang a hymn and I said a Prayer, then divided
into classes, I myself taking all the old men into the Church, and
trying to explain the sense of the collect to them. I told them
how God had prepared for them that love Him such good things
as pass man's understanding, and I asked them how we knew
that. I told them that God had revealed these things to us by
His Son Jesus Christ, and He had left His testimony with us in
His Gospel, and the books which persons chosen by Him had
written under the influence and direction of His Holy Spirit.
Their religion was a matter of mere hearsay and conjecture, and
had been handed on from mouth to mouth, and had grown as it
came down after the manner of mere verbal testimony. There
could be no doubt with us because we have the living testimony
of Christ’s own words which never pass away. Their religion
came from nowhere and no one knew of its beginning; of ours
at all events we were sure. I told them too that in England and
other countries, where arts and sciences were known and practised
far beyond anything they could conceive of, there were things so
marvellous that their understanding could not grasp even the
faintest idea of them, and how much more marvellous, wonderful,
and glorious must the things be which God has prepared for such
as love Him. Why even here below we see great and wonderful
and mysterious things which pass the understanding of the


world’s wisest minds, and how much more wonderful still must
the things he which are to he revealed hereafter, when the eye
shall he purified to see, the ear to hear, and the senses to discern
the beauty and true glory of them. And what does God, who
thus prepares these blessed things for us, require of us 1 Why
to love Him above all things. Each one of us had some darling
idol, to which we offered the devotion of our hearts, but it must
be torn down and removed if it comes before our love to God.
And the end of this love was God Himself, and to dwell with
Him for ever as inheritors of His gracious promises which exceed
all that we can desire. The old fellows were very attentive, and
interspersed running remarks, and when I had done I asked them
to kneel down, and I said the Collect as a Prayer for them.
Meanwhile the other teachers had school with their scholars in
the schoolhouse. The first class of boys and girls had to say their
Collect by heart, and after that they were questioned on its
meaning. School was closed with Prayer and a Hymn, and then
I was ready for breakfast, very dry, uncooked rice with sugar and
cocoanut cream, and a cup of delicious Norfolk Island coffee.
Morning Prayer followed in due course before the day got too
hot, and after this everyone was busy with their Sunday meal for
the afternoon. The day was as hot as the night was cold, but it
was most glorious, and all nature seemed to be keeping its Sabbath.
The evening was perfectly serene and peaceful, a fit termination
to a quiet, restful day.
In the evening I had the teachers, and after that service at
which I preached from the gospel of the day, “Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phari-
sees.” They were very attentive during my remarks, so I trust I
was understood. I told them God did not want us merely to
come to school and church but He wanted the devotion of the
heart, it was not outward righteousness He wished for, but inward
truth and honesty and straightness. The Pharisees were very
good Churchgoers, but their heart was not right with God, &c., &c.
After Service we had singing which they always enjoy, and
even now I hear their voices in the School house singing “There’s
a friend for little children.” I had intended to have made an
excursion to the neighbouring villages to-day but I could not
manage the time, the day having gone so rapidly. Now it is
very cool and betokens another cold night but Oh! how calm and
peaceful!


Monday, August 2nd. —Another peculiarly cold night ushered
in a most glorious day. A very heavy dew lay all round, and
until the sun was quite high in the heavens the cold was very
perceptible, and a flannel coat was very agreeable. I took two
photographs early and trust they are good, but it would be very
hard to reproduce the original so lovely as it appeared in the
morning light. The scene too was animated with the cheery
voices of the people, the crowing of the cocks, the merry laughter
of the boys, and even the squealing of the pigs as they followed
their owners for their morning food, lent additional and character-
istic charm to the occasion. All this one cannot photograph, but
it is necessary to suppose all this to give an idea of the village
as it is on these glorious mornings. Here we are several hundred
feet above the sea level, and a good way inland so that a pleasant
day breeze always fans the air, and keeps the place gratefully cool
under cover of a roof, or in the shade. I believe one could live
here quite comfortably all the year round, and for myself I never
feel better than Ido here. There is such a freedom too about
life here that one can carry a light heart and a contented mind in
a healthy body. To-day almost without exception the people are
off to the beach to windward. At this time of year the tides are
very low, and leave the reefs almost entirely uncovered. Fish
and crabs and other sea oddities are therefore left exposed, and the
first named are shot by the men in the pools, and the women
collect the latter, which are looked upon as choice articles of diet.
Just now I am left quite solitary, but I have just dismissed a bevy
of ladies who came to see the present seven days wonder, my
magnetic fish. They cannot fathom the mystery at all why when
one point of the fishing rod as they call it, is presented to the fish
they eagerly rush at it, and why when the other they rapidly
retire. They solve the problem by saying it is a “ Wui,” (spirit).
And it must seem strange to them as all our belongings must
being of an order of art, so far removed from their conceptions
or achievements. A kerosene lamp to this day is a marvel to
them, and the manipulation equally mysterious, why it should
flare up when turned one way, and why it should die when turned
the other. One old woman who has been very sick and up to-day
for the first time, came with the crowd and greeted me in the
most maternal manner, grasping my hand in both her own, and
calling me “Baua,” an obsolete word now, but belonging to a
district called “Loqala” which was utterly devastated years ago by
enemies among whom were these very people of Tanrig. This


old lady and her son Samuel, now my head teacher at Tasmouri,
are the sole survivors I believe, and she retains the expression or
appelation by which a grandmother greets her grandson.
I brought a box of refuse toys from Norfolk Island to which
our boys and girls there have grown superior, and the exhibition
and distribution of them created quite a furore. One would
never suppose in these days of superior enlightenment that any
people could be found simple enough to go into ecstacies over a
halfpenny toy, but these women and children have gone off
perfectly enraptured with their new possessions, and I dare say
they will treasure them up for many a day and find pleasure in
the contemplation and exhibition of them. One poor young
mother has just brought in great distress her infant child which
she says is suffering from a pain in its side, and the only remedy
I can conceive of is ‘ a dose of castor oil. The father comes
around to my side of the table, and whispers that it has not been
‘washed’ yet, meaning that it has not been Baptized, and that
it has no name. While writing this Samuel appeared with
another friend from Tasmouri, and I went with them to the beach
where all the population had previously gone. Our path lay
through the carefully and skilfully irrigated taro fields, and of
course it was very bad in some places. Crossing one place I
made a false step and went up to my knees, it was a fitting
judgment on my pride for I refused the assistance of a stalwart
follower’s back, which had borne me dry and safely over two such
places before. I presented a strangely harlequin appearance with
white flannel trowsers above the knee, and black mud gaiters
below. However appearances are easily pardoned here, and the
only grief was at my own discomfort. The people of course all
said it was because the roads were so bad, but that was too
palpable a truism, and was no relief to my feelings. Bootless
and trowserless, these paddy paths make no difference to them,
and mud has not the same appearance on a black skin. However
we went to the sea-shore and saw the sport which was not much.
One very large fish was caught with a hook and line, and the
women had great horse-loads of shell fish, but generally the
bowmen came off badly. The tide was out to the utmost limit of
the reef, and quite half-a-mile from the shore the rocks were
entirely exposed. Of course there was some very good reason
for the failure and ill luck, and I was somewhat surprised to hear
the wind blamed. It so happened that what of that element
there was, was off shore, but if it had been only blowing in shore


it would have driven in the fish. However there was disappoint-
ment depicted on every countenance, and there was some trifling
relief to the feelings in putting the blame on the wind. Probably
if the wind is all right to-morrow something else will be wrong,
and so on. What a wonderful place in the English language
those two little words ‘ if ’ and ‘ but ’ have, and how they qualify
almost every action of mankind, and how usually are they made
use of in self-extenuation. How scarcely possible is it to describe
a single character without the use of one or other of them! He
would be a very nice fellow ‘if.’ She would be an estimable
woman ‘ but.’ On our homeward road I marched boldly through
mud and water taking pride I suppose in revenging myself, and
showing my unmentionables that now the pink of their whiteness
was off, they might just as well be a little more dirty. However,
a refreshing bath was some return for my chagrin and discomfort,
and I hastened home for a clean change. The cooks brought me
two deliciously cooked fish for dinner, and were very disappointed
when I sent them back untasted. lam never very partial to
fish, and in these latitudes my digestive organs rebel even against
the smell of them. However, the boys very soon picked the bones,
and perhaps were not sorry that I had not partaken. There is
great feasting going on to-night with both sexes, the men with
their fish supper and the women with shell-fish.
Everywhere to-day we saw the bush lit up with the bright
red “ Karava,” a gorgeous tree, which flowers at this time of the
year, and gives its name to the winter season. The other season
is called “Magoto” from a reed of that name which shoots in
spring, and these are the only native seasons of the year. There
does not seem to be however any very marked distinction or
peculiar line of demarcation between summer and winter as
regards the heat and cold, but in fact it does seem to be warmer
in the “Magoto” and cooler in the“Earava.” To an Englishman
however it is always hot, and he does not detect any material
difference. One shivers now to think of ice and snow and of
such concomitants of the winter season, for here of course they
are absolutely unknown.
Tuesday, August 3rd. —lt gets somewhat monotonous to write
every day of cold nights, but this last one has been no exception.
The cold is so peculiar and penetrating that clad in flannel from
head to foot, and covered with a blanket and rug, I failed to keep
it out, and slept very badly in consequence. When I did sleep,
too, I was troubled with dreams and fancied myself in Ireland


hunted by ‘Moonlighters.’ I had proposed to go to a very distant
district called “Golvanua” to-day, but at the eleventh hour my
escort cried off and I could not go alone. I cannot quite say why
it is, but natives when they are about to make an excursion almost
invariably start on the spur of the moment without making any
previous appointment, or specifying any distinct time. Whether
they wish to elude * Fate ’ and deprive it of the chance of being
unpropitious by stealing a march, or whether the fear of material
foes induces them to do these things secretly so that they may
not be cognizant of their movements, or what it is I do not know,
but fact it is that if you want to make a journey, you must abide
the native’s time and conveniences for they will seldom assent to
yours if premeditated or prearranged.
I quite expect that some fine morning, before I am out of
bed perhaps, my escort will be awaiting me outside my door, and
anxiously and impatiently desiring to start at once. Natives
make no preparation for a journey, they have no impedimenta of
travel, and lightly clad, and lightly weighted, they are ready at
any moment to start, and a long or short stay is all the same to
them. They want no canteens or bedding or change of clothing,
and they can lay their heads down in any spot, and rest and
refresh themselves, and be ready for any emergency. They do
not even need as much as a tooth brush and pair of slippers for
their excursions, and marvel at our wanting so much to them
unnecessary luggage. I believe I should make many more
journeys, if I could accomplish them with so little inconvenience
and discomfort.
Samuel went back this morning, and I am to go to Tasmouri
on Friday for a week. He gives a very good account of his work
there and 1 am anxious to see and judge for myself. The whole
Community there are Baptized, and most exemplary Christians
they are. They are very nice lively good-natured people too, but
are not very numerous. Indeed these Maewo villages, have
dwindled down to very few inhabitants, from one cause and
another, and a large measure of the decrease is owing to the
wide spread practice of infanticide. Now in this district that
practice, thank God, is checked and the population is again on
the increase. Moses who was here with Samuel to-day asked me
to Baptize while at Tasmouri his fourth child, three boys of his
are already Baptized, and such mothers as his wife are a blessing
to the race. Here two mothers have three children apiece, and
several have two. I wish however the mothers would bring up


their children a little better, they are the perfect slaves of their
olfspring, and give into them in everything. Talk about spoilt
children, I have to roar every day of my life to some little urchin,
screaming his lungs out because his mother does not do at once
what he wants. The mother beats at one moment and coaxes at
another, and the child grows up anyhow, a burden to himself and
a nuisance to his neighbours. I want a good superior minded and
well educated mother here to give some practical advice. Arthur’s
wife is but a child herself, and as devoid of gumption as the rest
of them. Poor people, they do not know what trouble and
misery they entail upon themselves and their children from a
want of a little firmness, and well timed correction.
It has been a most glorious day, and this morning I accepted
an invitation from the boys to go to ‘ Kerepei.’ The tide was
very low and many of the people had preceded us, and were busy
searching the reef and rocks for the much prized products of the
sea shore. The little fellows got me most deliciously sweet green
cocoanuts, and while I was bathing caught me a nice lot of
prawns for my tea. Days spent in this way are very pleasant, for
we get to know each other all the better, and I can exercise a
continual supervision over their actions. I generally carry a
paper or portable volume with me, and to-day the Church Times
was my companion. The evening was most glorious and peaceful,
but when the sun went down peculiarly cold. Now as I write I
have a blazing fire in my house, and I feel the comfort of it.
The poor ill clad people are shivering all around, and are off to
their several domiciles to try and get some heat. The attendance
at school to-night was worse than I have known it yet, and the
cold was said to be the reason of it.
Wednesday, August ith. —There seems a perfect rage for
fishing just now, when the exceptionally low tides afford such
advantages for the pursuit. School was no sooner over to-day,
than there was a general exodus seaward of all the able bodied
inhabitants of the place. They talk to-day of trying the “Tasi-
goro ”to see what it yields. This Tasigoro is a tabu’d enclosure
of so much of the reef as those who make it choose, and it is
made in this way—one, two, three or indeed any number of
people who have reached the rank of “welu” kill a certain kind
of pig, and for ten days the killer or killers are supposed to
subsist on pig’s flesh, at the end of ten days they go to the beach,
and mark off the chosen portion of the beach with a long bamboo
at either end, like a base for football, but on a somewhat larger


scale, and tie on to the bamboo the leaf of a certain palm tree;
the person or persons then bathe in that part of the sea, and the
juice of the pig’s flesh which they have eaten, is supposed to have
the effect of sanctifying in some way the place, and no one fishes
within the enclosure until the “ welus” choose to take the “tabu”
off. There is a talk of doing this to-day, and the whole population
turns out to it. Of course the whole length and breadth of the
reef during these low tides is left high and dry, and the fish have
wisdom enough to retire as the tide goes out, but some are dilatory
like Lot in his flight from Sodom, and some stop to have a look
back like his wife, these are therefore left behind in the several
pools that are everywhere dotted about of more or less depth.
Some fish again which feed upon the reef have natural channels
of escape into deep water, but these are very skilfully guarded by
the natives with large nets, and the fish are captured while
making a rush to get out into the open sea. All these channels
are carefully guarded, and a very large number of fish shut in
from escape on the more or less exposed reef. The leaves of a
certain shrub are used for the purpose of stupifying the fish in
the deeper pools, and they are easily caught when under the
influence of the stupification. Others again are shot with bows
and arrows, others speared, others caught by hand until at times
the haul numbers several thousands, of all sorts, sizes and
descriptions. After this great catch of course there is much
feasting and rejoicing, and according to their own old heathen
superstitious ideas there is something sacred in the fish so caught.
‘ Kava ’ is largely drunk on these occasions and the festivities are
prolonged for many days. After my experience the other day I
did not care to go again, and followed Arthur and some others to
‘ Earava,’ whither I took my photographic camera, and shot off a
most beautiful picture in nature. I hope it may prove so in
development.
William, one of the men, lit a fire and soon produced some
fine large bread-fruit which were placed on the embers, and deftly
turned over and over so as to be properly cooked all round. The
result was that in about a quarter of an hour 1 was engaged upon
a smoking hot loaf of bread, which eaten with scraped cocoa-nut
is very nice indeed. Breadfruit is too much like boiled dough to
be really very nice, but to me it is very palatable food. The
black outside coating peels off very readily when well cooked,
and leaves a round puddingy sort of compound to be eaten.
Inside are seeds somewhat bigger than a marble, not unlike


filberts, and these are generally eaten with the breadfruit, the
hard outside husk easily peeling off, and leaving a large bean like
kernel. “Duwu” prepared his in quite a new way to me. Having
pealed off the outside crust caused by the cooking, he wrapped
the whole fruit up in the long dracoena leaves, and tied up the
neck very carefully. He then took a small bamboo, and beat the
breadfruit into a soft pulp, giving it a few final bangs on the
ground, the leaves were opened, and the pudding turned out on
leaves resembling very much a squash, and then cut up like a
vegetable marrow into slices and eaten with scraped cocoanut.
This I think was nicer than the bare breadfruit. We were a little
party of twelve of both sexes, and all shared alike, men and
women eating together in the most friendly manner, and not
only so but the men did the cooking and helped the women in
the nicest way. I could not help thinking what a contrast it
was to years gone by. There we were sitting every man under
his own vine and under his own fig, with no apparent fear or
apprehension of evil, and the most perfect harmony of the two
sexes existing among us. Here you scarcely ever now see the
husband without the wife, and where you see the wife you may
know the husband is not far off. Amina and Eliza kindly got
me some land crabs which I enjoyed for tea. These and prawns
are readily obtainable, and make a nice occasional change.
Thursday, August sih. —A strong Trade wind blowing fresh
all night, and this morning it is still very gusty and disagreeable.
To-morrow there is another house to be thatched, and those
who are not crazed about fishing are off getting food. From the
commencement to the finish, house building here is a matter of
great importance. There are four kinds of houses, of which the
‘ gamal ’is the chief. This is the men’s club, and the young men’s
sleeping quarters. Within its walls the women may not enter,
and there is a certain circumscribed boundary into which they
may not trespass. All food cooked in the ‘ gamal ’ is partaken
of by the men only, and a woman may not eat of it under any
consideration. ‘ Kava ’is prepared and drunk there also, and of
this a woman may not drink. Within the gamal are various ovens
according to the several degrees of rank, and those of the same
grade eat out of one oven, and the rules of precedence are
strictly adhered to. Fire used within the gamal may not be used
in a private house. After a certain age all boys are supposed to
live in the gamal, and that becomes their proper quarters until


they marry and build houses of their own. Any man may sleep
in the gamal and eat food there.
The next house in importance is the “ ima ” or married man’s
residence. Within this house the cooking of the food for the
family is done, and the married couples live. This house is
known from the rest, by having the front and back end worked
with cane, and more pains are expended on the building of it.
The third kind of house is the “ vale,” within which there is no
fire place for cooking, and this is used mostly as the apartments
of the young females before marriage, and for stowing any
treasures which may be inconvenient in the “ima.” The front
and end of the ‘ vale ’ are made only of bamboos. A fourth kind
of house is the “ ima somu ” (the Bank). In this house is kept
the treasures of the village, and it is always known by a peculiarly
neat front of reeds, and by a very curious sort of pallisade of
reeds placed in a sort of semicircle around the front door. Within
this house a fire is kept continually burning night and day, and
the reason for this is that the most prized and valuable article of
barter here is the smoked mat, and the blacker it can be smoked
the more does it increase in value. As may be supposed, within
these houses a most weird and odd sight presents itself. The
gross darkness being only relieved by the glowing embers of the
undying fire, the fresh black mats look like so many great flying
foxes suspended over it.
The importance of the several houses is therefore in this
order, the “gamal,” “ima,” “vale,” and “ima somu.” When a
building is finished there is always a great ceremony ranging in
importance according to the description of the house. For the
gamal the ‘ house warming ’ is a matter of much ceremonial called
“nasu,” and a man is supposed to “nasu gamal” with a pig at
least. Any live stock may be slaughtered in “ nasu ima,” and
fowls, or if possible fish, are mostly in requisition.' Plain food only
is required for the two latter, but all the same there must be some
house warming, or the building would not be properly finished.
The house I occupy is an “ ima,” and being a proprietor of many
pigs, I am going to add to the dignity and full completion of my
residence, by slaughtering two innocent animals next Thursday
(D.V.) and the school will get a general holiday and a pleasant
evening. Ido this partly because I want to give the boys some
slight return for the pains they have been at in building the house,
to get a piece of pork myself, and to give a holiday in honour of
my return among them. They say they must .dig an oven within


the ‘ ima ’ to make the thing complete, but to this I object.
To-morrow, all being well, I go to Tasmouri.
Friday, August 6th. —Morning Prayer, school and breakfast
at Tanoriki, and then started with three others for Tasmouri.
It was a most lovely day, and a fresh Trade wind fanned the air
and kept the paths pleasantly cool. Beneath the deep, dark
shade of the native forest, the strong burning heat of the morning
sun was not oppressive, and the roads and bush were fortunately
very dry. However, any exertion in this climate induces perspi-
ration, and that one expects.
The native guide swung along at a rapid pace, and we were
not long in reaching “ Uta,” where we rested for some time in the
neat little school, and Takele regaled us with green cocoanuts,
which were very acceptable. Poor Takele, who has only one
enlightened friend to help him, finds a difficulty in getting his
scholars together on a week day, and no wonder, as I suppose
he knows very little more than they do themselves, and it is
irksome to old people to spell over their A.B.C. day after day,
and get no oral instruction. It is far more in consonance with
their feelings and habits to go out for the day, either to the
seashore or to their gardens, than to be trammelled with the
cares and labour of school. On Sundays he says they turn up in
large numbers, and generally some one goes to them from
Tanoriki. I promised him a visit for Sunday week, all being
well, and I shall try to keep my promise, for he deserves all the
help we can extend to him. He has never been away, is a man
now of middle age, and entirely self-taught. He is a most
excellent, conscientious man, and tries to do all he can for his
people, according to his limited amount of knowledge.
He built the school himself and keeps it in most extraordinary
order. In many cases he has acted as a deterrent on his country-
men, when they have proposed some heathen act which he has not
thought to be within the bounds of strict rectitude, and I believe
he tries to lead a good life as far as he knows. As far as morality
goes, I do not think anyone would venture to bring an accusation
against him. I have always intended to Baptize him, and
perhaps this year I may put my intentions into effect. Leaving
“ Uta" we still marched on in single file, till we reached the brow
of the cliff down which, of necessity, we had to descend, Tasmouri
being on the other side of the island to windward. A striking
and broad prospect greeted us from the hill top, and we saw
besides Meralava and the wide expanse of ocean before us, the


grand fertile plain belonging to the Tasmouri district, and the
church and school visible in the far distance. At the foot of the
steep cliff our way lay through the beautifully irrigated taro beds,
and of course I had to pick my way to prevent being buried in
mud. Leaving the gardens, we had a grand stretch of level
country before us, and before long we came upon a merry party
of Tasmouri people awaiting our arrival, some distance from their
village. Being tired and hungry I pushed on ahead with some
of the boys, and enjoyed a refreshing bathe and change of
garments. Then came what I suppose I must dignify by the
name of dinner, mostly native food, but eaten with the best
sauce was as good as the best Lord Mayor’s feast, and I dare say
as digestible. The Bishop’s kind present was most useful, and
the canteen contained every article requisite for out of the way
travellers. After the meal the people came home, and before
long we had Evensong. I was quite surprised at the heartiness
of the responses, the fluency of the reading, and the general
brightness of the singing and service.
The women sang out lustily with a good courage, and
although a trifle slow the result was pleasing on the whole. With
a little teaching the singing and service will be very nice. I find
I have Baptized forty-six people here, two of whom have died,
two have gone away in a labour vessel, and forty-two still remain.
They are a very nice, genuine, exemplary community, and Samuel
has kept them well together. They seem to me beyond the
Tanrigese in point of mental ability, and readily take in fresh
ideas. One or two of the young men are very superior fellows.
This evening I felt the warmth of this place, by comparison with
Tanrig, and for the first time for the year I have slept without
any kind of covering. The reed bed I found somewhat hard,
but one cannot expect everything, and is content with such things
as one has. The condition of the people morally, socially and
spiritually, simply reconcile one to any amount of bodily incon-
venience. I can thank God and take courage.
Saturday, August Ith. —Most beautiful morning at Tasmouri.
After Prayers and breakfast we all went for a picnic to a pretty
place called “Eono nawo” meaning the sound of the surf, but
why I don’t know. It is curious how the Mota word has got in
here “nawo.” The word here for surf is “togovi” but nawo comes
probably from Meralava. We all turned out for the holiday,
men, women and children. The women did the cooking while
the men and boys amused themselves in various ways, fishing,


shooting, bathing or playing an animated game called “huka,”
something between “prisoner’s base” and the old game of “tig.”
Some of the young men amused themselves by shooting at a
mark about thirty or forty yards distant. They made such good
shooting at that distance, that I should be very sorry to give them
a shot at me with a good well balanced poisoned arrow. At
short distances of course they make very good work, and in their
own skirmishes they don’t want to make long shots. I dare say
by the side of a good English archer they would cut a sorry
figure at a long shot, but for their own purposes they are excellent
shots, and custom of course engenders skill. Their arrows are
unfeathered, and I don’t expect will carry as true as the better
made English arrow. Their bows are very strong and durable,
being made curiously enough from a tree called the “Aru” (she
oak). I spent my day pleasantly enough in reading and making
pencil notes. Crabs and breadfruit was roy luncheon, and a
green cocoanut. The whole party assembled in the course of the
afternoon, and the ovens were opened and their plentiful supply
of food disgorged. I said grace and then there was a general fall
to. The meal over we made preparation for a start homewards
which we reached some time before sunset. On the way home
the boys showed me in the water course a cocoanut tree which
time had failed to rot or destroy, and the story according to
native ideas was that this same tree was coexistant with the up-
heaval of the island, and had never changed, generation after
generation handing on the fact of its existence and whereabouts.
In the evening we had Prayers in the church and a nice
hearty Service. Poor “Samuel” the head teacher is sick and has
not been able to be with us to-day. I gave a short address at
Evensong explanatory mostly of to-morrow’s programme. It is
very warm here and one’s thoughts either cease to flow or one’s
hand to write, anyhow I find a difficulty in inducing energy to
write or my brain to cogitate.
Except for the perpetual boom and surge of the restless ocean
all is still and peaceful here at present.
On Saturdays following the general and long prevailing
custom of the Mission we have a whole holiday, end consequently
this morning we had only the shortened form of Mattins such as
we use here. Breakfast followed consisting of yam scraped and
cooked in leaves, and the particular kind presented for my
discussion this morning is called “ laqana.” The natives are great
cooks and have a very long list of various dishes on their menu.


There are three principal modes of cooking food, however,
such as yams and taro, (1) Boasted on the embers and the outside
skin carefully scraped off as it gets hardened, this is called
“tutunu,” (2) scraped on the rough edge of the tree fern, then
wrapped in leaves like a large pudding and cooked in the hot
stones, this is termed “ loko,” (3) roasted on the fire until cooked,
then beaten on a large wooden dish until as thin about as biscuit
pastry, and cocoanut cream poured over, this is named “lutu.”
The first two are the most common preparations, and the first
perhaps roost generally in use.
The different kinds of “loko and lutu” are wonderful, and it
would puzzle any one but a skilled native cook, to make any
distinct varieties of dishes out of such unpromising materials.
Both sexes are good cooks, and no wonder, as from the time
they are able properly to run about, until the infirmities of old
age creep on they are accustomed to shift for themselves. An
English boy would fare very badly if he had to cook his own
dinner, and provide for his own wants as early as some of these
native children. But education and habit are everything, the
latter of course is second nature.
Sunday, 'August Bth. —At Tasmouri. Beautiful but very warm
morning. After breakfast we had Sunday School, at which every
member of the village population was present. I was much
pleased with the way four or five classes repeated by heart their
catechism, and the collect for the week, and answered general
questions on the subject. It showed one that school was a serious
and important business both with teacher and pupil. We went
from the school into church, where we had full Morning Service
but without any Sermon. Service over, I was followed by the
whole male population to Tasmate. The day was very hot, and
we had been obliged to choose the hottest part of it for our walk.
However we tumbled over the same creepers, knocked our heads
against the same branches, brushed against the same bristly
bushes, that the natives of Maewo have done ever since they
peopled the island. No one ever thinks of trying to improve his
own or his neighbour’s ways, and from being accustomed so long
to the present condition of the paths, they are quite content to
experience the discomfort for ever and aye, they were good
enough for their own forefathers, why should not they be good
enough for them. Being head and shoulders taller than most of
our natives, I suffered untold agonies mentally and physically, but
I submit to the necessity, knowing that unless I commence to


improve matters myself, I may expect the same discomforts to the
end of the chapter. My helmet on more than one occasion has
saved my head very severe concussions, and to be bonnetted is no
uncommon occurence. However, on we swung, I being thankful
that the road was so level as, it was, and at length arrived at
Tasmate more fit to be comforted than to think of administering
comfort to others. They have built a nice little school here, and
by the way they turned up at the subsequent service it was
manifest that they knew the use of it. Augmented by the
Tasmouri people the little place was crowded to its fullest
capabilities, and the heat and flies were not such as one would
choose for ordinary enjoyment, but personal comforts with Mis-
sionaries are a secondary consideration. We had a nice service,
and I gave a somewhat long address in spite of inconveniences,
and when it was over I retired to the cool refreshing shade by
the sea shore, and all at once everyone began to feel the heat and
followed me there. However, our conversation ran in an edifying
course, and I hope some were profited by it. The return home
was the next consideration, and I must say it seemed formidable
for a Sunday afternoon. We reached a place called “Na Seu,’’
and there I could not resist a bathe in the natural bathing place,
under such a deliciously cool shoot of water. We came home by
a new route which was said to be much shorter, but it turned out
to be quite as long I think, and not nearly so pleasant walking.
At “ Uta riki,’’ where I formerly remember a good popu-
lation, one man and a small child are the only surviving remnant.
The rest are all scattered or dead. We asked him to come to
Tasmouri and live there, but he would not consent on the spur of
the moment. His son and relations left are mostly there. In
matter of wives he has been a regular Blue Beard, and the last of
a long list has just died, and left him a widower.
We arrived in due course at Tasmouri, and after dinner
all together, which the women had provided in our absence, we had
Evensong, a very nice service with a Sermon from me. The women
proposed singing afterwards, and this went on till late. At the
Evening Service I Baptized the infant daughter of Moses, naming
her Anika. Moses, wife, and four children are now a Christian
family. His care of, and love for, his children gave me good food
for my discourse afterwards, as did the case of ‘ Dimeli ’ and the
remnant of his people migrating from the place where many had
died, to a place where all were going to keep well and live, with
the result that all have died with the exception of himself.
There was no hope of life apart from2God.


Monday, August 9 th. —Very hot, oppressive day, and I was
so ill throughout I did little or nothing. My efforts to get cool
were utterly abortive. Great Christening festivities were going
on all day. The fatted pig was killed and eaten with much
thankfulness and rejoicing in the evening. At Evensong I screwed
my courage up to a Sermon which was better listened to than
delivered. Afterwards there was a dance.
Tuesday, August 10 th. —I saw this morning a beardless youth,
who is the tenth husband of a woman in the district. One of her
sons is a full-gown man at Tasmouri, himself married many years.
There is no accounting for taste, but on which side the love or taste
is Ido not know. Beauty of face and figure have little weight
generally with natives, they think more of utility and position.
They seem to me to have no idea of the sublime and beautiful
either in woman or in nature according to our ideas, and in a very
matter of fact way look to the practical side of the business.
Polygamy here is the exception, and there is not so large a
percentage of females as is found in some of the islands. How-
ever, if they are all as easily satisfied as the youth mentioned
above, young girls will he at a premium. There is one man here
at Tasmouri who has two wives, and he steadily refuses to divorce
one or the other with a view to Baptism, and according to our
present practice in the administration of that Holy Rite, we insist
on monogamy. Strangely enough the son of this very man had
five wives, four of whom he divorced in order to be Baptized.
All the four divorced are now married and Baptized at Tasmouri
It was so intolerably hot in the village, I proposed that we
should go to Rononawo, as I was going to Tasmate to sleep and
that was about a half-way house. All the population followed me,
and there we cooked our dinner and rested. After the meal we
had a short service there on the beach which was very quiet and
solemn, and then with most of the men I turned my steps towards
Tasmate, Samuel and a few others, with the women going back.to
Tasmouri. There was a great shaking of hands, some profusion
of tears among the women, and a great deal of Christian harmony
between us all.
Arriving at Tasmate we found another dinner awaiting us,
and a hearty welcome. We had Prayers after dinner with a
sermon from myself, in which I contrasted the present visit with
those they must remember to have known in heathen days. Then
the hands were full, but the heart was empty, now the heart was
full of love and the bands carried no bow and arrows. We had


great Hymn singing afterwards, and the men sat and talked
outside about the present and the past. There are a few hearts
here I can see being prepared for the good seed which may God
sow in His good time, quickly if it may be, and water the plant
of grace with the dew of His Holy Spirit.
We were rather late before we thought of retiring, and I
was not sorry at length when it was proposed, for without chair
or seat, except a native tree, there was no great pleasure in sitting.
Wednesday, August 11 ih. —Spent a very uncomfortable night
at Tasmate. The kind people had done all they could to make
me comfortable, but I found the bed very hard, the sleeping
quarters very rough, the fleas in large numbers, and the mosquitos
very lively. However, I have been more uncomfortable, and I was
not unthankful to be brought safely to the beginning of another
day. A place was named to me last evening called “ Beitabu,” as
being a most choice spot for a bathe, and it was said to be near
at hand. Having not many toilet requisites with me, I proposed
to one “ Lulu " a denizen of the place to pilot me there. I was
very “ breakfasty ’’ and most unrefreshed, but away we started
for “ Beitabu.” It was a fearful grind to get there, and the dis-
tance seemed to me interminable. Of course being well watered
there were irrigated taro beds, and I slipped off a bank clean into
the mud. Yet when the spot was reached it made up for all
difficulties and distresses and proved to be a most marvellous
natural bath, a large, clear, deep pool, with water pouring in from
a charming little waterfall, and flowing out rapidly over the rocks
below. I do not know when I have enjoyed a bath more, or
when water had a more invigorating and refreshing effect on me.
Fortunately my host had what breakfast there was ready for me
when I got back, and in my state of exhaustion it did not much
matter what it was. After breakfast we had Morning Prayer
with a short address from me instead of school. Not long after
“ sail oh 1 ” was cried and my boat appeared to bring me back
here to Tanrig, and heartily glad am I to be back here again in
comparative comfort. We had a pleasant but rather heavy row
up the coast, our party on board numbering twenty-eight. Fortu-
nately the sea was very smooth, and not much wind, or probably
we should not have fared so well. All my Tasmouri friends came
on with me and are spending the night. All were well here and
the place looked much as usual. One little baby had died un-
baptized during my absence, a matter of great regret to everybody,
and very much so to me. I had known of the child’s illness, and


it was better before I left. I had therefore postponed its Baptism
until I could make it convenient to Baptize three or four more
infants now waiting for the Rite.
Thursday, August 12 th. —General holiday. Arthur took'occa-
sion to “ nasu ima ” at the same time with me, and the great event
of two house warmings drew together a large concourse of people.
Fire was lit in my house, and part of a pig and two fowls were
cooked in the oven. It is the custom here to have as many kinds
of flesh as possible on these occasions, and as many kinds of
vegetables, representing I suppose all the different sorts of food
that will hereafter be cooked therein. There has been great
preparation for this day, and great excitement to-day. Every
household added its mite to the feast, and in the evening when
the feast was spread out there was a grand display. Everyone
had huge pieces of yam and taro and banana cake, and a large
piece of fish, fowl and pork. The pork takes precedence, hut the
fish costs the greatest pains in provision, not being so easily within
their reach or means of acquisition. Fish in these countries do
not seem to take hook and bait readily, and the poor natives have
to resort to all manner of odd expedients to secure them. There
were many strangers here, and quite 150 people or more must
have partaken. The pork was very nice and most beautifully
cooked in the native oven. The females presided over the cutting
up, but Arthur as co-host with myself gave directions as master
of the feast. He gave a sigh of relief when he came into my
house after it was all over, and said “ there, what a poor return
for so much labour.” That always strikes me as the most pitiable
thing about a feast, it is all over in the twinkling of an eye, and
what have you for your pains ?
This evening there is a great dance, a vast crowd of people
has already congregated, and it is to go on till morning light. It
is done as a special compliment to myself, and I do not like to stop
them. The patient endurance of some of the dancers is wonderful.
From the start to the finish, say from 8 p.m. to 4 a.m., they never
leave the ranks of the dance but keep at it all the time, singing,
clapping the hands and dancing. There is no rest for a good
supper at midnight, but the dance is carried right through to the
bitter end. lam going to attempt sleep, but I fear the noise
will prove too much for me. They have certainly a most beautiful
night for their dance, but I should be sorry to be one of the
performers. The songs are certainly very pretty, and they show
wonderful power of memory to keep up the succession all through
the night, without a book of words or musical score.


I can imagine too, as the enthusiasm of the dance increases,
that there must be a sort of fascination about the performance.
Friday, August 13 th. —The dance was kept up till daylight,
and I got little or no sleep before that. When I did get to sleep,
I slept so soundly that it was late on in the morning before I
awoke, and then I was driven to it. Arthur Huqe appeared at
my bedside and asked me if he should ring the bell for prayers,
and I was obliged to consent. The whole day afterwards was
somewhat of a blank to me, and I went no whither and did little
till evening. The duties of the day however, were carried on as
usual.
Saturday, August 14 th. —The usual holiday. We had Prayers
very early, and before breakfast I took a picture of most of the
congregation in front of the church, which I hope will turn out
good. It was not a pleasant day indoors, there was a strong wind
blowing, and clouds of dust penetrating my house from all
quarters, and I was not sorry to accept Arthur’s offer to go with
himself and most of the people to the riverside. There it is
always cool and pleasant, and the luxury of a bathe, although
almost a daily occurence, is always appreciated. I took my
photographic Camera with me, and after almost burying myself
in mud, succeeded in getting a good view of the pretty taro
gardens. On our way to Rarava the monotony of the road was
relieved by our starting a “malau,” the ornithological name of
which I know not, but it is a kind of bush turkey, it has a red
head, yellow legs and black feathers, and is really like a common
hen in shape and appearance. The poor thing was evidently
startled from her peculiar nest, where she was about to deposit her
eggs. These strange birds after securing a favourable spot, lay
their eggs some depth beneath the upper soil, and leave them
there uncared for until the young ones hatch themselves, and
when strong enough burst their earthly tenement, and come forth
to the light of day. Some say the parent comes occasionally
back to her nest to see how matters are progressing, and even
digs at the earth to find out how the process of hatching goes on.
If she finds her progeny ready to walk, she drives them on before
her to a place of security, but the general belief is that she allows
them to shift for themselves. ' These curious birds are said to feed
principally on the large ants here called “ gandee.”
In Savo and some of the Solomon Islands, these birds are
tamed and fenced in, to lay their eggs in the hot sand, but here
they are wild and rare. Their eggs which are very numerous are


esteemed a great delicacy. This poor bird in question tried very
hard to get away by flight, but getting entangled in the thick
bush, was shot by a cruel arrow. The capture was the food for
conversation throughout the day, and I listened to the relation
and re-relation of the narrative of it times without number, with
all the little details with which natives are wont to embellish and
amplify their narration of the smallest fact. It is perfectly
wonderful how the smallest matter affords pasture for native
conversation, and what a wonderful faculty they have of making
multum out of parvum. In powers of conversation and flow of
language, I think natives are far before our European working
classes. A native never seems at a loss for something to say, and
certainly never fails to express himself from lack of words.
I have frequently heard an European confess that he had a
great deal to say, but he could not express himself for want of
words. The fluency of speech, and powers of conversation are
not confined here to the weaker sex, and I think the men have
quite as long tongues as the women, although I do not think they
chatter so much or make such a clatter. Some of the men are
great wits, and make fun for the multitude, but I do not think
this applies to the women. The Maevvo folks are great “laughers,’’
and go off into fits of cacchination at the smallest joke. They are
a most simple, good-natured race certainly, and it is hard to
conceive of their being such depraved savages, so gentle are they
in their ways.
After school with the teachers in the evening, during which
we discussed our Sunday programme, we had Evensong, and
afterwards a long singing practice. Miss Mount's generous gift
is a most welcome addition to our singing, and Arthur Huqe
begins to play the harmonium very nicely at the services. Our
singing is very fair on the whole, but there is room for improve-
ment, and we have the ability if I could get the girls to use their
very nice voices. In the old familiar hymns and chants they sing
out lustily, but when we attempt anything new, they shut up
altogether, without making a trial to join in.
Sunday, August 15th. —There are two very homely sounds
which break the stillness of the early morning here, and the first
is the cock which seems to have a peculiar faculty for crowing in
these latitudes, he starts his chant before commerce is awake and
he keeps religiously at it all day long. Here at Maewo, too, these
birds are in prodigal abundance, their flesh is esteemed very
delicate food, and is kept for great and exalted occasions. Here


the male takes precedence of the female even in the matter of
dumb animals, and sows and hens are looked upon as only fit
food for women. The crow of the first cock is a signal for a
general chorus, and then the natives begin to stir. As soon as
they appear on the threshold of their doors another chorus takes
up the morning song, and the pigs begin their squealing.
Whether it is that one looks for more peace on Sunday morning,
or whether one perchance is a trifle more inclined to take a little
more sleep or a little more slumber, whatever the actual cause
may be, I always notice that on Sundays there is always a greater
noise from the domestic animals than on ordinary days. The pigs
here are hand fed, and will not be denied, they squeal to their
hearts’ content until they have their morning meal, and being in
considerable numbers the noise is not sleep producing. In old
days these animals were kept for their heathen feasts, but as of
late these have fallen into disuse, so the pigs have increased until
they have become one of the features of the place. At a
Baptism or any great Church Festival such as Christmas, Easter,
Pentecost, one or more male animals have to die, and although
the possession of a flock is as much valued as an Englishman’s
stud, no one ever grumbles to kill his animal when his turn
comes round.
Being very hot this morning, and there being a prospect of
the repetition of the Egyptian plague of flies, who always add to
the discomfort of a congregation, we had school very early. Our
numbers were slightly augmented by outsiders, but not quite to
my satisfaction. After a hasty breakfast I started for Uta. This
is a good long distance from here, and I was in a state of dripping
perspiration when I arrived there. I found everyone keeping a
Sabbath, but very few appreciating the idea of a Christian
Sunday.
However, I had quite a large congregation in the neat little
school, but the ladies preponderated in point of numbers. We
had quite a nice hearty little service, and they listened patiently
to an address from myself. I wish from my heart I had a good
teacher to place here, for I know he would be the means of doing
much good work to God’s glory. The present teacher is a very
good, conscientious fellow, but his own knowledge is not much
above that of his own countrymen, and they grow weary of
hearing continually the same thing. I was quite pleased with my
visit, and amply rewarded for any discomfort I experienced in the
journey. 1 do not expect that any immediate result will issue


from such spasmodic efforts, but there is no knowing the power of
grace, and God’s ways are not as our ways. Often it is that the
last becomes first, and the first last. At all events I keep the
door open, and I hope before long someone else may be raised up
to settle among them as a permanent teacher. After resting
awhile I took my homeward journey, escorted according to
custom by the denizens of the village beyond their own boundary.
I returned by way of “Na Kuru,” where “Anthony” one of
our Norfolk Island trained boys has a school He seems to be
doing fairly well there, and has a nice school After sitting with
him for some time, the shades of evening began to close in, and I
to feel somewhat famished, having had but little since morning.
Bidding him goodbye I started for Tanrig, where I arrived in due
course. After dinner I baptized three children, Maida, Victoria
and Matthew respectively. The Font was very prettily arranged
and decorated by Arthur Huqe, and the service generally, very
nice. Later on we had Evensong, quite a refreshing and stirring
Service, at which I preached, and never before do 1 remember to
have secured more attention. These children I Baptized this
evening make up the number of Christians here to 100, under
God, the fruits of my own, and my teacher’s work, and I feel that
by the orderly and consistent lives of most of them, 1 can thank
God and take courage.
I took as the basis of my remarks, our Lord’s last command
to His Disciples, and I urged those who had already been admitted
into the fellowship of Christ’s religion, to eschew all those things
which were contrary to their profession, and to follow all such
things as were agreeable to the same, and those still without the
pale to lose no time in applying for that rite, the absence of which
our Lord declared must be condemnation. Those words have a
strong sound here for Missionary and heathen—“ He that believeth
and is Baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be
dammed.” One realizes here their full weight, and solemnity, and
power. Quite three parts of the congregation have dropped in to
wish me good night, and by the hushed stillness over the place I
can tell that God’s Word has not fallen to the ground. God
grant that it may minister grace to hearer and preacher.
Monday, August 16 th. —The night was made perfectly hideous
by the howling of the fiendish curs which are dignified with the
name of dogs, the squealing of hungry swine, and the cackling of
a poor forlorn goose whose kith and kin have left her a solitary
representative of her species, and who seems to find her only


solace in sitting outside my door and calling to her lost com-
panions. The dogs are simply a pest to the place, they keep
up their incessant bark all the day long, and all night they howl
and prowl around. They are hideously ugly, undersized creatures,
and are the more loathsome because they are the acknowledged
scavengers of the place. They are not worthy to be called dogs,
and any one except he was assured of the fact, would scarcely
believe that they were dogs. They are supposed to be useful in
catching wild pigs, but from their appearance you would fancy
that it must be a poor specimen of a pig they would dare to
tackle. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and all these sounds
rending the still night air simultaneously drove sleep from my
eyes, and produced such inward irritation and disgust that if a
thought could have killed the lot, none of them would have troubled
the world again with their noises. A most glorious morning
enticed me up very early, and certainly the early dawn was very
fresh and beautiful. We had Prayers very soon after daylight
and even then the blue bottles had collected in great numbers
and were by no means a help to devotion. These pests spring
into existence at once as soon as any number of human bodies are
congregated together, and are particularly active in church and
school. The idea of them apart from their propensities is very
nasty and disgusting, and when in a country like this without the
concomitants of devotion, one wants all the solemnity one can
possibly obtain, their presence and irritation are the more odious
and nauseating.
To-day, according to custom, we kept the Christening Feast
of the children who were Baptized last night. The parents of the
children gave a most beautiful pig, and the women attended to
the cooking, the men dispersing in many directions each in quest
of his own business or pleasure. I went with a party to Euosi
where we bathed, and got back in time for the opening of the
ovens, and the division of the feast. I said grace and then each
one partook of his or her share of the plentiful repast, all eating
together in the most harmonious fashion, and not as in old days
the sexes keeping religiously apart. This middle wall of separa-
tion has been almost entirely broken down, and family life and
sociability have taken the place of the old seclusion and division.
It was a most glorious night but the people were too tired to
dance, and we all retired early to our houses. I kept busy till
very late writing up arrears of correspondence and reading, and
was the last in the village out of bed.


Tuesday, August 17 th. —The most glorious day from earliest
morning till now at night, the evening one of the most beautiful
I ever saw, when the moon rose it was a most perfect night
above and below, the sky studded with myriads of stars and abso-
lutely cloudless, here everything hushed in peaceful slumber,
except the restless, ever-singing crickets, whose buzz is continu-
ously kept up by night and day. At the heathen end of the village
there was a sort of Irish wake kept up to-day, but there was no
“ tangi ” or any ceremony except a pig being killed, and a great
feast being prepared. Formerly, death days were kept with great
strictness, and the day of death and the 100th were observed with
great festivities. I have seen nothing of the kind now for years,
and I fancied the custom had quite died out. It was supposed in
old days when the people were still heathen, that the disembodied
spirit, after it left its earthly tenement, hung about hungry and
restless on the thick creepers in the bush, and on the day of
death a great feast was prepared for-it, after which it. retired to
the place of departed spirits called Hanoi. This same Hanoi is
near Tasmouri, but I have never seen it. The idea, I believe, is
that when the spirit is at length at rest, its stone is placed in a
certain cave or pit there exists there, and the people who have
seen the place, tell me that certainly there far inland are smooth
seaside stones laid in wonderful regularity, and in old days supposed
to be put there by successive spirits in order as they died. Until
quite recently, no one ventured into this ghostly place, and it was
regarded as eminently sacred. Some day I hope to go there and
examine it for myself.
I cannot find out the rationale of the subsequent death days,
but they seem to have more to do with the living than the dead,
and are supposed to show the departed one that he or she is still
kept in faithful and affectionate memory.
In old days everyone was careful to have one good pig at
least, in readiness for the day of his death, and any others which
he might possess at the time of his departure, his friends were
careful to kill in his honour.
They carefully kept the days, principally the tens, I think,
and religiously observed the 100th, after which remembrance
seemed no longer necessary, but before that, I am afraid, there
was a large amount of selfishness about the death days, and more
was thought of the living in them than of the dead. The people
tell me how strictly these days were kept formerly, they dispensed
with their regular ordinary food sometimes for the whole 100


days, and ate only such roots and fruits as grow wild in the bush,
religiously abstaining from all garden produce until the full time
had expired. Some went even beyond this when a very particular
person died, and for the whole 100 days ate only one kind of root,
and that the most difficult to obtain, strenuously refusing to
partake of food in common with others. I have known a man
myself adhere to this rigid, self-imposed abstention, in the case of
the death of a son, and of a wife, not here however, but at Opa.
A man once came into my house over there, tired and hungry
after a long fast and a laborious journey, but he strictly refused a
biscuit or other food which I ventured to offer him, and when or
where he ate I do not know, for the particular food he had chosen
to eat was most rare in the neighbourhood, I doubt even if it was
obtainable at all. Yet no privation or distress would force him
to break his rule, and eat promiscuously until the proper time
had elapsed. In the keeping of their days they are wonderfully
accurate, and you seldom find them wrong in their calculations.
Their fingers are their ready reckoners, and they have to do a
great deal more work than ours in assisting a weak memory,
where the use of slate and pencil are unknown. I very often ask
people to count over the names of persons in the place or neigh-
bourhood, just to see how clever and correct they are with their
numbers. Here the whole ten fingers are used, at Opa only the
left hand, five fingers down being five, the first finger up and the
rest down six, and so on until all are up which makes ten, then
two tens, three tens, up to ten tens or one hundred. In the
distribution of food, too, it is wonderful how accurate they are,
and it is very rarely that any one is left out of the count. Of
course, where the science of numbers is unknown, nature teaches
by a more roundabout, but scarcely less accurate process. For all
practical purposes and uses, their fingers help them a great deal,
indeed almost as far as their requirements go, for their lives are
very simple and their ways uncomplicated. The leaves of a
certain palm, however, lends them some assistance, especially in
the distribution of food, and as the person is seen, or his name
thought of, a leaf is broken off, and then the broken leaves are
counted. I have never heard of the toes being used as assistants,
although one might fancy their being of service.
Wednesday, August 1 8th. —About midnight as I lay reading
in bed, and a perfect stillness reigned around, we experienced a
very sharp shock of an earthquake. My house shook so uncom-
fortably, that I really feared it was coming down, and I had the


sort of feeling as of some one trying to upset it, and I felt as if I
must say “ Oh! do not, please leave off, you will have it down.”
My neighbour’s fence was shaken so, that I fancied some consider-
able damage had been done. The vibration lasted a good long
time, some seconds I should say, after the real shock was over,
and 1 felt myself, a sort of palpitation for some considerable
period. I was not afraid, but no one can feel an earthquake
without some instinctive dread. Nothing, I think, makes one
feel one’s littleness and helplessness and insecurity more, and
there is such a solemnity attached to it, that you are very
thankful when it is fairly over. Man, bird and beast were roused
into action at once, and there was quite an excitement here for a
time. Curiously enough, in the evening there was a very bright
and exceedingly beautiful after-glow, and I remarked to the boys
how like it was to the time when the terrible destruction was
caused in the gulf of Sunda, and I said casually, that I should
not be surprised if we had more earthquakes soon. The natives
have a firm idea that they are the precursors of rain, and
certainly this morning we have had a very heavy downpour.
This is the first rain we have had for the whole month I have
been here, and the first day I have been kept to solitary confine-
ment. Most of the day I have been absolutely alone, and my
pen has been kept very busy writing letters and hymns and
songs. With the latter I have been very successful, and have
managed four. One, particularly successful, goes to the chorus of
“ Wait till the clouds roll by,” and is as follows;
Qe togatoga ririkqa.
Mati ni van ranai,
A lani ni rowo na wia,
Tavi dago na tasgoro.
Qana sake na usu maraga,
Gana toura na gabe tar,
Gana tura goro na masi
Gana koko betegag.
Gana unui vagamatera
A lenelene mas
Gana tuwur, sogon le gete
Toll tasgoro rik ka sem.
of which the translation is:—
Wait a little bit longer,
Wait till the tide is low,
Then we will take bow and arrow,
Then we will carry our nets,
Then we will stop in the fishes
And gather them properly up.
Wait till the wind blow fairer,
And then make the tasgoro.
We will kill them dead with poison,
All and every kind of fish,
We will gather and lay them in baskets,
What a glorious tasgoro 1


The tasgoro I have before described. Part of beach
enclosed, tabu’d, and after lapse of time opened again to the
public.
This evening we have sung this chorus with grand eifect,
and high as I was previously in popular estimation as a poet, I
have gone still higher now. What a little thing wins popularity,
how little is a thing so easily purchased worth the having! One
other song goes very prettily and smoothly to “Home sweet
Home,” and is much appreciated. It is, as far as I could adapt it,
the reproduction of the English song into Maewo. “Dream
Faces" supplied me with another very pretty little song, which
runs very well, the theme of which is the “moonlight.” “Our
Jack’s come home to night,” lent me the music of a fourth song,
which is peculiarly native in expression, and slightly more comic
than the two above mentioned.
The production' of this last was received with such peals of
laughter, that for a time confusion and merriment took the place
of composure and perfect gravity,
half its meaning if I were to atte
It would lose its charm and
pt to translate it into English.
to attempt to
Here, however, is the Maewo
Ta disava qarik
Eh ? Bono lolora va! •
Wa sagoro ta sagoro
Bono lolora va!
Isei ni tau na as ?
Ki isei qa ni sawn 1
Ki gida, sem, ta lai ranai I
Toli sagoro rik!
Ge riri betigag I
Ga laia ranai sag I
Ge wosawosa limamu!
Tolina rik ka sem I
Da I ta sagoro da I
Ta sagoro tei rik
Rare mawmaw, tei riki vak!
A wula marama I
The “ Dream Faces ’’ song is as follows:
Nan ligo asik suri marama, —l'll make my song about the moonlight,
Tolina rik sem a wula marama, —Charming indeed is the light of the
Osoos ti rasu mera na maran, —Darkness has flown, it is light as the day,
Non eteete ti lita soun na qou. —His brightness chased the night far away.
Nan ligo asik suri marama, —l’ll make my song about the moonlight,
Aneisa tea le isi Tamada, —Some day I ween in our great Father’s
land,
Ala na maran vagatewa tau, —There day unending for ever will be,
Qon tigai ala, moa marama, —Night is unknown there, light only
endless.
The light called “ marama,” is looked upon by natives as the
perfection of light, because it is, I suppose, unaccompanied by the
burning heat of the sun. I therefore use it as illustrating better
the idea of heaven’s light. Maran is the light of day.


Thursday, August 19 th. —The village was hushed in the
stillness of slumber again about midnight, and I was preparing
for bed, too, and kneeling down to say my prayers, when another
quite sharp earthquake shock was felt, and the sensation came
upon me very solemnly and impressively while so engaged. I
cannot say why I trembled, but I did, and it was quite instinctive.
However, I went to bed and slept profoundly. We have had
another slight shock of domestic earthquake here this morning,
and Ann, one of our young married women, after rating her
husband, started off for Naruru, and we were quite in a ferment
here for a short time. However, this evening, her parents went
for her, and I have had to give her a scolding. I told her that
anger was like a charge of dynamite, it not only exploded itself,
but it produced destructive effects far and wide, indeed there was
no knowing what the extent of its mischief might be. She
seemed penitent, and was utterly ashamed of her unchristian
conduct. lam thankful to say that scenes of domestic warfare
are uncommon here, and, generally speaking, a great deal of
harmony prevails, but of course there are clouds in the most
perfect day, and the smoothest ocean is at times ruffled by the
sudden breeze. Beyond this, our day has been like most other
days, except for the thatching of Peter’s “gamal,” which has
brought together a large concourse of people, and has been the
occasion of a great festivity this evening. Arthur, Patrick and
myself walked down to Euosi in the afternoon, where we bathed,
and returned in the evening. Our evening duties as usual.
Friday, August 20 th. —Certainly we are blessed with the most
glorious weather. This morning was simply perfect, and one
almost wishes one could keep some of its coolness for the middle
of the day, when the heat is very great.
After school and breakfast this morning, some of the people
invited me to go with them eel catching. As the performance
was new to me, I gladly assented. The scene of the sport lay in
the direction of the water fall, and I took my camera, hoping to
get a good view of it.
We followed the course of the stream, and waded through
the taro gardens, and finally found ourselves in the most advan-
tageous position for a photograph. It ought to be good, after all
my efforts to secure the picture, but I could not get far enough
away. While I have been writing this, since I began the last
sentence, an earthquake shock has shaken the place very percep-
tibly, and, why I know not, has left a tremour all over me, which


I cannot explain. The picture being shot off, I hastened back to
where the eel catching was going on. The water was cleverly
dammed off above two large pools, and then one pool “ teemed ”
out with buckets. In the first pool nothing was discovered, and
the next proceeding was to empty the full pool into the now
empty one. This took some time, but it was finally accomplished,
and one large eel was captured, the sole occupant of the pool, and
the only sport afforded after a long day’s work. Disappointment
was depicted on all countenances, and I was rather disgusted too,
having expected to see some sport. I comforted myself with a
most glorious bathe in the broad flowing river, and hastened home
to drown my disappointment in a cup of tea.
' After school this evening, I was sitting here alone, when four
men came in, in whispers, and shut the door behind them, and
when they had sat down, they said, still in the lowest accents,
“we wish to see your Eucharistic vessels.” I proceeded to
exhibit them, and they seemed quite awe struck. Miss Patteson
would have been pleased to have seen how her noble gift was
valued and appreciated. The exhibition of the beautiful vessels
gave me much food for conversation with these men, and I told
them I hoped the day was not far distant when they would be
regularly used in the Church here, and they themselves be par-
takers from them of the Blessed Tokens of Redeeming Love, the
bread of the world in mercy broken, the wine of the soul in mercy
shed.
Saturday, August 21 st. —General holiday as usual. Nothing
of particular importance marked the day, except the visit of three
nice fellows from Uta. The British Workman’s Almanac adorns
my walls, and they were particularly struck with the picture of
Lord Shaftesbury which occupies the centre. Curiously, many
others have admired this same picture, why I do not know,
except perhaps from its size. I told these visitors all about the
late Earl, of his philantrophy and the goodness of his life, and I
told them too, of the philantrophy and goodness of a greater than
he, “ who went about doing, and healing all manner of diseases
and sicknesses among the people.” They asked me if I had
heard the earthquake of late, to which I responded in the affir-
mative, and told them of the terrible outburst of volcanic power
at Tarawera, and the fearful and alarming results, and I said
there was no knowing but it might be our turn next, and we
ought to try and be prepared for whatever lay before us. I
urged them to fly, while they had the opportunity, to the Higher


Rock, for there we should find shelter and protection until the
tyranny were overpast, and any such visitation would be but to
bring us the quicker to a haven of rest and safety, whither such
things never come. They asked me if I could not spare some
regular teacher to come and live with them, to teach them the
wonderful things of God’s law, and expound more fully to them,
the things concerning the Kingdom of God. I promised them a
weekly service, hut I could do no more just yet.
Sunday, August 22nd. —A most glorious Sabbath morning.
We had school before breakfast, both because it was cooler and
also on account of the blue bottle flies, which become very
troublesome in the heat of the day, where people are congregated
together. Before our school duties were over, they became very
numerous, and I was not sorry to get back to the refuge and
quiet of my own house. After breakfast we had Morning Prayer,
a very nice service, but not rendered more solemn by the presence,
in crowds, of those disgusting pests, the flies. However, they are
an inevitable worry, from which there seems no chance of escape.
After Prayers I went to the Unduna villages, and talked to the
few people I found there. They were keeping Sunday, they said,
i.e. they were doing no work and were generally idling. I asked
why they did not come to Church as formerly, and they said it
was too far. I asked why then did not they build a school there,
and I would be responsible for the teaching in it. They so far
assented as to say that they would see about it, when they had
got through with their yam planting. There is a nice little
population there, and I have always had it on my conscience that
nothing practical or definite had been done for them. Natives do
not care to go to the trouble of a few yards more or less for
religion, so I suppose the alternative is that religion must go to
them. One very nice man called “ Vangoro,” was most energetic
about the building, in promising to get it done and helping all he
could, he is a leading man there too, and I hope my desire will be
accomplished.
It was very hot coming hack, and I was in a liquid state
when I got home. The evening was deliciously cool and fine, and
I enjoyed it outside my house with several of the people.
Evensong was a very nice quiet service, and I preached on
the subject of the Collect (9th Sunday after Trinity), the “ spirit
to think and do always such things as were rightful.” I hope I
got intelligent attention. We had some nice singing afterwards,
and the people went very quietly home.


Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. —Blank days.
On Monday there were great festivities here, and a dance till
morning. I began to feel ill in the evening, and spent a most
wretched night. On Tuesday I was unwell all day, and could do
nothing. On Wednesday I was fearfully ill all day with a severe
attack of fever and ague, and lay down under all the wraps I
could secure, until the hot fit came on with a very severe headache.
In the evening the boys surprised me by saying there was a white
man outside, and I was glad to welcome Mr. Blackburne, Govern-
ment agent of the Sybil, from Queensland. The vessel anchored at
the watering place, and the boys told him “ Missionary he plenty
sick.” He therefore very kindly came up and spent the night
with me. He has just left me now, and I have not strength to
go with him to the ship. However, lam better to-day, and hope
after a big dose of Quinine he has given me, that I shall be better.
Tuesday, August 31st—I have wasted a whole week, and only
to-day feel equal to doing anything or going anywhere. To-day
for the first time for a week, I have moved out of the village
boundaries, and have been to the river with the boys and bathed.
It has been a sickly time here all together, and many besides
myself have been laid by. It is bearably pleasant to be pent up
day by day within doors when feeling well, but almost unbearably
so when one feels ill and out of sorts. However, I trust it is all
over now, please God, and I must endeavour to make up for lost
time. Several of the people, Arthur included, have been quite ill
through eating a certain eel, caught somewhere in the sea and
very poisonous. They all detected the burning, stinging sensation
on their lips, tongue and palate as soon as they had eaten it, but
fancied it was the taro. From that time till the end of the week,
they have been all laid up, and one or two have been very bad
indeed. They have experienced not only burning, sharp pains
internally, and pricking, poignant stabbing pains in the palms of
the hands and soles of the feet, but have suffered a great deal also
from strong and utter prostration with an abhorrent distaste for
food. Several others were warned betimes from partaking, or the
poisoning might have been more general. This particular eel was
caught by a heathen on a Sunday, and therefore its peculiarly
deleterious and poisonous qualities have been traced by the more
virtuous to that fact, of which no cognizance was taken before it
was cooked and eaten, nor would have been afterwards, but for
its effects. The really admitted fact, however, I believe, is that
certain fish caught at certain parts of the beach at particular


seasons of the year, have all a more or less poisonous eifect on
those who eat them. The people themselves say it is the feed
they find there which makes them poisonous, but it may be
inherent in the nature of the particular fish. I remember on
many occasions on board the Southern Cross, the natives looking
askance at some very tempting looking fish which had been
caught, and p-onouncing them dangerous to eat. On one very
memorable occasion, when dinner was over, one of the senior boys
being cook, and one of the most poisonous of fish having
been served and partaken of by all, this youth without a change
of feature saying to some remark that was passed, “ Oh! Yes,
we die in our country if we eat that fish.” This was reassuring
after what had passed, and we eyed one another with wistful and
anxious faces, thinking whether or not perchance our end may
have been hastened by our wilful inadvertence in thus partaking
of deadly poison. But we neither swelled, nor fell down dead,
and felt no ill effects. Many a time, too, since, I have eaten the
same fish with the like happy and successful result. This par-
ticular kind of eel, however, has played the same post mortem tricks
before, and taken his revenge for wrongs received before going
into the oven. The people tell me that those who have eaten, have
become like mummies, their hair and skin have changed to a
ghastly leaden hue, and have fallen off like a snake’s skin. How
far this is true or fable, I know not, but it may be partially
credible. Nothing of the sort has happened fortunately, at this
present crisis, and the sufferers are about again.
A dull, dark evening ushered in a blustery, rough night, and
the coughs and sneezings and other demonstrative sounds peculiar
to people who do not carry pocket handkerchiefs, bore testimony
to the fact of an epidemic catarrh, contracted during a very incle-
ment week. Like the Norfolk Islanders, they look for the source
of such things in the world without, and accuse my friend Mr.
Blackburne of having brought it here, all the way from Queens-
land. In what part of his luggage he secreted so desirable a
communication I know not, but they are decidedly of opinion
that he it was who ‘gave them’ the cold, and they were unwise
enough to ‘ catch it ’ from him. He ‘ had ’ the cold, they said,
when he came here, and certainly said I, I believe he took it away
again. However, as colds are catching, I suppose they must be
left content with their belief, and to ‘ bless him,’ I hope, every
time they sneeze.


Wednesday, September ls<.—Another full month past and
gone, and leaving I fear, but a poor memory of much good done
behind it. The days here certainly fly past one after another in
rapid flight, and the very monotony of existence speeds their
departure. One day is so like another that it passes unmarkedly
by, and one finds oneself, all at once, at the end of the week, and
is brought to final consciousness of the rapid rotation of time’s
wheels at the end of the month. What has been done in the
month? I fear there is but a poor record. God grant that I
myself may have, by His Grace, made one step forward, and have
been instrumental in leading others also onward to a higher and
better life, and to that final epoch where the flight of time is
unmarked by days and weeks and months and years, for time
itself will be swallowed up in eternity.
Nothing much happened to-day. A bright morning seemed
likely to usher in a fine and brilliant day, but in the forenoon the
rain pelted down, and for some hours we had a glorious downpour.
The “ blue bottles ” gave indication of this at Prayers and morning
school, and I have never known them in such numbers or so
troublesome. One perfectly loathed oneself, but escape from them
was impossible, they crowded my house, which is generally free
from their incursions, and the poor people seemed quite distracted.
This is the great yam planting season, and everyone was away
after school busy at his garden. The heavy rain, however, drove
them home, and some took refuge here with me. Natives are not
great hands for introducing originality into their conversation,
nor do they go much beyond the sight of their eyes, or the
hearing of their ears for their subject matter. Any prominent
object which attracts their attention is made the subject of remark.
This is a specimen of the sort of conversation which goes on.
I was writing when my friends came in, “ Oh! you are writing! ”
“Yes, what else did you suppose I should be doing with pen, ink
and paper ] ” “Oh 1 this is a curious tin, what is in it} Meat ? ”
“ You are the 101st person who has asked that self-same question,
I answered the 100 before you with the monosyllabic negative,
No, and I give you the same answer.” “What then is in it]
Fish ] ” “ No.” “ Fruit ] ” Yes, I hope you are satisfied.” “ Oh!
I see yon have a “ kove ” (native flute) up there in the thatch,
who gave it you ] ” “ You yourself have asked that same question
ten times before, and I have always given the same answer,
‘Arthur,’ next time perhaps you will know without asking.’’
“ You have a bow and arrow there, where did you get them ] ”


“ Considering that every person in the village knows from whence
they came, and has made them the subject of general conversation
for weeks, I wonder you should be the only person ignorant of
their origin, especially as you were here when I brought them
from Tasraouri.” This is the style of thing which goes on, and
except that one is glad to accede to any means for introducing
conversation, one would soon weary of it. They themselves do
not seem to mind going over and over again the same conversation,
and wading through the same minutiae of detail, and they expect
one to be equally patient. The rain gave me a good opportunity
of planting my new fence, and I planted, as a start, a number of
oranges around my house. The evening was fine, and the moon
already quite sizeable. We had the usual singing school after
Prayers, with very good success. When the practice was over, I
asked the older men to sing some of their own songs, and they
readily complied. Old blind Daniel is the great leader, and
knows all the songs. There are three parts to the native song, (1)
the person who starts and sings the air as in a Gregorian tone,
and then follows (2) a chorus, then (3) a single voice takes up the
air again, and this is followed by the chorus. The first singer is
said to “ tau ” the song, the second to “ sawu,” and the chorus to
“ lai.” The songs are very pretty, and they kept them up with
spirit for quite an hour. Some of the singers beat a weird kind
of accompaniment with bamboos, and kept most excellent time.
When the performance was over, it was time to retire, and soon
quietness warned me that it was time for me, too, to be going to
rest.
Thursday, September 2nd. —How the days seem to chase one
another in ever too hasty flight! It seems no sooner morning
than the night is here again. We tried the experiment to-day of
having prayers even earlier than usual, to be rid of the noxious
blue bottles, but only partially succeeded in anything like freedom
from them. At the school subsequently they were more trouble-
some, I think, than ever, and it was not an easy matter to keep
one’s own or one’s pupils’ attention, with these hideous creatures
buzzing about. After Prayers and school one is fairly ready for
breakfast, and by the time that is over the day has already worn
on towards Noon.
It is the commencement of planting time now, and the people
are very busy day after day in their yam gardens preparing the
soil. It is by no means easy work, and they certainly make a
very good show by the end of the day.


I always like to get out somewhere if I can every day, for I
find my health is better for the constant out-door exercise. This
morning the people were all going shrimping, and I accepted an
invitation to go with them to a place called ‘Niewotu.’ I had
never been there before, and I was charmed with the picturesque
beauty of it. A clear, flowing river is utilized for the purpose
of irrigation, and there one saw again the quaint little taro beds
so deftly laid out, and the showy crotons and dracoeuas orna-
menting the immediate view, while all round the bush was thickly
matted with innumerable, and almost impenetrable creepers with
masses of white and pink flowers. In the direct foreground one
got a peep of the bright blue sea sparkling in the midday heat.
A bathe, and green cocoanuts were very agreeable and most
refreshing. The boon of abundance of water in these hot coun.
tries is inestimable, and this island is rich in its water supply.
Araga again on the other hand is very badly off, and Opa not
much better.
Evening duties as usual, and some hymn singing afterwards.
Saturday, September 4th. —After Prayers and breakfast, the
boys and I started for a long meditated journey up the coast. It
was a most glorious day, but very hot, the sun scorching down
with pitiless heat. We embarked at Kerepei, sixteen of us all
told, and rowed away against the Trade wind which was blowing
strong down the coast. We were a merry party, and the shore
view was very beautiful as we coasted along. From the point of
embarkation to Tanrowo, a distance of eight or ten miles, there
is not a single “salt water” native, and it seems a great pity to
see so much valuable land lying fallow, when it might be utilised
for almost any purpose. As we rounded the Point between us
and Tanrowo, called “ Yaturowa,” we saw a vessel at anchor in
the distance. The heat on the water was intense, and I felt
myself being scorched about the face and hands. The natives,
hatless and clotheless, did not seem to mind it, and their exuber-
ant spirits were proof against almost any outer evil. We saw
some people along the coast, and conversed with them at several
places. Arriving at “Beitarara,” we saw a number of people we
knew. We of course asked about the “schooner” at anchor, and
they said they did not know what she was, as she had only just a
short time before come to her anchorage. However, the boat
painted red was coming towards us, and soon we were within
speaking distance. I asked where she was from, and what was
her errand. As they came close to us, I heard my name called,


and found myself shaking hands with Captain Martin of the
schooner “Idaho” from Noumea. I met him years ago when he
was in charge of the “John S. Lane,” Captain McCleod owner,
and he very kindly then towed me across from Opa to Pentecost
Island. He seemed very glad to see me, and invited me on board.
He now belongs to the “Nouvelles Hebrides” Company, and was
recruiting labour for “Port Sandwich” in Mallicollo. The
Company had bought land here at “Beitarara,” and he just
dropped in to see the people. He was very kind and amiable,
and I spent some time on board, and made some purchases.
The boat then started for our destination, where we found
many amiable, friendly people awaiting us, and although they had
sold their land, they had very hazy notions as to how much had
been purchased, or what was to be done with it. After spending
some time with them, we gave them some presents, and then
found it was time to be getting homeward. A strong favourable
breeze took us rapidly to the Kerepei. Arriving at “ Euosi,” we
found a large number of our people awaiting us, with a smoking
hot supper they had cooked for us there. We arrived here tired
and sunburnt just before dark. Evensong followed, and a singing
practice for Sunday.
Sunday, September sth. —School very early on account of the
blue bottles. 1 took all the old men into the Church and talked
to them there. They paid good attention, and I hope remem-
bered something of what they were taught. I tried to explain
how God declared His Almighty Power most chiefly in showing
mercy and pity. There were times when He revealed Himself
as a consuming fire, but that was in His attitude towards sin, but
the whole being and essence of God was love. After breakfast I
started with Patrick for “Mandurvat” by way of “Naruru.”
Anthony had already had Morning Prayer, so I did not stay long
there, but pushed on for my destination. It was very hot
walking, and I was very liquid when I arrived at Mandurvat.
Sunday travelling here is much more tiring than week-day work,
for you are obliged to respect the day a little, as regards the
clothing you wear. I had not a very large congregation, and
when service was over I asked the reason. The people then told
me that a certain man called “Ala” had “tabu’d” {i.e. made
sacred) the school, and prevented the people of his village from
attending service. I protested against this, and when I had said
my say, the plucky young teacher “Tarione” at once went to the
village, and broke the “ tabu,” rendering himself liable to a fiuq


of pigs or perhaps a knock on the head. “ Ala ” was not at home
or I would have gone to see him. However, I believe Tarione
did all I could do, and perhaps more. I was very much pleased
with the way some of the scholars had been taught, and two
females especially, took me quite by surprise. These people have
no baptized teacher, and the efficiency of the school is entirely
owing to the exertion and perseverance of two young men,
Tarione aforementioned and “Livotari.” The latter requested
Baptism for himself, wife and child, and Tarione has previously
expressed the same wish. Now that the tabu is taken off, or at
least broken, no doubt the scholars will increase, but it reflects
great credit on these young fellows that they have built the
school themselves, taught themselves to read, and do their best to
teach their people. They are a most friendly, good-natured
people, and act up to their limited light and knowledge. They
have prayers and school every day, and this is very wonderful,
when one considers the few advantages they have had. “ Masa,”
the leading man of the district, was present at the service, and
was very enthusiastic in the after conversation. They gave us a
sumptuous luncheon of various kinds of “loko,” and we started
for Tanrig when the sun’s rays began somewhat to decline. At
“Naruru” we stopped some time, and I addressed the people.
Anthony afterwards came on with me to Tanrig. Here, in the
evening, I preached on the subject of the Gospel, the Pharisee and
the Publican, and tried to adduce some healthful lessons from the
parable. We were somewhat inclined by nature to think more
highly of ourselves than we ought to think, and not to be sober
and humble in our self consideration. Because we attended
service regularly, and were very accurate in our daily lives, we were
apt to despise others around us, who were not so exact, and were
still living heathen lives. When we came before God, our
thought ought not to be of our own worthiness or goodness in
His sight, still less of the depravity and wickedness of others, but
our attitude and our language should be that of our own utter
unworthiness and sinfulness, we should imitate the action and
adopt the words of the Publican rather than that of the Pharisee,
and smite our breasts and say, “God be merciful to me a sinner.”
What we sought from all our services was to go down to our
houses justified, and the only road to justification and righteous-
ness was humility. That was the only road for white and black
people alike, for teacher and taught, for Priest and people. How
many of us would be justified that night 1 How many of us were


growing day by day in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ 1
Monday, September 6th. —Captain Martin had kindly offered
to tow me and my boat’s crew across to Opa if I could manage to
be ready. He would come down and anchor at Kerepei, and fire
a gun as a signal for me. The gun went, but I was not ready,
and after breakfast I went down to tell him so. Being a French
ship they kept French hours, and I found a second breakfast
awaiting me on board. Twelve people had recruited at Tanrowo,
and all had been bought with snider rifles, and plenty of ammu-
nition. French and English recruiting laws are very different.
Vessels from Queensland and Fiji are not allowed to give guns or
ammunition to the natives, but the French do just as they like.
While I was on board, another silly female was recruited. In
one of her humours she had run away from her husband, and had
come a distance of twelve or fifteen miles, to be engaged for three
years as the slave and tool of some depraved Frenchman on one
of the island stations. I could say nothing, although I knew the
result of the embarkation. However, the Captain promised me
that he would call again at the place, and see the woman’s friends,
and if they consented to her going, he would keep her and pay
for her, but if not, she should be put on shore again. How far or
how truly he will carry out his promise I do not know, but he is
a tender hearted and, I think, an upright man in his dealings with
the natives. As soon as I was ashore, he lifted his anchor and
went up the coast, but 1 have not yet heard what he did. He
was very kind to our boys, and gave them several tins of meat
and biscuits. We made a fire at Kuosi, and there they cooked
their dinner, while after a bathe 1 came home. In the evening it
rained very hard, and just before the bell went for Prayers, our
congregation was therefore not so large as usual, and our numbers
thinner at school. I was very tired, and went early to bed.
Wednesday, September 7th. —Very heavy rain during the night
succeeded this morning by a northerly wind, and a hot, close,
oppressive day. I have not felt it so warm since I have been
here, and I was glad that my duties kept me at home, and mostly
in doors all the day. Nothing here seems possible to be done
without a feast and a dance, and all work was postponed to-day
to do my new fence the honour of having a supper prepared for
it. Any excuse for eating and dancing. The women were kept
busy at the ovens cooking, and the men away at the seaside
endeavouring to get a meal of fish, seemingly the choicest compli-


meat possible to be paid to the exterior decoration of my house.
The fence making certainly was a most laborious business, and
the result, if not strikingly beautiful, has the advantage of being
strong and durable, and hitherto pig-proof.
The men returned in the afternoon with about thirty nice
fish, which were at once consigned to the oven, and in the evening
the feast was spread here in front of my house, and the whole
village assembled to partake. Grace was said, and the huge
quantities of food distributed, and eaten with very evident relish.
Postprandial grace having been said, the company dispersed, and
soon all the festal remnants, too, disappeared. The evening was
one of the most glorious I have ever seen, and I sat outside my house
for a long time talking with the people. Many were prevented
attending by reason of sickness, and our numbers at Prayers and
school were not so full as usual. After school a dance was pro-
posed, but did not come off. Instead thereof, a few of the men
came and serenaded me, very quietly and softly, and much more
in consonance with my feelings than the noisy songs and clappings
of the dance. It was one of those nights in which it was a
“ shame to go to bed,” but tired nature seeks repose, and soon the
village was sunk in silent slumber.
Wednesday, September Bth. —Another most glorious morning
followed by a very hot and ennervating day. After our morning
duties here, public and private, I went with some of the boys to
Euosi. It was very pleasant there by the water side, and one got
a perfect freedom from the blue bottles, which invaded my house
in such numbers, this morning, that I had to retire. The discom-
fort of these loathsome creatures is excessive, and one gets away
from them as far as possible. Not having had a washing day for
some days, I made one to-day, and myself turned washerwoman.
The one idea of natives with respect to clothes washing, is to
pile on the soap agony, and leave your garments as stiff as a
board, and almost as uncomfortable to wear. I entrusted a pair
of white flannel trowsers, and a white flannel coat to one of the
boys to wash, but I tremble to think what the result will be. On
our way homeward we were stopped by loud “ cooes ” from the
rear rank, and Patrick came running forward to say “They are
here.” Soon a white hat appeared, and I fancied at once it must
be the “Southern Cross,” but wondered why she had come so
quickly.
However, I was soon undeceived, and was greeted by Mr.
Coates, Government Agent of the “ Lord of the Isles ” from Fiji.


He was photographing the Falls, and the boys brought him on
here. He was very amiable, and followed me on to the village.
He took three views of different parts of the place, and after
staying a short time returned again to the ship as night was
rapidly approaching. It is so seldom that a white man ventures
up here, that the sight of one is a seven days’ wonder. He came
quite unarmed, and was evidently not frightened by the ferocity
of our people. It is customary to look upon natives as naturally
wild and ferocious, and few white men trust themselves among
them without arms. However, of course we always go armed
with a Power more protective than a Colt’s revolver, and we, I
suppose, engender trust in the natives by trusting them.
The “ Lord of the Isles ” is a large ship of 300 tons, and has
brought over two hundred natives from Fiji as returned labour.
Mr. Coates told me that the Conservative Government was
in power with Lord R. Churchill as Premier, and that the English
Government had sent an ultimatum to the French to withdraw
their troops from the New Hebrides, or their action in sending
them there would be looked upon as a breach of faith and an act
of aggression. There will be troubles down here yet I fear, with
all the shilly-shallying there is over the annexation of these islands.
The French are evidently intending some forward step, for they
have troops both in Havannah Harbour, and Port Sandwich
(Mallicollo), and the Nouvelles-Hebrides Company are buying
land right and left all over these islands. It would not be pleasant
to find myself a prisoner in France instead of a free man in
England, and I hope there may be no fear of such a criterion.
Our evening duties as usual ended with singing.
Thursday, September 2th. —Another most glorious morning,
and a bright warm day. My home duties kept me here till far
on in the day, when I joined a large picnic party at Euosi.
Certainly these natives take life easily, and in their own way get
a good deal of enjoyment out of it. They seem utterly devoid of
that care and worry which kills so many of us, and certainly
follow the Scripture injunction as to taking no anxious thought.
Nature affords them all they want for their bodily comfort, and I
trust religion supplies the rest. It is perfectly wonderful how
far more merry and light hearted they are than their heathen
neighbours, and I fondly hope the secret is within, such jolly,
amiable, good-natured creatures they are, and so happy and
friendly and harmonious among themselves. The sportsmen to
the number of twelve or fifteen went off in search of wild fowlj


or any other of the feathered tribe they might come across, the
cooks setting to work to get the oven alight and start the cooking.
Prawns were caught in abundance, and were eaten with roasted
taro, as a sort of lunch, and green cocoanuts were secured as the
refreshing beverage. It was an animated and picturesque scene,
and in the evening the sportsmen returned with five fowls and
one owl, an odd looking object, as the result of their day’s sport.
These birds were soon consigned to the oven with the other food,
and were partaken of in the evening. I came away beforehand
and had my dinner here. It was a most gloriously still and
beautiful evening and the native songs sung by the boys coming
home, sounded very pretty in the distance. There seems to have
been an exuberant joyous spirit about to-day, animating everyone,
and never since I have been here, have I known so hearty and
bright a service as we had this evening.
After school most of the boys and younger men went to
“ Unduna,” a suburb of Tanrig, to a great dance, which is to be kept
up till morning light. The occasion of it is the ‘ nasu ’ ing of two
gamals to-morrow, and nothing can be done without a dance.
Arthur, who has neither tl)e strength nor the inclination to go,
has been keeping me company, and we have had some nice and
profitable conversation. He has left me now, and in the stillness
of the most glorious night, the song of the dancers breaks upon
one’s ear, and makes one conscious that one is in the Melanesian
Islands. Besides that one sound, nothing else is audible, and I
myself am going to prepare for the quiet and rest of my humble
couch.
Saturday, September 11 th. —Started this morning after break-
fast for Tasmate by boat, and saw a vessel heading in for the
watering place. This was the Southern Cross from the islands,
and before long she came to anchor and we were on board shaking
hands. We were somewhat surprised to see the Bishop, but he
was not well and was going for the change to Norfolk Island.
None of the party on board looked very well, but they were
going South and would soon feel the benefit of the colder weather.
Mr. Turnbull came back with me and spent the night here.
After service I held a consultation with the teachers as to Arthur’s
going to Norfolk Island, and they were unanimous that he ought
to go. A.' P. Huqe offered to stay in his place. The vessel was
much earlier than I expected her, but none too early. The news
generally, very good.
There were five earthquake shocks to-day, one of which was


very severe, felt equally on shore and at sea. The Captain
fancied the ship was on a rock.
Monday, September 13th. —Yesterday I spent at Tanrig. Mr.
Turnbull slept the night with me, and spent the whole of Sunday.
We had school in the early morning and after that, breakfast.
Then followed Morning Prayer with a very large congregation.
In the afternoon Mr. Comins, Mr. Plant, Mr. Brittain, the Captain,
Engineer, and a large number of Melanesians came up to see the
village and stayed to our social meal in the evening. They were
all quite charmed with the people and the place, and enjoyed very
much the pleasant walk. Mr. Turnbull took his departure, and
Mr. Brittain spent the night with me. The party, with the excep-
tion of Mr. Comins, were not successful on the return journey and
missing the track got into the taro gardens, and floundered about
in the mud in the most helpless confusion. Not finding a way
out of their difficulty they tried back, and hit happily upon the
right track. This little episode threw somewhat of a damper
upon the visit, and the party returned rather wet and crest-
fallen to the ship. Mr. Comins was accused of being the cause
of the misfortune, and I believe those who fared worse than he
heaped their approbrium on him when they got on board. The
Bishop was not well, and we were all disappointed not to see him
at our head quarters. Naturally, a visit from our Bishop is looked
upon as a red letter day by our people, and if he cannot come the
disappointment is very apparent. Mr. Brittain and I dined
together and spent a most pleasant evening. It was a most
glorious evening, and the calm peace of a cloudless sunset gave place
to the most brilliant moonlight. We sat outside the house talking
to the people until Prayer time. The service was a very impres-
sive one, for I got Arthur to say a few words to his people before
leaving them, and the thought of going away raised a great lump
in his throat, and for some moments, although generally so ready
and so eloquent, he could not say a word. Several times there
was a tremble in his voice and he was nigh to breaking down,
and his own undisguisable emotion produced a visible effect on
his congregation. He said in the course of his remarks, that
to-day they had seen a great concourse of people at their village,
of many colours and nationalities. But though divided by race,
differing in speech, and separated in locality, they were all one
people with them, because through Christ they were all united in
one, owning one God and Father of all, believing one Common
Saviour, knit together by one Spirit, and professing one religion.


Though so many and so various we were all one in Christ. And
then he went on to speak of himself and them, still carrying on
the same idea, and he said that although divided in bodily
presence, unseen by the bodily eye, and separated by the wide
ocean, they were still one in spirit and in heart. Oceans could
not separate those whom God had joined together, and whether
near or far they were still all one in Christ. And then almost
overcome, he said it might be God’s will that they should never
again see each others’ faces, but they must look forward to the
great meeting time beyond the grave, where parting would again
be unknown, and those whom Christ had joined together, and
made one in Himself should be one for ever with Him and behold
His glory. Because they were going to be separated it was no
reason that they should forget each other, but day by day they
should remember each other at the Throne of Grace, until such
time as they should be reunited in this world, or if not, in the
world to come. I followed with a few remarks, and a very
impressive service concluded with the Blessing. After the service
I called the teachers together to make final arrangements for our
departure to-morrow, and Patrick was quite content to take
charge of the school. lam very glad that he should, and I quite
feel that the extra responsibility will be good for him.
Arthur Huqe will go with me to Opa for the change, and
return again with me when the ship comes back from Norfolk
Island. Two Maewo lads have expressed a wish to go with us to
Opa, and I am very glad of any exchange of friendship between
the two islands. It will do them good to see other places, and
enlarge their minds and ideas to see other people beside them-
selves, Moreover, being with Arthur, a native of Opa, they will
not feel so lonely as if going by themselves. They are two nice
boys, and I hope they will profit by the little outing.
Mr. Brittain’s enthusiasm was quite cheering, and we were
very late in getting to bed, being so busy talking over our mutual
work, inasmuch as our district is one, and he knows the people
here so well.
This morning we were astir very early, and after Prayers
and breakfast were very busy getting ready for our departure.
Many hands made light work, and soon our impedimenta were
shouldered by willing bearers, and we were on our way for the
Kerepei. We had a most pleasant walk down, Mr. Brittain most
cheery and appreciative all the way, and we were all on board
very soon after the stipulated time, 10 o’clock. We had a light


wind to start with, hut it soon fell calm, and the engineer’s
services were called into requisition. It is very hot work steaming
in these latitudes, and the cabin especially gets very stuffy. We
anchored at Opa between five and six o’clock, and I got my things
ready for the start ashore in daylight. Mr, Brittain and Mr.
Turnbull came with me, and we visited the French Trader ashore,
who was said to have the latest telegrams. We were quite
astonished, not only at the polite manner in which we were
received, but by the neat and tastey appearance of the little man’s
premises and dwelling house. He is evidently a man of consider-
able genius, and far more energy than most of the Traders down
in these parts.
His kitchen garden was a sight to behold, and although for
three months he has had no rain he has an abundance of cabbages,
carrots, onions, shalots, garlick, parsley, spinnach, lettuce, &c.
The whole garden too is laid out in the most natty matter,
showing wonderful care and perseverance. Inside his house it
was equally neat, and the walls were decorated with an enormous
number of island curiosities. During the slack time of the year
when cocoanuts are scarce he makes very curious, but extremely
chaste, ornaments out of shells, and sells them to Traders at about
fifteen shillings the pair; He also makes sleeve links out of
opercules, and many other ornaments of personal adornment.
He gave us a great basket full of eggs, and some green food for
the ship. We bade the amiable and loquacious little man good-bye,
and thanked him for his kindness, and then pushed on for Tava-
lavola where we found the whole village waiting for us, and
Charles and Monica heading the party. I was most pleased to
see the happy and affectionate relations which existed between
them, and the natural and unaffected way in which she came
into my house, and the kind care she exhibited in the bestowal
of my goods and chattels. Afterwards when we went off to the
ship she came with us, and went down of her own accord to see
the Bishop in the cabin. We did not stay long on board, but
bidding farewell to them all we came ashore for the night. I
should have liked of course to stay till morning, but they were
so crowded on board I thought it was better we were out of the
way. It was near midnight when we finally retired for the night,
and I was very tired and glad to get to bed. The boys are so
nice and friendly, and come in and out of my house so naturally,
that it gives one quite a homely feeling, and when they call me
“Mama” (Father) I feel quite proud of the spiritual relationship.


I quite look forward to my stay here, and I hope under it God
may be the means of much good.
Tuesday, September 14 th. —Most beautiful morning, but the
night was very cold, and I was very glad of a blanket over me.
We had Prayers and school before breakfast, the scholars num-
bering about 50 of both sexes. I was quite astonished at the
admirable way most of them read and answered, and equally
struck with the diligent and painstaking manner in which the
boys were teaching. The school is admirably conducted, and
peculiarly well and thoroughly taught. The scholars are evidently
very sharp, and one or two little boys and a very little wee girl read
surprisingly well. Charles, the head teacher, is a most steady and
excellent young fellow, and to him the credit of the efficiency of
the school is mainly due. All the other boys however, work well
and steadily with him, and I was particularly gratified to see
what a helpmeet his wife Monica is to him. In the course of the
day the older people were about, and I told them I wanted them
to come and get instruction also, to which they consented. While
I was at breakfast the French Trader called on me and brought
me a most noble present of green food, for which I was deeply
grateful. He was very amiable, most polite and peculiarly
loquacious, and I was quite interested in listening to his broken
Fnglish. He is a Parisian and was in the ‘garde mobile’ during
the siege by the Prussians, which of course means that he is a
Communist. He left me after a time, and I set to work to put
my house in order. The boys went to ‘ Tahi mamavi,’ where we
have a school, which I hope we shall be able now to teach regu-
larly. Meramaeto (Paskal) had been there living, but some
trouble broke out and he had to come away in consequence.
Now all is pacific again, and we hope to make another fresh and
vigorous start, which I hope will be permanent. In the afternoon
I went to see a Trader who had sent me a request to visit him,
not having a boat of his own. His complaint was, that having a
Frenchman on either side of him, and he doing a better trade
than either they were jealous of him, and had threatened him with
violence if he did not leave. He is a Scotchman and a very
decent fellow. The Frenchmen had threatened also to lay hands
on his copra, looking on him as an interloper, inasmuch as they
suppose the French are about to annex the New Hebrides group.
I did all I could to explain his position to the natives, and ‘ Tabi ’
the chief, and really a big man, said that while he dealt fairly
with them he would see that he was properly protected and fairly


dealt with. I told him that he and I were subjects of one Queen,
and of a different nationality to the Frenchmen, and that being
a steady and well-behaved and honest man he ought to help him
all he could. He had a great many nuts, and a large amount of
copra, and I should say he was doing very well. He does not
trade with powder, or guns, or spirit, and is evidently a very
temperate man. He asked me to tell the natives not to bring
the coconuts on Sunday as he wanted that as a day of Eest, and
he asked me if I could make it convenient to come and see him
sometimes on that day, because he wished not to forget his God
in the midst of his mundane pursuits. He has been a sailor all
his life, and has a mate’s certificate, I think. He has only been
here five weeks from Sydney, and hitherto has done very well.
I got back to dinner, and then went to see David, one of our
teachers, who is sick. He was very full of his child, about three
years old, a perfect prodigy. He told me the child would get into
a perfect frenzy if he were not allowed to go to school and Prayers,
and when once or twice he has been left at home he has knelt
down in their house and gone through the form of prayer
by himself. He will never go without his clothes, and the
only time they can get him to take them off is to bathe. Even
at night he must have on a garment. His mother told me too
tjiat his first thought in the morning, even before eating, was
the bell, and he would tug at her sleeve until she took him
up and started for the school. The same was the case too,
in the evening. They also told me of a poor girl who had
died about a fortnight ago. She has been most regular at
school for years past, and was far away ahead of all the others in
knowledge. She never would marry because she was afraid she
should be debarred from attending school. She was most anxious
to be Baptized, and when she was taken ill she still longed for
Baptism. She importuned Charles so on the subject that just
before her death, he sprinkled her with water in the Name of the
Trinity, and signed the sign of the Cross on her forehead. She
died perfectly happy and at peace, and her devoted life and
peaceful death have produced a great and profound impression in
the village.
While talking with David, his old grandmother came in, and
she is a woman of great age, and marvellous energy. She is now
a great grandmother, and a bright, cheery old lady. I asked her
how old she thought she was, and she said she really did not
know, but she was very aged. She said that I had always told


her that she " tugi vetu ” (was as hard as flint) and it seemed as
if she really was. She comes regularly to school, but her eyes are
so dim that she can only sit and listen. Several old ladies attend
school only to sit and listen, and they take great interest in
coming. In the evening we had Prayers, and a very nice school
afterwards.
So ends my first day, and I hope all the other days I am here
may be as pleasant and as happy.
Wednesday, September 15 th. —A beautiful morning but a
strong Trade wind blowing. After our morning duties here we
sailed down to ‘ Lobaha ’ to see Arudale, Didi and the school
there. We pulled the boat up on the beach, no very easy work
with the sand so soft. Most of the boys were down at the beach
and we all went up together to the village. It was a hot, steep
climb and we were very liquid when we got there. The boys
brought us a plentiful supply of young coconuts and with these
we quenched our thirst. I was glad to see the amiability which
was manifested one towards another by our people and the
Lobaha folks, for lately the relations have been somewhat strained.
It appears that not long ago, the chief wife of our Head man
took offence at his scolding her, and ran away to his younger
brother who lives at Lobaha. Our great man was very fond of
this wife, for they had grown up together from childhood, and she
had always presided over his establishment in a most devoted
manner. She is most queenly in deportment, and quite one of
the finest native women I have ever seen. However, she went
off, and “ Yirclumlum ” was not only incensed, but very sorely
grieved. He told the boys in most pathetic words how he missed
his wife, how that it seemed unbearable to do without her, how
that everything seemed void and empty now that she was away.
However, once away it seems she was away for good, and very
soon a pig arrived and that he had to accept in lieu of her. For
a long time the people here have never been to Lobaha and con-
trariwise the Lobaha people here. However, we have, I hope,
broken the ice again, although I am particularly sorry to lose so
nice a woman from the place, and I believe she has deeply
repented already of her conduct and would give worlds to be
back again. I was glad to see a new school in course of erection,
and the old men and women told me they were only waiting for
it to be finished to all coming to school. Herbert has already a
nice little building at his own place, but the people say it is too
far away, and any excuse is enough to keep people away from


religious duties. Herbert shewed me with manifest pride, the
most beautiful tool chest sent by his English “mother” (Miss
Mount). He has been trying to use the tools, and I saw an
attempt at some amount of straightness in the new building at
which he was assisting. We stayed some time with him, talking
over matters in connection with the school, &c., and then we
made preparations for home. The wind was. blowing strong
down the coast, so that a sail was useless, and we had a heavy
pull. However, the boys are very good oarsmen, and we got
along famously. I anchored the boat off for the night, having
use for her again to-morrow. It was a very miserable evening,
the wind blowing in strong gusts, and the threatened rain falling
at short intervals. We had Prayers and a very long interesting
school afterwards. The boys and girls here are very sharp, and
learn very rapidly, and seem to understand well what they read.
There are three classes of Catechumens preparing for Baptism,
adults, boys and girls, all more or less proficient. Altogether,
this school is very cheering, and with such an excellent head
teacher as Charles, one need not fear of its stability.
Thursday, September 1 6th. —After our morning duties were
over here we rowed up to “Lo tahi mamavi,” and had school
there with a large number of people, who were very enthusiastic
to know more and to be regularly taught.
There are a nice lot of boys here, and some already know
how to read. The old men I had school with, and they seemed
quite delighted to say the letters one by one, and afterwards to
put them together, and find out that they made Opa words. I told
them as far as I could about our religion, and that I had left home,
and all to come and live with them and teach them, but that
Jesus Christ pitied and loved us so much that He left heaven, and
His Father’s glory to come down into our world to live and die
for us. They were very attentive, and asked me to come again,
which I promised to do on Sunday, all being well. They gave us
a handsome present of food according to native custom, and we
left for home. It was raining heavily and we got very wet, but
the distance was not very great. It was a most unpleasant
evening, and I was cold and miserable, and I began to fear ague
again. Last night was most wretched, my house was not properly
finished, and the strong gusts of wind blew me almost out of
bed, and brought in clouds of dust. To-day the boys have been
patching up the holes, and it is more snug and comfortable.


Friday, September 17 th. —Fine morning and very close and
hot after the rain. After breakfast I received a visit from an
English Trader, who lives about two miles from me. Poor fellow,
in my honour he had put on a coat, and he was literally running
with perspiration when he reached my house, and he did not
succeed in getting cool again before he left although he stayed
some time. He seems to be doing a very fair trade here in copra,
and although he has not been long on the island, he has already
several tons of the dried coconut (copra). After he left I was
attacked with a good-for-nothing fit and did nothing all day. In
the evening I was very queer, and thought I was going to have
rheumatism, my legs were so cold and my limbs generally so frail.
However I managed Evensong and school, and was not sorry to
be ready early for bed.
Saturday, September 18 th. —General holiday here. The hoys
wished me to take them to Yuinago, fishing, to which I rashly
consented. It was a perfectly windless day and, oh! so hot. We
had a long weary pull up, but were very successful when we got
there, and came home late in the evening with about eighty.fish.
I was very glad to be able to send ten to the French Trader, as a
return for all his many kindnesses to me, the rest were divided
out to different great people, and about thirty were kept for
to-morrow’s dinner. I was very glad the boys did not forget the
women in their distribution. I had a nice fish for my own tea, a
kind of mackarel. Very soon after dinner it was Prayer time,
and I am now preparing for bed being very tired, sunburnt,
and sleepy.
The boys are having great fun over the way, and it is
evident the outing has not had much ill effect on their spirits.
Sunday, September 19 th. —Yesterday was perfectly calm and
cloudless, and to-day again it is blowing very hard, with rain
squalls at intervals. We began the day with school, and then
after an interval for breakfast we had Mattins with a fair congre-
gation. The females are very enthusiastic and attend very
regularly, and the same applies to the boys, but the older men are
very callous. There are one or two who never miss, hut the
majority are much more concerned with the ‘affairs of this world,
than about the one thing needful. There are one or two old
fellows who are very regular, and who seem really to like being
taught, but most of the men prefer the free and careless life to
which they have always been accustomed. There are many who
feel the beauty of Christianity, but it is so hard to them to


practise it. They think it is all right for boys and women, but
they themselves cannot stand the bother and burden it entails.
After Prayers we went up to “ Tahi mamavi ” and found the
whole population awaiting us. We divided them into five sets,
two of boys, one of youths, and two of old men. Charles and I
taught the old men, and found them very attentive. Walter
Tarigisibue addressed the youths who seemed appreciative, and
Paschal and Peter taught the boys who were said to learn very
quickly. They asked us to fix a day for coming again, and said
they should expect us every Sunday. I had been feeling sick and
queer all day, and coming home was violently sick in the boat. I
got home as quickly as possible, but the sickness continued,
accompanied by ague, and afterwards strong fever headache, and
then strong perspiration, and this morning, (Monday)convalescence.
However, I am very washed out and good for nothing, and
shall rest at home. lam disappointed however, for I meant to
have gone to the other side of the island in the boat, and had
made all my preparations. Now I must wait a bit.
Tuesday, September 21 st. —Reasonably convalescent again, but
weak and not fit for much. It was a most unpleasant day
however, with fitful squalls of,rain and wind, and I could not
have gone far even if I had wanted. The boys were busy planting
“ Virelumlum’s ” yam garden, and were kept hard at work all day.
I was not surprised, for I previously knew it to be the custom
here for the chief’s wives to prepare his food in the gamal.
Generally speaking, women are not admitted within these edifices,
and more especially here, but to-day Yirelumlum’s wives, three or
four in number, were busy with the men getting ready the
evening meal. I asked them where they were going to eat
themselves, and they said with some naivete, “ Oh! that is a
secondary matter, we have to get our masters’ dinner ready and
shift for ourselves as best we may.” It would be impossible for
them to eat any food cooked in the gamal, and so religiously have
they been brought up under this restriction, that they would
probably sooner die of hunger than attempt to appease their
appetites with what to them is sacred food, or at least forbidden,
and they are more faithful to the laws of men, than was Eve to
the law of God. And, I suppose as spiritual death was the
judgment on Eve’s disobedience, so would physical death be the
penalty in case of their transgression. Human life is not more
highly valued here than it is in Ireland, and a woman’s life is not
much accounted of, and death is the common penalty for very


trivial offences. Here it is universally averred that woman is at
the root of all the evil that transpires, and poor things, they are
too often the victims where the men go scott free. Here the
females are much in excess of the males, and naturally polygamy
is widely practised. The big men however, get the lion’s share,
and it is no uncommon thing to find a troop of women in the
households of the chiefs, varying from ten to fifty or even one
hundred. All no doubt are not wives, but slaves and beasts of
burden, and these big guns do nothing themselves but impose all
the duties of the house and garden on their women. I do not
think I am maligning the Opa men when I say that I look upon
them as hideously lazy, but of course that results in large measure
from their imposing their own natural duties on others, whom
they find ready or obliged to do it for them. It is quite different
at Maewo, where monogamy now mostly obtains, and where the
men take an active and a man’s share in all out door employments.
However Yirelumlum was very active bustling about among his
women, and I saw him shouldering off a big burden of yams,
following up the rear of a troop of preceding females.
Here time seems of no importance and no account, and it
wearies me sometimes to see people squatting about for hours at
a time, whistling or otherwise killing time. It is an ennervating
climate no doubt, but that is no excuse for laziness in people who
have been born and brought up in the country. I often urge
laggards and idlers, who make my house a convenient lounge, to
go to work and plant their fences, but as nothing can be done out of
due course, what was, is, and ever must be the same.
In the evening there was a great feast spread for the workers,
and the day finished like all days here, with Evensong and school.
This little village is a bright spot in the surrounding darkness, and I
trust in time its influence for good will be more widely felt than
even now. The attendants at the school seem wonderfully staunch,
and the teachers very earnest, and I pray God that their vigorous
instruction may not be lost on the heathen people around them.
But there is the same callousness attending religious practice as
about everything else here, and although they see the beauty and
the benefit of Christianity, the effort is too great to reduce its
blessed precepts to daily practice.
Wednesday, September 22nd. —By-and-bye I shall have as much
trouble with my white flock, as with the black. The white
Traders have got some feud one against the other because of
difference of nationality, and I had to listen again to accusations


from an Englishman against a Frenchman, as to plots against his
life and property. Poor man, he is new to the business, is doing
well, and fancies that he is taking the bread out of the French-
men’s mouths, but there is room for all. I found he was not only
filled with gloomy fears himself, but had imbued the chief under
whom he lives with warlike intentions also, and I had to put a
veto upon any resort to open violence. I told the chief “ Tabi,”
that he must keep his hands from all white men, and if he had
any complaints to make, to make them in the proper quarter, and
not take the law into his own hands. He must learn the sacred-
ness of human life, and not rush to bow and arrow and club for
every fancied affront or grievance. As long as I was here I
would do my best to see that peace and harmony reigned among
whites and blacks, but I would countenance no violence or blood-
shed. After this I went to the Frenchman at Lananqa, and he
seemed very surprised to think that he was accused of any ill
feeling, and judging from his good nature I should imagine his
surprise was genuine. However, I said it was very hard if a few
white men living on so large an island, could not live at peace,
even if their nationalities were various, and if they could not
agree among themselves, what could be expected of the natives 1 I
quite like the natty little man, and certainly he is the best colonist
I have ever seen down here. He is a most handy man and always
employed, and as far as industry goes, he sets the natives a very
excellent example. The neatness of his house and surroundings
too, ought to have a good effect.
The fine day turned into a most dirty, rough, unpleasant
evening, and we went to Prayers in a perfect downpour of rain.
After Church there were great searchings of heart among the
elders, and I publicly announced that I wanted the names of
those who wished for Baptism. To the surprise of everybody,
and to the delight of not a few, four women stood up and said
almost simultaneously “Inew’’ (I). These quiet, demure creatures,
generally so terribly afraid of the men, and always so shy in
public, must have been influenced by a stronger Power than any
they had hitherto known to make this public profession, and it
produced no small sensation on all present. Two men also said
they wished to be admitted to the Sacred Eite, and I hope
they will soon be followed by many more. Charles Tariqatu’s
influence here is great, and the fruits of his thorough and earnest
teaching are beginning to be felt. He is so thorough and good
himself, that his example and influence have all the more effect.


There will be about twenty to be baptized on Sunday, the nucleus
I trust, of a good Christian population hereafter.
Thursday, September 23rd.—A thoroughly wet and disagreeable
day. Fortunately there was a great festivity here, and I was not
left without something to do all day. I trust I did not spend
quite an unprofitable time. I begin to see distinct light through
my work here now, and I can see how the seed sown through
long years is at last beginning to bear fruit. lam eminently
satisfied with the work of the boys here, and I can see that
Charles’s influence pervades everything. One man to-day, who
never has taken much interest in our teaching, came to ask me if
Martin Tanabei might not come back from Norfolk Island, and
live with him and his people as teacher. Another told me that
my words to him of former years have quite changed the course
of his life, and no doubt he is as different as possible to what he
formerly was. I was under engagement to go to Tahimamavi, but
when we were launching the boat the rain came down in such
torrents that I reluctantly turned back. The evening was as bad
as the day, and most uncomfortable it was in my leaking, cold
house. We had Evensong with a good congregation, but a great
gust of wind put out the principal lamp in the very middle of the
service, and made it somewhat dismal.
Friday, September 24 th. —Fine bright morning and a very
hot day. Having failed to go to “Tahimamavi” yesterday I
resolved to go instead this morning. We had a hot, but a most
pleasant row up the coast about three miles, and found the people
awaiting our arrival. They had been disappointed that we did
not come yesterday, but supposed that the rain was the occasion
of our failing in our promise. Such a nice number of bright boys
assembled for school, and a great many grown-np people. The
boys were divided into two classes, and two of the boys taught
them their letters. The older men I undertook to teach myself
with the help of Peter. I made a few remarks at first and then
told Peter to say a few words. I was quite unprepared for what
followed. It is not often I have seen such an effect on a native
audience, and his flow of natural eloquence from beginning to
end quite held the men enchained. With a great deal of energy,
and a vast amount of earnestness, he went into the thick of his
subject, and left an impression which I feel sure must, under God,
have a good effect. At the end of his remarks he said very
modestly, “You may perhaps think it presumptuous in me to
stand here in your presence and speak like this, you who are old


enough to be my fathers, and so high in rank all of you as to
look upon me as a mere nonentity, and indeed I am amazed at my
own audacity. But I speak about things of so momentous import
that I take the chance of your displeasure, and submit myself to
whatever verdict you may choose to return. Were I only con-
cerned about things which belong to our heathen state, I should
take the place of a humble listener and you should do the talking,
but here all is different, for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth must speak, and that heart and mouth, thank God, are
mine.” There was not even an assent of approval, all were so
impressed with the message delivered so eloquently by a mere
boy. I said at the end, after a long pause, for I did not like to
break the spell which seemed to hold them all, “Our son has
spoken good words to you which I hope you will not soon forget.”
And they all said, “ Who can forget them 1 ” I was also much
pleased with the way the boys had got on with their reading after
so few lessons, and altogether I felt that a “great door and
effectual had been opened here,” for which I was most thankful
to Almighty God. Now it remains but to put a good teacher
there, and I think a wide harvest may by God’s blessing be soon
gathered in. We came back with a fair wind in the afternoon,
and in the evening again we had torrents of rain. However, we
had our full complement at Prayers, and a very nice time
afterwards.
Saturday, September 25th. —I had intended to-day to have
gone to Walurigi, but it set in to a wet day, and I was obliged to
stay at home. However, I had a succession of visitors, and
among them some Bushmen from a long way inland; The boys
told me some odd stories about them, how ignorant they formerly
were and what strange things they did in consequence. When
they first came down to the sea they fancied it was hungry,
because the surf came rolling in, as they said, “mouth wide
open.” They therefore gave it food to eat. Knowing only the
taro root, when first getting possession of a yam, they fancied it
was firewood and put into the fire. Some many years ago they
came down here in quest of a pig, and while waiting in the gamal
their eyes caught sight of a tin with the picture of a lobster
outside. Thinking this was something very wonderful they stole
it, and marched off homewards with it instead of their pig.
Arriving at their village home the chief made a great feast for it,
and placed it in the midst of the village dancing ground, and
went through the various ceremonies as if it were a pig in verity.


The ceremonies over, the chief advanced to the tin, and with his
foot, squashed up the tin as if he was treading the life of a pig
out, with the inevitable result that he almost cut his foot off.
Now-a-days of course they are more enlightened, and the men
who were here to-day I found very amiable and intelligent. All
“salt water” natives despise Bushmen, and they have always
stories to tell of them. There is somehow a natural feud existing
between them, but the agression I must say, comes generally from
the Bushmen. They do, certainly, very unaccountable things, but
they are always forgiven, and their conduct explained by saying,
“ Oh, they are only Bushmen,” or as they say here “ (Taute).”
A small vessel passed here in the afternoon, and anchored off M.
Moussu’s place “ lananqa.” In the evening there was the greatest
excitement, the boys returning from fishing saw a boat under sail
coming down the coast, and the general idea was that it was Mr.
Brittain. I was led into the swim, and made active preparations
for his reception, but he never turned up, the sail belonged to
some other boat.
Heavy rain and strong wind squalls again in the evening.
Sunday, September 26th. —A day which will ever be memorable
to me, here at Tavolavola. To-day I Baptized twenty-five people,
and it has been indeed a day of great spiritual enjoyment to me.
Before I was up in the very early morning, I heard boys in the
school house reading their baptismal service over, and all through
the day there are some who have never had their books out of
their hands. The teachers have done their part most admirably,
and I thank God for such earnest children. We had school before
breakfast, and a most excellent school too. I went from class to
class leaving A. P. Huqe to discourse the older men. The boys,
nothing daunted by my presence, kept their instruction going,
which was generally very thorough and good. The earnestness
of all was quite remarkable. After school and breakfast we had
Morning Prayers, a nice hearty service, and after that we started
by boat for “ Tahimamavi.” Here we found the people awaiting
us, and soon we were assembled for school. Charles gave the old
men a very good and eloquent address, and three other classes
were provided for. On our way homo we stopped for a few
minutes to learn the news from the schooner at anchor, but they
had none except that the French troops were still at Port Sand-
wich, and did not intend to move at present, and moreover, that
the Mail Steamer had a contract to come as far North as that
fort. This does not look like clearing out of the group, and the


Captain told me they had not the least intention of moving at
present. Before long we shall know the fate of these islands, but
I sincerely trust they may not fall into the hands of the French.
In the afternoon I was most pleased to see the teachers selecting
boys and youths, more especially connected with them by ties of
kindred, and taking them for a walk and serious talk, as is the
custom at Norfolk Island. Everyone was so filled with enthusiasm
that the chief himself sent to say he wished to be Baptized, but
inasmuch as he has already four or five wives, and contemplates
taking more, I could not listen to his petition for a moment. To
put away his wives would lower him in rank at once, and in the
choice between God and Mammon, he felt the difficulty of putting
away any of his women, and I was obliged to leave him with his
god Mammon.
In the early evening we decorated the Font, and when the
building was lit up at night with lots of candles, it looked quite
nice. The service was quite one of the most stirring I have ever
taken part in, and the ready responses one by one, of men and
women, produced a great effect on every one present. The women,
generally like poor frightened, startled creatures, answered out
marvellously, with a vigour and earnestness, such as no one was
prepared for. The ceremony of Baptizing twenty-five people took
some time, but no one seemed fatigued, so interested were they in
what was going on. Among the number Baptized were a blind
man, and a blind woman, but they, like the rest, were wonderfully
self-possessed. Poor Diu, whom I called Kate, after Miss Lodge,
who had nursed her so faithfully at Norfolk Island, was perfectly
ecstatic in her delight, and seemed endued with special strength,
having risen from a bed of sickness on purpose to be present.
I gave a short address afterwards, and was followed by
Charles, who spoke well to the subject, and in very good taste
considering the number of outsiders present.
We finished with the Nunc Dimittis, a fitting conclusion to a
most beautiful service.
Monday, September 27th. —A most beautiful day, and a whole
holiday. 1 told the scholars in the morning that 1 wished to see
only smiling and happy faces all day, and to hear of nothing but
joy and gladness because of the occasion of the holiday, viz., to
celebrate the spiritual birthday of twenty-five brothers and sisters.
Food in large quantities was provided, and we managed to secure
two pigs for the feast. I think it was the brightest and happiest
day I have ever known here, and our festivities were shared in by


a number of neighbours. Contrary to strict custom here, the
women and girls of the school prepared the food under the trees
on the beach, the boys chopping the wood and doing the heavy
work. The scene was a very animated one, and all seemed to be
in the very best of tempers. In the evening the ovens were
opened, and the distribution of the food was made. Unfortunately
I was not very well myself, but that did not interfere very much
with the rest. In the cool of the evening the boys played a
number of their native games, very pretty and very picturesque,
with a pretty song to each. When darkness closed in we had
Evensong, and then the happy day was brought to an end.
Tuesday, September 28th. —This morning after our duties here,
we started for a long voyage to “ Yagebeo,” which means some-
thing like “down West.” “Beo” is the word used there for
“down,” while ours here is “Hivo.” “Vage” is a particle put
before the name of a place with a sense of motion towards the
place, thus when we are going to Maewo we are here going “ vage
Maewo,” or Araga “ vage liaga,” or Marino “ vage Marino,” and
so when we are going to the Beo people we are going “Yage
Beo.” We call the people of those parts “Meraibeo.” They, on
the other hand, term these parts “Taulu,” “up East,” and when
coming here they say they are going “ Vageulu,” because our word
for “up ” here is “ Ulu.” We here are to them “ Natiulu.”
We had a light, fair wind down, and did the journey in good
time. We hauled up our boat at a place called “Duidui,” where
a Mr. Wilber, commonly called “ Jim ” by white traders, and by
the natives, “ Timi,” lives.
He came down to welcome us, and extended his hospitality to
me as long as I chose to stay. I was not sorry to accept it, and
I made his residence the basis of my operations. He has been
here for many years, and is well known and very much liked by
the natives. He does a very extensive business there in copra
(the dried coconut), &c., and deals very kindly, liberally, and most
honourably with the people. He has very nice premises there,
and a large establishment. He got us refreshments served as soon
as we arrived, and after resting for a time he went with me to the
village of the great man of those parts “ Anga,” or as the Traders
call him, “anchor.” I knew him formerly as a very large and
powerful man, but long sickness has reduced him to a terrible and
pitiable state of weakness and leanness. He asked me to come
and settle in those parts and start a school for his people. The
natives there are very numerous and extremely amiable, and Tfeel


sure a great deal might be done if I could see my way to settling
there. A fine young fellow, his son, was very friendly, and also
asked me to come and teach them. I said I would see what I
could do if they would spare me some boys to go to Norfolk
Island to be taught. This they said they would do, as they were
tired of the Labour ships. We got back, and Mr. Wilber indulged
us in a most sumptuous repast. The boys, my boat’s crew, being
tired, we had Prayers early, and they retired for the night in very
comfortable quarters provided for them. We, Mr. Wilber, another
white man and myself, sat talking till far on into the night, and
when I retired it was to the ample recesses of a large four poster,
with sheets and other delights and comforts of civilization, I felt
I had turned my host out of his bed, but he would insist on my
sleeping where he had put me, and I acquiesced. The next
morning, Wednesday, 29 th September, it was very hot and calm, and
I determined not to start till the afternoon. After a sumptuous
lunch I went to another great man’s village, and received a warm
welcome. There they told me that they would build me a school-
house and give me boys, and would sell their land to no one else
if I would come there and occupy it. Altogether the cry from
Macedonia to come over and help them was very cheering, and I
must try what I can do for them.
At the end of this period of my work, it is pleasant and
thankworthy to find the Morian’s land stretching out her hands
unto God. We started soon after I got back for “home,” and had
a long, toilsome journey up. However, the boat’s crew were very
plucky and merry, and didn’t seem much to mind as the boat’s head
was towards Tavolavola. I myself was very seasick in the smooth
water, and very soon was in the shivering fit of the ague. I made
as good a bed as possible in the boat, and lay down till I got here.
On arrival I found Mr. Brittain and party here, and felt sorry for
him that I was such a sorry host. I certainly felt cheered by his
society, and we sat quite late talking about matters of mutual
interest.
Thursday, September 30th. —After a night of fever and strong
perspiration I got up this morning feeling fairly refreshed, and a
good deal better, but weak and not fit for much. Mr. Brittain
and his party went to Lobaha by boat, but I stayed at home to
rest. In the afternoon we walked up to M. Moussu’s place, and he
showed us with great pride his garden and poultry yard, and all
the other many things which his ingenuity devised, and his cunning
hand has fashioned. He gave a splendid quantity of green food,


which we afterwards enjoyed for dinner. Prayers concluded the
public part of the day, and Mr. B. and myself sat till late talking
here in the quiet of a most pacific and mild evening.
Friday, October Isf.—Fine day. After our morning duties
here were over, Mr. Brittain and 1 went up to Tahimamavi, and
stayed some time with the kind-hearted people.
Before leaving, Mr. Brittain bought a number of native Opa
mats, which are much treasured at his station at Araga. The Opa
people are great hands at mat weaving, and are possessors of a
greater quantity and variety than any natives 1 know. Since the
introduction of European calico the manufacture has somewhat
diminished. However, when it comes to getting so much tobacco,
a great many still turn up, and for the labour it must be to make
them, the price is perhaps inadequate except they get all they ask.
We came home in the very hot sun, and Mr. Brittain sat down
to dinner alone, I myself being too sick to join him. All the evening
I was fit for nothing, and lay down all the time. 1 did not get
up for church, and only finally left my bed to go back to it again
for the night. 1 felt miserably shabby in my position as host to
treat my guest so, but 1 could not help it.
Saturday, October '2nd . —Dull threatening morning and squally.
Mr. Brittain and party decided to go although we tried to detain
them. The day, however, cleared, and as they did not return we
concluded that they had stood across for Maewo. 1 was feeling
weak and miserable when the kind little Frenchman, M. Moussu,
appeared to take me away to have lunch with him. I had agreed
to partake of his hospitality on this day, but had quite forgotten
all about it. However, my seediuess was excuse enough for my
forgetfulness, and here he was with his boat to take me off. He
is a first rate cook, and treated me to such a display of luxuries
as 1 have never before seen in these parts. The choicest soup,
&c., &c., and later on in the feast a most excellent dish of beche
de mer. This 1 liked very much, and should fancy it was very
nourishing. He complained of my want of appetite, and I was
sorry 1 had not more when so many good things were there to be
eaten. He brought me back again in his boat, and 1 felt pretty
well all the evening. We had Frayers, and singing practice after-
wards, preparatory to Sunday. The evening was line, and I trust
Mr. Brittain and party are well on their homeward way. I
wished him to stay till Monday, but he was anxious to get back
for Sunday,


Sunday, October 3rd. —Last night I fancied A. P. Huqe was at
the point of death. To-day I felt very ill myself, and have been
fit for very little all day. I managed to get through my Sunday
duties here, however, and Charles, Mera, and some others went to
Tahimamavi, where they had the usual school.. I feel very com-
forted at the earnest manner with which these good people are
stretching out their hands at last unto God. I pray that His
Spirit may descend upon them in ample measure, that they may
continue as earnest to the end as they have now begun to be. I
trust, too, the zeal and perseverance of the boys may keep up, so
that the teaching may be regularly carried on, and the Word of
God become a savour of life unto life.
At present they are very earnest and even indefatigable, but
1 am somewhat afraid lest white supervision may have something
to do with this, and when I am away the present enthusiasm may
die down, and things be allowed to go on as they were before.
Would to God I had a few more teachers like Charles Tari-
qatu, a man in whom truly the Spirit of God is, the most earnest,
humble, patient, God-fearing, Gospel-loving youth Opa has ever
known. I can only commit the matter to God, and He will
provide as seemeth Him best.
In the evening I was very sick and could eat no dinner, and
went to bed with ague. Could not go to Church, and Charles
took the service and preached.
Monday, October 4th. —Not very well. I had promised, if well
enough, to go to Lobaha to-day, but I had to put off my journey.
It was a fine day with a strong Trade wind blowing. In the
evening A. P. Huqe was very ill, and I began to be quite alarmed
about him. However, we applied hot flannels, which relieved
the pain and the vomitting. When he was quieted a little, we
removed him to the chiefs house, where he was quiet and comfort-
able. Some of the boys sat with him, but before I went to
bed he was decidedly better, but painfully weak. The only
thing I could give him was arrowroot and brandy, which fortu-
nately he liked, and it did him good. I forgot my own ailments
in my anxiety for him, and I went to bed aguish and shivering.
Tuesday, October sth. —We had got through our morning
duties, and I had already secured my boat’s crew, and were on the
point of starting for Lobaha, when, “ Sail oh! ” was cried, and
there was the veritable Southern Cross close at hand. It was
not long before she was at anchor, and we were rowing off to her.
I saw the Bishop and Mr. Palmer on board from some distance


off, and when we got alongside, the first question I asked was of
course about the Norfolk Island news, which was good. When I
got over the side of the ship and had greeted the Bishop and all,
I almost fell overboard again with astonishment, for there was
Mrs. Selwyn in proporia persona , and I could hardly believe my
eyes. I was, as they say, perfectly “ flabergastered,” and could
only shake her by the hand without saying a word, so surprised
was I. Yet I was most glad to see her, and she makes quite a
new light and life to our ship-board life. Having all my things
in the boat, I did not go in again ashore, but the Bishop kindly
rowed in to bring off my party who were going to Maewo. When
I had settled down a little, and got over my surprise at seeing
Mrs. Selwyn, I devoured my home letters, which were very
numerous and most welcome. Thank God, all were well and pros-
perous at Norfolk Island.
One begins a new life now with good news, and a great slice
of home on board in the beloved presence of our Bishop’s wife,
and the past is forgotten in the present. When the Bishop came
off, we got away under steam for Maewo. We had a quick passage
over, and were at anchor about 8.30 p.m. It was a glorious
evening with a nice bright moon overhead, and. the Bishop and
Mrs. Selwyn went for a row in the quiet of the night. In due
course, we retired, but I found it very hot and stuffy after the
cool night air ashore.
Wednesday, October 6th. —On board the Southern Cross. The
tide did not serve till nearly noon, and then the watering began.
I took no part, because I was not very well, and I had to get my
things together preparatory to going ashore. In the afternoon
the Bishop and Mrs. Selwyn went ashore for a scramble, and her
enthusiasm when she came off was quite refreshing and most
charming to see and hear. The watering, too, was finished, and I
was to have gone ashore, but I stayed for another night on board,
intending to start very early the next morning. However, I was
not very well, and the Bishop kindly postponed the time of sailing,
so that the vessel did not leave till after breakfast on
Thursday, October 7th. —Mrs. Selwyn kindly came in with the
Bishop to see the last of me, and A. P. Huqe and myself sat some
time after our farewells had been said, deliberating the stupendous
undertaking of getting to Tanrig. We were both much refreshed
by our stay on board, and quite ready for our stay on shore again.
I shall certainly not want for medical comforts and dainties, or


even medicines, for the Bishop was kindness itself in lading me
with one good thing after another, until my paraphernalia of
travel have increased to the no small consternation of my bearers.
When the vessel was well away we made our start, and with the
expenditure of most of our strength, and certainly of all our
moisture, we got at length to the top of the first hill. Then it
was all plain sailing, and we got to Ruosi, where we rested and
bathed. In that refreshing water I seemed to have left all my
ailments and distresses, and I was quite another being when I
started again for Tanrig. Hither we arrived in due course, and
Huqe, too, seemed quite like another being. It is so nice getting
back here again, with the cool invigorating air and the cheery
welcoming faces all so pleasant. I miss Arthur, though, very much,
and now that Patrick has gone in the ship, the place is almost
devoid of teachers, ourselves excepted. The first evening ashore
was fine, and the moon shone out brightly as we were coming
from Prayers.
Friday, October Sth. —lt rained very heavily during the night,
and this morning and all day it blew very hard, with heavy rain
squalls at intervals. I did not go out all day, and indeed, I had
enough to keep me at home. The people were away busy with
their gardens, and the women at home preparing the food for the
men. I had almost interminable visits from one and another, during
the day, to see the pictures which I had taken of the place, and
which Dr. Codrington has printed and sent down to me. They
were quite charmed with them, and were much more clever in
finding out faces and details, than ever I expected they would be
The day drew rapidly to a close, and the evening was fairly
pleasant, but somewhat cold and damp. We had a fair attendance
at evening school, and I gave them an address instead of school.
Saturday, October 9th. —A thoroughly wet and disagreeable
day. The rain poured down, and the village looked as if it were
going to be flooded. It kept on, too, without intermission almost
the whole day, and I could not stir out of doors. However, I
had plenty of occupation, and the time passed rapidly. It cleared
slightly towards evening, and it was fine overhead for Evensong.
Nothing seems to keep these hardy people indoors, and most of
them have been paddling about all day in their taro gardens,
utterly regardless of the state of the elements. In spite of all
inconveniences we had quite a large evening congregation, and few
seemed the worse in any way for the unpleasant day. It was a
cold, raw evening, and I am not sorry that bed-time is so near.


Sunday, October 10 th. —The day somewhat finer overhead, but
still very squally and boisterous. As soon as I was up and dressed
we had morning school, with a large and general attendance.
The first two classes are supposed to say their Sunday Collect at
this school, and answer questions on it. The school begins with
a Hymn and Prayer, and finishes with the Lord’s Prayer and the
Grace. The third class learn the Church Catechism, and the
remainder of the school read from a small manual containing the
first seven chapters of S. Matthew’s Gospel. The school lasts
about an hour. After breakfast we had Morning Prayer, a very
nice service, and I Baptized the infant son of Thomas and Lily by
name and special request—Penny. A. P. Huqe, Harry, and
Agnes stood sponsors. The Font was very tastefully and prettily
decorated by Arthur, and the service was very solemn.
After Matins I assembled the Catechumens for instruction, and
I told them that I wished everyone present fully to make up his or
her mind to the dignity, the solemnity, and responsibility of what
they were undertaking. They are the last unbaptized inhabitants
of Tanrig, and of their own accord have pressed for Baptism.
They number over twenty, and seem very much in earnest,
especially the older men and women. It is most gratifying to me,
and a matter for which I cannot sufficiently thank God, that just
at the end of this era of my missionary life, I should see such
zeal and earnestness exhibited by the people among whom I have
worked so long, and apparently with so little result. I shall leave
behind me here, please God, an entirely Christian village, in pro-
fession at least, and I trust in reality also. There are one or two
I wanted to leave out, but they seem so anxious to be Baptized,
that I leave their future with God and the blessing of His spirit,
and accede to their request. We have here now, all the organi-
zations of a Christian community, a good school, an excellent
Church, and a zealous congregation. Surely one can labour on
steadfast and unmoveable, seeing that one’s labour is not in vain
in the Lord. At other stations also, people are crying out for
Baptism, and before I leave, please God, I shall admit many into
the Fold of Christ’s Flock.
It was too wet to get about during the afternoon, but we had
our usual social meal in the school-house, and in due course,
Evensong. This was one of the heartiest and most inspiriting
services I have ever known here, and the congregation felt the
same, the singing, the responses and all, went with a swing and
harmony which shewed that the people’s hearts were in it. I


gave a discourse on the Gospel for the day, the story of the
widow’s son at Nain, and likened them to the young man, and
Christ coming and touching the bier and saying stop! to the
powers of evil who were carrying them, dead in trespasses and
sins, out to their burial. The young man sat up and began to
speak, and our first act, when delivered from the wrath to come,
should be to sit up and speak and declare God’s praises for all He
has done for us in His dear Son our Saviour. We had singing
afterwards, and then dispersed for the night. A great many of
the congregation lingered outside, to wish me good-night. Thank
God for these real days, how different to the old heathen times,
when the people were still lying in the darkness and shadow of
death. God grant that they may know Him and the power of
His resurrection, and be filled with His fulness and grace.
Monday, October 11 th, was much finer, and the sun shone
out in rich splendour. The people at this time of the year are
very busy planting their yam gardens, and every day they are at
work from morning until night. The men do the toiling part, the
women the cooking. They work in parties, and many hands make
light work. The harmonium being out of order I stayed to try
and mend it. I was interrupted in the midst of my work by
visitors from Tasmouri and Tasmate, and retired to my house to
talk with them. When they left I finished my job, and was far
more successful than ever I dared to hope. The bellows had
burst, and the wind escaped in such quantities that it was hard to
get any music at all out of the instrument. I could only make a
patch up affair of it, but it was so far successful that a volume of
sound was emitted such as I have never heard from it before, and
the addition to the singing in the evening was very marked. I
had intended to have made an excursion during the day, but it
was too late when I had finished, and I had to content myself at
home. After Evensong I took the Catechumens for a lesson, and
afterwards joined my own class in the school previous to the
Roll Call. The evening was fine, but blustery and raw, and I
fancy the people were tired, for there was quietness soon after
school.
Tuesday, October 12 th. —Very rough, squally morning and a
terribly windy night. Sometimes I fancied I was going to be
blown over altogether in my frail native hut. However, these
little tenements stand a great deal, and here I am safe and sound
at the beginning of a new'day.


After early Morning Prayer we had our usual school, and
breakfast followed. I have no refreshment before this meal, and
sometimes I feel a little famished, but am generally ready for the
breakfast when it comes. It is not a very sumptuous meal at the
best of times, plain rice and a cup of coffee, but it does very well,
and stops the craving of the appetite as well as anything else.
The strange thing is that at home I scarcely ever touch rice,
having a positive aversion to it, but here I make my breakfast on
it nine mornings out of ten.
After breakfast I had school with a very earnest Candidate
for Baptism who comes from Mandurvat, and wished for special
instruction. I hope I managed to explain to him any difficulties
he has experienced in the nature and meaning of the service.
When he was dismissed I wended my way with some of the boys
to Ruosi, where I bathed and washed my clothes. Ido not know
what it was, but when I got home I was quite exhausted, and
somehow I don’t feel as strong as I did at the beginning of the
season. We had very hearty Evensong, and a nice class with the
Catechumens, who, I think, are very much in earnest, especially
the older men. There are about twenty in this class, the last
remnant of the heathen population. With their Baptism, Tanrig
will cease to have any remains of heathenism, and in name at
least will be able to call itself Christian. The usual school was
held, and the first two classes were engaged in solving the
mysteries of simple addition, one of the girls succeeding in doing
a six line sum without a fault. This same girl, Emily by name,
is rather a creditable production for this out of the world place.
She reads well, answers well, and writes well, besides being quite
an adept at figures. A couple of years at Norfolk Island would
make a very useful woman of her. There are seven others in her
class who all are very fair scholars, and take their turn at teaching.
Wednesday, October 13th. —Very fine morning and very warm.
After our morning duties were over there was soon a dead silence
over the village, the people all going off to their several occu-
pations in their gardens. I busied myself, and got very hot over
a little simple carpentering—but oh ! the tools, they were so blunt
and so rusty. However, I managed to do fairly well what I
wanted to do, viz. to enlarge the Communion table, and generally
to give a more Churchy appearance to the East end of our Church.
I proposed to myself a bathe after my labours were over, but I
was too exhausted, and stayed at home in preference. However,
the shades of evening soon stole on, and my little cooks came to


v,
get my dinner, which, frugal as it was, I enjoyed with the best of
sauce—hunger. The evening was calm and fine, and I sat outside
my house and enjoyed myself with a book. In the evening they
came to tell me of the death of a poor heathen woman who has
lately come here, and has been for years past a confirmed invalid.
Poor thing ! the women came back in the evening to find her cold
and stiff in death, without a soul near her to say a word of com-
fort or to close her eyes in dying. She was buried in the moon-
light, and her memory consigned to oblivion with her body. Her
gad story afforded me a fitting text for the Catechumens afterwards,
which I trust was not unproductive of seasonable' lessons and
wholesome and solemn warnings. Our singing school subsequently
was very nice, after which everyone seemed glad to turn in for
the night.
Thursday, October 14 th. —Fine bright morning, and a most
beautiful day with a strong Trade wind blowing. After our
morning duties I was left alone, the people being away almost at
once to their gardens. They work very hard at this season, and
the men do the heaviest part of the labour. At present they are
engaged in fence making, usually here with bamboos, and very
neatly they make them. It is very hot, fatiguing work for them
in the broiling sun, but I suppose habit has so far become second
nature with them, that they don’t seem to notice the heat or mind
a little extra perspiration. The cool waters of the river always
afford a grateful and refreshing anticipation when the work is
once over.
I amused myself with making a Cross to surmount the Com-
munion table, and give a little more of a sacred nature to the
Chancel of the Church. With my poor tools and limited neces-
saries at my disposal I flattered myself that I had done fairly
well, and I afterwards attempted a picture gallery on the walls of
my house, which has attracted all the boys in the village this
evening, and they have taken more interest in these pictures than
ever I have seen them before display. The launching of a life
boat, and the English Bishops have been the chief attractions, and
everyone, I think, has counted over the Bishops dozens of times.
There being no one here in the afternoon I went alone to the river
and enjoyed a refreshing bath. This evening it is blowing heavily,
but there is a good moon and it is fine overhead. Instruction to
the Catechumens, and the evening school finished a nice day.
Friday, October 15 th. —After our morning duties here and
breakfast I started with a party of four for Tasmouri. It had


rained a little during the night, and the bush was still wet this
morning. The sun, however, shone out in Tropical brilliancy, and
travelling was very unpleasant. The hottest time is just after a
shower, and to-day proved no exception to the native idea on the
subject. I don’t know when I have felt so hot and disinclined
for exertion. However, the journey had to be made, and on I
went somewhat mechanically. We arrived in due course at a
rippling brook which the natives call “Na Marou,” and here we
refreshed ourselves with its cooling waters and quaffed away our
thirst. We rested, too, awhile, and then shouldering our impedi-
menta on we trudged again. The dense bush afforded a grateful
shade generally, but every now and then we came out into the
open glade, and we felt by experience for how much we were
indebted to the shelter from the sun’s rays. Our next resting
place was “ Qaruqatu,” and then we were in a very liquid con-
dition, and could gladly have lain down and given up further
exertion for the day, but we were not half-way to our destination
yet, and when we had cooled a bit we moved on to the village,
where we found the “Uta” natives awaiting our arrival. They
had prepared food for us and procured a good supply of coconuts,
and we stopped for some time with them. However, the day was
hastening on to night, and we were driven to move on when we
would willingly have sat on. in idleness and inactivity. We
started again for “ Yanua garaqa ” where the school house is, and
there I found my friend and teacher “ Takele,” whom I was going
to Baptize on Sunday, and with whom I was anxious to have
some previous conversation. He is a good man, and a staunch,
and “Uta” owes him a great deal for his steadfast and consistent
upholding of the Truth, and his fearless and bold protestations
against evil. He had also food and coconuts ready for us, and I
am afraid I went to sleep for a while, as the boys were refreshing
the inner man. However, we were not yet at our journey’s end,
and shouldering our traps, on we went again.
After leaving Uta there is a very steep descent, really down
the face of the cliff, Tasmouri being on the other side of the
island to windward. The road, however, is good, if somewhat
precipitous, and my poor long shins ached again before I got to
the bottom. Yet we did get to the bottom, and there we found
a most lovely natural bathing place, the delight and comfort of
which we were not long in testing. One can imagine how
refreshing it must inevitably be to get off one’s dripping garments,
and get under a cool and delicious shower-bath. I felt much


more “fit” when I got on my walking garments again and
prepared for another advance towards Tasmouri, which I must
say has never seemed so far and the journey towards it so fatiguing.
We found Samuel and the Tasmouri people waiting from the
village, and of course had food and drink in readiness for us.
It was very cool and nice there, and being now near our destin-
ation we were not in a great hurry to move. Tasmouri, however,
was reached towards evening, but oh! how hot the place is! a
change of raiment scarcely mended matters, and 1 was soon
almost as liquid as before. My evening meal made matters
worse, and didn’t I long for a little grateful coolness 1 However,
that seems an unknown quantity, and I gave up the idea of
discovering it more here than anywhere else. Evensong followed
in due course, and afterwards I had the Catechumen class for a
short instruction. When these duties were over I was fit for bed,
and this is the reason of the shortness and scantiness of my
account of this day.
Saturday, October 16 th. —At Tasmouri. Most beautiful morn-
ing, but oh! so hot. Within doors it was absolutely unbearable,
and I was glad when the people proposed to go to the seaside.
The place selected was “ Konouawo,” and there it was bearably
cool. A “Guardian” supplied me with companionship, and it
proved to be so pleasant there that we spent most of the day,
the boys bathing, fishing, and generally enjoying life, and I reading
and seeking new names for the Baptismal Candidates. The heat
again in the evening when we came home was very oppressive,
and so great had it been in the house during the day that my
candle 1 found all melted and doubled down in the candlestick.
My dinner did not mend matters, but rather made the heat
the hotter. I could not get cool for the life of me, and I had to
grin and bear the discomfort. Ido not know a much hotter place
than Tasmouri and trust I never may, the wonder is how people
live there at all. The fact 1 suppose is that the natives live very
little within doors except at night, but during the day are engaged
in their gardens, or otherwise enjoying the free and easy life to
which they are the heirs by nature. It was intensely hot at Even-
song, and oh 1 how one sighed for relief I An interesting Class with
the Catechumens finished a pleasant day, on the whole, in spite of
the heat. While we were at Evensong, and even while praying
for her, one of the Christian young women, by name “ JN'esta,”
was given a happy issue out of all her afflictions. She has been
lying in a state ’twixt life and death for more than two months,


and died this evening. She was one of the first baptized here,
and a nice, clever girl she was, and a great favourite. The people
asked me to bury her to-night, and I consented. About midnight
the grave was finished, and I went with the people to the grave-
side. A weird, but picturesque scene it was, the moon in full
splendour high up in the heavens, the blazing native torches
casting a lurid glare upon the quiet figure of the dead, resting in
her final bed and wrapped in native mats, the husband seemingly
heart-broken, wailing beside the open grave, the women sobbing
all around, myself with a lantern and vested in a surplice at the
head of the grave, and the people all subdued and solemn around.
I read the burial Service, and when I came to “ earth to earth,”
“ashes to ashes,” “dust to dust,” Samuel threw on the earth
according to custom, and at the end of the service we sang a
funeral hymn, which sounded very solemn in the strange stillness
of the night. I gave an address to the people, and words never
seem to me more appropriate, and apposite than on this occasion.
When I had finished my part of the service I came away, and left
the grave diggers to their unenviable duty.
Sunday, October 17 th. —Most glorious morning and meltingly
hot. We had school before breakfast, and I took a class of adult
women. I was quite surprised at their readiness in the Church
Catechism, which they said by heart from beginning to end. The
Collect also they had got by heart and read with great facility.
With the proficiency of the school generally I was amply satisfied,
and teaching has evidently not been thrown away on the majority
of the scholars. After breakfast we had Prayers, and the dis-
comfort of the heat was not lessened by the hateful buzz and
presence of the blue bottles. The service was hearty and com-
forting, however, and I asked the Catechumens to stay afterwards.
With them I had a nice class, and was satisfied that they
were in earnest. One man who has two wives, and has long held
out against baptism, has now given in and put away one of his
wives. It is a peculiarly hard case, as he has children by both,
and the women have both lived with him for a great number of
years, both offered to go, and gave him his free choice as to the
one he chose to retain and which to banish. He chose the elder
of the two, his first wife, and the other consequently left, but I
could not help being sorry for them all, and at the earnest suppli-
cation of the divorced wife I admitted her and her young child to
Holy baptism. It was no inconsiderable pang to the husband to
relinquish his second wife, and I could see that the sacrifice both


he and’she were making had cost them a great deal of suffering,
but the rule is hard and fast, and 1 could not go beyond our
invariable practice to admit a man with one wife only to the Rites
of our Holy Church.
In the evening I Baptized seventeen people of all sizes, ages,
and sexes, and Tasmouri now lays claim to the proud title of being
the first entirely Christian village in Maewo. It has not now a
single heathen member, and I thank God and take courage from
the success which His Word has had here through His Grace, and
to Him alone be the honour and glory.
After the Baptism, and at the end of Evensong, I gave an
address, and was listened to with marked attention, and I pray
God my words may not have been spoken in vain. It was indeed
to me an occasion of rejoicing in the Spirit, and I do not think I
shall soon forget the reality and heartiness of that service. As I
sat here in my house afterwards, all the newly Baptized came to
bid me good-night, and the woman and child who were going into
new quarters were not among the last or the least grateful for the
events of the evening, for their present loss will be their eternal
gain, and to have Jesus as Eriend and Husband must compensate
any one, with a grain of mustard-seed faith in their hearts, for the
loss of husband and earthly father. None the less I could not
help feeling sorry for the pretty, gentle creature who will begin
henceforth a new and different life—this, of course, humauly
speaking. 1 was very tired when the day was over, and everyone
seemed glad that resting time had come.
Monday, October 18 th. —Fine, indeed glorious day, but conse-
quently very hot. According to standing custom here, I gave a
whole holiday to the school and, we went for our usual picnic.
The fatted pig was killed, and we all proceeded to Rononawo to
prepare it for dinner. The women did the cooking, the men
lending ready and very efficient aid in getting and cutting fire-
wood, &c. A book gave me employment throughout the day,
and there was a good deal to interest one going on. The
scene was far from being unanimated and devoid of interest, and
the day soon hastened on to its termination and natural darkness.
The ovens were opened in due course, and disgorged their plentiful
contents. After grace the food was distributed, and before long
we were wending our way homewards.
After Evensong a request was brought me that the people
might have a dance, and of course 1 consented. There was not a
very numerous company of dancers, but they kept up their energy


for an hour or two in a manner in which I should be very sorry
to imitate them, and the result may be imagined in a place
where the smallest movement throws you into a bath of perspira-
tion. This evening appeared those mysterious things like sea-
worms. They only come about one night in the year, but the
people not only know the very night of their appearance, but
almost the very hour. When they are expecting them they get
ready a peculiar kind of deep basket with a wide mouth, and long
cane torches, and when these worms of the sea are observed, the
people shovel them by handsful into their baskets, and great
quantities are in this way taken. They are of course esteemed a
great delicacy, and by cooking and re-cooking, they are kept for
a very long time as an accompaniment to their different kinds of
food. Their flavour is somewhat peculiar, but by no means
disagreeable, and I can quite understand a native esteeming them
a delicacy. Their wormy nature, lam afraid, gives me a false
sentiment against their niceness. Considerable numbers were
secured this evening, but the “ haul ” was said not to be a very
successful one.
Tuesday, October 19/A.—This morning we were early astir and
getting ready for our homeward journey. We had Prayers and
school and then breakfast, after which we put our traps together
and prepared to start. The boat was coming for me, so that
our first journey was to Tasmate, and no joke at that, hot as it
was. However, we got there finally, and before the boat. It was
very warm walking, and I was very liquid again by the time
Tasmate was reached. While we were there waiting for the boat
a big steamer passed Southwards. She had not the appearance of
a man-of-war, but was too large to be down this way for no
purpose. She was steaming fast and well, but looked to be rather
battered and dilapidated. She appeared to have come from Fiji
or from somewhere in that direction. Later on we saw her again
up the coast, whither perhaps she may have gone for water. Uur
row homewards was terrible —the heat was simply awful and
pelted down upon us piteously without a breath of wind. How-
ever, we got to our boat cove eventually, aud hauled up our boat,
and then, as night was drawing nigh, we prepared to start at once
for Taurig. W e had scarcely got off before we were caught in a
heavy thunderstorm, and the rain came down in torrents. The
roads, always bad, were now fearful, and having a good deal of
water before us to wade through I had taken off my shoes and
gocks. My feet were very sore when I got to Kuosi, where, in


spite of present dripping condition, we all bathed, and we got
home like drowned rats, to find that very little rain had fallen
here. After tea and Evensong I was ready for bed, being very
tired and foot-sore.
Wednesday, October 20Z/t.—l was very glad of a good excuse
for a thoroughly quiet day, and this was given me in a perfect
downpour of rain, which continued without cessation until past
midday, and I could not possibly get out. It cleared, however, in
the evening, and I got out to church and to my Catechumen class,
after which we had our usual secular singing. These Wednesday
evenings are certainly looked forward to, but they do not satisfy
me that much is taught by them. The people are very slow at
picking up new things, and except occasionally are far from enthu-
siastic about the performance, yet 1 suppose they enjoy it or they
would not attend in such numbers. I was perfectly inundated
afterwards by people coming to wish me good-night. Shaking
hands has become quite an institution here now, and you cannot
meet or quit anyone except the process of hand grasping be gone
through. However, it is a good step to the right direction and I
give so much encouragement to it that my own arm runs the risk
often of being wrung oif.
Thursday, October 21 st. —Busy here all the morning, and
having got very hot and tired with what 1 was doing, I came to
get my towel to go for a bathe, when lo and behold, down came
the rain in a perfect torrent, and 1 had to swallow my disappoint-
ment and stay at home. However, 1 started again at my picture
gallery, and got a good deal done. I must try and finish it at
some future time. It is a source of immense diversion to not a
few, and some of the boys are never tired of coming to find out
what the pictures mean. I was not very well all day, and after
the Catechumen Class was very glad to retire for the night.
Friday, October 22nd. —Was very sick all the morning, and
went to Kuosi to try and drown my cares in the river, but was
only partially successful. Came back appetiteless to an uninviting
dinner, and did not feel equal to much during the evening.
Saturday, October 23rd. —Very busy all day with preparations
for to-morrow. Anthony came to make final arrangements about
his Candidates. Determined to go to “ Naruru ” for the ceremony.
Was not well all day, and everything seemed a business. Einal
class with Catechumens.


Sunday, October 2ith. —A very full but an exceptionally joyous
day. We had school before breakfast, but that meal followed
directly after. Then came Mattins. Then, followed by all the
male population of Tanrig, I went to Naruru. • The house there
being very small I determined to have the Baptism out of doors.
I would have gone to the river-side but it was too far. While
Anthony and the others were getting ready the place and the
Font, I said, a few final words to the Candidates, who were already
well prepared. Anthony’s wife was among the number, and a
fine, intelligent young woman she is. There were nine Candidates
in all, and the service was a very solemn and impressive one. It
was the first time I had ever Baptized anyone in the open air, but
a great deal of solemnity was not lost by it. The whole service
went very nicely, and I hope the Candidates were fully alive to
the importance and dignity of the occasion. When it was over I
said a few words to the Congregation and Baptized, and soon after
we hastened home, having another Baptism at Tanrig. Curing
my absence A. B, Huqe had made a most chastely pretty Font,
and brightened up the Church with flowers, &c., until it looked
quite charming. The Baptism took place in the evening, and
seeing that there were as many as twenty-eight Candidates it was
not a short service. It passed off very nicely, and 1 think made a
great impression. I preached afterwards, and told them that this
would be my final Baptism for some time to come, and urged them
all to remember their Baptismal vows and to try and live more
and more up to them, by the grace of God. Tanrig is now a
Christian village, and the number Baptized here is considerably
over a hundred. There are suburbs, however, which are still
lying in comparative heathen darkness, and these we shall now
have time, please God, to attack. There is much rejoicing here
to-day, and a fresh start has again been made. 1 have Baptized
thirty-seven people to-day, and I thank God and take courage.
Monday, October 25th. —General holiday, and great Christening
Feast at Kuosi. All the world turned out from here, and we were
joined by many from Naruru. Four large pigs were slaughtered,
and a prodigious quantity of yams and taro prepared. It was a
most lovely day, and the sunshine overhead seemed to have found
its way into every heart, for there was the greatest harmony
and good will manifest on all sides. Men and women shared the
burden of the day alike, and the result in the evening was a most
grand spread of perfectly cooked food, more than sufiicient for


all the great number present. All shared alike, and the females
had great junks of pork as well as the men. Formerly the
women ate very little animal food, but now Christianity has broken
down the middle wall of partition, and taught them that all are
One in Christ. We came home in the evening, and dinnerless I
had to go to bed with an attack of ague which lasted me far on
into the hours of midnight. I did not go to Prayers, and indeed
I don’t know what happened. There was a dance, I believe, but
I didn’t hear anything of it.
Tuesday, October 26th. —Very weak and seedy all day—did not
go out anywhere. However, I had lots of little things to do here
at home, and I busied myself over them. Visitors from Uta came
in the evening. The people told me they wanted to take away
one of our women whose husband is just dead, but 1 refused and
told them they had women enough already. They were very
frightened I believe, and 1 don’t care, I trust they were, for I
meant what 1 said. They are quite enough as they are to live
and die in heathen darkness, while here the poor woman will have
a chance at all events of hearing and living.
{Wednesday, October 21th. —Beautiful day, but I was not par-
ticularly well to enjoy it. 1 was up betimes though, and got
through our morning duties before breakfast.
Perhaps this is not a wise plan, but it is more convenient
and therefore 1 submit to it. You certainly get leisure and quiet
afterwards, which one would fail to secure previously to Prayers
and school. I like to give the people every opportunity of getting
away early to their gardens, and therefore, perhaps, I sacrifice
myself. Many people could not stand this going without breakfast
so long, but it is a meal I was never very hearty at, and the want
of which very strangely 1 feel the least.
Our “Bush” friends brought down some prints for sale this
morning, and there has been a tremendous competition for them.
There were six yards of Turkey red handkerchief stuff, which were
finally bought by a young married lady, “ Ann,” for a large pig.
The Bushmen still go “ clothesless,” and returned Labourers find
a ready market here for their linen goods, which they bring home
from Queensland or Fiji. Pigs are of much more value to them,
for of course they still keep up the old native custom of purchasing
rank by means of these animals, while here now they are only
looked upon as so much meat. I have been long trying to get
a proper hold on these people, but 1 cannot Hatter myself that I
have yet succeeded very far. They live a long distance off, and


the road is very inaccessible, but I trust in time they may be
reached from hence. They are very amiable and very friendly,
but they are somewhat terrified at anything new. However, they
come here very often, and I don’t think they go away unprotited.
Thursday, October 28th. —Fine day with strong fresh Trade
wind blowing. I was busy all day here at home doing little odds
and ends of things preparatory to my anticipated visit from Mrs.
Welwyn. The people were all away busy at their gardens, and I
was left alone most of the day. 1 could not find time to get to
Euosi, so i went without my customary dip in the river.
The people were all back in the evening, and their lively
chatter and merriment were a pleasing contrast to the ghostly
stillness which had reigned throughout the day. We had .Prayers
late because the people were late with their dinner.
Friday, October 22th. —Not a very fine day, and threatening
for rain. Directly after school the people were away to their
gardens, but three or four boys were working for me here. They
felt the slight shock of an earthquake, but 1 did not perceive it.
The undivided opinion here is that earthquakes are the precursors
of rain, and often indeed i have known it so to result, but it
seems rather an extraordinary Jaw to lay down. However, there
are abundant signs of a no very distant downpour, and the
prophets may have a chance of being right in their present con-
jecture. We were very busy all day, but towards evening snatched
time enough to go to Kuosi for a bathe. The rain kept off well,
but there was a sprinkle in the evening, and evident signs of a
great deal more before very long. 1 have felt the heat here very
oppressive for the last few days, and by the appearance of the sky
we must soon have some dirty weather with thunder.
Saturday, October 30th. —The storm came on us with a ven-
geance this morning at daylight, and kept on for a long time. At
times the flashes and thunder peals seemed simultaneous, and the
crashes were peculiarly heavy. 1 have never known a more severe
storm in the Tropics, and as for the rain it simply poured down
in torrents.
1 did not get up till late, and Mattins were later than usual.
However, being a holiday it did not so much matter. In my
house it was as dark as night, and all day it has' been very sombre
and dull. Pain has kept on continuously all the time, and it has
been impossible to move out. The people, however, in spite of
>vet and dirt are up and about, and do not seem to mind the


■weather. Many here, indeed, prefer the rain to the sun for
making journeys and doing certain works. Rain does not seem to
give them cold or ague, and I suppose that custom has become
second nature.
I could not get out all day except to my duties, and these
wet days at home are somewhat trying, especially when you are
anxious to be about. It was somewhat finer in the evening at
Prayer time, and we had a good congregation, but it did pour
down while we were at service, and this gave us a good excuse for
a long singing practice.
Sunday, October 31 si. —Another wet and intensely disagreeable
day. However, there were spells of fine weather, and during
those we performed our duties. School came first with a full
house, the elder classes saying the Collect for the day and the
Church Catechism, and answering questions on the former, the
juniors reading from school books and large printed sheets.
When school was over I was quite prepared for breakfast, and
eschewed rice for once in a way for prawns which the boys brought
me. Sometime after breakfast we had Mattins, a very nice service
and especially well attended. I experienced much distress of
mind from the illness of my friend “ Virelumlum,” the Opa chief
who came over with me. He has been very ill all day with acute
inflammation of the lungs, and we have had to keep hot water
applications going, off and on, all day. He moans for home, too,
and there is no chance of getting him there. While at Opa, A. P.
Huqe was so ill, and here now I have my other visitor a patient
on my hands. In the evening I was down myself with ague and
and could not go to Church, and had no dinner.
Monday, November Ist—Terribly stormy, rough night, and a
most unpleasant day, the disagreeableness of which was not
decreased by the continued serious illness of my visitor Yire-
lumlum. All day yesterday and again to-day it has been a con.
tinual anxiety and care to me, and I have been dabbling about in
the mud and wet dancing attendance upon him. He has quite a
serious attack of inflammation of the lungs, and I have had to
keep hot flannels going almost continuously, and rack my brains
to find out what to give him to keep up his rapidly decreasing
strength. In addition to his sickness he has developed a craving
for home, and a strong impression that he is going to die here,
which with natives sometimes is actually equivalent to mean that
they will not recover, and when a native makes up his mind to
die, he in most cases does die. There is no remote possibility of


getting my friend home in such weather as we are having, and he
is killing himself with worry. If the weather were fine I would
willingly take him across to Opa in my boat, but that is scarcely
possible in a gale of wind and a downpour of rain. On the whole
it has been a most anxious and unpleasant day. Being “All
Saints’ ” Day I gave an address in the evening instead of School,
and no one, I fancy, was sorry to be indoors out of the cold and
wet. I had to paddle off after every one was quietly within
doors to feed my patient and make him comfortable for the night
Tuesday, November 2nd. —A most terrible night, wherein it
blew with almost hurricane violence in the squalls, with a perfect
deluge of rain accompanied by heavy thunder and lightning. I
was not sorry or ungrateful to be brought safely to the beginning
of another day. My first business when I got up, was to trudge
off to my patient, whom, thank God, I found better, but all day
long since I have had to look after him, for he is no exception to
the idiocy of all natives, who when they feel a bit better, rush
off and do some extraordinarily foolish thing. It was a terrible day
throughout, and I was so fortunate in keeping my man within
doors, that this evening he was visibly on the mend, and likely to
make a good and I hope a rapid recovery. I read him a most
strong lecture this morning about his craving for home, and told
him he could not possibly get there in this weather, and that he
was better where he was even if he could. I said he never would
recover if he went on distressing himself about getting home, and
told him that he was killing me too, by continually crying for
what he could not possibly obtain. And what a lot of spilt milk
I have cried over these last few days in my regret at having
brought a big man here at all. But the inutility of weeping is
more apparent to me than his crying for home is to him. 1 can
hardly say what I have done to-day either to benefit anyone else
or myself This evening I have turned away from my dinner,
leaving it untasted, and I feel that I must go to bed.
Wednesday, November 3rd. —An attack of ague last night has
made me feel weak and good for nothing this morning. However,
I had to get up, and the prospect outside was as dismal as ever.
Rain and wind and gloominess. My patient, thank God, is most
decidedly better, and if he takes care of himself will do very well
now. I have had a fire in my house all day, and with Dr. Cod-
rington’s book on the Melanesian languages, have got on very
pleasantly. I should like, however, to see a little sunshine, and
one has a right to expect it now in the height of summer. lam


dreadfully afraid Mrs. Selwyn’s visit to me will be impossible, when
the ship arrives the roads will be so impassable. Towards evening
it cleared a bit and I was able to move out, but generally speaking,
everyone has been kept close prisoner to-day. The people who
always seem to me to love paddling about in the wet, expressed a
strong disinclination to move from their houses, and in the absence
of other occupation or amusement, have been asleep most of the
day I fancy. A native’s capacity for sleep is unbounded, and
perhaps a fortunate thing for him, but he can wake at any time,
day or night, and get up straight away. We had our usual Even-
song and singing class, the weather keeping fairer until we had
all got indoors again in our several houses, when down came the
rain. There is a sweet, lulling, comfortable sound in rain when
you are safe indoors, or perchance in bed, and sleep seems to come
unwooed. I practice here what I seldom do anywhere else, read
in bed, and far on in the stillness of the solemn night, I read on
and on with keen enjoyment and a sense of rest, for one gets tired
of sitting in a land devoid of easy chairs and sofas. The usual
posture of a native is to squat on his heels or else to recline,
naturally our high seats are foreign and uncanny to them. I
cannot myself squat for any length of time, and at times I sigh
for the comfort of a good easy chair.
Thursday, November Uh. —Very wet, dispiriting morning, and
threatening for another stormy day. It cleared off, however, and
barring showers we have had a fine day.
A most interesting ceremony took place here to day called
“uli meroana,” {i.e. “untieing war.”) The event ought to have
come off long ago, but the chief actors in the sad drama which led
to its necessity have been somewhat dilatory. Sometime since
the natives of “uta” (the inland as distinguished from the shore)
attacked a village in our district and killed three people. They
were the agressors and the sole actors—the people did nothing
but pack up their goods and clear out, some flying in one direction
and some in another. The majority took refuge in this part of
the island and have never done anything in the way of retaliation,
but have always gone armed since and been on the alert, not with
the object of revenging their injuries, but from fear of further
attack.
However, thank God, all has been quiet since, and the Uta
people have the fire coals so heavily heaped on their head, that
being first in agression they have been the first to make amends.
They came down yesterday in great numbers, all armed, of course,


and bringing three pigs with them. Our people were all present
too, very fully armed, and also bringing three pigs. The chief
man on the Uta side and the attacker stood out in the open with
his pig, and the chief among the injured stepped out, and walking
around the pig took it from the other, first passing his hand over
the pig’s back and head and the rope he was held with, and then
delivering the scape pig to the injured. This was done thrice,
i.e. with each several pig. Then the ceremony was changed to
our side and the like performance gone through, and the pigs
delivered one by one to the attackers. There was thus a mutual
exchange and no one was the loser, indeed so far from it that had
the pigs been made for the occasion and cast in the same mould,
they could scarcely have been more of a size, shape, and colour.
It would seem, according to our ideas, as if the aggressors ought
to have paid all the pigs without receiving any in exchange, but
no, native custom seems to he different, and a fair exchange must
he made. After the pigs had been delivered, there was some
speechifying and a good deal of after talkey-talkey, and the
quondam enemies became the best of friends. I hope they will
continue so, I am sure, and I think they will. I made a
little speech, in which I glorified peace and good-will, and
denounced fighting and bloodshed. I have never seen such a
concourse of people in Maewo, certainly, and the place perfectly
bristled with guns and poisoned arrows. The natives, although
they seem somewhat careless with these weapons, are really very
careful, and an accident seldom or never happens through care-
lessness. Ido not like the poisoned arrows, and keep clear always
of them, for the smallest prod from one Would most probably
prove fatal. Very soon the vast concourse had dispersed, and the
pigs, the mediators, were escorted off to their new places of
residence, but I do not fancy they felt the weight of the aggressor’s
repentance, or the forgiveness of the attacked. A small coal of
inward anger would very soon kindle again the blaze of war, for
after all I fancy there is not much love lost between the two
parties. With one of ray Opa boys I came back here to get my
towels, and then made a start for Ruosi and Kerepei, being
anxious to bathe, and also to see the road the boys have made
for Mrs. Selwyn’s feet to tread in. I must say after my observa-
tion of it, that if her anticipated visits everywhere have the same
effect of causing people to mend their ways, she may well be
satisfied with her trip down here. The road was not good before,
neither is it perfect now, but the boys have certainly made a most


passable track, the question is whether a lady can manage the
first steep climb. In anticipation of this, they have strained a
strong climbing reed, like the rail of a balustrade, and by this it
is hoped she may be able to ascend. The road otherwise is now
very good. A delicious bath at Euosi was made doubly delicious
by some days’ privation, and my present liquid condition.
We got home here in the evening, and I dined very late, but
with much more of an appetite than I have had for some time.
In the evening A. P. Huqe being laid up, I gave an address at
Evensong, instead of school.
Friday, November sth. —The glorious sth November, Guy
Fawkes, of unhappy memory! Very wet night, but fairly fine
day. People very busy to-day, so they asked me to relinquish
school, which I did. I made preparations for photographing a
pretty part of the river, but the rain came down and 1 had to give
it up. However, my dry plates are at an end, and the few I have
left I must keep for a peradventure of something good before I
leave.
Saturday. November 6th. —Squally, unsettled sort of day, after
a very rough night. Great preparations were being made here in
the morning, for the Bishop’s and Mrs. Selwyn’s advent. When
it was done I went with the boys to Euosi, where I sat and
watched their sports and gambols in the water, and thought how
the one touch of nature makes the whole world kin. Human
nature and boy nature is the same everywhere, and these boys are
just like every other boy except in colour. They had a great spur
of fun and frolic, and boy-like pleasure produced no languor or
tediousness. I made a descent to “ Wosawosa,” and looked in vain
for the ship.
Back and dined, and everything as usual.
Sunday, November 7th. —The Mission schooner arrived with
all on board well. After Morning Prayer 1 went down to the
vessel, but it was too dirty for Mrs. Welwyn to come up to the
village, but in the evening Mr. Cullwick came back to Tanrig and
spent the night with me. The account of the work in the islands
farther North, was very cheering, and it had a fresh and charming
meaning, as told by Mrs. Welwyn in the full enthusiam of her first
voyage into these new but beautiful regions. The evening services
in our little native Church was a sad and solemn one, for I said
my public farewell to the people, in prospect of my leaving them
for a long time, inasmuch as it was decided for me to go to


England. Mr. Cullwick was very much struck with the beauty of
the service, and the devotion of the worshippers. When we bid
them “ Good night” they all said, “ Ah! this will be the last good
night for a.long, long time.”
Monday, November Bth. —The Bishop and Mrs. Selwyn came
to stay with me at Tanrig. It was fortunately a most beautiful
day, and Mrs. Selwyn, partly carried and partly on foot, made the
journey without any great fatigue. Of her visit, she herself no
doubt will write.
Tuesday, November 9 lh. —We stood across to Opa, distant
about twenty-five miles from this part of Maewo. The people were
in floods of tears at the final parting, and a general wail went up
from all, as the boat drew off from the shore. At Opa we
anchored for the night.
Wednesday, November 10 th. —The Bishop and I were rowed
ashore early, and examined the school at Lotahimamavi. This is
as yet in embryo, but the people were very nice and most friendly,
and seemed quite in earnest about their 'school duties. A proper
school house has yet to be built, but this they have undertaken to
do as soon as they have dug their yams. Their yam digging
answers to our harvest. Leaving this place we went on board
the Southern Cross to breakfast, and afterwards to examine the
school at Tavolavola. The Bishop,was much pleased with the
state of this school, and the great proficiency attained to by some
of the young scholars. Prizes of knives, calico, beads, fish-hooks,
&c., were distributed and then we went to Lobaha, another school.
Before leaving Tavolavola, Mrs. Selwyn was anxious to see how
the natives got up the coconut trees. There are no branches of
course, to hold on to, and many natives tie a cord around their
feet, and some use an ingenious arrangement with cord for their
hands. But these natives go up hand over hand without any
help or assistance. The lad in question was up the tree, had
thrown down green coconuts, and descended again with wonderful
and astonishing rapidity, with nothing on his hands or feet.
Before we got to Lobaha it began to rain heavily, and I was
overtaken with a fit of ague, and had to lie shivering on the beach
while the Bishop went alone to examine the school It poured in
torrents all the way home, and I was very miserable.
Thursday, November l\th. —Away early from Opa and started
for Araga, distant over twenty miles from this part of Opa,


There the school was examined, and we left in the evening for the
South end of the island. This we reached on
Friday, November \2th, the Bishop going ashore in a strong
gale of wind, and in pelting rain, to examine the school and
bring off Mr. Brittain, who had been spending some days there.
They were not long before both were on board, and Mr. Brittain,
thank God, quite well.
When the boat was hauled up we stood out to sea, and so
on our homeward journey for Norfolk Island, which we reached
after a stormy but quick passage on November 18th, and found
all well at home. “ Praise thou the Lord Oh! my soul, and forget
not all His benefits.”


Rev. A. BRITTAIN.
For the year 1886 my contribution will be concerned with
the time between April 3rd and November 18th, On the former
date the Southern Cross left Norfolk Island on the first trip of
the year, and on the latter we reached it again at the end of our
voyaging season. I had never before left for the islands on the
first voyage, but our plans gave me a longer stay than usual. My
own island, Araga, was to take up the usual time, but I was to
make a stay also in the Bank’s Islands, which would be out of the
ordinary course. As it turned out, however, the arrangements
were of necessity altered, and no stay was made in the Bank’s
Islands.
The Southern Cross left Norfolk Island with a wind very
strong, but altogether fair. None of the regular Araga boys were
on board, as they were to return home on the second voyage,
according to our plan. One lad, however, we had with us, whose
presence in the Southern Cross was quite out of the ordinary course.
The explanation concerning him will show something of the
individual efforts made in various places to give some sort of
instruction to those who are taken from our islands to work on
the plantations and elsewhere. On the whole they are simply
neglected, with the result that they return home having learnt
almost all the vices, and none whatever of the virtues, of the
white man. Personal interest has in some cases induced thought
and work for their benefit. In Sydney was one instance of this.
The visit of a young lady to Norfolk Island on the occasion of
the Consecration of the Memorial Chapel increased her interest in
the Mission, and on her return to Sydney she sought some kindred
work. A class was established for natives from the islands
engaged in different kinds of work in the city, and it has proved
most successful. Several of the lads are from our own islands,
and as it has happened that the Bishop has been in Sydney at
convenient times, he has twice held Baptisms of members of the
Class. One of these Baptized lads made a request that he might


be taken home in the Southern Cross, His home was Araga, and
he came to Norfolk Island in readiness for the first voyage of the
Southern Cross. It was apparently five or six years since he had
been taken away in a labour vessel to Noumea, whence he had
found it possible to make a move to Sydney. And this was the
end of his life in foreign countries—he was returning home a
Christian, with, in some respects, a surprising knowledge, with a
perfectly good character from all who knew him, and with a great
desire to do something for the benefit of his fellow-countrymen.
All that had hitherto been done in Araga is in the northern part
of the island, the remainder of the island being partially known
only, while the extreme southern end was quite unknown and
inaccessible. The lad, Thomas Rorsal, gave us to understand that
his village was right in the south, close to the neighbouring island
of Ambrym, and we had then the prospect of breaking into
new parts.
On April Bth, that is on the fifth day from Norfolk Island,
we were in the passage between Araga and Ambrym. A boat was
lowered, Tom’s belongings placed in it, and we pulled in shore to
find his village, which he could not distinguish from the vessel.
A clump of cocoa-nuts was recognised by him, and at last we
pulled into a good sandy beach with very good landing, where a
crowd had already collected for our reception. Their returning
brother was at once recognised, and his goods shouldered with
great readiness. The Bishop’s bad foot forbade his leaving the
boat, but I landed and went up with the people to their village*
which was quite close at hand, though invisible from the beach
owing to the very thick bush. Tom had previously expressed his
determination to build a house for school purposes as soon as
possible, and I, through him, told the people of our plans and
something of what we hoped to do among them. We thereupon*
in consequence of the readiness they expressed, chose a convenient
site for the house, and I promised to make a boat voyage to them
as soon as I could conveniently get away from the northern
district. It was evident that there could not be a great popu-
lation in the immediate neighbourhood, as there was only a small
level tract lying off the beach, backed up by somewhat high hills,
which would doubtless form a separate district from the beach
villages.
On the next day, the 9th, we arrived at the north end of the
island, having been almost becalmed on the way thither. The
Southern Cross anchored, my belongings were put together, and in


two or three hours I landed at the usual place, and was at home
again at Qatvenua. It was not a bright reception—the unusual
quietness all about, the absence of the usual vociferous greetings,
and the depressed looks of the teachers were not enlivening, and
it was easily seen that there were unpleasant tidings to be heard.
Gradually all became known. With regard to the chief school at
Qatvenua the report was altogether favourable. It had decidedly
advanced. Several outside adults, who had hitherto kept aloof
from us, had come forward and joined themselves to our congre-
gation, and the ordinary work had proceeded quite satisfactorily.
But the other two schools in the district had met with inter-
ruptions, and one was in a state of temporary suspense. The
cause of all was the fruitful source of trouble to us, the labour
vessel. Some short time before one had visited that part, and a
party of men and lads, almost entirely baptized or scholars, had
departed in her. It was all to be put down to one man who had
been of some importance. He had done wrong, and to avoid the
retribution that in some form or other would have fallen upon
him, he decided to leave the place, and then persuaded some
of these men to accompany him, and the rest followed them.
Amongst them was the teacher who had been in charge of the
school at Lamoru, whose going was a great surprise, as he had
always been so quiet and well-conducted. Fortunately his helpers
were able to continue the school work by themselves without any
intermittence. At the other place, Yathuqe, the school was closed
for a time, as there was no one to take the erring teacher’s place.-
He had been left there with some misgivings, as he was not of
equal standing with the teachers generally, but it was thought
that his zeal and expressed desire for the post would be equal to
the demand made upon his steadfastness. Some of the others
that embarked were his relatives, and so he had the unusual
temptation before him, and gave way to it.
My first fortnight on shore was spent at Qatvenna. The
landing was done in very unfavourable weather. It rained very
heavily, and the very steep path leading up to the school village,
bad enough in fine weather, was extremely troublesome for
carrying up my goods and chattels, and they got very wet. My
own little house was not in good condition, and until we repaired
it I slept in the large boys’ house.
Within a day or two we pulled some little distance down the
coast to a small bay, where I heard some white man had been
recently buried. We saw his grave, with an inscription, and in


time I heard the story of his death. No outrage on labour vessels
has been made or attempted in Araga for several years, but in
January, as it appeared, when a vessel from Samoa was visiting
some place about thirty miles down the coast, one man was shot
by a native as he was on shore with several others from the vessel
bathing. It must be said that this man, a German, showed a
great lack of wisdom in his behaviour. The native had come
down some distance from the hills under the impression that his
two wives, who had disappeared, were on board the vessel then to
be seen lying at anchor, and in his rage the man was shot, while
all the time the women were elsewhere. The body was brought
up along the coast, and buried near our station. The whole affair
had caused much excitement, even at the Northern end of the
island. Some time after the place was visited by a German man-
of-war, with results that will be spoken of further on.
The great man to the South, Viradoro, expressed his con-
tinued desire for us to do something in his part, and we visited
him several times, and were well received and listened to always
There is a lad at Norfolk Island who has connections with this
place, and when they make a beginning at a school-house we may
begin work with him as teacher, but I decline to put him there,
as they desire, before this is done. Within a fortnight of my
going ashore two labour vessels anchored near us, one from New
Caledonia, and the other from Fiji. In the latter there departed
a young son, quite a small boy, of Viradoro’s, whom I had hoped
to take to Norfolk Island some time or other. His father was
greatly put out by his being taken away.
I had decided to remain at Qatvenua until Good Friday, and
then to go on to Tanrig in Maewo for Easter. There are several
communicants there, and I should have taken the Araga commu-
nicants with me that we might have our Easter Communion
together. During the whole of Holy Week the weather was bad,
and I feared that our voyage would not be practicable. On the
Saturday, when we should have left, there was a strong wind
blowing from the North, which would have been dead against us,
with continuous rain, and there was no possibility of our going.
Our Easter, however, was very pleasant, and the joyful hymns
told of really joyful Christian hearts.
In Easter week we left for my first visit to Wonor, the
village at the Southern end where we had put Eorsal ashore!
My intention and arrangements for going there caused much talk
The distance would be nearly forty miles, and I suppose no one


had been more than half that distance down the coast, and it was
thought to be a very long journey. More talked of even than the
distance, however, was the belief that attaches itself to a par-
ticular place at the extreme Southern end. To this place were
supposed to go all the spirits of the departed, and to remain
there in some sort of community. Of all places in Araga, there-
fore, it is the one of the greatest superstitious interest and fear,
and many of my chosen boat’s crew’s relatives did their best to
dissuade them from accompanying me, but without effect. We
started on the appointed day, and as I knew we could not do the
whole distance in one day, as we went along the coast we made
several calls at the villages as they appeared, and fixed upon one
not quite halt-way, known to some of the men, in which to pass
the night. Our various stoppages, however, so delayed us, that it
became clear that we should not reach our destination before
night, and so when, upon rounding a point, we came upon a labour
vessel quietly at anchor, and were hospitably invited on board for
the night, I thought it wise to take advantage of it. It was a
Fijian vessel with a number of men on board, lately recruited,
and a Government agent whom I had met before. We passed the
night quietly at least, though not comfortably for any of us, and
pulled away in the morning, very grateful for the hospitality
shown to us, and resumed our journey. The evening found us
ashore at Wonor, where there was considerable excitement over
our landing. Although the place is quite open to the prevailing
Trade wind, a reef and a sand bank that lie off the shore shelter
it quite effectually, and make the landing on the shelving beach
easy and pleasant. In the fortnight that had elapsed since our
calling here only a little had been done towards building the
school-house. The site was cleared of all its timber, and some of
the posts were ready. During our stay we had therefore to sleep
in the men’s common house, which, being much smaller than is
usual in the northern part of the island, we found rather incon-
venient. On the whole our visit of a week was a great success,
and it excited much interest. The house was proceeded with with
great vigour, and all the people in the district showed a very
friendly spirit, making things look bright and promising for
the future. Thomas was doing all he could in the way of
teaching, and his Scripture Picture Books were all well thumbed.
I confined my doings to the immediate neighbourhood, and saw
but little of the adjacent country, though the report of our
sojourn caused people to come from a great distance to Wonor,


and they were very desirous of being visited. My boat’s crew
were thoroughly well treated, and feasted to a great extent, and
our entertainers did us the honour of dancing to us one evening.
I had not intended to make a long stay this time, and having
made some arrangements in the North, which required my
presence, we left at the appointed time, in spite of the pressing
invitation for a longer stay. Our return journey was accomplished
with a little difficulty. The ordinary winds would have taken us
back pleasantly in a day, but we fell in with a contrary wind half-
way up the coast, and were delayed. Some time after night-fall
we decided to land at a village then quite close, but the tide being
out the reef was uncovered, and not wishing to have the boat
injured we continued on our way, and at last reached our own
beach, after very hard pulling, two or three hours before the dawn
of the new day. It was not surprising that some of the lads
should be knocked up for a time after this, but it was thought to
be quite in accordance with the character of the place visited, that
they were all, one after the other, laid up for varying periods.
It did really seem peculiar that it should so happen at this
particular time, when so much was being said about the super-
stition connected with the southern part.
After this there was a month’s stay at the two Northern
schools. At Lamoru a new house was built, larger and in better
style than the old one which had seen the beginning of the work,
and new arrangements were made concerning the teaching staff.
At Qatvenua also repairs were made to the various buildings, and
a boat-house, sufficient for the purpose, but not of any great size
or beauty, was erected on the beach. The whole of this time was
more or less wet, and there was much sickness all through the
district. The infants suffered most, and very many died, several
being children of our congregations. A girl also died, one of the
two belonging to this place who had been to Norfolk Island. She
had been declining for about a year, and my attempts to improve
her health failed. Her lengthened sickness tried the patience of
her friends greatly, and it was suggested once or twice by relatives
that her end should be hastened. By these who made this sug-
gestion it was of course believed that the illness was due to some
unfriendly person’s charms, who would be rejoicing at seeing her
suffering. One of our Catechumens lost his only child, a very
engaging little boy, and his account of how he prayed that it
might recover, and how he felt when death came, and his prayer
seemed to be in vain, was very touching. This child he had been


in the habit of bringing frequently for me to see, and when I once
gave him some beads for it, he was delighted. These, he told me
afterwards, he had buried with him.
On June 5 the Southern Cross returned to me again from the
Northern islands, and 1 went on board to be put on shore at
Won or. It was my intention to go there to stay until the vessel’s
return again from the South, which would be in about six weeks’
time. Two boys were to accompany me for the stay, and I took
my boat. We could not land until the next day, after spending
an unpleasant night on board. On pulling in, the school-house
appeared well on to completion, showing that they had been
working well at it since my last visit. It was not possible yet to
sleep in it, so I spread my rug again in the men’s house, but we
assembled the people together in the school-house for such in-
struction and talking as were found possible. A large party of
Ambrym men was weather-bound here. Their home was plainly
visible, about seven or eight miles distant, but across a very
disturbed passage. They had already been here ten days, and
were anxious to return. They had a sorrowful tale to tell. A
short time before they had come over from Ambrym to go on an
ordinary bartering expedition along our coast, and when the
German man-of-war, the Albatross, mentioned above, arrived to
avenge the death of the man who was killed in the beginning of
the year, they happened to be at the very place. Naturally they
thought themselves quite safe from any attack, and sat quietly on
the beach awaiting the arrival of the boat. They all knew that
the culprit was in a village two or three miles away on the hills,
and they were prepared to assist in punishing him. Suddenly
however, without any warning, they were fired upon more than
once from some of the big guns of the ship. They at once fled
in great fear, and did not know until the evening, when they
ventured out of the bush again, what had been the result of the
firing. One poor fellow had part of one leg blown away, and was
found lying in great agony. A, day or two after he died. Having
thus fired and cleared the place of all people, a large number of
men went ashore from the man-of-war, and succeeded in killing a
few pigs, and in burning down the large men’s house of the place,
which belonged to perfectly innocent and unconcerned people.
Such a proceeding is not calculated to induce in the people any
thoughts either of the justice or of the courage of the white man.
It was a very weary time for them while waiting at Wonor,
before reaching home to tell of their missing brother, and it was


not pleasant for the people of Wonor, as the vessel had picked up
two lads of the place as guides, and they were on board when the
firing occurred.
Instead of spending six weeks at this place we spent only ten
days. They were busy days, as we all Worked at the house, and
as I could not get about very much to the neighbouring villages,
I had to content myself with talking to the people as they came
about us. It soon became evident that my two boys from the North
were very home-sick. One I discovered sitting in the dark one
evening crying, and although- they said nothing I could see what
they wished. I therefore decided to return with them,' and after
some little difficulty got a crew together. We started on a not
very promising morning, but did not go far before the hearts of
the Wonor men failed them entirely. There was a good breeze
blowing, and some sea on, and the prospect of a long journey
before them, and they formally requested to be allowed to return.
It would have been very awkward to get back in the boat, as both
wind and sea were dead against us, so I decided to put them
ashore at a convenient spot, and continued the journey with the
two boys. We had a fair wind, but rain commenced and continued
at intervals all through the day. At last we reached our desti-
nation as evening came on, and never was home more welcome.
Our wonderful journey, as it was thought, with only three in the
boat, caused much talk. Had the wind failed us we should have
been in a great difficulty, but as it was we did the forty miles
without much labour. I hoped to be able to get a crew together,
and to go South again to complete my stay, but we were over-
ruled. Three or four days after reaching Qatvenna the place was
greatly disturbed on hearing that a large canoe, which had left
Maewo with Araga people in it more than a week before, had not
been seen or heard of. They were either drowned or had been
blown over to Opa. After a day or two more of suspense I
decided to go to Opa to enquire. It was a relief to everybody
when we started, and the people at home rejoiced greatly when
they saw our signal fires in the evening to let them know that we
had found the missing ones. It was so—they had been blown
away from Araga, and could do nothing but steer for Opa. We
remained there one night, and a Trader who lives there kindly
gave the hospitality, and next day we started on our return with
some of the canoe crew. A night had to be spent on the way at
Maewo, but early the next morning we reached home. This was
on Friday, and on the evening of the next day I commenced to be


unwell, and continued so for three weeks. All plans came to
nought, as I found it impossible to get rid of the ague and con-
sequent fever, and only now and then could I manage to rise at
all. The arrival of the Southern Cross on July 17 was therefore
very welcome, and I went on board at once. All plans as regards
the Bank’s Islands had to be given up, and instead of my staying
for a time in Mr. Palmer’s district at Mota and Motalav, as I had
anticipated with great pleasure, I was forced to see the wisdom of
remaining on board for the voyage up to the Solomon Islands.
Much of great interest occurred during the voyage, but the
greatest event was a visit we paid to Nukapu, where the Memorial
cross for Bishop Patteson had been erected two years previously.
It was found to be well cared for, the people were more than
friendly, were most hospitable, and there are bright hopes of
something being done ere long in the place where the Martyr’s
death occurred.
I improved so much during the trip that on our arrival in the
New Hebrides again, I decided to continue my stay in Araga. I
was on shore therefore again from September 14 to November 12,
and all the places were visited, and I was no more hindered by
bad health. Wonor advanced most satisfactorily: my later visit
found the house completed and quite fit to sleep in, and I saw
much of the surrounding districts and people. At Lamoru we
had the only adult Baptism of the year—five men were Baptized
after much preparation and a long time of trial. November 18
found us again off Norfolk Island, and the Island Voyages were
a thing of the past for 1386.
NEXHEBTON AND WOBIH, PBXNIEBS, IKCBO.
