

Journal
of
The Sound Recording Institute
of
Australia




THE JOURNAL OF THE SOUND RECOUPING INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA..
Clubrooms: 4 Parliament Place, Melbourne, G. 2.
* Issued
At the Annual general Meeting held at the Institute on Friday
27th of June 1952, the following Members were elected to the Comm-
ittee as under:
President S. Martin
Vice Presidents W r . Philpot, J.K, Ibbott
Secretary E, Bruton
Treasurer & Publicity P, Inglis, J, Metcalfe
Editor W. Earle
Librarian , R. Chapman
General Committee M. Branagan, J. Walsh
J. Knox, R, Preston, G. Stevens.
EDITORIAL
IT IS felt sure that the appointed committee will do all in its
power to maintain the high level of work now being conducted. By
the high standards of the meetings now being held, it is certain
members benefit materially by attending. With the tremendous adv-
ances being continually made in the field of sound recording, mem-
bers cannot afford to miss gaining as much information as possible.
It has been seen that they have gained far more technical and prac-
tical experience than amateur non-members - - a point invariably
proved at ercording contests. It is, and should be the aim of all
members to reach the present day top standards.
Information on practically any subject relating to this phase
of electronics is obtainable for the asking, and all new ideas are
explored as soon as they come to light. Again the collective ideas
and brains of the members as a whole must result in steady progress,
so nobody has anything to lose by continuing their association with
the Institute.
The membership of the institute must grow still further and make
its presence more felt in interested circles. It is known there
are large numbers of people actively interested in sound
but how few of them barely reach pass standard with their endevours.
Is it too much to ask and see if each member could interest another
person sufficiently enough to join the ranks of the enthusiasts?
With a larger enrollment, the committee is sure that the club s
activities could be carried on even more successfully than at the
present moment, HOW ABOUT IT?
Club meetings are held at the clubrooms each alternate Friday
night at 8 p.m, and the committee cordially invite* friends and
visitors. The committee meets on the first Wednesday of each
month and invites members to attend.
The annual membership fee is 50/- and is payable from July Ist.


We now continue the resume of the meetings ana commence from the
point reached, in the last publication handed to members.
TAPE RECORDER DEMONSTRATION
Mr, J. Knox ~ 3?riday April 4, 195<i
Tonight Mr. Knox gave us the pleasure of a lecture-uemonstration
on tape recorders, and more-particularly on a unit he had just imp-
orted from England, '
Tape is not entirely a new medium for recording sound. Indeea
early experiments dated back to ' 1699 whdn, in Copenhagen 9 Vaxdemar
Poulsen constructed an .trument for magnetically storing sound on
a fine wire• This method was rather crude as it was entirely done
before the invention of the electronic valve. Later, various methods
were tried including steel tapes ana with the
coated plastic tapes in use today date back to. about 1950.
Before the start of the last war v the method of applying a bias
signal to the tape as well- as the subject matter was e\ c.tved,- An.,,
oscillator is tuned between 85 and 50 kc and its output is partly fed
into a winding on the recording head. This permits a cleaner reprod-
uction and a considerable reduction in the proportion or. background
noise.
We were then given much information into the theories Ox tape
recording and an insight into the mechanical requirements of such
units. Particularly stressed is the importance of a free-running tape
and that speed variations must bo entirely eliminated as in dx? rec-
ording. The elimination oi mechanical vibration is as important as
adequate shielding of the heads.
We then heard items recorded previously for us and later the club
recorded discs onto the tape for checking purposes e The amount of
attention shown was very gratifying indicating the great interest now
being taken in this form of recording-. It would appear that more mem-
bers and visitors are ’contemplating this form of re cording than .any
other, ■ .. -■ v : p T H , ,
At the conclusion of : the:: of thanxs -Was passed to
ten Mr^—Knox, arrl- Wupp«r to? served.,,,.
. . ' 1 ■ PICK-liP DEMONSIRAT’ICN
Conducted by J.K,lbbott 'T Friday 18th April 1952
Tonight the club presented another of its most successful Fick-up
demonstrations,;.which hove always proved most interesting in the past.
By the co-operation of Mr, itbott who arranged the pickups, tables
and necessary switching on:pre-amplifiersj we were given the opportun-
ity of hearing the following units!
Crystal Magnetic
Acos GP 2C MH Harris
Ibbott Model K private unit Me s rs.Davey&lnglis
Records were played on each pickup and some differences were app-
arent. Both microgroove and gbandart discs were used. The frequency
responses of all .unit's were computed beforehand and all details were
"written ohftihe, blackboard! Then by kind arrangement with Mr, F.
Walter we were able’ to observe the wave forms- on his oscilloscope.
We found it quite easy to see clean waifrT f ohms-uptoi. 20 kc .showing it
is available even if we cant hear it. wryroy '‘TJ';


Mr Ibbott then answered many technical queries on the constru-
ction of pickups in general? and at the conclusion of the meeting
a vote of thanks was p?„ssed to him for the efficient and enter-
taining manner in which he conducted the evening.
IMFOPjIATIOH LIGHT
Conducted by the Committee Friday 2nd May 1952
The committee had to announce that tonight that a lecture arr-
anded by Mr 0, Grobbecker on Music and Instruments had to be can-
celled at the last moment, and so notices for the meeting were un-
able to be sent out.
Therefore they arranged an information-night which covered the
following interesting points^
The construction of magnetic recording decks was discussed from
the aspect of buying the parts in kit-forms we see advertised. This
has several advantages such as cost and much information in the op-
eration of the particular unit can be gained by its assembly. It is
generally accepted that, carefully built, it should be the same as
its manufactured counterpart. Make sure that in buying a kit it
will do all you want it to do. Some will not wind forward at a fast
speed - a point that most members consider essential. See that all
necessary heads and an oscillator coil to match is supplied, and
examine the motor/s to determine adequate power. A point here is
raised from the experience of film projectionists that a true stab-
ilizer must not drive anything else than the pape.
Mr. Ron Chapman then gave particulars of damping experiments he
had carried out in a recording studio. Effective formulae were det-
ailed for calculating the amount of absorbent in a studio or room
of a specific size. Remember that in the average room a piano is too
powerful when played loudly for recording purposes. He demonstrated
his work by playing records of a dance band made both before and
after room treatment. He showed that a room must be of sufficient
size to obviate the formation of standing waves which would be half
the wave length of the lowest notes the system is to record. Pianos
therefore require a damped minimum studio of at least 20 feet.
Members then discussed other problems and the meeting concluded
with supper.
FILM MIGHT
Mr, Sid Martin Friday 16th May 1952
Tonight was a film night presented by the president of the Inst-
itute and the following films were showns
•'This is England" "Television"
"Voice of Canada" "Micrometers"
"Gauges for Industry" . "Party Line"
The highlight of the program was the feature "Gauges for Industry"
which dealt with all aspects of standard measurements for all Indus-
trial needs and how these were most accurately measured with the
Imperial Standards kept by the Board of Trade in London, It was
unanimously agreed by the audience that this picture be shown again
at a later date. The meeting wound up with a color cartoon novelty
called "Party Line" after which supper was served.


MAKE FOUR OWH RTCuKh/R
Mr. Ron Chapman Friday, 30 May 1952
Tonight Mr Ron Chapman gave an intriguing lecture on how to build
a disc recording machine to give high quality results with a minimum
of financial outlay, The type of machine in question is the Universal
Recorder, an excellent example of which is owned by the Institute.
It must be pointed out however that it would be virtually imposs-
ible to describe every part in full detail in a resume such as this,
and it is felt that a good study of this machine would be of far more
benefit for intending constructors than reading some hundred or•so
pages on the subject. However Mr Chapman gave ample details of how
to go about such a job, and outlined dozens of short cuts so that
really a superb machine could be made without very much having to be
made on specialised machines. It would not do any’ harm to remind
members that patterns for casting purposes are available from the
Secretary.
At the conclusion of his talk, Mr Chapman answered many technic-
al questions, and a vote of thanks was/moved bo' him for his interest-
ing and enlightening lecture. ,
RECORD CRITICISM; FIGHT.. ; R
Conducted by the Committee Friday, 13th June 1952
Once again the Institute conducted another of its recording
nights with the object of giving constructional advice on recording
problems. Members were asked to bring along a record of an item
chosen by the Committee and these were duly played in turn before
the meeting and a panel of appointed judges including Mr, P e Inglis
and Mr, A. Stevens.
The quality of recordings generally was very high, but a few gen-
eral points can be given here for interest.
The old problem of wow, or speed variation in recording seems to
been entirely overcome and no entries suffered from this fault. Also
a pleasing observation was that members generally have been operating
on their cutting heads and removing obvious peaks and resonances.
The level of hum and mechanical disturbances has been.greatly reduced
as from previous record nights, but the problem of cutting a silent
background track is' still presenting difficulties. I t would possibly
appear that some members were using blunt or worn stylii or that many
were still not yet fitted with hot-cutting facilities.
Generally speaking the night proved full of interest and after
pulling the judges to pieces, the meeting took the form of discuss-
ions on various aspects of recording and. then terminated with supper.
ANNUAL GENERAL M®.
Friday, S7th June 1952
Tonight the annual general meeting was presented and a review
of the past twelve months activities was made., The new Committee for
1952-3 was elected and the names and offices of those elected appears
on page one of this magazine. The accounts for the year were pres-
ented and passed for adoption, and then the question of membership
fees was raised. By a vote it was agreed to raise the yearly subscr-
iption from 21/- to 30/-. This has been.found necessary owing to
increased costs, particularly postage, which amounts to a rather
large sum in a year. However the committee have decided to purchase
a number of volumes for the library, and the first of these are here.


THE CHECKING OF TAPE RECORDERS
Mr. E,Bruton T Friday 11th July 1952
Tonight’s lecture des.lt with making tape recorders operate sat-
isfactorily, This information was supplied to the Institute by the
British Sound Recording Association, Very briefly the order of
checking must be done in the following order so that adjustments
made will not upset previous settings
1, Make sure the unit works - by this is meant that an audible
signal of some description can be reproduced,
2, Set current or signal level as follows; with a 1000 cy note
and the bias disconnected, record a series of signals of each a
few seconds, with a space between each, and gradually increase the
input with each track. Check the level indicator input with each
track. Play back the tracks from start and carefully note the
track when the output does not appreciably increase further. Deter-
the track and note the inwards volume level from it,
3, Feeding in 1000 cy at the constant level determined in (2)
and start the proceedure as above, this time gradually increase
the bias and note which track again will not appreciably on play-
back, This will determine the correct amount of bias■bo be-applied,
at all times,
4, Use this level for maximum recording,
5, Adjust for frequency response. Most units have a rising char-
acteristic and then fall off, A suggested pre-emphasis in the rec-
ording amplifier of 6 db per octave from 1000-10 kc will produce
the most satisfactory results.
6, It is now suggested that the bias be rechecked using music
or a multiple of frequencies.
Play music at 1 volt into the condenser and resistor and then the
high impedence head as shown above. Then into the amplifier and
bass and treble control to output and speaker. Any adjustment to
the taone controls as set up above will be equivalent to recording
and playing the tape so an immediate check can be made--on the head.
7. Judge distortion if any in the amplifier,
8. Set heads for minimum background noise level, (distortion,
9. If possible use instruments to find any intermodulation
10, Check mechanical drives for speed and wow.
A NSW TYPE OF LOUDSPEAKER
Mr. J.K, Ibb 011 Friday 25th July 1952.
On this occasion members and visitors were given a preview of
experiments carried out by Mr, Ibbott in an endevour to produce a
miniature speaker to give full wide range. This has been done by
carrying out a large number of modifications on a standard five
inch speaker. By the addition of an oil stabilized metal diaphram
and improved suspension, this unit when fitted into a special
cabinet of approx. 11 ,, x9"x7 n gave a truly remarkable performance
and should prove most useful where space is a very critical factor.




THE BYER MAGNACORDER . TAPE., UN IT,.
Messrs, Bruford and Goldsmith Friday Bth August 1952
For this meeting the Institute were indebted to Byer Industries
Pty Ltd for an excellent demonstration of their Magnacorder Tape Unit,
Messrs. Bruford and Goldsmith operated the machine for us and gave us
an excellent opportunity of seeing all its capabilities. It is an
excellently constructed machine and is built into two portable cases.
The recording speeds are 15 i! and 7 j 1 ' per second and on the higher
speed it is capable of producing to 15 kc.
We were fortunate to be able to connect a tuner to the recorder
to record a live artist concert from the town hall and at the same
time were able to check the quality of recording with the transmission.
Many technical questions were readily answered by the demonstrators
after which they partly dismantled the machine to show its detailed
construction. Some members were surprised at the large number of com-
ponents which are included in such a unit and at the way in which they
neatly assembled.
After a vote of thanks passed by the president, the meeting conclu-
ded with supper.
AVISITTO CYRIL STEVENS RECORDINGSTUDIOS,
Friday 22 August 1952-
Tonight the members were indebted to Mr Cyril Stevens for arrang-
ing a demonstration and inspection of his studios in Thornbury.
We were shown through the modern and beautifully appointed sound-proof
studio which is certainly capable of accommodating all types of instru-
mentalists and musical groups such as dance bands etc.
The well-fitted control room has two disc recorders, one each for
standard and microgroove recording.with adequate other turntables for
playback to the studio or for special recording effects. Also fitted
and operating in a Byer Magnacorder for taking original items prior
to making master recordings for processing. The studio is also fitted
with 16mm talking picture equipment for motion picture exhibition.
After a full technical explanation we were invited to listen to
samples of items recorded in the studio on tape-some of which have
now been issued for sale. The rest of the evening was taken up with
screening films some of which were made by Mr, Stevens himself.
At the conclusion of the evening, a vote of thanks was passed to
Mr Stevens and also to Alan Stevens for a most interesting and enjoy-
able night's presentation.
APPLYING NEGATIVE FEEDBACK TO COTTERS
Mr, Ron Chapman Friday, sth Sept, 1952
On this occasion, the members were given a lecture by Mr,Chapman
on the effects and the advantages of applying feedbach to magnetic
cutting heads. He then gave all constructional details necessary to
make such a head, and a full description of all processes will be
found in this magazine starting on page 12,
We have to thank Mr. Chapman for the full and comprehensive talk
on this subject, and he advises that he will be only too pleased to
advise any member who should require any further information.




Perforated Recording Tape
Mr, So Martin, Friday 19 September 1952,
Tonight we were given an interesting talk hy our President on a
method of recording sound which we think to be unique amongst members,
and probably not used by many others here in Austi 'aj- i A, jO any extent.
This is known as the ''captive tape" or magnetic film system. The
medium is a 16 mm tape of same dimens ions•as 16 mm talkie film, but
instead of photographic emulsion, the picture area is covered, with
magnetic oxide. The standard method of magnetic tape recording apply
to the tape, but the method of driving the film is of most interest
in this particular application.
The film is moved forward under the heads by means of a sprocket
drive and the sound is scanned on a. rotary stabiliser exactly as in a
proper film reproducing machine. The immediate point here may not be
apparent, but as Mr Martin continued, the reason for the whole scheme
became apparent.
Our president is most actively interested in the recording of
sound for motion picture films and he has actually built a complete
optical recording system for 16 mm film tracks.. However as the manu-
facture of a synchronised talkie is a very complex affair, any error
made by the artist is naturally left on the exposed sound track neg-
ative and final results cannot be ascertained until the'film is devel-
oped, So by using a separate magnetic sound track, this at least can
be played before a print is made onto a positive film. As the magnetic
sound film is the same size as optical film, it is an easy matter to
ensure that picture and sound on two different tracks can be made to
stay in exact synchronisation over any length of film. Be means of a
multi-selsyn drive system to both camera and sound tracks, and marking
the start on each film, these to films can be made to travel at an
identical speed over any given distance whether it be 1 foot or 100
miles sprocket hole for sprocket hole.
There is no other system- yet available where the lineal speed
can be so absolutely and positively controlled, as even on the very
best of tape recorders, it is not certain that some slippage does not
occur. Therefore, for this specialised application of recording, the
advantages of this whole system become obvious. Further, the final
sound negative is exactly the same length as the picture negative to
which it belongs. Further, Mr, Martin explained that he is not limit-
ed to one magnetic sound track on the film, but can place three tracks
parallel. Also, as the unit can be used for general tape recording,
it fulfils quite a number of interesting purposes.
We thank Mr, Martin for his interesting talk on this unusual
method of recording.
BYER ..MAGiMZIM.. TAPE...,, REGORDER
Demonstration By P, Inglis . Friday 17 October, 1952
Tonight, Mr o Inglis was able to show members the first of a new
type of tape deck seen here. This unit is an attachment for fitting
over a turntable from which the power is taken to drive and play mag-
netic tape. The unit itself was the first prize awarded by the Inst-
itute for the annual Recording Contest for last year, and it was kindly
donated by Byer Industries Pty Ltd,




The machine is one of fundamental simplicity, and most members will
have seen one of the units by now, It drives a 7 ,( reel of tape at 7-r-
-per second when operated by the table running at 78 Rpm o The results
are very good over its operating range of 50-8000 cps.
We have to thank Byer Industries for making available at short
notice an amplifier and auxiliary equipment- which made the demonstr-
ation most enjoyable*
OVERSEASACTIVITIES
Mr, Anastasio , Friday, 17 October,
Tonight we had the good fortune to oe told of some of some ox t -
recording activities of a group of enthusiasts in Malta, A new visitor
to the Institute, Mr, Anastasi related many interesting aspects oi a
similar group to ours in that country from which he recently came.
We were particularly in the manner in which their first disc rec-
order was constructed from parts obtained from military disposals and
how they also advanced into the tape recording field.
An interesting fact which made most of us envious was that virtual-
ly all the equipment that anyone needed for recording and radio and
electronics, could at the time mentioned, be obtained at the most red-
iculously low prices. Complete transmitters and multi-band receivers
could be, and indeed were bought for as little as £3-£o each.
The group obtained their blanks from Germany at prices a
of those paid in England, 12 inch blanks of high quality cost them 1/.,
Mr, Anastasi was inundated with questions to which he responded
most capably and interestingly, and concluded by reminding us that
sound recording is a world-wide interest, even if at times.we may tend
to forget that it exists outside the United States and England,
RECORD CRITICISM NIGHT
Conducted by the Committee Friday 31 October, 1952
With the advent of the 1952 recording competition in December, the
committee arranged for another of their most successful and interest-
ing record criticism nights, Members were all asked to record an item
to certain specifications and these were all played to the meeting in
general, A panel of judges then analysed the playing and had the
following general remarkss
Speed generally good and even and no w r ows were detected. Slight
rumbles were detected on some discs and one showed signs of having
a. mechanical rumble from a motor drive. Most discs showed that thou-
ght had been put into the cutting heads, and less troubles were exp-
erienced from this angle than anticipated. Only on rare instances did
any signs of peaks show up. One bad point was that too high a number
of records had very noisy tracks, showing that perhaps the hot stylus
technique was not employed. Two or three discs had a regular 78
swish in them suggesting that attention was needed to the cutter
pivot assemblies.
However, overall the results were quite satisfactory, and gave a
sample of the high quality workmanship to be expected at the sound
recording contest in December,




mcnovmms
Demonstrated By J. K. Ibbott. Friday 14 November, 1952
By kind arrangements with Zephyr Products Pty Ltd, the Institute
v/as able to have a demonstration of the wide range of Microphones
now being made by this company. Mr. Jack Ibbott proved a capable
lecturer and gave many interesting details .about each of the various
units. These included crystal, dynamic and ribbon. Ample technical
literature was provided with the microphones and members were handed
pamphlets giving the characteristics of each. These units were then
given voice tests with the institute’s amplifier, and the results were
most satisfactory. These units may be recommended in their various
catagories for different aspects of recording and amplifying work.
AMPLIFIERS
Mr. Clancy. * Friday 28 November, 1952
Tonight Mr. Clancy delivered another of his most absorbing lect-
ures, this time detailing his experiences in building a push-pull
amplifier to have as little distortion etc, as possible.
The unit in question certainly showed good results on paper, and
it was unfortunate that circumstances prevented our hearing the res-
ults.
The object of design was to place any points of instability bey-
ond the ends of the usable spectrum. Cro tests eventually showed a
minimum of phase shift from 5 cycles to 100 kc due to the following
carefully designed points *
Output transformer must have particularly good iron and this was
stressed as being the first salient point. Mr. Clancy described his
method of interwinding the primary and secondary coils. The amplifier
line-up was 6J7 - 6J7 - PP 6Y6 with negative feedback over the whole
stage from the output transformer secondary. Directly coupled from
the amplifier to the driver, and then r-c coupled to the output.
The by-pass on the screen of the first 6J7 was stated to be .02 mfd
and the by-pass had to have an additional r-c network with the object
or reducing any oscillation at the extreme top-end.
Mr. Clancy then answered many points on this and associated equip-
ment and at the conclusion of his talk a vote of thanks was passed to
him for his splendid lecture.
METERS
An interesting point about meters has been brought to our notice
and is worth passing on o
When it is necessary to calibrate an unmarked meter, or to re-
calibrate an already marked meter, why not carefully remove the dial
and turn it upside down and use the back? This is suggested mainly
in the event that the meter may have to sold at a future date, or
auctioned at an Institute Auction Sale, etc, and an unmarked meter will
certainly bring a better price than one presented with hand-drawn
symbols on it.
SOBERING
livhen soldering small component parts like resistors and conden-
sers, etc, use a pair of long nose pliers to hold the wire ends and
this will prevent too much heat damaging the component.




STAGES IN PROCESSING RECORDINGS FOR kASS PRODUCTION
The ordinary standard pressed disc found in everyday use is
composed largely of shellac, lampblack, and limestone. In its manuf-
acture, however, pure gold, wax, glass, copper nickel and sometimes
chromium are used. This article refers to originals made on wax.
Liquid wax is poured on to a glass disc to 28 mil thick and then
hardened. This material is then recorded upon. When completed,
this wax is jjut into a vacuum chamber to be spluttered with an ext-
remely thin coat of 24 carat gol dust. This is done by allowing the
wax disc to rest on a cathode plate of gold sheet. The other side of
the wax disc is attached to an anode and the whole sandwich is given
a charge of 1800 volts. The operation transfers the gold sheet to the
wax surface.
Spinning the disc in a plating bath adds a copper coating of 85 mil.
The copper plated gold sheet now becomes No 1 master when separated
from the wax, and has ridges instead of grooves. No 1 mould made
from No 1 master is given a nickel bath to harden its surface. A
similar coat of copper completes the mould. Master and mould are
still attached. Using a separating tool, the master is detached from
the mould. This mould is an exact duplicate of the original recording.
Subsequent plating and separating operation and No 2 master is made
from No 1 mould, and the final mould No 2 from master No 2.
The stamper which presses the final product is made from No 2 mould.
The mould has an imperfect hole, and an expert solders a plug to the
nickel faced copper mould as a first step towards putting a new hole
in the exact centre of the mould. This is spun on a centering machine
and a hole punched when the adjustment is perfect.
The mould is given the once over by an expert, and any defect seen
is marked and subsequently removed. A retouching expert using a tool
holding a sharp pointed needle, the craftsman removes nicks and bumps.
It may be mentioned that it took 6 months in restoring a Caruso mast-
er on which a worker had dropped a hammer. This completes the oper-
ations to the point of mass production.
The next procedure governs the mixing and rolling the materials
into a biscuit, and cutting it into 6 ■' squares by knife edges on a
roller. Blowers cool and dry the squares until they are in a brittle
condition.
The squares are steam heated until pliant prior to entering the
press. Labels are attached to upper and lower surfaces of the stam-
ping press, and an automatic action completes the pressing. Steam
at 310 degrees Fah. heats the stampers and the pressure if 1800 lbs
per square inch. The record is complete on emerging from the press,
and its rough edges are removed' by mounting and spinning it on a
shaft, using pressure with emery cloth.
REk IN DE R
Club meetings are held each alternate Friday nights and all members
are cordially invited to bring friends and visitors. The committee
meets on the first Wednesday in each month and all members are invited.




At 78 RPM
Velocity om/sec
Width cm.
At 33 RPM
vel, cm./sec
width c,ra
4.1
1
1.75
2
8.2
2
3.5
4
12.25
3
7,0
6
16.3
4
10.5
8
20.4
5
14,0
10
24.5
6
17.5
12
28.75
etc.
8
20,0 etc.
14
It is generally known that, when light from a small source falls on
a disc record which is laterally modulated with a single frequency,
the width of the hand of light reflected by the groove wall bears a
direct relationship to the modulation.
To make such measurement, the disc is illuminated by a source
point of light at about 10 feet or more from the disc - a clear
globe is best. The angle is to be about 10 so that the light rays
will strike the groove walls but not the bottom of the groove.
The recorded nattern is viewed from position "D" at a distance of at
least 15 feet. The exact angle to give the clearest image is best
found by trial and will be between 80 and 90 . It is important to
read the reflected band on the side of the disc nearest the light.
(For illustration see picture section - Fig l)
The amplitute of modulation in inches can be found from the formula
where 3 is total width of reflected images in inches
A = 22 U equals the revolutions per . second
23? (1) }? equals in cycles per second.
The Peak velocity in inches per second is Yp = n3u. 0, - 3^l4d-t>(.pij
\ *•)
The Root-Mean-Square (RMS) Velocity in Inches/Second
~ ABU (2>)
. Vrms =
72
Per Q-O example an image of l u is cut on a disc, find (a) amplitued,
"(b) peak velocity, (c) RMS velocity, Preq, is 1000 cycles, Speed 79
fr;;m (1) A - }. = 0- 00065*'
2000
from (2) Vp n 3,14 xl* x 1,3 = 4,08 ’* or 10,0 cm/sec
from (3) Vrms = 3.14x1x1,3 _ 2.91 11 or 7.3 cm/sec
2
As the NAB Standard is given as 7 cm/sec this would correspond to a
Meyer image of 1.72 cm, further as the maximum program peaks would
rise to approx 21 cm/sec this would correspond to an image width of
approx 5 cm at 78 rpm.
The large cutter displacement to record peaks up to the
above values on music peaks show still jurther the necessity of a
recording system that will allow' such large amplitudes to be rec-
orded with low values of distortion and the use of a feedback cutter
is one method of enabling large signals to be faithfully recorded.
Relative values of recorded velocity for a given pattern widths




llO\y TO MAICi A FEED-BACK CUTTER HEAD by Ron Chapman
The cutting head described here is the type as now -used by the EEC
and it is within the capabilities of members to manufacture such a
unit without the use of other than hand tools, and the results as
already proved by some members is that it is well worth following
the details set out here.
This head is a moving iron type and has a specially proportion-
ed armature which is centered by means of "two tortion bars, one front
and one rear. Damping is applied by means of oil or grease in the air
gaps. It is designed to give a level recording characteristic with
standard dural-shank sapphire stylii.
Basic Design. The basic parts of the cutter include two pole-
pieces cut from -1" square bright mild steel bar, an armature made
from 3/32" mild steel strip and two supporting brackets of 1/16"
brass strip. These are fastened together with two 4BA brass bolts
Other parts include a bass plate of 1/16" brass, a magnet (refer to
Mr, Chapman) and a speach coil.
The Poles, These are made from 4-" square bright steel bar, (Mild)
One 5/32" hole is drilled near one end as per Pig 3 for the coil slot
and another 5/32" near the other for fixing. The position of the
fixing hole will have to be varied if a larger magnet is used and it
goes through the other side of the bar if a horizontal cutter is
being made. Pig 4, The coil slot hole is cut away on one side by
a hacksaw and finished by filing, and a bevel is put on the top edge
as shown, Finally the pole face against the armature must be made
dead flat and perpendicular to the sides. Finally remove all sharp
edges especially around the coil slot.
The Armature, The armature is made from a strip of soft mild
steel wide by 3/32" (14 SWG)., The ends are filed away as fig 9
to leave two tortion bars of regular cross section, which provide
both the stiffness and the pivots on which the armature twists and
vibrates. The thickness determines the main resonant frequency of
the head and will be found to be about 4000 cycles. This may seem
rather low but unfortunately, as the res, freq, is increased, the
the cutter sensitivity decreases rapidly. However with the addition
of the oil damping instead of rubber, the response may be leveled
out fairly flat to 10 kc or higher. To hold the stylus, a blind
hole is drilled almost through the armature using 1/16" or No 53
drill. , At right angles to this hole a hole
is drilled with a No 53 drill for the clamping screw and is tapped
writh a 10 BA for the locking screw. Finally, all sharp edges should
be very slightly rounded to avoid damage to the coil.
Supports, The armature supports are made from 1/16" brass strip
or sheet, 4-" wide, and are bent as shown in the diagram; the pole-
pieces should be assembled with the armature and two 0,006" spacers
so that the fixing holes of the supports may be drilled accurately
to coincide w r ith the fixing holes in the pole-pieces, A note should
be taken of the dimension for drilling the base-plate. The rect-
angular holes for the ends of the tortion bars are made from a fine
square Swiss file starting from 2 3/64" drill holesi alternately a
fretsaw may be used. At this point it is suggested the ends of the
tortion bar be dipped in soldering flux and tinned.
The main base plates are made up from 1/16" brass as in fig 10
and 12.




nominal
Impedence
Basic
Turns
Main
Coil
j Approx
j DC res.
■Test
,volts
Test
i current
Feedback
C o j 1
3
15
50
600
45
100
180
630
32SWG
38
40
44
! 0,7 ohm
I 5 e 0
i 15,0
i 125,
**» r z p
-L « O 0
i _
• J o KJ
i 5 e 5
! 19,0
1 ,45 A
; o 2 A
110mA
40 SWG
44
46
48
X JL
The coil is wound on the former shown in fig 13« It is held in a
hand drill clamped in a vice when winding the coil. The slots In the
former allow cotton thread to he tied around the coil in four places
before removal. After removal from the former, the coil is hound with
strip of thin Empire cloth about -J- 1 ' wide. Alternatively, use silk,
linen, cotton or thin adhesive tape. When binding take care to prevent
bulges at the corners and leave the two ends emerging suitably between
the layers of binding. The reel-angular coil is now formed by bending
the short sides over the shank of an jr drill so that when the coil is
in position, the short sides clear the tortion bars.
The coil is wound on a basis of 100 turns of 56 SWG- enamelled wire
for a nominal impedence of lo ohms at 1000 c/s. As the coil is almost a
tance ’ the im P edence bears no relation to the D.C resistance,
which should not exceed one-third of the nominal impedence, in order to
get the correct turn-over at 250 c/s. For this, a special AC test will
have to be performed to check the impedence after assembly.
. p P r feed-back winding, a second coil may be wound on together
wi the main v/inding, both wires at once. As this winding only has to
suppiy a voltage, it can be a much thinner gauge, and it should be
possible to accommodate both windings in the coil slots of the sizes
given. feedback impedances, the number of turns and the
gauge of wire is varied as followss
lor assembly, all the basic cutter parts, pole pieces, armature and
armature supports, but not the coll are put together using the two 484
nuts and bolts. The bolts are not done up tightly at first, so that
o ims, x q x 0,006 brass or 0,006 cine film may be inserted in the
gaps each side of the armature. The pole pieces are now pressed tog-
ether to press the shims and armature closely and the bolts are done
up tignt. The top line of the pole pieces, where the magnet will be
fitted is now checkedwith a straight edge. The armature is checked
I lts c ° r J ect position, symmetrical front and back to the pole pieces
a £ d dOWn !° the . coil slots. If all seems satisfactory, the front
t rtion bar may be soldered in position, and the shims carefully removed.
e A fnr 6 iin?f*n^ r - n ? W he f d U P to the light so the gaps may be inspect-
ai?nfv 1 length ’ arid for ec l ual width.. The import-
f nis hing otf the pole faces square and true will now be apprec-
iated. if unsatisfactory, the pole pieces must be marked, taken to
pieces and adjusted by careful filing, and rechecked by re-assembly.
Wnen satisfactory, the head may be reassembled with coil and base plate
m position. The shims will again be used, and the rear tortion bar
soldered in position,
A i" I°.BA round head or cheese head Steel bolt is used to clamp
v/?om s US i n th ! armature. The head of this screw is turned down to
*■/, ,y a * Insert a stylus and take all measurements for a cover and
make the mounting and fixing holes.
(Continued on next page)




Testing the Impedence, Tne.se tests may oe periorme . sou .wi .nouu
the magnet, A 1000 c/s is played through a suitable a plvilier to which
a 15 ohm cutter is connected. Adjust for 3 volts AC across the cutter,
Uote gain control setting and turn off. The current ,t tiro ugh the cutter
now has to be measured with an AYO on the 1 amp AC range, connected in
series with the cutter, or by means of a 2" 0,5 amp thermal meter
similarly connected. When the gain is turned up through to the marked
position giving 3 volts, the current will be. .2 amp if the impedence is
15 ohms. If not, the application of Ohm’s law will give the impedence.
If it is within 2 or 3 ohms of 15, no alteration is needed; other-
wise, a new coil should be wound of more or less turns for a higher or
lower impedence, the ratio of variation of turns being as the square-
root of the new/old impedence ratio, e,g. if impedence was 20 ohms
instead of 15, the correct turns =
The impedence will vary only with
100 15/20 r 87 turns. different grades of steel, but
will be affected by changes in air-
gap; so check air-gaps before rewinding coil. The same impedence
measuring procedure applies to coils of other impedences, but the
voltages and currents will have to be altered to suit as given in the
tables on page 12.
Details of the magnets available locally will not be noted here in
this article, but any member requiring them should see Mr. Chapman.
Testing. Final tests involve (l) checking the armature resonant
frequency, (2) sensitivity (3) application of damping and frequency tests,
(l) After the magnet has been placed in position on the head, but
before the damping is applied, the armature resonance should be checked
by applying a tone of varying frequencies to the cutter. A dural cut-
ting stylus must be in position. The resonance will be clearly audible
and should lie between 3500 and 4500 c/s for the best overall results.
If the resonance is substancially above 4500 it is desirable to take
the head to pieces and file the tortion bars down slightly. As the
stiffness is proportional to the 4th power of the thickness, a very
small amount of metalneed be removed. However it may be preferred to
leave the resonance and test the head for sensitivity before alterat-
ion; if the sensitivity is adequate, a flatter response above 10,000
c/s may be obtainable,
(2) Sensitivity tests are made by recording 1000 c/s and finding
the power required to make a recording which will play back at the
same level as a standard shellac test record. Power = Voltage x
Current, or, sincq the impedence of the head at 1000 c/s is known,
Power = (Voltage)^/lmpedence, As a guide to the apparent power req-
uirements to be expected, the test voltages and currents given in the
previous table should result in a recording of at least as high a
level as the 1000 c/s tone on HMV DB 4035 or ED 300. These tests
are measured at 1000 c/s, since at this frequency the effects of (a)
armature resonance and (b) bass roll-off are negligible. The most
likely causes of low sensitivity are (a) poor magnet, (b) too large
air gaps. The gaps may be reduced to .005" if desired.
(3) Application of damping is made by dropping a little very
thin oil into each of the air gaps. This kept in plade by means
of capillary action, a strip of tissue paper -g-' 1 wide being threaded up
through one gap, over the top of the armature and down the other side.
Two drops of thin oil are now applied, one to the top, and one to the
bottom of the armature. (Continued on the next page)




Page 15
To conclude the description of this cutter, the correct type of oil
must be used. If the oil is too thin, the resonance will show up on a
Buchmann-Meyer pattern, and if the oil is too thick, the pattern will
decrease after about 3000 c/s. Once the correct oil is found, a small-
quantity should be put aside for this purpose. It will require renew-
al about every 8 weeks or so due to seepage and evaporation.
The Committee trust that the foregoing particulars will be of cons-
iderable interest to Members, and would be pleased to hear from any
Member who constructs this cutting head, Mr, Ron Chapman will be
pleased to give any further information needed, and will advise on the
methods of connecting the feedback coil to the amplifier.
STUPIP. STETOE SCOPE FOR DETECTING SOUND LEAKS
Station KLTI in Texas, U.S.A reports that to detect sounds leaking
iorm one studio to another, an Altec "salt-shaker" microphone was
connected to a remote amplifier. This was set up in one studio while
an audio oscillator and loudspeaker was placed in an adjoining studio.
The oscillator was adjusted to various frequencies from 5000 to 200
cps and each time the microphone was moved back and forth across the
walls, doors, and windows.
This revealed that low frequency tones were vibrating the door
panels, and high freqency tones passed through the cracks in the door-
way and through the air conditioning ducts, Sound passing through the
atter was reduced by lining the ducts with more sound deadening mat-
erial. It was noticed that moving the microphone around the edge of
the door caused the VU meter to rise and fall every few inches. It
was found that these leakage point were in line with the tacks used to
asten the gasket material to the door frame. The material, which was
a round sponge rubber with a cloth covering fastened to the frame, was
removed as a result of this examination. In its place, a strip of flat
sponge rubber was glued to the door frame covered with a small strip
of felt. The felt was added to keep the rubber from sticking to the
door. This gave a lower, more uniform transmission of sound. Standing
sound waves may be present in the room under test and so a piece of
sound deadening material should be wrapped around the microphone.
NEW PM STIC MAY RIVAL PAPER FOR CAPACITORS.
Prom London comes information that many new and interesting sub-
stances are being produced by the plastics industry, among them being
polythene terephthalate, which is being manufactured under the trade
name of Mylar''. The good electrical and physical properties of this
compound make it most useful for pertain applications where dielectric
properties are important, and experiments with condensers are proving
highly satisfactory. y s
It has been also found that this polymer is particularly adapted
for metallising techniques, although full details are not yet avail-
able.




PRE -RE CORDED IC.. TAPE ■
The possibility of pre-recorded tape eventually replacing the disc
in broadcasting, industrial, educational, and more particularly, home
entertainment applications has been a subject for wide discussion
among professionals and audio enthusiasts for the past two or three
years in the United States e The proponents, of the disc have contin-
ued their research and development during the past few years, They
show no signs of slowing down their efforts to make discs better and
better, In its present stage of development, the long playing Micro-
groove disc represents a formidable obstacle to the rapid development
of a broad market for pre-recorded tape* It is an accepted fact that
as a basic medium for master recording, magnetic tape is in a class
by itself. The rapid growth of these discs would never have been
possible without tape.
The question then arisess Why not bypass the expensive and com-
plex disc process entirely and make direct tape duplicate recordings
available on a mass production basis? This is an important question
but the steps towards its answer are not easy.
Perhaps one of the basic difficulties in advancing pre-recorded
magnetic tape is the sale price, necessitated primarily by the
cost of magnetic tape stock relative to the cost of materials used in
a record pressing. However, economics would show that when the demand
has been created or when it comes about naturally and mass production
can be reached, the costs of magnetic stock in large quantities would
fall, eventually reducing the retail price of pre-recorded tapes.
Another factor which has to be overcome by the proponents of tape
is the issue of the relative difficulty in handling magnetic tape. It
is claimed by some that the simplest tape machine is a more difficult
mechanism to operate than a three speed automatic record changer.
Perhaps the opinions frequently vary because of confusions in the
points which are sometimes considered to add weight to the anti-tape
attitudes. It really amounts to the fact that the respective equip-
ments must be examined in the correct light and that one must form
his own conclusions about any difficulties of handling.
Going on to the technical side of the matter, we find that in USA
there are at least three firms making it their business to manufacture
and sell tape pre-recorded music to the public. Standard -V' tape is
used as a medium and each item/s are available on 7,5 H single^track,
7,5'' double track or 0,75'' double track. Unfortunately here in Aus-
tralia we are not yet able to hear samples of music sold in this way,
but we are told by the Radio & Television News Magazine that such
tapes played on the Ampex Tape Recorder, the results varied from
excellent to mediocre
How any Members of the Institute who have had experience with
tape recorders and long-playing .records can imagine the possibilities
of issuing music in this manner. However, the editor of this article
wishes only to state personally in his opinion the whole method is
only satisfactory for really long items and not for a collection of
short items joined together in haphazard manner. One point revealed
is that the tapes are not marked in minutes or feet of playing time
and it would therefore be better to leave short items to the 7” 45er.




Continuing on the subject of pre-recorded tapes for domestic
and other uses, we think Members will be interested in some of the
items available from the first release,
AV 1001 (Concert Hall)
Faust Ballet Excerpts (Gounod)
nutcracker Suite Excerpts (Tchaikowsky)
AV 101 (Musical Varieties)
Wait and See - I Didn’t Know What Time It Was - You are Too Beau-
tiful - Its a Big, Wide Wonderful World - Linda Mujer - Crinoline
Days - Laura - I Love you so much it hurts me - Sleepy Lagoort-
Jungle Lamento
AV 304 (Moments in Music)
The Gondoliers, patience, and lolanthe, (Gilbert & Sullivan)
AV 303 (Moments in Music)
Gome to me - Every day - Song of India - I’ll remember April -
More than you know - Intermezzo from L’Arlesienne (Bizet)-Minuet
in G - Minute Waltz (Chopin)- Gopak(Moussorgsky)
AV 1004 (Concert Hall)
1, Overtures to Die Fledermaus, Gypsy Baron and Waldmeister,
2. Annen Polka - Hew Wein - Acceleration Waltz - Intermezzo -
Tik Tak Polka (Strauss) Austrian Symphony Orchestra
AV 104 (Musical Varieties)
I’m in the mood for love - Music maestro please - El carinoso -
You’re so understanding-A fellow needs a girl-Horwegian Dance-
Anniver&ary Song- I’M glad I waited for you- Exactly like you-
Gaminito- El rancho grande - Girl of my dreams o
AV 1017 (Concert Hall)
1, Sonata E Major Op 109, Sonata A Flat Major Op 110 (Beethoven)
Jorg Demus at the Piano
2 0 Sonata A Flat Major Continued o Fantasy Impromptu, Polonaise
E Flat, Scherzo G Sharp Minor (Chopin) Alexander Jenner, Piano o
AV 1018 (Concert Hall)
Legend of the Fair Melusine (Mendelssohn), Symphony Ho 1 in G
Minor Op 68 (Brahms), Zur Hamensfeier Op 115 (Beethoven)
Played by the Austrian State Symphony,
AV 1019 (Concert Hall)
Pictures at an Exhibition (Moussorgsky) Caucasian Sketches (Ipol-
itov-Ivanov),Romanze Andaluza (Sarasate)
Austrian State Symphony, Sari Biro and Heinrich Berg, Pianists
and Ivry Gitlis, violinist,
AV 1020 (Concert Hall) (Mozart)
Eine Kleine Hachtmusik - Salszburg Mozarteum Orchestra
Piano Concerto Ho 24 in G minor K 491 Austrian State Symphony cond,
by Wilhelm Loibner and pianist Sari Biro
King Thomas Overture
The above details represent a few of the items released on
magnetic tape by the AV (Audio Video) Tape Libraries of 730 Fifth
Avenue, New York, Since printing the above details we have found
(Continued next page)




all programs are recorded on Scotch Fo 111 palstic tape on 7" reels.
They are duplicated from master tapes made on Ampex Recorders,
Tape Recording Industries of Lancing, Michigan report they are now
perfecting their process for the duplication of* music on multiple tape
machines. The masters are recorded in the studios of Potte Parisien
in the Champs Elysees, Paris, and the Magellan Studio which is also
used by Pathe Marconi for the recording of well known discs in Prance,
Various artistic combinationa are used to cater for all types of
musical tastes.
The recording medium consists of special equipment built for this
purpose with a frequency response of plus and minus 1 db from 30 to
12,000 cps. Doth standard speeds of 7,5 H and 15" ps. Magnetic Tape
Libraries (AV) master tapes are recorded with a single microphone,
being a '‘Neumann Electrostatic" type. In Prance they duplicate 20
copies together at high speed onto Pyral as well as Scotch Tapes,
Another firm - Goncertone - issued by Berlant Associates of 4917
West Jefferson Boulevard, Los Angeles, California said;
‘'We sent a questionnaire to a selected group of several hundreds
of thier customers comprising a representative cross-section of prof-
essional, semi-professional and amateur users. Of the 65/ who replied,
seven-eighths were interested in pre-recorded tapes. Most of those
w-ho had no interest were recording studios and other professionals
who were in the business of tape recording themselves,
•uve found there was no agreement about the desired tape speed,
reel size, or between single or dual track recording. The only point
of agreement was for plastic base rather than paper base tape.
Because of the large segments who wanted 15" and/or 7f" ps,, ICf" and/
or 7 " reels, single and dual tracks (all in various combinations )• we
have decided that our Goncertone Tape be issued in the above variety
of forms^ as required. Variety is also made easier due to the fact that
electronic dubbing can only be done in relatively small batches, and
recording characteristics will be determined to some extent by the
music and its length,"
MAKING PIVOTS POR GUTTING KRAUS
Mro Jack Walsh has recently given us some interesting details
about his method of making pivots for mounting cutting heads. Most
difficulties arising from making mounts is that to get complete
freedomof movement the points have to be reasonably loose o This
often gives rise to chatter.
This simple method of making the most satisfactory pivot and
points is as follows. Obtain two of the pivot screws that hold the
balance wheel in an old alarm clock. Drill holes in the head mount-
ing block of the correct size and solder these pivot blocks in pos-
ition with the cups out. Any excess solder can easily be drilled out
with a hand drill without damaging the hardened inserts, pivot points
can be easily made out of silver steel and ground to shape,, and
threaded for locknuts. Temper to a light straw color and assemble.




SOME NEW USES FOR MAGIETIC...TAPE
Whether it's eavesdropping on the innards of a new car or rec-.
iting stories to children, the tape recorder is one of the-most vers-
atile tools in the communications kit.
Today recorders are used in electronic labs, radio and televis-
ion studios and industrial plants as well as in innumerable homes
and offices. In the auto industry, they are being used to track down
and analyse unwanted noises in new cars. One manufacturer redesign-
ed a noisy transmission in three weeks with the aid of the recorder’s
magnetic memory. The old cupped-ear method would have taken an estim
ated three months.
In America, the recorder is rated as a first class educational
aid. The University of Minnesota not long ago taped an interview
with a dairy cattle authority for use in classroom work. The studio
.was a cow barn, where an expert stood face to face -with his subjects
and the lowing of the herd provided an authentic background for the
lecture.
Tape recorders are not limited to picking up sound. They can
record any electrical impulse, and many experts are convinced that
non-sonic applications will grab the spotlight in the future. This
is already seen in the elaborate equipment build by research groups
in America for the electronic solving of most complex algebraic
equations. The tape is used here in the capacity of a "memory" and
will retain coded information for further computation in later parts
of the problem. The Monsanto Chemical Corporation recently adapted
an electronic device containing hundreds of valves and thousands of
other associated parts weighing in all 50 tons, to see whether they
could speed up the methods used in balancing their accounts at the
end of the month. They took it a step further and produced a whole
balance sheet with all information in a fraction of the time normally
used and a great deal more accurately. - Beware I Office workers.-Ed,
In sending a new rocket aloft on a test flight, engineers must
keep tabs on fifty or so instruments that register speed, altitude,
acceleration, temperature and dozens of other factors. It’s done by
combining readings from all the instruments in one radio wave, and
transmitting them back to the ground. There the readings are electr-
onically unscrambled and fed into a 50-channel tape recorder-fifty
tracks on a single tape. The tape can activate 50 duplicate instru-
ments in the laboratory, where engineers can watch the readings as
effectively as if they were riding in the rocket at thousands of
miles an hour.
The latest project is that television programs may soon be tape
recorded. Both picture and sound in the form of electrical impulses
will be transcribed magnetically and played at will. Since tape requ-
ires no processing, it would be possible to telecast remote news
events far faster than if photographic film were used.
Altogether, it would appear that the possibilities of tape are
almost unlimited, and that recording sound is one of the minor jobs
that it will eventually be required to do.




CH3MISTRY IN TELEVISION
The information in this article was received from America hy
the Institute in February 1953 and is part of a report made on the
huge new industry of manufacturing materials for the screens of
television receiver tuhes o
Picture tube phosphors, heart of the television tube screen
has jumped to a near 3 million dollar industry,, They are relative-
ly simple materials but exacting standards for purity puts them into
the super-fine chemical class, and bigger and bigger screens are
responsible for the rising demand.
The glow on a TV tube is caused by a miniscule - 5-10 grams of
luminescent phodphors, activated by an electron beam. A boom touched
off with war-time Radar, the demand for these salts has rocketed in
the past seven years. Monthly requirements are between 15-20,000
lbs,, at roughly $l5 per pound.
Chiefly in demand for home receivers are a pair of simple
salts, zinc sulphide and zinc-cadmium sulphide. There is also a call
for certaip zinc beryllium silicates for projection type tubes as
used in theatres. And likely due for future needs are the phosphors
for color picture screens. These include zinc phosphate, calcium
magnesium silicates and others.
Though these phosphors sound simple and basic, their production
is far from easy. Purity must be extraordinary. Common zinc sulphide
in the phosphorescent grades lists for c. $2.50 per pound, but the
high grade blends used for TV tubes costs five times that. The reas-
on for the high price and the limited number of suppliers is the det-
ail in producing the extra-pure sulphides. Though the process for
zinc sulphide might be outlined as formation of the sulphide with
hydrogen sulphide from a solution of the oxide in sulphuric acid, it
is fur more complex than that description indicates. Precautions for
Pun y» und the care needed in making the 1/30 micron crystals (most
average 10 microns _diameter) deduces the number of potential makers.
In audit ion, the final firing process for the phosphors is delicate,
and temperatures must be kept within a few degrees of a set figure.
. The fi- r st step in a difficult manufacturing process is the
cleaning of the glass tubes. Hydrofluoric acid or ammonium bifluoride
give, a surphace on which the phosphors can settle. Then the tube is
placed view side down on a rack or belt, and a cushioning solution of
barium acetate, aoout 3 inches deep, is poured into the tube. A sus-
pension of phosphors, in distilled or de-ionized water is eased in.
One part of copper in 20 million of water can alter the color of the
fight which the phosphor emits. The solution includes the zinc sul-
phide, which phosphorises blue, and the zinc cadmium sulphide which
produces a yellow color. Both salts are activated by O.OM silver
ordinarily in the form of silver nitrate. The silver is introduced
during the phosphor preparation.
Potassium^ silicate, carefully purified, is added with the susp-
ension of sulphides. It appears to bind the crystals to the tube
face, and prevents the crystals from sliding to the centre curve.




Settling the 4-6 mg 0 /sq 0 cm o of this coating is a tricky oper-
ation The conical portion of the tube shank and the curved face
make it necessary to cool the suspension carefully a few degrees be-
low' room temperature in order to set up'the thermal currents which
aid in creating an even coating 0 It takes about 15-40 minutes for
the major part of the phosphors to come down, after which the super-
natant liquid is cautiously poured* or in large tubes, siphoned off.
A bake at approx, 400 C completes the screen* unless, as is becoming
more frequent, the tube is aluminized. This process, designed to
brighten the viewed picture, consists of laying down a smooth coat
of nitrocellulose on the screen, and depositing a mirror-like layer
of aluminium on it. General Electric and Philco are among the lead-
ers in aluminized-tube production.
Advent of color television will multiply the problems of screen
making. The CBS could probably make use of a tube which has been
coated in much the same as the above manner, with a red phosphor -
such as zinc-activated zinc phosphate - added. But the color tube
now under principal development is the RCA type. This has a screen
consisting of minute dots (675000 in a 17" tube) of different phosp-
hors for red, blue, and green. These dots are usually arranged so
that their centers w r ould form the apices of an equilateral triangle.
They would usually use a slightly lesser amount of phosphors than
evenly coated w r hite TV tubes.
Silver-activated zinc sulphide might be the blue, copper-act-
ivated zinc sulphide the green, and zinc-activated the red. Others
possible phosphors are t blue- zinc silicate, or calcium magnesium
silicates, both titaniun-activated.s-green, Manganese-activated zinc
silicate,;-red, cadmium borate or zinc beryllium silicate, both
manganese-activated,
Red is a problem now-the zinc phosphate is neither quite red
nor quite bright enough. But the major difficulty introduced by
color tubes will be the mechanics of putting down the triple dots.
Silk screening, lithographing and a variety of processes are under
tests. Whatever will be chosen, it will likely result, in a tube far
more expensive than present black and white tubes.
In addition to screen chemicals, most TV tubes require -'getter"
metals to increase the vacuum, as well as metals for the anode and
electron'gun. In addition most tubes receive a coating of graphite,
usually painted by hand on the walls to lead off stray electrons.
An asset of all-glass tubes; By coating the outside of the cone
with graphite, a condenser is thus made that simplifies and lowers
the cost of the set. Although there have been major^difficulties in
developing phosphor screens, their cost is not a major factor now.
Raw materials necessary have dropped to one-sixth since^ 1940. _
Taken altogether, the chemist has had a lot to do with bringing
TV to the masses. And w r ith color TV in the offing, his role is not
likely to diminish.




STANDARDS ON SOUND RECORDING NOR THE INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE ON
PROGRAMIiES, Recommendation No 8]
of the Vlth Plenary Assembly G.C.T.Ri Geneva,
The C.G.I.R considering (a) that preferred methods of sound recording
should be adopted to facilitate the international exchange of programs
between broadcasting organizations £ (b) that technical standards refer
ing to the above should be established? - - recommends
1, that the international exchange of sound recorded programs shall be
by means of lateral cut discs or single track magnetic tape ;
2, that lateral cut discs shall he in accordance with the following
standards
2.1 Speed 78 r,p,m plus or minus 0.7;
33 1/3 •' " " Go 5/
2.2 Direction - Clockwise, 2,3 Start from Outside to inside
2.4 Type of disc; lacquer coated or processed,
2.5 Nominal maximum diameter;
for 33 1/3 -16" for 78 - 12"
2.6 Maximum number of grooves per unit length; 123 per" for both,
2.7 Centre hole diameter ; 0.265" minus nil, plus 0,002"
2.8 Minimum recorded diameter,
for 78 rpm 3.74" for 33rpm 7,5"
2.9 Plain grooves at start; minimum 2, max 4, Same at finish,
2.10 Groove profile; Max bottom radius; o,ools"and a smaller
radius is preferable, Width of groove- not less than 0,004"
and.’included aVigle 80 to 90 degrees,
2.11 Label content; (1) Broadcasting Organization (2) Program
Title (3) Side number (4) Total number of sides (5) Refer-
ence number (6) Total playing Time (7) Sneed rpm.
3 that single track magnetic tape shall be in accordance with the
following standards;
3,1. primary Speed, 30" per second p/m 0,5/,
15" per second p/m 0,5/,
Secondary Speed, 7,5" per sec p/m 0,5/,
3,2 Direction of Winding; Although there is no recommendation
as to the manner in which the tape is placed on the hub, it
is neverthe less recommended that manufacturers of tape mexk
along the entire length of the back of a coated tape and of
one side of homogeneous tape, A blank strip should be plac-
ed at the beginning of the tape giving at least the number
of the spool and the reference number of the program on the
recorded side. The tape should be wound in such a way that
it may be unwound in an anticlockwise direction during the
playing,
3.3 Width of Tape 0.250" ’ plus 0 minus 0,006"
3.4 Permissible stress exerted by the machine on the tape-2,2 lb,
3.5 Spool hubs, (Members interested, please see Mr, Bruton
3.6 Program identification- As equivalent for disc.
3.7 Level and frequency characteristics - to be arranged.


DRAFT RSCOMSKDATIOIm OR C,C,I.R STUDY GROUT- X, GEFEVA, 1952
The G.C.IoRo considered
(a) that in order to facilitate the international exchange of prog-
rams between broadcasting organizations, the G.C.I.R. Vlth Plenary
Assembly, Geneva 1951, in recommendation 81 defined the preferred
methods of sound recording and certain relevant technical standards
but did not include those relating to recording characteristics?
(b) that the need for the standardisation of these of these charact-
eristics is now even greater.
Recommends:
(a) that the characteristic for recording on discs should be defined
as a curve of recorded velocity v, frequency. This curve shall be the
result of the superposition of two curves, one rising with frequency
in conformity with the admittance of a scries combination of a capac-
ity and a resistance having a time constant of 450 microseconds, the
other rising with frequency in conformity with the admittance of a
parallel combination of a capacitance and a resistance having a time
constant of 50 microseconds. Plottings from the combined curve are
detailed further on in this article. The recorded velocity is def-
ined by the Buchmapn-Meyer light pattern method.
Taking the value at 1 k/cs as zero, the tolerances at other frequen-
cies should be p/m 2 db. Any variation, for example that which res-
ults from the application of radius compensation, should be within
the stated tolerance.
(b) that for recording on magnetic tape at speeds of 30 and 15 !l a
standard replay chain should be defined as that of an ideal reproduc-
ing head, the EMP of which is amplified in an amplifier with a resp-
onse curve that results from the superposition of a curve that falls
with increase with frequency at the rate of 6 db per octave and a
curve that rises with increase of frequency in conformity with the
admittance of a parallel combination of a capacitance and a resist-
ance with a time constant of 35 microseconds. Taking the value at
1 k/cs as zero, the tolenance should be within p/m 2 db.
(p/m means plus or minus)
The Institute has to thank the British Sound Recording Assoc-
iation for allowing us to republish the information on these two
pages from their own journal, Sound Recording and Reproduction,
-Editor.
Members are now invited to draw up frequency responses from the foll-
owing details in support of the above information.
For Disc; 50 cps -19 db ? 100, -12 ? 200, -7? SCO, -2 5 1000, 0? 2000,
plus 2? 5000, plus 6; Bkc plus 8; 10 kc,plus 11? 20 kc, plus 17 db,
Por Tape; 50 cps plus 27db? 100, plus 20? 200, plus 14? 500, plus 7;
1000, 0? 2000,' -5? 5 kc, -10 ? 8 kc, -12?10 kc,-12? 20 kc,-13db.














SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE INSTITUTE MEETINGS
With this issue of the Journal, we are commencing a section covering
details of the fortnightly meetings held alternate Fridays. These
summaries are given mainly £pu the benefit of country members who are
naturally unable to attend, and also as of general interest for city
members.
SOUND REPRODUCTION IN THE MODERN THEATRE
By Hartley C, Davoy, Friday, 1.7 August, 1951
A most interesting lecture was given by Mr. Davoy on the subject of
Theatre Reproduction and the recording of films for theatre use. After
a brief historical synopsis of the earlyexperiments, we were given a
groat deal of information about the various methods of recording on
film, Thoro ire two main types? variable density and variable area,
with variations of each. Sample prints were shown on the screen, and
the methods of obtaining them wore explained. Modern methods of noise
reduction wero also shown and explained,
Of the'many interesting and little known facts of the actual repro-
duction, the exceptionally fine speaker systems now used in high qual-
ity theatre work must bo praised. Their high technical requirements
leave them far ahead of virtually all other types of speakers and the
efficiency demanded is 50 as against a normal 10-15/.
Next of interest were the ingenious ideas used to ensure constant
speed of film past the sound-heads to eliminate wow and flutter, etc,
Further points discussed wero tho construction and operation of proj-
ectors which was illustrated b}- a film token by the lecturer, and also
another film showing tho effect of over-emphasised noise-reduction.
NEW CONTROL CIRCUITS FOR AMPLIFIERS
By Jack Ibbott Friday .31/8/1951
Tonight's mooting consisted of a description of a now type of con-
trol circuit for amplifiers which would supersede the ordinary feed-
back loops generally used today.
At the moment it is sufficient to say that the system operates as
followss From the secondary of the output transformer a signal is
taken and fed into a grid of a twin triode through a resistor network.
Then take also a signal from the input of the amplifier and feed into
the other grid of the triode at equalized level. It will be seen that
any difference at all between the in- and output signals must represent
a loss or distortion throughout the unit. If there is any difference
between these two signals, plate current will flow in thes valve, and
this in turn can be rofod into the amplifier out of phase, thus cancoll
ing or adjusting any irregularities.
This system can be adjusted to give considerable control over .ampli-
fiers . Two units were then demonstrated, employing this circuit, one a
single-ondor 6J7 and 6V6, and the other push-pull §o7’s.
After playing st .ndard and. Microgroove records on both amplifiers,
much controversy arose as to the practicability of the idea, but there
was no doubt that both of those units, in their respective classes,
and coupled into Stentorian or Rola 120 X speakers, gave quality perf-
ormance equal to any amplifier yot operated or demonstrated at the
Institute.


FILL I iG-IT
Friday, 14/? A*? 51 .
By Mr. J. llalpln, using a Fil-uo Projector. Friday, 14/9/1951
on interesting and entertaining film night was enjoyed by Club i.embers
tonight.
The main technical film was on ;i F>rtF ! its operation and differences
to A'-', in transmission and reception, and was capably and very fully cover-
ed in the usual interesting manner* Other items screened included 2
A Piano Performance by fadorowshi
Projector mt.6' Film Caro and I aintenance
Flirt? Tactics - hat to watch for in films,
Two short Musicals and a Laurel and Hardy Comedy,
LATBBT IDjAS IK BObi'd RBBOHDIIG
By rlc Bruton Friday 29/9/1951
Tonight’s mooting was given over to a tall by r„ Brie Bruton on
latent ideas and theories on Bound locordir.g, based on lectures and
information received by the Institute fxvr> the British Bound Recording
Association.
The major improvement discussed at sowe length was the now applicat-
ion of the "hot stylus 51 method of recording, n his consists of winding a
very tiny element of a few turns around the sapphire stylus which is then
heated by a lev; voltage transformer. Tests have shown that the noise
level from the actual cut on the disc, particularly microgroove and slow
lineal cuts, can be reduced by up to 20 db, It is expected that all
Members will consider this a necessity for recording. It has apparently
been developed from an earlier idea of cone 20 years ago, when it was used
to cut direct, discs of harder material, ie. vulcanite, before the advent
of the acetate disc in the earlr nineteen-thirties,
A mathematical analysis of distortion in cutting in relation to tip-
radius, speed of cut, amplitude, and. size of playing tip, was examined
and embers with a knowledge of naths found that these nil bore a defin-
ite relationship to the finished product.
Other points included disc v. tape, and during the evening special.
RBiLe test, discs wore played. These consisted of music ’or showin" the
low and high frequencies, and also a s-ort history tracin' the develop-
ment of the ■ gm-lophono since its 1. -contion •
RECORD CRITICISM NIGHT.
Conducted by the Committee Friday 12/]O/1951
In order to enable Members of the Institute to see and rectify any
faults in their recording equipment, a record criticism night was held
this evening. Members brought along discs they had recorded and these
were played, and a panel of technical judges wore appointed to dissect
any irregularities.
This audition brought forth a varied program of discs which was dis-
cussed at length after the-playing of the records. The results were
obviously beneficial in view of the forthcoming Recording Contest.


I Speed
Number
i
i
Cost $
*4
7°
Av 0 cost.
i 7B
I 145,628,476
79.13 I
102,987,611 j
69.19 :
.70
\U5
!' 32,4,98,928
17.65 1
23.957,588 ;
15.86 -
.74
1 33
5,909.958
3.21
24,095,312
15.95 |
4.07
j
184,037,360
100.
151,040,511 i
100,
.82
FURTHER ADVANCES IN USC RECORDING
By Mr. H. King, Friday 26/10/l9sl
Members were pleased do hear Mr... King deliver the second of his most
interesting lectures on various phases of disc recording. Although prim-
arily his interests are the manufacture and treatment of sapphires for
cutting and playback, many interesting points were brought forward.
Among the reasons for selection o- sapphire as being the best cutting
medium, were its hardness end abiliby to retain a high degree of accurate
polish. Virtually any material would, r.o but its lasting qualities must
be taken into consideration, A piece of hard wood, say lignum vitae,
would give a track as silent as sappnire but only for a few seconds.
The necessity for polishing faevts on a cutter for acetate use pres-
ents a -difficulty in as much tabt they must be of a sufficient size to
operate and not too large to limit the frequency response, and so cut a
distorted wave-form. On wax cutting a higher response was obtained bec-
ause the actual cutter was virtually triangular chape and practically no
clearance was required, for burnishing. However, thus again bad practical
limitations due to the included angles being razor-edged’, and thus fragile,
A'further point to consider here is that the overall length of the
shank and tip must be■considered in relation to the cutter. If it is too
long the response on the disc will suffer due to the whip effect of the
shank, although a somewhat greater amplitude may be obtained.
Mr. King then gave more details of the hot cutting technique (refer
to lecture 28/9/51) of which ho had a major part in the introduction of
the idea in this country * He suggested hi so that the cutter be set in
operation before turning on the heat. Duo to the velocity at 78 RPM
and the heat thus generated in itself, it is not usually found necessary
to apply heat at this speed. Recommended voltage supply is 8 volts from
a bell transformer, arid fit a 6 ohm ww heavy duty pot., in series with
one lead. The voltage can then be regulated to gives the correct heat.
This may be seen when the swarf assumes a bright silvery color, and the
track Itself is perfectly shiny. Further coat only causes bhe swarf to
melt and weld itself onto the surface of the disc, thus ruining it.
The meeting then took the form of a discussion on various subjects
with Mr, King who gave answers most efficiently to questions asked.
For these members who desire to wind their own coils, use a-5 inch
length of ~OQA3 H nichrome resistance wire, and wind eight turns starting 2”
from one end of'the—wire. Wind onto the actual sapphire only and fix
the coil with a dab of shellac. Remember also to set the depth of cut
with the heat ON, as the hot stylus cuts deeper than when cold.
The following information shows details shows the number and cost
of records sold in the United States for the year ended 30th June 1951.


A MODEM DISC IJ3CORDING MACHINE,
By Eric Bruton Friday 9/11/1951
A further lecture was given by Mr. Bruton tonight ‘ ased on infor-
mation about the latest BBC Disc Recording Unit as detailed in special
liturature received from the British Sound Recording Association.
As this machine is a complex unit, it is difficult to describe
fully in a summary such as this, but a few details may be given.
It is a recording table driven by l/6th H.P. motor with an
extended shaft. A pulley on top engages with a neoprene rubber idler
wheel which turns the table on the outside rim. The motor itself is
fitted with a harmonic damper to iron out AC vibration. Its drive'shaft
is fitted with a rubber 'universal 1 coupling to stabilize the pulley at
the top.
The traverse mechanism is a universal tjpe overhead carriage
driven across by a 32 TPI lead screw. Suitably driven from the under-
neath of the table, a cord drive turns the lead screw so that 10/. lines
per inch are cut on the disc. A scrolling motor is employed to over-
drive the lead screw for run-ins and run-outs etc. '
The cutting head, their own design, is a magnetic moving armat-
ure type with a permanent magnet, and its response rises to a peak at
10,000 CPS, A feed-back coil is wound in with the drive coil and conn-
ected to the amplifier to eliminate magnetic distortion from the satur-
ational effects of transients, A copy of this head was then demonstrated
and the effects of the feed-back were quite apparent in the cleanliness
of reproduction.
Pictures, plans, specifications and full details of the whole
machine may be seen at the Institute, while a drawing is featured in
Brigg's book on Sound Reproduction.
.PRACTICAL NIGHT
Under Supervision of the Committee Friday X6/11/1951
As arrangements for the closing date for entries in the 1951
Sound Recording Contest was this evening, an extra meeting was called so
that members and others could bring along their entries.
' Although members did not know it, arrangements for a small work-
ing bee had been made to generally clean out the premises and tidy up
the equipment. Much energetic work was put in on brooms and vacuum-
cleaners and so forth, and by the end of the night when supper was ser-
ved, the whole place had received a thorough going-over. The Institute's
new Pickup was installed, and a general tidy-up was made on the amplifier.
As the meeting was entirely informal, there was time for discuss-
ion on various technical problems.
The Committee now requests that members please use the ash-trays
provided, and not the floor for cigarette butts etc. Thank you'.
A Note on The Recording Contest
With the date of the Annual Recording Contest rapidly approaching,
it is felt that a mention of the valuble prizes offered would be timely.
The Committee and Members are indebted to the following organisations
for this most generous prize list;
‘Byer Industries Pty Ltd for their offer of a "Magnafilm" magnetic
recording deck.
Red Line Equipment Pty Ltd for their offer of a "Red Line" Trans-
former kit for the "Williamson" Amplifier.
Playback Equipment Manufacturers for their offer of a "Royce"
Senior Model Traversing Mechanism..


THE MECHANICS OF TURNTABLE DRIVE.
Friday 23/11/1951.
The President of the Sound Recording Institute tonight gave a talk
on the mschani.cs of turntable drives* Being thoroughly conversant with
engineering practice, Mr, Martin was well able to advise on this subject.
Noise, rumble or uneven running is something that every record
enthusiast has had to eradicate at some time or other, and after hearing
about all the problems associated with the various types of drives, must
decide that the most expensive units available are net always good
enough for precision work.
It is an established fact that, to be able to get a slab of metal
to turn at an exact speed without any bearing noise or rumble that can be
amplified, is cno of the most difficult feats known to mechanical eng-
ineering.
From tho early days of weight drives and spring drives with gover-
nors, to synchronous drives, pulley drives, bolt drives, direct drives
and others, we are nowhere nearer the perfect system than thirty years
ago. Particularly so when we find that microgroove records require a
fairly higher degree of amplification than previously necessary.
Members are advised to study tho information received' about the
BBC tables. These details are available from the secretary.
As all types of drive roquie differenr consideration, it is imp-
ossible to suggest any remedies here without any actual experience
with the nmit in quest,:*.on.
SOUND RECORDING CONTEST FOR 1951.
Conducted by the Record Committee at"the Radio Theatrette, Fri, 7/12/51.
A full resume of the proceedings will be published elsewhere in
this copy of the Institute Journal,
■ CHRISTMAS PARTY.
Fri l4/12/51.
A social evening for the Members and their wives and families
with suitable entertainment was held tonight, and ail those attending
thoroughly enjoyed themselves, the younger visitors particularly.
Witn this evening the activities of the Institute concluded what must
be regarded as the most active year yet, and wo look forward to an
even more interesting and instructive year in 1952♦
A Note of Interest: Shoppers in Boston, U„S.A., are now getting a preview
of the best food buying in the stores for tho week-end shopping. Every
Fiiday afternoon a local television station shows the more plentiful,
fruits and vegetables and gives information on food preparation.
A typical programme opened with pages of a scribbling pad being lifted,
showing programme titles and credits, The commentator stood in front of
rows of fresh fruit and vegetables set up like a regular retail shop. He
then reviewed the best food buys, and introduced a colleague to report on
apples-the buy of tho week. The two talked about the size of the apple
crop, varieties, prices, how to identify varieties, and major uses for the
different types. The camera then switched onto a homo economist for a
demonstration of tho most efficient ways to prepare apples for baking,
and of ways to serve them.
When more people in Australia understand the exciting and useful
possibilities of television there will be a greater urge for its develop-
ment hero.


THE SOUND RECORDING CONTEST FOR 1951.
Conducted by the Record Committee Fri 7/12/1951'.
The annual Sound Recording Contest for 1951 was held on Friday, the 7th
of December, 1951, at the Radio Theatrette, Melbourne Technical College at
8 P.M.
The Contest was open to everybody, whether members of the institute or
not, using any standard method of sound recording.
The Institute had by this time considered itself well out of the exp-
erimental stage, and so all items had to be recorded directly from a micro-
phone, and thirty-six entries were received, - all on disc except for one
entrant on wire.
The judges, Mr. Hooper of 3 DB, Mr. King of Pyrox, and Mr. Otto Grob-
eckker were set a most intriguing problem of adjudication, and they co-oper-
ated with the record committee in arranging the final audition program held
this evening.
It was found that the standard of workmanship displayed in the entries
was very much better than expected in spite of somewhat more difficult
conditions of entry over previous years, The programme was presented to a
capacity audience, who had to select their idea of the winning item by ballot•
■ ' At the conclusion of the playing, the judges awarded the following
most generous prizes;-
First Prise; A Magnafilm Tape Deck kindley donated by Byer Industries
Pty, Ltd., to Mr. P. Inglis, for his entry "Two Gavottes" played as an
Organ Solo by Mr. Hartley C, Davey.
Second Prize; A Transformer Kit for the Williamson Amplifier kindly
donated by Red Line Equipment Pty Ltd. to Mr. W. Philpot for his entyy,
"Riding to Heaven on a Streamline Train"- Guitarist and Yodeller
Third Prize; Royce Senior Model Traversing Unit kindly donated by
Playback Equipment Manufacturers to Mr J. K. Ibbott for his entry "The
Dickey Bird Hop" another organ solo by Mr. Hartley C. Davey.
The audience vote was awarded to Mr. J. C. Walsh who received a
parcel of Recording discs for his entry "Too Young".
The following interesting items were played with the above-
nSharpshooters" by W. Earle - ' Mellopiano and voice
"Barn Dance" By E. Bruton - Piano solo
"It Happened in Kalloha" by J. Jackson - Instrumental and voice
"Parade of the Tin Soldiers" by S. Martin - Piano Solo
"Samba Sud" by C. Mutton - Instrumental quintet
"Banjo Medley" by C. Stevens Studio. - Instrumental quartet
"If" by R. Chapman - Dance orchestra and vocal
"Three of Yesterday’s Hits" by A. Stevens - Vocal and Guitar
"South Sea Medley" by C. T. Krygger - Electric Guitar Trio
In conclusion, the Institute Committee expressed their grateful thanks
to Mr. Mackay for the use of the Radio Theatre, Byer Industries Pty Ltd for
their donation of the Magnafilm Tape Deck, Red Line Equipment Pty Ltd for
their donation of the Transformer Kit for the Williamson Amplifier,
Playback Equipment Manufacturers for their donation of the Royce Senior Model
Traverser unit, Mr. King, Mr. Hooper, and Mr. Grobeckker who so patiently
adjudicated, and to the many others who helped to bring this competition to
a most successful conclusion, and they also trust that all who attended
had a most enjoyable evening.
S. Martin
- President.


DISCUSSION NIGHT. '
Led by J. K. Ibbott. Frida y 18AA952.
The opening meeting for 1952 commenced without a notice of a syllabus item
and it took the form of a discussion headed by Mr. Jack Ibbott. The main factor
discussed at some length was a simple one-valve compressor described fully below,
and then how feed-back operated on amplifiers in conjunction with its effects ol
overall damping the applied stages. Another interesting point brought forth was
the importance of correct placing of components and the danger of long leads or
the best results from an amplifier.
■ This compressor is fitted between the pre-amp and main amplifier, and it
uses either valve shown without change, There is a loss of some DB over this
circuit and this should be considered before building. v,4-v, B t- the
The unmarked resistor should be tried by experimentation. The higher the
gain both before and after the compressor, the lower the value of the re
and converse. This may vary from a direct shorting link to 10, to 2 , *
It should be adjusted so that with the control pot fully on, there is no undue
tendency to pump on severe modulation. .
The ultimate results may not be obvious on a DB meter, but will be seen
on a recording particularly from microphone.


W-l
A M TYPE OF SPEAKER BAFFLE...
Demonstrated by Mr. E McMahon
Members tonight had the pleasure of hearing the
first of a new type of speaker baffle seen here• It
is a type known as the taper pipe and was built by
Mr. McMahon from basic information received from Eng-
land. A demonstration of recorded items revealed
that it has great possibilities, and many memners
showed interest in its construction.
It was built of 11/l6 n Bukas Board; a Czechoslo-
vakian building material made oux. of pressed wbodchips.
The sizes shown in the diagram are for an 8” speaker,
although the model shown tonight was increased 2” in
the foot for a 10" Stentorian Speaker. The inside
front and back were covered with 2 layers of carpet
underfelt, and an internal brace fore and aft was
fitted to prevent bellying. The open vent is 6 " high
off the floor, and is on the front only. There is no
bottom required if the unit stands on the floor.
THE APPLICATIONOF ELEMENTARY MECHANICS TOSOUND RECORDING.
By Mr, E, Bruton. Fri, 15 Feb, 1952.
Tonight Mr. Bruton gave a further talk based on information received
from the British Sound Recording Association, and he dealt with various
mathematical problems encountered in sound recording.
Is it possible to record a square wave? This is the sum of any partic-
ular frequency to which is added all its odd harmonics to the infinite or nth
harmonic. This was simply explained graphically by adding arithmetically all
the harmonics as above to a sine wave. It was seen that the further harmonics
added, the more square the wave became. If wo had a perfectly infinite cutter
and amplifier, etc, the ultimate figure traced on the disc would do governed
by the rate of acceleration of the wavs, and on the disc will be produced, not
a , J 1 1 , but a \ pattern.
Naturally, much argument arose over this, and photographs were produced
to substantiate the above. No doubt the Institute will record a square wave
and play it back to observe its form in an oscilloscope.
The ratios between the size of needle points, the mass of armature, and
type of damping in a pick-up were shown as being corelatod, and methods
brought forward showed how to calculate the above forces to best advantage.
Other factors mentioned wore effects of non-linear cutters, and incorr-
ect tracking error in pick-ups.
CIRCUIT NIGHT
By J. K. Ibbott. Friday, 29th Feb 1952
The meeting tonight featured information about AM and FM tuners suitable
for high quality reception and details of these were given by Mr. Ibbott.
Circuits for various types of FM tuners that could be easily built with
few parts were detailed and explained, and a full plan is reproduced on the
next page. Likewise, an AM timer of simple outline but effective performance
is given. This latter item was demonstrated with a Williamson amplifier
loaned by Mr. Eric Bruton. The amplifier featured a new type of output, trans-
former imported from England at a very reasonable price. This also operated
well, and enabled the full amount of feed-back to be applied to the Williams-
on without oscillation.
AUCTION’ NIGHT
Conducted by the Committee Fri. 14th Mar ’52
To e nab 1 e members to dlspose of surplus equi'pment, an auction
night was arranged for tonight, A surprising amount of all types
of gear went under Mr. Martin’s hammer, and many members went
home with bargains they didn’t expect. Altogether, a most inter-
esting night was passed by all who attended.
Would all members please note that these summaries of club
activities will be posted to you as they are printed, and not
with future copies of the Club Journal as originally intended
Your Club Reporter.




- \
COM PA N y/F ACT 6 R Y y -
CERTIFICATE R_EOONCIL iATJON V
(For the purposes of the Group Wages Tax Scheme)
In respect of the year ended 30th June 1960
DETAILS OF ATTACHED CERTIFICATES | -■ CERTIFICATES
GROUP CERTIFICATES I3SUEL - PiNK DUPLICATE; COPIES ONLY !
GROUP CERTIFICATES CANCELLED - ALL Four Copies
GROUP CERTIFICATES UNISSUED - ALL Four Copies
TOTAL GRCIJ? CERTIFICATES - Equals the Total Number of Certificates
Received from the Taxation Department
Nos. from To
TOTAL NUMBER OF CERTIFICATES OF EARNINGS ISSUED
CANCELLED GROUP CERTIFICATES | UNISSUED GROUP CERTIFICATES NUMBERS
NOTE:- Only the pink copies of unclaimed certificates are required to be forwarded
j HEREWITH, The ORIGINALS SHOULD BE FORWARDED DIRECT TO THE TAXATION DEPARTMENT
NO LATER THAN 31ST OCTOBER.
Prepared and agreed Date
WITH CERT I F ICATES BY! ; PREPARED: ;
This form together with all the certificates as set out above.and two (2) copies of
the list of Earnings of all employees must be forwarded to the Central Office prior *
to Bth August,
FF 2/319
