

N. W. AUSTRALIAN
EXPLORING EXPEDITION.
ERAS. T. GREGORY, F.E.G.S.
April to November, 1861.
Pe-intrd by Subbing, Sholi, & Co.




JOURNAL
OP THE
NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIAN EXPLORING
EXPEDITION.
April 20, 1861.— A1l the preliminary arrangements in Perth having
been completed, and the stores and equipment of the Expedition already
sent on board the barque Dolphin, I proceeded to Premantlc and shipped
the 10 horses that had been furnished by the settlers in this part of the
colony; the remainder of the hay and water being also completed by 2
p,m., we were prepared to sail, when the agent for the vessel raised
objections to our departure, on the plea that the arrangements for the
payments on account of the charter were not satisfactory. Wrote accord-
ingly by express to the Private Secretary for an acknowledgment that
the requisite documents were complete.
April 21. —Received reply from the Private Secretary to the effect
that everything necessary had been approved of already by the Governor;
the agent would not, however, allow the vessel to leave until he had
actually received the first instalment on account of the charter from the
Colonial Treasurer.
April 22. —Accompanied Mr Manning and Captain Dixon to Perth,
when they were informed by the Colonial Treasurer that the money would
be forthcoming on the presentation of the accounts. Returned to
Fremantle, where we were detained for the remainder of the day, to
enable the agent to close his accounts.
April 23. —Went on board the Dolphin at 7 a.m., and by 11 got
under way, with a fresh breeze from the E.N.E., and stood to the
N.N.W. The portion of the exploring party embarked at Fremantle
comprised the following persons:—F. T. Gregory, Commander; J.
Turner, Assistant and Storekeeper ; E. Brockman, W. S. Hall, and J,
McCourt, Assistants; and A. James, Farrier. Supplies of flour, salt
pork, dried beef, preserved meat, bacon, sugar, tea, &c., sufficient for 8
months, were provided for a party of 9; three more volunteers and 10
horses having yet to be taken on board at Champion Bay.
April 24. —Light winds from the N.; at noon sighted land, in lat.
31deg. 28m. 12sec. S.; all hands attending to horses.
April 25,—Experienced variable and contrary winds j made but
little progress.


April 2G.—Weather cloudy, winds unfavourable; had a distant viei
of Mount Lesueur.
April 27.—Sighted Mount Hill soon after daylight, rain and squall
rendering it difficult to distinguish the coast. The weather clearing uj
ran into Champion Bay and came to anchor by noon, i mile north of th
jetty, in 4 fathoms. Landed and procured a horse from the Govcrnmen
Resident, and rode out to Mr K. Brown’s station.
April 28.—Procured a horse for the Expedition from Mr W. Moore
on aconnt of Hamersley & Co., and returned with it to the Bay.
April 29. —Sent round to the rest of the subscribers of horses to tin
Expedition. Party employed filling up ship’s water tanks.
April 30,—Mr J. Harding arrived, as a volunteer, with 2 horses fron
Mr W. Burges ; also Mr M. Brown, as a volunteer, with 1 horse. Tin
following gentlemen also sent horses: —Messrs. J. S. Davis, 2; P
Dußonlay, 1; C. Yon Bibra, I; H. Gray, 1; M. Morrissey, 1; and J
Drummond, 12 sheep. Mr P. Walcott joined as a volunteer for the
collection of specimens of natural history and botany. Ship’s crew
employed discharging the remainder of the cargo from England, con-
signed to Champion Bay,
ATay 1. —With the assistance of a number of gentlemen who kindly
volunteered their aid, the ten additional horses were safely swam off tc
the Dolphin ; Captain Dixon and his crew being employed landing e
steam engine. Wrote to His Excellency the Governor, reporting inten-
tion to sail to-morrow.
May 2. —Wrote to the Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society,
reporting progress of the Expedition. Transferred order for 20 sheep
subscribed by J. Williams, to Mr T. Burges, Took on board 12 sheep
sent by Mr Drummond, and closed accounts at the Bay. Party fitting
wp mangers, &c. At sh. 30m, p.m. got under weigh and stood to the
N.W., the soundings for 5 miles varying from 3f to 7 fathoms; the sea
breaking heavily for about a mile in a N direction from the end of the
sheltering reef, shewing a much greater extent of shoal water than is
noted on the charts. Established a routine of watches of two hours each,
for the members of the Expedition to attend upon the horses.
May 3.— By observations at noon, found the latitude to be 26de<r,
53min. S., long. U2deg. 33min. E. Party preparing equipment, drying
horse slings, &c. Wind light from south-east.
May 4.—Putting pack-saddles together, covering water belts, &c.;
light wind from south, ship making from 1 to 4 knots; course N. by E.
Increased allowance of water to horses from 4 to 5 gallons each, on account
of the heat of the hold. Killed a sheep. Lat. at noon 25deg, 40min. S
long. 112 deg. Imin. E.
May 5 (Sunday). —Held Divine service. Passed through several
drifts of seaweed at noon, in lat. 25deg. 43min. 34sec. S., long, 112 deg.
Amin. E.; shewing a southerly current of nearly two miles per hour;
cloudy, with light winds from S.E. and S,


33 jo] F I OC
a*
EXPLODING EXPEDITION.
May 6.—At noon sighted Cape Cuvier, bearing oast 20 miles; lat.
Ideg. 52min., long. 112 deg. 53min E.; current of 19 miles S. in 24
mrs.
May 7. —North-west Cape was visible at noon, bearing E. f north,
stant 25 miles, our lat. being 22deg. S., and long. 113 deg. 18min. E.
le cape appears to have an elevation of 500 or 600 feet, and to be of a
ndstone formation; the soil back on the hills appearing good and
)thed at this period with an abundance of grass, wattles of large growth,
d flooded gum trees growing on the slopes ; the character of some of
e lower hills and valleys is that of a mineral district.
May 8. —Passed through many patches of drifting seaweed coming
3m the E. Light B.E. winds and cloudy weather. Lat. 20deg. 21min,
, long 114 deg. 37min. E., at noon.
May 9.—Richie’s Reef cannot be in the position shewn on the charts,
we sailed over it, and saw no broken water. At noon found our lat. to
; 19deg. 58min, S., and long. 115 deg. 23min, E.; light winds from the
E., and a current of | mile per hour setting to the west or north-west.
May 10.—At daylight sighted Legendre Island to the S.E., distant 10
iles. Ran east-north-east till 10 a.m,, with fresh breeze; tacked to
W., with wind at E.; by noon it fell calm; having fetched to within
) miles of the N. end of Delambre Island. At 5 p.m. a light wind from
ie N.W. enabled us to run in and drop anchor at 6 in 13 fathoms, the
nth end of Delambre bearing E. about 3 miles; at 11 a strong breeze
rung up from the SE., freshening to a gale by 2 am. of the 11th.
ide setting to S.W. at 4 miles per hour, with a rise of 16 feet.
May 11.—The gale continued to 11 a.m., when it moderated ; the
de being full at about noon. Got under weigh at 1 p.m., and stood to
ie S.W., under top-saiis, stemming a strong ebb tide to 3h. 30m. p.m.,
hen we came to anchor in five fathoms, (sand and shells) about 3 miles
ora the western shore of the bay, Sloping Head bearing N. by E. 5
iles. The water of the bay is much discoloured, being of a deep reddish
:own. In passing down the shore, we observed that the whole of what
shown on the charts as a promontory, extending to the north of
loping Head, is an island, with a channel nearly half a mile wide,
parating it from the main; to the outer portion was given the name of
olphin Island. At 4 p.m, left the ship in the life-boat, accompanied by
aptain Dixon, Mr Hall and four men, and took soundings for 6 miles to
ie S.W. down the centre of the bay, finding 5 and 6 fathoms all the
ay; the water then shoaled to 3 fathoms, when, being within a mile of
ie head of the bay, it became dark. Pulling about 2 miles to the 8.L.,
gradually shoaled to 1 foot, when we grounded, and remained there till
1 p.m., when the tide being at the full, we pulled for the ship, but not
ieing her lights by 1 a.m, on the 12th, and the meu being much
digued, we lay on our oars for an hour, and then took a stretch for 2
files to the S.S.E., to get under the shelter of the B.E. shore of the bay,
hen, having no anchor, we lay-to till daylight, by which time the boat


had drifted into heavy rollers under the high rocky land at the S.W.
head of the bay; the wind having risen so much that the boat was only
kept afloat by keeping her head to the sea. As we could not observe any
spot at which we could land without the risk of swamping the boat and
wetting our firearms, we continued pulling towards the ship, the ebb tide
assisting us, until 2 p.ra., when just as all hands were becoming
thoroughly tired out, a boat was sent from the to our relief,
with a timely supply of biscuit and brandy, which, with the assistance of
a tow-line, enabled us to reach the ship by 3 p.m., very thankful that we
had escaped what at one time appeared likely to have proved a serious
disaster.
May 13.—1 n the morning it blew so fresh from the eastward that
Captain Dixon did not like to move the vessel until 2 p.m., when we
stood to the south for about 4 miles, and came to anchor in 4 fathoms.
Taking the life-boat and cutter, both well manned, we pulled south to
the shore about three miles, the water gradually shoaling until at half
a mile from the shore the boats grounded on a sand-bank, from which we
walked, through mud, shells, and coral, to a belt of mangroves about
50 yards through, behind which rose a sandbank about 30 feet high,
covered with flowers and coarse grass; from this to the foot of a range
of rugged metamorphic sandstone, a distance of half-a-mile, was an
open, undulating, loamy plain, covered with grass just arriving at
maturity, a few small wattles, hakea, and white gum trees. As the
sun had now set, we had only just time to ascend a few hundred feet up
the rocky ridge, from which elevation could be discerned a sheet of water
about a mile to the eastward, which we attempted to reach, but it became
so dark that it was found better to return to the boats which were now
high and dry. By 8 p.m., the tide had risen sufficiently to admit of
Captain Dixon’s return to the Bolpbin, while I remained with a portion
of my own party to make a further examination in the morning; the
leaky state of the cutter keeping one of us baling through the night.
May J4.—With Messrs Turner, Drown, Harding, and Brockman,
landed at 7 a.m., and walked to the sheet of water observed last night,
but found it only a tidal inlet, terminating in a salt marsh. Continuing
on our course for 5 miles to the S.E., across a grassy plain, the soil being
a light brown loam, with occasional patches of quartz and gneiss pebbles,
and beds of limestone in irregular nodules, in an hour and a half arrived
at a deep stony watercourse, containing some pools of brackish water.,
This stream was followed up to the southward about a mile, but found
to bo dry, and did not appear to come from a greater distance than 20 j
miles. _ This river was named the Nickol. The country to the south \
jaol. being very we turned to the westward, recrossing the|
plain more to the south, passing several hollows, in which the rain-water \
had very recently rested, leaving a rich alluvial deposit, from which had
sprung up a splendid sward of grass, which was still quite green. Not 1
meeting with water in this jjlrection, and the party not being yet in full J


training, we were glad to return to the boat, which was reached by 2
p.m.; the tide being now in, enabled her to come in close to the beach,
the rise being found to be about 16 feet. By sh. we had returned
to the ship, all tolerably well fatigued with our first day’s march on
shore.
May 15.—Not being satisfied to land the horses on a shore devoid of
water, I determined to attempt a landing in a small sandy cove in the
high rocky shore on the west of the bay, which we had been afraid to
enter during the gale on the 12th. Leaving the ship with two boats and
provisions for the day, we pulled for the little cove, about 4 miles distant,
bearing W. by N. For the first 3 miles the soundings did not shew less
than 3 fathoms, with an even sandy bottom, the last mile shoaling
gradually to the beach; the landing being easily effected, as there now
was but little surf. The shore was found to be generally very sandy, a
low flat valley extending from the head of the cove across the isthmus
about two miles to Mermaid Strait, where it terminated in a muddy
mangrove creek. In about half an hour several wells were found, some
containing rather brackish water, but one, about 8 feet deep, in a hollow
under a steep range of bare volcanic and granite hills, not more than 200
yards from the beach, was found to contain an abundant supply of good
water; grass being plentiful and of fine quality in the valleys under the
hills. Our principal requirements being now satisfied, it only remained to
bring the ship in near enough to land the horses. On our return to the
Dolphin wo found that she had been visited by two natives, who had
paddled off on logs of wood, shaped like canoes, not hollow, but very
buoyant, about 7 feet long and 1 foot thick, which they propelled with
their hands only, their legs resting on a little rail made of small sticks
driven in on each side. At first they were afraid to come on board, but
on friendly signs being made, they ascended the ladder that had been put
down for them. They were both fine looking men, af about forty years
of age, above the middle stature, one measuring 6 feet 4 inches, and the
other 5 feet 8 inches; their hair straight and black, teeth regular, and
general features characteristic of the tribes on the west coast; their
bodies were rather more spare, and had not on them a vestige of clothing.
The Champion Bay dialect w r as quite incomprehensible to them; they,
however, knew the use of both biscuit and tobacco, some of which was
given them. After remaining several hours on board, they took their
departure for the eastern shore of the bay, promising by signs to repeat
the visit next day. It is worthy remark that neither of these natives
were circumcised, or had lost the front tooth, as is common on this coast
further to the eastward. Their fearlessness and confidence in the good
faith of Europeans would lead to the impression that this was not their
first acquaintance with vessels on the coast. It was not far from this
place that Captain P. P. King had a visit from natives similarly equipped
more than 40 years ago. While on shore to-day, several new and very
beautiful plants and flowers were observed, amongst them one in


particular, which, without exception, is the handsomest shrub I have ever
seen in Australia; in form the plant resembles a large chandelier, with a
series of branches springing from a centre stem in sets of five each; on
these are short erect stems a few inches apart, carrying five beautiful
deep crimson dragon flowers, nearly three inches in length, grouped like
lustres, producing a very gorgeous effect ; the leaves of the plant are
elegantly formed, like those of the mountain ash, and are of a rich green.
A purple flowering bean, the seeds of which are the size of the English
horse-bean, is here found in abundance, and are eaten by the natives.
Melons similar to those formerly seen by me on the Gascoyne, several
varieties of brachychiton. a small variety of the adansonia, three or four
different kinds of convolvulus (one of which runs along the sands near the
beach with arms sometimes as much as forty yards in length), acacias,
sterculia, and a variety of eucalyptus, resembling a stunted red-gum, are
also found growing among the hills in small quantities.
May 16.—Early this morning the Dolphin was moved to within three
miles of the cove visited yesterday, and anchored in 24 fathoms at the
lowest water, the landing place bearing W. by N. By eleven a.m. the
first pair of horses were hoisted out, and placed in the water under the
counter of the cutter, two other boats assisted in towing us to the shore,
which occupied about an hour; the horses, on landing, being scarcely
able to stand, from the length of time they were in the water. On
reaching the beach, a serious accident occurred to Mr Hearson, the second
mate of the vessel, resulting from the negligence of James, the farrier,
who, notwithstanding my repeated cautions to all the members of the
Expedition to keep snappers on the locks of the guns, had omitted to do
so, in consequence of which, on its being handed out, the hammer caught
on the gunwale of the boat, and discharged a ball through both hips of
the mate, causing him to fall in the water, which circumstance fortunately
tended materially to stop the hemorrhage; he was immediately carried
to a sheltered spot, and a tent pitched over him. On examining the
wound, I found the ball had entered the right posterior, passing close
below the joint, and taking an oblique direction through the lower edge
of the pelvis, made its exit in front of the left thigh, between the femoral
artery and the principal tendon, without injuring either. This mishap,
and the freshening of the breeze, prevented our landing any more horses
to-day, the remainder of it being spent in making a camp, and attending
to the comfort of our wounded companion, who occasioned me some
anxiety, as the treatment must entirely devolve upon myself, who
possessed but a very limited amount of experience in matters of this nature.
May 17. —Four more horses were safely landed this morning, and we
were returning to the vessel for another pair, when a party of 14 natives
made their appearance at the camp. At first they came boldly up, but
on a gun being discharged as a signal for my recal, they appeared much
alarmed, although they would not go away. Our number being small,
i determined not to allow them to enter the camp, on account of their


propensity to thieving, and the few that could now be spared to guard
the stores was insufficient to keep a constant watch on their stealthy
movements; I therefore tried at first to make them understand that we
had taken possession for the present, and did not want their company;
they were, however, very indignant at our endeavours to drive them away,
and very plainly ordered us oft to the ship. It was very evident that our
forbearance was mistaken for weakness, and that mischief was preparing.
I accordingly took hold of one of the most refractory, and compelled him
to march oft at double-quick time, when they all retired to some rocky
hills overlooking our camp, from which it was necessary to dislodge them.
Taking Mr Brown with me, we climbed the first hill, which made them
retreat to the next. Besting ourselves for a few minutes, and taking a
view of the surrounding country, we were just on the point of returning
to the camp, when we observed three armed natives stealing down a
ravine to the horses, evidently with hostile intentions, as they shipped
their spears on getting close enough to throw ; we did not, however,
give them time to accomplish their object, as we ran down the hill in time
to confront them, on which they took to the rocks. Seeing that it was
now time to convince them we were not to be trifled with, and to put a
stop at once to what I saw would otherwise terminate in bloodshed, we
both took deliberate aim and fired a couple of bullets so close to the
principal offender, that he could hardly escape feeling the effects of the
fragments of lead, as they split upon the rocks within a few feet of his
body. After dark, it set in to rain heavily for an hour, when lights were
observed moving in the direction of our horses, but the sentries being on
the alert, no further attempt was made to molest us.
May 1 8. —Two more horses were lauded this morning, but rain setting
in from the N.W., with a strong easterly wind below, a stop was put to
landing any more to-day.
May 19 (Sunday.) —It had rained both heavily and continuously
during the night, but as our tents were good, we did not experience
much inconvenience from it, and it gave a fair prospect of finding a good
supply of water on our contemplated trip into the interior. Mr Hearson’s
wound was progressing favourably, and I was in consequence enabled to
go oft to the ship and procure a few additional comforts. On our return
two more horses were brought ashore, reducing the number on board to
one-half.
May 20.—We succeeded in landing 6 more horses during the day;
the great distance they had to be swum ashore, made the process very
slow and fatiguing, some of the horses being scarcely able to stand for
some time after landing. This morning I made a rough survey of the
cove and surrounding hills, and while so employed, observed 17 natives
pass across the shoals at low water, carrying nets, but no weapons; they
did not appear to fear us, or inclined to come up to the camp ; nor did
we offer them any encouragement, as in the present exposed state of our
camp, they would have been very troublesome.


In the evening Mr Brown and myself rode across the isthmus to
Mermaid Strait, and found it to form a very fine and romantic looking
little harbour, surrounded by a bold rocky coast, giving it much more
the appearance of an inland lake than an open strait. I have no doubt
but that it would afford an excellent harbour; there is, however, reason
to think it is equally difficult of access from the main, with the cove
upon which our camp is, as a wide expanse of marsh land appears to
extend all round behind the hills that bound it to the southward.
May 21.—The last 4 horses were landed this morning, as also the
instruments and remainder of the stores required for our first journey.
The farrier, with two assistants, was kept busily employed all day shoeing
horses.
May 22. —The forge was in full employ during the day, and great
progress made with the shoeing and preparations for our departure.
Accompanied by Mr Brown, I rode out to-day to reconnoitre, and seek
for a place through the hills that encompassed our camp; the only
practical outlet we found to be through some very rocky ravines to the
S.W., where at about 5 miles we found, what I had for some time
suspected to be the case, that the whole of the isthmus upon which we
had landed was cut off from the main land by an extensive salt water
marsh, commencing at the bottom of Kickol Bay and running parallel to
the general line of coast, at least as far as Enderby Island. Skirting
the northern edge of the marsh for several miles to the westward, we
found it gradually getting wider and deeper; we accordingly returned
to the narrowest part, and rode into it for about half a mile, the water
being very shallow, and the bottom sufficiently firm to carry us, although
with considerable labour to the horses. Finding it was getting late, we
determined to try and return to the camp round by the head of Nickol
Bay, and succeeded in climbing over the rocks and boulders that
encumber this portion of the coast, until we were within a quarter of a
mile of the camp, when the tide came in upon us so quickly that, after
having been repeatedly thrown down by the surf, we were compelled to
leave the horses jammed up in the rocks just above high-water mark, and
proceeded on foot to the camp.
May 23. —At 3 a.m., the tide having fallen sufficiently, Messrs. Brown
and Harding were enabled to bring in the horses left imprisoned last
night. During the day, all the arrangements for our departure were
completed, and in the afternoon Mr Hearsou was removed to the Dolphin,
having been kept on shore since the accident, to be constantly under my
own attendance; he was now rapidly recovering, although much reduced.
Wrote instructions for the guidance of Captain Dixon and Mr Walcott
during the absence of the Expedition, the latter gentleman being left in
charge of the stores, and to make such observations as the means at his
disposal should admit of.
May 24. —Landed at daylight, intending to make a start, as it was
the Queen’s birthday, but owing to some of the horses having rambled.


vie did not succeed in getting them all in and saddled tip before 2 p.m.,
vhen three or four of the horses that had not been accustomed to carry-
ng packs, commenced playing up and scattering their loads in all
lirections, straining and otherwise injuring several of the packsaddles,
vhich detained ns so late in the day, that 1 deemed it best to return to
amp, and as the forge had not been removed to the ship, to shorten
ome ot the saddle-irons, to render them less liable to injury, which was
ithcrwise a great improvement.
May 25. —The re-adjustments having been satisfactorily accomplished,
we made a fair start this morning by 9 a.m., and arrived on the edge
of the marsh by llh. 40m., where, having first first taken a survey of
the several channels from the summit of a high granite hill, we entered
the waste of mud at a point where it did not appear to be more than 2
miles wide; an hour’s struggle carried us fairly through on to terra
firma, only one horse having to be assisted by the removal of his load.
After resting an hour and a half for dinner, we resumed our route in
a south direction, across an extensive low grassy plain of red clayey
loam, passing over a few rocky ridges at sunset, and at G p.m. encamped
an a dry creek 20 yards wide, water being found in some clay pans in
die adjoining plain. [Camp 2.J
May 2G.— Being Sunday, the camp was only moved a mile further to
a fine pool of water in a river 80 yards wide, with beautiful grassy banks,
which I named the Maitland ; it comes from the S.E., and may probably
nave a course of 60 miles, coming through a plain 5 or 6 miles wide,
die greater part ot which is occasionally inundated by floods from the
nterior. Cockatoos and other game were plentiful, 16 of the former
oeing killed by Mr Brockman at one shot; they were white, with orange
anted feathers in the crest, similar to those on the Murchison and
Gascoyne rivers. It may be as well hero to observe that upon first
star tin tg, a regular routine of duty had been established in the party,
the care and loading of 5 horses being told off to each two of the party,
is they could lift on opposite packs simultaneously, and their being all
numbered, every one could at once know the loads under his charge,
the night was also divided into eight watches, commencing at 8 p.m. and
mding at 6 a.m.; the duty of the first watch being to cook the bread
for the following day, and the last to have breakfast ready in the
morning by the time it w r as light enough to see. By this arrangement
no time was lost, and every one knew what was under his particular
fliarge. [Camp 3.]
May 27. —Having determined in the first instance to strike to the
westward, with a view to cutting any large rivers coming from the
Interior that might serve to lead us through the rocky hills that hemmed
as in, in that quarter w r c this morning took a S.S.W. by S. course to
llh. 40m., when we crossed a dry stream bod, 60 yards wide, coming
out of the granite ranges to the southward, the country becoming more
barren as we edged upon the spurs of the rocky hills. At 2 p.m. we


halted on the banks of another stream bed of the same size as the last,
when it came on to rain; resuming our march at 4h, 10m., steering west
to 6, when we encamped on a dry gully, with a little feed near it.
Having pitched the tents, it continued to rain until 11p.m., when a
sudden rush of water swept down the valley, filling the watercourse and
carrying away our fire, and before we had time to remove the baggage to
higher ground, we had a foot of water in the camp. Fortunately' nothing
was lost or injured, and it only served as a useful lesson for the future.
[ Camp 4.J
Mat 28. —The early part of the day was employed drying the stores;
so that we did not make a start until late. Four and a half hours’
travelling over stony country, principally covered with triodia, but
containing several patches of good grass, brought us to another river, 59
yards wide, in which were a few pools. This stream was followed up
to 5 p.m., when we left it, and halted on an open plain close to some
shallow clay-pans, containing rain-water; our course for the day having
been about S.W. 11 miles. \Camp 5. Lat. 2!deg. 7min.]
May 29. —-By an azimuth of the sun’s centre taken this morning, the
magnetic variation was observed to be about 20min. W. Steering N.
230 deg, E. mag., soon brought us out of the hills into a plain extending
as far as the eye could reach to the N.W., with a few patches of good
grass upon it, but mostly covered with triodia, which was now just ripe,
yielding fine heads of seed, which the horses are very fond of. At 13
miles struck the channel of a considerable river coming from the south.
As this offered us a fair prospect of working inland, and we had already
attained nearly to longitude 116 deg., or about the meridian of the mouth
of the Alma, the stream was followed up for an hour, its average breadth
being over 200 yards. At 4h. 40m. encamped at a fine spring on the
bank of a deep pool, under a cliff of metaraorphic sandstone nearly 300
feet high; a cane, much resembling a Spanish reed, growing in
considerable quantities near the water. [ Camp 0. Lat 21 deg. 18 min,,
long. UGdeg. 4 min,]
May 30.—Soon after starting this morning, we came upon a camp of
15 or 20 natives, on the bank of a deep reach of water, hemmed in by
steep rocky hills, up which they hastily scrambled on our approach, and
on reaching the summit, tried by various gestures to express their
disapproval of our visit, but would not hold any parley with us. At 5
miles tlm river turned abruptly to the N.E. through a precipitous rocky
defile, which induced us to make an attempt to cut across and strike the
river some miles higher np, but after being for some time involved in
impracticable ravines, we were again obliged to have recourse to the bed
of the river, although incumbered with beds of large stones, over which
the horses had great difficulty in travelling; so that by sunset we had
not accomplished more than G miles in a direct E. by S. line from last
night’s f Camp 7. Lat. 2ldeg. 19min. 29sec.]
May 31.—The general course of the river during to-day was very little


to the south of east, its banks still maintaining the same rocky and
precipitous character, marks of inundation being frequently observed at
the height ot 3 ) feet above the present stream, which now was only
running gently in a channel not more than SO yards wide, but when in
flood occupying the whole of the valley, which averages a quarter of
a mile in width. The larger pools are lined with flags and reeds, and
contain numbers of small fish, resembling trout, similar to those found in
the Lyons and Gascoyne rivers. A very handsome tree, resembling
an ash, grew on the margin, bearing a beautiful white flower, 4 to S
indies across, having on the inside a delicate tinge of yellow, and
yielding a sweet scent like violets. Several natives were met in the
course of the day, but would not come near us; in one instance, however,
we came upon one so suddenly, that he had only time to jump into a
pool to escape being surrounded by the party. After calling for some
lime most lustily for his friends, he gradually crept away amongst the
canes and disappeared. Only one tributuary of any size was observed
to join the river in the course of the day’s march, and that came in from
the southward. At 6h. 20m, p.m. halted on the banks of a deep pool,
surrounded by fine cajeput-trecs and flooded gum, grass being plentiful
for our horses. [Camp B.]
June 1. —There was a decided improvement in the appearance of the
valley as we continued to ascend the river, the deep pools more
continuous; and grass more abundant; the high lands on either bank
still however, retained their rugged outlines, and were clothed with
little else but triodia. Travelling along the bed of the river was never-
theless difficult and dangerous for the horses on account of the immense
quantity of rounded boulders of water-worn rocks that occupied a large
portion of the channel and frequently jammed the horses into narrow
passes, where thej could not be extricated without meeting with very
severe falls, which very soon crippled more than one of them ; their shoes
also began to be wrenched off’ by being caught in the deep clefts of
the rocks, very soon expending all the extra sets brought with us.
Just before coming to our night’s halt a large stream-bod, 40 yards
w ide, was observed to come in from the southward. [ Camp 9. Lat.
21 deg. 28min. 18sec., long, llfideg. 31 min. by account ]
June 2 (Sunday.) —Having abundance of feed and water, we gladly
availed ourselves of it, to make it a day of rest; it also aflorded me
an opportunity to ascertain the rate of the chronometer, which, as I had
reason to expect had gone very irregularly since landing.
June 3. —Made an early start, and as the valley of the river was
not quite so rugged as that we have passed over during the last 2 or 3
days, by noon we had accomplished about 8 miles, the course of the river
still being very little from the souuthward of east; we had not, there-
fore, made much progress towards the Lyons river (our more immediate
destination), and to quit the valley was out of the question, as there is
no feed or water out of it, within a reasonable distance. Both the valley


and surrounding country are destitute of trees, and bold hills of in eta-
inorphic sandstone frequently jut out into the valley and terminate in
perpendicular cliffs 200 or 300 feet high. Towards the evening the river
had been coming fi'om the northward of east. \_Ca77lp 10. Lat. 21 deg.
27min. 48scc.]
Juke 4. —During the forenoon the river became much hemmed in by
steep rocky hills, the bed being a succession of rapids, over a bare rocky
channel, but after the noon halt the stream came more from the 5.8.,
with wide grassy flats on either side, in many parts very boggy, and
producing melaleuca leucodendron, with tall straight stems, and a variety
of eucalyptus, resembling E. piperita. White sandstone and shales
began to make their appearance on the banks, and the water in the
river had a saline taste. Several of the horses began to show signs of
being much distressed, by falling and sticking fast in the mud, from
which they had not strength to extricate themselves, even after being
relieved of their loads. Ducks were plentiful and tolerably tame. [Camp
11. Lat 21deg. 33min. 55sec.,long. Il7deg. 2min. by account.]
June 5. —Having marked a largo double-stemmed gum-tree with NAE
and the date, we made a start up the river, but at about a mile found
the valley narrow in until the channel of the river, which was here full
of water, was walled in on both banks by perpendicular cliffs, from
which we were compelled to turn back nearly to our last night’s camp.
During the last two days we had caught an occasional glimpse of an
elevated range of hills extending for many miles parallel to the river
and about 10 miles to the southward, which rendered it probable that
some change would now be found in the character of the back country,
enabling us to travel without being so frequently retarded by the rocks
and bends of the river. A suitable spot was accordingly selected for
ascending out of the valley, which was accomplished with some difficulty,
when the country was observed to be intersected for many miles by deep
ravines, terminating, however, to the south in a level plain, extending to
the base of the range already referred to. After four hours’ heavy
toiling, we at length reached the summit of the plain, water having
been found in one of the rocky gullies by the way. For the first half
mile, on entering the plain or table land, the ground was stony and
covered with stunted acacia, but it very quickly changed into a rich
clayey loam, yielding a splendid crop of kangaroo and other grasses,
melons, and small white convolvulus, yielding a round black seed the
size of a pea, which we found scattered over nearly the whole surface
of the plain for miles together. In the lower parts of the flat rain-water
appeared to have remained in shallow clay T -pans until very recently,
killing much of the grass, which was replaced by antriplex bushes. As
we approached the foot of the range, the ground became stony and
covered with triodia; good grass was still however, to be found in the
ravines leading out of the hills, and as our object was now to shape a
course to the southward, we followed up one of the most promising


valleys in the hope that it might lead ns through the range ; we were,
however, disappointed in finding that, after pushing some distance up
very steep and rocky passes, they all terminated in cliffs of horizontal
sandstone, running in parallel bands, one above another, to the height
of 600 or 600 feet, and frequently extending, without a break, for 10
or 16 miles along the face of the range. The horses being much fatigued
by the climb from the valley of the river, we encamped at 3h. 10m.
within the hills, and without water. [ Camp 12.]
J tine 6. —A light drizzling rain came on early in the morning, but
not enough to supply the horses, who rambled so far during the night in
search of it, that it was noon before they were all collected. Quitting
the range, which had been named, after one of the most liberal promoters
of the Expedition, Hamersley Range, w r e took a N.E. course, crossing
over 12 or 14 miles of beautiful open grassy plain, in many parts the
kangaroo grass reaching above the horses’ backs; the soil being of the
richest clay-loam, occasionally containing beds of singular fragments of
opaline rocks, resembling ancient lava. By 6h. 30m. p.m, we reached
the river again, several miles above the deep glen that had checked our
course on the sth. The valley having again opened out, gave us easy
access to its banks, which were here a rich black peat soil, containing
numerous springs. Here was first observed a very handsome fan-palm,
growing in topes, some of them attaining to the height of 40 feet and 20
inches diameter, the leaves measuring Bto 10 feet in length. The river
had again opened into deep reaches of water, and contained abundance of
fish resembling cobblers, weighing 4 and 5 lbs each. The whole character
of the country was evidently changing for the better, and as I have no
doubt that at no distant period it will become a rich and thriving
settlement, I named the river the Fortescue, after the Under Secretary
of State for the Colonies, under whose auspices the Expedition took its
origin, and the large expanse of fertile plain that lies between the river
and the Hamersley Range, Chichester Downs.
June 7. —A quarter of a mile up the river brought us to a fine
tributary from the south, running strong enough to supply a large mill.
This had to be traced up for 2 miles before we could find a ford; it was
found to take its rise in several deep pools, fed by springs issuing out of
the plains crossed yesterday. Some powerful springs were also observed
to flow into the river from the northward, through a dense forest of
melaleuca, with a rank undergrowth of canes, flags, &c. At 5 miles the
river again presented a wide reach of water several miles in length, after
which it all at once broke up into numerous channels, wandering through
a forest of white gum, well grassed, the soil being highly fertile. Owing
to my having been accidentally trodden upon by one of the horses, we
were obliged to encamp early, having only made about 12 miles. ' [ Camp
14. Lat. 21deg. 40min. 42sec., long., by account, H7deg. 17min. E.
June 8. —Following up the channel upon which we had encamped, in
about an hour it was lost in open grassy plains, which vve continued to


traverse until noon, when we struck on a well-defined stream-bed, which
had branched oft’ a mile or two short of last night’s camp. Grass and
water being abundant, we halted till 2, when we resumed an easterly
route to sh. 30m., over rather stony plains, yielding triodia. Encamped
after dark without water or feed, tying the horses up short to prevent
their rambling; having accomplished about 20 miles in an E.S E.
directioa during the day. [Camp 15. Lat. 21deg. 49min. 40sec.]
June 9 (Sunday.) —Less than a mile this morning brought us to a
grassy- channel containing water, which was followed up for a short
distance, when we halted for the remainder of the day to refresh our
tired and famished horses. [ Camp 16. j
June 10. —The channel of the river was still followed for several miles
to the eastward, when it again disappeared in open plains extending
the to the base of the Hamersley Range, which still continued to run
parallel to the river, at about 7 miles distance to the southward. Pools
of water were occasionally found in channels scooped out of the alluvial
soil of which plains were composed, the waters of the Eortescue, during
the period of the summer rains, spreading over the country for miles,
and leaving a rich deposit of alluvial mud, adding greatly to its fertility.
In the course of the afternoon we came suddenly upon a party of natives,
digging roots. One woman, with a child of about 5 years of age, hid
close to our line of march, and did not move until she was afraid of being
run over by the pack-horses, when she ran away leaving the child gazing
upon the monster intruders with a look of passive wonder. It was a
poor, ill-conditioned-looking object, suffering from a cutaneous disorder.
On giving it a piece of damper, it quickly began to devour it, tearing
it to fragments with its sharp and attenuated fingers, with all the keen-
ness of a haw'k. We left it standing with a lump of bread in each hand,
where its mother would no doubt find it when she came to see what
had been left of it by the large dogs, as the aborigines of this part of
Australia call our horses. Travelling on till late, we encamped in an
open grassy plain, without w 7 ater. \_Camp 17. Lat. 21deg. 55min. 57scc.,
long. 118 deg. 3min.]
June 11.—Four miles to the S.E. we came upon a pool of brackish
water, surrounded with bulrushes, in a channel coming from the south
of the Hamersley Range, again offering us a chance of getting to the
southward. We accordingly struck for the gorge out of which this
stream came, and succeeded in penetrating for three miles up a very
rocky gully, filled with some of the harshest triodia w r e had yet
encountered, and had to halt for the night in a narrow pass, wdiere there
was scarcely room to tie up our horses. [Camp 18. Lat. 22deg. 12min.
52 see.
June 32.—One of the horses having slipped his halter during the night,
Messrs. Brown and Brockman returned down the gully to track it up, while
we made an attempt to follow up the deep defile in which we were hemmed,
but a quarter of a mile brought us to an impassable barrier of cliffs.


Retracing our steps about a mile, we again made an attempt more to the
eastward, and this time succeeded in reaching a considerable stream-bed,
which ultimately proved to be the main channel of the Portescue, and led
us through the range. Heating till noon, Messrs. Brown and Brockman
overtook us with the missing horse, when we resumed our route up the
bed of the river to the southward, until again brought to a dead stand by
the whole bed of the stream being occupied by deep pools of water, ted by
numerous strong springs. As it was getting late in the day, I left the
party to form a camp, while I climbed the hills to get a view of the
country in advance, A laborious ascent of nearly an hour brought me to
one of the highest summits of the range, at an elevation of about 2,700
feet above the sea, and 700 above bed of the river. From this hill I had
a fine view to the southward, and observed that by following up a small
dry ravine to the S.E. there would be a fair prospect of reaching a large
extent of open level plain, that came within two or three miles of the camp,
in that direction. To the E. and S.E. the range was lofty and mountain-
ous, while to the S. and S.W. stretched open grassy plains, occasionally
interrupted by bold detached hills, apparently of the same formation as
the Hamerslcy range. On descending to the camp, 1 started a fragment
of rock af a few tons weight, which rushed with fearful velocity towards
the deep gorge in which the horses were feeding. After carrying all before
it for a quarter of a mile, it made a clear spring over a cliff 2uo feet in
depth, and plunged into the waters below with a sound like thunder, in-
ducing a belief at the camp that a large portion of cliff had fallen. For-
tunately it did not produce an eslampede, which I had known to have
been caused on another occasion by a similar occurrence. [Camp 19. Lat.
22 deg. 15m. long. 118 deg, 4m. 30 see.]
June 13. —Availing ourselves of the observations made yesterday, we
succeeded, after a hard scramble of two hours, in getting through the
remaining portion of the range, our horses having learned to climb like
goats, or they never would have accomplished the passage. The plain
appears to have a considerable elevation above those to the northward,
and is drained by several deep breaks through the Hamersley Kange.
Resuming a S.S.W. course to lat. 22deg. 26m, 32secs., we passed at first
over some very stony land, yielding little else besides triodia and stunted
acacia, but for the last 6 or 7 miles was a rich alluvial clay, covered with
very fair pasture, and water was found in abundance in pools in the bed
of a watercourse coming from the SE. [ Camp 20. Lat, 22deg. 26m.
58secs.]
June 14.- On our first landing at Nickol Bay, the nights had been
very mild, but we now began to feel them cold and bracing. This was
partly owing to the increased elevation of the country we were travelling
over; the S.E. wind, coming off the mountainous country, was very keen,
and almost frosty early in the morning. Our course this day was at
first over tolerably good country, which gradually became more and more
rocky, the ridges increasing in elevation, until the Aneroid barometer fell


to 27 - 33, giving an altitude of 2,400 feet above the sea. Night overtook
us in a deep rocky ravine, where we Had much difficulty in keeping the
pack-horses together, and were at last compelled to unload them among
rocks in the bed of a dry watercourse trending to the westward ; a little
grass being procurable in the vicinity. Fortunately water had been met
with at noon ;so that we were not pressed for want of it. [ Camp 21.
Lat. 22deg. 41m. 43secs.]
June 15. —Following the gully upon which we had encamped, it led us
to the westward, over a very rocky line of country, until 1 p.m., when,
not meeting with any water, and the horses showing great weakness and
symptoms of distress from the loss of their shoes, it was found desirable to
quit the main gully and try and find feed and water up a promising tri-
butary coming from the north, with the view of ultimately falling back
on the plains under the Hamersley Range, should we fail to meet with
water sooner; fortunately, however, in an hour we came upon a small
supply among rocks, surrounded by some tolerable feed. Had we failed
to find this timely relief, it is probable that not more than half the horses
would have been able to carry their loads back to the nearest known
wate hole. [ Camp 22.]
June 16. (Sunday.) —This day of rest was alike acceptable to man
and horse, and afforded me an opportunity, after reading prayers to the
party to clear a set of lunar distances, by which I found that the chron-
ometer would have placed us 40 miles to the west of our true position.
I had long since observed that it could not be trusted under even ordinary
variations of temperature, but could procure no other, the Acting Sur-
veyor-General having declined to supply me with either of the two chron-
ometers belonging to his department that could be relied on, and in
consequence I now found I should be compelled to have recourse entirely
to lunar observations and triangulation for the compilation of the maps,
which add very much to the amount of labour and liability to error.
Several crested pigeons, white cockatoos and crested quail or partridges,
were shot as they came to drink at the water-hole.
June 17. —The horses had so far recovered after the day’s rest, that we
were enabled to resume a B.W. course, following down the bed of the
stream to lat. 22deg. 51 min., the country slightly improving towards
evening; but we again had to encamp without water, having however
obtained a small quantity in some gravel at noon. The hills to the east
of our track rose about 1,000 feet above the bed of the watercourse, and
consisted of metamorphic sandstones and shales, intersected by whinstono
dykes, their summits being capped with red conglomerate. In one place
the river had cut through a ridge of altered rocks, and exhibited a very
singular contortion of the strata, the 1 ami dec being crippled up into an
arch of 100 feet high, shewing a dip on each fiank of 45 degrees, forming
a care beneath, running for some distance into the hill. [Camp 23.]
June 18.—Continuing to follow the stream-bed S.W, for 8 or 9 miles,
we came upon a patch of very green grass, on which we halted, to allow


the horses the benefit;, on account of their not having had any water
since noon yesterday. In the meanwhile, accompanied by Mr Brown, I
started off and walked to a prominent hill 6 miles to the south, to get a
view of the surrounding country. From the summit of this hill, which
we found to have an elevation of 700 or 800 feet, we procured a valuable
round of bearings, and had a distant view of the country to the
southward. Level plains and detached ranges of moderate elevation
appeared to be the general character of the country towards the Lyons
Liver. We returned to the party by 3 p.m., and were glad to find that
during our absence water had been found in shallow clay-pans a mile to
the westward, to which we moved over and encamped. [Camp 21.
Lat. 22deg. 66min. 23sec., long, by account H7deg. 21min.]
June 19. —We were unable to proceed this day, owing to my having
eaten some of the dwarf misembrianthemura, which I had formerly
observed to be used as food by the natives on the Gascoyne, but which
had produced with me violent headache and vomiting. The horses were,
however, enjoying excellent feed; and I contrived to work up my map
and clear a lunar.
June 20.—Started at 7h. 25m., with 19 horses, having been obliged
to leave behind a horse belonging to Mr Leonard, so lame that he could
not move. Following the stream-bed nearly west for 10 miles, came
upon a pool of permanent water, containing flags—the first we had met
with since quitting the Haraersley Range. This was of great value, as
there was no water that could be depended upon on our return, in the
last GO miles. Pushing on quickly for 12 miles further, thr river entered
a wide plain, in which was some tolerable feed; we had again, however,
to halt for the night without water.
J une 21. —Although the size of the channel of the river we had been
following down for the last 60 miles, had considerably increased both in
width and depth, yet very little water had been found in it, and as it
took a decided turn in its course this morning to N.W., after 2 hours’
ride, without observing any change, and there being every appearance of
its keeping the same course for the next 20 miles, I was convinced that
it could not be a tributary to either the Edmund or Lyons, which I had
at first hoped it might prove. The barometer also ranged too high for it
to be at a sufficient elevation to admit of it flowing into either of those
rivers, as the elevation of the Lyon’s at the confluence of the Alma is at
least of the same altitude above tbe sea. Having named the river the
Hardey, we fell back upon the pools passed yesterday, where I had decided
upon forming a depot camp, at which to rest the weakest horses, while
with a lightly equipped party I proposed to complete tho exploration of
the country intervening between this and the Lyon’s River. [Camp 2G.
Latitude 22deg. 58min, 28sec., long. 117 deg. lOnsin.]
June 22. In accordance with the plan decided upon yesterday, I
started, this day, accompanied by Messrs. Brown, Harding, and Brock-
man, with 3 pack-horses, conveying 8 days’ provisions and 14 gallons of


water. Twelve miles on a S.S.W. course, over a very stony country,
brought us to a deep stream-bed trending in the same direction, which
we pursued for 13 miles, the country gradually improving, until the
channel was lost in an open plain of rich soil, covered with fine green
grass. Several pools of rain-water of a deep red colour, but fresh and
sweet, gave us a good camp for the night; a set of Stellar observations
giving the lat. 23deg. 19min. 16sec. To the south, at ab»ut 6 miles
distant, lay a bold range of hills, running nearly E. and W., with many
sharp summits, having an average elevation of from 600 to 1000 feet
above the plain, and extending for 12 or 15 miles to the eastward, while
to the west it was lost in numerous broken hills of lesser elevation.
[Camp 27.]
June 23.—As to pass the eastern end of the range appeared likely to
take us too much off our course, we struck for what appeared to be a
break in the hills about 7 miles to the S.W, The first five miles was
across an open grassy plain, at times subject to inundation, which
brought us to the bank of a fine river, containing permanent reaches of
fresh lined with canes, the channel generally being from 100 to
200 yards wide, with a depth of 40 feet; it was now barely running, but
it was quite evident that it was too large for either the Alma or Edmund,
and its bed must be at least 200 feet below the level of those rivers. We,
however, determined to follow it so long as it ran to the south of west,
which it did until it came in contact with the range observed yesterday,
when it altered its course to the W.N.W., and appeared to continue that
direction for many miles, probably until joined by the Hardey, when, in
all likelihood, it continues its course direct to Exmouth Gulf. Anxious,
as I naturally was, to continue the examination of this promising rivei,
time, and the condition of our horses’ feet, did not permit us to do so
with advantage, Naming it the Ashburton, after the noble President of
the Royal Geographical Society, we quitted its verdant banks, and took a
south course up a stony ravine, which led us into the heart of the range,
where we soon became involved amongst steep rocky ridges of sharp slaty
schist, which very quickly deprived the horses of man}' of their remaining
shoes, and retarded our progress so much that by night-fall we found
ourselves to be in only lat, 23deg. 28min. 15sec.—hemmed in on all sides
by rugged country, yielding little else but small acacia-trees and triodia.
A little grass and water was, however, obtained in the bed of a stream
tributary to the Ashburton. The summits of the hills passed over during
the day had been seen from the the Lyons River in 1858, and were now
named the “Capricorn Range.” [Camp 28.]
June 24.—A rather rough ride of four hours to the S.E. brought us
to a watercourse, 60 yards wide, trending to the N.N.E., in which we
found pools of water, lined with reeds and flags. This was traced up to
the southward till 3 p.m., when we entered a deep gorge in a sandstone
range, the bed of the stream becoming very stony and full of meialeuca-
trees; it however, contained many fine pools and strong running springs,


with a small supply of grass. There was now a fair prospect of our
reaching the Lyons, as the range we were now entering must contain the
sources of the Edmund, which river has a much more restricted course
than was originally supposed. [ Camp 29. Lat. 23deg. 42min. 16sec.]
June 25. —The country continued hilly for about 10 miles, when we
arrived at the summit of a granite and sandstone table-land, at the extreme
sources of the watercourse we had been follow ing up. From this point
we had at last the satisfaction of observing the bold outlines of Mount
Augustus, bearing S.S.E. about 30 miles, while more to the westward
could be discerned the summits of Mounts Phillips and Samuel, and yet
more to the right the southern face of the Barlee Range. Descending to
the S. across an open plain, we struck for a remarkable gorge in a granite
range (the only one now r between us and the Lyons), at which we arrived
by sundown. On examining this singular gorge, it was found to be an
almost perpendicular cut through a narrow ridge nearly 300 feet in depth,
the length of the pass not exceeding 200 yards, the plain on each side
being nearly on the same level. From the summit of this pass the course
of the stream could be traced across the fertile flats of the Lyons until it
was lost in the numerous channels of that river, and I was able to obtain
bearings to many well remembered objects noticed on my former visit to
this part of the country. [ Camp 30. Lat. 23dcg. 56min, 45sec.]
June 26. —As we had only 4 days’ rations left, and no further object
could be obtained by advancing further south, unless there had been time
to examine the present condition of the pasture in the vicinity of Mount
Augustus, we marked several trees on the north side of the gorge close to
a pool, and retraced our steps to within a mile of our camp of the 24th,
having improved upon our outward track by keeping rather more to the
eastward. [ Camp 31.]
June 27.—Instead of returning by the rough route by which wo came
through the Capricorn Range, we followed the stream to the N.N.E.,
through a good country all the way to the Ashburton, which river it
joined in lat. 22deg. 26min., passing through the end of the range 1 mile
south of the junction. In this pass we encamped on a fine deep pool, in
which we caught a small quantity of fish, showing the water to be per-
manent. [ Camp 32.]
June 28.—Making an early start, w r e soon crossed the Ashburton, and
rode for 12 miles across open plains, thinly timbered and yielding a large
quantity of good pasture, principally of kangaroo grass, which here grew
to the height of 6 feet. Resting for several hours at the water-holes of
the 22nd, at 4h. 30min, p.m. we resumed our route, having filled our
water kegs, and pushed on to within 16 or 17 miles of the depot,
encamping amongst some good grass on our outward route, but without
any water except what we carried with us. [ Camp 33.]
June 29. —Diving our horses rather more than a gallon of water each,
we made an early start just as it came on to rain, which was the first
shower w r e had experienced since the 27th May j it continued until noon,


but not heavy enough to leave any surface water on the parched and
thirsty loam. Keeping more to the westward than our outward track,
we escaped much of the stony ground then passed over, and arrived at the
depot camp by 2 p.m.
June 30 (Sunday.) —Remained in camp, and read prayers to the
party.
July I.—The horses left at the depot were much improved by their 9
days’ rest, and had we been provided with more shoes for them, 1 should
have at once returned to the Ashburton, and traced that river up to the
eastward, as it offered a fine opportunity of penetrating to the S.E.,
probably at least another 100 miles; and our provisions on a reduced
allowance, would admit of out remaining out 40 days longer; but the
lameness of many of the horses, and lacerated condition of their fetlocks,
convinced me that should we meet with any more difficultios or rough
country before obtaining a fresh supply of shoes, much valuable time
would be lost, and we should probably fail to get many of the horses
back. I therefore deemed it more prudent to return at once by a
shorter route more to the eastward, so soon as we had repassed the
Hamersley Range, and, obtaining a refit at the bay, to throw all our
remaining time into the second trip. We accordingly to-day returned
to camp 24, where we found the horse left there on the 20th June,
sufficiently recovered to accompany the party, although incapable of
carrying a load. The remainder of the day was devoted to obtaining
bearings, and adding to the triangulation of the many remarkable summits
visible from this part of the country.
July 2. —The country generally being very rough, except on the banks
of the Hardey, on our outward track, we found it desirable to return
along it, more particularly as there was a better prospect of procuring
water by so doing. At about 20 miles we found a little water under a
cliff in the bed of the stream, and halted for the night. [ Camp 34.]
J uly 3. —Still returning on our old track, at 5 miles I stopped to
ascend a very remarkable hill which had formed an important point in
the triangulation of this part of the country, to which had been given
the name of Mount Samson. Sending the party onward to wait for me
at camp 22, I commenced the ascent of the mount, which proved some-
thing more than I had calculated upon, as it occupied more than an
hour’s sharp toil to arrive at its summit; when gained, however, it amply
repaid the trouble, as from it I could discern almost every prominent
hill or peak within 60 or 70 miles, and amongst them the mountain
which on a former occasion I had procured a bearing to from Mount
Augustus, at a distance of 124 geographical miles, and which I now named
Mount Bruce, after the gallant Commandant of the Troops, who
has always warmly supported me in carrying out explorations. This
part of the country I believe to be the most elevated in N.W, Australia;
Mount Samson having an altitude of not less than 1000 feet above the
valley of the Hardey, while Mount Bruce and the mountainous country to


the eastward rose to a considerable height above its summit, which, by com -
parisons from the Aneroid barometer, w r onld give not less than 4000 feet for
the elevation of those ranges. Having completed my observations, I des-
cended the hill with somewhat greater speed than it took to climb it, and
was met at the foot by Messrs. Brown and Harding, who had waited for me
with a horse. In less than an hour we overtook the rest of the party at
camp 23, when the additional horses at once drank up all the remaining
water left in the rocks ; resting, therefore, less than an hour, we moved
on, taking a north course, over a very rocky but highly fertile country
of trap formation, the grass just now being much dried up. At sundown
we halted in an open grassy flat, on which no water could be found,
although it is probable there is plenty in the vicinity, as emu and
cockatoos w r ere numerous ; one of the former walked boldly up to the
horses, and was fired at, but without effect, [ Camp 35. Lat. 22 deg.
3‘2min. 13sec.]
July 4. —Travelling at a rapid pace on an average N.E. course for
upwards of 20 miles, over plains mostly of rich loam, well grassed, and
extending to the southern foot of the Hamersley Range, we came upon a
low range of sandstone hills, covered with acacia bushes and triodia,
extending for 3 or 4 miles, when we again emerged on open plains, in
which was found a deep channel, 30 yards wide, containing pools of
rain-water retained in the clay. The amount of fine pasture country
passed over during the day could not be less than 200,000 acres, and
although we have not time to go in search for it, I have no doubt that
abundance of water will be found in the deep gorges of the range skirting
the plain. This tract of country is, I imagine, well suited for the growth
of either cotton or sugar, as it is apparently well irrigated during the
summer months, and the soil is remarkably rich and strong, while its
limits to the westward are at present unknown, and most probably con-
tinues to skirt the hills for at least 30 or 40 miles. Halted at the
water-holes about 4 miles to the west of the pass through the Hamersley
Range. [Camp 36.]
J uly s.—Two hours brought us to the head of the pass, which we
entered by a ravine a little more to the northward than on our outward
route, and by so doing saved a preliminary ascent of nearly 200 feet, and
a similar amount of descent, making a very successful passage through
the range, without experiencing the same difficulties we had formerly
met with, and by 3 p.m. found ourselves once more in the open grassy
country that forms the Chichester Downs. At 6 p.m. encamped in an
open flat without water. [ Camp 37.]
July 6. —Started at 7h, 30min., and In an hour came upon a pool of
water in one of the numerous channels into which the Fortcscue is here
divided, and at 7 miles struck the bulrush spring passed on the 11th
June. From this the river was followed dow r n for 13 miles, through
grassy clay pans, thinly timbered with white-gum. Encamped on a pool,
in lat. 21 deg. 53min. 4sec., about 5 miles north of a very remarkable bold


projection of the Hamerslcy Range. [ Camp 38. J
July 7. —Sunday was kept as a day of rest.
J uly B.—The horses strayed so far back on our tracks during Sunday
night, that by the time they were brought in it was too late to make a
start with advantage, as we were now about to enter a new tract of
country, by striking for the coast somewhere between Breaker Inlet and
Depuch Island. As a knowledge of this part of the country would greatly
assist us in starting on the second division of our exploration, I availed
myself of the delay here to fix by triangulation many of the summits and
prominent spurs of the Hamersley Range, and take observations for the
variation of the needle, which I found to be about 1 degree E, by the
prismatic compass I had in use.
July 9. —Our horses again gave us some trouble to find them, so that
we did not start until lOh. 30rain, Two hours’ sharp travelling across
the plain brought us to the foot of low hills of trap and sandstone, covered
with triodia ; good feed being, however, plentiful in the valleys, although
now rather dry. Tracing up a small tributary to the Fortescue, at sunset
we halted on a small rocky pool, near its source, in lat. 21 deg, 41 min.
40sec. Several pools, supplied by springs, coming from under the super-
stratum of sandstone, were passed during the day. [Camp 39. Long.
117 deg. 47min.]
J uly 10.—For 7 miles the country continued gently to ascend, the
sandstone giving place to trap boulders, yielding a very rich soil, clothed
with short green grass and melons, the soil being too stony for agricul-
tural purposes, although I have seen country of a similar appearance in
the island of Mauritius producing fine crops of sugar. Some of the
melons weighed as much as 5 or 6 ounces, and were passably good eating,
although rather bitter. At noon the country dropped suddenly to the
northward, and we descended a deep rocky ravine, in which we soon found
water and grass. Travelling now became difficult and sometimes
dangerous to the horses; rugged and semi-columnar metamorphic
sandstone cliffs hemmed in the ravines on either side, while large rounded
boulders of trap rock filled the bed of the stream, which in several places
was running. We had a rather indifferent camp in lat. 21 deg. 29min.
lOsec., the camp at Nickol Bay bearing W.N.W., distant 7o miles by
account. [Camp 40. J
July 11. —The stream wc were upon continued to take a northerly
course for 8 or 10 miles down a valley from 200 to 300 feet in depth,
where it is diverted to the eastward for about the same distance by a
cross range of black volcanic hills of loose ragged rocks, totally devoid of
vegetation. The channel receiving several tributaries, here becomes a
succession of fine open pools of water from 80 to 150 miles in width.
We halted for the night on a wide bed of bare sand and rocks, the only
feed being in the channel of the river, to which was now given the name
of Sherlock. [Camp 41.]
July 12.—This morning the river resumed a N.N.W. course, and very


soon led us out into an open plain, rather sandy in character; the channel
dividing into several branches, separating, miles apart, the stream of
water issuing from the hills, soon being absorbed in the sandy bed, but a
well-defined line of verdant trees served well to mark the course of the
channels through the plain for many miles. Selecting the one that
appeared the most promising, it was traced down to lat. 21 deg. 6min.
43sec., where we encamped on a shallow pool of brackish water, the only
one seen during the day. Several natives were found here, employed
capturing partridges, by means of nets, constructed out of the leaf of the
triodia ; neatly twisted and netted in the same way as done by ourselves;
the mesh varying from 1 to 5 inches, according to the purpose to which
it is applied. It was very singular to observe the mode in which they
induce the birds to enter the nets, or rather cages, prepared for them.
In the first instance, they place ragged bushes all round the small pools,
with the exception of a few spaces 5 or 6 feet wide, from which opening
they stick in a double row of twigs, arching so as to meet over-head in
the centre lor 2 feet from the ground; these little avenues lead away
for several yards, and then terminate with a net thrown over a few light
sticks at the end. The birds first alight on the margin of the pool, but
after drinking, do not take flight at once, but run up the only opening,
which leads them first under the arch of twigs, and finally into the net,
which is then drawn to by the hunter lying in wait under a tew bushes.
In this way they must capture a large amount of game, judging by the
quantity of feathers around some of the water-holes. [Camp 42.]
July 13.—Two miles north the river turned west, and kept that
course for 7 or 8 miles, through a poor sandy and stony tract of country,
and was then joined by a fine channel coming from the south. Near the
j unction are two reaches of water, half a mile long each, and a rifle shot
across, containing a quantity of ducks and other water-fowl, amongst
which our sportsmen were very successful, along with other game, bag-
ging the only two swans we had seen since landing ; a number of fine
fish like cobblers, were also caught, weighing from Ito 51bs a-piece. As
it was Saturday, and our horses were showing unmistakeable signs of
knocking up, we halted for the rest of the day. [ Camp 43, Lat. 21 deg,
Gmin. osec., long. 117 deg. 32min. 30sec.]
July 14 (Sunday.) —After reading prayers, Messrs. Brown, Harding,
md mysslf, walked to the summit of the range of black volcanic hills
Lat skirted the western bank of the river, at about a mile distant. These
lulls consist of ragged scoria, elevated 300 to 400 feet above the plain,
md are nearly destitute of vegetation. At their summits are deep fissures,
the heat of the eruptive rocks from beneath having been sufficient to
convert the trap and sandstone rocks into a deep bluish grey scoria,
having a specific gravity of nearly 4, but we did not observe any instance
af the actual overflow of lava, and consequently there was a want of the
Fertilizing properties in the soil, resulting from it, that usually accom-
panies volcanic formations. A native dog had left a litter of pup > under


a heap of stones not 18 inches beneath our feet, but such was the sharpness
and ponderability of the fragments of rock, that it fairly baffled our
attempts to unhouse them. A valuable round of bearings was procured
from this spot. Depuch Island being seen, bearing N. 14deg. E., distant
about 28 miles.
July 15. —We resumed our course down the Sherlock, the stony
nature of the country telling severely upon our horses’ feet, who in other
respects were in very tolerable condition. We had not proceeded more
than 3 or 4 miles, when Mr Brockman’s horse, Rocket, gave in, and
could not move another step, the hoof being fairly worn through ;
leaving him close to a pool of water amongst plenty of feed, I hoped he
might possibly recover by the time we returned from the bay. Below
this the channel became sandy and dry, and we only little
water at night In a clay-hole. Plains extended from the river to the
north and eastward as far as the eye could reach, only interrupted by
occasional detached hills of granite or volcanic trap, the feed being
generally coarse and the soil poor. [ Camp 44. Lat, 20deg. 54min.
45sec.J
July 16.—Leaving the valley of the river on a N.W. course, in half
an hour we came upon an open plain of rich clayey loam, covered with a
tine even sward of good grass, on which were feeding large flocks of
pigeons and white cockatoos; this change in the character of the soil
being ascribable to the occasional overflow of the river, leaving a deposit
of rich mud. This plain extends as far as we could see to the north and
east, a few widely-scattered tops of trees being the only objects breaking
the monotony of the sea of grass. To the north was a strong line of large
timber, for which wo steered. At 3 miles we entered the wood, and found
it to contain the main channel of the Sherlock, in which were a few small
pools of rain-water. Crossing the bed of the river on the same «ourse,
we soon came upon another branch coming from the S.W., which was
named the George, Immediately below the junction of the two streams,
the river opened out into reaches of brackish w r ater, evidently under the
influence of the spring tides. From this point the left bank was followed
down to within 3 or 4 miles of the sea, where the country becoming low
and flat, the grass coarse, and no fresh water procurable, we quitted the
Sherlock and struck to the west for 6 or 7 miles, crossing several salt-
water creeks, until we were compelled to turn to the southward, to avoid
a channel much larger and deeper than the rest, at which a party of
natives were engaged drawing their nets, but ran away on our approach.
A little further on the plain became more fertile, and we found a small
pool of rain-water in the clay, at which we encamped. There is no doubt
but that the Sherlock and the creek we were upon discharged their
waters by the numerous creeks shown on Captain King’s charts, 15 or
16 miles to the west of Depuch Island. [Camp 45. Lat. 2Udeg. 52min.
15sec., long. 1 l7deg. ISmin.J
J uly 17. —8 y observation of the sun at rising, the variation of the


needle was found to be Ideg. lOmin. E. We were now about 40 miles
from Nickol Bay, and as it was very doubtful whether water would be
procurable in that distance, I became very anxious on account of the
horses, as, should the country prove stony, I was quite certain they could
not perform the journey in less than three days; I therefore determined
upon following up a leading valley towards the Maitland River, with the
intention, in the event of not finding water or a pass through the heavy
mass of hills that back Cape Lambert, of pushing through the upper
branches of that river, and by a round of 60 or 70 miles, to approach the
bay by our outward track ; fortunately, however, in the course of
the day we fell in with some pools of rain-water, which enabled us to
advance about 18 miles over tolerably even plains, well grassed, our
night-halt being without water. [ Camp 46.]
JtriY 18.—From our position, and the observations I had made of the
country on the eastern shores of Nickol Bay, I was satisfied that the
breadth of stony ranges lying between us and our destination did not
exceed 8 or 10 miles, which we therefore now determined to venture
upon, although at great risk to the horses, some of which now walked
upon stones as they would over red hot coals. Entering the range by a
small ravine, 3 hours’ scramble over sharp rocks brought us out on the
head of a small tributary to the Nickol River, the sufferings of the horses
in crossing the range being quite painful to witness; they all, however,
succeeded in getting through, and as a little water was found in the bed
of the stream, we were enabled to push on late, and cross the marsh at
the head of the bay before it was quite dark, the departing rays of the
setting sun having first favoured us with a glimpse of the Dolphin,
riding at anchor on the deep blue waters of the bay—a sight which was
welcomed with no small satisfaction by the little band of weary travellers.
\Camp 47.]
July 19.—The camp was easily aroused by the morning watch, as
there was now only six miles between us and the landing place in Hearson
Cove, the horses appearing to partake of the general activity; so that it
was only 10 a.m, when we arrived on our old camping ground, which we
found occupied by 10 or a dozen natives, engaged mending their nets.
Coming upon them suddenly, they would not stop to carry off their gear,
although not half an hour before they had been employed assisting a
boat’s crew from the Dolphin, in loading with wood and water. A rifle
shot soon recalled the boat, which was not a mile from the shore, when
we were glad to learn that Mr Hearson was fast recovering from his
wound, and that all had been going on well since our departure. From
Mr Walcott I ascertained that he had been able to establish a friendly
understanding with the natives who frequented the western side of the
bay, and that they had been made useful in filling up the ship’s water
and wood, for which service they had been rewarded by a suitable distri-
bution of biscuit. In one instance the natives on the eastern shore of the
bay had shown a hostile tendency, on the occasion of a boat landing on


the reef to gather shells. One of the seamen, who had wandered from
the rest, was chased into the sea, and menaced with spears and clubs,
until he was up to his neck in water, when the boat came to his rescue,
the officer in charge of her firing a shot over their heads to drive them
off. Mr Walcott had also been successful in obtaining a very useful
vocabulary of native words and other interesting particulars from the
aborigines, as also many botanical specimens, shells, &c., —amongst the
latter some very fine pearl oysters, from which several pearls of good
colour had been obtained, but appeared to be principally valuable on
account of the size and beauty of the mother-of-pearl, which averaged 6
inches diameter, with more than half an inch in thickness of solid shell.
July 20. —The forge, stores, and other additional supplies having been
landed, and the party set to work shoeing horses, repairing saddle-bags,
&c. I proceeded with Mr Walcott and Mr Angel in the boat to make a
rough survey of the coves on the western side of the bay, with a view to
selecting a suitable spot from which to re-embark the horses on our
return from the next trip, as it would bo too late in the season, by that
time, to venture the trip overland to Champion Bay. I found that a
good anchorage existed, with 3 fathoms at low water, 1 mile off the little
cove from which the ship had been watered, and is approachable at all
times, except in strong E. or S.E. gales, when a heavy swell sets in across
the bay, rendering a landing unsafe. The fresh water runs down a rocky
gully at the N.W, corner of the cove, at the north end of a small patch
of sandy beach, and the supply appears tolerably abundant ; it is, how-
ever, rather difficult of access towards the end of the dry season, as the
water has then to be carried over the rocks in small baracas 50 or 60
yards to the boats, but from the setting in of the rains to the end of
August, it runs down strongly at high-water mark. I walked back
overland to the camp with Mr Walcott, the distance being about 4 miles,
heading, by the way, another deep cove, the margin of which was lined
with a broad belt of mangroves.
July 21 to 28.—Was fully taken up in shoeing horses, making spare
shoes, refitting and packing stores, Ac., ready for our trip to the eastward,
my own time being principally taken up in roughly plotting the country
already explored, so as to secure all the information obtained, in the event
of any accident occurring to my field-books.
t July 29.—Everything being in readiness for our departure, I gave
Captain Dixon instructions to wait for us in the bay to the 10th of
December, and in the event of our not then returning, Mr Walcott would
land one of the ship’s iron tanks, and bury in it a quantity of stores, at a
spot already agreed upon; the Dolphin would then proceed to Fremantle.
It blew so fresh all the morning, that I could not land until 3 p.m.,
when we quickly saddled up and proceeded 3 miles to a waterhole up in
the volcanic hills, as it was probable we should have a very long day’s
march to-morrow without water. As we had now only 19 horses, and one
of these so low in condition as not to be able to carry a load, we could


only take with us 87 days’ rations, at the rate of 11b of flour, 7oz. of
meat, and 4oz. of sugar per ivan, per diem; we were, however, well
provided with ammunition, and 30 spare sets of horse-shoes, with nails
sufficient for at least two removes, the horses themselves being shod at
starting with extra strong shoes, tipped with steel. We had now only
7 saddle-horses; so that one of the party was always on foot by turns of
an hour each. It had been originally intended that the Dolphin should
proceed to Roebuck Bay and meet us there, but it was now so late in the
season that I did not deem it prudent to run the risk of removing her to
an unknown anchorage, where it was possible we might not be able to
reach, and thus lay ourselves open to the probability of a very embarrasing
uncertainty. The result proved we had adopted the right course.
[ Bivouac. ]
July 30. —This morning we crossed the marsh with some difficulty,
as all the pack-horses but 3 fell and stuck in the mud, until we trans-
ferred their loads to our own backs and carried them through half a mile
of the softest part. This operation detained us so long, that we did not
make more than 18 miles, when we found a little water left in the pool
seen on the 18th. [Camp 48.]
July 31. —Started at 8 a.m., following our old tracks to 3h. 30m.
p.m., when we turned to the south up a stream-bed crossed on the 17th.
At the gorge where it issued from the granite ranges, we found a fine
pool of permanent water and abundance of beautiful green grass. This
stream was now named the Harding, and as the packs were heavy, we
remained here the rest of the afternoon. [Camp 49.]
August I. —Passing under tne northern foot of the granite ranges on
an easterly course for sixteen miles, we came upon a fine reach of open
water in a branch of the creek on which we had encamped on the 16th
July. This pool was a valuable discovery, as it would not only form a
useful halting place on our return, but, from being in the middle of a
fertile plain containing at least from 15,000 to 20,000 acres of arable land,
equal in quality to the Greenough Flats, the whole could, if necessary,
be easily irrigated from this large natural reservoir, the highest part of
the plain not being 30 feet' above the water-level at the driest period
of the year. This fine tract of country, in connection with the lands
already seen almost adjoining on the eastern bank of the Sherlock,
would in itself support a larger population than is at present contained
in the whole of the colony of Western Australia. We had seen more
kangaroo on these plains than on any other portion of our route; one
that was shot resembled the osphranier, and was in very good order, the
fur much thicker and softer than the common kangaroo of the western
coast, and oi a pale mouse colour. It weighed about 45lbs. [ Camp 50.
Lat. 21deg. 54min. 18sec.]
August 2. —Proceeding eastward over grassy plains and stony ridges,
13 miles we struck the Sherlock only 2 miles below the pool at which
i had left the" horse Rocket, and hoped to find him improved by the


rest, but on approaching the spot, the presence of crows and a wild dog
gave indications of a different fate; we found him partly devoured within a
few yards of where we left him, inflammation of the feet having most
probably produced mortification. Pushing on till sunset we arrived at
our old camping ground (camp 43) at the bend of tbe Sherlock. [Camp
51. J
August 3.—Followed up the left bank of the Sherlock to camp 42,
and found a little water still remaining in the Bird-Cage pools, where
we halted for 2 hours. At Ih. 30m, resumed an easterly route, across a
sandy plain, yielding little but hakea and triodia. Five miles brought
us to a large branch of the Sherlock, coming from the S.E., in which
were several small permanent pools, surrounded by flags, at which we
halted. [Camp 52. Lat. 21deg. 7min.]
August 4 (Sunday). —Although the feed here was very indifferent,
yet as we had again entered unexplored country, 1 was glad to make it a
lay of rest before entering upon the rather unpromising tract of country
that lay in the onward route.
August s. —Making a rather late start, on account of the horses
having strayed very far in search of feed, we steered for a bold range,
bearing E.S.E., distant about 20 miles. At 4 miles, crossed a dry channel
coming from the S.S.E., and continued our course over a poor tract of
country, covered with triodia and a few acacia, large bare red granite
rocks cropping out here and there. At one of these wts a small water-
hole, near which a native was hunting mice. Although at first alarmed,
le soon told us, in answer to our enquiries, that we should find no water
co the E., but plenty to the south, which e found to be correct, as
we had to halt, after a very long day’s march, in a dry ravine in the
ranges for which we had been making. [Camp 53. Lat. 21 deg, lOmin.
35 sec.]
August 6.—Having reconnoitred the country for some miles ahead
over-night, without finding water, it was no use leading our horses
further into the rugged defiles, where we might get entangled for many
hours; we accordingly struck to tbe S.W. for 4 miles, when we came on
a rocky pool of permanent water in the S.E. branch of the Sherlock, just
at the point where it emerges from the hills. Having watered the
horses and given them an hour’s rest, we followed up the stream to the
S.E. for seven miles, when it divided into numerous small dry ravines in
the heart of an elevated range of granite capped with metamorphic sand-
stone; water having-only being met with within the first mile from where
we struck it. [Camp 54.
August 7. —The horses requiring water, we fell back upon the pool
passed yesterday, where I decided upon leaving the bulk of the party
for a day or two, while 1 explored the country for a pass to the eastward.
[Camp 55. Lat. 21 deg. I4min. 28sec,]
August B. —Taking with me Mr Brown and Mr Harding, mounted,
and one pack-horse, carrying water, we struck through the hills to the


eastward, and at 6 miles came upon a stream-bed that led us to the N.E.
15 or 16 miles, when finding it contained no water, we resumed an
easterly course over an open sandy and stony plain, covered with triodia,
for 12 miles, and encamped in poor feed without water. [ Camp 56.
Lat. 21 deg. 4min.]
August 9.—A heavy dew having fallen during the night, our horses
were much refreshed, and we were enabled to proceed with the scanty
supply of water carried with us. In an hour we struck upon the channel
of a river, with a sandy bed, 300 yards wide, in which were a few pools
of water, under a bold sandstone bluff, rising abruptly 300 feet from the
plain. From the summit of this hill the river was observed to trend to
the N.N.W. for 8 or 10 miles, and to come through the gap in a granite
range 4 miles to the S.S.E., towards which we now turned our steps,
across extensive beds of soft drift sand brought down by the river.
Cajeput and acacia trees occupied a large portion of the channel, and it
was not until reaching the gorge in the range that grass was met with
in sufficient quantities to supply our wants. Several large pools teeming
with water-fowl, occupied the whole of the valley, which here was fully
a quarter of a mile wide. The remainder of the day, I devoted to sketch-
ing and triangulating the country, while the horses were enjoying the
benefit of the fine feed. [Camp 57. Lat. 21deg. 6min. 26sec.]
August 10. —As this river, from its magnitude, afforded a fair chance
of working to the S.E., I determined to bring forward the rest
of the party. Having named this river the Yule, we returned to the
depot party by a somewhat shorter cut, making it in about 30 miles,
which we accomplished by sundown.
August 11 (Sunday.) —Party resting. Observed a set of lunars,
which placed us in long. 118 deg. 3 min. E,, the rate of the chronometer
being still so irregular as to be almost useless.
August 12.—T0-day the whole party proceeded 24 miles towards the
Yule, finding a small pool of water in a rocky ravine by the way, which
we had missed on our former trip. Bivouacked in an open grassy plain
6 miles short of the river.
August 13.—Moved on to our camp of the 9th, and halted there for
the remainder of the day. The latitude by meridian altitude of the sun
I found to be 21deg. 6min. 22sec.
* August 14. —As travelling near the river was found to be very labori-
ous, on account of the vast beds of loose drift-sand thrown up by the
summer floods, we steered to the S.S.E. for a pass in the ranges, about
20 miles distant, through which the river was supposed to come, but on
reaching the hills, the river was observed to the westward; we accord-
ingly altered our course to S.W., and struck it at about 6 miles; the
character of the river being still the same, the aggregate width of the
several channels amounting to nearly half a mile ; water being produced
in them by digging a few inches in the sand. The country passed over
during the day was an open plain of light sandy loam, interspersed with


bare granite rocks, cropping out at intervals of a few miles. Giant ant-
hills of from 10 to 16 feet in height, and 30 to 50 feet in circumference,
(a few of which had already been met with on our first trip,) were here
remarkably conspicuous, on account of their size and brick-red colour.
An emu was shot during the day, while running at full speed, at the
range of over 200 yards. [ Camp 58. Lat. 21 deg. 23min, 23scc,
August 15.—One of the horses was missing this morning; so that
we did not start until 10 a.m., when the river was followed up to the
S.E., through country the same as ycsterdaj ; halting for the night in
lat. 21 deg. 32 min. 13sec. [Camp 59.]
August 16.—Our average course to-day was nearly east, occasionally
crossing channels coming from the S.E. Towards evening we found that
the main channel which it had been our intention to have followed, had
escaped our observation to the southward, and we were only on a com-
paratively small tributary coming from a rugged range ot hills to the
eastward. Our object for the present not being to push too far into the
interior, this tributary was followed until it broke up into numerous
small valleys, in one of which water was obtained by digging 3 feet in
the sand, amongst tolerable feed; the country having much improved in
the course of the day, [Camp 60. Lat. 21deg. 34min,
August 17. —Soon after starting this morning, we came upon a camp
of natives, but we could not prevail upon any of them to stop and hold
parley with us. Four hours’ travelling over rocky ground led us well
into the range, which we found to consist of granite, capped with naeta-
morphic sandstones, and broken up by dykes of variegated jasper. In a
deep ravine at the foot of a cliff we found a small pool of beautiful clear
spring water, which was very acceptable, as the sun had now acquired
considerable power, and the grasses were beginning to get very dry food
for our horses. During the halt at this spring, Mr Harding and my-
self ascended the highest part of the range, which was found to be 500
or 600 feet above the plain. From this elevation 1 was enabled to select
our onward route, and obtain bearings to several useful summits for
triangulation ; a few hills to the S.S.E., being visible at the distance
of 60 or 70 miles, which no doubt form a part of the continuation of
the Hamersley Range. Resuming an east course, the culminating point
of the range was soon passed, when we descended to the eastward down
some deep and remarkably picturesque rocky glens, in which were found
several springs and pools of water, leading down to a fine grassy flat in
which were growing some large flooded gum-trees. [Camp 61.]
August 18 (Sunday). —Found our lat. 21deg. 36min. 8 sec., long.
119 deg. 13min. E., by account.
August 19. —The country being very hilly, it was found best to follow
down the stream upon w 7 hich we had encamped, although it trended to
the north of east. In a few miles the valley opened out with fine pools
of permanent water, covered with numerous flights of ducks, and at 8
miles it joined a wide valley from the south, down which flowed a river.


divided into several channels, containing many fine pools from 50 to 200
yards wide, which were still running gently from one to another. The
banks, although well grassed, were very rocky, rendering travelling ex-
cessively fatiguing to our heavily-loaded pack-horses, several of them
being bruised and strained while jumping from rock to xock, the clefts
being too deep and narrow for them to walk between, and the ranges
bordering the valley were too steep to admit of our leaving the river,
which we were compelled to follow down to lat. 21deg. 26rain. S2sec.
[Camp 62.]
August 20.—The river, which had been named the Strelley, continued
to hold a northerly course ; we therefore availed ourselves of a smoother
valley coming in from the E. to resume our old course. At 9 miles we
met with a stream, 100 yards wide, coming from the S.E., evidently
tributary to the Strelley, and taking its rise in elevated granite ranges,
with black volcanic ridges protruding through them, but not to any
considerable height above the general level of the country. After a few
hours 5 scramble over these ridges, we came upon a small stream, trending
E., containing several springs, surrounded by high grass and flags, gradu-
ally leading us, by sunset, into a deep pass, walled in by cliffs and bluffs
from 100 to 800 feet high; the stream, having joined several larger ones
from the southward, now occupying nearly the whole width of the valley.
We encamped in one of the wildest and most romantic-looking spots to
be found in this part of Australia, to which we gave the name of Glen
Herring, from a fish bearing a resemblance to a herring being found in
the stream, f Camp 63. Lat. 21 deg. 20min. 35sec.]
August 21. —With some difficulty we wended our way down the
intricate windings of the glen for 6 miles in a N.E. direction, when it
opened out into grassy flats, turning to the northward. Leaving it at
this point, a mile E. brought us to the bank of a fine open river-bed, 200
yards wide, down which a little water was still flowing, the country on
its banks becoming much more promising, and grass plentiful. This
river I named the Shaw, and some beautiful grassy plains through which
it came for 20 or 30 miles to the southward, Norton Plains, after the
talented Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society. In the afternoon
a large tributary from the S.E. was followed up for some miles, when,
turning to the south, we quitted it, to follow an open valley leading east,
towards a bold granite and schistoise range, under which we encamped
late, without finding water. [ Camp 64. Lat. 21deg. 20min.]
August 22. — A.» we did not find water for some distance to the
eastward under the foot of the hills, we turned to the south-east, quickly
emerging from the hills upon the Norton Plains, and at 2 miles came
upon the stream quitted last evening, to which the name of Emu Creek
had been given. It had altered its course, and was again coming from
the 8., and contained several fine springs. This creek was followed up
for the rest of the day, through a rather indifferent country, and, towards
nightfall, led us into a deep rocky ravine, in which we encamped, a small


supply of water being obtained from holes in the rocks. [Camp 65.
Lat. 21 deg. 28min.]
August 23. —As we advanced, the ravine divided into many branches
coming from an elevated table-land to the southward j we therefore again
resumed an easterly course for 5 or 6 mile -, over rugged hills, and
descended by a gully trending N.E., which led us in a few miles into
open plains. Skirting the northern loot of the range until after dark,
we encamped on a small water-course, in which we obtained water by
digging under some granite rocks. [Camp 66. Lat. 21 deg. 23min.
30sec.]
August 24,—The horses having suffered much amongst the rocks
during the last few days, I determined to follow the southern edge of the
plain until a stream could be met with to lead us to the S.E. A few
miles brought us to a small watercourse running gently from some springs
in the plain, which, contrary to our expectations, ran into the ranges to
the S.E., instead ot coming out of them. As here there was plenty of
green grass and water, and the horses were not looking well, we encamped
early in the entrance of the gorge. [Camp 67. Lat. 21 deg. 20min.
13sec.]
August 25 (Sunday.) —Long., by observation, 120 deg. I7minj var.,
30min. E.
August 26.—The stream we were upon led us about 5 miles S.E.
through the hills, and then joined a river coming from the southward,
100 yards wide, which was followed down on an average course of E.N.E.
to lat. 21 deg. 18min.; reeds and rank grass lining its banks in many
parts, while in others granite boulders and banks of drift-sand offered
considerable impediments to travelling. [Camp 68.]
August 27. —The river took us on a northerly course 9 or 10 miles,
receiving many large tributaries, several of them still running slightly,
forming altogether a stream of some importance, which, on account of
the large extent of pastoral and agricultural lands afterwards found on its
banks lower down, and its many fine tributaries, I named the DeGrey, in
honour of the noble Lord who took a lively interest in promoting the
objects of the Expedition. As the object at present in view was to push
to the S.E. we left this promising river and resumed an E.S.E. course,
for 5 or 6 miles, into a hilly country, and encamped in a gully with rather
scanty feed, a little water being obtained by digging. [Camp 69,]
August 28. —We soon became involved in deep ravines, which led up
into high table-land, the summit of which was no sooner obtained than
we had again to descend equally precipitous gullies to the eastward, the
horses sliding down amongst the loose rocks and stones with a velocity
that threatened immediate destruction; they all, however, arrived safe at
the bottom, although in so exhausted a state that two of them had very
shortly after to be left behind, while we pushed on with the rest in
search of water and feed, which was not met with until late in the day.


After a short rest, I sent Messrs. Brown and Brockman back for the two
beaten horses, while I moved the party on a mile further to a fine spring
in a grassy flat, where we encamped. [ Camp 70. Lat. 21 deg. 9muu
3sec.]
August 29.—The two horses left yesterday were brought into camp
early in the day, and as they were too weak to carry their loads, they
were placed on our saddle-horses, one of the party by turns having to
walk. As the season was rapidly advancing, we could not venture to
incur any delay, much as the horses required rest, and accordingly
resumed an cast course late in the day. At 5 miles came upon a sandy
stream-bed, 50 yards wide, trending to the N.E., beyond vfhich the
country opened out into an extensive plain of white waving grass—to the
north uninterrupted by a single elevation, while to the E. and S. at 8
or 10 miles distant, rose ranges of granite hills, capped with horizontal
sandstones. It was not until some time after dark that we arrived near
the opposite edge of the plain, when wo came upon a river, 200 yards
wide, running to the northward. The long drought had reduced it to a
few shallow pools, running from one to the other through the deep sand
in the bed j magnificent cajcput trees lined the banks, and grass was in
abundance. [ Camp 71.]
August 30.—We did not start till late, as Mr Brown had to go back
gome little distance for his horse, which had been again left behind over-
night, knocked up. As it would have been useless, in the present condi-
tion of our horses, to attempt at once to enter the ranges to the E., we
determined to follow up the river for a few days to the S.S.E., and by
so doing secure feed and water, and give the poor animals a chance of
recovering their strength j we therefore followed the river up for 7 or 8
miles, through fine open forest country, and encamped near a deep pool,
in which were caught 10 or 12 dozen of small trout, which, with
cockatoos and ducks, afforded an important addition to our ration of only
7oz. of meat. This river was named the Oakovcr. {Camp 72.]
August 31.—For nearly 10 miles the river continued to lead us to
the eastward of S ; it then divided, the main channel coming from the S.
W.; wo, however, followed the eastern branch until quite satisfied that
it contained no water, and then fell back to the westward, striking the
river near some cliffs, at the foot of which water was plentiful. Although
only 1 p.m,, I determined to halt for the remainder of the day, as it
was too late to make an attempt to enter the hills without giving the
horses the advantage of some hours’ feed and rest. It also aflorded me
leisure to make astronomical observations and work up the plans of our
route, A set of lunar distances, very carefully taken, placed the camp
in long. I2ldeg. 3min. 30sec. E„ while that by account, carried on by
triangulation and dead reckoning from the Sherlock, placed us miles
more to the westward; the latitude being 21 deg. 23min. 43scc. [ Cam
73. J
September 1 (Sunday) —Read prayers.


Septemeer 2.—A march of 3 hours across the plains to the eastward
brought us to the foot of the range, which we entered by a tolerably
easy pass, and soon came upon a pool of water in a tributary to the
Oakover, the mouth of which had been passed on our ascent of that
river. Here we halted for two hours, and then resumed our route
through steep and rocky hills containing numerous fine springs. It was
not until 7 p.m., that we finally got through the ranges, and emerged
upon open sandy plains of vast extent, no object being observable from
N.N.E. round to S.S.E., except low ridges of red drift-sand, in many
parts nearly bare of vegetation. A large party of natives were encamped
upon the watercourse down which we descended to the plain. Not wish-
ing to alarm them, we passed the water-holes from which they were
supplied, and proceeded a mile farther, but had in consequence to encamp
without water, although amongst abundance of grass. [Camp 74. Lat.
21deg. 21min. 30sec.]
September 3.—This morning we returned to the native encampment
for water, and found that they had already deserted it, leaving many of
their things behind—amongst others, a very singular head-dress, shaped
like a helmet. It consisted of a circular band, made of twisted grass,
the size of the head, into which were stuck 10 or 12 upright twigs,
brought together into a point two feet high, which was woven like an
open basket, with yarn, made of opossum-fur; the whole no doubt
being considered highly ornamental by the wearers, but of not the least
service as an article of protection for the head, either from the sun or in
war. Having watered the horses, we entered the sand-plain, travelling
between the ridges, which ran in straight lines parallel to each other,
at the distance of several hundred yards apart, the sand being thrown by
the S.E. gales into acute ridges 30 to 60 feet high, their direction being
almost Invariably N. 109 deg. E. Travelling to 25h. 15min., p.m., we
got over about 18 miles, the valleys yielding little else but triodia, with
occasional patches of stunted gum-forest, in which was found a little
good grass, on which were feeding flights of pigeons and a variety of
parrot, new to us, but which I believe to be the “ golden-backed” parakeet
(psephofus chrysopterygius ) of Gould. As no water could be found, and
many of the horses gave signs of being greatly distressed, no change
being observable in the country for many miles ahead, a few very distant
ranges being the only objects visible, we were obliged to have recourse
to the only safe expedient of falling back and forming a depot. Resting
to oh. 10m., we commenced a retreat until 7h. 20m., having been obliged
to abandon a horse of Mr Brown’s quite exhausted. [ Camp 75.]
September 4. —At 6h. 30m., resumed our retreat, and by noon
arrived at the water-hole of the 2nd, having left two more horses behind,
which, however, Mr Brown and myself carried out water to in the course
of the evening and drove them in during the night.
September s.— Leaving the party to rest, I walked 10 or 12 miles
round to the S.S. eastward along the foot of the range in search of


water, ami to ascertain if a better lino of country could be found in that
direction, but it continued to maintain the same arid appearance, and I
only came on one pool, in a gully about 4 miles from the camp
[Depot.']
September 6.—Leaving Mr Turner and four of the party in depot,
with instructions to remain there three days, and then fall back upon
the Oakover, where there was much better feed, I started with Messrs.
Brown and Harding, taking 6of the strongest horses, 16 days’ rations
and 6 gallons of water, and steered S.S.E. along the ranges for 6 or 8
miles, looking for some stream-bed that might lead us through the plains,
but was disappointed to find that they were all lost in the first mile
after leaving the hills, and as crossing the numerous ridges of sand
proved very fatiguing to the horses, we determined once more to attempt
to strike to the eastward between the ridges, which wo did for 15 miles,
when our horses again shewed signs of failing us, which left us the
only alternative of either pushing on at all hazards, to a distant range
that was now just visible to the eastward, where, from the numerous
native fires and general depression of the country, there was every reason
to think a large river would be found to exist, or to make for some
deep rocky gorges in the granite hills 10 miles to the south, in which
there was every prospect of finding water. In the former case the
travelling would be the smoothest, but the distance so great that, in the
event of our failing to obtain water, we probably should not succeed in
bringing back one of our horses; while, in the latter, we should have
to climb over the sand ridges, which we had already found so fatiguing;
this course, however, involved the least amount of risk, and we accordingly
struck south 4 miles and halted for the night. [Camp 76.]
September 7.—The horses did not look much refreshed by the night’s
rest; we, however, divided 3 gallons of water amongst them, and started
off early, in the hope of reaching the ranges by noon, but we had not
gone 3 miles when one of the pack-horses, that was carrying less than
401bs. weight, began to fail, and the load was placed upon my saddle-
horse ;it did not, however, enable him to get on more than a couple of
miles further, when we were compelled to abandon him, leaving him
under the shade of the only tree we could find, in the hope that we
might bring back w r ater to his relief. Finding that it would bo many
hours before the horses could be got on to the hills, I started ahead on
foot, leaving Messrs Brown and Harding to come on gently, while I
was to make a signal by fires if successful in finding water. Two hours’
heavy toil through the sand, under a broiling sun, brought me to the
ranges, where I continued to hunt up one ravine after another until
5 p.m, without success. Twelve hours almost incessant walking, on a
scanty breakfast, and without water with the thermometer over 100
degrees of Fahrenheit, began to tell upon me rather severely; so much
so, that by the time I had tracked up my companions (who had reached
the hills by 1 p.m, and were anxiously waiting for me), it was as much


as I could do to carry my rifle and accoutrements. The horses were
looking truly wretched, and I was convinced that the only chance of
saving them, if water was not found, would be by abandoning our pack-
saddles, provisions and everything we could possibly spare, and try
and recover them afterwards if practicable; we therefore encamped for
the night on the last plot of grass we could find, and proceeded to
make our arrangement for an early start in the morning. There was
still remaining a few pints of water in the kegs, having been very
sparing in the use of it; this enabled us to have a little tea and make a
small quantity of damper, of which we all stood in much need, f Camp
77,
September B. —At 4 a.m. we were again up. Having disposed of
our equipment and provisions, except our riding saddles, instruments
and firearms, by suspending them in the branches of a large tree, we
divided a pint of water for our breakfast, and by the first peep of dawn
were driving our famished horses at their best speed toward the dopot,
which was now 32 miles distant. For the first 8 miles they went on
pretty well, but the moment the sun began to have power they flagged
greatly, and it was not long before we were obliged to relinquish another
horse quite unable to proceed. By 9 a.m. I found that my previous
day’s march, and the small allowance of food I had taken, was beginning
to have its effects upon me, and that it was probable I could not reach
the depot until next morning, by which time tie party left there were
to fall back to the Oakover; I therefore directed Mr Brown, who was
somewhat fresher than myself, to push on for the camp and to bring
out fresh horses with water, while Mr Harding and myself would do our
best to bring on any straggling horses that could not keep up with him.
By dark we had succeeded in reaching to within 9 miles of the depot;
finding unmistakeablc evidence, towards evening, of the condition to
which the horses taken on by Mr Brown were reduced, by the saddles,
guns, hobbles, and even bridles, scattered along the line of march, which
had been taken off to enable them to go on a few miles further,
September 9. —At dawn Mr Harding and myself got up from our
beds of sand, stiff and giddy, but much refreshed by the cold night air.
In 4 or 5 miles we met Mr Brown with fresh horses and a supply of
water, having succeeded in reaching the depot at 8 p.m. the night before,
with only one horse. We were now enabled to proceed with the tracking
up of the horses left over-night, which, after resting some hours, had
commenced to ramble in search of water; Mr Brown returning on our
route and recovering the saddles and firearms left the previous evening,
the stores abandoned the day before being too far off to attempt their
recovery. By Bh, 80m. p.m,, we had all returned to the depot, having
tracked up the 3 missing horses, the two left at the furthest point being
too distant to carry relief to without incurring the risk of further loss.
I cannot omit to remark the singular effects of excessive thirst upon
the eyes pf the horses; they absolutely sunk into their heads until there


was a hollow of sufficient depth to entirely bury the thumb in It, and
there was an appearance as though the whole of the bead had shrunk
with them, producing a very unpleasant and ghastly expression. [Depot
eamp.~\
September 10.—We were only able to move the camp a mile to
another water-hole, for the sake of a little better feed. [ Bivouac .]
September 11. —On taking into consideration the reduced number
and strength of our horses, it was quite evident that we had but little
prospect of being able to cross the tract of dry sandy country, that had
already occasioned us so much loss and trouble; yet there were many
reasons to stimulate us to make the attempt. Not only had we now
attained to within a very few miles of the longitude in which, from
various geographical data, there are just grounds for believing a large
river may be found to exist, draining Central Australia, but the character
of the country appeared strongly to indicate the vicinity of such a feature;
added to which, the gradual decline in the elevation of the country,
notwithstanding our increasing distance from the coast, tended towards
the same conclusion. Nor should we omit the strong evidences, that the
remarkable ridges of drift-sand which encumbered the plains, must in the
first instance have been brought from the interior by water, and then
have been blown by the strong prevailing S.E. winds across the country,
in a direction at least 50 degrees from that which they originally came.
This, with the clean water-worn appearance of the sand, the bold
outlines of the hills seen to the far east, and the number of native fires
observed in the same direction, must all tend to support the hypothesis
that the western half of Australia is probably drained by a large river in
about this meridian. I could not therefore, help regretting, more than
ever, that we should be driven back at such an interesting spot, but
mature reflection convinced me that any further attempt, with our present
means, at this period of the year, was almost certain to be attended with
the most disastrous results. I therefore decided upon adopting the only
other useful course open to us—that of examining down to the sea the
rivers already discovered. With this in view, we to-day fell back sor 6
miles across the ranges to a tributary to the Oakovcr called the Davis,
when one of the horses became so crippled by a strain in the loins, that
we were obliged to halt to give him a chance of recovery ; affording me
leisure to verify our position by observing another set of lunar distances,
which I found to agree well with those formerly taken 10 miles to the
westward, [Camp 78.]
September 12.—We commenced the descent of the Davis, having
much difficulty in getting 'along the sick horse, as it required the united
strength of the party to lift him on his legs every time he fed, which he
at last did so frequently that I ordered him to be shot, as it was hopeless
to attempt to bring him on, and if left, must have died of starvation. By
2 p.m., we reached the junction of the stream wo were upon with the
Oakovcr, and halted 2 miles S. of camp 72, most of the party being now


dismounted, and shoe-leather was beginning to get very scarce with us.
\Camp 79.]
September 13.—This day we only travelled 8 miles down the Oakover,
and encamped near a deep creek, in which was caught a good haul of fish.
[Camp 80.]
September 14.—The feed was so good on this river, that we were
able to proceed to-day to latitude 20deg. 69min. 33sec.; the country
improving much, grassy flats, extending for some miles to the northward j
the channel of the river being augmented by the junction of the large
tributary crossed on our eastward track, on the afternoon of the 29th
August. [ Camp 81.]
September 15 (Sunday). —Remained in camp to rest the horses. A
few natives were seen near the camp during the day.
September 16. —After running 4 or 5 miles further north, the Oak-
over turned to the N.W. for 14 miles, having a clear sandy or stony
bed from 150 to 200 yards wide, water and grass being plentiful, and
the country generally being open forest, with pleasing appearance. [ Camp
82. Lat. 20deg. 46min.]
September 17.—The course of the river was followed for about 17
miles in a westerly direction, the bed widening out to 300 or 400 yards,
the water being now confined to a sandy channel not above 150 yards
in width, the depth of the valley through which it runs being about 40
feet; timber of white gums and cajcput is tolerably plentiful on the
banks, the soil of which is a red loam of considerable depth. Many
of the pools are lined with tall reeds. [ Camp 83. Lat. 20deg. 41 min.
32 sec.]
September 18. —Started at Gh. 40m. a.m. and in two and a half hours
entered a deep and wild-looking gorge, at which point it formed a
junction with the DeGrey, coming from the S.S.E., through a beautiful
level tract of open grassy country, a broad belt of flooded gum trees
growing for some distance back on either side. Passing through the
gorge, which was a quarter of a mile wide, and about a mile long, we
came upon a camp of natives, who, as usual, quickly dispersed, without
giving us an opportunity of showing them that we intended them no
harm. The river here contains a fine reach of deep water, upon which
was a large quantity of whistling ducks and other water-fowl. Two
miles lower down we halted on the banks of a deep creek coming in
from the northward; the rest of the day being employed restuffing pack-
saddles, &c., while some of the party caught a quantity of fine fish—
amongst them an cel, which, however, was allowed to escape, being taken
for a water-snake by one of the party who had never seen one before. A
large kind of bat, or vampire, was first observed here, measuring about
2 feet across the wings. [Camp 84.]
September 19. —We continued to follow down the DeGrey for about
18 miles in a W.N.W. direction, through open grassy plains extending
for many miles on either bank, the channel of the river still maintaining


the same sandy character, and with abundance of water In its bed. [Camp
85, Lat. 20deg. 36min. 30see.]
September 20. —There was little or no change in the appearance of
the country for the 18 or 20 miles that the river was traced down during
to-day. We encamped on the bank of a wide and deep reach of water,
more than a mile long, surrounded by tall reeds. Fish were caught here
in great abundance. [ Camp 86. Lat. 20deg. 31 min. 48sec.
September 21.—Shortly after starting, we crossed the bed of a
tributary coming in from the southward, with a shallow sandy channel,
200 yards wide, which must drain the high ranges between the DeGrey
and Shaw rivers, which we passed over on our outward track. In many
places we began to observe patches of triodia in the midst of the alluvial
plains through which the river continued to run, and distant ranges were
observed both to the north and south. Towards sundown we surprised
a large party of natives encamped in a dry channel of the river, and
approached so near before we were discovered that we had separated a
young child from the rest of the party, which was observed by the mother,
who remained while the rest of the natives made a hasty retreat; it was
not long, however, before an aged warrior returned to her aid, with his
spear shipped, and came forward in a very menacing attitude to recover the
child, who stood by us with a look of the most perfect unconcern.
Finding we took no netice of his threats, he threw down his weapon,
and, walking up to the boy, caught him up in his arms and bore him off,
with a look of triumph, to his companions. No attempt was made to
carry away their supper, which was ready prepared in a number of
wooden scoops, and consisted of fish, rats, beans, grass-seed cakes, and a
beverage made with some oily seed, pounded. Leaving everything
undisturbed, we pushed on for another mile, so as to prevent their being
afraid of returning to their evening repast. [Camp 87. Lat. 20deg.
25min. ISsec.]
September 22.—Being Sunday, wo only moved a mile lower down
the river to a fine reach of water, on the banks of which was a rich sward
of green grass for our horses. Shortly after we had made ourselves
comfortable for the day, we were startled by six of the horses coming
into camp at a gallop in their hobbles, followed by eighteen armed natives.
Every one sprang to their arms in a moment, which caused the intruders
to fall back. I tried to make them comprehend that we did not approve
of the horses being hunted, but as they would not go away, and they had
a stronger party concealed in the brushwood, I fired at a tree to show
them the use of our arms. The moment they heard the report of the
rifle and saw the splinters fly, they took to their heels, and did not again
trouble us. We afterwards found a spear sticking in the ground in the
track of the horses, having evidently been thrown while in pursuit. [ Camp
88. Lat. 20deg. 25min., long. 119 deg. 21 min ]
September 23. —The river soon passed round the southern foot of a
range of hills of 400 or 500 feet elevation, the country to the south again


becoming very fertile, and clothed with a rich sward of kangaroo-grass.
At 10 miles we struck the Shaw River, coming from the S.E., with a
broad deep and well-defined channel, in which were many fine pools of
water. Below the confluence of the rivers, the DcGrcy widened out
considerably, turning rather more to the northward, and 7 miles further
was joined by the Strelly, in lat. 20deg IGmin., and long. 119 dog. smin.
E.; the liver being diverted to the northward by a rugged range of
volcanic hills; its course being now direct for Breaker Inlet, which was
distant about 18 miles. [Camp 89.]
September 24.—As it was very important that I should obtain a
round of bearings before proceeding any further, the country having for
some days past been too flat to afford many opportunities tor triangula-
tion, I to-day started with Messrs. Harding and Brown to ascend the
ranges that lie to the west of the river. A scramble of three miles over
very rugged rocks brought us to the highest point, which was found to
be not more than 500 feet above the sea; our journey, however, turned
out to bo fruitless, the magnetic attraction of the volcanic rocks of
which the hills are composed, being so great as to reverse the needle,
which varied so much that I could not even make use of the compass to
take angles, and I had omitted to bring a sextant. Kangaroo were
numerous among these hills, but we did not succeed in shooting any ;
they appear to be similar to those seen on the plains near the Sherleck.
The view we had of the country was very extensive. To the south is
a vast gently-undulating plain, only occasionally interrupted by detached
granite and sandstone peaks; while narrow green lines of trees inter-
secting the plain in various directions, indicate the watercourses coming
from the distant ranges, and wander in wide sandy channels towards the
sea; the course of the Stf elley being easily distinguished for many miles.
To the north, the eye could trace the broad sandy bed of the DcGrcy,
trending towards Breaker Inlet, the position of which was only
distinguishable by the margin of deep blue mangroves that line it, and tho
whole of the extremity of the delta formed by the alluvial deposits
brought down by tho river. To the east and west of this is a wide
expanse of alluvial flats, covered in most parts with rich waving grass,
the sameness of the scenery being relieved by detached patches of open
park-like forest of flooded gum. Returning to the camp by noon, the
remainder of the day was devoted by me to bringing up the arrears of
mapping, &c., and by tho party generally in providing a supply of fish
and ducks, which here were found to be very plentiful.
September 25.—8 y 7 a.m. we were once more tracing down tho
DeGroy, through the flats seen yesterday. At 8 miles the river divided
into two channels of nearly equal width, the eastern one being followed to
lat. 20deg. smin. 16sec., travelling being very heavy, on account of the
numerous rat-holes that completely undermine the banks of the rivet for
more than a quarter of a mile back on either side. For the last few
miles the water in the river was decidedly brackish, and at our camp was


evidently influenced by the tides; we, however, procured some tolerably
good water by sinking a well in a sand-bank in the dry portion of the
channel, which here was about 300 yards wide. [ Camp 90.]
September 26. —This morning we found the water in the well quite
salt, in consequence of the tide having risen during the night, and as out
horses required water, it was found desirable to fall back upon some of
the fresh pools to form a camp, while a day or two could be devoted to
the examination of this fertile and interesting tract of country. We
accordingly crossed the channel and proceeded westward for nearly three
miles, when we came upon the other branch, which proved eventually to
join again several miles below, forming an island, containing some 8,000
or 9,000 acres of alluvial flat soil, covered with a quantity of mixed
grasses. To this was given the name of Ripon Island. The western,
channel was found to be over 300 yards wide, and to contain several fine
reaches of open water, some fresh and others slightly brackish j they all
were teeming with ducks and a great variety of waterfowl. Having
selected a suitable spot for a camp, I started with Messrs. Brown and
Harding to examine the country towards the inlet. At a little more
than two miles we crossed the river between two pools of salt water,
subject to the influence of the tides, and proceeded northward over an
open grassy flat for two miles further, when the grass gave place to
samphire and small mangroves, which gradually thickened to dense
mangroves, cut up by deep muddy creeks, which put a stop to proceeding
further in that direction. Here we observed several remarkable stacks
of dead mangroves, evidently piled together by the natives, but for what
purpose we could not ascertain, unless to escape upon from the tide
when fishing. Having gained firm ground, we made a detour more to
the eastward, and at last succeeded in reaching the bank of the river close
to the head of the inlet. The tide being at the ebb, I was able to walk
over the mud and sand to the mouth of the river, and obtain bearings
to Points Larrey and Poissonier, and observe the character of the entrance,
from which I formed the opinion that the breakers seen by Captain
Stokes when surveying this portion of the coast, and which deterred him
from entering the inlet, were nothing more than the sea rollers meeting
a strong ebb tide setting out of the DeGrey, possibly backed up by
freshes from the interior, which would, from a river of this size, occasion
a considerable commotion, where the tide amounts to 20 feet; at any rate,
I could not observe any rocks, and there appeared to be a channel with
ot least sor 6 feet of water in it at low tide. For the first mile the
river has a breadth of from 400 to 800 yards, and would admit, with the
tide, vessels of 12 or 14 feet draft of water with perfect safety up as far
as Ripon Island, where they could lie completely sheltered in all weathers
quite close to the shore, which here has steep banks 20 to 30 feet high;
they would, however, be left aground at low water, as we did not observe
any deep pools in this part of the river. I had only just time to complete
my observations when the roaring of the in-coming tide warned me that


no time was to be lost in returning to the horses, which were
nearly a mile higher up the river. Although I ran part of the way, the
mud creeks filled up so rapidly, there was some risk of my being cut off
from the shore, and having to take up a roost on the top of the man-
groves until the tide fell; I had time, however to observe, that the head
of the tide carried with it thousands of fish of great variety, amongst
them a very remarkable one from 3 to 6 inches in length, in form resemb-
ing a mullet, but with fins like a fiying-fish ; it is amphibious, landing
on the mud and running with the speed of a lizard, and when frightened
can jump five or six feet at a bound; I did not, however, succeed in
capturing one for a specimen. Swarms of beautiful bright crimson crabs,
about 2 inches diameter, were to be seen issuing from their holes to
welcome the coming flood, on which was borne a great number of sea-
fowl, who, it was evident, came in for an abundant feast in the general
turmoil. Mounting our horses, which had stood for the last two hours
without touching a mouthful of the rank grass around them for want
of water, we returned to the camp by a different route, through open
grassy flats bordering the deep reaches of water that encompass the N.W.
side of Ripon Island.
September 27.—Accompanied by the same party, but with three
fresh horses, we again started to explore the plains eastward towards
Mount Blaze. For several miles after leaving the island, the country
continued of the same fertile character as that passed over yesterday, and
is at times subject to inundations from the river, but as we receded from
the influence of the floods, the soil became lighter, and the grass thinner
with patches of triodia and samphire. At 12 miles we entered a patch o!
open grassy forest, extending for some miles, but as there was no promise
of obtaining water, and the day was calm and sultry, ve turned to the
northward, in the hope that water might be procurable under the love
sand hills that line this portion of the coast ; in this we were, however
disappointed, as the fall of the country terminated in mangroves and salt'
water creeks, between which and the sea is a narrow ridge of low
sand-hills. Amongst them we observed many tracks of natives, but die
not discover any water. The sea here is apparently very shallow foi
miles off shore, more than half-a-mile of mud and sand-bank being lefi
dry at low water. Resting the horses for turn hours, we returned te
camp by a more direct route, passing for several miles over a plain o
rich black mould, covered with a short sward of bright green grass, th<
native fires having swept off the dry grass a few weeks previously, anc
although there had been no rain since, the heavy dews that fall during
the night in these latitudes had been sufficient to produce a rapic
growth.
September 28.—As I expected to meet ■with some difficulties to
want of water between this and the Yule River, I thought it best to givi
the horses the benefit of a little rest before resuming our homeward route
Some of the party were also deriving much benefit from the abundanct


of fresh game, as they had been suffering from debility, brought on most
probably by over-exertion while traversing the heavy country of the
interior. While here we obtained several additions to our small collec-
tion of birds—amongst them a beautiful wader, the size of a large snipe,
the head being covered by a remarkable membraneous hood or sheath
of a rich gamboge yellow, resembling the leaf of a flower falling back
from the beak, and lying close over the feathers, protesting them when
the beak is plunged into the sand after food ; they had also a remarkable
sharp horn or claw projecting forward from the last joint of the wing,
with which they can fight when attacked by birds of prey. A very
handsome bird was also shot, resembling a flamingo; the body being
about the size, and in plumage like a pelican; the head and neck of a
deep rich purple, and formed like the flamingo; the legs bright red, long
and slender; it flies extended to its greatest length, measuring 6 feet
2 inches, and across the wings 7 teet 2 inches; its weight being only
lllbs. A white heron, with bird-of-paradise feathers on its back, was
occasionally seen, but only one specimen procured,
September, 29.—Sunday.
September 30.—We made an early start up the river, and at 3 miles
struck out into the plains to the westward, where we found a large
extent of open flat yielding grass and atriplex, and timbered in many
parts with flooded gums. At ten miles we came upon a deep reach of
water flowing to the N.W., which must empty itself into the sea 4 or 5
miles to the S.W. of Spit Point, forming an island of a portion of the
delta of the DeGrey, containing between 90,000 and 100,000 acres of
alluvial land. This channel was followed up, and found to come from
the river, close to the junction of the Strelly, and must be a very con-
siderable outlet for the water during the summer rains. I regretted
much not having time to trace this branch of the DeGrey, to its mouth,
as it might be found to be navigable, and afford a fine site for a seaport
town. Fresh water is abundant, and building stone procurable in any
quantity, being found in the immediate vicinity, on land superior to
inundation. We remained at the junction the rest of the day. [ Camp
92.]
October I.—As the plains were now dry and parched we determined
to follow up the Strelly to the ranges before striking W, to the Yule.
At first the river spread out into so many wide grassy channels, that it
was difficult to trace it, but at 4 or 5 miles collected into one bed,
about 100 yards wide, in which were a few small pools. Up to this
point the country had been fertile, the soil being an alluvial clay,
resulting from volcanic rocks, but after getting clear of the line of hills,
the soil became poor and hungry, yielding little else but triodia, and
acacia bushes; water was procured in several places in the course of the
day’s march; our course having been nearly due south. [Camp 93.
Lat. 20deg. 32min. 30sec.
October 2.—The river led us this morning a little to the eastward


of south, through a country very similar to yesterday. Late in the day
we crossed a considerable tributary coming from the S.E., which was now
quite dry, and takes its rise in a bold range of granite hills now visible
to the southward, at the distance of 10 or 12 miles, and forms a part of
the main table-land of this part of the coast; the plain we had been
passing over being only a sea flat, with a few detached ranges widely
scattered over its surface. The river now began to trend to the westward;
granite rocks showing themselves on the surface in large masses. Water
was occasionally procurable, which was very as the horses
could not travel many hours without it, although the heaviest packs were
reduced below lOOlbs. We had now only 6 saddle horses, so that two
of the party had to walk hy turns for an hour at a time. "W e halted
late in lat. 20deg. 45min. 17sec. '[Camp 94.
October 3. —Started at 6h. 30m., and in an hour came upon a fine
pool in the granite, which was very acceptable, 4s we had encamped
over-night without any water. The channel of the river here deepened
considerably, was full of rocks, and contained plenty of water. Skirting
the ranges for some distance, several tributaries joined from the south-
ward. The country, although rocky, improved much in general appear-
ance; grass was abundant, and game frequently met with. At night
we encamped on a small pool in the bed of the river about 3 miles frorr
the foot of the range. Cockatoos and pigeons came in great number!
to drink at the pool about sundown. [Camp 95. Lat. 20deg. 50tnin
33sec., long. 119 deg. lOmin. by account.]
October 4.—Made an early start, and travelled 4 miles on a S.W
course, when the river divided into two channels, the main one coming
from a deep gorge to the S.S.E., exaatly in the direction in which w<
had left the Strelley on our outward route, at a distance of about 30 miles
identifying the stream with some degree of certainty. Taking the westeri
branch, which would lead us towards the Yule, we followed it up unti
long past noon into a hilly country, without meeting with water; we
hewever, saw a large extent of fine grazing land, which would make ai
excellent summer station, when the flats were inundated. Having rest©
during the heat of the day, which had lately become rather oppressive
we resumed a westerly course, having run out the head watercourses c
the western branch of the Strelley. A few miles brought us to a con
siderable stream-bed trending to the N.W., which was followed dow
till some time after dark, having procured a few gallons of water froi
a native well in the bed of a creek. To-day we had travelled for 9 hour
and accomplished a distance of 22 miles, the longest day’s march we ha
made for many weeks past. Early in the day we had noticed what u
took for a number of native fires springing up in all directions, an
quickly to die away again; we, however, found it to be a number (
whirlwinds, carrying with them huge columns of charcoal and dus
which traversed the plains sometimes for miles before they broke. [Cam
96. Lat. 21deg. 4min.]


October s. —Our computed distance from the Yule was now only 21
miles, and the country promised well for travelling, but the long march
yesterday, and the short allowance of water, rendered it very doubtful
whether some of the horses would hold out long enough to reach it ;
we therefore had our breakfast before daylight, and as soon as we could
see resumed our route to the westward. At 5 miles we crossed a sandy
channel, 200 yards wide, full of cajeput and gum-trees, but as we did
not soon find any water in it, pushed on at a rapid pace, and in two miles
crossed a similar channel, 100 yards wide, trending N.W, and
running parallel to the first, beyond this the ground became rocky for
a few miles, and by the time we had gone rather more than 12 miles,
Mr Burges’s mare Lucy, could go no further; giving her half a gallon
of water out of the little stock carried with us, I left Messrs. Brown and
Harding to bring her on when rested, and with the rest of the party
continued our route. A mile or two further, and another horse. Bob,
was knocked up and left behind, having also had some water given him.
With considerable difficulty we succeeded in getting the rest of the
horses on to the Yule by Ih. 30m. p,m., making it close to our camp
of the 18th August. Had the distance been 10 miles further, probably
not more than three or 4 of the horses would have reached it, so much
were they reduced in strength. On reaching the pool, several of the
horses, notwithstanding our efforts to prevent them, rushed headlong
into the water with their packs on, and drank so much of it that it was
with great difficulty we could drag them out again. In the course of
the afternoon Messrs. Brown and Harding came in with the horse Bob,
but had not been able to get the mare on more than 2 or 3 miles ;
being anxious, however, not to loose her, I sent McCourt and James
with two of the strongest horses, carrying 4 gallons of water for her,
after which they succeeded in getting her into camp by midnight.
[Camp 97.]
October 6 (Sendat). —Moved a short distance down the river to
camp 67 for better feed.
October 7.—As the distance from the Yule to the last known per-
manent water on the eastern branch of the Sherlock is over 25 miles, and
our means of carrying water very limited, since abandoning our largest
pair of kegs in the retreat on the Bth September, I to-day set to work
and soldered up a number of preserved meat-tins that had been carefully
opened and kept for this purpose, putting a small spout to each; eight
of these (4-lb. tins) we found to contain something over 4 gallons, which,
added to our water belts and the two remaining kegs, would provide for
the conveyance of 12 gallons of water, which I hoped would prove
sufficient to enable us to pass the dry tract of country in safety, as it
would allow half a gallon to each horse and an ample supply for the
party for two days. I also succeeded in repairing the Aneroid barometer,
which had been crushed nearly flat by the fall of a horse j fortunately,
however, without injury to the vacuum vase.


October B. —Having re-arranged the loads and lightened them by
leaving hid amongst the rocks a pack-saddle and 601bs. weight of horse-
shoes and nails, at 3h. 45m. p.m. we commenced a retreat on our out-
ward tracks of the 13th August, travelling to 7h. 15m., when we en-
camped on a patch of tolerably good grass in the plain at the foot of a
volcanic range, without any signs of water near us. [Camp 98.]
October 9, —We were up before daylight, and by 6 bad our breakfast,
and were again on our march, visiting a waterhole seen on our outward
route, but now found to be quite dry. We pushed on at the best speed
of our horses, which was now not much over 2 miles an hour, to lOh.
a.m., when the heat of the day began to tell on the jaded animals; we
therefore halted for an hour, to give the horses half a gallon of water
each, after which they travelled on much more briskly, so that by a
little past noon we succeeded in reaching the large pool in the eastern
Sherlock near camp 55 ; some of the horses were, however, so much
exhausted, that we had some difficulty in getting them to move for the
last mile, although entirely relieved of their loads. [ Camp 55 A.~\
October 10. —Although the horses were by no means in a fit state
to continue the march, yet grass was so scarce, on account of the native
fires having here swept it off, that we found it best to push on for the
springs at Camp 52.
Following down the banks of the stream, we found several pools not
yet dried up, which proved a great help to our horses; before noon,
however, the mare Lucy again gave in, and was finally abandoned, as
there was but little chance of her ever reaching the Bay; it is possible
she may live to be picked up by some future travellers, although too old
to last many years. By 1 p.m we reached the springs at camp 52, and
found an ample supply of water, but the grass was here also much
parched up; we however remained for the rest of the day.
October 11. —This morning our route was resumed down the eastern
Sherlock, tracing a portion that had not been before examined, and which
was now found to be well supplied with water and grass; cockatoos and
pigeons being seen in large numbers, feeding on the banks. As we
approached the junction of the two branches of the river, we met a party
of 10 or 12 natives, who came boldly up to us, which was the only time
we had known them to do so since quitting Nicol Bay. Hoping to gain
some useful information from them, they were allowed to follow us to
our old camp of 2nd August, where there are the large fish-pools, of which
they gave us the native names. We were not quite so successful in
procuring game here as on the former visit, although as much fish was
caught as could be consumed while it was good. The natives kept rather
aloof while we were shooting on the river, but about dusk 8 or 10 came
to the camp, unarmed, evidently on a thieving excursion, and although
narrowly watched, managed to carry off a portion of Mr Hall’s kit,
which, however, he recovered next morning, on paying them an early
visit, finding the articles buried under some rushes in their camp.


October 12. —We were now getting so near our destination, that
although provisions were running low, we could afford to give the party
a whole day’s rest, while I was enabled roughly to plot out some more
of my work and write up the journal, which, from having my time
constantly taken up with more pressing duties, had fallen sadly into
arrears. The natives again came to see what they could steal, but this
time were made to sit outside a line drawn on the sand, some 20 paces
from the camp—an arrangement they appeared highly to dissapprove of,
giving expression to their dissatisfaction in a manner anything hut
polite ; finding, however, that we were inattentive to their impertinence,
so long as they confined it to harmless display, they watched their
opportunity, and suddenly set fire to the grass in several places at once
around the camp, and ran off as hard as they could. As this was an
open act of hostility that it was necessary they should he chastised for,
although I did not wish seriously to hurt them, they were allowed to
run to a suitable distance, when a charge of small shot was fired after
them, a few of which taking effect on the rear of the principal offender,
induced him, on meeting some of the party out shooting, to make an
apology, and try to lay the blame of the theft of the previous day on the
dogs!
October 13 (Sunday). —As the distances between the several water-
ing places on the homeward route were too much to perform without
intermediate halts, and the heat of the noon-day sun rather oppressive,
it was found better to start from the pools late in the day, so as to make
the halts without water during the cool of the night, travelling only
very late in the evening and early in the morning. We accordingly did
not start this afternoon until 4 p.m.. and travelled on to Bh. 45m., en-
camping in an open grassy plain under Black Hill—a volcanic emin-
ence, the position of which is shown on the Admiralty charts. (Camp
99.]
October 14. —By 6h. we were again on the move, and in an hour
gained the banks of the George, which takes its rise in the volcanic hills
to the southward. In its channel was an abundant supply of water,
with many fine healthy trees overshadowing the pools. By nine we
arrived at our old camp (50) where we rested to 4h. 15m., when we
resumed and travelled on to nearly 8 p m , encamping on the open grassy
plains near the Harding River. [ Camp 100.]
October 15.—An early start enabled us to accomplish the remaining
six miles to the Harding by Bh. 30m., where we halted for the remainder
of the day, as it was not unlikely that we might have to travel the remain-
ing 30 miles into the Bay without finding any more water. As we had
now only four days’ rations left, and it was uncertain, in the present low
condition of our horses, how long it might take us to reach the ship, the
sportsmen of the party made the best use of the halt to procure game,
while I proceeded to convert some more of the empty meat-tins into
water-cannisters, increasing our means for the transport of water to 18


gallons, with which we had a fair prospect of getting in all the horses,
even though no more water should be found on the route. Our camp
was enlivened this evening by the continued screeching of a number of
large bats, which kept up a vigorous fight in the trees overhead the
greater part of the night, notwithstanding our shooting 10 or 12 of them.
They were very fat, but emitted such an intolerable odour that it would
require even an explorer to be hard pressed before he could make a supper
off them, either roast or boiled.
October 16.—This morning set in intensely hot, by noon the ther-
mometer standing at 107 degrees in the shade, and at 3 p.m., when
placed on a sandbank in the sun, rose to 178 of Fahrenheit; on the
setting in of the westerly breeze it, however, fell at once to 96deg.,
and by 4h. 30m. p.m. we were enabled to resume our route without
feeling in any way inconvenienced by the temperature. We did not now
attempt to pass through the rocky ranges so far to the eastward as on
our outward route, but kept more to the westward along the open grassy
valley, until opposite the narrowest part of the range, when, turning
sharp to the north, we very quickly passed over the rocky portion of the
hills, only encountering a few miles of extra rampant tnodia, which was
anything but pleasant to walk through, especially leading the party after
dark. Following down a small watercourse for several miles, it at length
joined the Nicol River, in which we shortly after found a small quantity
of water, in the bottom of what had been a pool, but which toward the
close of the dry season sometimes goes dry; here we halted for a few
hours to rest. [ Camp 101.]
October 17. —Without waiting for daylight, by 2h. 10m. a.m.
we were again on the move, as tfcerc was now a fair chance of getting
all the remaining horses into the Bay, if we did but avoid travelling
during the heat of the day. In an hour the hills were cleared, and it
was now all open plain as far as the marsh at the head of Eickol Bay.
By the time the morning broke, we were in full view of the Bay and
several islands of the Archipelago, the long black hull of our ocean-home
riding at anchor on the now placid waters, forming by no means the least
pleasing feature of the scene, to those who had not seen a vestige of civili-
zation for many months. After halting for nearly two hours for breakfast,
and to distribute the water amongst the horses, we again moved rapidly on,
crossing the marsh with some difficulty, owing to the spring-tide having
been recently over it, and at 1 p.m. arrived on our ojd ground at Hearson
Cove, where we found a boat and party from the ship waiting for us,
James having been despatched by a shorter route to signalize our return.
Everything had gone on satisfactorily during our absence. The vessel’s
water-tanks had been kept filled up, ensuring a supply for our horses on
the homeward voyage, as it would bo utterly impossible at this season of
the year, with the animals in such low condition, to attempt the overland
route to Champion Bay. Amongst other discoveries during our absence,
was a bed of pearl oysters at head of the Bay, from which the crew


of the Dolphin had procured several tons of very fine mother-of-pearl,
besides a small number of pearls, varying in size from 1 to 4 carats.
October 18— The party was fully occupied in clearing out the well
and packing up saddles and outfit for shipment. It was also found that
deepening the well had caused the water to become brackish, so much so
that we had to bring water by boat from the spring at which the ship
had been filled up; the horses however still managed to drink the well-
water, although it produced great thirst. 1 have no doubt but that had
we had time to sink a fresh well closer to the foot of the hills, we should
have obtained fresh water, as several ravines terminate there in a beauti-
ful grassy flat, where a large proportion of the rain water brought down
from the hills sinks into the soil, from whence it gradually drains down
and supplies the wells in the salt strata. I was disappointed to find that
the cotton plants, that had thriven so well on first being sown, had been
burnt in consequence of some of the sailors having thoughtlessly set fire
to the adjoining grass; had they not been killed, by this time they would
probably have been in flower, as their growth was very rapid.
October 19—As it was necessary to give the horses a few days’ rest
previous to swimming them off to the ship, I started this morning in the
life-boat, accompanied by Captain Dixon and Messrs. Brown, Harding,
and Walcott, to examine the eastern shores of the bay, for the purpose of
asceitaining whether a more suitable spot for a landing place and site for
a future town, could be found in that quarter. Leaving the Dolphin
at sh. 30m. a.m., we ran to the eastward with a light south wind, passing,
at 6 miles, two small islands in the mouth of the small bay into which
the Nicol River discharges itself. These islands had been visited already
by Mr Walcott, and I gave them the name of Pemberton and Walcott
Islands, Continuing to run along the shore towards Cape Lambert, the
souiidings gave from 2 to 3 fathoms, with a good bottom of mud and
sand, but the leading was generally indifferent and rocky, until we came
to within about 9 miles of the cape, when a deep opening was passed,
affording good shelter and landing for small craft. Two miles further
we landed in a small rocky cove for breakfast, which gave me an oppor-
tunity of climbing a hill and examining the surrounding country, which
proved very dry and rocky. A little further we passed a bold headland,
against the extremity of which rested a singular flying buttress, forming
half an arch of 50 or 60 feet span, and from 30 to 40 feet in height.
Turning this headland, another opening was observed which we entered
with the tide, and soon found that it communicated with the first one,
forming an island of some extent and elevation, to which was given the
name of Dixon Island. We continued to beat down the channel, which
had an average width of over half a mile, until late in the evening when
we came to anchor in 11 feet wnter.
October 20.—At daylight we found ourselves high and dry, only a
narrow channel a few yards wide being left. Having walked over the
mud to Dixon Island to breakfast, the vicinity was examined for water


but without success. At 6 the tide came in again so rapidly, that it was
not without some little difficulty we gained our boat, when the wind
set in so strongly from the S.W., that, after several hours’ almost ineffec-
tual attempts to work to windward, we again landed, not 2 miles from
our last night’s anchorage, the character of the country being equally
unfavourable for landing, as it was cut up by deep mangrove creeks
running far up the valleys into the steep rocky hills, forming a difficult
and unpromising country. The breeze having moderated and shifted a
point more to the westward, we again attempted to beat out into the
bay, but by 9 p.m. had not made more than 2 miles, when we landed for
the night, leaving 2 of the party in charge of the boat to keep her off the
rocks when the tide fell.
October 21.—The wind and tide being now in our favour, by 3h.
20m. we took to our boat and arrived on board the Dolphin by 1(3 a.m.
when she was very soon got under weigh for the purpose of taking her
closer in to ship the horses; light and variable winds, however, prevented
our working more than a mile nearer the landing cove by sundown, when
we dropped anchor for tl e night.
October 22.—With a light west wind the Dolphin was worked into
11 feet water, 1 £ mile of the point near the cove, the vessel drawing over
10 feet, brought the mud up to the surface in our wake. Eight horses
were soon swam off without much difficulty, as we all had now some
little experience in this sort of work.
October 23.—8 y 2 p.m. the remaining 6 horses and equipment of
the Expedition were all safely shipped, and a conspicuous intimation of
our sojourn on the coast having been painted in large white letter’s on a
pile of granite rocks near the south corner of the cove, we took our final
departure, getting the Dolphin under weigh by 4 p m., with a light
westerly wind, which carried us through the passage between Haiiy
and Delambre Islands by 7, when we hauled up and stood to N.N.W.
October 24.—The wind still holding to the west, we made but little
progress, the Dolphin being only a good sailer in smooth water, or
running before the wind. Lat. I9deg. 12m. S. at noon,
October 25.—8 y noon observations we were only in lat. 18deg.
42min., long. l!3deg. 32min.
October 26.—The wind veering slightly to the south, we were able
to make by noon to lat. 18deg. 46min. 30sec., long. 1 lldeg. 47min.
3 Osec.
October 27.—From this time to the 3rd November the winds con-
tinued to blow almost uninterruptedly from the south and eastward, which
carried us as far west as long, 101 deg, E. and lat. 31 deg. S., where we
met with westerly winds, which enabled us to run up to within sight of
Cape Naturaliste by the Bth.
November 9.—By 10 a.m„ we were off Rottnest Island, when the
Pilot came on board and took us to the anchorage in Gage’s Roads by
about noon. Having given instructions to Mr Turner for the landing


of the horses, &c., I landed with Messrs. Brown, Harding and Hall, all
of whom were, at their desire, at once released from the duties of the
Expedition. Proceeded by steamer to Perth.
November 10. —Had an interview with His Excellency the Governor,
and reported the safe return of the party and general results of the
Expedition,
P. T. GREGORY,
Commander N. W. Australian Expedition.
Perth, February 6, 1862.
APPENDIX,
Adopting the course which I have found most convenient on similar
occasions, I now proceed to offer a few remarks on the general features,
productions and natural capabilities, &<?., of the count.iy traversed by the
Expedition, which could not, without disadvantage, have been introduced
into the foregoing narrative. These remarks have already appeared at
Hie conclusion of my Report published on the 18th November, IBGI, but
are equally applicable to the present publication.
Commencing with its geographical and geological peculiarities, that
portion of the country that came under our observation, consists of a
succes ion of terraces, rising inland for nearly 200 miles, more or less
broken up by volcanic hills towards the coast. The first belt averages from
10 to 40 miles in width from the sea, and is a nearly level plain, slightly
ascending to the southward, with an elevation of from 40 to 100 feet, the
soil being generally either light loam or strong clays, according as it is
the result of the disintegration of the granite rocks that occasionally pro-
trude above its surface, or of volcanic rocks of black scoria that frequently
interrupt the general level; hills of this nature also constitute the greater
portion of the more elevated islands off the coast Cape Lambert and the
promontory that shelters the western side of Nicol Bay. The generality
of these rocks do not, however, yield so rich a soil as might be expected
from their origin; this is owing to the absence of actual lava, the eruptive
heat having only been sufficient to convert the superincumbent primary
and tertiary rocks into a vitrious scoria, having a specific gravity of 32,
and is highly indestructible in its texture.
Proceeding inland for the next 50 or 60 miles, is a granite country that
has been originally capped with horizontal sandstones, and has an eleva-
tion of about 1000 feet; this range terminates to the southward in level
plains of good soil, the produce of the next series of more elevated country,
while towards the northern edges, the granite and sandstones have
undergone great changes through the action of numerous trap dykes, that
have greatly disturbed its surface, producing metamorphic rocks, some
resembling jasper, and others highly cellular and scoriaceous.
In about latitude 22deg. ou the meridian of Nicol Bay, wc came upon


another and more elevated range, trending away to the S.E., having an
altitude of 2,500 feet above the sea. This, unlike the last section, has a
southern escarpment of 500 or 600 feet, and consisted of horizontal sand-
stones and conglomerates, which have comparatively undergone little
change, and has an average breadth of 8 or 10 miles; the southern flank
being bordered by fertile valleys of strong loamy clays, merging gradually
to the southward into stony ridges and hills, some having an elevation of
nearly 4,000 feet, the culminating point being attained at Mount Bruce,
in lat. 22deg. 30m.
From this point the country gradually falls to the Ashburton, the' bed
of which river, in the same meridian as the bay, is about 1,600 feet above
the sea, and the adjoining ranges not above 2,200 feet, or about the
same as the country on the Gascoyne, Lyons, and Upper Murchison.
Of minerals, I was unable to discover any traces, except iron. Quartz
reefs occasionally traversed the country in a N.N.E. and S.S.W. direction,
or nearly the same as the mineral lodes at Champion Bay, but I could
not find any instance in which this rock offered much to indicate the pro-
bable existence of gold, it being far surpassed in this respect by the rocks
on the Upper Murchison, Coal does not appear likely to be found within
the limits of the country passed over, unless towards the eastern-most
point attained by the Expedition.
With regard to the harbours on the coast, I can only speak of Nicol
Bay and the anchorage under Rosemary and the adjacent islands. The
former I consider only second to King George’s Sound, as it can be
entered in all weathers, either from the north or north-east, and there is
reason to believe that a safe passage exists between Legendre and Dolphin
Islands, leading into Mermaid Straits, where there appears to be an
excellent harbour at all seasons of the year.
The soundings towards the eastern and western shores of Nicol Bay,
taken at low water, show sufficient depth for vessels of considerable ton-
nage to lie within a cable’s length of the shore, the bottom being fine sand
and soft mud. Towards the head of the bay the water is much shallower,
not carrying more than 2 fathoms, 2 miles from the shore. No reefs are
known to exist in this bay except quite close in to land.
In making the running survey of the western promontory, I found that
all to the north of Sloping Head was an island, having a boat channel,
between from half a mile to a mile wide; to the outer portion I therefore
gave the name of Dolphin Island.
The tides are tolerably regular, and average 16 feet, but at the spring
they rise 21 feet, on which oscasions the whole of the western promontory,
including the high lands for several miles to the westward, are entirely
cut off by sea, the other opening being under Enderby Island —a circum-
stance that greatly detracts from the value of these otherwise fine har-
bours, as it would require 2 miles of causeway to connect the best landing
place, where water is to be found, with the main-land.
The average declination of the needle throughout this district I found


Thermometer,
maximum.
minimum.
May
80
65
June
76
63
July
78
56
August
80
64
September
83
65
October
92
70
to be 1 degree east, the result of many amplitudes and azimuths; there
is, however, in the vicinity of many of the volcanic hills, great local
attraction.
Of the climate I can only say that during the 5 months we remained
on the coast we never experienced the same inconvenience from it that
we frequently have done within the limits of the settled districts of the
colony; the weather was, however, principally fine, and the sky clear
during our stay, only two showers having occurred, at the latter
end of May and the other in June. The meteorological register kept at
Nicol Bay shows the following results, from observations taken at all
hours of the day and night;—
Under the peculiar circumstance of the thermometer being placed on a
sand-bank in the sun during the hot days in October, it rose to I7Bdeg.
of Fahrenheit, whilst the lowest it ever fell to was up in the hills in July,
when it was 2deg. below freezing just before sunrise.
The winds continued to blow almost uninterruptedly from the E. and
B.E. during the first four months, veering to the S.S.E. and S. and
occasionally to the N.E. Latterly the wind was alternately S.E. in the
morning, and N.W, or westerly in the afternoon; the sky becoming
frequently overcast, and every appearance of the near approach of the
rainy season, which it has been observed by former navigators and
explorers to do about the beginning of November, and continue to March.
Amongst the natural productions, I would first briefly refer to the beds
of the pearl oysters, as they are likely to become of immediate commercial
importance, considerable numbers having been gathered by the crew of
the Dolphin at their leisure time, the aggregate value of which, I am
told, is between JOSOO and £600; besides pearls, one of which has been
valued by competent persons at £25. The limits of the bed are as yet
undefined, but there is good reason to believe, from the position of it,
that with proper apparatus, ships could soon be loaded with them.
Sandalwood was found in small quantities, very highly scented, but too-
widely scattered to become of much importance as an article of export.
Of indigenous fruits, &c., we observed the adansonia, or gouty stemmed
tree of Sir G. Grey (nearly allied to the boabab or monkey bread-fruit of
Southern Africa.) Sweet and water-melons, similar to those formerly
seen by me on the Lyon’s River, but of much larger size ; a small gourd ;
a wild fig, well tasted ; and a sweet plum, very palatable, were found in
tolerable abundance.


I have already spoken of the palms which grow on the hank of the
Fortescue ; they are very handsome, and grow to the height of 40 feet,
but not having brought in any specimens, they have not yet been identi-
fied as to their variety.
Tobacco does not grow so luxuriantly here as on the Lyons River, but
the natives prepare it, and after preparation, chew it ; but we did not on
any occasion observe them to smoke.
Many beautiful flowers were also collected, which will be forwarded to
some of the most eminent botauists, to be described and classified.
It now only remains for me to give an opinion on the capabilities of the
country for colonization. It would be almost impossible to particularise
the positions or define the limits of country adapted for grazing purposes,
beyond the reference already made to them. The total amount of land
available for this purpose within the limit of our route I should estimate
at not less than two or three millions of acres, and of this I may safely say
200,000 are suitable for agricultural purposes, the greater portion of
which lies on the two flanks of the Hamcrsley Range, on the banks of the
DeGrey and its tributaries, and on the Lower Sherlock.
Of the fitness of this distriet for the growth of wool, which, on account
of its being an intertropical country, it is generally supposed it would be
unsuitable, I would remark that its elevation above the sea appears likely
to obviate the objection, and render it probable that sheep may not de-
generate in the same way they are found to do in other tropical Countries;
at any rate, flocks are now being pushed over on to the same latitude in
Queensland, and we do not hear of the wool-grower complaining that such
is the case there.
As to its fitness for the growth of cereals, it is quite possible that wheat
and barley may not come to the same degree of perfection they do in the
more temperate latitudes of Australia, but there is no reason to doubt its
capability of growing sufficient grain for the support of a numerous
population.
What it appears more highly qualified for than anything else, is the
growth of cotton—a question which at the present juncture cannot be
lost sight of. From my personal observation of the cultivation of this
plant in Egypt, and the attention I have recently paid to this subject
while in Europe, I feel confident that a very considerable portion of the
arable lands on the DeGrey and Sherlock are precisely the soils adapted
for the production of this valuable commodity. As, however, I purpose to
make this the subject of a more lengthy paper at a future period, I will
not now venture to enlarge upon it.
As the number and disposition of the aborigines is likely to have some
effect on the first settlement of a district, I would give it as my opinion
that these people will not prove particularly troublesome to the settlers, if
properly and fairly treated. They are not numerous, and appear very
w illing to take employ under Europeans, and will no doubt soon be made
as useful as in the other districts, la stature they rather exceed the


usual standard, some of them measuring two or three inches over six feet.
bringing my report to a close, I would wish to observe, that al-
though the results of the Expedition have fallen short of my san-
guine hopes with regard to Geographical discovery, and will, I am afraid,
in some degree disappoint the anticipations of the eminent Geographers
who have lent their valuable aid in promoting the undertaking, yet I
cannot but hope that the large amount of additional fertile country it has
brought to our knowledge will compensate in some degree for the defici-
ency. I am, however, unable to refrain from again expressing my opinion,
that had not so many concurrent circumstances combined to retard the
departure of the Expedition until so late in the season, and it had arrived
on the coast at the time originally recommended by the Geographical
Society, it would, in all probability, have resulted in the full accomplish-
ment of the object they had in view.
It now devolves upon me to perform the pleasing dnty of recording my
entire satisfaction with the manner in which the whole of the members of
the Expedition put forward their best energies in the performance of their
respective functions. To Mr Turner lam indebted for the care bestowed
on the store department, which came under his immediate charge To
Messrs. Brockman and Hall, J. McCourt, and J ames, are due my acknow-
ledgments for the cheerful alacrity with which they performed the duties
allotted to them.
Of Messrs. Maitland Brown and J. Harding I cannot speak too highly.
Accompanying me on all the extra services upon which I was engaged,
they had to endure privations of no ordinary description, which they met
with a spirit of steady fortitude deserving of the highest praise. Of the
valuable services rendered to the Expedition and to science by Mr P.
Walcott I have already had occasion to refer, and I sincerely hope that
his talents and zeal in the pursuits of Botany and Natural History may
meet a more substantial reward than the thanks which are justly due to
him and those gentlemen who have given their time and talents gratuit-
ously in the service of their fellow-colonists.
To Captain Dixon and the officers and crew of the Dolphin every praise
is due for the assistance which on all occasions they promptly afforded in
aiding the Expedition, and for which I gladly avail myself of the present
opportunity to return them my best thanks.
In conclusion, permit me to tender Your Excellency my acknow-
ledgments for the readiness with which you have acceded to my various
suggestions, in carrying out the arrangements of the Expedition since the
passing of the vote of money in aid by the Local Legislature.
F, T. G.


