

JOURNAL
OF A
MISSIONARY VOYAGE
TO
NEW GUINEA.
BY THE
REVS. A. W. MURRAY AND S. MACFA RLANE
iIISSIOKAUIt* of XltkiLoSOOX- Missiojmuv Soi-lET*.
■im-DOX : JOHN -SNOW & -GO., 2, IVY I-A' I!
r ■ - «.
, •••; ■ 1572.- _ •


A GROUP OF PAPUANS.




JOURNAL
OF A
MISSIONARY VOYAGE
TO
NEW GUINEA.
BY THE
REVS. A. W. MURRAY AND S. MACFARLANE.
Missionaries op th* London Missionary Socibtt.
LONDON: JOHN SNOW & CO., 2, IVY LANE.
1872.








JOURNAL OF A MISSIONARY VOYAGE
TO
NEW GUINEA.
Under arrangements sanctioned by the Directors of the London
Missionary Society, towards the close of 1870 the missionaries
in the Loyalty Islands' commenced preparations for the com-
mencement of a mission in New Guinea. In that mission
both the Directors and the missionaries took the deepest
interest. But it was felt on every, hand that the scheme was
one of unusual importance; that it might possibly be attended
with great danger; that once begun it ought to be carried
through; and that if successfully established, it might, under
God’s blessing, become eventually the largest mission carried
on by the Society in the Pacific. Eight native evangelists were
selected with care from among our teachers, four from Mare
and four from Lifu. A suitable vessel, the Surprise, commanded
by a most competent man, Captain Paget, was engaged for the
voyage. In a farewell meeting held in Lifu on Sunday, April
23rd, the evangelists and their expedition were specially com-
mended to the care of God by their native brethren. And on
Tuesday, May 30th, the little party, which included the wives
of the teachers and four children, embarked and set sail on our
long and fondly anticipated voyage. The good hand of God
had plainly been upon us in all the preparations we had made;
our way had been made clear; we joyfully set forth in His work,
trusting to His guidance and care; and it will. be seen that
our expectations were abundantly realised.


We caught the first glimpse of New Guinea on Thursday,
the 29th of June. A thick haze hung over the land, so that
for some time only the mountain tops were visible. We gazed
with intense interest as we neared the great land, one object
after another appearing, till we found ourselves in view of the
barrier reef, about two miles from the shore. We made the
land near Keppel Point, in latitude 10° 11' S. and longitude
148° E., and ran along the coast all the way to Hood Point,
keeping as close into the reef as we could with safety. We
saw a number of natives fishing, some in canoes, and others on
the reef, as we passed along.
Hood’s Bay and the Point which forms its western extremity
have a very striking and interesting appearance. The bay is
about six miles wide and four deep. At the east point there
is a lagoon, a remarkable looking place, called Hood’s Lagoon.
Many natives were seen at the sides of the lagoon, and they,
and also those in canoes and on the reefs, appeared to be
making signals for us to land. As, however, no canoe came
off to us, we did not consider it advisable to attempt to hold
intercourse circumstanced as we then were, but rather to pass
on towards Darnley Island, at which we hoped to obtain in-
terpreters and other facilities for the accomplishment of our
object.
It occurred to us that some place in or near this bay would
be very suitable for a mission station. The western point
named Hood’s Point,, on which there is a village, and which
runs out a considerable distance into the sea, would probably
be a healthy spot. Night overtook us as we were off this
point, so there -was no further inducement to keep near the
laud. Hence we stood out to sea and proceeded on our course.
The part of the island we made, and to which the above
remarks refer, is on the south-east side of the great eastern
peninsula mentioned by Lieutenant Chester, and the mountain
peaks we saw were parts of the great central ridge which forms
the back bone of the peninsula.


New Guinea, so called by the early Dutch navigators from a
fancied resemblance of its inhabitants to those of the coast of
Guinea in Africa, is, with the exception of Australia and Borneo,
the largest island on our globe. It lies in the Australian
Archipelago, and is about fourteen hundred miles in extreme
length, or nearly double that of Borneo. It is bounded on the
south by Torres Straits ; west by the Moluccas Sea ; and on the
north and north-east by the Pacific Ocean. The most striking
geographical feature of the great Eastern Peninsula consists in a
backbone of lofty mountains, apparently extending throughout
its length, with peaks far surpassing those of Australia, the
loftiest being more than thirteen thousand feet above the sea
level. It is called the Stanley Eange.
There are three remarkable table-topped mountains near the
centre of the island, estimated to be quite twenty thousand feet
in elevation, whose summits appear to be covered with snow,
and are visible for a considerable distance. The greatest breadth
of the Island is over three hundred miles in longitude, 141°
E., and its least breadth twenty miles at the head of Geelvink
Bay and the Gulf of McClure.
New Guinea was discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese
Commanders D’Abreu and Serram, and was first visited in 1615.
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the northern
coasts were frequently visited by Dutch and English navigators,
and in 1774 an English officer, Captain Eorrest, in the service of
the H.E.1.C., who was to search for spice-producing districts,
resided for some months at Port Davy, on the north-east
coast, and maintained constant friendly intercourse with the
natives.
Until the year 1828 there is no record of Europeans having
established friendly relations with the natives of the south-west
coast. Indeed the names given by the early Dutch voyagers to
NEW GUINEA.


the two principal rivers, Moordenaar or Murderer, and Dood-
slaager or Slaughter, prove their intercourse to have been any-
thing but friendly. Captain Cook, who visited the south-west
coast in the Endeavour in 1770, was the sole authority
respecting the natives till 1828.
The choicest gifts of a .bountiful Providence have been
bestowed on this 1 great land. Its shores are covered with groves
of cocoa-nuts; and it produces in abundance the banana, sago,
betel, figs, oranges, lemons; and other tropical fruits. The
interior abounds with valuable timber, as ironwood, ebony,
canary-wood,- and also with valuable spicds and fragrant barb.
Its forests, rivaling those of South America and Ceylon in
luxuriance, afford shelter to multitudes of beautiful birds, among
which are crown pigeons, black cockatoos; parrots, lories, and
birds of 'Paradise.' The sea that washes its shores supplies an
almost inexhaustible mine of wealth in the shape of trepang,
pearls, tortoise-shell, &c. To this catalogue it is said gold may
be added.
The name Papua, according tq Mr. Chester, is derived from
the Malay word, piiwa, woolly, and by this name the coast
tribes are designated. According to the Same authority the
population of New Guinea and the adjacent islands is estimated
at 880,000. But this, of course, is a mere guess. Considering
the immense extent of the island, and the fact that the parts
with which we are acquainted seem pretty thickly populated,
it is probable that the above estimate is much too low. But
many years must pass before any reliable estimate of the actual
number can be made.


ARRIVAL AT DARNLEY ISLAND.
We sighted Darnley Island about mid-day on Saturday,
July the Ist, and got to anchor towards evening. No natives
however made their appearance. As we afterwards found they
all live on the opposite side of the island to that on which is
the anchorage. At length one man was seen on the shore. A
boat was at once lowered, and we pulled in to the beach. Our
new acquaintance looked repulsive enough. Eight glad were
we, however, to make friends with him. We got him to come
into the boat and accompany us to the ship without difficulty,
though he manifested at first a little tremor. He understood a
little English, and with the converse we were able to hold with
him by words and signs, and giving him food and a small present,
we soon had his full confidence. We sent him on shore again
in the boat, with an urgent request to come on the following
morning accompanied by the chief or chiefs, and as many others
as possible. On the following day, which was Sabbath, there
was no lack of visitors. Having heard that there were white
men on the island in charge of a fishing-statipn, belonging to
some parties in Sydney, the captain started early in the morn-
ing for the opposite side of the island. In the meanwhile a
number of natives appeared on the heights near the anchorage,
intimating by signs and shouting their wish to get on board.
They have only a few large canoes among them, which they
get from the mainland of New Guinea, and these are kept on
the opposite side of the island, so that they had no means of
getting to the ship.
After a while the captain returned with a white man and a
number of natives, among whom was Amani, the principal
chief, and another man of importance. The boat was then
sent for those on shore, and most of them were soon on board:
among the rest was our friend of the evening before, whose
name isDabat, and whom we found to be one of the principal
men of the island.


A service in the Lifu language was conducted on hoard, at
which our visitors were present; in all probability it was the
first act of worship to the true God that they had ever
witnessed. In the afternoon we went on shore and had a
formal conference with the chiefs and people, through the
medium of broken English, We informed them of the nature
of our business, and asked them whether they wished a teacher
to live among them, whether they would treat him kindly, and
so on. To all our inquiries satisfactory replies were given,
and all passed off in the most encouraging manner. Our way
had been prepared, by the news that we were coming having
preceded us, and no adverse influence had as yet been brought
to bear upon the natives.
On the following day, Monday, July 3rd, we took the
teacher and his wife and property on shore, anticipating
for them a cordial and joyful welcome. In this, however,
we were disappointed. Evil counsellors had been at work
during our absence, and had so influenced the principal chief and
others, that it was with difficulty we succeeded in getting their
consent to the teacher remaining. Amani and the interpreter
got out of the way, and a considerable time passed before they
could be induced to come and meet us. Dabat, our first
friend, remained staunch ; but as the other chiefs and the bulk
of the people appeared ignorant and doubtful with reference
to our object, we proposed a compromise which united all,
viz., that the teacher should remain for twelve months, or till
the next deputation visit the island, and then his continu-
ance shall be at the option of the people. We knew that if
he could only be allowed to remain, he would, with the help
and blessing of God, work his way among the people, and
gain their confidence and affection. The present we had
designed for the three chiefs was received by Dabat, he en-
gaging to stand by the teacher, and the bulk of the people
evidently approving.
An incident occurred while these arrangements were in


progress which is worthy of being recorded as an illustration
of the spirit in which our teachers have come forth on their
great enterprise. The teachers spent a night on shore and
were in company with parties belonging to the fishing estab-
lishment, natives of different islands from the eastward.
Among other subjects talked of, was the projected mission to
Murray Island, to which the said establishment is about to be
moved. On that account those belonging to it seemed specially
intent on intimidating the teachers, and convincing them that
the idea of commencing a mission on that island was perfectly
hopeless. “ There are alligators there,” said they; “ and snakes,
and centipedes.” “ Hold,” said Tepeso; “ Are there men there ?’’
“ Oh yes,” was the reply, “ there are men ; but they are such
dreadful savages that it is no use your thinking of living
among them.” “That will do,” responded Tepeso, Where-
EVER THERE ARK MEN, MISSIONARIES ARE BOUND TO GO ! ” A noble
reply, worthy of a disciple of Him who commands His fol-
lowers to “ Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature.”
Darnley Island, or Erub, as the natives call it, lies in lat.
9° 35' S., and long. 143° 50' E. It is small, not more than
seven or eight miles in circumference. Some parts of the island
look pretty’; but all around the coast it is rough, and shows
nothing particularly attractive. It is poorly watered, and there
is no safe harbour; but safe anchorage can be found on the
north side during the south-east trades. Huge boulders lie
scattered all round the coast, and great piles of sandstone
appear in some parts. The highest elevation is 580 feet.
Every part of the interior of the island, as well as along the
coast, is clothed with vegetation, and the usual tropical fruits
are found. The natives are a poor, down-trodden looking
race.


WARRIOR ISLAND.
We sailed from Darnley Island on Wednesday, July sth. We
had hoped to obtain interpreters there for the mainland, and at
one time it seemed as if our hopes would be realised; as we
found several natives of New Guinea, who were on a visit to
their friends, and who expressed their willingness to return to
their homes with us. Ere we left, however, misrepresentation
had done its work, so that in addition to the difficulty we had
in leaving the teachers on the island, the natives of New
Guinea refused to go with us. This led us to determine to go
to Wakrior Island, which is distant from Darnley about fifty
miles, and which we reached about two p.m. on the day we
sailed.
. Our calling at Warrior Island led to results of the utmost
moment; that island will have an important place in the
history of the New Guinea Mission for all time to come. We
found there Captain Banner, the manager of a shelling station
on the island who received us kindly, and rendered us valuable
aid in carrying out the object of our voyage. He informed us
of islands which he felt sure would suit our purpose. All
around, the islands to which we were recommended and the
adjacent coast are unsurveyed, and it was considered unadvis-
able to attempt to reach them in the ship. This difficulty was
met by Captain Banner, who, with great kindness, placed a
large open boat at our service with a man to manage it, and a
native of Warrior Island as interpreter.
Our falling in with the man who had charge of the boat is
a thing to be specially noted. It is one of those wonderful
Providential arrangements which we have often had to mark in
connection with our evangelistic efforts throughout Polynesia.
In all probability there is not another man who could have
rendered us the service which this man did, and yet he was
just put into our hands without any seeking or planning of ours.
A few particulars of his history will interest, and serve to show


how he is fitted to render us such important aid. He gives his
full name as Joseph John, hut he goes hy the name of Joe.
He is a native of Nukualofa, an island of the Tongan group,
the Friendly Islands of Cook. He has been away from his
native land for thirty years or more, and during that time he
has made an extensive acquaintance with both the civilised
and the heathen world. At the time of the Crimean war he
was in an English man-of-war, and for nearly six years he was
connected with the British Navy. He resided in London for
a time; and he has been to Sydney again and again. He has
a very extensive island experience especially is he well ac-
quainted with the islands of Torres Straits and the Papuan
Gulf, and his acquaintance extends moreover to many parts of
the coast of the mainland of New Guinea. Among the islands
and on the coast he is better known and has greater influence
than any other living man; and, withal he is shrewd, sensible,
and observant, and being himself an islander, and belonging to
a group into which Christianity was introduced a number of
years before he left his home, his sympathies are strongly with
the native races, and with us in our desires to evangelise them;
and he is able to deal with them in a manner which few, if any
white man, could do. The reader does not now need to be in-
formed that Joe was the right man in the right place in our
expedition.
VISIT TO TAUAN.
All the arrangements were completed on the day we reached
Warrior Island, and on the following day, Thursday, July 6th,
we started on our important errand. We had no white man
with us. Joe was in charge, and our crew consisted of natives
of Lifu and Uvea. We took with us four teachers and their
wives, Kerisiano, Waunaea, Josaia and Simone. The weather
was unfavourable, wet and unsettled; but we had a fair wind,
and a run of seven hours brought us to the island to which we


were bound, Tauan, a name which will be memorable in
the annals of the New Guinea Mission. We went into the
anchorage, which is good and safe, and remained in the boat
while Joe and the interpreter went on shore to see the chief
and people, and inform them of our arrival, and of the object
of our visit.
Joe had been frequently at the island and had made friends
with all belonging to it. With the chief he had exchanged
names, according to a custom common on many islands ; the
name of the chief is Nudai, and by that name he will continue
to be known, notwithstanding the exchange made with Joe.
Still the transaction forms a connecting-link, a bond of friend-
ship between our Tongan friend and his Papuan worker. Joe
found that most of the people were from home; they had gone
to the adjacent island of Saibai. The chief, however, and some
of the principal people were at home, and that was enough for
our purpose. Joe soon returned to the beach and called to us
that all was right; so we hastened on shore and received a most
cheering welcome. After we had explained as fully and clearly
as we were able the object of our visit and our wishes, the
chief expressed his satisfaction and desire that the teachers
should remain on his land, and, pointing across a little stream-
let that was running by to a rising ground, he announced that
that and the land beyond were at the service of the teachers on
which to build and plant to as great an extent as they pleased.
We made the chief a present, with which he seemed much
pleased, and so passed our first transaction on the island of
Tauan.
We spent some time in looking about the neighbourhood till
night drew on, and brought us back to the house which the
chief had given up to the teachers. It was his own house, the
best in the village, and a very tolerable place, considering the
state of the people; but the ground floor, to which we and
our large party had to confine ourselves till sleeping-time came,
was small; the property of the teachers had all been hud-


GROUP OF NATIVES OF NEW CALEDONIA— PAPUANS.




died into it; and we had no light but what could he produced
by a fire kindled on the floor. So we were in and out, and out
and in, according as it rained or otherwise. Cooking was done
outside, and we had a hit of food beneath a tree. The night
was dark and cheerless; hut what were these little discomforts
in comparison with what had that evening been achieved ?
At the hour of evening prayer we had all the natives toge-
ther, that they might -witness an act of worship to the true God;
the first act of the kind, no doubt, that had ever been performed
on their dark shore. The native service over, and a little con-
versation which followed, we withdrew, and outside the house
under the canopy of heaven, and with the great dark land of
New Guinea before us and close at hand, we sang> “Jesus shall
reign where’er the sun,” &c., poured out our hearts in fervent
prayer and thanksgiving, and talked of the spread of His
blessed reign, and the far-reaching consequences of the step we
had been privileged to take on that ever-memorable evening.
The house in which we spent the night had an upper storey,
a sort of loft, in which we slept. The houses generally—both
on the island and on the mainland—have an upper storey which
is used for a sleeping place. The design is, doubtless, to get
out of the reach of alligators and snakes. The house in which
we slept had bamboo joists, and the flooring was of cocoa-nut
slabs, and though it was perhaps pretty strong, it felt shaky,
and one was fain to move about cautiously lest it should give
way, to the inconvenience of the occupants of the house both
above and below. The bamboo grows to a great size, both on
the islands and on the mainland, and is used for a great variety
of purposes, among which are fencing, house building, and even
the construction of bridges on the mainland.
There was not much sleeping in our case on the night in
question, and early on the following morning (Friday, July 7th)
we were astir, and off for the neighbouring island of Saibai.
This was the island specially mentioned and recommended to
us by Captain Banner; but Joe did right in taking us first to


Tauan, as it has the invaluable advantage over the other of
being free from fever and ague, and is not less convenient
for the mainland. Both were about equally near to the land,
being separated from it by a narrow channel from three to six
miles in breadth.
VISIT TO SAIBAI.
Saibai is about four miles distant from Tauan. Nudai, the
chief, went with us in our boat; the people followed in two
canoes. In an hour we reached the part of the island to which
we were bound, and drew up in a fine safe anchorage in front
of a considerable village. A large number of people—men,
women, and children—crowded the beach and gave us a most
friendly reception. The sight of the chief from Tauan, with
our friend Joe, was enough to inspire confidence. The chief
figured in a red merino shirt, the only article of dress he wore,
and doubtless he felt himself a man of no small importance as
he moved about and related the marvellous doings of the
strangers on the previous evening.
We were led by the hand from the beach amid the noisy but
friendly clamour of the. crowd, to whom we were evidently,
objects of great wonder. We were reminded of the astonish-
ment which was excited by the appearance of Mungo Park, in
Central Africa, when searching for the sources of the Niger.
Everything about us occasioned wonder, but especially our
white skin. It was not enough that our hands and faces were
exposed to view, we had to bare our breasts, and turn up our
trousers, as if the natives were in doubt whether we really
were all white. Besides, exposure to the sun and the weather
had made our hands and faces about as dark as those of Joe.
Hence it was only by seeing other parts that they got a correct
impression. Party after party came, led by some officious
youth who had already had his curiosity gratified, to see the
wonderful white skins. By-and-bye they were diverted from


ourselves to the umbrella which one of us carried. The putting
this up and down, and the use of it, excited great wonder and
admiration; and a watch was regarded with a high degree of
astonishment not unmixed with awe.
When the excitement had somewhat subsided, the object of
our visit was explained to the chiefs and people, and by them
warmly approved. The names of the chiefs of Saibai are
Sauai and Maiak. Sauai, we were told, is a brother of Nudai,
the 'chief of Tauan. He was away on a fishing excursion, so
we did not see him; but our present was received by Maiak, in
the presence of all the people, and we were assured that the
absence of the other would not affect the engagement into
which we entered. And this is altogether likely, especially as
the absent chief is brother to Nudai.
APPEARANCE OF THE PEOPLE.
We were much pleased with the appearance of the people of
these islands. They are greatly superior to the natives of
Darnley and Warrior Islands. They are genuine Papuans, very
dark coloured, and their hair slightly curled, but not woolly.
They are tall and well proportioned, and many of them have
very good features. Many are as much as five feet ten inches
in height, some perhaps more, and muscular in proportion;
and they have not the cowed, down-trodden appearance of the
Darnley Islanders : on the contrary, there is an air of freedom
and independence about them which leads one to regard them
as a manly and independent race. Poor fellows! it is to he
hoped that the withering and deteriorating influence of inter-
course with a certain class of foreigners will not reduce them to
a level with other tribes to which they are now superior.
They do not wear any clothing, and but few ornaments, nor
do they seem to use paint, as do the natives of the New
Hebrides, and many other dark races. The ornaments they
wear are armlets, pieces of pearl-shell polished and formed into


a crescent shape, and worn on the breast suspended from the
neck, and a kind of beads with which they adorn their ears.
The mode of decorating the ear is of a character not met with
among the islands to the eastward. The lobe of the ear is
perforated when young, and gradually distended. That is
common among all the natives of Western Polynesia; but the
singular part here is that when the distension is complete, the
lobe is cut, and a weight is attached till it becomes elongate^
HEAD OF A PAPUAN.
about an inch and a half; it is then pierced at intervals of
about an eighth of an inch, and the series of holes is carried
all round the rim of the ear, and in each hole a bit of red
string is inserted, at each end of which a white bead is placed.
This decoration must cost severe and protracted pain. It is
not anything like universal; but we had a good specimen of it
in one of the young men who accompanied us from Warrior
Island to Tauan and Saibai. The armlets are very inferior


things: they are a sort of wicker-work; they extend from
about the elbow to the wrist.
The women look debased —very much inferior to the men.
Polygamy, we were sorry, though not surprised to find, is
largely practised ; the chief of Tauan has twelve wives, and his
brother, the chief of Saibai, ten. Their position seems very
much that of servants; perhaps slaves would be a more ap-
propriate designation. They do the drudgery and hard work,
while the men live at their ease, and work or not, as they
please. They wear a girdle of leaves.
While Joe was engaged in purchasing provisions for the
ship, we walked about examining the different objects that met
our view, and surveying, as far as opportunity allowed, the
fine island. Twice messengers were sent after us to call us
back from places to which we were about to go, for what
reason we could not ascertain. But it was evident that there
was some strong reason in the minds of the natives, as they
called us back in a very decided though friendly manner.
Probably some sacred object or enclosure was in danger of
being profaned by us.
About noon we took our departure. The women had
gone to get food, and it was arranged that a large party
should cross to Tauan on the following day, to see the
teachers and take them a present. We had a very rough pas-
sage back to the ship. The distance is not great, about thirty
miles; but it is a dead beat, and much of the time we had a
rough head sea and a strong adverse tide. We left Saibai
at noon on Friday, and did not reach the Surprise till about
sunset on Saturday, thirty hours being occupied in making
thirty miles. So ended this important expedition. , Our hopes
had been exceeded. God had done for us great things, and
we felt a satisfaction which words can but feebly express.
The great object of our voyage was accomplished. The foun-
dation of the New Guinea Mission was laid.


DESCRIPTION OF THE TWO ISLANDS.
But we must now return and say something a little more
definite about the islands that are likely to occupy so impor-
tant a position in . the evangelization of New Guinea. Of
course we saw but little of them ourselves, and so are unable
to give a very satisfactory account. They lie on the west side
of the Great Bight, or Gulf of Papua, about lat. 9° 30' and
long. 142° iO'.
Tauan is a small rocky, mountainous island. It has one
high central mountain, which appears to .reach an elevation
of 1,500 to 2,000 feet. From this mountain the land slopes
gradually down to the sea. The island looks wild and
rugged for so low a latitude, very unlike islands in similar
latitudes in Eastern and Central Polynesia. Immense blocks
of stone are strewed about in wild confusion, and present all
manner of fantastic shapes. Some look like grave-stones;
others like mounds erected over graves, and others like
pillars, forming doorways and arches. Some of tire blocks
are of immense size, and must have been thrown into their
present positions by tremendous convulsions. In some cases,
one block is placed upon the top of another, forming a sort of
cope-stone, and appearing as nicely poised and balanced as if it
had been done by human hands.
The part of the island where the teachers are located is a
snug, quiet nook, with good, safe anchorage, and a sandy
beach. There are two or three small streams in the neigh-
bourhood, and there is a fair proportion of low land, all of
which may, no doubt, be turned to good account; and the most
important thing of all is that the island is healthy, and so
fitted to be an available asylum at all times from the adjacent
coast, and the neighbouring island, where fever and ague pre-
vail. The stated population is very small; but there seems
to be constant intercourse between it and Saibai, the popula


tion of which appears large. The circumference of the island
may be about ten or twelve miles.
Saibai is totally different in character to Tauan; marvel-
lously so, considering that the islands are not more than four
miles apart. It is a low, swampy island, and fertile in the
highest degree. No part of it seems to be more than about eighty
feet above the level of the sea. A large part of one side is
covered with mangroves, and behind the village, wliere we
met the people, there is a very extensive fresh-water swamp,
which looks as if it might generate any amount of malaria;
still, as already mentioned, the natives look remarkably
well.
The swamp appeared like irrigated plantations, and no
doubt parts of it are under cultivation. The natives were
moving about it in little skiffs, and beautiful wild ducks
with snow-white plumage were seen enjoying themselves,
evidently in no fear of , being molested. On the further
side this great swamp is protected from the incursions of the
sea by a natural rampart, somewhat like the elevations that
surround Mares and Lifu, and other islands of Eastern and
Western Polynesia. As regards productiveness, Saibai is
evidently quite a garden; and this is a matter of considerable
importance in view of the comparative sterility of Tauan. It
is probably from thirty to forty miles in circumference.
The two islands, as already remarked, are about equally
distant from the mainland, and with the natives on the coast,
not only in their immediate neighbourhood, but for many miles
beyond, they have close relations. Hence, getting a footing
among them is really equivalent to obtaining a hold upon the
mainland; whilst over that it has the invaluable advantage of
securing a safe retreat in case of loss of health. With the pre-
vailing winds, whether blowing from the east or the west, the
channel can be crossed at any time in an hour, either from the
one side or the other, there being a fair wind both ways. And
on the coast is a large population, among whom we doubt not


the light will soon spread, scattering the darkness of untold
ages, and introducing an era, the characteristics of which will
be, “ Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth and good will
to iflen.” : Alas! what labours, struggles, and conflicts must
intervene before the full realization and development of our
scheme; but the result is sure, for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it. He will sustain His servants under all, and enable
them to triumph over all.
Our understanding with the teachers is that two of them,
Kerisiano and Waunaea, consider themselves, as specially ap-
pointed ; to the mainland, and that the other,two regard the
inlands as their more immediate sphere.
■ The country on the mainland presents a level flat, as far as
the eye can reach, except one hill of no great elevation. , The
whole is an unknown land, unexplored, arid uhyisited by white
men, and so it will probably remain for years to come, as other
parts of Hew Guinea present greater attractions to those who
may resort to it for scientific or commercial purposes.
VISIT TO CAPE YORK.
On Monday, the tenth of July, we sailed from Warrior
Island at 9 a.m., and stood for Cape York, the northern point
of Australia, which we reached on the evening of Tuesday,
the 11th. Capo York is only sixty miles from Warrior Island.
Our object in calling at Cape York was to see Mr. Jardine,
agent of the Queensland Government, and Lieutenant Chester,
Ex-Police Magistrate, who reside there, and also to take in water
for the return voyage. We thought it important to see Mr.
Jardine on account of his official position, and Mr. Chester on
account of the warm interest he takes in the native races, and
the frequent cruises he makes among the islands. We wished
to acquaint them with what we had done and intended doing
in the way of landing teachers; to enlist their sympathies in


our object; bespeak attention and succour for the teachers
should danger or difficulty arise; and get from them any infor-
mation that may be useful in our future operations.
We at length reached Somerset, where these gentlemen re-'
side. As we opened up, the bay, Port Albany, at the head of
which is the Government settlement, we were , much struck
withj the beauty of the scene. The house in which Messrs.
Jardine and Chester ,reside, stands upon high ground, some two
hundred feet or: more above the sea level. ! It is covered , with
an iron roof, has .epacidus Verandahs, and looks exceedingly heat *,
and with the; various, other 1 houses by .which it. is surrounded,
and which compose the settlement,;it presents altogether an im-
posing sight.
Mr. Jardine .met us at the landing place .and gave: us; a most
friendly reception, arid we spent, in company with him and Mr.
Chester, two or three pleasant and profitable hours, giving and re-
ceiving information mutually interesting. Mr. Jardine authorised
us to instruct our; teachers that, in the event of danger or diffi-
culty arising, they have only to apply to him : and he will render
them all the assistance in his power. Thus they will always have
an available retreat at 1 Somerset should they have occasion to
seek it: and Mr. Chester will visit them and give them
countenance and encouragement when he makes his rounds
among the islands. He has promised to visit Damley Island
shortly, and take the teacher appointed to Murray Island, to his
destination, should he find him still on Darnley. Mr. Chester is
well known on Murray Island; hence his accompanying the
teacher is likely to be of much service. On the whole we were
much gratified by our visit to these gentlemen. We saw only
two Englishmen who appeared to be residents at Somerset, in
addition to Messrs. Jardine and Chester, and a mother of the
former. All the other persons connected with the establishment
appear to be natives of Australia, with a few from some of the
islands to the eastward. Several native troopers figure about
the establishment in a uniform which gives them something of


an imposing appearance. They are paid £3 per month, which
we were glad to find they have it not in their power to spend
in intoxicating drinks.
All about Cape York is a fine healthy country ; the fever and
ague said to be so prevalent on New: Guinea are unknown,
as are also other diseases incident to tropical climates.: And
for so low a latitude it is wonderfully cool ; at this season of the
year. But this is true of all the places we have visited through-
out the Straits and the Papuan Gulf. The south-easterly trade
winds which blow almost constantly for half the year keep the
temperature cool ; and we were told that during the other part
of the year when westerly and north-westerly winds prevail the
heat is not very oppressive.
While on our way to and from Somerset certain curious
looking objects attracted our attention on the slopes of the hills,
the nature of which we could not conjecture and we had not
an opportunity of examining them. They were of a drab colour
and bore some resemblance to tombstones but some of them
terminated in two three or more spiral turrets. The mystery
was solved on our second visit to Tauan where the same strange
objects again arrested our attention; they were found to be
Ants Nests ! Some of them were twelve feet in height and
as many round.
RETURN TO TAUAN.
We sailed from Cape York on Friday, July 15th. Having
brought up at Eennel Island, we found a letter from Josaia,
informing us that he and Simone had left the island under
circumstances which led them to suppose that their lives were
in danger. We at once hasteued to Warrior Island, where we
found them; and then with two boats rundown to Tauan. One
of these boats we had purchased for the use of the teachers, and
we proposed to leave it at Tauan. On rounding the point of the
island, we descried them on the beach. Fervent gratitude to God


filled our hearts, and corresponding expressions escaped from our
lips. We hastened on shore and spent the day with our faith-
ful teachers and their wives, experiencing a satisfaction which
words can but feebly express.
We found all right: no change whatever, except in the right
direction, had taken place in the feelings or conduct of the
people towards the teachers. What then had led to the strange
proceedings of those who had deserted their post and fled, and
whose conduct had occasioned us such an amount of trouble
and anxiety ? The following is the explanation. Soon after
the teachers were landed, it must have been the next day, or at
latest the second day, a small vessel, the , belonging to
Sydney, commanded by Captain , engaged in shelling or
fishing, touched at the island; the said vessel anchored abreast
of the settlement where the teachers are located; and the captain
and his mate, and a number of his people went to the planta-
tions of the natives and helped themselves to sweet potatoes,
bananas, cocoa-nuts, &c. The natives were almost all absent
at the time on the neighbouring island of Saibai, and when
they returned and found that their plantations had been plun-
dered, they were of course excited, and a hostile demonstration
was the consequence. All the teachers were alarmed, and
thought themselves in danger. This seems clear from the fact
that the two who remained, retired by turns to commit them-
selves by prayer to the Divine protection. But when the ques-
of flight was raised, one of them, Waunaea, said he would not
leave, the natives had done nothing to them, and he was
determined to remain. Upon this Kerisiano announced that
he would stay with Waunaea; and the other two being inclined
to leave, they told them to go and they would remain and
await the issue.
And what are the mighty inducements that lead men, prid-
ing themselves on possessing a white skin, and calling them-
selves Christians, to be guilty of conduct so mean and con-
temptible ? In the present case some two boats’ loads or so of


vegetables were obtained, which might have been purchased for
trifles of the value of a few shillings. Eeally one wonders that
men will stoop to conduct so exceedingly paltry. We left a
paper with the teachers, certifying who and what they are; com-
mending them to the kind attention of visitors; and expressing
deep regret on account of the lawless conduct of certain parties
at this island and elsewhere ; making special reference to the
case which had just occurred ; and expressing an earnest hope
that there will be no repetition of such doings in future. And
here we may remark, as a warning to those who are implicated
in the practice, animadverted upon, that unless they are discon-
tinued, we shall be constrained to expose the perpetrators. We
are in a position to do that to a considerable extent now, and
as light spreads, concealment will be more and more difficult.
We went, led by a native, and saw for ourselves the plundered
plantations of Tauan, and not a little grieved and ashamed did
we feel, to think that men of our own colour and speaking our
own tongue, should have been the perpetrators of such a con-,
temptible deed.
The teachers and the people of Tauan were delighted at
our return. We had much important intercourse with them,
and left them in circumstances mutually satisfactory to them
and to ourselves. We succeeded at Warrior Island in
engaging a native of that place to remain with them for a
month as an interpreter. He has been to Sydney, and has a
considerable acquaintance with the English language, and bears
a good character; moreover, he is a man of some consequence
on his own island, and this will not be lost at Tauan. When
his month there is up, another native of Warrior Island will
take his place at Tauan in a similar capacity, who is also fitted
to be of much use to the teachers. They have, beside, the boat
which we purchased, so that they can move about at any time
as occasion may require.


VISIT TO THE MAINLAND KATAU.
We left Tauan at 2 a.m. on Monday, July 17th. We
were given to understand by our friend Joe that in returning
to Warrior Island we might, without loss of time, stand along
the coast of the mainland; and have intercourse with the
people of Katau, a populous district which he had visited,
and with whose chief and people he had formed an acquain-
tance. Everything turned out as Joe had represented, and we
were very thankful that we acted upon his advice.
In the channel between Saibai and the mainland, and for
some distance beyond, we had very light winds. Hence our
progress was slow for the first four or five hours, and though
the place to which we were bound is only about twenty miles
from Tauan, we did not reach it till near noon. For hours
we were moving slowly along the coast of the great land, our
progress being retarded by an adverse tide. We had a good oppor-
tunity of observing every object as we passed. There is little
variety; the land is low all along ; we passed only one little
hill. A mangrove swamp extends for many miles, terminat-
ing at the district to which we were bound. Beyond that are
groves of cocoa-nuts, and behind these are interminable forests,
stretching away into the interior.
As we drew near our destination a fine river opened out to
view. The weather was unfavourable, wet, and unsettled;
hence the river and the district, with their surroundings, did
not show to advantage. Nevertheless, we looked upon them
with intense interest. We made our way some distance up
the river, and dropped anchor opposite the settlement of
Katau. We can hardly hazard an opinion as to the breadth of
the river. The current did not seem very broad, but the space
covered by fresh water must have been a full mile. Its course is
distinctly marked for a considerable distance into the sea.
Joe informed us that it has two mouths, about four miles


apart; the second of which we could not see. Between it and
us was an island, near which we anchored. The island looks
very interesting, and adds much to the picturesque beauty of the
scene. The river must pour down an immense body of water,
especially when flooded. The sea was discoloured for miles
on the day of our visit. A native of Warrior Island, who was
with us, told us that the river extends a long way into the
interior, and that large numbers of people are found on its
banks.
At our first approach the natives looked shy and distrustful.
Six or seven appeared, and watched us cautiously as we drew
near; and it was not till Joe and the young man from Warrior
Island were recognized that we got their confidence. From
the appearance of those who showed themselves we felt
assured that we had nothing to fear; so we moved our
boat as near the shore as we could get, in order to enable
the natives to reach us. As soon as we had done this they
waded in to the boat, and we were soon warm friends. Among
those who came out to us was Maino, the chief, a friend of
Joe, and another man of importance. Confidence soon spread,
and large numbers appeared on the beach. The women
and children, and the old people kept out of the way; still
all were unarmed, and we could readily see that no danger
was to be apprehended. We found, after landing, that the
natives had hung green boughs in front of their houses, when
they saw us at a distance, as an indication of their desire for
friendly intercourse. One of the principal men who came to
the boat had a basket siting over his shoulder, containing
three or four heads of cooked taro. These he offered, thinking
probably that we were hungry, and being desirous of showing
himself friendly.


INTERCOURSE WITH THE NATIVES.
After some delay in tlie boat we went on shore, and
had the high gratification of setting foot on the mainland of
New Guinea, and holding intercourse with its people on their
own soil And interesting enough was that intercourse. Few
of those we met had seen a white man before. Lieutenant
Chester and Captain Banner visited this place during the course
of last year: but they landed armed, and the consequence
was that the natives fled into the bush, except some twenty or
thirty. In our case there was perfect confidence. The men
crowded around us to have their curiosity gratified, and the
women peered at us from the upper storeys of their houses. By
the way the houses are very remarkable. One which we saw and
measured was. over a hundred feet long; yet that was a small
one comparatively, as the following extract from Lieutenant
Chester’s journal proves. “ Some of these houses were upwards
of three hundred feet in length, and appeared like immense
tunnels when viewed inside.”
As at Saibai the umbrellas were objects of special interest, so
much so that we could not resist the temptation to leave them
with the people. One was given to the chief, and the other to
another man of importance, and the demonstrations that followed
the small gift were amusing indeed. One grand difficulty
however soon checked their joy, the umbrellas were opened and
could not be shut again; although we had repeatedly opened
and shut them amid roars of applause. At length one fortunate
fellow discovered the secret, and was rewarded by the loud
acclamations of the bystanders.
We found the people here very much like those of Saibai and
Tauan, so that what has been said of the one will apply to the
other. They are a mild, inoffensive-looking race, and they are
industrious, if we judge from the abundance of food which they
seem to possess. When they were given to understand that a


little trading would "be done, taro, bananas, and cocoa-nuts were
soon forthcoming; and in a short time Joe and Mr. Ormiston.
the mate of our vessel, had bought as much as we could con-
veniently carry away.
We made it our special business, of course, to’try and give to
the chief and people some idea of our object in visiting them
and their neighbours. We told them of the teachers we had
left at Tauan and Darnley Island, and of our visit to Saibai;
striving to convey some notion of the benefits which will accrue
from the presence and labours of teachers. The chief declared
his approval, and his wish to have teachers to live with him;
he said he would go to Tauan and see those left there, and that
he would receive and provide for them whenever they might
visit his land. Thus we have got one open door on the main-
land of Hew Guinea, and who can tell'the mighty results to
which that may lead ? There are some 600 or 700 people
connected with the village we visited; there is another
settlement a little further up the river on the same side; and
there is doubtless a large population bn the banks of the river,
stretching away into the great unknown interior.
With only one request of the chief we were unable to com-
ply. Having entered into a friendly compact with us, he wanted
us to help him to fight a tribe on the opposite side of the river
who are hostile to him. Quite a natural idea for him to wish
.to turn his new friends to account in that way. We hope, ere
a great while, to show him a more excellent way, namely, by
changing enemies to friends. Let teachers get a footing among
both parties, and their ancient feuds are likely soon to be for-
gotten, and peace and goodwill to be established in their room.
The river on whose banks these people reside has neither
name nor place on any chart. It, and its surroundings, and all
on as far as Saibai and Tauan, and we know not how much
further beyond, are unexplored. In the meanwhile, till a better
name can be 1 found, we may call it the Katau Eivee.


RETURN TO DARNLEY ISLAND.
About two p.m. we took our leave of our new acquaintances,
leaving them evidently much gratified with our visit, as assur-
edly we were with the intercourse we had had with them. We
had a rough, disagreeable passage back to Warrior Island, but
all ended well. We reached the Surprise about noon on Tuesday,
the 18th July.
We left Warrior Island on Wednesday, July 10 th, feeling
deeply grateful to our friend, Captain Banner,'and to Captain
Bedford also, of the James Merriman, connected with the same
establishment, who had manifested the kindest interest in our
operations and sympathy with us in our difficulties. Our
course was again directed towards Daenley Island. We
brought up for the night at Eennel Island, and on the follow-
ing morning again made sail. We had a hard day’s beating,
and got to anchor early on Friday morning, July 21st.
We had the satisfaction of finding all going on well with the
teachers. A number of the people had attached themselves to
them, and these and others had assisted them to put up a neat
little cottage. Thus at this early stage of the mission they are
comfortably housed, and their circumstances altogether are full
of encouragement. We were unable to get to sea on Saturday,
on account of ship’s business, so we spent the Sabbath at the
island. We went round to the settlement where the teachers
are stationed, and had service with them. The occasion was
deeply interesting. In addition to the teachers and their
families, and a number of natives from the Loyalty Islands, we
had quite a company of natives assembled; about eighty, old
and young. They were, of course, mere spectators; still it was
pleasing to see them, as it showed interest and friendly feeling.
About thirty of them had managed to get a little clothing;
very scanty in most cases, yet interesting to see. About that
number have decidedly attached themselves to the teachers, and
shew them great kindness. Our first acquaintance, Dabat,


continues their staunch friend; and on the whole their prospects
are very encouraging.
Mataika, who it will be remembered is appointed to Murray
Island, and was left hero only temporarily, will proceed to his
destination as soon as a suitable opportunity offers ; which is
likely to be in about six weeks or two months from the time
of our visit. Soon after the service we bade the teachers and
others on shore, adieu, and returned to the ship; and early oil
Monday morning, July 24th, we weighed anchor and set sail on
our return voyage;
VOYAGE OF THE “JOHN KNOX.” MR. THORNGREN.
Great interest attaches to our having made a second visit to
Garnley Island, from .the fact of our having fallen in there with
the John Knox. After the idea of attempting the commence-
ment of the missiop. in her was abandoned, and the employment
of a larger vessel determined upon, it was arranged that she
should still proceed with us, as part of our expedition, and that
she and Mr. Thorngren should render us such assistance as
might be practicable. Mr. Thorngren had resided for some time
on Garnley Island, and so had experience which it was hoped
would turn to valuable account. And now he had made up
his mind to return to his former home and settle there. It
was hoped moreover that his presence there with his handy
little vessel might be of much service to us in the early years
of the New Guinea Mission.
The John Knox is a fine little cutter, but she is only eleven
tons burden. Mr. Thorngren set out on his adventurous-
voyage from New Caledonia with sixteen souls on board, some
of them women and children, and all of them, with a single
exception, natives of the Loyalty Islands. Had he made a
direct course he would have had to traverse fifteen or sixteen
hundred miles of ocean. Some of the passengers were to
have gone in our vessel. Mr. Thorngren was not in circum


stances to undertake such a voyage, even had his vessel been
suitable. He had not the necessary charts or nautical instru-
ments. Hence it was a great marvel that he ever found his
way to Darnley Island. Hoping to fall in ‘with us at the south-
east end of New Guinea, he made for the Louisiades, but was
carried by contrary winds to the Solomon Archipelago, which
he mistook for the Louisiades. Then New Britain was mistaken
for New Guinea; and Mr. Thorngren stood along the coast till
the appearance of the land convinced him that he was on the
wrong side of New Guinea; by continuing his course west-
ward,. his convictions were confirmed, and he had to make the
best of his way back against a head wind.
On his way he spent twenty-one days among the islands of
the D’Entrecasteaux group. He met with very kind treatment
from the natives, and gathered valuable information which will
be of use to us in our prospective operations.
One very important point seems clear from his account, viz.,
that the natives of that large group, and most probably those
of the adjacent coast, belong to the Malay race. The colour of
their skin, their straight but slightly curled hair, and words in
their language unmistakeably Malayan, the high position oc-
cupied by the women, their mode of dress, tattooing, carving of
canoes* &c,, all go to identify them with the Malay tribes, who
people the islands of Eastern and Central Polynesia.’ The
group consists of four or five very large islands, and a great
number of small ones. All the more considerable islands are
inhabited. They are separated by narrow channels, and would
form a fine field for missionary labour; just the field for
teachers from Eastern and Central Polynesia. The large
islands are very lofty; some of them appearing to reach an
elevation of from 5,000 to 7,000 feet.
Various curiosities obtained by Mr. Thorngren, show that
the people have quite a taste for carving; an additional proof
of their Malayan origin. They have indifferent houses and
poor war-weapons, their and taste being chiefly seen in the


construction and decoration of their canoes. After leaving this-
interesting group Mr. Thorngren fell in with a fishing-party
from, he supposes, an island called Bonvouloir, lying off tho-
north-cast end of Ne\V Guinea. The party consisted of twenty
persons in two canoes ; they and Mr. Thorngren and his people-
spent a day together, during which the two companies seem to-
have formed quite a friendship. When they came to part, the
savages embraced the white man with all affection, as if they
had been old and intimate friends. How different from the
kind of intercourse which so often takes place between civilized
and uncivilized men when they first come into contact! Of
course Mr. Thorngren was entirely in the power of the natives
at the different places at which he anchored. At any moment
they might have surrounded him and his small party, and over-
powered them; yet no disposition was shown to take advantage
of their circumstances ; a satisfactory proof of the peaceful and
friendly character of these people, and a presumptive proof that
among barbarous, as well as civilized men, the rule will
generally hold, that men are to us what we are to them. “He
that would have friends must shew himself friendly,” and he
who does this will generally meet with an appropriate response.
As far as Mr. Thorngren could judge, the people from the
small island spoke the same language as those of the large
group. After parting with these people, Mr. Thorngren made
his way round the east cape of Hew Guinea, and thence to
Darnley Island, where he terminated his adventurous and
eventful voyage on the 19th July, fifty-nine days from the
time of his leaving New Caledonia. It was a great relief to us
to find that the party had readied their destination in safety, as
we had serious fears lest some disaster should have befallen
them.


REDSCAR BAY ON THE MAINLAND.
After leaving Darnley Island, on Monday, July 24th, we
stood over towards the coast of the mainland of New Guinea;
hoping, by so doing, to fall in with slants, if not with fair winds,
to enable us to make our way to the east. On Tuesday the-
high laud was sighted; but we had very light winds for the
next twenty-four hours. On Friday, the 28th, we stood close
in to land, and had a good view of Yule Island and the country
adjacent. We were near enough to see the natives on shore,,
but none of them showed any disposition to come off to us.
Yule Island is about four miles in length, and one in
breadth. It is 534 feet in height, and with the exception of
a few grass patches, it is covered with apparently large timber.
It lies in front of a very extensive opening in the coast, which
is supposed to be the mouth of a large river. The adjacent coast
is unsurveyed. The island looks as if it might prove a Tauan
for this part of the mainland, when rve may,beableto extend our
operations thus far along the coast, These small islands lying
close to the mainland are likely to be of great service in carry-
ing on the evangelization of New Guinea, as they are almost
certainly free from the diseases that are said to prevail on the
loav land along the coast. Yule Island is in latitude 8° 4 Y S.,
and longitude 146° 30' E.
Eough Aveather came on just as Ave Avere leaving this part
of the island, and for the next four or five days avc made no
progress. On Wednesday/the second of August, Ave made the
land again, very little to AvindAvard of Avhere Ave Avere on the
Thursday preceding. The south-east trades in these parts
seem to - Moav very strongly all the time at this season of the
year. For three days of the above interval avc had strong
head-Avinds and a A r ery high sea, AA’hile it Avas quite fine over-
head ; the sun shining by day and the moon by night. Thus
it is a very formidable undertaking indeed to get to Avimbvard.
On the afternoon of Thursday, August 3rd, avc Avere abreast.


of Eedscar Bay, and on the following day, about noon, we
anchored near the east point of the bay, close to a remark-
able headland named Eedscar Head, The name Eedscar
was given to this point and the bay on account of the reddish
colour of the cliffs. We were able to turn our stay in Eedscar
Bay to valuable account.
The natives were at first exceedingly shy. They showed no
disposition to come near the ship; and had no advance been
made on our part we should doubtless have left without
holding intercourse with them. But on Saturday morning a boat
was sent to the shore, and after a while returned with a man and
a boy. They were from a canoe which the boat had met. No
natives were found where it landed, though we had seen a
number about the place the day before ; they were evidently
distrustful, and so were inclined to keep out of our way. By
bestowing little presents upon the man and the boy, and send-
ing them back to the shore to display their gifts, and tell the
wonderful tale of what they had seen, we gained our end;
there was no more difficulty in getting intercourse on shore.
The most important thing connected with our visit to this
place is that we have ascertained that this part of the coast is
peopled by the Malay race. This confirms the impression we
got in passing Hood’s Bay, seventy-five miles further to the
eastward, from the view we had of the natives there: and now
we may almost certainly conclude that the whole coast of the
Eastern Peninsula, on the south side, from Eedscar Bay and
possibly from Yule Island, is peopled by the same race-
Very probably, judging from the information obtained from
Mi’. Thorngren, the same is true of the north side. It is not
unlikely that the dark race may be found in the interior.
We have ascertained another important point by calling here,
viz., that there is no difficulty in having friendly intercourse
with the light-coloured races on Papua any more than with the
dark. In the case of both we have now tested the thing, and
we have seen no trace of that invincible ferocity and treachery


■winch have hitherto been regarded as their prominent charac-
teristics. That they have been guilty of deeds of shocking
cruelty and barbarism is beyond dispute. But we suspect that
if all the circumstances were known, it would generally be
found that there have been misunderstandings; or that a wrong
policy has been adopted by the visitors ; or that in some cases-
these have been guilty of deeds which fully account for the
excesses committed by the natives. In dealing with a barba-
rous people everything, in all ordinary circumstances, depends
upon the manner in which that intercourse is conducted.
Among the natives of Eedscar Bay only a single weapon of
war was seen by parties who went on shore and moved freely
about among them; this was a stone club carried by the chief
of the party.
The people of this neighbourhood are a fine race. “ They are
of a light copper colour, and have handsome features and good
expression. Painting the face or body does not seem to be
practised here; but the men are usually tattooed on the breast,,
cheeks, forehead, and arms. It is much fainter and less
profuse than among the women, every visible part of whose
skin is generally marked with a great variety of patterns.
The women wear a petticoat of shreds of the pandanus
leaf, reaching to the knee, and the men a narrow piece of cloth
secured by a string round the waist.” * What the men wear is
the maro, or malo, known all over the islands of Eastern and
Central Polynesia, and worn by some whole groups, as the
Marquesans, in their heathen state. Thus it forms one among
the many links that connect them with the light-coloured races
on hfew Guinea.
We have seen no place on Hew Guinea equal in beauty
and grandeur to Eedscar Bay and its surroundings. The Lay
is twenty-three miles in breadth and seven in depth. From
Eedscar Head, which forms the eastern extremity, to the Manoa
* Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake, in 1845-G.


Paver, five miles distant, the coast is covered "with mangroves,
and for some distance inland it is probably uninhabited, and
unfit for cultivation. The river must either be very large, or
the conjecture we have met with must be correct, that there
is another large river further to the west, as an immense body
of fresh water is discharged into the sea. The fresh water line
is visible for miles, and the stream is about two miles in breadth.
For fifteen miles inland, and thirty-five miles north-west and
south-east the country is low, but it is not a dead flat. There
are several hills from the eastern Head onward towards the
west; and there is a small mountain range near the west side,,
which reaches an elevation of 770 feet. Inland at the dis-
tance of forty miles is the great Stanley Eange, which termi-
nates the view. It is very lofty at this part, over 13,000 feet,
and looks very grand. At early morn, when the weather is.
fine, the scene is enchanting. The clear, blue outline of the'
distant mountains towering far above the clouds; their sides,
and the hills and valleys at their base, skirted and partially
covered with snow-white drapery; with the rich and beautiful
country which stretches out to view on every hand, form a picture
of indescribable beauty and grandeur. So far as we could
ascertain, the people appeared to have their settlement near the
river, and there probably will be the place for a station when
we may be able to commence a mission at this inviting place.
We sailed on Monday, August 7th, and with our visit to
this place our intercourse with New Guinea, for the present,
came to an end.
CONCLUSION.
The London Missionary Society, under whose auspices this
field has been opened up, will doubtless endeavour to prosecute
with vigour the great enterprise of its evangelization. That
Society having a native agency at its disposal such as no other
Society (so far as we know) possesses, is in a peculiarly favour-
able position for undertaking it.


The extensive territory examined by us is peopled by two
distinct races ; the dark race having much in common with
the tribes found on most of the islands of Western Polynesia;
and a light-coloured race, evidently having a common origin
with the natives of Eastern and Central Polynesia. It so hap-
pens that the London Missionary Society has just the kind of
agency needed for the evangelization of these two races. In
the Loyalty Islands it has what is needed for the dark race : and
for those of Malay origin it has the Tahitian Mission, the
Hervey Island Mission, the Niue Mission, and the Samoan
Mission: each of which is in a position to furnish its quota of
labourers for the great undertaking, who are just the kind of
labourers needed.
We commend the infant Mission to the watchful care of the
great Master, and pray that in a very large measure His bless-
ing may rest upon its great future. To Him who hath so
graciously prospered our way, and permitted us to realize the
desire of our hearts, to Him be glory, honour, dominion, and
praise, now and ever. Amen.
A. W. MURRAY.
S. MACFARLANE.


LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
Extract from the Minutes of the Board Meeting , held on Monday,
December 11 th, 1871.
SOUTH SEA MISSION.
The Foreign Secretary informed the Board that a successful effort
had been made by the Rev. Messrs. Murray and Macfarlane,
of the Loyalty Islands Mission, to commence the Mission, planned by
the Directors, in the Island of New Guinea. He laid on the table
the voluminous and valuable Journal of their voyage, which had been
sent home by these brethren, and read extracts, showing how they
had placed teachers on Darnley Island, the Islands of Tauan and
Saibai, and had held pleasant intercourse with the natives on the
mainland. He showed also, from the journal and letters of these
brethren, that the Eastern Peninsula of New Guinea and the Papuan
•Gulf, contained an extensive population, both of Malay and Papuan
origin, and that there was abundant work open among them for all
-our Polynesian Churches.
The following Resolutions were then adopted :
I.—That the Board recognise, with devout thanksgiving, the good hand of
God in the protection of the native teachers in their first intercourse
with the natives of New Guinea, and hlcss Him for the guidance and
grace which have been vouchsafed to them and to the missionary
brethren in commencing this important mission among that people.
The Board commend these pioneers of the mission to His continued
goodness, and pray that the Holy Spirit may open the hearts of these
barbarous and ignorant races to the message of love and peace which
His servants have brought to them.
ll.—That the thanks of the Board be given to Messrs. Muhkay and
Macfarlane, for the Christian zeal, fidelity, and prudence with which
they have executed the commission with which they were entrusted.
That the Directors rejoice with them in the present success of their
enterprise; and, during Mr. Macfarlano’s visit to England, they commend
the teachers to Mr. Murray’s kindest superintendence and care.
lll.—That the Secretaries bo instructed, as soon as practicable, to publish
tho journal of these brethren in a separate form; and that all details
connected with tho maintenance and extension of tho mission be
referred to tho "Western Committee.
The Directors then commended the new mission to God, with
special thanksgiving and prayer, their devotions being led by
Mr. S, R. Scott.
Yates & Alexander, Printers, Symonds Inn, Chancery Lane.
