

JOURNAL
OF THE
EXPEDITION
FOE THE
deration 4 Ik
BY
L. M. D’ALBERTIS, C.M.Z.S., &c.
f riifil tm l|t iifarilta.




JOURNAL
OF THE
EXPEDITION
fob the
(fejjtorathm of tk J7i| JlittiT,
BY
L. M. D’ALBERTIS, C.M.Z.S., &c.
JMiftfi !» Iff iitoiiltiis.




EXPLORATION OF THE FLY RIVER,
NEW GUINEA.
By L. M. D’ALBERTIS, Corr. Mem. Zool Soc. &c.
To the Committee op the D’Albertis Expedition eor the
Exploration op the Ely River.
Gentlemen,— Having received from Signor D’Albertis the jour-
nal kept by him during his recent expedition for the exploration
of the Fly River, New Guinea, I have translated those portions
which I considered would be of public interest, and send them to
you for the information of the subscribers, a copy of which has
also been sent to the Government. The perilous nature of the
expedition to those engaged in it may be understood when it is
known that the steam-launch Neva was an open boat of about
twelve tons, and was deeply laden with stores and fuel. On
leaving Somerset her complement was ten men, three of whom
were white men, one Chinese, and six men of colour. The collec-
tion of living plants obtained during the expedition was very
large, and those that survived were presented to the Sydney
Botanic Gardens. The collection of dried plants, together with
fruits and flowers of those which only could be preserved in spirits,
were forwarded to Baron von Mueller, at Melbourne, who, as will be
seen in the appendix, speaks very highly of the collection, and is
now engaged in identifying and describing them in his forthcom-
ing fourth and subsequent Parts of the Papuan Plants, respecting
one of which, a fine Hibiscus, which he has named after its disco-
verer, Hibiscus Albertisii, he says . —“ Its nearest affinity is with
Hibiscus tupuliflorus of Hooker, of Guadaloupe, and Dominica,
in the West Indies,” and it is not a little remarkable that, coin-
ciding with this, M. D’Albertis discovered a singular South
American form of rapacious bird—a harpy, named by Salvadori


Harpyopsis, Novae Gkiineae. Among the plants, Baron von
Mueller also mentions a new Mucuna, of which D’Albertis consi-
ders there are probably three species, bearing red, yellow, and
blue flowers, all very handsome. The climbing plants bearing
red flowers were in great abundance on the banks of the Ply
River, and D’Albertis describes the pendulous masses of elegant
flowers, covering from the base to the top of the loftiest trees, to
be one of the most gorgeous and beautiful sights it is possible to
behold. The yellow-flowering species was very rare, and only
seen in the interior of New Gruinea, in latitude 6 south, on the
banks of the Fly River. In this species the flowers were only
seen on the tops of the trees, forming a dense mass, and were
not seen hanging in festoons or blossoms as in the former. Of
the last, nothing but the blue flowers were collected, as the blos-
soms were found strewed upon the ground, but the plant pro-
ducing them not having any flowers visible, could not be
distinguished from the general mass of creepers over the tree.
I remain, Gentlemen, yours faithfully,
GEORGE BENNETT, M.D., F.L.S.
Sydney, January 15,1877.
P.S. With reference to the superstitious fears among the
natives respecting rockets, alluded to on this and previous occa-
sions by Mr. D’Albertis, the following extract from the recently
published life of Norman McLeod, D.D., may be interesting
“ He had provided himself when visiting Palestine, before leaving
London, with musical snuff-boxes and fireworks. It was his
delight to hear the ‘ mashallah ’ of the astonished natives when
music burst out in some unexpected corner, or when a rocket
whizzed aloft and fell in a shower of fire. He claimed this use of
fireworks as an original invention for the protection of travellers,
and he was so confident of its merits that he would not have been
sorry had the Bedawin of the Jordan given him a fair opportunity
of showing the effect on their valour of a discharge of crackers
or a bouquet of rockets.”


JOUIRAL
OF THE EXPEDITION FOR THE EXPLORATION OF
THE FLY RIVER.
By L. M. D’ A LBERTI, C.M.Z.S., &cs.
I left Sydney on the 20th April, 1876, in the mail steamer
Brisbane, for Somerset, with Mr. Hargrave, the engineer, More-
man (a sailor) and Mr. Wilcox. I expected to get some native
troopers from the Government at Brisbane, Queensland, but felt
much disappointed that from the great demand for the police at
Cooktown, none could be spared ; but on my arrival at oooktown
I succeeded in engaging six men of colour. I arrived at Somerset
on the Ist May, and disembarked the Neva safely. From the
2nd to the sth of May we were employed in fitting out the Neva,
and on the 6th left Somerset at 2 p.m. on a 'trial trip, under a
steam pressure of 80 lbs., proposing to visit Mount Adolphus
Island, but the wood we used being wet, we stopped at Muddy
Bay until we had attained a power of 40 lbs. steam pressure,
when we started for Cape York Island, and anchored at 4.10 p.m.
west of Cape York, cut wood, and remained for the night.—
May 7: Passed the day on shore ; the bilge water was very
offensive on board the Neva and discoloured the paint.—May 8 :
Left Cape York at 11 a.m., under a steam pressure of 40 lbs.;
passed east of Albany Island, and anchored at Somerset at 1.30
p.m, For five miles we had a current in our favour, and for
three miles the current was against us, but the sea was calm.
May 9 to 11: Engaged in completing the arrangement and
stowage of the Neva.—May 12: Purchased two tons of coal from
the steamer Bowen, and was annoyed by some of the men getting
drunk. —May 24 and 14: Engaged in loading the Neva.—May
15 : Was informed that Moreman was unwilling _to go with the
expedition, as higher wages had been offered to him; I therefore
proposed to Moreman to discharge him, on condition that he
repaid the money I had advanced to his wife and his passage
money from Sydney, but he replied that it was his intention to
go with the expedition, —May 16 : Moreman left last night; I
was told he left with Captain Hovell on board his vessel. —May
17 : Moreman has not been seen in Somerset. —May 18 : Called


on the Police Magistrate for a warrant to be issued against
Moreman. The weather being fine and calm, I left Somerset at
1 p.m., and anchored at Harvey Bocks. Some of the bars of the
furnace melted, so that we had to lessen our steam and help
with the sail. Mr. Hargrave had'an attack of fever.—May 19 :
We left our anchorage at 7 a.m., and anchored at 10.15
at Long Island, where we remained all day and night, the engineer
still continuing ill ; the weather was very fine.— viay 20: Started
at 7 a.m. and steamed until noon, and then sailed until 5 p.m., for
we could not get fresh water at Long Island.—May 21 : We left
at 7 a.m. under steam; at 9 a.m. saw the schooner Pacific at
anchor on the Warrior Beef; we steered towards her, as she had
some coal, rice, and biscuit on board for us; at 10 a.m. we went
on board the schooner, and received our supplies, and then left
for Katow at 10.30 a.m.; being over the coral reef, and having
no chart, we had some difficulty in keeping onrselves clear of
accidents. Following one of the pearl fishing boats, we sighted
the coast of New G-uinea, and landed at Katow at 3.30 p.m.,
being desirous of procuring a pilot to Kiwai. Maino, his son,’
and another young native promised to go with me to-morrow to
Kawai.—May 22 : Early this morning I landed again at the vil-
lage (Moatta), and found that Maino, his son Waruki, and Do wan
were ready and willing to accompany me as pilot to Kiwai. We
left at 9 a.m. for Bristow Island, about two and a half miles dis-
tant from the mainland, and found a good channel from 3 to 7
fathoms deep. About 1 p.m. we were abreast of a coral reef east
of Bristow Island; passed about a mile from the reef, sounded at
low water, and found from 4to 5 fathoms. After clearing the
reef, steered for Bampton Island, named by the natives Parama.
At 4 30 p.m. we sighted Breakfast Island, named by the natives
Mibu. At 7.15 p.m. anchored three miles south of of this island
in two fathoms of water.—May 23: At dead low water during
the night the Neva struck the bottom, which, being rocky, occa-
sioned some alarm, but fortunately the steamer received no injury,
it being very calm at the time. At 7.30 a.m. we left for a small
village, at Kiwai Island, south-east of Mibu, named by the natives
Tzamari, and anchored in front of the village, about a mile from
the shore, on account of a mud flat. At 3 p.m. went on shore,
the natives of the island being on very friendly terms with the
Moatta people, we were well received by them, and ready to sell
provisions in any quantity, consisting of pigs, bananas, yams, and
cocoanuts, the medium of exchange being tobacco; so having
loaded the dingy with a large stock of provisions, we had to refuse
to purchase any more. Bemained at our anchorage all night.
May 24 : We had a strong breeze during the night, with heavy
rain in the morning, but it cleared up and became very fine dur-
ing the remainder of the day. A few miles above Tzamari we
found the water fresh. We passed close to some islands, opposite
to Kiwai Island, and found a good channel five fathoms deep, and
shoaling to one or two fathoms, but it is very probable that we


had got out sometimes from the proper channel. Anchored at
11.30 a.m. opposite a village at Kiwai, named Para by the natives.
This village can he readily recognised by some lofty trees, which
are very remarkable by being flat on the top. We found the
current here ran from four to five knots an hour. The natives
of this village did not come to us, and we saw only a small canoe,
in which were two men, far away. Landed on an island opposite
the village to cut wood, which we named Hixson Island.—May
25 : Left Hixson Island at 7.30 a.m., but the wood being wet we
made but slow progress, but derived some assistance from our
sail. After clearing Kiwai we had a fresh south-east breeze, and
made good speed. Passed Attack and Long Islands without
seeing any natives, and I made at this part some alteration in the
chart planned in the former voyage of the Ellangowan. We were
in a good channel of from five to seven fathoms deep. Passed on
the left, close to an island, which, judging from its vegetation, is
of recent formation ; this was named Bennett Island, We now
got into shallow water, but close to Canoa Island there is a chan-
nel of seven or eight fathoms ; anchored at the same place as when
in die Ellangowan. We have not yet seen any natives.—May 26 :
This morning, about 7 a.m., two canoes were seen about a quarter
of a mile from the Neva; a short time after three more appeared
behind, but kept at a distance. We made signs and held out
baits to them, by waving red calico, and called to them, but it was
of no use. At 8.30 a.m. we raised the anchor, and the noise of
our whistle and steam caused them to take flight, and to enable
them to pull away faster they left some of the canoe fittings
behind. They were not armed or attired in their war dresses. I
regretted I could not communicate with them, as they seemed to
me to be the same people by whom we were well received in the
Ellangowan. We tried to pass close to the village on the main-
land west of Canoa Island, but we were obliged to stop at noon,
as we found we had got into shallow water and had but little
steam, from the wood being too green. About this place are
many sandbanks, dry at low water and difficult to cross. It was
at this place the Ellangowan struck. I believe that when the
Eiver is properly surveyed, a safe and deeper channel will be
found nearer to the eastern bank. At 5.30 p.m. we reached
Howling Point, where in the voyage of the Ellangowan we had
seen natives. We, however, did not see any to-day, but heard
the dogs barking, and saw some smoke. Anchored for the night.
At dark we sent up some rockets, and made an experiment with
a combination of the dynamite with the rocket, which consisted of
inserting the fuse of a cartridge of dynamite, to which the cart-
ridge was secured, into the body of the rocket. The first trial
wrs unsuccessful, as probably the rocket exploded before the fire
had communicated with the fuse. The second time was a success,
proving the possibility of sending a cartridge of dynamite to a
great distance, and which will explode after the rocket is spent.
The lime for the explosion of the dynamite may be regulated by


the length of the fuse. It is wonderful the effect it produces at
night, hearing the heavy report of the dynamite after the explo-
sion of the rocket and its shower of fire. We did not expect that
the natives would venture to attack us that night. The day had
been very fine.—May 27 : We did not see any fires on the land
last night, nor did any natives make their appearance this day.
We left at 11 a.m., but the strength of the current obliged us to
stop and wait the rising of the tide. The second time we stopped
at an island, which I named Walker Island. We then explored
in the dingy a small creek for about half a mile, and killed some
fish with dynamite. We left again at 4.15 p.m., and anchored at
dark.—May 28 : With the small supply of wood we had yester-
day, we left this morning at 5.30 a.m., having the flood tide with
us. We went up six or seven miles, and then anchored in seven
fathoms water. It rained in the morning, but the remainder of
the day was fine. —May 29: Left at 6 a.m., with the rising tide,
and the wood we used as fuel being dry, we made a run of about
twenty-six miles ; at 11 a.m. we had to stop, having exhausted all
our fuel. We did not meet any natives. Passed so many islands
that it made this part of the river very narrow ; but we had
always from five to seven fathoms. The banks at this part were
low and flat, but covered with beautiful dense and luxuriant
forest. —May 30: We left at 7 am. and anchored at 4 p.m. at the
distance of one or two miles from the last place we arrived at in
the Ellangowan. We passed a large island north-east of it, and
saw a small village on the mainland, composed of four or five new
houses. Some few miles further we observed a few natives, some
of whom were armed with bows and arrows. They were laugh-
ing and chattering at us, but did not seem to have any bad
intentions. Near them, fastened to the bank, were some canoes.
I waved some red calico towards them, but they did not or would
not notice it, but soon after disappeared into the bush.—May 31:
We started early in the morning, and reached Ellangowan Island,
passing on the north side. The bank on the right was covered
with dense and luxuriant trees, but on the left vegetation was
very scanty, there being only a few lofty trees about the bank,
and behind these, as far as we could see, was only an open coun-
try of coarse grassy vegetation, and appeared to be swampy and
flooded at some seasons of the year. The banks of the river had
at this place a very different appearance from what we had previ-
ously seen, for it was covered by that graminaceous plant the Coix
lacryma. At 3 p.m. we discovered some huts in an abandoned
village. We landed and found eight or ten old houses close to
the bank, which was at this part seven or eight feet above the
level of the water. Following a path through the forest behind
the houses, we found a new canoe, which had been constructed
on the spot. The ground around was cleared of trees and shrubs,
and small trunks of trees were lying across of about two yards
one from the other, on w r hich the canoe had to be launched into
the river. A similar plan is adopted on the north-west coast of


New Guinea. In the houses I found a stone, some fresh-water
shells, fish bones, and pigs’ skulls. The houses looked very rudely
constructed, and it is very probable they were only used as places
for shelter. Close by I observed some small platforms, on which
the natives preserve their provisions against the hungry dogs and
pigs; such platforms are also used by the natives of Yule Island
and Hall Sound. A short distance further on I saw a few more
houses, protected by a side wall made of leaves ; they were pro-
bably used by the women. We left the village at 3.15 p.m., and
anchored at 6 p.m., but we did not proceed any distance from the
village, the wood we procured there being wet. We had a fine
and calm day.
June 1: Left at 8.10 a.m. and anchored at 2 p.m. The
engineer reported that, from the quality and state of the wood,
we could not go any further to-day. The banks at this part were
very low, and covered with long coarse grass, of which the Coix
was very prominent, and some straggling trees, which appeared
to be a species of acacia. We saw a small channel, and consi-
dered it probable that we had anchored on the north side of an
island formed by this creek, At this place the river assumes a
much more broad appearance, and the presence of a number of
aquatic birds suggests to me that we are not far distant from a
lagoon.—June 2 : We left at 7 a.m., and steamed until 5 30 p.m.,
when we anchored, during which time we ran thirty or thirty-two
miles, advancing somewhat in a northern latitude; bui the direc-
tion of the river seems to trend to the west. The banks of the
river are still low. and are now only covered by Coix and other
coarse grasses, or a very poor vegetation; still here and there
some clumps of beautiful trees would appear. The acacia was
also seen occasionally, but was not plentiful. The bread-fruit
tree (Artocarpus) was more common on the banks, and also a
species of taro. We also saw a few cocoanut trees, and I observed
that those bearing fruit had their leaves hanging over the river
cut down in the middle. This, I suppose, was done by the natives,
so that they could perceive at a distance which trees were bearing
fruit. Also passed some huts, and saw some traps for catching
fish at several places on the bank, especially on the left side. A
short distance inland we also discovered a plantation of cocoanut
trees, and observed some smoke. No doubt there is a village, but
we saw nothing of the natives. —June 3: Left at 10 a.m., and
anchored at 5 p.m. On three different points a quantity of smoke
was seen, and about 2 p.m, we came upon a small grove of
cocoanut trees on the right bank. Behind it the ground is a
little more elevated, and covered with coarse grass; and a short
distance beyond a dense forest was seen. We landed here and got
some cocoanuts. About half a mile from the cocoanut groove we
met a canoe with a boy, and apparently also a woman. They did
not appear to be frightened, but, pulling away, entered a lagoon
on the right, and disappeared among the reeds; some houses were
seen in that direction. A little further on another lagoon was


seen, about three miles in extent, as far as we could see ; it may
be larger, as some portion was not visible for the trees. We met
also another canoe with two men, but they soon disappeared
among the reeds. I endeavoured to make them understand we
were friends, but they avoided all intercourse with us, without
evincing any great fear. The country we passed to-day looks
much better ; the banks were here and there more elevated, con-
sisting of red clay, and the vegetation was much more luxuriant.
—June 4th: We steamed from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., except stopping
at 11 am. to get more wood. The banks again became low, some
of the land being covered by shrubs, and sometimes with coarse
grass, among which the Coix predominated. A species of bamboo
appeared very abundant at this place. A little before dark, about
one or two miles inland on the left bank, some cocoa palms were
seen, and probably there is a village, but we only saw a canoe
with one native, who took no notice of us.—June 5 : Very early
this morning I observed a canoe about three hundred yards behind
us, and all our attention was directed to gain their confidence, but
all our presents of red calico and bottles, sent down by the cur-
rent, were unavailing; they did not notice or seem to care for
them, but crossed the river and disappeared among the reeds. A
short time after two other canoes, manned by natives, passed the
same way without communicating with us. At 6.30 p.m. five
large canoes came out from the place where the other canoes had
disappeared, with about twelve or fifteen men in each. After look-
ing at us for some time they passed on, making a great noise, and
at times appeared as if they would approach nearer. They were
in fighting order, as they were attired in their war dresses, and
were armed with bows and arrows. I endeavoured to pacify them
by sending some red calico, knives, and bottles fastened on a piece
of wood, but they did not take any notice of my presents or pick
them up. When we raised the anchor the flags were hoisted;
this seemed to alarm them, for they almost immediately ceased
shouting and talking, and pulled away. Two chiefs apparently
tried to place the other canoes ahead, so as to protect them from
any danger. As soon as the Neva moved they began to retreat,
but when we turned the bow of the steamer towards them they
rapidly fled, still more terrified at the noise from the steam whistle
and the report of a few shots from a revolver fired in the air, and
they speedily got out of sight, vanishing among the reeds. We
continued our course until 4 p.m., when we landed among some
old houses on the left bank, which at this place was about twenty
feet high from the water, and for the purpose of obtaining some
more wood as fuel. To get into the house we had to climb up an
old rotten ladder, which was not very safe. The houses were
situated along the bank, and were similar to those used by the
natives of Yule Island. In the middle of the village was a square
place kept cleared from plants and other vegetation, and judging
from a painted post, the carving of animals and other devices on
the bark of some of the trees, and the remains of animal bones,


it was evident that this place was used as a place of meeting for
the people, for dancing or any other public assemblies. The
animals carved on the trees were principally reptiles, or alligators
and iguanas, which are used as food by the natives, and may be
also objects of veneration. Some of the designs were very well
executed, and I cut out one of these carvings from the trees repre-
senting a human face, very odd and grotesque; the colours used
were red, white, and yellow. The bones of pigs and fresh-water
turtles were found in the houses, with net bags filled with fresh
water shells, &c., the latter stored for the purpose of being
converted into lime, which the natives mix with their betel leaf and
areka nut. The ground about this locality was somewhat undu-
lating and tolerably dry. Breadfruit trees were abundant and of
large size, and taro was growing also on the banks. Our provi-
sions being rather scanty, we had a good supply of fish from the
river by aid of the dynamite.—June 6: We left about 7 a.m., and
found the river bending very much. Still we got some miles west
by north, when the banks again had only a little elevation, but the
forest was very rich and luxuriant. We stopped a short time at
some cocoa palms, to get a supply of nuts for the crew, who were
very fond of them. At 3.30 p.m. we saw an opening on the left,
from the north-west, and came upon some places with not a greater
depth than one fathom of water ; but we soon got again into the
proper channel, when we then had from five to seven fathoms of
water. Opposite the opening just mentioned there was a muddy
bank on the right. At 4.30 p.m. we had to anchor, having no fuel,
as we had exhausted all our wood, close to a bank of red clay.
The weather was windy, with a little rain, and we got some large
fish by aid of the dynamite.—June 7 : We did not leave before 10
a.m., and, our supply of wood being bad, were obliged to go very
slow, and to drop anchor at a small plantation to procure more
wood; left and stopped after a short time, for the purpose of
visiting another old village, and found some implements and other
articles in one of the houses, which in its form resembles the
reception-houses of the south-west coasts of New Gruinea —that is,
like an overturned boat with a projecting spur in front, the only
difference being that it was not built on piles. Part of the bank
on which the village is situated has been washed away by the
water, and consequently some of the houses have fallen down
amongst the debris. Some fine banana trees and tobacco plants
were under cultivation by the natives; but, judging from the
grass growing about the houses, I should consider they had been
abandoned, from some cause or other, several months since.
Steamed again for a few miles, and then anchored near a tall dead
tree in the water bearing the marks of fire, the first seen of any
indication of fire since we entered the river.—June 8 . Left at 8
a.m., and anchored at 5 p.m., remaining half an hour at another
old village. We found that tobacco was cultivated at this place,
and appeared to be of excellent quality. Some bags with fresh-
water shells and the remains of alligators and fresh-water turtles


were found in the house. We had some rain to-day, but it soon
cleared up and became fine again. From stellar observations
taken by Mr. Hargrave, we were now in 6° 28’ south latitude ; by
my calculation we are only four miles above. The health of all
on board to this day was very good.—June 9 : Left at 8 a.m., and
the wood being good we were able to steam until 4 p.m. without
any delay. We spent the night near the left bank, mooring the
Neva to a tree, and using the dingy as a bridge to go on shore
from the steamer. The bank was high, and covered with a very
rich vegetation of more luxuriant growth than any we had yet
seen, and of a deep green colour. During our excursions we met
with no natives, but fell in with a young plantation of eleven
cocoanut palms, a few huts, and some old landing places. The
bank was from six to eight feet above the level of the water, and,
judging from the discoloration of the water, and the large amount
of snags and debris brought down by the current, it is probable
that there was very heavy rain about the higher lands of the inte-
rior far away from us. It was proposed to give the men a day’s
rest to-morrow, the first since we left, and also to go on a shooting
excursion, as our provision was getting short.—June 10: Went
on shore at 8 a.m. with some of the men, and were very fortunate
in killing, among many other birds, a noble full-grown cassowary
(Cassuarius species), as well as a new species of Goura, or crowned
pigeon.* We soon returned to the Neva, with a fine specimen of
cassowary and a good supply of fresh meat. —June 11: We left at
6.30 a.m. and anchored again at 5 p.m. By stellar observation Mr.
Hargrave made out our position at 6° 20’ south latitude ; by my
reckoning we were four miles more north. The bank was low,
but covered with the most luxuriant vegetation and magnificent
forest trees. Ido not think this place is inhabited, as all traces
of natives have disappeared. The men were dissatisfied that the
cook did not give them a larger supply of meat, and also asked
for an extra supply of biscuits; but 1 refused, as we have only
about 40 or 50 lbs. of biscuit left. —June 12 : Left at 8.30 a.m.;
but our wood being bad we could only proceed slowly. We passed
an island, and then found ourselves in front of some openings, one
of which may very probably be another large branch of the river.
We landed on the western point, to give time to get up sufficient
steam to enable us to proceed. Found an old arrow, and cap-
tured a living snake ; so I named that point “Snake Point.” I
did not see any natives, but observed a cutting on a tree by some
sharp instrument. We finished this day the flesh of the casso-
wai’y. —June 13 : Our wood being bad, we did not proceed far this
day. The banks were covered with a thick and luxuriant forest.
We passed two hills about 200 feet high covered with a dense
forest vegetation. The trees were of a rich deep-green colour,
* This new species of Goura has been described very recently by Salva-
dor!, and named Goura Sclaterii, after the Secretary of the Zoological Society
of London, There are now four species of Goura known —Goura coronata,
Goura Victoria, Goura Albertisi, Goura Sclaterii.—G. Bennett.


and amongst them I observed some species of tree fern. We
anchored at 5 p,m. —June 14 : Left at 11 a.m. and anchored at 5
p.m. We were not able to make much progress this day, from
our fuel being bad. It is now three days since we had a glimpse
of any natives, but this day we had signs of some being in the
vicinity, for we saw three or four canoes fastened to the muddy
bank, but could not discover any tracks or signs of the owners, so
I suppose the canoes must have been there for some time. The
banks at this place were seven or eight feet high. I took a long
walk, and found that the forest was very rich, the lesser vegetation
beautiful, and the soil very fertile; but in many parts it was
exceedingly damp and muddy, and in other places covered with
water. I found the sago palm very abundant. —June 15: We
were late in making our departure this morning, not leaving until
10 a.m. We had cut a large quantity of wood, but being green
we steamed this day very slowly, and were often obliged to stop.
The banks as we passed along became of greater elevation, and
once we stopped at the foot of a hill. At the edge of the water I
observed some yellow sandstone with oxide of iron in it; this sup-
ported a conglomerate of flint stone, basalt, and quartz in abund-
ance. Above the conglomerate was red clay and a strata of hard
decayed vegetation. I collected several mineral specimens, with
one or two fossils. The men washed some dirt for gold, but Ido
not think that they found any. From the washing I obtained a
sample of ferruginous iron sand. The sight of a hill, rock, or
stone seemed to animate my people, who no doubt engaged in the
expedition in the expectation of finding gold. We met this day
canoes in different places, some lying on the banks and one in a
creek. On examining this one, I found only some leaves in it
and two wretched paddles, being formed only of long sticks with
three bits of bark inserted in a cleft at the end and tied with
rattans. On the mud I recognised the footprint of a boy or
woman. I placed a bottle in the canoe, which I think will astonish
the owner, who, I suppose, was not far away. We anchored about
4 p.m. near a small creek, in which I procured some excellent fish
by aid of dynamite. Observed several paths in the forest, so I
think we are in the vicinity of natives. Palmer had an attack of
fever to-day.—June 16: Left at 10.30 a.m., as we could not get
up our steam before. "We obtained more fish by dynamite.
Visited the shore, and shot a specimen of Paradisia apoda, if it
should be that bird, which it closely resembles ; if so, it is the first
time it has been met with in New Guinea. Not far from our
starting-point we saw a large rock above the water in the middle
of the river, and, trying to avoid it by nearing the right bank,
about twenty-five feet high, came upon a large house, and a few
natives were seen to run away, armed with bows and arrows.
stopped in front of the house, and then landed to visit the house
and plantation, in order to procure food and ethnological speei-
mens, so as to be able to form an opinion of the natives of this
part of New Guinea. So far we have not as yet been able to have


any communication with them, from their constantly running
away on our approach. I found the house was constructed upon
piles, fifteen feet high, very neatly built, but of a different style to
any I have seen in other parts of New Guinea. The interior was
very clean, and arranged in good order. We inspected everything,
and took away with us some weapons, stone implements, and
several ornaments, which will serve to show by comparison and
examination the race of people inhabiting this part of New Guinea.
We procured also some bananas of a very bad quality, but did not
see any pigs. In exchange for what we took I left three axes,
three knives, six bottles, some red calico, and some handkerchiefs.
We returned on board without seeing any natives, and steamed
away. Soon after we passed a small island, got into shallow
water, and struck the ground three times, but fortunately received
no injury ; but on steering for the left bank we got again into the
proper channel, with a depth of water of two and three fathoms.
About 4 p.m. we were obliged to stop, our supply of wood being
exhausted. We saw three men and two canoes, but found it
impossible to induce them to approach us, for they abandoned
their canoes and disappeared into the forest.—June 17: About 10
a.m. we left. After steaming a few miles the water became so
shallow (only half a fathom) that we had to stop near to the right
bank, where we found one and a half fathom. The engineer went
in the dingy to sound, and found the channel continuous at
one and a half fathoms on the right hand side, but there was
a large snag lying across it. He returned on board at 4 p.m., but
too late to proceed any further. We proposed to clear the pas-
sage, but we at the same time hoped we should have some rain by
to-morrow, and have a greater depth of water. I went on shore
and ascended the summit of the hill, 250 feet high. On the top
I found a good path along the ridge of the hill, and also visited a
small house, which appeared to have been only recently vacated
by the natives, judging from the remains of food, and fresh leaves
used by them to sit upon. There were some net bags, in which I
found some Dammar resin, and also some bamboos for carrying
water. The paths at the summit of the hill were very numerous.
Prom the top, in a north to north-east direction, I observed some
very high mountains at a great distance, and the land rose gradu-
ally in that direction. It was so misty at the time that I found it
impossible to determine the distance. In the afternoon I again
visited the hill with some of the men. We then obtained a much
better view, but not enough to enable us to form an opinion of
the true distance, but I calculated they may be fifty or sixty miles
distant from us. Very probably it was the great Charles Louis
range. The hills were covered with a dense vegetation, on a yel-
low and red clay soil, to be seen here and there covering a hard
sandstone. In the creeks quartz was seen in abundance. John
(one of the men) is ill with fever ; Palmer improving.—June 18 :
After the rain of last night we found the water deeper, and left
at about 7.30 a.m., but found the current very strong against us.


Had to stop at 1 p.m. for want of fuel, haying progressed only
four or five miles. The water soon shallowed, and the current
was strong against us at the rate of about five miles an hour. I
passed nearly four hours rambling on shore, and found the coun-
try formed of small rounded hills, from 50 to a hundred feet high.
I observed, as usual, in the creeks and gullies an abundance of
quartz and pebbles, and the dirt, when washed, gave a large quan-
tity of iron. The forest is very luxuriant, and of semi-tropical
vegetation, and the ground was generally covered by a species of
Begonia. Mr. Wilcox had an attack of illness.—June 19 : Left
at 7.30 a.m., but the wood being bad we did not progress more
than six or seven miles, and about noon had to delay for the pur-
pose of cutting more wood. Steamed again about 3 p.m., and
stopped a short time after at some bread-fruit trees we saw in a
small plantation. We proceeded again, and as the water was
shallow, having only three feet of water, I gave orders to the
engineer to go slow, and to stop when we had only half a fathom
of water, to give us time to sound ; but he must have misunder-
stood my instructions, for he went at full speed. The result was
that we struck the ground three times and had to stop. The men
landed to cut wood, and I occupied myself by rambling about, and
found the country undulating and hilly to the height of from 40
to fifty feet. The trees were here growing widely apart, but taller
than any I had previously seen. The soil was of yellow clay,
covered by a strata of decayed vegetation. Mosses and an appa-
rently new species of pitcher plant (Nepenthes) covered the
ground in great abundance. Quartz and sandstone were found in
the creeks.—June 19 : It was raining all last night and this morn-
ing to 9 a.m. Left at noon, but the wood being wet and a strong
current against us, we did not go very far. About 4 p.m. we
arrived at a plantation on the left bank, where we saw some poor
sugar cane and plenty of taro. Anchored to collect some provi-
sions, as ours are all consumed; but I keep in reserve four or five
pounds of flour and biscuit, to be used only in case of necessity.'
We thought we perceived some movement among the grass on the
bank, but could not distinguish if any natives were there, or only
dogs or pigs. We landed, and found a small house two or three
hundred yards from the river, in the middle of a taro plantation.
Entered the house, and got some yams and fish, which we found
ready for cooking by the natives, and some ornaments and stone
implements. La wan captured a young pig, at which we were all
delighted, as we all began to feel the want of meat, We deter-
mined to remain here for the night, to cut wood to-morrow (there
being a great number of fallen trees) and taro for future occasions.
—June 21: We had a good deal of rain during the night and this
morning, so that the men did not land to cut wood until 9 a.m.
Captured another pig, and obtained ten bags of taro. I found
two human skeletons exposed on a platform, and secured them for
scientific purposes. I left in exchange for what we took toma-
hawks, knives, handkerchiefs, beads, bottles, tins, and looking


glasses. Left at 12.30 p.m., and our progress was slow, the cur-
rent being strong against us. From passing too close to the bank
we were struck by the branches of an overhanging tree, occasioned
by the want of care of the man at the helm. I saw in the middle
of the river a very singular plant, which only grows in gravel
banks in the rivers, serving as a natural warning to voyagers in
an unexplored river. I was aware of this, and gave orders to pro-
ceed at half speed, and told the man to steer to the left; but my
directions must have been again misunderstood, as we went at
full speed, and received a severe shock upon the gravel bank.
Fortunately we sustained no damage, but had to drop anchor
for the night.—June 22 : All night and morning we had heavy rain,
andalthough we had our steam up till noon,the currentwas sostrong
against us that we resolved to wait until the flood had subsided.
Passed the day on shore, which teemed with a most luxuriant
vegetation; observed yellow clay and quartz in the creeks. Mr.
Hargrave and the Chinaman ill with fever.—June 23: Left early
this morning, and after steaming a few miles, came upon two
branches of the river; took the right branch, being the largest, but
not of a greater breadth than fifty or sixty yards, the depth of
water being almost constant, from two to three fathoms ; but we
had not proceeded very far when we came upon a gravel bank in
the middle of the river, and found that we had suddenly shoaled
to half a fathom of water. The Neva got aground, and the force
of the current sent her on her beam ends, and we fully expected
she would capsize. Sounded in the dingy from bank to bank, and
found only half a fathom, with a gravel bottom. At last found
one fathom close to the river bank, where we anchored, expecting
by waiting the river would rise with the rain.—June 24: We had
no rain, so the shallow water still continued, and we were obliged
to remain; so I spent the day in shooting, and traversed some
miles of country, which I found hilly, and the hills becoming
more elevated as we passed inland from the river. Still I did not
see any mountains. The height of the hills seen and ascended
averaged from 300 to 400 feet. Observed yellow clay, green
sandstone, and the usual quartz pebble in the creeks. This place
afforded the greatest interest to the naturalist. On the top of one
of the hills I found a small house, in which I discovered some
arrows and stones used for cooking food, some flint implements,
and some cassowary bones. Although the house was small, there
was a division in the middle for a separation of the sexes. We
had some rain during the day. Mr. Hargrave had a slight attack
of fever. —June 25: Abundance of rain last night, and the river
had risen this morning, with a strong current. We left at 9 a.m.,
but in two hours did not make more progress than one or one
and a half miles. Notwithstanding we took every precaution, we
got twice aground, but did not sustain any damage. At 11 a.m.
started for the third time, but the current drove the Neva against
a snag, and we sustained two or three shocks, and were nearly
capsized, and lost from the roof a valuable collection of living


plants, together with some skulls and skeletons of animals which
were stored on the roof for want of room inside the steamer,
and also some yards of canvas which got entangled in the screw
and rudder, so that we could not move. The anchor was quickly
dropped, so that we should not be carried by the current, but it
placed the Neva on a gravel bank, lying over on her side, and
much water got into her. We made every effort to get her afloat
again, but were unsuccessful. As the flood subsided the Neva
remained on the now dry gravel bank all the day. At 8.80 p.m.
the clouds were heavy with rain, and every appearance of a thun-
derstorm ;so we remained, in hopes that a heavy flood would
relieve us from our unpleasant position.—June 26: Heavy rain
last night. The river was rising, but at 6.30 p.m. our position
had not improved. It appears to me and to all, and especially
to Mr. Hargrave, that we cannot proceed any further in the Neva,
who advised me when we floated again to return. I requested
him to write bis opinion in my log-book, which he did as follows :
“ Mr. D’Albertis asked my opinion about the possibility of the
Neva proceeding up the Fly River. I said she cannot. The cur-
rent is six or seven knots, the channel narrow, the eddies make
the rudder useless — Law. Hargrave.” From 6 to 8 a.m. the
flood rose a little more, and we again tried to float the Neva, but
without success, and she remained this day on the gravel bank.
Two men on the sick list.—June 27: This morning, about 1 a.m.,
the water again rose until 6 a.m., when I sent some men in the
dingy to put an anchor astern, in order to try to get her off the
gravel bank on which she had been fixed for the last two days.
By the carelessness of one of the men, the point of the anchor
struck the dingy and damaged it so much that we had to defer
any attempt to relieve the Neva, as the dingy had to be put on
shore to be repaired. The flood having subsided, the Neva
remained dry on the bank, still on her beam ends. I went up the
country with some of the men about six miles, and crossed some
swampy flats and some very stiff hills, and followed the course
of the river, in some places only twenty-five or thirty yards wide,
and very shallow, with here and there gravel banks similar to
those on which the Neva is grounded, and which is composed of
pebbles of quartz, basalt, limestone; and I also found some fossil
plants, coral, and a fossil scapular bone of a turtle. The fossils
appear to me to be representant of still living species.—June 28:
There was a very heavy flood last night, and this morning we
were delighted to find the Neva in her normal position and afloat.
The current of course ran very strong, so much so that it would
have been imprudent to venture further up the river. It was,
therefore, with much regret that I came to the determination to
return, as I found it would be impossible to take the Neva further,
as at low water she was too deep, and at flood she had not
sufficient power to stem the current. To abandon her, and to go
on the land journey, it did not appear to me to be wise to attempt
it, nor would it be possible. We reckoned that we were now in


latitude 5° 30’ south, and longitude 141° 30’ east, so that if the
men could be induced to accompany me, from this place the
distance to be traversed in a straight line to Hall Sound would
be about 400 miles; and I never at any time entertained the idea
of crossing the land at a greater distance than 200 miles. The
crew are also much exhausted by work, sickness, and a want of
constant supply of nourishing food, so that I think nothing would
induce them to volunteer to follow me overland. Not only this,
but we have not yet reached the mountain range, and the only
mountains we saw were in a northerly direction, and had we
landed, our course would be east by south-east, with the pros-
pect of having to travel over a flat swampy country; for such
a distance seemed to me an impossibility, particularly io a country
like New G-uinea, and without any means of carrying even our
ammunition. So I gave orders to return, and the current took us
in a few hours to the plantation from which we got our taro
on the 20th instant. This course was also required, for we had
finished all our provisions, and could find but little game and no
fish. We landed here again, and got as much taro as, I consider,
will last six or eight days; so that I hope to be able to go and
examine the large branch of the river we have”seen at Snake
Point. We were surprised to find that the uatives had not
returned to the house, for I found all the articles I left there
untouched. The soil is very rich at this part, and covered with
a luxuriant vegetation. A nutmeg (myristica) tree was very
abundant, bearing a large and eatable fruit. The land was flat on
the left bank, and hilly on the right. We remained here for the
night to cut some wood for to-morrow. —June 29: At 9.30 a.m.
we left the place and passed down rapidly, aided by steam and
the current, to the house we visited on the 19th instant. Some
natives appeared in front of the house, and seemed ready to pre-
vent our landing. They sent three arrows at us, but they did
not reach their destination. Mr. Hargrave and myself fired some
shots and made them go away; but one came down to the bank,
and under shelter of the shrubs, thought to send us some of his
arrows, but a discharge of a gun at him with game shot soon made
him retire. We also fired three or four shots at some distant
canoes to prevent them from approaching us. We then landed
with the hope of finding some pigs, but could not seeany. I then
visited the house, and a shocking sight met my gaze In the back
room there was lying an old blind woman. Only a thin diseased
skin covered her bones. She was still alive, but evidently dying
fast. The fore part of the skull was broken, and the brain pro-
truded, covering her grey hairs. On a careful examination, I
found that the wound had been made by a cutting instrument,
and we afterwards saw some marks of blood near the door and
on the ground in the direction in which we had seen the natives
running away. Probably the natives thought it better to kill
her than to allow her to fall into our hands, or probably because
she was helpless and diseased. Some few miles below the village


we saw a canoe with two or three people in it. When they saw
us they hurried on shore, leaving the canoe. On examining it
we found it was full of sago. We took, it with us, and consi-
dered we were fortunate in securing food for about a fortnight
by far superior to the taro we had been living upon for so many
days, and left in exchange some trade, as calico, axes, beads, &c ,
&c. —June 30: Left at 9.30 a m., and although the current was
in our favour, we did not go very far, as the wood was too green.
When we arrived at Snake Point, I gave directions to enter the
western branch of the river, which I named Alice Hargrave River,
after the wishes of the Honorable the Secretary of N.S.W.
Many on board were disappointed at this arrangement, as they
expected we were returning homewards. The natives of Katow,
Maino, Waruki, and Darwan grieved and cried out at this
change, and I at last pacified them by a promise of an increase to
their wages, so they became consoled. We anchored at 5 p.m.,
four or five miles from the entrance. At first we found shallow
water, and had some difficulty in finding the channel, which is
from three to five fathoms deep. On my return from the Fly,
I made another chart, in order to correct any errors that might
have occurred when going up, and I was pleased to find that
one agrees perfectly with the other; but great accuracy could
not be expected with my appliances. Prom the great rising of
the water to day, we could recognise with difficulty many of the
places we had marked as important points; and some, noted in
my chart as muddy or red bank, &c., had entirely disap-
peared.
July 1: We steamed this day from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., and then
had to stop, from our wood being exhausted. We got up about
fourteen miles. We had a constant depth of water of from
four to five fathoms, and only got out of the channel a short
time after we started. The soundings gave us one and a half
fathoms, but nearer to the right bank we again found five
fathoms of water. We saw some old native houses, and a raft
rudely constructed of two trunks of trees. Por the first seven
or eight miles the land we passed was very low, and covered
with scanty vegetation. Eeeds were abundant, and the general
appearance, more especially on the left bank, was very swampy.
We then passed a point where the bank is about twenty-five
feet high, but it soon decreased as we passed on to five or six
feet, and the vegetation became very rich and luxuriant. It
appeared to be raining not very far from us. —July 2: There
was nothing worth noting this day. We steamed to-day from 9
a m. to 5 p.m., and had a depth of water of from three to five
fathoms. —July 3: Gave rest to the men, some of them not feeling
well, and, not being well myself, remained on board ; others went
on a shooting excursion, and returned on board with some
interesting birds. They informed me that during their excursion
they found several native paths, and a trap for catching pigs.
—July 4 : Although I felt ill to-day from a bad attack of rheu


matic fever, I proceeded, to avoid loss of time, so we left at 8
a.m. Passed some old houses, some creeks, and two small
islands on the right, and a smaller on the left. At 3 p.m. had
to stop on account of shallow water. Palmer and the Chinaman
are both very sick, and I feel so exhausted that I can hardly stand.
—July 5 : Remained the whole day at anchor, the water being
low. Some of the men landed, and went on a shooting excursion.
In the morning five or six natives made their appearance on the
left bank not far from us. They did not evince any surprise, but
merely curiosity; and after laughing very much, one of them
turned his back and gave a slap upon his hip, as an insult (such
an act is considered an insult in other parts of New Guinea.) We
replied by sending a rocket close to them, which made them
disappear into the bush. I feel much worse, and three of the
men are lying down with fever. —July 6: Rain last night, and
deep water this morning, with a very strong current against
us. Left, but could not proceed further than a mile, or perhaps
less, and anchored at the foot of the left bank, which at this
part was about thirty feet high. Here was situated a small
village of three or four houses. Being too ill, 1 could not go
myself, but it was reported by some of the men who visited
them that they were built very high on piles, and one of them,
which was supported by a tree, was about fifty feet from the
ground. All round the houses the ground has been cleared from
trees, and cultivated by the natives. My men found the houses
deserted,?and carefully shut up. Went inside, and found every-
thing had been removed. A short distance beyond they found
another large but old house, and some banana trees, from which
they gathered some fruit. They also brought on board some two
or three stone implements they found, which had apparently been
forgotten by the natives. I was fortunate in obtaining the skele-
ton of a boy, which was brought on board by Mr. Hargrave.
After replenishing our stock of wood, we again tried to stem the
strong current, and twice we failed, being driven back by the cur-
rent to the point from whence we started. The engineer con-
sidered it impossible to proceed further. I requested him to give
me a written statement to that elfect which he did as follows :
11 On the 6th of July I tried twice to steam up the second rapids
of the north-west branch of the Fly River and failed. Mr.
D’Albertis asked me if I could steam further, I said ‘No
Law Hargrave.” After our experience on the other branch of
the river I considered it would be useless to make any further
attempt, so I determined to return to-morrow and anchored below
the village for the night —July 7: Early this morning the men
went to cut wood, and also succeeded in killing two fine pigs. I
was thinking of making another attempt this morning, but I
found John, Palmer, and Jackson very ill with fever, and,
although a little better myself, unfit for work, so gave directions
for our return, and in a few hours we were carried down by the
current, and again anchored in the Fly River, at about ten miles


from Snake Point.—July 8: Many being sick, we rested all day
and cooked our pigs.—July 9 : From 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. we steamed
down about sixty miles, and then had to stop to cut wood. Sick-
ness still on board.—July 10 : Steamed fifty miles down to our
anchorage of the sth of June. —July 11: Left at 10 a.m, but
the anchor got hold of a log, and so not to lose it we had to work
carefully to extricate it. We succeeded after three hours of hard
work. We then proceeded to some new huts or shelters we saw
on the left bank. There were also some canoes. Visited the
huts and found some bows and arrows and a fine large paddle.
Did not see any natives, as they were probably engaged in col-
lecting sago in the bush, or may be occupied in a hunting
expedition. lam much better, but Jackson, John, and Palmer
are still down with fever. —July 12: Left this morning, after
getting our supply of wood, and about 1 p.m., arrived at the
cocoanut grove we had previously visited, and stopped to get. a
supply of nuts. We discovered a village about half a mile dis-
tant with many natives, who did not appear to be aware of our
presence. I was desirous ©f paying them a visit, and returned
with the Neva a short distance back to the channel, where in our
ascending passage we observed a canoe pass in through the reeds;
some of us went in the dingy, and with difficulty found the chan-
nel, which was obstructed with reeds and aquatic plants for about
three-quarters of a mile, we then landed and found we were not
nearer the village than when we were at the cocoanut grove, but
still saw the natives in the village; we returned, to the Neva in
the hope of finding another passage to the village. A canoe
appeared with two natives, and soon disappeared again, close to
the cocoanut palms, we followed them in the Neva, found the
channel they had taken, and went in the dingy. We soon found
ourselves in a small lagoon, and saw a few men escaping from the
village, where we landed soon after. The houses are on a small
dry spot at the end of the lagoon, and in the middle was a plain
covered with coarse grass, behind was a dense scrub. We suc-
ceeded in killing one pig and capturing another alive. When
engaged in examining the houses, three canoes with natives
(women only) approached the village at a distance of 200 yards,
we went to see the new arrivals. For a little time they did not
notice us, but soon they stopped pulling and looked as if our
appearance was something beyond their comprehension, and then
finding we were strangers and of a novel kind, they pulled away
in great terror before we had an opportunity of conciliating them,
and disappeared behind a low hill. We got in the village some
bows and arrows, human skulls preserved and painted by the.
natives, and some other articles. My men got a quantity of
tobacco and sago. From the large quantity of tobacco we saw,
and the large marine shell used by the natives for ornament, I
believe that these people grow tobacco, and trade with southern
tribes, bartering it for shells. —July 13 : This morning revisited
the village with the hope of securing some more pigs ; found a


stuffed human head, the skull having been previously removed. I
brought it away ; and, in return for what I had taken yesterday,
I left handkerchiefs, tomahawks, knives, hooks, beads, and
calico. Observed a number of ducks in the lagoon, and suc-
ceeded in killing some of them. Left about 8 a.m., and soon
after we saw nine canoes, four of them containing a number of
men well armed and wearing the usual war ornaments ; in each
canoe there seemed to be from fifteen to twenty warriors. The
other five canoes contained but few men, who appeared to be un-
armed, and remained at some distance from the others. It was
sufficiently apparent that their object was to attack us, but their
ardour diminished very much as we approached them. I made
every endeavour to assure them that our intentions were friendly,
waving calico, &e., but without success, so I gave the order to
run the steamer at full speed to divide the war party in the
middle, so as to leave the unarmed canoes up the current on our
right, and the armed canoes below the current. As soon as they
saw this, the unarmed canoes stopped, and seeing the others re-
treating as fast as they could paddle, went on laughing heartily.
As soon as the canoes with the warriors reached the shore they
deserted the canoes with their arms and provisions, and disap-
peared in the forest. We boarded the canoes and found and
appropriated plenty of sago, some fish, a living turtle, and some
thousands of arrows, for which this time I did not pay anything.
On going down the river we observed some more canoes, but they
did not wait for us but went into some of the creeks.—July Id :
Passed Ellangowan Island; and at 5 p.m., reached 37 miles dis-
tant from it. —July 15: We steamed from 8.30 a.m to 5 p.m.,
but we got 'on shore at 1 p.m., and it was some time before we
got afloat again. At Howling Point we saw many natives on the
opposite bank, as well as canoes ; tried to attract their attention
by friendly signs. Some of them entered the canoes, and we
slackened our speed, thinking they would come to us, but they
appeared to get alarmed and pulled away.—July 16 : Bested the
men this day; some went ou a shooting excursion, but with very
poor success.—July 17 We left early, and at 3 p.m. anchored
at Kiwai Island, at a village named by Maino, Auti. The inhabi-
tants of Kiwai are on very friendly terms with the people of
Moatta (Katow) ; at this place Maino passed some years when a
boy, and one of his wives lives here. We bought a quantity of
yams, taro, and cocoanuts, and a pig. I also bought twelve
human skulls from a heap I saw in the verandah of a large house.
We visited one of the large houses, but the natives did not
like us to go inside. The women and children had left the village.
The house was very large, and kept very clean, and could
accommodate 300 people. The dim light of the interior, and the
peculiar form of the building, conveys the idea of an old Gothic
church. I saw a fine tame hornbill in the village—a female of
Buceros ruficollis, or the red-necked hornbill. I wished to pur-
chase it, but the natives said they could not catch it, but would


procure it for me by to-morrow.—July 18: Sent tbe men on
shore to cut wood, and also a large knife and a red blanket to
purchase the hornbill. On tbe return of the men, they said the
natives were willing to sell the bird, but could not catch it. I
did not believe this statement; so I sent three rockets in the
direction of the village, and then Maino went for the promised
bird, and he returned with it upon his arm.* Some canoes came
with natives to wish us good-bye and to shake hands. We had
met them before; some canoes also came off from the village
where I had stopped when in the Ellangowan, bringing cocoanuts
and yams, but demanded too high a price for them Left at 10.30
a.m. to go to Mibu Island, to shorten the distance, so that we
might in one day go from that place to the Kataw Eiver, and land
our pilots at their village, Moaita; anchored east of Mibu Island
at 1 p.m. Strong south-east breeze. The health of all on board
is very much improved, no doubt from having a good supply of
meat—July 19 : Strong wind all night, and the steamer rolled
very much, and shipped some water. I shall not go to sea yet as
it is. too rough for a boat like the Neva.—July 20: Passed a
terrible night from the heavy rolling of the Neva, and powerful
wind and sea, with the danger of the dingy’s getting destroyed
against the stern of the Neva; took the advice of Palmer, the
only true sailor on board, who advised me not to venture the pass-
age with such a rough sea and strong head wind; gave orders to
get up steam and to go and find a safe anchorage, and wait for
more favourable weather. Maino suggested a channel which
divides Mibu Island into two parts, forming two islands. We
entered this channel and found from five to seven fathoms depth
of water ; went out on the other side west of the island into the
passage formed by Mibu Island and the main land of New
Guinea, considering that it may be possible by this way to get to
Bampton Island (or Parama of the natives). Steamed south for
this island, but soon arrived abreast of the south end of Mibu
Island; found the sea was too rough to proceed and anchored at
the southern point of Mibu. The steamer rolled very much, and
we did not anticipate an agreeable night.—July 21 : We had a
miserable night, with very bad weather, and the rolling of the
steamer was very heavy, and the dingy struck several times the
stern of the Neva, and caused a little damage. The rough
weather continuing this morning, I got up steam and went,
directed by Maino, to find a more sheltered place in one of the
channels dividing Mibu Island. The one we are now in is 20 to
30 yards wide, and with two or three fathoms depth of water in
the middle of the passage; the banks are low, muddy, and
swampy, covered by mangroves and the nipa palm, as well as an
abundance of cocoanut palms. Waruki and Dawan crossed the
island, and returned with some natives of Kiwai, who were on a
.. J*. T ¥? d F s , n ° w i n s y dne y alive and in good health. It is the celebrated
‘ big bird of Mr. Stone.


visit to this island, and bought from them cocoanuts, yams, Ac. —
July 22 : We had a much worse night than the preceding, for on
the tide changing we found ourselves across the channel with the
bow in the middle of the water and tao stern on a dry bank. We
set to work to get her out of this dangerous position, but when
we succeeded we got in a worse state, for the strong current
carried her on the opposite bank, on which we remained so fixed
in the mud in a very inclined position that she could not be
moved. The tide was falling all the time, so at last the Neva was
lodged on a slippery mudbank and nearly capsized and was only
prevented from overturning and ending her career in this place,
by the old roots of Nipa palms prevented her slipping and cap-
sizing entirely. At daylight it was dead low water, and I sent on
shore everything I could get out of the Neva. As the tide rose
the water entered the vessel and four men were employed in
baling the water out. We succeeded at last by great exertion to
get her afloat again. None of us are expert seamen, but every
precaution is taken to prevent accident. Our provisions are
getting short and water also, and if the wind does not subside we
shall have to depend upon the natives for our supplies.—July 23:
No change in the weather. The natives and some of the men
crossed the island, and saw the sea on the Kiwai side, and found
it very rough. Last night we dragged the anchor, and this morn-
ing found we were some hundred yards from our original position,
and at low water had only half a fathom; returned to our former
anchorage, and took every precaution to prevent a recurrence.
July 24: The night has been nearly calm, so we steamed out
thinking to be able to reach Parama, but in the morning the wind
freshened, and we had to stop again. I directed the steam to be
ready by 4 a.m., so that if the night should be calm we might
start and reach Parama before the set in. July
25 : The night had been calm, but we were not ready to start
before 6.30 "a.m. The strong wind came on as the sun rose; we
made an attempt to go but failed, for out of Mibu it was too
stormy for an open boat like the Neva. As it was, we shipped
three seas, one after the other, with some damage to the stoies
and collections, and likely to be followed by worst consequences,
so we returned to the channel first pointed to us by Maino in
sight of Kaiwai, and anchored. I sent Dawan and some men in
the boat to buy a pig and some yams at Kaiwai. The natives
were unwilling to sell* but Dawan pointed out to IBob, one of the
men, a fine pig; and told him to kill it. This being done, he
afterwards paid for it with a large knife, a blanket, a Crimean
shirt, and a pair of trousers. —July 26 : A. fine day and calm, but
a heavy swell on the sea from the gales on the previous days.
When the men were on shore to-day with the pig, some natives
arrived, and, seeing the dead pig, began crying out, but when
Dawan told them it had been well paid for they were satisfied,
and went away in their canoes to the village at Kiwai to secure
the price which was left in the hands of others for the proprietor.


—July 27: Rain during the night. Left at 5 a.m., but we had
to return to our anchorage. Maino got so alarmed at the sailing
qualities of the Neva in a rough sea, that when we arrived at our
anchorage, he requested to be put on shore, telling us he would
never again expose himself to so dangerous a position, so I had
to promise that I would not again leave except the day was calm.
It rained to-day, so we filled our casks with fresh water.—From
the 28th of July to the Ist of August, detained by the weather,
living on game and some yams purchased from the natives.
August 2: Calm night. Left at 5.30 a.m.; Dawan did not
come on board, so I left him behind with his friends. We arrived
at Parama Island, passed in the channel, between it and New
Guinea, attempted to go as far as Yarru, but out of the channel
we found shallow water, and the wind was too strong and the sea
too rough to proceed, so we turned back and anchored in the
channel between Bampton or Parama Island and the mainland of
New Guinea. Sent to buy provisions at Wighi, a village on the
mainland opposite to Mibu, where they obtain yams, bananas,
and cocoanuts. We have now ascertained that there is a passage
from Bampton Island to Kiwai by the mouth of the Ply River
west of Mibu, and it is probable that a future survey may dis-
cover a channel for larger ships. Two men attacked by fever this
day. Dawan joined this day, coming in a native canoe.—August
4 : Left at 9 a.m. for Jarru, and Maino proved to be an excellent
pilot. Except on two or three occasions we had always two or
three fathoms of water or more the nearer we approached to
Jarru. So here also a channel might be found for vessels larger
than the Neva. We had no accidents this day, but lam certain
that we cannot go to sea with a head wind and rough sea in safety,
so I do not intend to attempt it any more.—August 5 : Remained
at anchor all day, and visited the little island, where we found it
had been used as a station for beche-de-mer. The island is well
covered with shrubs and grass, and an ample supply of fresh
water. The island seems formed of yellow and green sandstone
with oxide of iron lying in strata, and forming a base to the
yellow, reddish, and blue clay. The western part of it is swampy
and muddy and covered with mangrove. I found in a creek an
abundance of fish, birds were also plentiful, so we had a good
supply of fish and game. —August 6: Remained at anchor and
got a good supply of birds and fish—August 7: Left at 7 a.m.
for Katow, passed between the main land and Jarru, arrived at
Katow, entered and anchored in the river at 10.30 a.m. So this
day we had completed our passage from Mibijl to Katow, passing
inside all the islands close to the mainland, sa vipg many miles
than by the passage south of Bristow Island, Bampton Island,
and Mibu. If a deeper channel could be found no doubt this
will be the best course to be adopted for the Fly River. I asked
Maino before he landed to sell or to get some one to sell me a pig
and I requested him to send on shore for the pig. He held a long
conversation with his wife from the steamer to the shore who


seemed opposed to selling the pig. At last Maino spoke very
decidedly, when the pig was brought, paid for, and killed; and
Maino landed with his luggage and suite to his great satisfaction.
—August 8 : This morning Maino sent us a present of taro, and
we purchased from the natives some bananas and cocoanuts. I
asked Maino to send some provisions on board so. that we .might
have at least five days’ rations on board, so that if on leaving we
should be detained by the weather at some uninhabited island we
should have sufficient supplies, but the natives did not bring any,
so when it was dark I let off some rockets, with the hope that to-
morrow the natives would be better disposed.—August 9: The
rockets had the desired effect, for early this morning natives came
with yams, taro, and bananas, which we purchased with tobacco,
which we found the best article for barter at this place. Two men
ill with fever.—August 10 : More natives come to-day to sell pro-
visions, but one demanded an axe for a cocoanut, which I refused.
I was told by Daw an that the women and children left the village
when they saw the rockets. I told him they had nothing to fear,
but at the same time they must understand that they must sell me
some provisions to feed my crew. After he left women and
children were seen returing to the village.—August 11 to 16 :
Strong gales and heavy seas prevailing, could not leave, and had
some difficulty in procuring food for all the crew, but what with
pigeons, megapodius, and cockatoos, parrots, and fish, and a few
bananas and taro from the natives, we were not exactly in a starv-
ing state. —August 17: The weather more moderate, if we had
provision on board we might have left. This afternoon Waima,
another chief of Moatta, came on board and asked a blanket,
shirt, trousers, and a large American axe for a pig. I consented
and sent the men to the village to get the pig, when Dawan sug-
gested to the chief to ask for a gun instead of the other articles
he had proposed, so the men returned without the pig, and I was
angry with Dawan for his interference. —August 18 : I went on
shore early this morning with four men to the village to inquire
about the pig. Dawan appeared, and after much altercation a
fight appeared imminent, but by threatening to fire rockets, I kept
the natives at a distance. Maino came and said I had to send a
man to kill the pig, as it could not be held; but fearing for my
men, I asked to see the pig first, which, after a little delay, was
driven to us, killed, and paid for amidst great shouts of laughter
among the natives. Dawan had fled into the bush frightened. We
all parted friends as before, and Maino told me not to take any
notice of Dawan, who was one of those “ who talked much, but
thought little.” The pig was afterwards carried to the dingy, fol-
lowed by about 100 natives. I threw some tobacco among them,
and the struggle amongst the crowd to get a piece of this, to them
precious commodity, caused a good deal of laughing, and good
humour prevailed among them. I bought from a native two
human skulls taken by him from a bundle hanging in the front of
the house of the young men. The natives have promised to supply


me with all the food I may require, but I do not place much
dependence upon them.—August L 9 : At 3 30 a.m. we were ready
to depart, but having been told it would be dangerous to leave in
the dark, I waited for daylight, but the wind increasing very ranch
I was obliged to put off our departure.—August 20 : The weather
still very bad. As the natives brought no provision for sale, I
sent the men to get some bananas from a plantation. Some natives
from the interior are soon expected at Moatta with sago. One of
the men sick.—August 21 : About two hundred men and women
from the interior passed this morning in sight of the Neva, going
to Moatta with sago, exchanging it for cocoanuts. They left again
soon after, but none could be induced to sell any to us or to come
near. I observed the women wore the small grass petticoat, as at
Yule Island. Mr. Wilcox ill. —August 22 to 23 : Still detained
by the state of the weather.—August 24: The weather being
sufficiently calm, I left at 5.30 a.m., but we soon struck on the
left bank at the mouth of the river, and did not get afloat again
until past 10 a.m., when we had to go back. —August 25 : As we
could not start early I deferred it to the next day.—August 26 :
As early this morning we had only a steam pressure of 22 lbs., I
would not leave until it had a pressure of 40 lbs., which occasioned
some loss of time, and with a receding tide I directed the course,
and considered we were almost out of danger, when we found we
were in only half a fathom of water. I gave orders to stop, but
by some accident the rope of the boat got entangled in the pro-
peller, which caused some delay to cut it. In the meantime the
wind and the current sent us on a sandbank, on which we struck
so hard as to be unable to move, and ran a great risk of filling
with water from the heavy breakers ; on the tide flowing we again
floated, but, being too late to leave, we had to return.—From the
27th to the Ist, the weather was too tempestuous to leave, and
some difficulty in purchasing food. The men were, however, very
successful in procuring a supply of game.
September 1: Nothing particular to mention from this day to
the stb, except the difficulty of purchasing a sufficient supply of
food from the natives ; but this day two of the pearl shelling boats
called here, and we were glad to get some biscuit and rice from
them. —September 6: The pearl shell boats left this morning ; we
followed them, but as soon as we were out of the river, we found
that what was fine weather for the decked boats, was bad for an
open hqavy steam launch, and Palmer advised me to return, not-
withstanding he complained a good deal of our long detention at
this place.—September 7 : Finding that every day I was exposed
to new difficulties respecting getting a supply of food for the crew,
I considered it advisable to send the boat to Brother’s Island to
ask for some supply of provisions from Captain Redlich, who has
a beche-de-mer station on that island. I expressed this proposal to
the men, and they agreed to it, so that four of them will start at
L a.m. to-morrow —September 8: As arranged last night, the
four men left ahout 1 a.m., and we were not a little surprised to


find Captain Redlich calling at Katow in the afternoon. He will
sail again to-morrow. I requested him to take six of my crew to
Somerset, whom it is my intention to discharge, from the difficulty
of procuring food for them, and they also expressed a wish to
leave Captain Redlich consented to take them, and he lett at A
p m on the 9th of September for Somerset, with the engineer
and'Jackson, and the other four he will take from his island
where he will find them. Wrote to the Rev. Mr. MTarlane to
pay the men and discharge them before the Police Magistrate at
Somerset, Mr. Wilcox, Bob (a South Sea Islander), and the cook
(a Chinese), remained with me.—September 10 : I felt reliet to-
day, as I am now quite independent of the natives for food having
but few persons on board. Eight native canoes, Waruki informs
me, are fitting ©ut for a fishing party to leave to-morrow.—Sep-
tember 11 : All the people of Moata, except two or three families,
left this morning on the fishing excursion.—September 12 : About
6 p.m. I saw a sail, it was our dingy returning from the Brother s
Island, they reported that they got no provisions as Captain
Redlich was absent. I told them what occurred m their absence,
and they accepted my advice to return to Brother s Island, and
that Captain Redlich would take them to Somerset, at this they
were very delighted and would not stay the night but left again
immediately. They gave me the news of the murder of Br.
James, at Yule Island.—From September 13th to 17th nothing of
particular interest, except that this day, for the firs
canoe with women came near the Neva to sell cocoanuts. 1 •
The canoes returned from their fishing expedition.—On the
some canoes that arrived from Kiwai some days ago, with sago, are
returning, taking’.with them some young banana and other plants
—On the 23rd, in the morning, Moatta village was in a state of
alarm, and all the men had left the village to repel an attack
from some inland tribe. I observed, however, that the women
passed near the Neva, going to their usual work. About 4 p.m.,
I saw the natives returning, and they seemed to be carrying a
wounded or dead man. They would not permit Mr Wilcox to
enter the village, but told him they did not fight, as the hushmen
ran away as soon as they appeared.—On the 24th Captain Redlich
arrived, bringing me provisions and letters, and returne on e
worth mentioning, except that the Moatta people being now triends
with the inland tribes enabled me, with the assistance ot the
tobacco I received from Somerset, to purchase specimens ol
natural history from them. On the sth a large canoe arrive
from Wighi.—October 6 to 15 : Nothing of importance. On the
16th some natives from the interior visited Moatta to-day, m
order to purchase fish, giving in exchange sago and bananas.
Five canoes also arrived from Wighi; there was a man with them
who had a gun and spoke English very well, and two others armed
with clubs; they wished to come on board; I would not allow


them to come armed on board, as it is not the usual custom among
natives. So I told them to go away, which they refused to do for
some time, until I took my rifle. Bob, at Tureture, met the same
man; it seems that he has been to Sydney on board of one of the
Pearl Fishery vessels.—October 17 : Finding that the weather
was breaking, and likely to be fine and calm, we put the Neva in
order for leaving. From the 18th to the 29th, nothing worth
mentioning, except that two pearl-shell boats came for provisions
and water ; a white man was in charge, but they had to go four
miles distant for fresh water, and the natives and ourselves could
only obtain it from the same distance. The Moatta people are
much annoyed at seeing the inland natives receiving so much
tobacco for animals, &c., and they have tried to prevent their
coming, and even threatening to fight them. —October 30: The
natives say the weather will now moderate and be fair, so I shall
make every preparation for taking my departure for Somerset.
November 1: A boat arrived to-day with two native teachers—
Lochat and Elia —from Cornwallis Island, sent by the kindness of
Mr. Macfarlane, with a letter. They told me the weather was
fine and calm, and would continue so very probably for a few
days. They left again in the afternoon. I shall leave to-morrow
if the weather continues fine.—November 2 : One of the inland
natives brought me this morning a beautiful snake of a species I
had never seen before. Eeft at 10 am, and on amving at the
entrance of the river found the weather fine, and steered for
Cornwallis Island with a gentle breeze, and aided by our jib sail
went at the rate of six miles an hour ; passed north of Saiba, and
anchored at Cornwallis Island at 4 p.m. The two following days
we occupied ourselves in getting a supply of wood and water on
board in which the teachers aided me by lending their boat with
two boys On the sth I attended the service conducted by the
native teachers in their little church, about- one hundred natives
were present—men, women, and children; almost the whole of
them neatly dressed ; they seemed very attentive to the service.
A great number were from Saibai. lam not capable or judging
of the influence of the teachers in a religious point of view, but
from the benefit derived from their moral influence the result is
very satisfactory. The advance of the natives of Saibai m
civilization is progressing very fast, and the London Missionary
Society may be proud of two such new teachers as Elia and
Lochat, who are eminently qualified to reform the wild tribes and
to prepare the ground for future settlement.—November 6 . The
wind being fresh, and our anchorage not safe, I left for the
Brothers Island, and arrived after a run of six hours. The
passage was not pleasant, for the wind was fresh and the sea was
rough but I knew there was no danger of rocks or shallow water
durin" the passage. The men had to bale the water out, and it
was with some difficulty that it was kept from rising to the furnace
and putting out the fire. On the following day (7th) Bob, the
South Sea Islander, made a raft to go on shore to look for the


dingy, but be found that Captain Redlich had removed to Pumpkin
Island, and as Bob did not see the dingy, it was probably taken
to that Island. It is blowing very hard but our anchorage is safe.
—November 8 : Bob went on shore and made such arrangements
as would enable us to get on the island to cut wood and obtain a
plentiful supply of fresh water. There are no natives on the
island. The wind still continues to blow very strong. On the
following day again landed to cut more wood, and obtained some
birds. The Chinese cook was bitten by a snake of a poisonous
species, and the symptoms in less than ten minntes were very
alarming. I incised the wound, allowing it to bleed freely ;
applied ammonia, and gave brandy and ammonia internally. The
next day (10th) the cook was much better; but he was very ill
during the night, but on the following day (l Ith) he was so much
improved that I considered him out of danger. —November 12 :
The weather being fine and calm, left the Brothers Island at 10
a.m., and anchored at Mount Ernest, where Mr. Jardine has a
station. The next day was windy, I started for Somerset, but
was obliged to return after going a few miles from the stormy
state of the weather. This morning (l 4th) I left the Neva and
went on board a boat going to Somerset, and on the 20th returned
to the Neva. The wind during my absence had changed to the
north, and the anchorage on the north side being unsafe the men
had shifted anchorage to the north of Mount Ernest Island. On
the 21st it was calm all night, and we left early in the morning
for Somerset. Am accident happened to the engine bv the
bursting of one of the tubes, so I was obliged to cease steaming,
but it very fortunately happened when we were only three miles
from Somerset, when, by aid of our sails and the current being in
our favour, we soon anchored at Somerset. I left the Neva at
Somerset, when I departed for Sydney, in charge of Bob, under
the control of Mr. Powell, the Post-master, who kindly promised
to see that the Neva was put in good order, cleaned and painted.
After my long narrative, I shall conclude with a few words,
expressing my regret at not having been able to do more ; but it
is not the pioneer who shows the way that attains the most glory,
but often the one who follows him; and it is easy to hear of a
road, but very difficult to find it out. I wish every success to
any explorer of this part of New Guinea (should I not be able to
return aad complete my work) and I hope that the little I have
done will be some guide, and enable him to find his way more
readily than I did mine, and avoid any errors I may have made.
By this exploration we are now aware of a road to the interior of
New Guinea, which is of more importance, as it is so near to
Somerset, where a line of large steamers call twice every month.
We also found a new passage from Moatta to the Ely River,
shorter and safer than the one previously known, and when
properly surveyed may be found navigable for larger ships. The
richness of the land we visited, its vegetable and, probably, mineral
productions, the soil suitable for many of the most valuable plants,


as coffee, sugar, cotton, india-rubber, sago, tobacco, nutmeg, &c.,
ought to attract the capital of the colony to open up the country.
The Dutch in their part of New Guinea, although on a small scale,
derive some trade; and the part of New Guinea into which we
penetrated was in latitude 5 30 South, and ran about 500 miles
on the winding river, the course of which may be seen on the
chart appended, and it almost forms a line of demarcation between
that part of New Guinea claimed by the Dutch and that remaining
as yet unclaimed by any nation. About the Fly River, as far as
I could judge, the natives appear less numerous than I have seen
in other parts of New Guinea, and the land is cultivated in a
smaller quantity, so that in this part of New Guinea the settler
will not find the same difficulties I pointed out on former
occasions when speaking of the south-eastern part of New Guinea,
where the natives are more numerous and possess and cultivate
all the best land. I have appended Baron Yon Mueller’s report
on my collection of dried plants ; and on the return of Professor
Liversidge to Sydney he will report on the small collection of
minerals, &c., 1 submitted to him for examination ; and I hope on
a day not far distant to give the ethnological report on the natives,
their weapons, &c.; also on the mammals and birds collected, the
latter consisting of about fifty species, many of which are new, or
only recently described from specimens obtained during my first
visit to the Fly River. There is also a rich collection of reptiles,
fish, both of salt and fresh water, some beetles, fresh water and
land shells. 1 expect that the voyage of the Neva will be
remembered by those who in future will take an interest in New
Guinea, and by the scientific world.
I have now to give my grateful thanks to the members of the
Committee, who have exerted themselves so much in my behalf,
and to the Subscribers, for aiding my private means in
accomplishing this exploration.
L. M. D’ALBERTIS, C.M.Z.S.
Sydney, January 15.


APPENDIX.
REPORT OF BARON VON MUELLER, F.R.S., &c.
The collection of plants brought together by Signor D’Albertis
during his last expedition to New Guinea is of particular interest,
inasmuch as thus for the first time an insight into the vegetation
of the more central portions of New Guinea is obtained. But
since the distinguished Italian traveller, with the means at his
command, could not extend his explorations beyond the country
along the Ely Eiver, only plants of a strictly intratropical type
and mainly indicative of a jungle vegetation came within his
reach. It seems that no Alpine forms of plants descend to that
river as far as it was followed by Signor D’Albertis; nor shows
by the material, kindly submitted to me, any repetition of the
Australian types, which some other portion ot South-Eastern
Papua have brought to light, except two species of phyllodinous
Acacise, both distinct from A. Simoii. This almost entire absence
of Australian forms in these newly traversed lines, may perhaps
be accounted for by geologic circumstances. But now for the
first time are added to the hitherto recorded genera of New
Guinea plants —Gompharena, Grewia, Melhania, Muhlenbergia,
Connarus, Terminalia, Cynometra, Pipturus, Codiaeum, Cerato-
phyllum, Jussisea, Alstonia, Coleus, Vandellia, Limnanthemum,
Calanthe, Eurycles, Costus, Schelhammeria, Dracaena, Hypaelytum,
Phragmitis, Paspalum, Lycopodium, Helminthostachys, Gleichenia.
The collection contains also species representing the following
genera : —Myristica (nutmeg), Wormia, Pittosporum, Elaeocarpus,
Hibiscus, Dysoxylon, Harpullia, Vitis, Semecarpus, Marenga,
Phyllanthus, Piper, Albizza, Mucuna, Eerns, Eugenia, Barring-
tonia, Gardenia, Psychotria, Ixora, Plectronia, Myrmecodia,
Ipomaea, Maba, Alstonia, Tabernaemontana, Maeasa, Coleus, Clero-
dendron, Solanum, Tournefortia, Cycas, Ereycinetia, Elagellaria,
Calamus, Pothos, Cordyline, Scleria, Kyllingia, Hypselytum,
Panicum, Coix, Leptaspis. Besides, there are also representatives
of other genera, belonging to Anonaceae, Menispermace®, Rutaceae,
River I found in the natives’ houses, carefully preserved, the


Laurinaceac, Melastomacese, Myrtacese, Araliaceso, Tlrtcacese
Euphorbiacese, Acanthaceae, Gesneriacese, Orchidacese and
Palms; but to define the species of these, and to contrast
them with allied forms of other tropical regions, especially of the
Sunda Islands, the Philippines, and Polynesia, will require careful
investigations, the results of which will be promulgated in the
succeeding pages of the publication on “ Papuan Plants.” As
specially noteworthy on this occasion already may be mentioned
a Sapindaceous tree with edible fruit. Two Begonias (one with
spotted leaves), a grand Hibiscus, and several Amaranthaceous
and Scitamineous plants of horticultural importance, further a
Nepenthes (Pitcher-plant) distinct from N. Kennedii.
Melbourne, December 1876.
In the Sydney Morning Herald of February Bth, 1877, the fol-
lowing appeared respecting the Papuan Plants:—
The “descriptive notes on Papuan Plants,” by Baron F. von
Mueller, have now reached eighty-two pages of closely written
matter. For a long time New Guinea was thought little of, and
its vegetation, with the exception of a few plants occasionally
collected on the coast, was almost totally unknown. Some speci-
mens of Papuan plants were gathered during the voyage of the
Astrolabe, in 1827, but until recently very little has been done to
develop the natural history of New Guinea. Baron Mueller’s
notes are founded on the collections of the courageous and enter-
prising travellers Signor D’Albertis along the Fly .River, and Mr.
A. Goldie in the country beyond Port Moresby. There is great
difficulty in determining the species of some of the plants, and
the Baron remarks that in such instances “ they must be retained
until further searches may complete the material needful for
accurate investigation, especially as the low land jungle plants of
New Guinea stand in close relation to those of insular India, the
Philippines and Polynesia.” The present descriptions, however,
of which the learned botanist speaks so humbly, are, in point of
fact, a most valuable contribution to science; and when the des-
criptions of Dr. Beccari (who has commenced to prepare at
Florence the descriptions of his Papaun plants for Camel’s
“ Giorale Botanico Italiano,”) have reached Australia, we shall be
able to compare the vegetation of different portions of New
Guinea. Dr. Beccari, it seems, made his collections in the north-
western portions of the island, whereas Signor D’Albertis and
Mr. Goldie have explored the south-east. It is probable, therefore,
that there may be a considerable difference in the vegetation, as
represented by the respective collections. The Baron records his
great obligations to Dr. G. Bennett, for the interest which he has
evinced in elucidating the flora of New Guinea; and also to the
Rev. S. MacFarlane and the Rev. Dr. Turner for the means
afforded of promoting his studies of Papuan plants. Two


inquiries have especially arrested the attention of the Baron, vi^..
What relation do the jungle plants of New. Guinea bear to those
of tropical Australia ? And what connection. is there between
the alpine plants of that island and the vegetation of the Austra-
lian Alps ? As Baron Mueller visited north-western Australia in
1855 and 1856, and the Australian Alps in 1853, 1854, and. 1857-
1861, he possesses abundant materials for comparison ; whilst his
extensive knowledge of plants in general renders him peculiarly
qualified for these inquiries. In the present collections there are
not many plants of Australian type. No new species. of
Eucalyptus is recorded, nor any of the Proteads or Epacrids,
though many of the plants enumerated are common to Australia
and New Guinea The species apparently new are Hibiscus
D’Albertisii, Bauhinia Williamsi, Mucuna Bennettii, M. Albertisi,
Combretum Goldieanum, Begonia spilotophylla, Randia Macar-
thuri, Cycas Papuana, and Dicksonia Papuana. Some others are
at present doubtful, because it has not yet been ascertained
whether they are Papuan forms, or identical with species common
to the Oriental Archipelago. In a former part of the descriptive
notes, Eucalyptus Papuana is described, and another of the same
genus (probably E. platyphylla) is mentioned as indigenous.
Melaleuca, Eugenia, Myrtus, and Rhodamnia, are also said to have
representatives in New Guinea; and Barringtonia speciosa (a
handsome tree common to the Oriental Archipelago, the Pacific
Islands, and North Australia), occurs on Kataw River. It is sup-
posed, that as the forest mountains become better known, vast
additions will be made to the plants of the Myrtaceous order.
The recent collection has not furnished any more species of the
order, as Signor D’Albertis and Mr. Goldie did not reach that
part of New Guinea in which such plants are likely to occur.
Baron Mueller describes the new Hibiscus and the new Mucuna,
named after Dr. Bennett, as being splendid plants. The latter,
according to the enterprising explorer, presents one of the most
gorgeous sights in the flora of the island. There is a species of
Mucuna (a large climbing plant) extending from Clarence River
to North Australia, but the flowers are of a pale greenish yellow,
and by no means so showy as those of the Papaun species. To
the previous orchids two are now added—Dendrobium undulatum
and Calanthe veratrifolia —both of which are said to be identical
with the plants described by R. Brown more than a half-a-century
since. The former appears to be limited to the northern parts of
Australia and Java, but the latter, which (according to the “ Flora
Australiensis,” vol. 6, p. 306) extends from Rockingham Bay to
lUawarra, has recently been forwarded to Baron Mueller, from
the Kurrajong, by Dr. Woolls. It is stated that, in the Australian
forms of this species, the lobes of the labellum are rather broader
than those of the Indian ones. New Guinea seems to be very
rich in ferns, for in addition to those already enumerated, many
species are now added, though, for the most part, they are common
to other islands as well as to Australia. The last specimen dos-


cribed is Capnodium Fuligo, a fungus growing on the leaves of
fig trees, and communicated to the Baron by Sir William
Macarthur.
The following extract from letters sent by the Baron to Dr.
George Bennett since the publication of the 4th Part of the
Papuan plants, gives further information on the plants collected
by Mr. D’Albertis :
“ The discovery of Banksia, as demonstrated by the collection
of fruit, modifies my remarks in reference to the non-Australian
type of the vegetation of the Fly Fiver. Among the fruits
is a new Sloanea, with very large dark red fruit, much like those
of Sloanea Jamaciensis. I have named it S. paradiseanum, as
doubtless it is frequented by the paradise birds, who may feed
upon the edible seeds. Among the fruits I found those of Nageia,
indicative of cooler regions, being coniferous. The collections
also contain Heptapleurum. The fruits in alcohol and the dried
seeds were well worth examining, and although in the absence of
flowers, we must be careful in dealing with such material closely
for scientific purposes, yet it has enabled me to add Garcinia,
Flindersia, Sideroxylon, Banksia, Heritiera to the genera of Mr.
D’Albertis’ plants. A number of new genera have also been
added to the collection which will appear in the forthcoming parts
of the Papuan plants.”
ON THE
ORNITHOLOGY OF THE FLY RIVER
Although collecting specimens of natural history was not tha
principal aim of the voyage, still; from the list of the birds col-
lected and observed, sve have, I may say, added a new link to the
chain which connects the northern and southern avifauna of New
Guinea with that of Australia.
From my list it seems that rapacious birds are scarce in the
centre of New Guinea ; but if we consider the difficulty of detect-
ing that class of birds in their native forests, and when perched
on the branches of lofty trees, or when flying above the dense
mass of vegetation, we may consider their scarcity to be more
fictitious than real. Among the few collected, it is worth while
to mention a pair of the beautiful and rare Henicopernis longi-
caudatus, which, although inhabiting the Aru Islands, and I think
also the north-west coast of New Guinea, is still very rare in the
museums of Europe.
Among the parrot family, in which my list is a little richer,
I have first to mention the l)asyptilus pecquetii, which, judging
by the shape of its bill and head, is almost an aberrant form among


the family. This bird has been for many years very rare in
collections, and only one or two skins had reached Europe pre-
vious to 1872, when I got four fine specimens on the Arfak moun-
tains, and subsequently it has been found by explorers, but always
few in number. It is generally an inhabitant of the mountains,
but it is seen occasionally on the plains, and also very far up the
Ely River. I met this bird while remaiuing for two days at the
same anchorage. I saw about fifty coming to roost on a very high
tree in the evening and started in the morning a little after sun-
rise ; but the bird is very shy, and for this reason not easily killed.
The Cyclopsittacus fuscifrons is a very small parrot, one of the
smallest, and difficult to find in the dense foliage of the trees; but
its piercing whistle is often heard. It is not shy, and once
the tree on which it feeds is found, it is easily secured. It is
very similar to another allied species I discovered at Hall Sound,
named by Mr. Sclater, Cyclopsittacus suavissimus, and they re-
semble each other in their habits.
Chalcopsittacus chloropterus is described by Mr. Salvadori
as a new species ; but, I cannot see that this bird can be distin-
guished from Eos scintillata Gray for the distinctive characters
pointed out by Mr. Salvadori I consider dependent only on the
age, and not constant in all individuals of different age and
sex- Many other birds of this family may be added to my
list by other explorers, for I saw many, especially among the
Charmosyna, but I did not kill any.
The Buceros ruficollis is a common bird all over New Guinea,
I cannot say if I saw this species in the interior, or only one per-
haps intermediate between B. ruficollis and the Buceros of the
Solomon Islands, for I found some beaks of this bird in the
houses of the natives so much smaller, although of adult birds.
Therefore, I am inclined to believe they may belong to a new
species.
Among the kingfishers there is, after Salvadori, another new
species—Cyanalcyon stictoleama; but I do not think it is a
new species, and I believe the differences pointed out by him
between this bird and C. nigrocyanese are only derived from the
sex or age of the specimen he had under consideration. The
specimen I got in the same locality where I procured the first does
not differ from C. nigrocyanese of the Aru Islands.
An elegant bird which attracts the attention of the traveller
is the Cypselus mystaceus, from its peculiar shape, and from the
length of its wings and its forked tail. It is seen in the daytime
at rest on some high dead tree, and in the evening and early in
the morning it flies about chasing the insects on which it feeds.
Flycatchers were very scarce, and indeed I cannot mention
more than the beautiful Arses chrysomela, which I had never col-
lected before, and only saw once from. New Guinea in Mr. Stone’s
collection, and which is found also in the Solomon Group.
Campephaga sloetii is a rare bird in collections, but it seems to
be distributed all over New Guinea, as I have found specimens on


the Arfak, at Hall Sound, and lately far up the Fly River, and
there most numerous ; but I could not get more than one, which
1 met in a native’s garden feeding on the small berries of a high
tree. Along the banks of the river, or on some gravel flat of the
river’s bed, when the water was low, I saw another interesting
small bird, which I discovered in the streams of Mount Arfak,
in 1872. It is a lively bird, and is often seen giving chase on the
wing to insects, on which it lives. It has been named Monachella
saxicolina. The Artamus leucogaster is an Australian bird, but
very common also in the the eastern and central part of New
Guinea. Its abode is on some old trunk projecting in the river’s
bed. There it is often seen waiting for insects, which it catches
flying, similar to the swallow. Near the mouth of the river I
found two little gems of the feathered family, Cyrtostomus fre-
natus and Hermotimia aspasia. The first one is an Australian
and Papuan bird : the second inhabits all over New Guinea and
many islands east and west of the same island. Perhaps on
account of the flowerless season the Melphagidas were scarce in
number and species; but it is not improbable that I have found a
new genus of this family. Only two species of Eupetes have been
known for many years as inhabitants of New Guinea. Lately
some new ones have been added—one from the west, the other
from the east. The last one is also found in the bush up the Fly
River, and it has been named Eupetes nigrocrissus by Mr.
Salvadori. Other species of this genus will be found in New
Guinea; so I think it will not be considered absolutely a Malayan
form. Only two Pitta, P. mackloti and P. Novas Guinea), were
recorded in the Papuan birds. Now I may add a third—which I
found for the first time in New Guinea, and killed at Katow
River, but it inhabits also Cape York, and is plentiful on many
of the Torres Straits islands—that is, Pitta assimilis. So, out of
these, two are found in Australia also.
Large flocks of a Calornis were seen on the Alice River
hunting after insects, probably of the Libellula tribe, which were
so abundant as to cover almost the surface of the river from bank
to bank for many miles. They were so plentiful that when seen
flying about a little above the water they conveyed to the mind a
heavy fall of snow. I could not identify this bird. Many other
birds were engaged in a similar chase, and I remember a Grau-
calus, the Mina Dumontii, the Merops ornatus, and a Eurysto-
mus, probably the crassirostris. Mina Dumontii is a common
bird all over New Guinea, and is to be considered with interest by
the naturalist ; but I may mention that I never saw it so plentiful
as on the upper part of the Fly River.
Another Mina, which I consider to be new to science, was
very scarce, and only four specimens were seen, and two killed.
Its description is as follows: Male —head, neck, and breast rich
orange golden colour; throat and sides of the head, dark blackish
green; abdomen, above and below, black, each feather margined
with dark shining green; rump and tail cover, deep golden


orange ; belly, yellow; undertail cover, white, tipped by a light
yellow ; wings and tail, black; primaries, white spotted; bill,
eyes, and feet, yellow. The female is very similar to the male.
I named this bird in honour of the Hon. John Robertson, Colonial
Secretary ef New South Wales, Mina Robertsonii. Manucodia
Keraudrenii is found in Australia and New Guinea. The speci-
mens from Cape York have lost the name of M. Gouldii, but I
have before me specimens from New Guinea and Cape York, and
they are at once distinguished from each other. The specimens
from Cape York are of a uniform dark, shining green, while
specimens from New Guinea differ, having the wings, tail, and
back of a rich shining purplish violet.
Gymnocorvus senex, a very common bird all over New
Guinea, is remarkable for the great difference of its plumage at
different ages. It was to be expected that in the centre of New
Guinea many species of Paradise brids would be found, but only
six species are given in my list, and certainly many others may be
discovered. The most beautiful of them, no doubt, is the Seleu-
cides albus, or twelve-wired Bird of Paradise, and at the same
time one of the rarest. On the upper part of the Fly River I
saw it several times crossing the river very slowly, and often in
the morning and before sunset it was seen on the top of some
high tree motionless and uttering its mournful note. It is a very
suspicious bird, and for this perhaps is still rare in museums. It
is found also on the north-west coast of New Guinea and Salwatti
Island. Cicinnurus regius is a very common bird found also on the
north coast and Aru Island. Sericulus aureus is found also all
over New Guinea. I saw it on the Arfak Mountains, at Najabui,
in the eastern peninsula, and now also up the Fly, but it is a rare
and shy bird. Mr. Salvadori places this bird close to the Chlamy-
dodera, but I cannot see more affinity in this bird with Chlamy-
dodera than with Cicinnurus, but at the same time, by its head,
bill, wings, and shortness of the tail, I think it nearer to Cicin-
nurus than to the Chlamydodera. To say that it has not the
same habits of the true Paradise birds is not of much value, for
nearly every species, or at least every genus, has its own habits.
Ptiloris magnifica is found also in Australia and on the west
coast of New Guinea and Salwatti. Paradisea raggiana, dis-
covered at Orangerie Bay in 1873, by myself, extends its habitat
up to the centre of I\ew Guinea, and seems to be common
enough; its plumes are used by the natives as head dresses all
over the country where the bird is found. Another bird, very
closely allied to the last-mentioned, is Paradisea apoda; if not a
new species resembling it very much. Allowing it is P. apoda, it
is the first time this bird has been met with in New Guinea, and
only w T as believed to be an inhabitant of the Aru Islands. The
fact of two species so alike living in the same locality is of some
interest and suggests some remarks. There are now r four species
of the true genus Paradisea, viz , P. apoda, P. papuana, P. rubra,
and P. raggiana. The former tw r o resemble each other very


closely by the long yellow plumes at the side of the breast, while
the last two resemble each other by the red colour of the same
plumes, but differ by the two middle tail feathers, &c. So far as
we know, P. apoda inhabits Aru Islands and the mainland of New
Guinea, south of the Charles Louis mountains ; Paradisea
Papuana, the west to 134 deg. longitude E., and north of the
above-mentioned range, so far as 141 deg. longitude E., and other
islands north of New Guinea. The two red species, instead, are
living very far from each other; the rubra seems confined to
Waigiou Island, and P. raggiana to the centre and eastern penin-
sula of New Guinea. But it is not improbable that rubra also
may be found some day in New Guinea.
After comparing the rich series in my collection, of the speci-
mens of P. apoda and P. raggiana, I see a great similarity between
the young male and female birds of the two species, and they
indeed can be only recognized by the yellow tint on the back of
the head and neck in young and female birds of P. raggiana
After the first moulting, they are generally distinguished by a
small yellow band across the small wing-cover of the raggiana,
and also by a yellow collar between the green of the throat and
the dark purplish chestnut of the breast. It is only after the
first moulting that the yellow of the head and the green of the
throat are fully developed, and, nevertheless, in a young specimen
of the raggiana at this stage of moulting there is no yellow band
on the wings, and were it not for a beginning of the yellow collar
it could not be distinguished from another bird of the apoda of
the same age. At the same time on another young bird of the
apoda, and of the same age, I observed the tips of the wing-cover
slightly tinged with yellow, and in another younger specimen of
the apoda the back of the head and neck is also, although very
little, inclined to yellowish. Are these facts of such a nature as
to allow us to suppose that the two species are derived from a
common parent perhaps now extinct ? And if so, will it not be
the same with the two other species of the west —viz , P. papuana
and P. rubra P Shall we consider the four species independent in
their origin, or that they are derived from a type lost or not
found yet ? Or shall we consider each one as a primitive species ?
It would be of interest to know if the feathers mentioned by
Schlegel as found among the natives at Humboldt Bay were from
the Apoda or from the Papuana, to see if, as I believe, the two
species are separated by the alpine range above mentioned. If
so, we could have in this fact a good proof to show that high
ranges of mountains are more effective barriers to prevent emigra-
tions than the sea and the jungle. Erom the first insight we
have of the fauna of southern New Guinea, we have learned how
in this part of the country Australian forms, genera, and species
are abundant, and are generally found in preference to allied
species now inhabiting the north-western coast; and I think that
what applies to the animals will be also found in a less degree to
apply to the plants. So we find a large number of specie


inhabiting North Australia, Aru Islands, and New Guinea,
because the narrow sea which separates the three countries may
he easily crossed even by birds of not very great power of wing.
So far as I can guess from my last visit to the central part of
New Guinea, as well as from some fossils collected there, I think
that all the flat land from the coast of Torres Strait up perhaps to
the foot of the mountains has been submerged, and raised again
in a not very ancient time, and probably when Aru Islands and
Australia were separated from New Guinea. Plants and animals
which during the time of subsidence could live on the mountains,
at the new rising of the land descended to populate it again more
or less modified, and others emigrated from the nearest land,
especially from Australia, and established themselves there,
probably undergoing some modifications, but at all events retain-
ing much of the characters of the primitive type. And while the
species inhabiting the lowlands on both sides of the mountains
differ much, we find that those inhabiting the mountains are
almost invariably the same on both sides, no matter what the
difference of latitude or longitude may be. This may be
explained, for the alpine forms are not subjected to sensible
change of temperature, soil, &c, in their emigration, so long as
they keep to the mountains. On the other hand, the forms of the
plain cannot cross the high mountains without modification.
The geological union of Australia, Aru Islands, and New
Guinea in a recent time is to me a certainty, and I cannot consider
the gigantic peaks of Torres Straits but as the links of the chain
which has for a time united Australia to New Guinea. Mount
Ernest Island, The Brothers, and Tawan Island, and all the other
islands of Torres Straits are faithful witnesses of this. When the
fauna and flora of New Guinea and North Australia will be better
known and compared, especially reptiles, small mammals, fresh-
water fish, and other small animals, of limited power for emigra-
tion, the fact will be proved. Although I propose to remain on
the subject of birds, I cannot refrain from mentioning the
existence of an Echidna in New Guinea Yery far up the Ely
Eiver I found in the natives’ houses, carefully preserved, the
quills of an Echidna, and also many arrows whose barbs are made
with such quills. It is within my knowledge that the Eev. Mr.
Lawes obtained at Port Moresby a young animal from the natives,
and which was described to me like a platypus ; but I am inclined
to believe it is a young Echidna * The importance of such a dis-
covery needs no comment.
Among the pigeon family I may mention Carpophaga spilor-
rhea, C* Zoese, G. Mullerii, Megalaprepria assimilis, Ptilonopus
superbus, P. ionozonus, P. coronulatus, P. auranturons, and
Ptilonopus nanus, which inhabits principally New Guinea, Aru
Islands, and North Australia. A bird strictly Papuan, one of
*The above was written when I received from Italy the description of
Tachyglossus (Echidna) Bmijnii (W. Peters and Doriap, founded on a por-
tion of a skull found on the Arfak Mountains.


the largest of this family, is the crested pigeon or Goura, of which
four species are known, viz., G-. Victoria, G. coronata, G.
Albertisi, and G. Sclaterii, although the former has not yet been
found on the Papuan continent. G. coronata is found on the
north-west, and G. Albertisi on the eastern peninsulas, and G.
Sclaterii in the central part of New Guinea, where I discovered
it during my first visit to the Fly. During my second trip I found
it also at the Katow Eiver. I also found the pretty Ptilonopus
nanus, Dendrocygna guttata, D. vagans, Nettapus pulchellus,
Pelecanus conspicillatus, Haematopus longirostris, Mycteria Aus-
tralis, and Tachypetes, Prion, &c., all birds common to the
Aru Islands and Australia, and only lately added to
the list of New Guinea birds. I wish I could give the specific
name of a beautiful cassowary, of which I possess a skin and
skeleton ; but so many species of this bird have been lately des-
cribed that I cannot venture to say to which it belongs, but I am
inclined to think it may be allied to or identified with Casuarius
Australis.
List of birds from Fly and Katow rivers: Cuncuma leucogaster,
Haliastur girronera, Haliastur sphenurus, Pandion leucocephalus,
Henicopernis longicaudatus, Microglossum aterrimum, Dasyptilus
pecquetii, Cacatua triton, Eclectus polychlorus, Chalcopsittacus
scintillatus, Lorius lory, Eos fuscata, Cyclopsittacus fuscifrons,
Caprimulgus n. sp. ? Cypselus mistaceus, Dacelo gaudichaudii,
Cyanalcyon Macleayi, Cyanalcyon nigrocyanese, Tanysiptera
galatea, Pitta macklotii, Pitta assimilis, Arses telescophthalma,
Arses chrysomela, Ehipidura gularis, Ehipidura sp. ? Gerigone
sp. ? Grancalus sp. ? Ptiladela boyeri, Campephaga sloetii,
Artamus leucogaster, Eectes ferruginea, Buceros ruficollis, Her-
motimia aspasia, Oyrtostomus frenatus, Myzomela obscura, Myzo-
mela erythrocephala, Ptilotis filigera, Ptilotis n. gen. ? Ptilotis
sp. ? Tropidorhyncus Novae Guineae, Pomatorinus isidorii, Calornis
sp. ? Dicaeum rubro coconatum, Gymnocorvus senex, Manucodia
atra, Manucodia Keraudrenii P Mina Dumontii, Mina Robertsonii,
Paradisea apoda ? Paradisea raggiana, Cicinnurus regius, Sericulus
aureus, Epimacus magnificus, Seleucides albus, Dicrurus carbo-
narius, Carpophaga pinon, C. Zoeas, C spilorrhoa, C. Mullerii,
C. n. sp., Megaloprepia assimilis, Ptilonopus nanus, P. coronu-
latus, P. jonozonus, P. aurantifrons, Goura Sclaterii Eupetes
nigricrissus ? Megapodius duperreyi, Talegallus cuvieri, Ibis
strictipennis, Ibis igneus, Lobivanellus personatus, Mycteria Aus-
tralis, Herodias alba, Herodias melanopus ? Butoroides flavicollis,
Ardea jugularis, Nyctocorax Caledonicus, Dendrocygna guttata,
Dendrocygna vagans, Nettapus pulchellus, Hematopus longirostris,
Tachypetes aquila, Prion turtur, Pelecanus conspicillatus.


Amount of the Subscriptions paid in aid of Me. D’Albertis’
Exploration of the Fly River, New Guinea £449 6 6
P.S.—ln connection with the Subscriptions, the Committee are desirous
of placing on record their sense of the liberality evinced by Charles Moore,
Esq., Director of the Botanic Gardens, who, previous to the leaving of
the Expedition, offered to recommend to the Government to defray the
expense of sending a professional botanical collector with the Expedition,
—in which he succeeded, —although Signor D’Albertis was obliged to
decline the offer, principally on account of the small size of the “ Neva,”
and the very limited accommodation he should have been able to afford
such collector.
GEORGE BENNETT, M.D. ) ~ Treasurers
JAS. R. FAIRFAX j ±lon - ireasurers -
ARVID NILSON.
Hon. Secretary.


Statement of Receipts and Disbursements.
1876. Dr. £ s, d.
June 13. —To amount of subscriptions received
and advertised in the S. M. Herald 429 6 6
Eefund by the E. & A. M. S. Co 20 0 0
Total £449 6 6
1876. Cr. £ s. d.
April 19. — By Advance to Mr. D’Albertis ......... 100 0 0
May 22. Moreman, for wages 4 0 0
25. Mitchell & Co. for goods 12 4 0
June 19. Purser of the s.s. Bowen, for coal 8 0 0
Scott, Henderson & Co., for passage
of six men from Cooktown to
Somerset 18 0 0
20. Moreman, for wages 4 0 0
July 8. E. & A. M. S. Co., for freight on
steam launch 55 0 0
31. Cash returned 1 1 0
Oct. 7. Isaac Jackson, for wages 20 0 0
12. James Palmer, for ditto 20 0 0
Dec. 12. C. Wilcox, for ditto 24 0 0
15. A. Tornaghi, for money advanced
to pay wages 27 0 0
18. Orders on Treasurers in favour of
Webb and Co 93 10 6
1877.
Jan. 24. Orders on Treasurers in favour of
Captain Eedlich 20 0 0
Ditto ditto Bob, for wages 26 5 0
Mar. 12. Advertising Committee meetings
and subscriptions 3 15 6
27. Balance in Bank to meet expenses
of printing report, postage, &c. 12 10 6
Total £449 6 6
Examined and found correct, this 27th day of March, 1877.
JOHN ALGEE, Auditor.
GEORGE BENNETT, M.D.
JAS. R. FAIRFAX,
Hon. Treasurers.




FLY RIVER, NEW GUINEA
As Surveyed by L.M. D AIbertis
on board the steam Launch "Neva
187 6.
Scale of Miles.
0 S 10 IS 20 2S 30
ff -H -+4 t-i m i in r i I
Lithographed cut the Surveyor Generals Office Sydney NS.W.
Note. The soundings are sheww ire fathoms
THE ISLANDS ARE NAMED AFTER THE FOLLOWING GENTLEMEN
J. Robertsoto the HonTfrf CoZordaL Secretary.
CapZ A. Orustoyv, R.N.
Cap'r Htocsorv. R.N.
H.E AVZeru FsqH
RarocZe Master of the EZLareg ow are.
Revh SvcrotLerZajrvdZ.
Rev MaucfaRlaroe.
Thxnrxxxn WalJoer Esq Te
Hon lle AZeocaruLer Stuuart, CoZonfaL Treassiarer'.
DV George BervruetL.
FcuurfcLDc Croup after ttoe Proprietors of foe S.M Heralcb.
Marqyuts Francesco RaggC.
L.M. D Albertis.
RIVER
ALLce, Haj'Cj rav e .
Sydney Charles Pottery Acting Government Printer.
10a 23-11




