



JOURNAL
OF A
VOYAGE
TO THE
SOUTH SEAS,
IN
Dio: “ .9 Al* A w,”
EMPLOYED IN TilF.
SPEM WHALE FISHERY,
UNDER THE COMMAND
OK
Cai-t. JOHN MA Y,
BY
ROBERT JARMAN.
LONDON;
LONGMAN AND On. AND OIIARLKB TILT,


“A Plain unvarnished Tab it; prdbrahlr (o llu* most highly
oniamnnlcd Narrative. Whore wo st.ii* that a man lias Iho power,
w<; may naturally I'Kpect that he has llu- will lu docnivi; us; ami
those w!n» are used lo literary mamil'iietim’ know how nunth i.s
often sacrificed hi the vomnling- of a period, or t hr pointing' of an
airlilhrsis,''
MARIA ED GEWORTH.
Hfiiilml liy K, B. Jaiiman, Bncdi-si.


PREFACE.
Tap, Journal comprised in the following pa-
gan, wan not written with any view to publica-
tion, bat for the information of kindly attached
friends, whoso •wishes the writer was desirous
to gratify. This was his first voyage. At
twenty years old, having resolved, to quit his
employment on land, and try his fortune on
the world of waters, he embarked in the South
Sea Whale Fishery; and with, every branch of
seamanship to learn; and amidst ihe toils and
dangers of whaling, and the hustle, of a ship's
forecastle, he committed the incidents of Ms
voyage to paper, in the off-hand stylo of a
sailor.
The manuscript has been read by several very
respectable individuals, who have encouraged
its publication, for the detail it gives of Sputh
Sea fFinding, and the notices it contains of the
distant islands of the great Pacific, whose com-
paratively recent discovery, imparts an air of
interest to every intimation respecting them.
ISecclcs, August, 1638.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Farewell —Under sail —Starboard and larboard watch-
es—Palma—Teneriffe—Observations on whales—
Lowering—Hard and unsuccessful chase —Crossing
the line —Calm—-Cape Pigeons—Arrive nt the islands
of St. Paul and Amsterdam. I
CHAPTER 11. '
Departure from Strrrcul’s—Blackfish—Off Java—Thun-
der storm —Sandalwood—Wreck of the Louisa—
Copang—Watering—Malays at Copang—Capt. Eligh
and the mutineers of the Bounty—lncidental re-
marks. 21,
CHAPTER HI.
Anchor hove to leave Copang—Water-spout—Timor
Straits—Mahralta and the Moluccas—The Alhacoro,
Boneto, Flying-fish, Dolphin, and Bill-fish—School
of Whales—lncidents—Sea scurvy—Arrival of the
tlyrus—Shark—Wooding—Cock Roaches, 47
CHAPTER TV.
Sail from Mahratta—Whales— I Tornate—Custom-house
regulations—Tidore—Narrow escape of a seaman
from drowning. 7]
CHAPTER V.
Passage from Tomato to the Japan Sea—Deatli of a sea-
man—Rainy weather at Sea—Dreadful gale—The
Squid—Melancholy death and funeral of a seaman
struck by a whale—Arrive at the Sandwich Islands. Sfi


CHAPTER VI.
Island of Owyhoo—Anchor at Woahoo—Mission-,wins—
Public worship—Depraved habits of the natives—Thu
Tarrn—Language—Arrival of the Recovery. ] 1 i,
CHAPTER VII.
Sail for the Kingsmill Group Islands—Terrific Gale—
Seaman lost—Ship in extreme danger and much dam-
aged—Proceed for Port Jackson to refit—Narrow es-
cape—Arrive at Tongatnboo—Tragical incidents—
Passage to Sydney, lt>(i
CHAPTER VIII,
Off Sydney Cove, New Holland—The Phenomenon of
the Brickiielder —Refitting—Aboriginal Inhabitants of
New Holland —-Description of Sydney—lncidents
Sail from Sydney. 13!)
CHAPTER IX.
Arrive at the Fojco Islands—Whales—Rolnmah—Du-
prostor’s Group—Tamana-—Simpson’s and Dmulas’
Islands —Orrori —Whales—Return to Rotumah ; de-
scription of the Island, and of the manners and cus-
toms of its inhabitants. Kill
CHAPTER X.
Bail from Rolimmh—Whales—Arrive at Pylstaftrls
Island—Trading with the inhabitants—The Tea-root
—-Eocia and Toiigatalum—Whales—Various inci-
dcnls. JBfi
CHAPTER XI.
Whaling off the French Rock—Sail for New 'Zealand—
Singular fish—Arrive at the Ray of Islands—New
Zealanders —Incidental occurrences —Language of
New Zealanders—Sail for England—Gale—Passage
home —Enter the Channel —Moored in (he new Lon-
don Dock Basin. aiH


SOUTH-SEA VOYAGE.
CHAPTER I.
Farewell—Under sail—Starboard and larboard watch-
es—Palma—Teneriffe—Observations on whales—
Lowering—Hard and unsuccessful chase—Crossing
the line—Calm—Cape pigeons—Arrive at the islands
of St. Paul and Amsterdam.
June 21st, 1831. Took ray farewell of my
friends with a heart filled with various emo-
tions : a long, distant, and dangerous voyage,
and the uncertainty attending it, at that moment,
were uppermost in my mind ; but all thoughts
wore soon drowned in the bustle and preparation
attending the pilot’s coming on board, for tbe
purpose of hauling out of the canal and dropping
down to Gravesend.
All hands wore busily employed in loosing
sails. The first part of seamanship aloft which
fell to ray share was the bumble act of loosing
1!


the mizen lop-gallant-sail. Whilst there, 1 east
many an anxious look down the canal, in expec-
tation of seeing my father and brother ; they ar-
id reel a few minutes before the ship entered the
river; had only time to exchange a few words
before we were under sail. The friends of the
crew gave us three cheers as she luffed up to the
wind ; and wo lost sight of them for a few years,
at least.
Wo were employed at Gravesend with various
jobs about the rigging until the twenty-third,
when the captain and ship’s husband came on
board ; we received our advance, hove up the an-
chor, and broke ground.
We got under weigh early the following morn-
ing, cleared the river, and anchored for the night
on the flats, a few miles distant from the isle of
Sheppey. The following day we anchored in the
Downs; took in fresh provisions for the last
time, brought off by a Deal boat through rather
a heavy sea.
The Deal boats and boatmen are considered
the best in the world, for the superior excellence
of the boats in a sea-way, and the admirable


dexterity of the men in working them iu ail
weathers.
We continued our course down channel with a
strong breeze. The wind freshening considerably,
the ship proved very crank; her lee gunnel al-
most under water, sent clown royal masts and
yards, took in top-gallant-sails and reefed top-
sails.
All, with the exception of myself and the doc-
tor, who, also, had never been at sea before,
were now dreadfully sick : I always had an opini-
on that I should not suffer from sea-sickness, nor
have I been disappointed, although I have been
at the mast-head, on the look-out, when the ship
has been pitching so bad, as to cause others to ho
ill without being the least affected myself.
Many of the host seamen in the ship, from
her extreme crankness, imagined she was not
sea-worthy ; a party of which went aft and spoke
to the captain concerning it; but he gave such
reasons as satisfied them.
After leaving the Downs we had foul winds till
we came within sight of the Isle of Wight, when
we saw a pilot-boat on our lee-bow, it was blow


ing very stiff and hard when he boarded us ; the
captain intending to put into Portsmouth ; but
the wind soon after veering in our favor, wo
stood on our course.
All hands were now called aft for the purpose
of picking the watches ; the captain choosing the
first man, the chief mate the second, and so on
until all hands were chosen. The captain’s, which
is called the starboard watch, was officered by
the second and third mate ; and the other, which
is called the larboard watch, was commanded by
the chief mate. Myself and a few others, with
whom I had become acquainted, belonged to the
former watch. The watches are divided into four
hours duty each, alternately, night and day;
thus, the starboard watch is on duty at night
from eight until twelve; the larboard watch is then
roused, and continues from twelve until four in
the morning on deck ; the first watch is then
called again, and is on duty until eight; when
they are again relieved by the larboard watch,
and so on until four o’clock in the afternoon,
when the dog-watches of two hours each com-
mence ; the larboard watch then has from four to


six, and the starboard from six to eight; thus
giving the watch that had but four hours rest the
night before, eight hours the following night, and
“ vice versa."
On the 16th of July came in sight of the
Canary Islands. Stood close along shore the
island of Palma, and had a tine view of the land.
The day was delightfully fine and clear, with a
gentle breeze, and the ship gliding through water
as smooth as the Waveney. I was employed aloft
most part of the day, and the surrounding scenery
was viewed hy me with a double zest. When I
looked down, the majestic vessel was gently
ploughing her course through the blue water, the
white foam dashing under her bows.
Close to, on our larboard beam, was the beau-
tiful island of Palma ; its mountains and valleys,
and the tipe temperature of the climate with a
clear unclouded sky, were delightful. In the dis-
tance might ho seen the celebrated island of Te-
neriife, with its enormous peak, resembling an
immense dome, far above the clouds that en-
velope its base. Some of the cliffs on the S. W.
coast of this island are half a mile in height, and


as perpendicular as a wall. From the summit
several streams fall into the ocean. It was in an
attack upon the capital of this small island, Santa
Cruz, if my memory does not deceive me, that
the immortal Nelson was wounded, and narrowly
escaped with his life. This island in clear
weather may he seen at the distance of forty
leagues.
The following day we spoke an American
schooner bound for New York ; the captain sent
a boat with letters for England on board ; the
boat returned with a present of fruit, amongst
which were bunches of the finest grapes I over
beheld, the produce of some of the neighbouring
islands.
All hands were now busily employed in getting
the boats and whaling gear in readiness, should
we be fortunate enough to fall in with whales, in
our passage down the Atlantic ; and two hands
were constantly kept at the mast-head on the
look out. Whales are descried principally by
their spouting; and, it may not bo generally
known, that they cannot remain long under water
without coming to the surface to spout, it is their


breathing, and by it they are discovered. A
large whale’s spout may be seen in clear weather
tive or six miles, resembling a column of steam
or smoke rising out of the ocean.
The large or bull whales are generally found
cither in pods of four or five together, or singly ;
the female or cow whales, on the contrary, are
almost always found in great numbers together,
called, by south seamen “a school of whales.”
There is generally a large whale, and one only,
in each school. It would appear that the males
have frequently desperate engagements ; as their
heads are always seen with dreadful scars and
notches, apparently inflicted by the teeth of
their opponents. The bull whale will make
from seventy to more than one hundred barrels
of oil: but the cow whale only from twelve to
twenty-five.
On the morning of the twenty-seventh we
were roused about seven, in all the haste and
bustle attending preparations for lowering the
boats among whales. It might frighten many
young mariners, had they not been previously


informed of the confusion attending a lowering.
The cries of the sailors in clucing up the sails,
the shouts from the mast-heads “ there she
spouts, there she spouts,” ami a very stiff wind
blowing at the time, made a scene not easily
imagined or described.
Wo lowered three boats the first time, for
what proved to be a pod of largo whales. -After
about an hour’s hard chase, the captain’s boat
got fast to a very fine one, but too near the
flukes, or tail, to lance it fatally. It immediately
began running to windward at a tremendous
rate ; the other two boats wore left far behind,
and in about twenty minutes were completely out
of sight. The boat seemed is if she was rush-
in cr through a sea of blood, from the numerous
O D '
wounds the animal received, which, without
weakening him, or affecting his life, rendered him
more furious. The wind still kept freshening
until it blew half a gale ; and it was with the
greatest difficulty that the boat could bo kept
free by haling; the spray broke into her with
such violence ns to prevent our seeing distinctly
to windward.


When a whale is first struck and the harpoons
are well fast in him, ho generally goes down with-
out making any head-way, and, to prevent the
boat being carried down, the line is slackened
yet still keeping sufficient strain upon it to im-
pede his sinking. This requires great caution
and dexterity, by taking turns round the log-
gerhead, in the stern. The line leading
forward through a groove at the head is then
slackened and eased accordingly, until the whale
begins to rise, which is not sometimes till he
has carried out the lino of three boats, or rather
more than seven hundred fathoms. Whilst
sounding, the lino is kept constantly wet; for
the extreme friction would soon set fire to the
loggerhead unless it was well watered: and in
case the line gets foul, an axe is always kept in
the bow to cut it, otherwise the boat would he
taken down.
When the whale rises the line is hauled iu
and coiled, leaving about six or seven fathoms
to keep clear. It is then bowed by a man in
the head of the boat hauling upon it, and bring-
ing the boat close up alongside the whale, paying
c:


the slack of the line overboard, that the boat
may quickly drop astern, should the whale begin
to clip, or strike, with his tail, which is frequently
done with tremendous violence, smashing the
part which may bo struck like match wood.
As the whale continued running, the ship
with difficulty kept up with him ; until the other
two boats being nearly out of sight from the
mast-head, and the captain seeing no chance of
success, gave the signal to cut, which was done,
with groat reluctance, after running about forty
miles. The value of such a fish may be estima-
ted at about six or seven hundred pounds. The
boats all returned, but the men were greatly
fatigued and exhausted.
On the third of this month (August) we cross-
ed the line, about seven p. m., being about six
weeks since we left the canal. Towards the
evening, I noticed several preparations of tar,
grease, &c., among the sailors, which I judged
were for the agreeable operation of shaving such
of Neptune’s children as had never before
ventured thus far into his dominions : nor was
I deceived, Wo were all seized and confined


"below, brought upon dock singly, blindfolded,
and after undergoing an examination before
Neptune and bis bear, who was none of the gen-
tlest, relative to nautical affairs, and during
which several had their mouths stopped by the
before mentioned mixture, for their lubberly re-
plies, we were washed and shaved ; a piece of
notched iron hoop serving for a razor. Many of
us bore visible marks of the operation for a
fortnight afterwards.
After getting into south latitude we had hard
blowing weather, succeeded by calms, with a long
heavy swell, causing the ship to roll most ter-
ribly. A calm of this description is very trou-
blesome ; every thing in the ship is fetching way
or capsizing ; chests are sliding from one side of
the forecastle to the other, until secured by lash-
ings ; and it was truly ludicrous at meal times
to see the scaldings, escapes, and capsizes we ex-
cxpcrionced from pea-soup, coffee, &c. "We could
neither sit nor lie comfortably, except in ham-
mocks, of which there were very few slung
aboard us, being in danger of rolling out
of the bed cabin, after dropping asleep.


The man at the helm, unless particularly careful
to hold on the wheel, is liable to he struck with
it, as it flies round with considerable violence
should it escape out of his hand. A seaman was
struck with it so forcibly that he was off duty for
six' weeks; and we were fearful at first that his
arm was broken.
After getting into 20 S., we began to see nume-
rous birds called by the sailors “ Cape pigeons,”
which, singular as it may appear, invariably follow
ships in this latitude, until they arrive in lower
and warmer climes. They followed ns into about
21 S., and 90, E., after doubling the Cape, keep-
ing close by the ship in all weathers, and, like the
swallow, always on the wing. They very much
resemble a common black-and-white pigeon whilst
flying ; the bill is like a duck's, but not so largo
in proportion ; 1 have often wished that they
made as good a dish as that fowl, being easily
caught with a hook and line baited with a piece
of moat towed astern. They arc web-footed
and when set on dock are unable to rise to fly,
As we got further south we began to expe-
rience a change of climate, and when in 3G S„


found it as cold as in England iu the mouth of
February or March ; the nights particularly so ;
we also began to experience the strong winds pe-
culiar to this part of the world at this season of
the year ; and to prepare our storm-sails fur the
bad weather we might expect off the Cape. Nor
were our precautions found unnecessary, for wo
had a strong breeze, which soon increased into a
gale, with a very high sea on, hut, fortunately,
the wind was dead aft, so that wo wore enabled
to hold our course, scudding under a doable
reefed main-topsail. Onr ship proving very good
in this weather, the captain choose to run all
night rather than heave to.
The boats wore all taken in and well lashed
upon deck, to prevent their being stove and dash-
ed to pieces by the sea, which was now running
mountains high, sometimes breaking over us,
threatening to clear the decks ; hut fortunately
no one was injured, with the exception of some
slight bruises, nor any thing carried away or lost.
The sea off the Cape is considered to run
higher iu had weather than iu other parts of the
world, and to a person 'not accustomed to such


scones, and who has not acquired the indifference
with which most seamen view it, it is awful.
The sea, without exaggeration, ran as high as
our main-top, and when we were in the hollow
or trough of the sea, the wave astern seemed as
if it must inevitably overwhelm us.
The ship was rushing at a fearful rate through
the water, yoreing from one side to the other as
the seas struck her quarter, so as to require the
most watchful attention 1 of the helmsman. The
officers were below at breakfast and the starboard
watch on deck, when she was struck so forcibly
on the quarter, as to knock down the man at the
helm, and narrowly escaped broaching to. This
disaster was luckily prevented by one of the
boatsteerers who fortunately stood near the
wheel. Had she broached to, her decks would
certainly have been swept and lives lost, and
very probably she would have foundered.
Whilst the gale lasted we were followed by
the Capo pigeons and great numbers of the alba-
tross. Upon the gale ceasing, many of the latter
were caught with a large hook and line, baited
with a piece of salt junk; they arc about the


size of a large swan ; but the beak is much larger
and more formidable, being very sharp at the
edges and hooked ; if they got a dog or any
animal near enough, they will cut a piece out as
cleverly as a pair of scissors would.
After the bad weather we had a strong and
fair wind for a month, and soon made the islands
of St. Paul’s and Amsterdam,, in 37- 55. S., and
75. 15. E. These islands exhibit a very desolate
and dreary appearance from the sea, scarcely a
tree is to be seen on them : they are the resort
of seals and aquatic birds. Two boats were
sent on shore to fish for rock cod and craw fish,
which are found hero in groat abundance. The
boats passed through a narrow passage, in very
shallow water, with the surf very strong, into a
fine basin, about half a mile in diameter. The
land gradually sloping upwards to a considerable
height on all sides, effectually protected and
screened it, so that the water was as smooth and
unruffled as a looking-glass ; and the fish might
he seen of all sizes and beautiful colors sailing
about beneath.


We had most excellent sport, and soon laded
both boats with as ranch fish as wo could
safely carry through the dangerous surf. The
cod were caught with hook and lino, and I
heartily wished that some of my angling ac-
quaintances could have shared the sport. The
craw fish, or lobsters, as wo called them, wore
caught by sinking a hoop-net to the bottom, the
middle of it baited with pieces of meat; the fish
crawled in after the bait, and wore hauled up
by dozens.
In this secluded spot there was also plenty
of game for the fowler, the slope or declivity of
the hill affording excellent cover, which the ex-
posed part of the island does not, consisting
principally of brown short turf, and in many
places not covering the barren rock. We heard
the crowing of cocks, and saw a few goats,
which most probably had been left by some for-
mer navigator to breed. We also found a grave,
the last solitary home of some poor fellow, whose
hones were here deposited far from all friends,
perhaps forgotten and unknown. A log of wood
with the initials of the deceased’s name cut


upon it served for the head and another for the
foot stone.
Upon this island, it is supposed, there was
formerly a volcano, and the basin in which we
had been fishing, is also thought to have been
the mouth or crater. These conjectures seem
very probable from many interesting circumstan-
ces we saw. From the fissures of the rocks, in
several places, smoke or steam escapes, which is
so hot that the naked hand can be held in it only
for a few seconds without pain ; and the rocks
have acquired a heat which renders it impossible
to stand on them in some places. Not far from
the water side there is also a boiling spring con-
stantly issuing from the earth ; the water is hot
enough to cook fish, of which we made a trial (
and had a hearty repast off the same, and some
greens that we discovered, sown no doubt by
some former visitors. There is the greatest pro-
bability, that volcanic fire now exists, although
the greater part has been extinguished by the
influx of the water, caused by some convulsion
of nature, that opened the passage wo enter-
ed through. After having rambled as long as
D


our limited time would allow, we returned to our
boats, and pulled for the passage. The surf that
had sent us in fast enough, now opposed our get-
ting out, and although whale-boats are consider-
ed the best of any, it cost us a severe struggle
to effect our object.
Our doctor, who I suppose was never in a
boat before, was most dreadfully alarmed ; we
narrowly escaped capsizing from the strength of
the current and swell, slowing her head about
and bringing her nearly broad-side on. It was only
owing to the captain’s dexterity at the steer-oar
that wo escaped the treat. Had it been any other
kind of boat, steered in the usual manner, we
must have gone, and some very likely would never
have lived to tell their escape.
A very fine Dutch bark, was lying off and on,
and her boats attempted the same passage into
the basin, but wisely forbore, when they came
close enough to perceive the danger.
The fish proved excellent, equal to any cod
1 have ever eaten in England, as were also the
lobsters or craw-fish. All hands having eaten
a very hearty supper without inconvenience, the


remainder of our finny produce was hung upon
the main-stay, and other parts of the rigging ;
the cook objected to it, saying, if they were ex-
posed to the influence of the moon, it would
render them poisonous and unfit to he eaten.
He being a black man, and like many of his
color, very superstitious, some of us made a joke
of what he said, and laughed at him; but, on
the following day, after partaking again of the
fish, many of us seriously thought of what
he had said. We were all afflicted with a
dreadful vomiting, accompanied with cold sweats,
extreme languor and weakness; hut soon re-
covered after ridding the stomach of its disagree-
able load.
In what manner the moon renders fish poison-
ous I cannot learn nor account for, hut that it
certainly does affect it, and in a very short time,
is certain; for the fish which the cook care-
fully covered, were eaten without any inconve-
nience whatever. I remember reading in " Bel-
zoni’s Travels in Egypt,” that it is highly inju-
rious to sleep in the moon-shine, endangering the
loss of sight, and affecting the head in various


ways. Soon after getting into warm weather,
and when we began to sleep upon deck, an in-
stance of it happened on board us. A man laid
down to sleep upon dock in the shade of the
sails one beautiful moonlight night, but from the
ship breaking off, lying upon his back he be-
came fully exposed to the moon’s light for a con-
siderable time, and when he was roused by a
messmate, his eyes were afflicted with a weak-
ness, which in a few days so increased, that he
could not discern a person a few yards from him.
His temples were blistered several times, and
other remedies were resorted to by the doctor ;
hut it was a considerable time before he perfectly
recovered his sight.


CHAPTER II.
Departure from St. Paul’s—Blackfish—Off Java—Thun-
der storm—Sandlewood—Wreck of the Louisa—
Copang—Watering—Malays at Copang—Capt. Bligh
and the mutineers of the Bounty—Incidental remarks.
We left the island of St, Paul’s with a fine
breeze, iu beautiful and clear weather: the
temperature being much the same as in England
in the spring months. The following morning
we saw a ship about six miles to leeward, with
her fore-top-mast struck, going before the wind;
but as she made no signal of distress, we stood
on our course without speaking her.
Steering away to the northward we soon felt
the difference of climate, and enjoyed, both night
and day, the mild genial breezes we had delight-
ed in, daring our passage down the
whilst between the tropics. Instead of shivering
in the cold blasts of the higher latitudes, du


ring the dull and cheerless night watches, it was
delightful to sit in the soft air, listening to each
watch-mate’s “ yarn ” of “ home and beauty,”
comforting ourselves, with what I am confident
few classes of men enjoy with the zest of
seamen, u pipe of tobacco, and the “ hopes of
return.”
Our course lay to the N. E., the captain
intending to cruise off the island of Sandlewood,
situated in 10 S., and 120 E., for a month, and
then refresh the ship at Copang, a port in the
island of Timor, about six days’ sail from the
island of Sandlewood.
One beautiful calm day we espied a school of
black-fish, apparently making in the direction of
the ship, and as we had been for a considerable
time in want of oil for the ship’s use, the cap-
tain determined to lower a boat and endeavour
to kill one ; the second mate lowered and brought
one on hoard : they are from ten to eighteen feet
long, and a very stout fish, bearing a greater
resemblance, in their formation, particularly the
bead, to a sperm whale, than any fish of the
spouting species.


We had now been out nearly five months with-
out seeing whales, with the exception of the
single pod we saw off the Cape de Verd islands :
and were now approaching the spot which we
anxiously hoped would repay our toil; hut, dis-
appointment awaited us, for during the five
weeks’ cruise off Sandlewood, not a single sperm
whale was seen, and the only oil we carried into
Copang was forty barrels, part of a large whale
we killed after three hours sharp run, on the
passage from St. Paul's to Sandlewood.
We ran close along the shores of Java, and
many of the adjacent small islands, hut without
success. The intense and almost insufferable
heat off Java, during a calm, is indescribable.
The thermometer stood at 90 in the shade, and
at 130 in the sun, at eleven in the forenoon.
The weather, in the vicinity of these islands
for the first three weeks, was generally very fine,
accompanied with a light and agreeable cooling
breeze : but the last fortnight was alternately
calm and squally, accompanied with the most
awfully loud thunder and vivid lightening I have
ever heard or seen.


I was in the middle watch, one night, when
the thunder had been growling at a distance all
the evening, presaging an approaching storm;
the sky and ocean to windward looked like one
immense dark black mass, whilst small forbid-
ding looking clouds were slowly advancing against
the natural course of the currents in the direc-
tion of the ship. We expected that the storm
would burst over us every instant, and had begun
to take in sail when it came ; the first watch had
just turned in ; the ship was on her beam ends
in an instant; it was as dark as I have ever
known from the thick gloom of the sombre sky,
except when the flashes of lightning gave an aw-
fully vivid light, we could then discern as clearly
fur the moment as when the sun shines at
noon-day. Officers and men were now all upon
deck clueing down the sails, whilst a young sailor
and myself were aloft furling the main-top-
gallant-sail, when a flash so vivid struck across
our eyes, accompanied with a report, to which
the loudest thunder in England is a mere mock-
ery, I was blinded and so was the young man
with me for some seconds, and I actually thought


that I had lost my sight. All our yards had
iron back-stays, and when lying across the yard
I felt as perfect an electric shock, caused by the
attraction of the iron, I suppose, as from any
machine, and so powerful as almost to cause me
to lose my hold. This was succeeded by so vio-
lent a gust, that the sail which was furled and
passing the yard-arm-gasket, was torn adrift in
a second; fortunately the squall moderated,
otherwise it must have been blown away.
The -wind subsided soon after into a perfect
calm, accompanied with heavy rain and vivid
lightning, which at sea, in dark nights, is not
without its use, as it enables the sailor to disco-
ver his situation, find his ropes, &c.
This exceeds all places I have been in for
thunder and lightning, but more'especially for
the latter, it was in fact almost continual every
night all around the horizon, during the fine wea-
ther ; but was more violent and less frequent as
the bad weather advanced.
The natives of Sandlewood are a very fierce
and intractable people, avoiding all trade with Eu-
ropeans. The .Dutch, some years ago, attempted
E


a settlement, and sent missionaries amongst
them, but some jealousies and disputes arose
between them and the natives, who rose one
night and massacred all indiscriminately; since
which no further attempt has been made to civil-
ize such a dangerous and treacherous people.
Their trade consists principally in sandal-wood,
of which this island produces immense quantities,
and from which it derives its name. The Ma-
lays, from the neighbouring island of Java, trade
for it in their prows, and dispose of it again to
the Chinese, who, I have been informed, use vast
quantities in their temples, burning it as incense
to their deities.
It was here that the unfortunate Cap. Cook,
of the Louisa, south seaman, was wrecked in
1825 or 6. I had a short verbal account from a
shipmate, who was lying in Copang, in the Indi-
an, Captain Swain, at the time the survivors ar-
rived there. The ship had been out about two
years and a half, and was hound home with a full
cargo; they had overcome the most laborious
and fatiguing part of the voyage, and had just
begun to think of home as not far distant, and


when they would return with the hard earned
fruits of their toil.
They had left the port of Copang, and wished
to sight this island to take a departure, when
one night, from want of keeping a careful look
out, she struck upon a reef off the south end of
the island ; at the second bump, from a heavy
swell, she Was sent nearly over it; where she
stuck ;it was found impossible to get her off ;
the next consideration was the preservation of
life. From the well known savage disposition of
the natives, it would have been almost certain
destruction to land, especially in their defenceless
state. On the other hand, they would have to
pass several hundreds of miles before they
would make Copang, which is the nearest port,
and that too through a burning atmosphere,
in a small open whale-boat, scarcely sufficient
to carry the ship’s company, independent of
provisions, and above all, water, without which
they must inevitably perish, of that most in-
sufferable of all torments, thirst. They resolved
upon the latter alternative, and made such
preparations as the time would admit of. When


the morning dawned, finding the beach lined with
natives, armed with long spears and bows, and
being fearful of an attack, they commenced their
departure ; but the calms, which almost always
prevail in this part of the globe, delayed their
passage; row they could not, from the intense
heat and their privations; their water was soon
expended; their sufferings now may be better
imagined than described ; they dropped off one
by one ; and of the wretched remainder that ar-
rived in port, the majority died from exhaustion,
or a broken heart.
The captain recovered, and Captain May,
when master of the Ranger, brought him home.
He embarked for another voyage ; misfortune
still followed him ; he was taken down by a
whale, from the line getting foul of his legs, and
was lost. A man who after shipped on board of
us at Sydney, belonged to his boat at the time,
and was one who attempted to save him by
diving after the line got clear ; but his shirt un-
fortunately tore ns the man was bringing him up
by it, and he was never seen afterwards. He
was in command of the Ashmy at that time.


Our short cruise oil this place proving unsuc-
cessful ; the captain determined to proceed to
Copang; there to refresh the ship’s company,
and from thence pass through Timor Straits, to
the Moluccas or Spice Islands.
In six days, during which we had light breezes
and calms, alternately, we, at length, came to an
anchor, after being towed about three hours in
a calm.
Copang presents a very agreeable prospect
from the ocean ; it is situated in the centre of a
very deep bay, in which is a very small island
about a mile in circumference, covered with
wood, but uninhabited: on the left, as you enter,
the prospect is bounded by lofty mountains,
covered with noble trees to the very summit, on
the right the bay branches off and divides Timor
from another island, with the name of which 1
am unacquainted.
Numerous canoes may be seen in this passage,
which is not above two miles in breadth, wear-
ing, from its smooth unruffled waters, more the
appearance of a fine river, than a branch of the
sea.


■ The Dutch are in possession of the place,
and have a fort, with a few guns mounted, to
keep the natives in awe. The climate is very un-
wholesome, and particularly fatal to Europeans,
the few that I saw, more resembled persons in
the last stage of consumption, than any I ever
saw who were really afflicted with that dreadful
complaint.
We had been tolerably well seasoned to heat,
but this place was more insufferable than any we
had hitherto met with. It was rendered more
so, as we were now deprived of the shade of the
sails; which, also, in the lightest weather cause
a trifling degree of wind upon the deck: the
decks were heated to that degree so as to render
it impossible to walk bare footed without'blister-
ing the feet.
I belonged to the watering party, so that I was
the greater part of the day time employed ashore.
This was not one of the most agreeable employ-
ments, but I preferred it, as it gave me plenty of
time to gratify my curiosity, and to trade for
such necessaries as I knew would be serviceable
next cruise.


We bad a number of casks rafted together,
which we towed ashore; they had then to be
rolled about two miles up a river, which, from
the indolence of the inhabitants, is not navigable
even for the smallest craft; huge masses of rock
and shoals of sand choking it up in all directions.
The casks, when filled, had to be taken back by
us along the bed of the river, breaking our
shins over rocks, sticking fast in the mud, or
going souse to the bottom in a hole a dozen feet
deep ; a matter very diverting to the native
spectators, who seemed to enjoy out various pre-
dicaments with no little pleasure.
The Malays, at this place, are a very diminu-
tive people; few of the men exceeding five feet
six inches in height, and the generality not
above five feet two inches, and being of a thin
and weakly appearance. The females are with-
out exception the most squalid, and disgusting
looking objects that can well be imagined ; their
features are particularly uncouth, and their
skinny withered faces and arms, with their high
projecting cheek bones, make them appear more
like a superior class of the baboon tribe than


human beings. Like most of the eastern tribes,
they make no use of seats, or chairs, but rest
themselves by squatting down, when disengaged
or at meals, which they eat off a calabash, or a
mat, laid upon the ground. Their diet is very
simple, consisting chiefly of rice and fish, with a
few dried plnintains and bananas, which latter
are very pleasant and wholesome, either raw, or
cooked.
In Ternatc, where the climate is wholesome
and the laud fruitful, they arc exceedingly plen-
tiful, growing in immense hunches, some of them
weighing upwards of half a hundred weight. I
can compare them to no English fruit, but in
taste they somewhat resemble a fine ripe mealy
pear. The plaintains are a larger and coarser
kind of banana, and are considered as superior
to the bananas by many persons
The Diana, Capt. Palmer, was lying here,
fitting out for home when we came in ; I deliver-
ed a packet of letters into the surgeon’s hands,
from several of our ship's company, for well
remembered friends in Old England.


The refreshments to be procured at Copang
are not very good nor numerous; consisting
principally of buffalo beef and a few greens-
Potatoes or yams are not to be procured. Fruits
are scarce, with the exception of mangoes, and
they do not agree very well with a European’s
palate, having a strong and disagreable smell.
The principal drink of the natives is toddy ;
a liquor procured from the cocoa-nut tree by
tapping it close to the root; it resembles milk
when it is fresh, but rather thinner and sweeter.
It will not keep sweet above half a day, after
which time, it ferments and turns sour, in which
state it is preferred by the natives; they will
got intoxicated with it as quickly as an English-
man upon bis beer. It makes a very good
substitute for vinegar if kept long enough; 1
found it very serviceable after leaving port,
and believe it conduced greatly to keep me in
health ; as some, who took no precaution of this
kind, had slight touches of the scurvy before wo
entered port again.
Our watering party having fine opportunities
ashore, of taking rambles in the neighbourhood
F


of the town, wo very frequently gave the mate
the slip, and broke loose for a frolic. The
Malays, who are like the eastern nations, a very
slow, sedate people, would look with astonishment
upon the antics and drolleries of a British sailor ;
naturally in good spirits and aided perhaps with
an extra glass of arrack, and like school-hoys on a
holiday, released for a short time from the tram-
mels of authority.
Their houses were always open, and whenever
any of us felt tired or oppressed with heat, in
we marched and seated ourselves upon their
hamhoo couches or mats, and were attended
upon, as far as they could oblige us, with cheer-
fulness. That they are partial to the English,
and dislike the Dutch, I am convinced ; arising
partly from the severity and restrictions of the
latter, who arc ex’tremely jealous of their autho-
ity ; and partly from the liberality and humanity
of the former, when amongst them.
I have hoard many who could talk tolerable
broken english, express a wish that the British
were in possession of the country. They are not
allowed to come alongside ships in their canoes


to trade; and articles we took ashore were
liable to be overhauled by their excise. Arras
and ammunition form the best trade, but are
contraband.
Their. houses are principally constructed of
bamboo, and are well suited to the climate ; the
bamboo is split into laths and lashed to other
cross pieces, so as to serve for a wall, the apart-
ments are divided by the same light material,
and the roof, which projects twelve or fourteen
feet outside, is covered with a large kind of leaf,
water tight, so as to form an agreeable shade.
So fur as the roof projects is generally paved
and kept clean, and more used in the day time
than the inner apartments. These are however
only the superior houses, where the owners are
comparatively wealthy ; the common huts of the
lower orders, are miserable indeed, constructed
of a few bamboos stuck in the ground, and
thatched over, with a hole left to crawl in and
out of.
It was at this port, Lieutenant Bligh, of his
Majesty’s ship the Bounty, in the- unfortunate
expedition to Otaheito, for the purpose of trans


planting the bread fruit tree, arrived in an open
boat, only twenty-three feet long, containing
eighteen persons, having been forty-five days
at sea; and traversed an ocean of more than
twelve thousand leagues, from the time of
leaving Tofoa, near which they were cast adrift
by Christian and the remainder of the mutinous-
crew.
Lord Byron has writtea a very interesting
piece founded upon the circumstances of this
mutiny, but has taken the liberty of a poet in
accounting for the death of Christian and his
comrades. It was for a space of above twenty
years' a matter of uncertainty what had become
of Christian, the ship, and part of his accomplices.
The remainder, to the number of fourteen, were
afterwards apprehended by Captain Edwards, of
the Pandora; fitted out expressly for that pur-
pose by the Admiralty; four were lost in the
wreck of the Pandora, in Endeavour Straits, the
other ten reached England, and were tried for
the otfence ; four were pardoned, as it was proved
they were compelled to join the mutineers ; and


the remaining six, finished their eventful life
ignominiously on the scaffold.
These events happened about the year 1/89 ;
and it was in 1808, that Captain Folger, of the
American whaler. Topaz, touched at Pitcairn’s
Island, in 26. 20. S., and 120 TV., for the purpose
of sealing ; upon approaching the shore in the
boat, and supposing the island to he uninhabited,
they were surprised to see a canoe, containing
three young men, making towards them, and,
when near enough, hailing them in English. After
some questions, they informed the captain that
they were born on the island, and that their
father was an Englishman, who had sailed with
Captain Bligh.
They landed with them, and found an English-
man of the name of Smith, who informed them
he was one of the Bounty’s crew ; and gave the
following account of the fate of such of his ship-
mates as had accompanied Christian. Having
set their commander and his unfortunate com-
rades adrift, and committed them as they
thought to certain destruction, the mutineers
returned to Otaheite, where part of them choose


to stay ; but Christian, with eight others, pre-
ferred seeking a safer and more remote hiding
place from the vengeance of their country ; being
well aware of the consequence of their villainy.
After a short stay at Otaheite, and providing
themselves with wives and men servants, they
sailed, with the intention of running the ship
ashore on the first uninhabited island, after get-
ting every thing out of her that might prove
useful. This was accomplished, she was run
ashore on the before mentioned island, and burnt
by Christian, to destroy all traces of her, and
preclude the possibility of any of his companions
in guilt returning to tell the tale.
There they lived for about four years tolerably
peaceful, when Christian’s wife died; he soon
after deprived one of the Otaheite men of his,
and the man, watching an opportunity for
revenge, soon after shot his oppressor dead, as
he was working in his plantation.
Thus perished, unknown and unlaraented, a
man who for his superior abilities and strong
energy of character, was well calculated for the
service in which he begun his career; and in


which, had he persevered, instead of allowing
himself to bo led away by the delusive pleasures
with which he flattered himself, to the commis-
sion of such a cold-blooded and atrocious mu tin v,
ho would, in all probability, have risen to become
an honor to his country.
It might be imagined, that, situated in this un-
known isle, and secluded from the remainder of
the world, the comforts of the one depending in
a great measure upon the society of another,
peace would have reigned in their little world ;
but it was not to be; blood bad been shed for
the first time upon the island ; but, unfortunately,
it was not destined to be the last.
Fierce jealousies reigned between ibe Otabe-
tians and English, from the attachment of the
native women to the latter; and about six years
after settling upon the island, the Otabeitari ser-
vants rose and massacred all the white men,
with the exception of Smith, who was severely
wounded. The same night, the widows revenged
the death of their husbands by killing the few
that remained of their countrymen. Smith alone
now remained with the widows and children, with


whom he was living happily and in comfort, so
late as 1814, when the Briton, Captain Staines,
touched there, on his passage from the Marquisas
Islands to Valparaiso.
Some of the inhabitants came on board, and
amongst them a son of Christian, who is descri-
bed as being a very fine young man, well behaved
and intelligent; as were also the other natives;
owing to the care with which Adams had incul-
cated honest and just principles into their minds.
Their numbers had increased to about forty-
seven, who looked up to Smith as their com-
mon father and protector ; who was as impli-
citly obeyed from affection, as the most absolute
chieftain is from fear.
The land is very productive ; its chief produce
consists of bananas, plaintains, cocoa-nuts, bread-
fruit, yams, sweet potatoes, &c. It abounds in
pigs, which is the largest quadruped on the island.
The inhabitants were rather surprised at the
sight of a cow, which they supposed to be a large
kind of horned sow.
The island is very small, not being above six
miles long and three broad, completely iron


bound, being surrounded with rods. It affords
no harbour nor shelter of any kind for ships, al-
though they can approach pretty close in shore:
but it is, at all times, very difficult to land, in
consequence of the dangerous surf.
The women arc described as handsome, well
formed, and virtuous, resisting all endeavors, on
the part of their visitors, to form connections
with them ; and Adams assured Captain Staines
that since the death of Christian and his mis-
guided comrades, no instance of infidelity had oc-
curred, to his knowledge, on the part of either
sex. When parties formed an attachment, they
wore united hy a kind of marriage ceremony of
his own, and from that time were considered man
and wife.
Captain Bligli observes with respect to the
motives of the mutineers for such a revolt, “ I
can only conjecture, that the men had flattered
themselves with the hope of a happier life among
the Otaheitans than they could possibly enjoy in
England ; which, joined to some female connec-
tions, most probably occasioned the whole trans-
action.”
G


How miserably they were disappointed we have
seen. After regaining their wished for island,
which, in their imagination, they had painted as
the land of ease and plenty, and where they had
flattered themselves they should live in luxury
and uncontrolled freedom ; a guilty conscience
followed them, and fear again compelled them to
leave it, for the lonely and almost unknown isle
of Pictairn : where the inquietude and distrust in
which they lived to the time of their bloody and
violent death, were more than an equivalent for
all the pleasures they had promised themselves,
could they have realised them.
Captain Bligh in his journal says, “ The
women of Otaheitc, arc handsome, mild, and
cheerful in manners and conversation, possessed
of groat sensibility, and have sufficient delicacy
to make them be admired and beloved. The
chiefs were so much attached to our people that
they encouraged their stay, and made them pro-
mises of large possessions. Under these and
many other concomitant circumstances, it ought
hardly to be the subject of surprise, that a set of
sailors, most of them void of connections, should


be led away, where they had the power of fixing
themselves in the midst of plenty, in one of the
finest islands of the world, where there was no
necessity to labour, and where the allurements of
dissipation are beyond any conception that can
be formed of it.”
The Malays, of both sexes, are very fond of
chewing betel-nut mixed with a substance called
“ chenam, ” which dyes their teeth and lips of a
dirty rod color; it is considered by them as
wholesome, and red teeth as handsome. Their
notions of beauty certainly are widely different
from mine, a female with a tump of betel-nut and
chenam in the front of her mouth, causing the
lips greatly to protrude, is not to me very at-
tractive.
We found them honest when trusted, and em-
ployed them frequently to purchase articles for
us, which they did, procuring them at a cheaper
rate and of a superior quality than if we had
purchased for ourselves. They washed for many
of us during our stay, always returning the ar-
ticles in good order, and repairing them if ne-
cessary ; considering themselves well rewarded


with a piece of soap, with which they are very
pleased. Having no means of procuring soap,
the method of washing their own scanty “ tappa ”
or covering, is by knocking it against a smooth
rock by the river aide, until they consider it suffi-
ciently cleansed.
I was ashore one afternoon with a boat’s crew
waiting for the captain, and had with me a mag-
nifying glass, to light my pipe with ; this was
looked upon by the natives with astonishment,
and at a house we used to frequent, it was handed
round for examination, an intelligent looking little
savage at last got hold of it, put it in the case,
as I thought, and returned it to me. The follow-
ing morning missing my glass and discovering the
young rogues deception, I went immediately to
the hoy’s house and taxed him with stealing it,
which he strongly denied; but I threatened to
take him before the governor at the fort, and he
at last told his mother where he had secreted it.
She soon brought the glass in one hand and a
stout bamboo stick in the other, which she deli-
vered to me with great solemnity, making me to
understand that I was to thrash the boy with it;


this, however, I did not feel inclined to do, and
the boy promised to make me some atonement
for his crime.
At this place I saw some birds of the parrot
kind, small in size, of the most beautiful plumage
I ever beheld, and very tame and lively ; but
they are not hardy enough to live in our colder
climate, I could have bought as many as I
pleased at the price of a knife for a couple.
Monkeys of a very small species are also very
numerous. We bought two ; but from their filthi-
ness and mischievousness we were glad to set
them ashore after two days.
The canoe of the Malays at Copang is very
clumsy and ill contrived, consisting of a tree
roughly shaped out, very narrow, high stem and
stern, and as roughly hollowed. Its greatest
breadth does not exceed eighteen inches; it
would consequently be always in danger of capsi-
zing were it not for out-riggers, which are long
pieces of bamboo lashed across, so as to project
on each side eight or ten feet, and fore and aft
pieces lashed to the bamboo running athwart.
When the canoe is thus rigged,, it can scarcely


be upset; which ever side has a list, the buoy-
ancy of the bamboo in the water supporting it
on that side, and the weight of the out-rigger ou
the other side counterbalancing it.
We lay here for a fortnight, and in that short
time were thoroughly tired of the place ; and it
was with the greatest pleasure wo saw the
captain come on hoard for the purpose of getting
under weigh.


CHAPTER III.
Anchor hove to leave Copang—Water-spout—Timor
Straits—Mahratta and the Moluccas —The Albacore,
Boneto, Flying-fish, Dolphin, and Bill-fish—School
of Whales—Incidents—Sea scurvy—Arrival of the
Cyrus—Shark—Wooding—Cock Roaches.
We hove anchor on a Sunday morning; but
the wind shifting, we were compelled to let go
again : and had a disagreeable job of warping
the ship further off shore, for the remainder of
the day, in consequence of her drifting after the
anchor was atrip.
The Monday was one of those close, suffoca-
ting, calm days, so common on the Timor coast;
but on the following day we had a change ; the
morning setting in with a breeze, we got under
weigh, hut before w'e cleared the hay it came ou
squally, accompanied with thunder, lightning, and
heavy rain ; the atmosphere being so thick that
it was impossible to see a ship’s length ahead.


Rainy weather is of all others the most disagree-
able and uncomfortable at sea ; the captain, how-
ever, served out some grog, which somewhat
enlivened us.
Water-spouts are very common in this part of
the world. I have seen as many as two or three
in a day, when cruising off Java and Sandlewood,
We were caught in one, which lucidly was nearly
spent, just after we cleared the bay. We were
slashing through the water with a strong breeze,
when we were taken all aback in au instant, and
before we could brace the yards round all was
full again. The thickness of the weather pre-
TBivted us seeing it coming, or we might possibly
have avoided it hy altering our course. It was
the opinion of many, that the water-spout in its
lull power would have endangered the ship, and
I thought myself that it would have taken the
masts out of her.
We ran through Timor Straits with a light
breeze ; they are about twenty-four miles long
and eighteen in breadth, with very high land on
both sides. The inhabitants were described by
some of my shipmates, who had been close in


shore, on former voyages, trading for fruit, vege-
tables, &c., as being in the rudest state, very
treacherous, and fond of thieving. A small piece
of iron hoop, or an old nail, will purchase most
of the articles they produce for trade.
Some years ago, those Straits were very good
whaling ground; but for the poor fellows who
were engaged in whaling, it was the worst and
most killing climate in the world. Calms so con-
stantly prevail here, that a whale when dead has
generally to be towed to the ship, perhaps a dis-
tance of eight or ten miles. And such is the
scorching heat of the sun, that men have been
known to drop dead or become delirious at the
oar ; and very frequently the officers have been
obliged to take the oar to enable the boat to
reach the ship ; to such an exhausted state have
the men been reduced by their eagerness in the
chase.
After clearing Timor Straits we entered the
Banda Sea, and had a fine strong breeze all
night. The fires of the natives in the mountains
were distinctly seen, the shore not being above
four or five miles off. Wo were a few days off
H


the island of Celebes ; but seeing no whales we
proceeded to Mortay, one of the Spico Islands,
and arrived therein December, 1831.
On the first of January we saw a school of
whales, lowered and killed two, which produced
fifty barrels of oil. This may be said to be the
commencement of our whaling, for up to the pre-
sent time, we had obtained only forty barrels of
oil, from the whale rve killed on our passage to
Sandlewood.
We continued cruizing off Mahratta and the
numerous small islands in the Molucca group un-
til the beginning of April, when we bore away for
Ternate, for the purpose of refreshing &c., for
the Japan season, having picked up about seven
hundred barrels.
Whilst cruizing among the Moluccas we were
followed by innumerable schools of fish, called
Albacore and Boneto, they constantly kept by
the ship, either under sail or lying to; I suppose
for protection ; for when their formidable enemy
the bill-fish was in pursuit, I have seen thou-
sands of them dodging him round the ship, keep-
ing close in to her side, and under her bottom.


Bonetos are rather larger and more full in the
round than a mackarel; the back, when just
caught, is of a most beautiful blue; and the belly
of a bright silver color, shaded off where it con-
nects with the blue, with all the tints of the
rainbow.
The albaoore is a much larger fish, varying in
size from that of a small cod to a porpoise.
It is a very handsome looking fish when first
caught: the back is -of a variegated brown and
blue; and the belly is much the same as the
boueto, with the exception of the tints being ra-
ther deeper. These fish emit a very strong
flashing light in the night-time, resembling a
stream of fire beneath the surface of the waters.
I suppose it to be when the fish slues upon its
side, and the bright lower parts of its body be-
come exposed. Their principal food is the poor
persecuted flying-fish, which they pursue with in-
credible swiftness ; and when the flying-fish, as
a last resource, takes wing, instinct teaches its
ravenous enemy to continue on in the same track,
until it drops into the water, when it is instantly
seized with a sudden spring by its enemy. From


their voracity and manner of catching their prey
they are easily caught by man. A piece of white
rag is fastened upon the shank of a hook, and
played with upon the surface of the water in imi-
tation of the flying-fish, the motion of the ship
through the water, causing the artificial bait to
skip from wave to wave, assists in the deception.
They bite eagerly, aud it was always in our
power to procure a mess of them, which, in a
long cruize, after living upon salt junk, was ac-
ceptable.
1 do not think that these fish would be much
relished in England, being of a very dry nature.
I have seen hut very few of them without worms
adhering very firmly to the stomach; this may
account for their cstreme voracity and eagerness
in the chase of their prey. They are very quick
sighted, and their eyes are uncommonly large and
full; that of a middle sized albacore is as big as
the eye of a large whale ; hut it is to bo observed
that a whale, like the elephant, has a very small
eye in comparison with its tremendous bulk.
The flying-fish is rather larger than a full
sized sprat; aud is gifted with a pair of large


fins, which enable it to rise from its native ele-
ment, when pursued by any of its numerous
enemies, and it will fly a long distance. When
at the mast-head, I have seen them rise under
the hows, and have traced them nearly a quarter
of a mile before falling. Besides its numerous
pursuers in the water, when it flies for safety, it
is seized upon by the man-of-war-hawk, the boo-
by, and many other tropical birds, with the names
of which I am unacquainted. When on the
wing, if it come in contact with any object, it
strikes very forcibly; I have picked them up
dead, their heads being smashed to pieces from
the force of the blow against the ship’s bulwark.
But the most beautifully formed, and gorgeous
colored of all the fish I have yet seen, is the
dolphin.
Dolphins are very numerous among the Mo-
lucca Islands, and at Japan also. I have seen
none that exceeded four feet in length, and very
slender, tapering gradually to the tail; which is
formed like the swallow. The head is sharp
like a wedge, very deep from the crown to
the month, and furnished with a tier of


small but very sharp teeth. They are considered
the swiftest fish of the ocean ; and when in the
act of darting upon their prey, apparently change
color; sometimes from a bright yellow to a beau-
tiful blue or green: it is caused, I imagine, from
the skin of the fish being brought into a diffe-
rent light, when about to make a rush. They
have a very large kind of fin, which reaches
from the fore part of the head, along the back,
nearly to the tail, of a beautiful bright blue, and
this they can erect or depress at pleasure ; thus
giving the fish a noble appearance, especially
when in pursuit.
They may be caught with the hook, but are
so strong and struggle so violently, that they
seldom can be hauled on board. Wo usually
caught them by striking them with the grains ;
an instrument with five prongs, and barbed like
a harpoon. Sailors mostly tell a yarn about
their changing color, when in the agonies of
death. I have observed many in that state, and
that they do apparently change color is true, but
I think it is nothing more than the violent con-
vulsive stragglings and quiverings of the fish


dilating' the skin and bringing it into a different
light.
When caught and on deck they strike with
their tail very violently ; I had a blow from one
on the ancle, which took the skin off as if a
musket shot had grazed it.
But the most formidable fish of the ocean is
the hill-fish ; so called from a sharp and strong
bill, about two feet long, which projects in a ho-
rizontal line from its nose; and with which they
transfix their prey. They are frequently seen
lurking about ships, lying wait for the albacore
&c., who, on their part keep a sharp look-out for
their dangerous enemy. A boy on board caught
an albacore with a large hole completely through
the fleshy part of its body, still bleeding, from
a bill-fish wounding it; it was a striking instance
of the eagerness of the albacore in pursuit, as
even in that state it bit at our usual bait, a
piece of white rag, secured upon a hook.
On examining the bottom of the Greenwich,
one of our owner’s ships, after a voyage, a great
part of the hill of a bill-fish was discovered stick-
ing in her ; it penetrated completely through her


bottom; and upwards of three inches into the
solid timber. He, lam told, has the piece in
bis cabinet of, curiosities. It is supposed that
the fish, in chase of its prey, missed it, and
struck the ship, when the force of the blow broke
its weapon.
On the twenty-second of February we saw a
fine school of whales; and could discern their
spouts from the mast-head as far as the eye
could reach. We lowered all four boats, and the
chief mate fastened to a whale, when his
boat was soon surrounded ; the whales making in
the direction of the wounded one from all quar-
ters. It is singular, but. true, that only school
whales will “ heave to,” to use a whaler’s expres-
sion, or flock together, when one of their number
is struck. The bull whales on the contrary, as
soon as one of their number is struck,
take off with the speed of lightning. It is thus,
rarely, that more than two arc killed out of
a pod of bull whales; whilst it is common to
get from five to seven out of a school of cows, in
consequence of their heaving to, and giving the
boats an opportunity of fastening.


All the boats bad soon singled out a whale
each ; and the poor timid animals had just begun
to recover from their stupor, and break away
from their wounded mates, who were now dashing
about in agony, from the barbed weapons rank-
ling in their flesh, when a loose wbale passed
just under our boat, and I saw it was a narrow
escape for us : but another following the other’s
track, struck the boat just abreast the tub-oar,
(the one I pulled) and crash went the boat’s side
all to atoms. The next moment I found myself
under water, along side the wbale, who soon shot
ahead out of the way. When I came up and
looked round me, ] found the boat bottom up,
and all hands safe, with the exception of a boy,
who rose to the surface a few moments after-
wards, and was saved from sinking again.
We managed to roll the boat over, and lashed
all the oars athwart, in the manner of out-riggers,
to prevent her capsizing with the swell; then
getting in, we made the best of our ducking, un-
til we were picked up by another boat. The chief
mate soon came to our assistance, cutting his
whale adrift as soon as he espied us; and in
i


about three hours wo reached the ship. We
lost, however, three whales through this accident,
which was more regretted by us than a stove
boat.
The greatest danger when amongst a school,
arises from the loose whales ; the wounded one
may be mostly avoided, as it can be seen by the
streaming of the line in what direction the whale
will come up: but the loose ones arc as apt to
rise under the boat, and capsize her or knock
her to pieces, as to go clear.
Whilst cruising on this coast we fell in with
another of our owner’s ships, the Ranger ; she
hoisted, one day, the signal for whales, and we
lowered our boats, they proved very wild, and
after chasing them from noon until nearly sun-
set, one of the Ranger’s boats had the chance
and succeeded in getting fast; the whale sound-
ed out all their line and we bent on ours ; thus
saving the whale for them.
Soon after we saw signals of distress from one
of our boats to wind-ward, it was now getting-
dusk : on our way towards it we passed the third
mate, who had just turned up a whale dead ;he


told us the chief mate was fast to a whale, and
expected, from the signals, that his boat was
stove, two whiffs or small flags being hoisted.
We pulled away at our utmost speed, for the
boat was about a mile and a half off, and we
found it half full of water, and in danger of cap-
sizing every swell, from having no lashings for
their oars athwart-ships.
They had fastened to a fine largo whale about
an hour before, who had given the boat a slight
crack with his flukes and stove four or five of her
planks; they with great difficulty kept her
afloat until we arrived ; when rve took all the
gear and those who could not swim out of her,
and took her in tow, leaving the remainder in her
to keep her free, until we reached the ship.
Whilst off Mahratta, we fell in with the Lloyd's,
a ship that had been out eighteen months, with
only six-hundred barrels. It is miserable to he
in a ship that is not fortunate in whaling ; but
much more so in some than others. All discon-
tented from the captain to the cook. The pros-
pect of. making a long voyage upon short allow-
ance : and perhaps after all, an unsuccessful


one, depresses the spirits. It somewhat resem-
bles a tradesman’s family ashore ; when business
prospers, and all goes smilingly on at home, con-
tentment follows, —and “ vice versa.” This is
well known to unfortunate and deserving thou-
sands.
It was in this cruise that I saw, for the first
time, and I hope it will be the last, a person
afflicted with that dreadful scourge of sailors in
long voyages, the sea scurvy. It generally at-
tacks the lower extremities first; causing in the
first stage of the disease, a swelling and slight
discoloration of the affected part; which conti-
nues gradually increasing, causing stiffness, con-
traction of the parts, extreme weakness, and me-
lancholy. Land is the only cure for it. Before
we got into port, the cooper’s mate’s legs were
as black, as if they were in the worst and most
loathsome state of mortification. It was the
opinion of our surgeon, that had we been detained
a week longer by calms or contrary winds, his
fate would have been sealed. Every morning,
by the surgeon’s advice, he was set up to the
middle in mud : this is considered, by most sailors.


as the best method of assisting the cure, and is
universally practised in these warm countries.
He recovered in about three weeks after landing
him at Ternate. One of the worst evils at-
tending this complaint, is, that old wounds that
have been healed for a considerable time will
break out afresh : and cuts or bruises, which at
another time would be considered trilling, turn
to obstinate sores ; and it is rarely they will
heal until the disease is removed. I am told
that the scurvy is scarcely known, except hy
name, among any other than south seamen ; and.
in them it is frequently owing to the carelessness-
and indifference of the captains, in not procuring
the necessary refreshments for the ship’s com-
pany ; and keeping them long upon deck in rainy
weather with wet clothes.
The Moluccas and Timor Islands are very sub-
ject to rain, so much so, that I have not had a
dry monkey jacket to stand at the wheel with for
a fortnight. I heard some of the Recovery's crew
say, that they had not so much rain during the
three years they were out, as we had in the three
months we cruised here.


Turtle we frequently saw whilst in these seas,
floating in the suu, on calm days. The only way
of catching them alive is to dive under them,
seize them by their flippers, and capsize them on
their back, it being otherwise impossible to hold
them, they have then but little power in the
water,
The mate lowered his boat one day after a
large log of wood; and found on the top of it,
basking in the sun, a small bawk’s-bill turtle,
which curious species, I suppose, is so named
from the formation of its beak, being,exactly si-
milar to a hawk or parrot. The shell is very
fine, and divided into parts or,scales, which, if of
any size, is as valuable as .tortoise-shell.
Captain Hinxton, of the Cyrus, arrived upon
this coast soon after us, from Guam, one of the
•Ladrone Islands. He had been very unfortu-
nate, and met with an accident that had nearly
cost him his life. He came on board with his
arm in a sling, and was assisted up the side. In
fastening to a large whale, one of the harpoons
had got foul of the line, and as it was jerked


out of the boat by the whale, one of the barbs
caught him by the shoulder, dragged him out of
the boat, and carried him down ; but fortunately
it by some means tore out and disengaged itself.
When be rose to the surface, he was picked up
by the boat, which had instantly cut from the
whale, in a state of insensibility. Upon exami-
nation, it was found that the arm was dreadfully
mangled and torn, close to the shoulder; and
from having no surgeon on board he had suffered
considerably.
Our surgeon examined the wound, and found it in
much better order than he expected ; considering
the difficulty of making a good cure of had wounds
in these long voyages.
You may perhaps have read of the extraordi-
nary voracity of sharks ; but it is scarcely cred-
ible, nor should I have believed it, unless I had
been an eye-witness of it. Being uncommonly
numerous among these islands, one night when
we had whales made fast alongside, they were so
thick about ns, attracted by the blood, that my-
self and another killed and wounded upwards of
sixty, by darting what south seamen call a spade>


with a line bent on to it, at them. It is made
very sharp at the three parts forming the
triangle, and is used for cutting up the blubber,
into small pieces, previous to its being mixed
for trying out.
Some of the sharks, after being cut so dread-
fully, that half a fathom of their entrails were
trailing after them, would return again and tear
pieces out of the whales, as if nothing had
happened.
When I first saw a shark I was disappointed :
my imagination had painted him as a much more
formidable monster than he really is ; and also
considerably larger. I speak only of such as I
have seen, but I am told that some are of
immense size, in shore, upon the coast of Guinea,
in Africa, by persons who say they have seen
them.
I may safely assert now, that I have seen some
thousands, and the largest among them, did not
exceed eight feet, and as proportionable to its
length, as a fresh water pike is, with the exception
of the head, which as much resembles it, as the
fine sharp head of a greyhound does that of a


bul]-dog. The head of a shark is short, thick,
and very strong ; the nose does not taper off, but
is shaped like a half moon ; and the jaws are
the same. Its eyes are very much like those of
the cat. The gills are differently constructed
from any fish I have yet seen ; consisting of a
set of valves, something resembling a Venetian
blind. The jaws are furnished sometimes with
three rows of triangular, sharp, and finely serra-
ted teeth ; but it appears to me, from examining
the jaws of many we caught, that only the inside
rows can be depressed or elevated at will. The
outside tier I have always seen erect; whilst the
inside arc mostly found lying flat, imbedded in
a kind of soft skin, apparently provided by
nature for their protection.
Although cuts and wounds about the body
■seem to take so little effect on these numerous
and troublesome attendants upon whalers, yet
they are easily despatched, if struck upon the
back of the neck; immediately under which the
heart is situated. I have seen three species of
them, the brown, the blue, and the tiger-shark,
of which the blue is generally the largest, and
K


more numerous in higher latitudes, than either
of the other species; but they are found most
plentiful in warmer climates, and upon the line.
About this time we were all out of tobacco.
Persons who have spent all their lives ashore,
are but little acquainted with its value at sea.
With many of them, a pipe, a sociable pipe, by
the fire-side forms no inconsiderable share of
their enjoyments. With Jack, a pipe and his
own lively humour forms his poor all at sea. It
is his bond of sociability. After the work of the
day is over, in fine weather, all hands assemble
on the forecastle ; and the pipe is the prelude to
the yarn, of his home, or his friends. In bad
weather it shortens the time, warms and comforts
him. Alone, in the night-watches it is his com-
pany, and tends to raise agreeable reflections in
his mind, of the friends he hopes to enjoy a whiff
with again. In short, it is his tie of content-
ment, without which he has no pleasure. But,
it was all gone, and we were forced to make
the best shift we could; this shall, however,
serve as a kind of memento, not to neglect ray
stock of tobacco, any future voyage.


Whilst cruising among the Moluccas., I went
ashore but once ; and that was for the purpose of
wooding, upon a small uninhabited island, called
Mayo. The ship stood in till within about three
miles of the shore, when we lowered three boats.
We pulled along shore, the beach being very
rough and rocky, in search of a place to land,
until we doubled a point, when we discovered a
canoe fishing ; the inmates of which were rather
alarmed at our presence, and tried to paddle
ashore before our boats came up ; but finding
they could not escape they hove to. The
canoe was within four inches of the water’s edge;
and had on board five or six men, besides two
or three women and children, from the island of
Ternnte, which is distant about a day’s sail. It
is astonishing how these people crowd their little
frail barks, and make long trips in them from
one island to another ; but it is to be observed
that the climate is so calm and peaceful, that
there is little danger of their being lost from bad
weather at sea. The man who seemed to be
their leader, immediately knew Captain May,
having seen him there on a former voyage. The


captain requested him to inform some friends of
his at Ternate, naming some Dutch gentlemen,
that they might expect to see him soon ; which
we were very glad to hear, feeling a great desire
to get into port,
We at last discovered a small bay with a white
sandy bead), where we landed. There is a little
stream of beautiful clear fresh water at this
place, and it is so situated that a ship can water
at it very conveniently ; I believe this is not ge-
nerally known.
The land is high and very steep, covered with
noble trees, from the very summit to the water’s
edge : and the underwood so thick that we could
not penetrate any way inland. We found no wild
fruit trees, with the exception of one, which bore
a red fruit about the size of an apricot, and some-
thing like a crab-apple in taste; we devoured
many of them without experiencing any ill
effects.
Being under the lee of the land, as we pulled
along shore, the bottom presented a most beautiful
appearance, being completely covered with vari-
egated coral rock. I would have dived to procure


some specimens, but from the extreme clearness
of the water, the depth was so deceptive that I
found it impossible.
We cut down what trees wo wanted, Jack is
not very economical of the timber, and filled our
boats ; pulled to the ship ; manned the mast-
heads ; and got under sail again in search of our
friends of the sperm kind.
It is a very imposing sight, in fine moon-light
weather, to set out on the jib-boom, in the still-
ness of the night, and view the majestic dark
mass moving like a living being through the
water, heaving its head as if proudly to the swell;
whilst the white foam, under the hows, inter-
mixed with the aniraalculre, seems studded with
sparks of fire, as the vessel ploughs her way.
Since leaving Copang we had been infested
with an insect on hoard called Cock-roaches;
and they had increased to such a degree latterly,
that it was almost impossible to sleep below for
them. They, however, served for one good pur-
pose, and that was, they destroyed all the bugs ;
a plentiful stock of which some person had favor-
ed us with. I was entertained one day by over


hearing a question and answer between an Irish
tar and another shipmate; “ I would’nt growl at
the beastly things ” said one, “ if I could find out
what use they are sent for—can you ? ” “ Why
to eat the bugs to be sure,” was pat’s reply.
“ Well, but after all, what use are the bugs,” was
the next question. “Why to feed the cock-
roaches with, you lubber.” This answer was
conclusive.


CHAPTER IV.
Sail from Mahratta—Whales—Ternate—Custom-house
regulations—Tidore—Narrow escape of a seaman
from drowning.
Finding the whales beginning to get scarce off
Mahratta, the captain steered for the straits of
Malacca ; where wo got four or five tolerably
good fares of oil.
One day, just as we espied a school of whales,
the Cyrus hove in sight, to windward. Our colors
were immediately hoisted as a signal for whales,
and we lowered three boats; the captain stopped
on board to heave in the heads of three we had
killed the day before. The chief mate got fast
first; but the harpoon tore out; he then struck
another, which sounded out all bis line, and ran


four or five miles to leeward, before bo could
come up with it and kill it. They had towod.it
within three miles of the ship, when the weather,
which had been delightfully fine all day, turned
squally, accompanied with rain and wind, which
soon rose a heavy sea, and they were obliged,
after staying as long as their safety would admit,
to cast the whale adrift; which we lost.
The second mate’s boat, (which I belonged to)
caught two whales. _ The first was killed very
easily, with the dart of the harpoon, which
struck it just under the fin ; the best place for
killing them. The second was the most trouble-
some we had during the cruise. When we fast’
cued to it, it -was surrounded as far as we could
see with whales, eight or ten in rows, moving
gently through the water, so close as to rub side
and side. 1 never before saw any so quiet. They
seemed to be, what south seamen call, stagnated.
They still surrounded the wounded whale, and
prevented the boat getting -close enough to do any
execution with the lance; we were therefore
forced to be towed for a considerable time ; the
whales sometimes going clown and running under


water, then coming up again, and so on, till we
expected every instant one of them would rise
under our boat and capsize or smash her ; at last
we got a chance to dart a lance, which unfortu-
nately penetrated the fin hone, and stuck so first
that we could not draw it; we were, therefore,
obliged to cut the lance warp, and leave it stick-
ing in it. The whales went down again, and af-
ter running about a mile, we found ourselves
adrift; upon hauling in the line, it was found to
be bit through, from its coming athwart some
whale that took it into its mouth. We looked oat
for the same whale again, upon their coming up,
and soon distinguished it by its spouting blood,
and by the lance and iron poles sticking up in
him; another harpoon was bent on the line, and
a lance laid ready to dart if possible. The whales
now began to single out; and there was only one
lying alongside the wounded one: the harpoon
was darted and then the lance ; the poor whale
rolled over and over in agony before the lance
could be drawn out, taking turns with the warp
round its body, which compelled us to cut away.
Nothing was now left but one harpoon and the
I.


boat spade ; which is used for cutting a hole to
reeve a rope, when there is occasion to tow a
whale to the ship. We hauled up again, and
stuck our remaining harpoon into it, with but
little effect; and most likely should have lost it,
had not one of the Cyrus’ boats passed by and
lent us a lance.
The loose whale still faithfully stuck by its
companion, nor could we force it away, although
it was repeatedly wounded for that purpose, until
the other was dead.
The third mate had in the mean time killed
another, and had taken it with the first one we
killed alongside ; we got within a hundred yards
of the ship just as a squall came on ; had we been
much farther, we must have taken care of our-
selves, and cut adrift.
The spring of the year being now well ad-
vanced, and the season for whaling off Japan
coming on, it became necessary to determine
either to stay ou the Timor coast, or commence
our passage for Japan. The latter was resolved
' upon 5 and we put about for Ternate, to water
and refresh ; the scurvy beginning to make its


appearance among us, as I have before men-
tioned.
On the passage to Ternate, we came up with a
Malay prow, one of the most curiously rigged
machines, I think, that ever was set afloat. And
the number of men, women, and children with
which it was crowded was no less astonishing.
Forty-seven had ventured themselves some hun-
dred of miles from land in this tub, which I am
unable, in words, to give any idea of. The captain
lowered his boat, and went on board her, to
purchase fruit or turtle, should they have any to
spare. They belonged to Ternate, and had the
Dutch and Malay colors flying, on little poles,
fore and aft. The captain purchased some cocoa
nuts of thorn, but they could not spare many, as
the nuts and a little rice, were all they had on
board for their own subsistence.
We had the land in sight for six days before
we got into the harbour, owing to the calms
which prevail at this season of the year; and
what rendered it more insupportable was, that
the cooper’s mate had the scurvy so bad, that


we were afraid he would die, with that in sight
which would cure him.
The beautiful island of Ternate, which is con-
sidered by far the most healthy and fruitful of
this group, is situated in 0. 50, N., 127-32. E.
It is separated from the neighbouring islands of
Tidoro, Motir, Gilolo, &c., with which it is
nearly surrounded, by narrow channels, gene-
rally not exceeding from three to six miles in
width, and which the extreme height of the land
on each side renders apparently much less.
These passages are enlivened by numerous ca-
noes and prows of the Malays from the islands,
trading to Ternate, all with the Dutch and Ma-
lay colors flying, on a stick, at the head and
stern. They are not allowed, by the Dutch, to
come along side and trade with any but their
own ships.
The bay, which is formed by these islands,
and which has entrances from the north and
south, is, I should think, about fifty miles in cir-
cumference ; and if bottom could be found in all
parts, it would he one of the finest harbours in


the world. Whatever may be your ideas of the
scenery of the isles in the Great Pacific, you can-
not fancy a more enchanting spot, than this bay,
with its numerous prows, canoes, &c.; and the
mighty ships of the European, proudly towering
above all.
The climate, as I have before mentioned, is
very fine and healthyalthough the mid-day
sun is too hot for Europeans. But that is their
time for repose, after the enjoyments of the hath.
The mornings and evenings are cool and refresh-
ing ; and the bay, at those times, is as smooth
and unruffled as a polished plate of silver. The
reflection of the lofty mountains of Ternate, and
the shipping in the water, combined with the
stillness which usually reigns at those hours, re-
minded me of the luxurious descriptions of the
Eastern Nations, so frequently met with in the
Arabian Nights and Tales of the Genii; such
were my ideas at first, but, by degrees, these im-
pressions wear off.
I observed several times a very beautiful ap-
pearance of the mountain in the evening, after
a warm day ; the upper region of which, for


about two thirds down, was covered with a light
fleecy vapour; which exactly resembled an im-
mense gauze veil, lightly thrown over it, through
which the trees might be indistinctly seen ; and
the remainder was as clear and distinct as at any
other time, the outline not being shaded off, but
clear, as if the veil was cut off at that place,
The mountain is volcanic; about two miles
high ; and is very productive in those parts where
it has been cultivated ; which are not one twenti-
eth part of it; and, like all I have seen, is co-
vered with wood to the summit. The little
patches, which have been cleared, are conspi-
cuous, from the various hues of their produce, hall-
way up the side.
"VYe came to anchor in sixteen-fathom wa-
ter, and about half a mile from shore ; there were
inside of ns, at anchor, two large barks under
Dutch colors, commanded by English skippers ;
a Manilla brigantine ; two small sloops ; a Dutch
sloop of war, of twelve guns ; and three small
schooners belonging to the place.
There is a bamboo jetty, and a custom house,
as it is called, of the same materials, at the


landing place. No person is allowed to carry any
article ashore without paying a duty; nor to
enter the town, until a passport has been granted
him by the Governor. If any foreigner be
caught ashore without one, he is liable to be
seized and imprisoned. All English vessels are
compelled to keep a corporal and three soldiers
aboard, whilst lying here, to prevent smuggling ;
and the water casks are sounded by the excise
upon landing, to prevent any articles being clan-
destinely landed in them.
I understand that the Dutch are thus strict
with the English, principally because of the wild
tricks and pranks of many of the ships’ compa-
nies, when upon liberty ashore.
Not many years ago, a party of drunken sailors
quarreled with some natives, and in the night set
tire to their huts ; which, from the combustible
nature of the materials, spread rapidly, and did
considerable damage beforp it could be extin-
guished. Since then the governor has been
very cautious in allowing such unruly visitors to
land, unless provided with passports.


As soon as we came to anchor, all hands were
turned to, to get down the top-gallant-yards and
masts, for the purpose of shortening the top-
masts, and making other preparations for light-
ening the vessel as much as possible aloft, for
the Japan cruise. These were the more neces-
sary, as the ship was never very stiff; and it is
seldom ships escape in that sea, without heavy
■gales of wind at least, and very frequently hurri-
canes, similar to those which prevail at certain
seasons of the year in the West Indies. These
winds are called by the Chinese “ tyfong ” which
•signifies in their language, a mighty or irresist-
able wind. Our precautions were not found un-
necessary, as will be seen in the course of our
passage.
Here the chief mate was attacked with a vio-
lent fit of sickness, to the regret of all, and
lived ashore during the time of our stay.
As we could not have much recreation ashore,
we made up our minds to enliven ourselves
aboard. The poor soldiers were the butt of all;
and very many ingenious pranks were contrived


and executed, to their no small annoyance ; and
I must confess, no less to our thoughtless amuse-
ment. But what annoyed them most was, plac-
ing a man ludicrously dressed, with an old mus-
ket and bayonet, in the gang-way, who allowed
none to go forward without first applying for a
mock pass to one of the sailors on deck.
Notwithstanding the precautions to prevent
smuggling, means were found to run whatever
was desired, until the last week, when an adven-
ture happened which created suspicion, and spoilt
our false trading for the remainder of the time
we stopped here.
Pine apples arc plentiful and cheap at this
place, and they are certainly the most delicious
and highly flavored fruit I ever tasted.
The town is divided into two parts : one of
which is inhabited by the Malays and Dutch,
the other by the Mahomedans; and the fort,
which mounts upwards of a hundred pieces of
heavy cannon, is situated between them.
Every night, at eight o’clock the town is
patroled by a party of soldiers ; and all foreign
seamen from ships in the harbour, arc required
, M


to be on board ; and should they be in the least
manner disorderly, they are politely accommo-
dated with lodgings in the fort, for which atten-
tion, a donation of two dollars is demanded in
the morning, previously to their discharge.
The houses of the wealthy portion of the Eu-
ropeans, who reside upon this beautiful island,
are very elegantly furnished; the roof projects
on all sides, so as to completely screen them from
the sun, which renders them deliciously cool in the
heat of the day ; the luxury of which can only be
appreciated by those who have visited warm
climates.
Parrots, lowries, and cockatoos of all descrip-
tions, and of the most gorgeous and beautiful
plumage, can be procured here for a trifle ; para-
dise birds are also very common, though not
found upon the island ; many of their skins are
brought from some of the neighbouring islands,
stuffed, or more properly preserved, without
any regard to the shape of the bird, for the
sake of the feathers, which are very fine and
beautiful.


The boat to which I belonged w r as sent early
one morning across the bay, to a neighbouring
island “ Tidore ” to get a boat’s load of sand:
we set forward on our expedition with as much
pleasure and eagerness as a crew of young ad-
venturers would, to explore a newly discovered
land ; and, determined, at all events, to take a
ramble ashore before vve returned. After about
an hour’s pull we approached the shore, which
was rugged and mountainous, and covered with
thick wood to the water’s edge ; hut there was no
surf, or it would have been very difficult to land,
as the bottom was nothing but the most beautiful
coral. 1 brought two fine specimens away with
me.
We pulled along the coast for about a mile,
admiring the beauty of the view across the bay
of Tornate, with the shipping, and landed in, a
little creek, for the purpose of finding some na-
tives, As we proceeded, we found several huts ;
taking the precaution, however, not to stray too
far from the beach ; but the inhabitants were
absent; fishing, we supposed. We were just


upon the point of returning, when, as we cleared
a thick cluster of plnintain aud banana trees, we
espied a small hut on the mountain opposite us,
and caught a glimpse, as we thought, of some
females, who were, apparently, watching us from
their place of concealment. We were making for
them with as much haste as our naked feet would
allow us through the thick underwood and over
the rough rocks, when a young native joined us,
naked, with the exception of a slight and scanty
covering round his loins. He wore, at his girdle,
in a sheath made of buffalo hide, a long, thick,
and clumsy kind of knife, which,, apparently
from its weight, might occasionally serve for
a hatchet; he seemed rather uneasy from the di-
rection we were going ; and when we came into
the little footpath which led up the mountain, he
shot a little way ahead, and then suddenly turned
short round, motioned to us to proceed no. fur-
ther ; very unconcernedly at the same time
chopping off the small branches of the trees
which were within his reach, with great dexterity,
as if to give us some idea of the effectiveness of


liis weapon. We were wise enough to take the
hint, though with some reluctance; and returned
to the beach.
The land, as far as we could discern, was
thickly covered with wood, so much so, that
it is very difficult, for any but a native, to pe-
netrate it. We saw numbers of parrots and
cockatoos in flocks. Wild animals are no doubt
to be found in abundance in the inland parts,
as very small portions of it are cleared: the
principal food of the inhabitants consists of fish,
bananas, plaintains, &c.
One of our people, whilst lying at this place,
nearly lost bis life in swimming hack to the ship,
after having been on shore without leave. The
ship lay moored about half a mile from shore,
and there is always a strong current either to the
north or south, through the harbour, to allow
for which, it was always necessary to enter the
water a considerable distance above the ship,
when coming aboard. Through the darkness of
the night, he mistook a vessel lower down for
his own ship, and after discovering his mistake,
had to swim a considerable distance back against


the stream. When he regained the Japan, he
was nearly exhausted, and finding no rope to
come up the side, the fear of death overcoming
that of detection, he sung out lustily, when fortu-
nately a man happening to he awake on deck,
hove out a rope’s end, and saved him.
A few nights after, a large shark was seen
lurking under our starboard quarter; but even
after this, some were fool-hardy enough to swim
ashore, and one was caught by the “peons,” and
lodged for the night in the " calibose,” The
captain paid the fee, and in the morning he was
escorted down to the boat.
The neatness of the Dutch in their household
is proverbial. And that part of the town, which
is inhabited by them and the Chinese, confirms
it. The church is situated in the midst of a
pretty little lawn, built of brick and stone, and
white washed; as are all the houses both of
the Chinese and Dutch, which gives their exte-
rior a neat, comfortable, and homely appearance.
Their doors are never shut during the day, and
I frequently took the liberty of entering them,
and asking for a draught of water; that, and


every other little attention were always paid to
us, whenever we entered.
One of the chiefs of Tidore came to Ternate
whilst we lay there, in a large double canoe, co-
vered with mats to protect his chiefship from
the sun : the Dutch flag flying at the mast head,
and no less than six small Malay pennons in
various parts of her. She had a rudder on each
quarter, with a man at each, and was lined with
men, women, and naked children. Our handsome
stern seemed to attract great attention. The
approach of this important personage was an-
nounced by the beating of some instruments
heard at a great distance, like the Chinese
gongs.


CHAPTER V.
Passage from Ternate to the Japan Sea—Death of a sea-
man—Rainy weather at Sea—Dreadful gale—The
Squid—Melancholy death and funeral of a seaman,
struck by a whale—Arrive at the Sandwich Islands.
About the middle of May we left this delight-
ful little island for the Japan sea ; where most
ships, both American and English, depend upon
getting the greatest part of their cargo.
1 shall ever remember this cruise to Japan
with the deepest sorrow. It was there I saw
committed to the deep, the body of as bright a
seaman, and as kind hearted and upright a tar
as ever saw blue water ; cut off in the pride of
bis manhood, by a whale; and the gallantry and
good nature with which he bore his sufferings,
made the scene more affecting ; as we knew the


wounds to be mortal; and he flattered himself
with the certainty of recovery.
Wo had now been eleven months from Eng-
land, and had got seven hundred barrels of oil
in that time, which is considered as moderate
success. When a ship has got in as many hun-
dred barrels as she has been out months, it is
considered good success. We wanted eighteen
hundred barrels more to complete our cargo.
The weather was very bad on the passage, at-
tended with much rain. For three weeks the rain
was almost incessant. You can scarcely imagine
any thing more miserable, than rainy weather at
sen. A sailor has no shelter night or day ; and,
until it ceases, has no convenience to dry his
clothes. At night too, from the ship’s pitching,
and a slippery deck, he is unable to walk to keep
himself warm, but must sit cold, benumbed, and
wet, until the hour arrives when the other watch
relieves him. A pipe of tobacco at such times is
almost invaluable. “ Eight bells. Call the watch.”
‘‘ Aye, aye Sir ; ” accompanied with three heavy
knocks of the handspike over their heads, and,
“ all the larboard watch a-hoy. Eight bells
N


there, —rouse out, rouse out,” shouted louder
than ordinary down the hatchway, is cheerly
enough to those on deck, but is heard with quite
a different feeling by those who are below, warm
and comfortable in their berths. Jack gets re-
lieved, goes below, lights his pipe, rolls his chil-
led limbs up in the warm blankets in his berth,
and enjoys his hard bed with more zest than
those who know no hardship, and who seek re-
pose upon the softest and most luxurious down.
On the passage, many birds lodged on the rig-
ging and vessel, and were easily caught: they
betrayed no fear, and would eat insects, which we
brought to them, as unconcernedly as tame pige-
ons, out of our hands. They seemed to be quite
unacquainted with the sight of man.
On the 2nd of June we were in about 22 N.
and 134 E.; not far from whaling ground ; and
very fine weather. To make the ship more snug,
in case of had weather, the fore and mizen top-
gallant masts and yards, were sent down, and the
flying-jib-boom got in for the season. These pre-
cautions were just taken in time, for on the 3rd,
it blew one of the most tremendous and awful


hurricanes, perhaps, that ever was experienced.
The first part of the night of the second it was
calm, very dark, and lightened considerably. In
the middle watch a light breeze sprang up, very
unsteady, and veering all round the compass ; it
increased, coming in puffs and then dying away
to a comparative calm. We thought mischief
was brewing, from the hollow mournful sound of
the wind, as the gusts rose and died away.
The captain came on deck about four o’clock
in the morning, and not liking the appearance of
the weather, ordered the fore and mizen top-sails
to be taken in, and to double-reef the main-sail,
and heave the ship too until day-light.
The wind and sea gradually kept rising from
this time, and at ten o’clock it was blowing a
complete gale of wind; the ship pitching very
heavy, hut still making very good weather of it.
At eleven o’clock it was blowing tremendously
hard, and the ship lying over very much; the
main-top-sail, fore storra-stay-sail, and mizen
had been taken in some time before. Not a
stitch of canvass could be kept set. The sea
was now one entire sheet of white foam, ami


the roaring of the wind was so piercingly loud,
that, although you were standing alongside the
officers, you could not hear their,loudest shout.
The wind was indeed wild ; and none but those
who heard it and saw that day, would believe the
power of that element.
At twelve o’clock the gale was at its height,
and the scene then was beyond description. The
ship’s lower yard-arms touched the water, and
the water was up to the hatchways on deck. The
axes were now held in readiness to cut away the
weather rigging on a moment’s warning. All the
lee bulwark was washed away; the starboard
quarter boat was torn away with the davits, and
dashed to pieces under the counter; the mizen-
top-sail clue-lines gave way, and the yard was
blown to the mast head, and the new sail blown
to ribbons in a moment; nothing being left but
the bolt rope. The fore-top-sail and main-top-
gallant-sail got partially adrift, and we were in
expectation of seeing the mast go every moment.
But our sticks and rigging were good and new,
or they never would have stood that day’s gale.
It was impossible to get aloft whilst the violence


of the storm lasted. The second mate and my-
self attempted to get aloft, to secure the fore-top-
sail ; and however incredible it may appear, and
I would not have mentioned it, had I not been
an eye witness, the mate had no sooner got
in the fore rigging, than such was the violence of
the wind that the trowsers which he had on were
blown to pieces ; and such was the lifting power
of it, that we were almost compelled to force
ourselves down the rigging, after ascending half
way.
About three o’clock in the afternoon the wind
began to moderate ; and by twelve at night, we
had no more than a gentle top-gallant breeze.
The ship, considering her craukness, rode it out
remarkably well; and fortunate it was for us that
she was in so good trim; her lower hold being
filled up nearly with water, and but little weight
between decks, or we must have cut away the
masts or capsized, as she would lurch fearfully
into the hollow or trough of the sea, being, at
times, nearly upon her beam ends, and the water
up to the hatchways on deck.


We all escaped with some slight bruises, with
the exception of the steward, who was not so
fortunate, being thrown from the ■weather side
down to leeward in the cabin, which dislocated
his collar bone. From the violent and incessant
motion of the ship, he suffered considerably after
the accident. A young manat the wheel was
nearly hove overboard; a huge lump of a sea
having struck' her upon the quarter, tore the
spokes from his hands, and sent his heels flying
over his head ; he was caught by the mate and
taken below, considerably bruised, but not dan-
gerously.
I had often wished to see a gale of wind, from
motives of curiosity, that I might behold nature
in all her terrific grandeur; I have been grati-
fied, but I never wish to witness another. This
was one of the very few instances in which I
found the reality to exceed what I had imagined,
from either description or conception.
G. A, Stevens’ storm is powerfully descriptive
and vivid: I hear' the howling of the tempest
almost when I read it; —


“ Now tile dreadful thunder’s roaring !
Peals on peals contending clash !
On our heads fierce rain fails pouring !
In our eyes blue lightning flash !
One wide water all around us,
All above us one black sky !
Different deaths at once surround us !
Hark! what means that dreadful cry ? ”
Our oldest seamen, and some had sailed on
salt water for nearly forty years, declared they
might have been in a heavier sea, but in such is
hurricane they had never been before. From the
state of the ship it was impossible to work the
pumps ; and she was getting into worse condition
every sea she lurched into, from the water she
took in at the hatchways and down the com-
panion. Had she been an old ship instead of a
new one, this, in all probability, would never have
been written.
A few days after the gale, we saw the
“ Cortes,” a very fine American ship, from New
Bedford. She suffered considerably, having
lost her mainmast, besides sustaining many
other damages.
From this time until the 21st of September,
we bad the most delightfully fine weather du


ring tho voyage; and in that time, we killed
■whales, making to the amount of eight hundred
barrels of oil; all of the male or large kind,
averaging from sixty to eighty barrels each.
We spoke the ship Tamar’s boats one day
after killing a large whale; there had been nine
boats in chase of it, from different ships; one
of which lost a poor boy a few days previously,
from the line getting foul of him, and dragging
him out of the boat, when fast to a whale; he
was never seen after.
I saw a very rare natural curiosity the same
day : rare from the perfect state of preservation
it was in ; what sailors call “ squid a kind of
fish found alive only at great depths of the ocean,
and is the principal food of the sperm whale, It
was disgorged by the whale in his agony whilst
lancing him, and was taken into the boat entire.
The length of it was about four feet, of a jelly-
like consistence, and milk white; long strings or
fibres extended from its head and stern; and at
the root of the fibres, in the thickest part of the
body the head is situated, with a large brown and
strong hooked beak, resembling a parrots’. I.


expected to have got the bill, as I hauled it into
the boat; but the captain’s claim proved stronger
than mine, and I lost it.
Whilst on Japan, wo fell in again with the
Cyrus; she had been tolerably successful, and ns
we soon learned was homeward bound. The mate
of her, after we parted company off Mortay, was
struck in a severe squall by lightning, which very
much disfigured his face.
We killed two large whales one day this
month ; the chief mate one and my boat the other.
We were lying in the boat, waiting for the ship
to run alongside and make the whale fast by the
fluke rope, exulting in our success, when to our
mortification it sunk, and we were obliged to cut
away the line to prevent the boat being carried
down by it. Instances have been known of boats
being carried down by the sinking of dead whales,
and ail hands perishing, when the ship has been
at too great a distance to render assistance.
One beautiful day towards the latter end of
July, the second mate got fast to a large whale,
there was just breeze enough to cause a ripple
upon the water, and make it cool and pleasant in
o


tbe boat. Two harpoons were driven up to the
shaft in him; the boat’s nose, in our eagerness,
was now' on the top of his back ; “ starn ! stnrn
all! for your lives!” cried the mate ; the boat
shot astern with our back strokes, and got clear
of his formidable tail or flukes.
Soon after the chief mate came up and fast-
ened also ; the whale shewed wild play, lashing
the water into foam, and spouting with great
violence. The blood was also gushing in tor-
rents from the wide gashes made by tbe har-
poons. About one o’clock in the afternoon a
third boat came up, and gave him another har-
poon. The poor animal now attempted to
escape from his tormentors by sounding to tbe
depths of his native element, but in vain, for tbe
barbed irons still bung tenaciously, and from tbe
strain kept upon the lines attached to them only
aggravated the wounds. He soon came to the
surface again, and made off to windward with
bis utmost speed, towing the three boats after
him with ease, through a sea of foam and blood.
From this time until dark, one or other of the
boats was alternately* hauling up upon its


line, close alongside, and lancing him ; but
with little effect, all the harpoons being too
far aft; consequently the boats could not haul
sufficiently forward, to reach his vitals with the
lance.
The crew and mate of our boat never desisted,
until every plank on one side of her was stove
by repeated blows, and we could hardly keep her
free by baleing, when we were obliged to cut
adrift. Neither of the other boats experienced
any material injury; a man was cut across the
eye, and knocked down, by a sweep of the tip
of his flukes, but was not much hurt. They
were obliged to cut at last; it being so dark
that we could see neither boats nor ship until
the signal lights were shewn.
Thus one of the largest whales I saw during
the voyage escaped, with seven harpoons and
one lance sticking in him. The next day we
discovered a dead whale, blown to an immense
size, and surrounded with sharks ; our boat was
lowered to see if it were worth picking up ; hut
it was too much decomposed, and the stench


from such an immense mass was intolerable.
We had some fine sport in killing the sharks.
On the 22nd of August, we finished stowing
down upwards of two hundred barrels of oil.
Pretty good success had attended us for some
time previously ; and in the evening, after knock-
ing off work, we were enjoying our grog and a
sociable pipe of tobacco, of which we had got a
few pounds from an American whaler some days
before; congratulating ourselves upon our good
fortune, and of our chance of again soon seeing
our native country and friends, and
“ The girls that love a sailor.”
As is usual at such times, the tale went round,
the lively, the laughable, and the dreadful. At
the conclusion of a melancholy yarn, in which
one had been describing the horrid death of an
unfortunate man who perished in a whale’s jaws,
the monster rearing his bead out of the water
with the victim struggling in his mouth, my
late unfortunate friend Williams observed,
that “ lowering a boat amongst whales, was
like a battle, no man could depend upon re-
turning again, and it wauld be well for all were


they always suitably prepared.” The observation,
most probably, would never have been thought of,
but for the dreadful accident which happened on
the following day. Poor Williams was my watch-
mate, and what sailors call “my chummy, ” or
confidential friend; and a more independent
principle, combined with an upright and be-
nevolent heart, I do believe never actuated any
man’s conduct.
From the age of seven years he had constantly
been at sea; in almost all the descriptions of
craft, from the humble fishing boat to the rich
and proud Indiaman. His want of learning he
often lamented; but with trifling assistance he
had learned to write very passably; and had
gone through the first rules in arithmetic with
ease since we had been out. But whatever his
wants were in that respect, they were richly com-
pensated by good sense and sincerity; and his
knowledge of seamanship, was allowed to be of
the first class.
I may be thought partial, and I do not deny
it: for in the dull mid-watch he used to he my
companion: I have often bitterly thought of


him; and am not ashamed to confess that I
have sometimes involuntarily paid the tribute of
a tear to his memory.
About five o’clock in the morning of the 23rd>
being our watch on deck, a roan was ordered to
the mast head, to look out. He was scarcely
np, and looking carelessly round, when he sung
out, “ There she blows, there again.” " Where
away ” asked the mate. " About a mile off on
the larboard bow.” We now saw the white
column of water ourselves, blown up with such
violence as to resemble steam or smoke. All
hands were now roused out and the boats man-
ned. Williams belonged to the captain’s boat.
The boats went off in fine style, dancing cheerly
over the deep blue waves ; now rising on the
summit, and then gently sinking into the deep
furrow, left by the perpetual swell of the fathom-
less deep. The sun was just appearing above
the horizon, throwing his lengthened rays along
the surface of the waters: the ship was lying
with her raain-top-sail to the mast, majesti-
cally heaving to the swell; every object looked
cheerly. We were now within a few fathoms of


tlie whale, tho chief mate's boat ahead; our’s
was hove to, that we might run less risk of
“ gallying,” or frightening the whale. The har-
poons were “ given home " by his boat-stcerer ;
the whale shot violently ahead, and after a fen-
flourishes of his fatal flukes, he went down. The
line was soon run out; another was then bent
unto the first one, which, also, was nearly taken
out, when the whale began to rise. Both lines
together were four hundred and forty fathoms
in length. Our boat and the captain’s were now
left in reserve to commence the attack as soon
as he should make his appearance upon the sur-
face. He came up at some distance from the
first boats, and close to the captain’s ; he per-
ceived the whale to be vicious, and was particu-
larly cautious in approaching him, and manoeu-
vreing the boat so as to lay her in the least dan-
gerous position. The boat steerer darted the
first iron; the whale rounded up the after part
of his body in torment; the second was darted;
he raised the how of the boat out of the water
as he elevated his flukes, and then let them de-
scend with the speed of lightning and the force


of a cannon shot upon hor. The crash was ter-
rible ; we were at no great distance, and pulled
up immediately ; the boat was bottom upwards;
wc found the whole of the starboard bow, as far as
the mid-sbip thwart, taken clean away along the
keel, and floating about in pieces. The aft oars-
man, a young lad, was lying across the bottom
of the boat, apparently stunned, with his bead
drooping in the water. Some were close along-
side the whale ; and we were laughing to see the
eagerness with which they were endeavouring to
escape from such a disagreeable companion.
Poor Williams was supporting himself by one of
the oars, and sung out for the sake of God to
take him into the boat. We pulled towards him,
thinking he might have received some slight
bruise : “ My leg is broken, take me in gently, ”
said lie, as a man laid hold of him: how he
managed to get him over the boat’s gunnel
alone I cannot imagine. As he lifted him on
board I saw both legs dangling powerless; when
he set him down in the boat, I saw the extent of
the injury. The whale’s flukes had, apparently,
struck him in an oblique direction, below the knee.


The left one was torn from its socket, wrenched
nearly off, and immediately below it was a dread-
ful deep cut across the calf of the leg, with the
bone protruding through it. The right leg had a
similar wound, with the bone splintered, but the
knee-was not hurt. Close to the ancle was a
cruel wound, where the flue of a harpoon had
dragged out the sinews some inches. The right
arm was also severely cut, from a harpoon or
lance being driven into it. Scarcely any blood
flowed from the wounds ; I suppose from being
immersed so long in the salt water. “ Place me
easily ” said lie, as wc seated him on the boat's
bottom, and then looking mournfully at bis
mangled limbs, “O my God! never, never, shall
I be the man I was,” and be closed his eyes and
sunk his head back upon one of the thwarts.
The chief mate’s boat had now come along-
side us; after picking up the captain and re-
mainder of the boat’s crew ; the unfortunate man
was transferred into his boat, that we might
kill the whale, which was lying all the time with-
in four boats’ length of us, spouting and playing
with his flukes, as if conscious of the mischief he
p


had done. The captain burst into tears when
he saw the dreadful condition the poor fellow was
in ; all were deeply affected. “ What is to be-
come of me now captain, how am Ito support
myself'?” “Do not distress yourself on that ac-
count, you shall be provided for,” answered the
captain. The unfortunate man did not appear
to suffer much bodily pain at this time; he seem-
ed to he musing upon the future consequences;
and was apparently more distressed in mind, from
his melancholy reflections.
He was soon alongside the ship, and hoisted
on board in a chair ; the carpenter was assisting
in lowering him down upon deck, “chips’’said
he, “ what kind of hand are you at rigging wood-
en legs? I’m thinking I shall want a pair of
them.” The doctor, a young man, who had never
performed an operation before, now examined the
wounds. The left leg was amputated immediately
above the knee; the other leg was set and dress-
ed, and the patient placed upon a bed. From
the heat of the weather he could not be kept be-
low, especially as coolness was favorable to his
recovery. An awning, or kind of small tent, was


therefore rigged upon the quarter deck, by
spreading a top-gallant-sail upon some spars,
and he was placed under it.
In the mean time we had killed the whale;
and brought him alongside about twelve o’clock ;
he, however, gave us work to do ; hut it all
arose from being too much intimidated, not haul-
ing well up, and giving the lance effectively. 1
think this whale, before he died, must have
spouted a ton of blood: the water in his differ-
ent tracks, was crimsoned, without exaggeration,
for several miles; at last he turned fin up:
and we were as glad at his death, as sailors
are after a naval victory.
Williams, at the time of the accident, pulled
the bow oar ; and the boat-steerer was standing
up in the head of the boat; his escape was next
to miraculous ; a severe bruise upon the ancle
was all he suffered; hut it was a long time be-
fore he perfectly recovered, for the scurvy at-
tacked the injured part; nor was it until he had
lived some time ashore, after arriving at Woahoo,
that the black swelling and stiffness left it.


Poor Williams bore his dreadful suffering with
the firmness and gallantry of a tar ; his cheerful-
ness seemed revived ; and to the last moment he
would indulge in occasional sallies of blunt hu-
mour ; at intervals, he was melancholy, and his
observations, were then, very affecting, when his
thoughts wandered to home ; to his widowed mo-
ther. At his request I was spared to attend upon
him, during my watch on deck, in the night time.
From the second night I felt convinced that
unless the other limb was amputated speedily,
death would surely be the consequence. At that
time, a period of nearly forty hours since the ac-
cident, no circulation had taken place in the parts
below the wound. The foot was cold, stiff, and
considerably discolored ; I repeatedly pinched it,
asking him what part I touched ; but he was not
susceptible of the least feeling in the part. Above
the knee, also, began to look very red and in-
flamed, and became exceedingly painful, Ah
though no surgeon, I knew perfectly well, that
these symptoms were the certain forerunners of
mortification. I mentioned this to the surgeon,
but could not understand what he intended to do.


and 1 believe he did not know himself. A sharp
look-out was kept for ships, that he might have
the benefit of another surgeon’s advice; but
none hove in sight: and whilst hanging in this
state of indecision, the last chance of saving life,
was, I think, lost. When at last amputation was
resolved upon, it was found that gangrene had
extended above the hip, into the body ; and my
unfortunate shipmate’s doom was sealed. I can
never, satisfactorily to myself, account for the
surgeon’s conduct. It would be only aggravation
to suppose a professional man ignorant of the
rapidity with which gangrene spreads in such
cases; and surely he must have been aware of
the extent of it, when he ordered the victim to
be brought forth for the operation ; and, if so,
why was the poor sufferer put to unnecessary
pain in preparing for it, when he knew it was
too late to be of any avail 1 In charity, I can
only suppose he had not nerve sufficient for the
occasion, and delayed, until the last moment, as
he was inexperienced in such cases, in the hope
of falling in with assistance ; and the melancholy
result was as I have described it. The amputated


limb was doing extremely well; and it is but
justice to observe, tbe operation was well and
quickly performed, considering the many incon-
veniences attending it on board a south seaman.
When we were sliding him out upon tbe hatch
be was laid on, from beneath tbe awning, “ Here
I go like seven bells half struck,” said he, making
use of a common sea-phrase.
He requested to be raised up to look at his
leg, the bandages and splints being removed ;he
was at first refused, from the loathsome state it
was in ; but obtaining his wish he exclaimed,
“What a limb for a man to have hanging to
him : avast there Jim ” to the boatswain, who
was placing it on a pillow, “ you overhaul my leg
as you would the shank of a seventy-four’s an-
chor.” He was now acquainted with his fate;
hearing it with the utmost serenity, only slowly
ejaculating, “Then God have mercy on my soul,
and help my poor mother.” He was again placed
under the awning'—sent for the captain—made
his will—and at six o’clock in the evening was
no more. He died without a struggle, lamented


as a brother by his shipmates, to whom he was
doubly dear, as a sincere, kind-hearted,and trusty
friend, and a gallant and unflinching watch-
mate both in labor and in danger.
The last night I attended upon him was misera-
ble indeed. He was suffering the most excruciat-
ing pain in his right thigh, as the inflamma-
tion, I suppose, spread towards his vitals. He
described it to me, as if a burning sheet of red-
hot iron was bound upon the part. “Oh ! ” said
ho “ what I suffered in cutting off my limb, was
a flea-bite to this.” From the first he was
constantly craving for water every two or three
minutes, which he would insist upon having,
although contrary to the surgeon’s orders ; and
in his state it would have been barbarity to
deny it.
The morning following his death, his body was
consigned to the sailor’s last home; the unknown
depths of the dark blue sea. It was carefully
sown up with his bed, in a hammock, to which
ballast was made fast at the feet, and then
placed upon a hatch in the waist. The union
jack was used as the pall: the ship’s bell tolled,


and all hands were summoned to attend the fune-
ral rites of their late shipmate. The main-top-
sail was now laid to the mast, and the surgeon,
who was evidently much affected, read the service
for the “ burial of the dead at sea,” in a very
impressive manner; when he came to the words
“we commit thy body to the deep,” it was
launched into the ocean.
All the pageantry and shew attending the
wealthy on shore, never, never would leave such
a solemn impression on the mind, as committing
this son of the ocean to his vast and lonely
grave ; and although the “ panoply of woe ” was
not there, it was not missed. The genuine
tear of manly sorrow accompanied the splash of
the waters, —that closed over him for ever.
% !ft % # % $ #
We killed but three large whales from this
time until we “up sticks ” for Woahoo, the
capital of the Sandwich Islands. Hard blowing
weather began to prevail in this latitude, and as
it was not possible to do any whaling, we com


menced our passage about the middle of Septem-
ber) the time of the equinoctial gales ; and after
a very rough passage, arrived in sight of the
islands on the 29th of October, 1832. Immense
shoals of the alhacore and boneto attended the
ship all the season on Japan, and followed her
to within a day’s sail of the islands. The benefit
of these fish following ships is particularly felt
by south seamen, who frequently cruise a Jong
time without refreshing ; and, I have experienced
it, a piece of fresh fish is then relished as a
great dainty.


CHAPTER VI.
Island of Owyhee—Anchor at Woahoo—Missionaries—
Public worship —Depraved habits of the natives—The
Tarra —Language—Arrival of the Recovery.
The island of Owyhee, situated in 29. 28. 10.
N,, and 155. 56. 23. W., is celebrated as the
place where the unfortunate Captain Cook was
killed, in an affray with the natives ; it may be
seen, in clear weather, at a great distance, from
the immense height of the mountainous portion
of the island. It is worthy of remark, that the
natives consider it as the severest reproach, to
be reminded of his death.
When we came to anchor in the outer
harbour of Woahoo, there were nine sail
of English and American whalers, lying


tfiere. And the inner harbour more resembled
an English port, than the idea I had formed of
the Sandwich Islands, there being no less than
nineteen sail of whalers, besides traders to the
north-west coast of America ; and small schoon-
ers and other craft, which trade from one island
to another, belonging to the chiefs, and manned
with natives.
The day was delightfully fine, on which we
came to anchor, with a light breeze; and the
run along the land was peculiarly exhilirating to
us, whose eyes had been cheered with nothing
but sea and sky, for the last six months I was
also viewing in reality, one of those isles, where
ray imagination had so often accompanied Cook.
But how changed since the time of that cele-
brated navigator is impossible to conceive.
From the narrowness of the passage, between
the shoals of coral rocks, ships are towed into
the inner harbour early in the morning, before
the land breeze springs up, at which time it is
generally dead calm. Ships inside send their
boats, as well as those that are outside waiting
their turn ; and it has a very pretty appearance,


twenty or thirty boats in line, towing a majestic
vessel over the gently undulating surface of the
glassy waves ; and the cheerly song of the sailors
gives life and animation to the scene. There is
a regular pilot here, an Englishman, of the name
of Adams, who got his branch from the com-
mander of a frigate, who was out here, some few
years back. Ships, however, sometimes strike
upon tile rocks. It was here the Recovery got
damaged last voyage, from bumping, just at the
entrance of the passage.
The harbour, inside, is about half a mile
across, still water, mostly as smooth as a fresh-
water pond ; and is considered one of the safest
in any part of the world. Quays are built along-
side, where ships can lie and discharge their
cargoes. A fort, after the European fashion, is
situated close down to the water’s edge, com-
manding the harbour, and well mounted with
cannon. It is commanded by a chief, who acts
as magistrate and judge with the natives, and
likewise with Europeans, in cases where natives
are concerned, such as fights, riots, &c., which
frequently occur between them and half drunken


seamen. This fort is the newgate of the place.
On a hill, at the back of the town, is another
fort, with very heavy guns mounted ; said to bo
very strong, and the place where the treasure of
the king and chiefs is deposited. Be that as it
may, it is jealously guarded ; for two or three of
my shipmates were not allowed to ascend above
half way up the bill towards it, before they were
stopped by a soldier, and compelled to return.
The natives have learned the use and value of
money; and few people are more avariciously
fond of it; or know better how to buy cheap and
sell dear. They are the jews of the South Seas,
in buying and selling ; and for most articles of
dress, will seldom give more than the prime cost
in England; and very frequently will not offer
even that. This, however, is not the case at the
other islands, where there is not so much inter-
course with Europeans. It is calculated that on
au average not less than a hundred sail have re-
freshed here every year. The natives, conse-
quently, are becoming more enlightened every
day; and Europeans, instead of being, as for-
merly, considered an order of superior beings.


are frequently made their dupes. The change
has arisen, in a great measure, from the wild and
extravagant conduct of seamen when ashore.
The,town is of considerable extent, and very
populous. The huts of the common orders are
built the same as a thatched shed in England,
with clay walls: they consist of but one apart-
ment, where all, old and young, male and female,
indiscriminately sleep together upon the mats,
with which the floor is covered. In fact, modesty
is a feeling they are totally unacquainted with.
There are fourteen or fifteen public houses and
hotels : the latter for the especial accommodation
of captains and officers, elegantly furnished, with
billiard rooms, &c. They are all licensed by the
king, upon payment of a certain sum ; two or
three belong to him, which are conducted by
English or Americans, at a salary.
Neither grass nor trees are seen in the neigh-
bourhood of the town, owing to the nature of the
soil, which gives it a dry, desert, dreary appear-
ance, as if scorched by the sun ; but among the
bills and valleys the country is richly luxuriant,
from which the town is supplied with fruit, &c.


The houses of the missionaries are neat little
buildings, after the English fashion. The church,
which is erected at a small distance from their
dwellings, is a long thatched building, with seve-
ral doors and wickets to admit air and light. A
pulpit is erected opposite the main entrance;
chairs and seats are provided for the accommo-
dation of Europeans and the chiefs; mats are
spread for the natives, upon which they squat
down in a position which would soon fatigue such
as were not accustomed to it.
I was astonished to see the dresses which
some of the natives sported on Sunday. All
the chiefs were dressed as respectably as an
English gentleman would desire to be, and their
wives and daughters were also gaily decked out
with silks and satins, Chinese parasols, &c.;
but there appeared a ludicrous want of taste in
the method of wearing their finery. Many wore
their silk scarfs and shawls over their gown, in
the same manner as their original “ tappa,” that
is, by making it fast round their middle, so that
it covers as far down as their knees, by tucking


in the two corners, leaving the open part on
one side of their body.
These fashionables were sadly contrasted by
their humbler and poorer sisterhood, clad in
their native “ tappa a manufacture from the
bark of some tree, very much resembling coarse
paper, and like it, easily torn. The dress of
the men consists of nothing more than a “mara”
sufficient, and barely that, to cover their
nakedness. They sometimes wear a “ tappa,”
which is thrown carelessly over one shoulder,
and made fast under the opposite arm-pit.
The intermixture of so many gaily attired
“ wihenas,” or females, with the half dressed
beings of the other sex, had certainly a very sin-
gular and curious appearance to us.
The service was performed first in the lan-
guage of the natives; and the singing was, to my
ear, peculiarly sweet and harmonious. It was
the first time I had heard, for many months, the
silvery and soft tones of woman or man either,
in adoration of that Being, on whom it so parti-
cularly becomes seamen to rely. And although


many, who were with me at the time, affected,
merely from bravado, to ridicule the worship of
Him, in the persons of these lately enlightened
south sea islanders ; yet before two months had
passed over our heads, an event occurred, and
they were the first to implore mercy, when
eternity seemed inevitably staring us in the face.
After the native service was concluded, a very
interesting young woman, apparently about
eighteen years of age, informed us, with the
greatest politeness, that the English service
would commence in about half an hour, which
she would be happy to see us attend. The
attention thus paid us was very gratifying, and
■we returned at the appointed time.
The notice of a beautiful female is, at all
times, pleasing, but more particularly so in climes
like this; to meet one of our own complexion
and language ; it was like finding a lovely rose
in a rugged wilderness, its beauty the more
admired from the loneliness of its situation, and
its sweets the more valued from its rareness.
That the missionaries have done much good
in restraining, and in some cases putting a stop
R


entirely to what may be justly called, their na-
tional vices, is not to be doubted. But to this
day, many of the natives will sell the persons of
their wives or daughters to any stranger that
will satisfy their cupidity.
It is considered as no disgrace by the women
to be known to have their favorites, even after
being married by the missionaries ; and it is sel-
dom the husband troubles himself much about
the matter; jealousy appearing to be unknown
to them.
Most of the females are very fat and indo-
lent, and swim much more gracefully than
they walk. As swimmers and divers they
are certainly to be admired. They will leap
from any height and swim a great distance under
water. A favorite amusement of the natives
is playing among the breakers, upon the
surf board, which is about seven feet long
and two broad, upon which they lie flat on
their face, using their hands as paddles. With
this board they get outside the rollers, which
sometimes set in here with great violence, they
then paddle towards them, taking care to keep


end on, when the surf takes the board and shoots
them over the rollers with astonishing rapidity.
Should they slue broadside on, it capsizes and
whirls them round and round, but this seldom
happens to any but seamen, who are sometimes
induced to partake in the amusement.
Women with children on their backs, girls,
boys, and men are constantly wading among
the shallows and rocks, inside the reef, in
search of shell-fish, which with “ pow-e,” forms
their favorite and constant food, from the highest
to the lowest class. “ Pow-e ” exactly resem-
bles paste, and is made from a vegetable which
grows here very plentifully, called “ tarra.”
This useful and highly nutritious vegetable
is cultivated in small patches, which are hanked
in, and kept constantly covered with water to
the depth of about eight inches, which is con-
ducted into them from the numerous little
streams descending from the hills. It is about
the size of a small turnip, and will not flourish
unless watered as I have described. When fit
for use, the natives pound it with stones into a
thick firm paste, which they afterwards mix with


water as occasion requires. The family sit
round a calibasb of this food, which they convey
to their mouth by dipping their two fore fingers
into it, and cut many graceful flourishes and
waves of the hand to prevent its dropping be-
fore it reaches its destination. It appeared to
me a very natural method of feeding the infant,
the mother dipping her little finger into the
“ pow-e, ” with which she fed the child until
satisfied.
Dogs are considered a delicacy and great care
is taken in fatting such as are intended for the
table. They are fed upon “ pow-e, ” and are
washed and combed with the greatest attention
by the women ; who often carry their indulgence
so far as to allow the animal to lick the food
from their mouths.
Their language is particularly easy to learn.
During the short time we lay here, almost all
acquired a smattering of it, enough to get our*
selves into trouble, or to conciliate, as we choose
best.
It is remarkable, but there certainly is a great
similarity in the language of many of the Islands


situated at immense distances in this vast ocean.
For instance between the Sandwich Islands,
Otaheite, and New Zealand.
The Recovery, Cap. Morgan, arrived off the
island whilst we lay here ; hut did not come to
anchor. They sent a boat ashore, and I then
learned for the first time that my brother was on
board of her. The chief mate went on board
in the afternoon in his own boat, and I went
with him. Few things ever gave me more plea-
sure than meeting him in this remote part
of the globe. Ho was well and hearty, and
seemed to like the change in life which he had
made. The ship lay off the land that night, and
on the following day he came ashore with the
captain, and stayed with me until the evening,
when we took our farewell until chance should
again throw us together.
Here the person wiio steered the boat I be-
longed to ran away from the ship: he was a bold
and excellent whaler. It was supposed that an
attachment for some female ashore induced him
to leave.


CHAPTER VII.
Sail for the kingsmill Group Islands—Terrific Gale—
Seaman lost—Ship in extreme danger and much dam-
aged—Proceed for Port Jackson to refit —Narrow es-
cape —Arrive at Tongataboo—Tragical Incidents—
Passage to Sydney.
On Saturday, December 3rd, we hove up our
anchor, making fast to an old vessel, with an
hawser, waiting the land breeze to take us out.
A beautiful breeze sprung up about ten o’clock,
and we glided out of the harbour, being saluted
and cheered by every English ship as we passed
by them.
After getting a few miles from the land, steer-
ing south, being bound for the Kingsmill Group
Islands, the breeze freshened considerably;
and we took in the first reef of the topsails.
The breeze continued all the following day, and


blowing strong towards night, the topsails were
double reefed and the fore and mizen top-gallant
sails taken in. The weather continued much
the same, blowing heavy squalls at times, until
Friday morning ; the mizen top-sail occasionally
clued up and furled.
On Friday the weather looking very dirty, and
the wind increasing, the ship was hove to under
a close reefed main-top-sail, fore storm stay-sail,
and main stay-sail. The top gallant yards were
sent down, every sail was well secured with
preventer gaskets, and the bow boat taken in.
The gale continued increasing, the wind chopping
about to all points, and a high sea running.
About nine o’clock in the evening the ship lurch-
ed very heavily into the trough of the sea down
nearly to the leading block, tearing away the
starboard quarter boat, the lee gangway board,
and part of tbe lee bulwark. The wind
increased terrifically; tbe ship lying down and
rolling so heavily as to keep the lee rail and
most part of the deck continually under water,
taking in great quantities down the companion
and sky-light, which was washed away. We


were now compelled to start about fire tuns of
water, which were lashed on deck, and heave the
casks overboard. The fore top-mast stay-sail
split and was torn to atoms. The main top-sail
and main stay-sail were taken in; the ship
being at times on her beam ends, and pitching
dreadfully. The wind at length rose to a complete
hurricane, and was so piercingly loud, that the
orders of the officers could not be heard, and it
was only by signs they could be understood.
Soon afterwards the tryworks were washed away,
and the bow boat torn in two, leaving about three
feet of the stem, which was secured to the ring-
bolts by the main hatchway. The steward had
an almost miraculous escape, for coming up out
of the cabin, he had just set his foot upon deck,
when he was washed over the side, and the ship,
at the next lurch took him on board again ; and
when he recovered he found himself upon his
hands and knees in the place where the tryworks
had stood. He was much bruised and had a
very painful swelling in the knee, which disabled
him for a considerable time afterwards.


About one o’clock in the morning, a sea struck
her on the weather how, which shook her from
stem to stern. She seemed going down stern
foremost, heeling over, and not being able, appa-
rently, to righteu herself. The binnacle and com-
passes were knocked away, with nearly every
moveable upon deck; and the poor fellow who
was standing at the wheel, was washed overboard
and never seen afterwards. It was a critical mo-
ment, and a few minutes more of indecision,
would, most probably, have left the fate of the
Japan a mystery. The order was given to cut
away the weather rigging of the mizcn-mast, and
it soon went over the side, with a crash which
was heard above the roar of the tempest. The
weather quarter boat went whirling over our
heads at the same time like a balloon, so pow-
erful being the wind, that it broke the lashings
and straightened the hooks by which it was
secured-
When the roizen-mast went the ship righted
for a second or two, but again went down on
her beam ends, “cut away the main-mast”
shouted the captain, “ quick! quick 1 for your
s


lives,” and it was with great difficulty done, for
such was the power of the wind, that the axe
could not bo steadied in the hand to strike twice
in the same place. The main-mast soon went
with a loud crash, carrying with it the fore top-
mast, top gallant-mast, Jib boom, &c., leaving not
a single spar standing, with the exception of the
fore-mast.
The ship now slowly Tightened, and upon
sounding the pumps there were about seven feet
water in the hold ; nearly all of which must have
been taken in at the companion and skylight, for
her bottom was found as tight next day as when
launched. The fall of the main-mast crushed
the two boats which were lashed upon the skids
over the quarter deck, and left us without a boat
to lower down in case of an accident. This was
about two o’clock in the morning, and by seven
the wind had died away to a common breeze.
After pumping the ship, we had leisure to ex
amine into our losses, and to clear away the
wreck of the masts and rigging. It was very
disheartening when day broke, instead of our
gallant and noble ship, to behold a helpless hulk,


rolling in the trough of the sea, without a sail
to steady her, and many hundreds of miles dis-
tant from any port where it would he possible
for us to refit, or, to make jury rigged; for so
many of our spare spars had been lost in the
hurricane, that we could never have made suffi-
cient sail to beat to windward.
It was found, upon inspection, that the ship’s
hull had suffered but little; but the ornamental
work upon the stern, and figure head was nearly
all carried away ; as was also the starboard
quarter gallery. The starboard bow was con-
siderably battered by the flue of the best bower-
anchor, which, it is supposed, was knocked adrift
by the fall of the fore top-mast. It was, fortu-
nate the chief mate ventured forward soon after
the masts went, and discovered it, for a passage
would soon have been made through, from the
violent motion of the ship, had he not cut the
stopper away with an axe.
At the time we met with this gale we were
about seven hundred miles to the southward of
Woahoo, N. 12. 52. A native of the Sandwich
Islands, who was shipped in the room of our


hoat-steerer, very innocently stripped off his
shirt just after the mizen-mast was cut away, for
the purpose of swimming, in case the ship should
sink. “ Marmora moca idolar, ” as the poor
fellow expressed himself.
After weighing all circumstances the captain
determined upon making for Port Jackson, as the
most eligible port of any in the South Seas for a
ship in our distressed condition ; and the only
one where we should he likely to meet with what
we wanted for a refit.
We soon got a spare top-mast stepped on the
stump of an old mast, for a main-mast, with top
gallant and royal-mast over it; the stump of
the fore top-mast, which was broken in the fall,
was got up for a fore top-mast; and a mizen
top-sail set for a fore top-sail; with a flying jib
for a jib upon the stump of the old jib boom ;
a spare jib boom was rigged and got on end for a
mizen-mast, and a try-sail set for a spanker;
this, with the addition of a main top-mast and
top gallant stay-sail, was all the canvass we could
make upon her ; and fortunately we found her
much better under this rigging than we expected.


Three days after losing our masts, and before
the carpenter had time to repair a boat, I had a
narrow escape. We bad only the fore-sail upon
the ship, going dead before the wind, when
I slipped overboard out of the raizen channels.
1 was a considerable distance astern, but the
captain, with great presence of mind, bent a
whale line upon the carpenter’s stool, and hove
it overboard, slacking out the line until I reached
it. But the weight of the line was so much from
the quantity paid out, that the stool was scarcely
sufficient to keep it afloat ; and I found myself
very much exhausted by the time I was hauled
alongside, being most part of the time under
water. The captain gave me a lecture for my
carelessness, and thought it would be a warning
to me in future.
About the middle of January, 1833, we made
Tongataboo, one of the Friendly Islands, situate
, in 21. S. 36. S., and 175. 1. 50. W., two vessels
in sight. One proved to be the Toward Castle,
of London, Captain Bren ; and the other a small
bark fitted out from Hobart Town, called the
Caroline, both sperm whalers.


We got a very fine spar from Captain Bren,
which served us for a main yard.
A few weeks before we made Tougataboo, a
sailor belonging to the Toward Castle was put
to death by the natives of that island, for stab-
bing one of the chiefs, in a dispute which arose
when upon liberty ashore. The chief died in a
few hours, being cut and wounded in many places
with a large knife; the man, though severely
wounded, might have recovered, but the natives
wreaked their vengeance upon him, putting him
to a cruel death ; and it was with great difficulty,
and through the protection of one chief, that the
whole party escaped being massacred. The bar-
barian by birth, though not in soul, with a sense
of justice, which would have done honor to more
civilized people, considering the provocation and
the excited state of the natives, observed,
that “it was no good to mat-te, mat-te, (kill)
all white men for one bad.” He had them
strictly guarded all that night, and the following
morning got them safe off to the ship. Since
this tragical affair no boats have been ashore,


or probably we should have procured a stock
of yams and fruit.
The Toward Castle bad on board a mate, and
the cooper of the Lady Rowena. These men
had been left ashore at Eoaa, an island situated
at a small distance from Tougataboo, owing to
some dispute with their captain ; upon which our
captain agreed to give them a passage to Sydney.
The cruelties that the Lady Rowena’s crew
were guilty of, when cruising off New Britain,
without the least pretence, were the most revolt-
ing and inhuman I ever heard of.
It cannot be supposed that the inhabitants of
these places will neglect to retaliate, the first op-
portunity they have it in their power. The fate
of the Oldham furnishes a memorable instance
of this, and ought to serve as a lesson to sailors,
to treat the natives they may be trading with,
with humanity and kindness; especially when
we consider how often by shipwreck, they are
thrown dependant upon them for life and sub-
sistence.
The Oldham was lying at anchor at Wallis’
Island, one of the Friendly Group, situate in


13. 30. S., 176. 5,W., trading with the natives
for fruit and refreshments, about June or July,
1832. Most of the seamen got ashore, and
partly by force and persuasion, brought a number
of women on board, whom they afterwards treat-
ed in a cruel and brutal manner, which compelled
the greater part of them to jump overboard and
swim ashore. This, with other insults and cruel-
ties roused the spirit of the natives, who boarded
her in the night, and, at the first onset, des-
patched nearly all the crew ; some of whom flew
up the rigging into the tops and cross-trees.
Their feelings may be more easily imagined than
described, whilst witnessing the massacre, hear-
ing the shrieks and groans of their messmates on
deck, thus falling under retributive justice, and
awaiting, in dreadful suspense, their own doom, so
soon as the work of destruction should be finish-
ed below. This being soon despatched, they
did not long escape the searching eyes of men
whom they had so guiltily transformed into mer-
ciless enemies. The cabin was ransacked, cart-
ridges and muskets found, with the use of which
these people are well acquainted, and the


remainder of the Unfortunate, but culpable, men
aloft, were picked off and brought down like
birds by the fowler.
Out of two or three and thirty hands, only
a boy, belonging to Rotherhithe, escaped, who
secreted himself in the hold among the casks,
and when hunger brought him out, was saved
by one of the native girls, to whom he had
made some trifling presents, when acting as
cabin boy. The Zebra, eighteen-gun brig, after-
wards visited the island and brought the hoy to
Sydney; and our carpenter, who is well ac-
quainted with his friends, had letters for him.
The vessel was hauled aground, stripped by the
natives of whatever took their fancy, and burnt.
All hands were employed, during the passage
to Sydney, in fitting rigging, strapping blocks,
making spun-yarn, and various other prepara-
tions for refitting, so soon as we arrived in port.
We saw, several times, great numbers of whales
close to the ship. It was very mortifying to see
that for which we had come so many thousand
miles, almost within our grasp, and yet unable
to possess ourselves of it.
T


We had the gratification, however, to find our
ship answer considerably under her jury masts,
much more so than we had anticipated ; the
more especially with strong breezes ; sometimes
going free, at the rate of nine knots per hour.


CHAPTER VIII.
Off Sydney Cove, New Holland—The Phenomenon of
the Brickfielder—Refitting—Aboriginal Inhabitants of
New Holland—Description of Sydney—Incidents-
Sail from Sydney.
On Sunday, the 10th of February, to our great,
joy, iu the afternoon, we sighted the land of New
Holland ; and about dusk the following evening
were within ten miles of the lighthouse, which is
situate upon the south head, at an elevation of
nearly three hundred feet above the level of the
sea, forming an entrance to the cove.
The coast, formed of enormous masses of per-
pendicular and overhanging rocks and cliffs, pre-
sents to the view an appearance of wild and
rugged grandeur; and the roar of the vast
Pacific, whose tremendous surf breaks, in white


foam, mast-head high, against these everlasting
bulwarks, can he heard at Sydney Town, a
distance, inland, of eight miles from the heads.
Just before dark, off the harbour, we spoke
the Brothers, she had just cleared out, bound for
London. We hacked our main-yard, and she
crossed our stern; we gave an account of our
mishap, and requested to he reported at Lloyds*
Our captain not being acquainted with the har-
bour, and the weather looking squally, with sharp
lightning from the southward, declined standing
any further in, against the advice of the captain
of the Brothers, who assured him he might do it
with perfect security, as a pilot would shove off
upon firing a gnu or two, and showing a light;
at the same time warning him of very heavy
squalls, which the appearance of the weather
foreboded from the southward, called on this
coast “ brickfielders.”
About nine o’clock in the first watch, it blow-
ing at the time a very light breeze, all hands
were roused out to shorten sail, and although very
dark, we could see the squall coming by the white
and luminous spray which it caused on the sur


face of the water. By the time we had got all
sail clued up and furled, it struck us with a vio-
lence sufficient to have taken the masts from us
again, had we been caught unawares with can-
vass on her.
There was a curious phenomenon attending
these squalls, which much surprised and aston-
ished us ; the heat of the wind was as great and
nearly as suffocating as would be experienced
when lying to leeward of a vessel on'fire, or
standing in the heated air of a brick-kiln. The
ship was kept before it to gain a greater offing
from the land, which, in the morning, was
scarcely visible off deck.
Owing to had winds and these squalls, which
were sometimes accompanied with whirlwinds,,
obliging us frequently to shorten sail, we did not
fetch up the ground we had lost until the follow-
ing Thursday, when being seen from the light-
house, a pilot soon after boarded us, to the great
satisfaction of every man aboard.
We came to anchor about four o’clock in the
afternoon, unbent all our sails that evening, and
then had leisure to look around us upon the


romantic beauties of this large and beautiful
harbour,
Port Jackson or Sydney Harbour, is situate in
33. 51. S., and 151. 16. E., and about twelve
miles to the northward of the celebrated Botany
Bay, where the French have erected a pillar to
commemorate the memory of their lamented and
enterprising traveller, La Perouse, that being the
last spot where he could be traced to have
landed.
Sydney is, I think, with the exception of Ter-
nate, one of the most picturesque spots I have
seen. From the entrance between the heads to
the town, is a distance of about seven miles ; the
harbour forming fine bays,, interspersed with
little islands covered with trees, varying from
one shore to another, between one and four miles
the whole way; and from thence branching oft’
into deep bays and coves, with water, sufficient
for the largest vessels, for several miles, leading
to the village of Parramatta, where the governor
resides.
Parramatta presents a pretty and lively ap-
pearance, from a distance, coming up the harbour ;


bat upon a nearer approach, the irregularity
and singularly rough and rocky nature of the
place detracts from the beauty, but adds to the
novelty of the scene. The harbour is command-
ed by two small, but strong, forts, which add
much to the appearance of it.
We found the Eliza Francis, lying at anchor
in Cockle Bay, the captain of her having put in
on account of the mutinous and discontented
state of his crew ; arising from the badness and
small allowances of provisions. Five of her
hands were punished with imprisonment on board
the hulk, and nearly all the remainder left the
ship voluntarily. This is one out of innumera-
ble cases of the kind, where men are driven
almost by starvation, to acts which sometimes
nearly affect their lives, and ruin all prospects of
making a voyage, to the great loss of the owners
and all hands on board.
The Sunday following, we all had permission
to go on shore; with orders to be on board iu
time for work on Monday.
When we returned to work the ship was haul-
ed alongside a wharf and sheers raised prepara


tory to taking out the oil, for coopering, and
getting the stumps of the old main and mizcn-
masts out.
"We were allowed three pounds of beef a man
per day, with vegetables, &c. whilst in Sydney;
meat being only three half-pence per pound; and
five shillings per week pocket money, which was
sufficient for us to spend a very comfortable
Sunday ashore every week ; cape wine costing
only from eight-pence to fourteen-pence per pint,
whilst good porter varies from one shilling and
four-pence.to two shillings per quart. The colo-
nial flour is excellent and great quantities are
brought from Van Dieman’s Land, varying, ac-
cording to its quality, from eight to ten shillings
per cwt. Potatoes are very scarce and dear in
Sydney, although they are plentiful in other parts
of the country.
The first thing that struck me upon going
ashore, was the wretched appearance of the
aboriginal natives, covered with rags and dirt.
So attached are they to their own customs and
manners of living, that they cannot be induced to
change them. They gain a wretched subsistence


by begging, fishing, &c. They seem to have an
innate aversion to work, or certainly they could
have been tempted to make some improvement
in their condition, during a period of forty years.
For the purpose of fishing, they are supplied
with a boat by the governor, and can have it
repaired, at any time, by taking it to the dock
yard. They are very dexterous in striking fish
with a kind of spear, of four branches or points,
which they dart with astonishing swiftness.
They have no regular dwelling or huts, but sleep
most frequently in their boats, which they make
fast in some place where the rocks or trees afford
a shelter from the wind and rain.
The women have sometimes an old gown to
cover them, but are more frequently wrapped
up in a piece of old tattered blanket, sometimes
with their infant child hanging to their back,
partially protected from the weather in a kind of
bag, forming a part of the covering of its mo-
ther, after the manner of the gypsies in England.
The natives who are seen in the vicinity of
the town of Sydney, seldom wander far from its
TJ


precincts. They can all, from their infancy, al-
most speak English as fluently as their native
language ; and it has often made me smile, when
they have been quarreling with each other, and
have exhausted their native stock of abuse, to
hear them have recourse to the more energetic
English. I was astonished here to see the
females bathe with the greatest unconcern, before
strangers ; this frequently occurred, whilst we lay
alongside the wharf, during the hot weather.
The government leaves all quarrels and crimes
of whatever description, even murder, amongst
themselves, to he settled by their own laws.
But when they offend against Europeans, or, the
latter against them, the law takes cognizance of
it, as if both wore English subjects ; but such
cases very seldom occur.
The men are mostly armed with a heavy club
or “ waddy,” a fish spear, and “ hommarung.”
The latter is a very singular kind of weapon,
about two feet long, bent, so as to form nearly a
quarter of a circle, and peculiar to this people.
In the “United Service Journal,” Mr. Wilkin-
son thus describes it:


“ The Bommarang may be formed of any
tough, heavy wood, and is about three-eighths of
an inch thick in the middle, gradually tapering
off towards the extremities, and rounded on each
side from the centre until brought to an edge.
“When used as an offensive weapon, it is
usually thrown with the convex side outwards ;
but when intended to return, it is held in the re-
verse position ; although it will probably act in
either direction, if properly managed.
“ For the latter purpose, however, it should
be thrown from the hand at a considerable ele-
vation with a sudden jerk, so as to combine
with the projectile force a rapid rotation round
its centre of gravity. The rotation acts con-
stantly in opposition to its line of flight; so that
if a similar rotation could be, communicated
without any projectile force, the instrument
would move backwards : now, as the force with
which it is thrown is constantly diminishing
while the rotation continues, it must always
arrive at a certain point where these opposite
forces balance, or equalize each other. At that
moment the weapon would fall towards the


ground, were it not for its fiat surface and rota-
tory motion; but in consequence of the centre
of gravity being so placed that it will always
present its broad surface to the air, it cannot
descend perpendicularly, but slides down the in-
clined 'plane, up which it has been thrown, in
consequence of the whirling motion continuing
after the projectile force has ceased ; so that if
properly thrown, it will pass over the head of
the thrower, and often to a considerable distance
behind him.”
They are extremely addicted to liquor, and
when in a state of intoxication are very quarrel-
some, and frequently inflict cruel wounds upon
each other, with their “ waddys in fact, Ido
not recollect seeing one, with the exception of a
few women, but what bore the marks of some of
their drunken squabbles.
From the number of small vessels trading
from Sydney to New Zealand, for flax, and the
convenience of the Bay of Islands, for refitting
and watering ships employed in the sperm whale
trade, a great many New Zealanders, belonging
to different ships, are seen at Sydney.


It is both strange and unaccountable, that
such a contrast should exist between these peo-
ple and the New Hollanders, The New Zealand-
ers, are industrious, intelligent, bold, and enter-
prising : whilst the former can no more be wean-
ed from their wretched mode of life, than the
swine from the mire. I know a New Zealander,,
who is now second mate of the Stanhope whaler,
sailing out of Sydney. Those who have sailed
with him, give him an excellent character, both
a? a whaler and officer. He can read and write
English fluently.
From the size of the island, the productiveness
of its soil, the spirit of its inhabitants, and its
convenient situation for trade with the rising co-
lonies of New South Wales, Van Dieman’s Land,
and the populous and productive islands of
Otaheite, and the Sandwich Group, it will pro-
bably become, at some future time, a place of
considerable importance.
There are many small schooners, &c., com-
manded and manned by natives, who trade in
beech-le-mnr, sandalwood, tortoise-shell, &c.,


with islands at considerable distances from their
own.
Menini, a native of Woahoo, carriec\, on a
trade, for some considerable time, with Wallis’
Island, until quarreling with the natives of the
place, when he and his crew were all killed.
But to return to Sydney. After taking a view
of the town, the principal beauties of which are
the grand and romantic views it affords of the
noble harbour, by which two thirds of it is nearly
encompassed. I could not help admiring the
labour and industry it must have cost to convert
such a rocky and rude uneven soil, into a
populous and generally speaking, well built
town.
In many parts the rocks are blasted to render
the spot more even for building, but there is this
advantage attending it, that what is excavated
is an excellent kind of freestone, and the expense
of blasting the rock, is more than repaid by the
materials it affords for building.
Several of the richest and most considerable
merchants in Sydney were convicts, who in
the infant state of the colony obtained large


grants of land for good conduct, and afterwards
were emancipated by the governor, that is, made
free, and independent of the colony, as an
emigrant, but not allowed to leave it or its
dependencies.
When a ship with convicts arrive in Sydney,
such of them as are not allotted out by the
governor to masters are sent to the prisoners’
barracks, where they are employed in different
kinds of work, as they are found adapted for it;
and according to their behaviour, so are they
treated, being divided into three classes, the
first or best possessing many advantages over
the others.
By steady, quiet conduct, they frequently
obtain tickets of leave ; that is, are allowed to
work for persons upon their own account, but
are obliged to muster at the barracks at certain
times, notified by the government.
Females are also treated nearly in the same
manner ; such as are not applied for being sent
to the factory, where they arc classed and em-
ployed according to their merits. For the punish-
ment of such as commit offences after arriving


in the colony, there are penal settlements, where
the prisoners are treated with great severity.
The greatest danger to be apprehended in
travelling through the country, arises from the
number of runaway prisoners, called bush-rangers,
who, notwithstanding the utmost vigilance of the
soldiers and police, still prevail; the immense
extent, and thinly inhabited state of the country
affording such facilities for concealment and
escape.
In the church-yard, at Sydney, is buried the
body of a celebrated bush-ranger, named Donohu.
I saw the grave in one of my rambles. He was
as celebrated for his narrow escapes, bold, da-
ring, and generous actions, as Robin Hood, of
Sherwood Forest. He was taken at last, but
not alive, being shot through the head, as he
would not surrender.
No person can travel through the country
without a pass ; as they would be liable to
be apprehended and sent back to Sydney as
runaway convicts. On all the roads leading
to different parts of the settlement, constables
are placed at convenient distances ; and on the


road leading from Sydney to Pararnata, there is
a small house for them, situate at every mile*
built with a bright yellow clay, which to a
stranger has a very novel and singular appear-
ance. .
The land, in the vicinity of Sydney, begins to
bear the appearance of the farmer’s industry;
being all well cleared of wood and brush ; form-
ing fine levels of pasture land, fenced and railed
in ; and the neat farm houses and cottages, sur-
rounded by the live stock, give au appearance
ef comfort ■ peculiarly English. The town of
Sydney contains some very handsome public and
private buildings. A theatre has also lately been
licensed by the governor ; and horse racing took
place whilst I was there.
The barracks are a large, fine, and very ex-
tensive building. The new church is handsome
but not so ornamental, as the catholic chapel
which is scarcely yet finished. A fine and ex-
tensive market-house is erecting, which, when
finished, will be a great ornament, independent
of its use. A great number of fine private houses
•are also rising in various parts, and the place
x


bears every appearance of a lively commercial
town.
Some idea may be formed of the increase of
trade, from the fact, that about six years ago,
there were only five or six whaling vessels sail-
ing out of Sydney, but now at the lowest compu-
tation there are between fifty or sixty. Great at-
tention has also lately been paid to the cultiva-
tion of the vine; and I understand with suc-
cess. Peaches are very plentiful and cheap,
which at present is the only fruit that is so.
The north shore is not cleared or inhabited,
and the wild rocky nature of the place affords
every facility for concealment, for it is covered
with trees and bush. It is astonishing how
trees take root and flourish where I should have
supposed a gooseberry bush would scarcely have
found depth of soil sufficient.
Towards the latter end of February, we had
nearly completed coopering and re-stowing the
oil; and soon after stepped our new main and
mizen-raasts. A new gang of main rigging was
also fitted, which had been sent out for the
London Merchant. She was lost in some part


of the coast of New Guinea ; a part of her crew
were brought into Ternate in a very distressed
state, by a schooner, whilst we lay in that
harbour.
At this time fresh hands were taken on for
those who had left the ship, but few of them
would work more than a week, not approving of
our ship’s bread; but after some good was got
from Sydney, plenty of bauds could be procured,
and the work of rigging the ship proceeded
rapidly.
Many ships, with male and female convicts,
arrived in the harbour during our stay; and we
heard from them that the cholera had made its
appearance in England ; and, also, of the rup-
ture with Holland. We had now the consolation
of knowing, that the misfortune, as we then con-
sidered it, of losing our masts, most probably
had saved us from a prison, in the Dutch East
Indies ; for had we not met with the hurricane,
our next port would have been Ternate,
where we should have been detained until advice
was received from Batavia, how to proceed with
us.


One night, whilst alongside the wharf, some
thieves entered the ship, and plundered the
third mate and surgeon of nearly all their
clothes; ransacked the cahin and got clear off,
without disturbing any person, although they
must have entered the berths of the officers
where they were sleeping, which are so small
that there is scarcely room for a man to move
without touching the person in bed.
H. M. Sloop the Imogene, of twenty-eight
guns, arrived in the harbour, about three weeks
after us, and sailed for New Zealand a few days
afterwards, taking a gentleman who had been ap-
pointed as consul or resident for British affairs
at that place.
A fine young man, boatswain of the Sovereign,
was found dead one morning, a short distance
from Campbell’s wharf, having fallen over a pre-
cipice during the night. Such instances are of
frequent occurrence, from the rough precipitous
nature of the land, in the vicinity of the
harbour.
■ On Saturday, the 11th of May, having got all
our stores in, and completed the rigging of the


ship, she was hauled from alongside the wharf
into the stream, preparatory for sailing. It
blow tremendously bard two or three days the
following week, so that we were obliged to send
down top-gallant yards; the ship dragged her
anchor, and when not more than her own length
from the rocks, the wind suddenly veering about,
she swung off shore. On Friday the 17th, the
new hands that were shipped signed articles, and
the Sunday following was appointed for sailing.
After hauling out into the stream, the chief
mate got intelligence, that an apprentice intended
leaving the ship and concealing himself until
after her departure. It was also found, upon
examining his chest, that he had taken the
greater part of his clothes ashore, a quadrant
was also missing, which the captain had taken
into the cabin for security, whilst we lay in the
harbour. A strict look out after him was kept,
lest he should escape ashore in some boat. Early
in the morning of the day appointed for sailing,
the chief mate was alarmed, before day-light, by
hearing the noise of a boat alongside the ship,
and upon coming on deck, found the starboard


quarter boat was lowered dowu and missing.
Upon looking round he perceived a boat at a
short distance, with some person sculling her
towards the north shore, having some oars
apeak, as the wind was blowing in that direction.
Another boat was instantly lowered and chase
given, and in a short time the boats returned
with the boy to the ship.
After breakfast we hove short, waiting for the
pilot to take us down the harbour. During
breakfast it was found that the boy had made
his escape, hut in what manner no person could
tell; whatever prompted a lad of his age to
persevere and resort to such bold manoeuvres for
leaving the ship, it is impossible to say ; it could
not be for harsh treatment: 1 can testify that
the boys were always treated with the greatest
lenity and forbearance, both by the captain and
his officers. It was thought that bis strongest
motive for staying at Sydney, was an acquaint-
ance he had formed with a girl, who had lived
as servant at Mr. Campbell’s, and to whom his
attentions had been very peculiarly directed for
some time previous to quitting the wharf.


The constables, as is usual with every ship
leaving Sydney, came on board about eight
o’clock on Sunday morning, to search the ship,
to ascertain that no convicts were concealed
on board, for the purpose of escape. Soon
afterwards the harbour master and pilot arriving,
we made sail, and got under weigh. The ship
was rigged as a bark, that rig being lighter
aloft, and more convenient than a ship rigged
vessel for any service.
It was a beautiful morning, blowing a fresh
and fair breeze, and wc soon glided down the
harbour towards the sea gates or heads, where
the pilot left us, giving us three cheers, which
wc returned.
We now began to feel the gigantic swell
which sets in between the heads, breaking mast
head high, in white foam, against the stupendous
crags which oppose its further progress.


CHAPTER IX.
Arrive at the Fejee Islands—Whales—Rotumah—Du-
prester’s Group—Tamana—Simpson’s and Dundas’
Islands —Orrori—Whales—Return to Rotumah; de-
scription of the Island, and of the manners and cus-
toms of its inhabitants.
We were now bound for tbe Kingsriiill Group
of islands, which are situated between ] 77- 17. bl-
and 173. 30. E. longitude, and from 2. 41. S. to
8. 15. N. latitude, and consist of about fourteen
in number. We bad cold, wet, and squally
weather for a fortnight after leaving Sydney,
steering to the eastward until we were within a
few day’s sail of the north cape of New Zealand.
The ship was then kept away to the northward,
and on Sunday, June 16tb, we saw one of the
Fejee Islands, which are situated in about 19.
15. S. and 175. 6. W.


Thu ship was close in with the land early in
the morning, but we saw no canoes or natives.
They are described as a very ferocious and war-
like race of people, by persons who have been
trading among the islands for tortoise shell and
bcech-loe-mar; the former they exchange for
muskets, powder, ball, &c., these articles now
being the standing trade at most of the south
sea islands in preference to any other article
whatever. In the afternoon we saw whales,
lowered the boats, and got a young bull, which
made us fifty barrels of oil.
On the 19th we saw whales again, the land
still in sight, gave chase, and after a long, and
severe pull, came up with, and struck two.
These whales tried out forty-five barrels. The
captain not liking to cruise among these islands,
from the many dangerous reefs with which they
are surrounded, extending to a considerable
distance from the land, the setting of unknown
currents, and the islands being very imperfectly
surveyed, and laid down in the charts, bore away.
On Saturday the 23rd, we were chasing whales
from day-light until five o’clock in the afternoon,
Y


and returned unsuccessful. The boat I belonged
to was the only one that had a chance; the
whales meeting us head and head, as it is called;
the harpoon went socket up into the body of the
whale, but from some cause did not hold. The
whales were more numerous round us this
day than I had seen before, but very wild and
would not allow the boats to come near them.
On Tuesday the 25th, we made the island of
Rotumah, situate in 12. 30. S. latitude, and in
177. E. longitude. Three canoes came olf, in
one of which was an Englishman, of the name
of Emery, who had been residing upon the island
for five years. He was once second mate of
the Toward Castle, but loft it at that place on
account of some disagreement. He is now a
chief man among the natives, with whom he has
great influence; and appears to have no desire
to return to his native land. The canoes brought
some cocoa-nuts, bananas, and a fruit called by
the natives " wees,” about the size of an orange,
and of a flavor something between that fruit and
an apple.


The natives are of a bright yellow color, well
featured, and very friendly in their manners.
Most of them could speak a smattering of broken
English, which they have learned from sailors who
have left different ships and are living among
them ashore. Mr, Emery told the captain that
a boy was still living, who ran away from him
when he was at this place before, in command
of the Ranger. The captain sent word to him
that he should be off the island again the latter
end of September, and would take him home
if he choose to accompany him.
Rotumah, when viewed from the sea, has a
very remarkable and beautiful appearance ;it is
very productive, and has the advantage of a fine
healthy climate; but there is no good or safe
harbour for ships.
We stood on our course, after trading with
the natives, who are excessively fond of tobacco
and pipes, for their fruit; and on the 27th, saw
Duprester’s Group, which have been but lately
discovered ; several canoes came off, with cocoa-
nuts, which the natives traded for pieces of iron


hoop, and fish-hooks. They wore the first
people I had seen who wore no covering what-
ever. They had no weapons with them, and
were very free and unsuspicious; they held up
in one hand cocoa-nuts, and the fore finger of
the other was hooked in their mouth, exclaiming,
“ raattow, mattow,” meaning fish-hooks. Their
canoes were very ingeniously contrived, consis-
ting of planks, sown together with small line
made out of the stringy husk of the cocoa-nut,
and measuring about twelve feet in length by
fourteen inches in breadth. It is astonishing to
see in what weather these poor unenlightened
people will venture five or six miles from the
land, in their light canoes, to obtain a few pieces
of iron hoop, a fish-hook, or, the ultimatum of
their riches, a knife.
These islands are very low, almost on a level
with the sea ; and their produce is very limited,
consisting chiefly of cocoa-nuts, which with fish,
form almost the only food of the inhabitants.
Those we saw were above the common size of
Europeans, copper colored and well featured.


Many of them had prominent or Roman noses,
which, in these regions, I had never observed
among any natives before.
In the afternoon of this day (27th) died Philip
de Roza, seaman, a native of Brava, one of the
Cape de Verd islands. He had been afflicted
with a lingering consumption for many months,
which reduced him to a skeleton, and carried him
off almost without a struggle. He was buried in
the evening of the same day. His body was sown
up in a white shroud, with a sufficient quantity
of ballast attached to sink it. After placing it
upon one of the main batches in the waist, the
ship’s way was stopped by laying the main top-
sail to the mast; the funeral service read, and
on the delivery of the words “we commit the
body of this our brother to the deep,” the sullen
splash of the fathomless blue water, announced,
that “he was gone to that bourne from whence
no traveller returns.”
On July 3rd, we made Chase’s Island, or Ta-
mana as it is called by the natives, situate in
2. 28. S., and 170. 20. E., being one of the south


ernmost of the Kingsmill Group. The natives
came off with cocoa-nuts, which they bartered for
iron hoop. Their canoes were constructed in the
same manner as at the island we left last. They
were not such fine men as at Duprester’s Group,
and were remarkable for the enormous holes
which they had stretched in their ears, wearing
a short tube in them, made by rolling up the
broad leaf of some plant. They seemed very
much at ease on board the ship, and favored us
with a specimen of their mode of dancing. They
accompanied their steps with the voice, clapping
their hands in a peculiar manner at the same
time upon their breasts, keeping time, and grad-
ually raising their voices to its greatest power,
then gradually decreasing to the end of the
dance.
One of them made us understand that he wish-
ed to go in the ship, to which the captain con-
sented, as we were short of a hand. He went
below until his countrymen departed. It seems
they had formed a very favorable opinion of
life on board the " kiboki ” ship; for another


ascended, and stationed himself upon the main
top-gallant-yard; and the captain was obliged
to send a hand aloft to fetch him down.
On the 11th we spoke the Toward Castle. She
had met with but moderate success since we saw,
her off Tongataboo, on our passage to Sydney.
We were in sight of land almost every day, and
several sail appeared ; but we had the fortune to
see very few whales.
On the 10th, saw Simpson’s and Dundas’
Islands, the former is situate in 0. 22. N„ and
174, 14. E., the latter in 0. 8, N., and 173. 45.
E., the natives came off with cocoa-nuts and
traded for iron hoop, as at the former islands.
The man we brought from Tamana, jumped over-
board at this place, and went ashore in a canoe
with the natives. It appears he was tired of a
seafaring life ; for he had a strong antipathy to
any kind of work or exertion.
The captain having given him a pair of draw-
ers, which he had torn a small hole in by acci-
dent ; a day or two after, when we were all down
in the boats after whales, leaving Tamana Jack,
as we called him, on board with the ship keepers.


he watched an opportunity, and with part of an
old knife, cut a piece out of a new blanket to re-
pair his drarvers. The owner, when he returned
on board, was not very well pleased with the
appropriation of his blanket; and chastised him
to prevent such occurrences in future.
These people, like most of the south sea
islanders, are excellent divers ; and will pick up
a piece of iron hoop when thrown overboard, at
a considerable distance from them.
The skin of most of the inhabitants of these
islands is extremely rough and scaly, arising,
I suppose, from the constant exposure to a tropi-
cal sun, and the poorness of their food ; consisting
of fish and cocoa-nuts.
From this time until the Cth of August, we
had almost continued calms. The sun was most
oppressively hot; and our decks wore heated to
that degree, that it was painful to walk barefoot
upon them, during the heat of the day. The
ship lay lazily rolling to the gentle swell of the
waters, with nothing to disturb its polished sur-
face, but the breach of the rapacious albacore
or fleet dolphin, in pursuit of their common prey,


the persecuted flying fish, or sluggish squid. The
latter fish has the singular power of being able,
when it finds itself pursued or in danger, to dis-
charge a dark brown colored liquor, which so
colors the water around it, that its enemies
cannot perceive it; thus, it frequently escapes,
when almost within the jaws of its pursuers.
The weather being too warm to sleep below,
the greater part of us reposed in the open air
upon deck, during the whole time we cruised
among these islands. I do not consider it a
healthy practice, especially for persons of a weak
constitution ; hut I thought it more unwholesome
to attempt sleeping in an atmosphere, from which
a person upon turning out of his berth, found
himself almost as wet as if he had received the
benefit of a vapor bath.
On the 6th of August, we perceived a vessel
trying out oil, as we judged by the smoke, at a
•considerable distance to leeward, which after-
wards proved to be the Juno, from Sydney. On
the 9th we went on board in the captain’s boat;
her decks were loaded with live pigs, which they
procured at one of the Navigator’s Islands, and
z


fed upon cocoa-nuts. Our captain exchanged
a musket for fourteen of them, that being
the rate at which they had procured them.
The meat was excellent, and lasted our ship’s
company a fortnight.
On the 20th, we were cruising off Chase’s
Island, called hy the natives “Orrori,” situate in
2. 40. S., and 177- 18- E., the natives, as usual,
came alongside in their canoes, trading with co-
coa-nuts, shells, &c., for small pieces of iron
hoop, in one canoe was a woman, with her
husband,'the first we had seen among those peo-
ple. The men, as I have before observed, wear
no covering whatever, the woman had one inge-
niously made of rushes ; it was made fast round
her waist, and reached nearly down to her knees ;
she wore no ornaments, nor any other covering
of whatever description. If the females ashore
are to be judged by the appearance of the one
who came on board us, if not handsome, they
arc certainly interesting. The dark languishing
black eyes of the females, of many of the islands
in the Great Pacific, are greatly to be admired.
They may be said to have caused the mutiny of


the Bounty ; and have induced many a sailor to
leave his ship, and live for years on the islands.
The inhabitants, on most of these islands, are
very friendly. I saw no weapons of any descrip-
tion among them : and yet they are in the lowest
state of civilization. How is it that mission-
aries are found upon almost every fertile and
pleasant isle of the Pacific ; even upon islands
where the natives have shewn the most decided
animosity to civilization ? And yet no attempt
has been made to civilize and instruct these poor
people in the arts of life.
One calm morning, whilst among these islands,
we witnessed a singular affray, between two of
tbe most formidable inhabitants of the deep ; a
bill-fish and shark. The bill-fish had been no-
ticed for several days chasing the albacore,
yellow tails, &c. The shark was very leisurely
taking a survey round the ship, when he was
attacked by the bill-fish, who with the rapidity
of lightning wounded him in several places, with
his formidable weapon, and obliged him to sheer
off; who notwithstanding his powerful treble


armed jaws, did not appear to have a shadow of
chance with his better armed opponent.
Our cruise among these islands having been
very unsuccessful up to the present time, the
captain thought it advisable to proceed to the
southward; and we steered south-east for se-
veral days ; but the weather being very squally,
with rain and a high sea running ; and continuing
to get worse we altered our course, and stood
back to the north-west again.
On the Sth, we lowered the boats after a
school of whales. The boat I belonged to fast-
ened to one, and got stove by a small whale,
which we had run the boat over to got at the
largo one. They hove to, bewildered, running
round and round, is if unwilling to leave their
wounded companion. The chief mate came up
next, struck one, when “ smash ” the boat was
stove the moment after. He was obliged to cut
his line and return on board. Wo stuffed an old
shirt in our leak, kept two hands bailing, and
soon killed the whale: fastened to another, and
killed that too. The other two boats, also, had


killed one each; making four whales in all,
which produced about forty-five barrels of oil.
A few days afterwards we experienced a severe
squall of thunder, lightning, and rain. The elec-
tric fluid splintered, in a trifling degree, our fore-
top-gallant-mast : fortunately no man was at the
mast head ; the captain always making a prac-
tice of calling the look-out men down, upon the
approach of squalls.
We saw many dolphins, which followed the
ship, during the fine weather ; I killed one, it
measured about four feet in length, and had a
wound quite through the belly ; which probably
had been inflicted by a bill-fish.
On the 14th, we again steered to the south-
east, and a few days afterwards got a fine breeze
from the westward, which lasted several days,
steering south by east, it carried us six or seven
degrees to the eastward of Rotumah, where the
captain at first intended going, had he not un-
expectedly met with the wind from the westward,
which is of rare occurrence in the south-east trade
winds.


On the Bth of October, two large whales were
seen about two miles from the ship ; every heart
heat high with expectation; the boats were
lowered cheerly ; the third mate had the chance,
pulled up, his boat-steerer darted and missed:
what a variety of emotions such blunders excite
in different individuals.
Our boat and the chief mate’s returned on
board the ship, leaving the third mate and the
captain’s headsman, in case the whale should
come up near them. He rose about a mile from
the ship, going very gently; we pushed off in-
stantly after him; our boat got the chance,
meeting him head and head ; “stand up boat-
steerer ; hit him hard ; good iron ; starn ! starn
all! well done my boys ; soho lie ; hold water ;
hand here the lance.” The boat was soon haul-
ed side and side with the whale ; the monster
quivering with agony every time the lance was
thrust socket up into the tenderest and most
vital parts. He spouted thick blood, throw-
ing up, without exaggeration, many gallons at
each spouting, besides what was flowing in
streams from the many wounds in his sides.


which so weakened him, that after a violent
struggle, called by whalers, “ going in a flurry,”
he turned “ fin up.” He, was soon towed along-
side, and cut in ; his head made about twenty-
five, and the blubber off his body nearly sixty
barrels of oil.
A few hours after the whale was cut in, the
wind shifted about to the south east, blowing
3 O
very fresh, and the sea running high, the ship
was hove to under a close reefed main-top-sail,
and fore-sail, until the blubber was tried out.
The weather continuing rough and the ship roll-
ing very much, she was kept before the wind to
enable us to stow the oil down in the hold, after
which, she was luffed to the wind again.
Two days after it blew a gale of wind, with a
heavy sen ; about four o’clock in the afternoon
I was at the wheel, when a sea struck the
ship, throwing her nearly on her beam ends,
staving the waist and bow boats, and carrying
away the skids.
The wmather continued unsettled until the
twenty-third, by which time we had drifted in
sight of Ilotumah ; and the following day proving


fine wo stood in for the land, for tlio purpose of
getting a supply of water, and trading for pigs,
fruit, See,
When we approached within about two miles
of the shore, the ship was hailed by a chief, who
-came on board in a whale boat belonging to an
Englishman, formerly carpenter of a ship, who
is married and has been living with the natives
ashore for many years.
The captain agreed with the chief, who is
called “ Coutang ” that his people should fill all
the water casks after we had towed them ashore,
thus giving us an opportunity of wandering about
■and gratifying our curiosity.
In the afternoon, Mr. Emery, whom I have
mentioned before, came on board in his canoe,
from the island which goes by his name.
In consequence of his wishing to take the ship
nearer that part of the island where he resides,
some altercation ensued between him and
Coutang, who would, by that means, have been
deprived of the trade of the ship. However, it fell
calm in the afternoon, and the ship drifting in to
the laud, we were obliged to let go the anchor in


fifteen fathom water, lying about two miles and
a half from the land. Mr. Emery, I understand,
is married to Coutang’s wife’s sister.
The ship was soon surrounded with canoes,
laden with fruit, &c.: and they traded very
readily for tobacco, of which they are excessively
fond. Several females came on board in the
evening; they are very fond of beads, and they
managed to wheedle mo out of the best part
of my stock.
The natives of Rotumah, have a mild and
pleasing cast of features, with a light copper
color complexion, fine black eyes, and long
black hair, hanging about the shoulders. The
chiefs generally wear their hair in a knot upon
the top of the head. They use a preparation of
red ochre and yellow saffron, mixed with cocoa-
nut oil, which they rub upon their bodies, giving
them a lighter and far from disagreeable ap-
pearance.
On the following day a party went ashore for
water; and I took a young Newfoundland dog
with mo, which I had brought from Sydney. Wo
had been ashore about two hours when the dog
2 A


was seized with a fit, lying struggling on the
ground, gnashing his teeth and foaming profusely
at the mouth. A shipmate seized him by the
hack of the neck, carried him to the beach and
hove him into the sea, which restored him in
some measure, but left the poor dog so weak that
he could scarcely walk. When dogs have been
any considerable time at sea, they are subject to
this kind of attack upon going ashore: and it
very frequently ends in madness. He apparently
recovered, but was affected in a similar manner
soon after we put to sea, and, having attempted
to bite several persons, it was found necessary,
for our safety, to destroy him. The captain of
the Recovery shot a very fine dog, being affected
as I have described, upon taking him ashore on
an island, for the purpose of hunting goats.
As soon as we landed we were surrounded by
little children, girls and boys, rivalling each other
in pressing their little presents of young cocoa-
nuts upon us, and after we had satisfied our
thirst, with the delicious draught they afforded,
the children would take our hands and beg for a
small piece of tobacco, " fenam chaw tabac.”


What struck my attention upon first landing,
was the peculiar appearance of some of the fe-
males ; arising from the singular method of dis-
tinguishing the single from the married women.
The custom I allude to is, I believe, peculiar to
this island. The maidens plaster their heads
with “ chenam,” which is a kind of mortar or
cement, prepared from some kind of shells.
White, I suppose they consider an emblem of
purity, for the day previous to the consummation
of marriage, it is carefully removed. These girls
are denominated white-heads.
Whilst rambling among the huts of the na-
tives, we came to a party of men and women who
were preparing for a feast, in celebration of the
election of their chief governor, who holds Ins
situation for only six months. The women, who
were mostly white-heads, were employed in ma-
king an intoxicating liquor culled “ cava.” It is
made from a root, which is found in all parts of
the island, in the following manner. A bowl is
placed in the centre of the party, which, when
full, contains from two to three gallons.
Each female then takes !> portion of the root.


and after chewing ifc sufficiently, empties it into
the bowl; it is then mixed with water by one
of them, who after washing her hands, care-
fully expresses the juice from the root; it is then
handed round to the men to drink,
Their method of cooking is simple, but well
adapted to their wants. A hole is dug in the
earth, according to the size of the article they
intend to cook; a number of large stones are
then heated, with which the bottom is covered.
Whatever they intend cooking is then carefully
folded in leaves, and put in, after which the hole
is filled up with hot stones, and covered over
with mould. Pigs are cooked in this manner in
excellent style; and yams, bread fruit, and
potatoes, are, in my opinion, better cooked this
way, than either by baking or boiling.
They are very hospitable to strangers, who
■are always invited to partake of whatever they
may be eating at the time ; if the invitation be
refused without assigning some reason, it is
considered “ fracsis,” or unfriendly.
But the hospitality of the natives is decreasing
fast; owing partly to the number of whalers


who frequent the island for refreshment, and the
many hands that run away from them and live
a lazy, indolent life ashore, dependent upon
them for support.
I cannot help mentioning the native generosity
and noble rnindodnoss of the principal chief,
“ Fang Morion.” The second mornin'g wo were
ashore, a parly of ns went to his house ; we
found him silting upon a mat in conversation
with iris wife and domestics. He was apparently
about fifty years of ago, of a particularly fine and
open benevolent countenance, but rather fat.
He invited us to take something to eat, and
took ns into another house, whore a basket of
bread fruit, yams, terra, bananas, &c., was set
before us, with young cocoa-nuts to drink ; —I
thought of tiro Golden Age.
After we had finished our repast, ire invited
ns to return to his house so soon as we should
feel again disposed to “ki id “for” said
ire “ plenty Rotumah man speak a you eat, for
catch a tabac ; Hint no Rotumah fashion.”
We afterwards took a ramble through the
hush, for a mile or two, hut the cocoa-nut trees.


bananas, vees, &0., were so thick, Unit nothing
worth mentioning could be seen, save now and
then a flock of paroquets or wood pigeons. Cocoa-
nuts are so plentiful at Rotumah, that the milk
of the young nuts is almost the solo beverage
of the inhabitants ; besides immense quantities
upon which they food their pigs, and make use
of in various ways for their own food.
We were soon fatigued with our biishranging,
the roughness of the foot-paths not agreeing with
our naked feet, and I was well pleased when we
again arrived among the huts. We rambled
from one to another indiscriminately, the little
children fetching us cocoa-nuts when thirsty, and
modestly waiting till we should “ fenam the chaw
tabac.”
The white-heads and black-heads also, were
not backward in using their more seducing arts
to obtain a pipe of tobacco, or a few beads. 1
wore a necklace which seemed to be an object of
particular admiration. After excessive coaxing
and bestowing nearly all their endearments upon
me, which I withstood heroically before I sur-
rendered the prize, it was at length yielded, hut


not to a white-head. Most of us returned on
hoard Hie ship, completely painted with the
yellow preparation I have before mentioned.
lu many of the huts wo observed canoes of
immense size anti length, or more properly,
double canoes, about eight feet apart, and sc-
cured together by upright and cross pieces
strongly bound with lashings made of the cocoa-
nut husk. 1 should suppose these canoes are
capable of carrying from one hundred and fifty
to two hundred men ; and are from sixty to
ninety feet, in length. I was led to enquire
for what purpose the natives had constructed
them, apparently so unwieldy and useless, as
they must have cost them, with the tools they
possess, such infinite time and labor.
They are formed of a single tree of immense
size, hollowed out, and partly decked over from
the stem aft. Curiosity or a spirit of enterprise
seems to have prompted them. Soon after the
island was discovered, the natives were puzzled
to ascertain how a ship could come there. Con-
sultations were hold by the chiefs, and it occur


red to them, that there must he some opening in
the horizon, through which the ship entered ;
therefore it was resolved to fit out canoes, and
send them in search, as the only method of
discovering it. Many were accordingly sent to
sea upon this strange expedition, and so soon as
they lost sight of their native land, were driven
hy the wind to the neighbouring islands ; many
undoubtedly perished, some reached the Fejoc
Islands, and others wore driven as far to tiie
westward as Santa Cruz, whore their descendants
are still living with the inhabitants. Since Mr.
Emery has resided among them, many have put
to sea, and no trace of them have ever been
discovered.
But it is not to be supposed that their former
singular ideas of the horizon still prevail. These
latter expeditions seem to have been undertaken
more from a restless desire of seeing and visiting
other lands, than from any other motive. Inqui-
sitiveness is a very prominent trait in the cha-
racter of these people. The island being very
productive, they have not to labor much for their


subsistence ; which gives them leisure to gratify
their curiosity, upon whatever subject may in-
cite it.
I purchased from Coutang, a very splendid mat,
nine feet long by seven wide, made by one of his
(laughters, and two pig’s, fur au old musket.
II is astonishing to sec with what dexterity
they will climb, I might say run, up the cocoa-
nut trees, which grow to a great height, and pro-
duce no branches sufficiently low to assist in as-
cending them.
Rotumah is the principal of a group of six or
seven very small islands, all situated within a
few miles of each other, some of which arc inha-
bited and others nut. The next largest to Rotu-
mah is Emery’s Island, lying four or five miles
to the north-west, and inhabited by about seventy
or eighty people ; it is very high hind, the
rocks rising perpendicularly from the ocean, to a
height, varying from one hundred and fifty to
three hundred feet, on all sides, and only afford-
ing a landing place, in fine weather, in one small
spot on the Ice side, It is about four miles in
circumference, and is represented to be much
2 ji


mote fruitful than its appearance bespeaks it to
be from the sea.
The otliers arc pretty little spots of land
covered with trees ; with the exception of two,
one of which is remarkable for a very tall soli-
tary cocoa-nut tree, on the highest part of the
land, which tit a distance bears a great resem-
blance to a ling staff. The other is called Split:
Island, from its being divided in the middle by
a passage wide enough for a canoe to pass
through. The rock rises perpendicularly to a
great height on each side, and a portion of rock
is suspended over the chasm near the top, as if it
had been rent by some convulsion of nature,
which left this natural bridge for the purpose of
communication.
One of the small islands is called Woahoo,
from a few natives of the Sandwich Island of
that name, being allowed to inhabit it, after
having left a brig belonging to his Majesty of the
Sandwich Islands, called “The Tainchamaha,”
which was sent to trade among the islands for
sandalwood. After leaving Rotumali she was
never heard of; and it is supposed that she blow


up at son, having on board a largo quantity of
gunpowder.
llotumab is, I think, one of the most interest-
ing islands in the South Pacific : whether we
take into consideration the friendly and hospita-
ble manners of the inhabitants in their own in-
tercourse with each other ; or, their generous
conduct to strangers. Each tribe resembles a
large family ; all share alike in whatever con-
tributes to their benefit or enjoyment; and it is
customary even if one kill a pig, to distribute it,
us fur as it will go among the rest of the tribe.
Their peculiar marriage ceremonies, their religi-
ons belief, and their more minute general cus-
toms, are all very interesting, but it would re-
quire a residence of some time among them, to
obtain a knowledge sufficient for an accurate
description.


CHAPTER X.
Sail from Rotumah—Whales—Arrive at Pylstaarts
Isla nd—Trading with the inhabitants—The Tea-root
—Eooa and Tongalaboo—Whales—Various Inci-
dents.
Tun ship was lying in a very exposed situa-
tion, and tlie woatlicr continuing rather unsettled,
the eaplnin roused out all hands about one
o’clock in the morning of the 27th of October,
for the purpose of getting under weigh, and we
were live or six miles from the land by day-light.
The wind fell almost to a calm. In the after-
noon we saw a school of whales ; the boats were
lowered, and we chased them close in to Emory’s
Island, when the chief mate succeeded in fasten-
ing to a largo one : our boat came up next, and
darted two harpoons into him, the boat was


hauled (dose up, and never loft him until he turn-
ed “ tin up.”
Thin whale tryed out seventy-live barrels of
oil, milking up about four hundred since wo left
Sydney ; and it was one of the most unsuccessful
cruises we had made. The weather certainly had
been most unfavorable, being culm the greatest,
part of the time among the islands ; and since
then, with the exception of a few lino days, it has
continued blowing half a gale of wind. Doubts
now began to arise of the probability of our being
able to 1111 the ship, during the remainder of the
time our provisions would allow us to continue
on this side of Cape Horn.
Mr. Emery observed the boats fast to the
whale, from the island, which I have before
stilted is very high, and ho came on board the
following day in his canoe.
There were at this time some of the largest
sharks about the ship I bad observed during the
voyage. Mr. Emery killed one with a harpoon,
it was of the tiger species, and took it ashore in
his canoe. This fish is considered a groat deli


cficy by the Rotumah people, and is “tabooed”
to all but tbo chiefs, by whom only it is eaten.
We continued in sight of Rolumah a week, in
expectation of seeing more whales, but were dis-
appointed. The season for whaling off the
islands of Tongataboo and Eooa advancing, the
ship was kept to the south east: the wind blow-
ing nearly as fresh as it did previous to anchor-
ing at Rotnmah, from the eastward; consequently
wo made but a slow progress in the direction we
wanted to go, hut wore obliged to run into the
latitude of 20. S. out of the trade winds, and
make our easting in the variables.
On ihe 14th of November, a school of whales
was seen at noon, right a luend of the ship, hat
the breeze was so light that she did not come
up with them until sunset, at which time it was
not thought proper to lower the boats.
On Sunday, the 24th November, wo saw a
small island called the Pylstnnrts, situate in 22.
23. 30. S., and 176- 49. 30. W. The following-
morning the ship stood close in with the land,
and three boats were lowered down for the


purpose of trading with the natives. The island
presents a rough and rugged appearance on all
sides, rising perpendicularly from the water to
a great height; and affording but one small and
precarious landing place, and that only in fine
weather. One huge rock is very remarkable,
standing about two ships’ lengths from the island,
and greatly resembling an immense square tower.
It is quite white witli the dung of sea-fowl, who,
since its creation, have been its only inhabitants,
and to whom only it is accessible. Wo passed
between it and the island, on our way to the
trading place.
The scenery was such as nature bad produced
in one of her wildest moods, and very impressive :
hut the impression was that of awe. It was im-
possible for the boats to land without being stove
at the only place whore the natives can venture
off, wo wore therefore obliged to lie upon our
oars until they should bring off whatever they
wanted to dispose of. They were soon seen
descending the steep which rises from the water
side, with pigs, baskets of yams, tarra, &c. The
captain gave a musket for five pigs, whales' teeth


and knives make of iron hoop, lor yams, tarra,
tea-root;, &c. We got but a small supply, for the
cauoo was capsized among the breakers the third
trip : after which the poor fellows kept swim-
ming oil' through the rocks and surf, with such
light articles as they could manage in the water,
mild they wore exhausted.
These natives appear to lie a, line race of peo-
ple, they are well featured and strongly propor-
tioned. Their only dross was a few rushes se-
cured about the middle, and reaching nearly
down to the knees; something like the river
gods, described in the mythology of the ancients.
There appears to ho but few inhabitants upon
this island ; and most probably it was originally
peopled by canoes being driven off from the
weather islands of Eooa and Tongatahoo ; their
language being, I believe, precisely the same.
The tea-root I have mentioned, is a very curi-
ous production, greatly resembling a large yam
in external appearance, but widely differing from
it in taste and color. When cut in slices it:
looks almost like gingerbread, and is full of a
very agreeable saccharine juice ; and judging by


siticli of us who ato large quantities of it, I am of
opinion that it is both wholesome and nutritious.
On the 26th wo hove in sight of thu islands
of Eooa and Tongataboo, which are situate about
a degree to the north east of the Pylstanrts ; the
funner in 21. 24. S., and 174. 30. TV., and the
latter in 21. 8. 30. S., and 175. 1. 50. W. They
arc perhaps two of the healthiest, most pro-
ductive, and beautiful islands in the South Paci-
iic, and are included in the friendly group.
They were first discovered by Abel Jansen
Tasman, a celebrated Dutch navigator, in 1643,
and the whole group were afterwards thoroughly
explored by Captain Cook.
Tongataboo presents a very dill'eront appear-
ance when viewed from the ship, to the delightful
prospect Eooa exhibits.
The former is a very fine island of considera-
ble extent, and the land is remarkably flat,
with scarcely a hill to diversify the view. The
latter rises gently from the sea to a moderate
height, alfording a most beautiful and pleasing
prospect: the land, about half way up the slope
being covered with cocoa-nut, banana, plaintain,
2 (i


and other fruit trees; among which are the
houses of the natives. At the back of these we
could discern meadows of prodigious extent,
covered with long grass, apparently running from
one end of the island to the other, interspersed
with cocoa-nut and other trees, at; irregular
distances, formed also into small tufts and plan-
tations.
Captain Cook, when hero, walked with some
of his officers to the highest part of the island,
in order to have a. view of as great a portion of
it as possible. The philanthropic wish, however,
of that great and benevolent navigator has not
yet been accomplished. “ While I was surveying
this delightful prospect,” said he “ I could not
help flattering myself with the pleasant idea, that
some future navigator may, from the same sta-
tion, behold these meadows stocked with cattle,
brought to these islands by the ships of England ;
and that the completion of this single benevolent
purpose, independent of all other considerations,
would sufficiently mark to posterity that our
voyages had not been useless to the general inte-
rests of humanity.”


There was something peculiarly pleasing to mo
in beholding those isles in reality, which I had
so often pictured in imagination, when reading
Cook’s voyages ; and in witnessing those luxu-
riant climes, where nature yields, almost sponta-
neously, all that is necessary for the support, if
not the comforts of life.
On the 27th, we spoke the Toward Castle ;
she had been to Now Zealand for refreshment,
since we last saw her on the line ; and like us,
had got but very little oil in that time. They
had on board a female from New Zealand,
the daughter of a chief named Rivers, a person
of considerable importance. She looked to bo
about eighteen years of age ; and of a very inter-
esting appearance. Her lips wore tattooed after
the manner of her country, which makes them
look very remarkable. She had as an attend-
ant, a young Now Zealand boy, a “ cook-e,” one
of tier father’s slaves.
We found the weather off this island much the
same as wo had experienced during the last
three months, with the strong regular trade wind


from the south-east, by far too stiff for whaling :
consequently wo did but little.
On the 29th, running close along shore upon
doubling a point, wo saw the Elizabeth ; she
was in a leaky state, and expected soon to be
homeward bound, wanting only two hundred bar-
rels to complete her cargo.
On December the Ist, the Toward Castle saw
a school of whales, and hoisted her colors at the
main as a signal. Both ships lowered their
boats, and kept up the chase nearly all day, but
without success.
The following day, the wind blowing very
fresh, the ships ran in under the lee of the land,
and the boats wore sent ashore to trade for yams,
fruit, &c.
1 was highly gratified with the excursion. We
had to pull through a narrow passage in the
coral reef, up a small crock, where we landed.
There was a space of cleared land, surrounded
with lofty trees, about which many of the natives
were seated, who had articles to dispose of.
These consisted of yams, sweet potatoes, water
melons, pines, apples, bananas, and Chili peppers.


On ono side was situate the hut of a chief, where
Captain Bren, who is in great estimation with
the natives, was seated with some chiefs smo-
king his pipe.
The scene was picturesque, all sat cross leg-
ged, after the native fashion, upon the mats ; the
chiefs had no other covering than a kind of
“ tappa ” thrown across the shoulders, and so
disposed as to cover their person. Whales’ teeth,
handkerchiefs, knives, pipes and tobacco, are the
articles most in request at this island, especially
the latter.
I saw some of their war clubs finely carved,
but 1 had not enough with me ashore to purchase
one, 1 bought a quantity of white “ tappa ” ot
the girls, who parted very readily with it for
small blue beads ; but they appeared to be well
acquainted with the value of these ornaments,
and would accept knives, tobacco, or handker-
chiefs, in preference.
The natives arc darker than the Rotnninh
islanders, but there is no remarkable difference
in features. They are, I think, a larger race of
people, and even exceed the general stature of


Europeans in height. They did not appear to
me to possess that mild friendliness of disposi-
tion which so distinguishes the former people,
but are rather inclined to take advantage ol
strangers, if they find them easily intimidated.
I had bought a few articles of one of them,
and was trading with him again for a small chib,
for which I offered tobacco : another native came
up at the lime, took up the tobacco as if with
the intention of examining it, and putting it
under his “ tappa, ” with an air of the greatest
indifference, very composedly walked off. I could
not help smiling at the fellow's impudence, but 1
was determined not bo robbed of ray tobacco.
Knowing it would be useless to chase the thief,
I seized hold of the club for which I had offer-
ed it, and persisted in retaining it till the to-
bacco was restored, which, after half an hour’s
violent altercation, chiefly expressed by signs in-
termixed occasionally with a word of broken En-
glish, and worse Eooaic on ray part, was at
length accomplished.
The women are well featured, and setting aside
all prejudices with respect to color, some of them


might bo considered handsome, even in compari-
son with European beauties, if properly attired.
The boats returned on board in the evening,
laden with yams, potatoes, pripoi apples, &c.;
and the captain went on board the American
ship.
The weather continued unsettled and rough
until the Ifith of December, when the chief male
discovered a spout, six or seven miles to the
leeward. We kept the ship oil' in that direction.
The whale kept up spouting about ton minutes,
making a steady course at the rate of two and a
half or three knots per hour. The time that he
remained down was about throe quarters of an
hour. We were not, however, sufficiently near,
to allow the boats time to come up with him,
before ho again “ peaked his flukes’’ and went
down.
When the course and rate at which a large
whale is going, can be correctly made, you can
tell almost to a certainty the place where he will
again rise to spout, by observing with a watch
the lime lie remained down between the preceding
spoutings.


The boats wore accordingly spread about n
mile apart in different directions, near the spot
where lie was expected to coinc up. “ There she
spouts, there again ; close to the first mate ;
pull ahead for the second chance cried the
second mate. Wo required no further order for
the boat seemed to fly; our attention was at
the same time most anxiously fixed upon his
ejaculations, for as he stood at the steer oar he
could witness all the movements of the whale,
and the boat which was now close upon him ;
“ there’s stand up, he’ll be fast directly ; there’s
dart; there’s give it him ; two solid irons ;
what white water; the boat stove 1 stretch
out; pull and save him.” We found, after
coming up to the boat, that the flukes of the
whale had struck the blade of the midship oar
so violently that it was knocked out of the
man’s hand who was polling it and broke
his jaw hone. The poor fellow immediately lied
a handkerchief across his face ; and the male
after waiting until the whale gave us an oppor-
tunity to fasten, cut his lino, and took him on
hoard the ship for surgical assistance.


He was not able to return to his duty for a
period of nearly throe months : a proof of the
slowness with which wounds heal, after a man
has been at sea any considerable time. It is one
of the most troublesome afflictions, that seamen
in south sea whalers, generally are troubled with.
A severe bruise or wound will seldom heal at
sea ; ami it often occurs, that the scurvy
attacks the injured part, before it is possible or
convenient for the ship to make a port. This
was the case with a seaman oil' Japan. When
long without refreshing, the skin of the hands
and feet becomes so tender, and is so easily
broken, that the slightest rub against a rope
will tear it off like wet paper, leaving a painful
fostering sore, which is sometimes months before
it will heal.
The Eric, of New Bedford, America, was
cruising off these islands at the same lime with
ns. Our captain exchanged coals for a quantity
of sweet potatoes, of a most excellent flavor,
which she bad brought from Otaheito. The
captain had got his Otabcitan wife on board,
2 o


who was considered a remarkably handsome
young female.
\Yv spoke this ship again about ton days after-
wards, and found she had been into Tongataboo
harbour, where the unfortunate girl met with her
death in the following melancholy manner :
She was swimming at a short distance along-
side the ship, with another female who belonged
Id Tongataboo, when she. uttered a piercing
shrielc, and sprang convulsively half out of the
water, winch, at the same time was observed to
bo tinged with blood. A boat went oil’ immedi-
ately to her assistance, and when aim was picked
up, it was found that a shark had bitten her log
and part of her thigh off, and loft her in a dread-
fully mangled state. The poor girl was taken on
board the ship, and died a few hours afterwards.
Tongataboo is the same island which is men-
tioned by Captain Cook under the name of Am-
sterdam ; and although it presents nothing par-
ticular in appearance, is yet one of the most pro-
ductive and best cultivated islands in the South
Pacific.


Our cruise oli these islands proving very un-
successful, having killed no more than throe or
four whales, making about one hundred and
twenty barrels ; as a last resource the captain
determined to take the season oIV the French
Rock, situate about a week’s sail to the north-
east of the Bay of Islands, New Zealand : and
thou after refreshing at the latter place, to com-
mence the passage home round Cape Horn, about
the latter cud of March, or the beginning of
April following.


CHAPTER XI.
Whaling off the French Rock—Sail for New Zealand—
Singular fish—Arrive at the Bay of Islands—New
Zealanders—Incidental occurrences—Language of
New Zealanders—Sail for England—Gale—Passage
home—Enter the Channel—Moored in the new Lon-
don Dock Basin.
We arrived on the whaling ground oil' the
French Rock in the beginning of January, 1834,
and saw several Sydney vessels which had beeu
tolerably successful: one named the Venus had
boon particularly so, having got nearly seven
hundred barrels in live weeks. The French
Rock, when seen at some distance from the
mast-head, greatly resembles two ships.
Early in the morning of the 15th, a large
whale was seen with the glass from the mast
head, and, judging from the manner in which he
spouted, it was supposed some boat had beeu


fast to him, and that ho was “ sick.” The boats
were lowered, and the one I belonged to succeed-
ed in getting one iron in him. He immediately
went down and sounded out nil our line, and part
of another, when the iron drew out, and lie
escaped. Upon hauling in the line, we found
I’onr irons and ten or twelve fathoms of line,
which getting foul, was pulled out hy our
harpoon.
We afterwards learned that one of the Wolf’s
boats had linen fast for four hoars to him, the
previous evening, hut had been obliged to cut
the line when it became dark.
Three days afterwards we saw a dead whale,
swelled to a monstrous size, which was judged to
he the same, hut it was in such a state of pu-
trefaction and smelt so intolerably odenaivo, that
it was of no use to us.
During our cruise in this place, we had long,
and frequently unsuccessful chases after whales,
which it would only bo tedious to describe. We,
however, killed six or seven large whales, which
made up nearly nine hundred barrels of oil
since leaving Port Jackson, and in all about


two thousand four hundred; completing our
cargo within about one hundred and fifty barrels ;
and considering the unavoidable loss of time
from accidents, and various disappointments,
we had every reason to be satisfied with our
success.
Nothing bad been neglected which perseve-
rance could effect to fill the ship, for wo bad
been out of port nearly ten months, in the course
of which we bad enjoyed only a slight refresh-
ment for a few days. The season for whaling
in (Ins part of the globe was getting late;
and boisterous weather might soon set in, which,
both the ship and ourselves were in a very
indifferent condition to withstand.
By continuing out any longer it would also
drive us into the depth of winter in doubling the
Horn, besides forcing ns upon a short allowance
of provisions in that “region of eternal snows,”
which must he doubly severe to men who had
been within the tropics for nearly two years, and
during that time had not experienced a greater
degree of cold than a mild summer’s day in
England. It was therefore to the great joy of


all ou board whim we put the helm up fur Now
Zealand.
We observed the colors of the Wolf at half-
mast, one day after chasing whales, when her
boats killed one, hat ear’s wore aasaecessfal. I
learned afterwards that her cooper was dread-
fully wounded by falling overboard upon a spade,
and expired from loss of blood, before surgical
assistance could be procured. The surgeon of
the Albion expressed it as bis opinion, that the
unfortunate man’s life might have been saved,
bad a medical man been on board the vessel to
assist him immediately the accident occurred.
One of the most remarkable fish 1 have seen
during the voyage, was caught in a bucket (loot-
ing alongside the ship, ou the surface of the
water. It was about the shape and size of a
common turnip : the skin seemed forcibly dis-
tended as if by air, and its Hus and tail were
standing out from its body quite still'and power-
less, the skin along the back unis of a beautiful
color, varying from that of highly burnished
steel to a delicate hue ; the belly was white,
with yellow spots. I judged from its unnaturally


distended appearance, that from some cause or
other it got inflated, and became incapable of
remaining under water, or of governing its
motions when upon the surface. It was
floating as light as a bladder when it was caught.
The captain had it stuffed, and brought it
home in a good state of preservation, hut it did
not retain the brilliancy of its colors.
On the 28th of February wo had two sail in
sight, one proved to ho the Harmony, and the
other the Proteus of Sydney. Wo lowered a
boat and went on hoard the latter vessel with
■the captain’s invitation. She sailed about a
fortnight before us from Sydney, and had got
nearly fourteen hundred barrels. One of ray old
shipmates, who left the Japan at Sydney, was
acting as third mate on board of her. He was
a Narragenset Indian by birth ; but had been
serving, from Ins boy-hood, in American and
English ships ; and was considered an excellent
whaler. The captain's headsman was a native
■of Otaheite. They had been watering at Santa
Cruz, situate a short distance from Bougauville
Island, where a man, whom I was acquainted


with at Sydney, was shot through the back with
an arrow, by one of the natives, and another
man lust his eye in the affray. The former died
in nine days afterwards ; the arrow having pene-
trated his kidneys ; and, unfortunately, the
Protons carried no surgeon.
It is to he lamented that some owners of vessels
employed in this trade, should be so indill'oruat
to the lives of the men employed in them, as to
sutler them to proceed on a voyage, whore they
are constantly exposed to groat danger from the
peculiarity of the trade, without a medical man
on hoard. With the limited opportunity that I
have had of obtaining information, many are the
cases where unfortunate men have boon lost,
for want, of proper medical assistance. A great
portion of the English ships do carry a surgeon ;
and many do not.
Oa the passage from our cruising ground to
the Bay of Islands, we saw whales four days
successively, but always too late in the evening
to lower the boats after them.
After lying off the mouth of the bay part of
the night of the 12th, wo stood in with a fine
2 li


breeze the following morning, and came to an-
chor in four and a half fathom water, at Koro-
rattica, at two o’clock p. m. This is one of the
native towns, situate about seven miles from the
nine-pin, a huge rock which stands iu the passage
between the two capes farming the mouth of the
hay.
Kororatliea is inhabited by the tribes of three
of the most powerful chiefs, residing in this
part of New Zealand, named Totorc, Rivers,
and Amoco. We had not anchored long before
the decks were covered with girls, and the ship
surrounded with canoes.
What a contrast the landscape exhibited, to
the luxuriant isles we had visited within the
tropics. Instead of the gigantic-leafod banana,
and the straight towering cocoa-nut tree loaded
with fruit, wo beheld the low dirty lints of the
natives, interspersed with a few houses of rather
a superior description, belonging to the Euro-
peans residing here, who obtain a livelihood by
selling grog to the seamen, and by trading with
the natives for potatoes, flax, &e., in exchange


I'or powder, muskets, and other articles of English
manufacture which they procure from Sydney.
The back ground presents a dull dark mass of
forest trees ; hut none of that kind upon which a
seaman's eye rusts with satisfaction after a long
cruise. This, however, is not the fault of nature,
hut rather to he ascribed to the warlike charac-
ter of the natives ; ami their dislike to agricultu-
ral pursuits, beyond what stern necessity compels
them to do for their own subsistence; and their
eagerness to trade for such articles as are now
become almost indispensable in their wars : their
acipuiintanec with the superiority of the musket,
having entirely superseded their own arms, where
they can possibly procure it.
There is hut little dilVureaec in personal ap-
pearance between the natives of New Zealand,
and the Sandwich Islands, beyond what the pe-
culiar customs of each may have cll'cclcd.
The New Zealand men have their faces tattoo-
ed, in a remarkable, and as it respects the tattoo-
ing, hoauliCnl manner. The lines arc so dose in
many eases, that it would ho scarcely possible
!o ini reduce another, from the chin to the fore


h(!iul, particularly in persons of consequence.
The women tattoo only the lips anil chin, which
give them rather a sullen appearance : many of
the “ cook-os ” are not tattooed.
Chastity is not one of the virtues which the
females possess in any eminent degree. Several
of our people who had boon at this place before,
after the native salute “ tcncra coqni omcra”
how do yon do my dear '! were soon recognized
by some of their old acquaintances.
The Bay of Islands is situated in 35. 10. S.,
and 175. E., and from its mouth to the upper
part of the hay, is upwards of ten miles, afford-
ing excellent anchorage for ships of any size and
burden, in the roughest weather. Us shores are
inhabited by several tribes, who are frequently in
a state of warfare with each other.
The chief or “ rangatara ” named Beaurnori,
whoso tribe inhabits the upper part of the bay,
called “ Cova; covae ” is considered by far the
most powerful, and able to cope with all the
allied tribes at Kororattica. I saw him one clay
on hoard the Venus, which vessel was lying at
anchor in his territory. He is a tall, active, and


muscular man ; liis face was tattooed so closely
that its natural color could bo scarcely dis-
cerned. He was tolerably well dressed, and
armed with a short dagger, musket, shot-belt,
&c. His large war canoe was lying alongside,
and be was attended by several of bis head light-
ing men, similarly armed to himself, with the
exception of the dagger.
A disturbance occurred whilst I was on board,
which, but for the authority of Beaumori, might
have proved serious. One of the chiefs came
down the half deck to light his pipe, and the
boatswain, who was somewhat fresh with liquor,
ordered him, in a very abrupt manner, upon
deck, at the same time threatening to compel
him to go. The New Zealander stood silent, but
gave him a look as if to defy him. The other
immediately closed with him, and a struggle en-
sued. The natives now began to gather round
the hatchway, and shewed by their actions, how
willing they were to take a part in the fray.
Beaumori hoard the noise, and came down at the
lime very opportunely, or the fight might soon
have become general, and perhaps fatal to some


on both sides, for harpoons, lances, &c., wore ly-
ing very conveniently at hand. He soon quieted
his own people, and gave us to understand, that
no more should interfere, as only one man
was struggling with the New Zealander. They
wore, however, soon parted, and an amicable
acknowledgement made on both sides.
There arc, perhaps, lew people more alive to
an injury, or quicker in resenting it, than those
natives. It is to he recollected, however, that
they arc prone to take the most cowardly ad-
vantages, to gratify their revenge, when it is in
their power ; although none are bolder in facing
danger, when necessity compels them to do it.
Some of their war canoes are very largo, and
decorated along the sides with feathers of vari-
ous colors ; pieces of wood, the carving of which
must have cost them infinite time and trouble,
rise to the height of seven or eight feet from the
stem and stern. Most of them have a monstrous
curved man’s head, with the tongue protruding,
their characteristic emblem of defiance, for a
figure head. When full manned they paddle
with great swiftness, keeping lime to a kind of


sony, in which, at proper intervals, they hurst in
chorus ; altogether giving a wild and peculiar
filled. When out lor the day, they are seldom
to he met with la their canoes without muskets ;
and those who trade from the opposite
shores of the hay, bringing in potatoes, &e., are
never without them ; for even in this peaceable
occupation, they arc to he scon landing with a
basket of potatoes in one hand and a musket in
the other.
The missionaries have made a small settle-
ment at a place called Pisheor, about live miles
from Kororaltica, across the hay. But their
influence with the natives is very small ; indeed
by the rnajoriiy of them, they are looked upon
almost with contempt. It must and will un-
doubtedly take many yearn, before people of
their fierce and (intractable dispositions can ho
brought to embrace or even listen to the mild
doctrines of Christianity.
Being divided into clans, the different chiefs
of which are jealous of each other, and ready,
upon any real or imaginary injury, to break into
open war ; in which, the most horrid cruellies,


and oven cannibalism, are practised. The chiefs
also being subject to, and acknowledging, no
other authority than their own will and pleasure,
form altogether, obstacles to the improvement of
the people, which, only, time and intercourse
with Europeans, will overcome.
The “ cook-es ” are those who arc captured in
war ; and arc considered the sole property of the
chief, or free man, by whom they are taken, and
who retains the power of life and death over
them ever after. They arc often sacrificed upon
the death of their chiefs.
in some conversation I had with a hoy about
fourteen years of ago, belonging to Rivers, a
remarkable instance was exhibited of the indiffe-
rence with which they look upon death. He was
captured and brought from a place called the
Thames River, so named by Captain Cook, du-
ring a war which was carried on between the
natives of the bay, and that place. He said be
expected to be killed, upon the death of Mr.
Rivers’ brother, and that then he should go
under the sea and rejoin his friends.


It iii a remarkable fuel, that, the prisoners who
arc taken in war, never attempt In escape, as
their friends wmilil consider it disgraceful, and
derogatory to their warlike fame, to receive
them. So even among the must savage and un-
civilized tribes, some regard is paid to coin!
faith in their contests.
We witnessed one day ashore, the dread lid
excess lo which the ungovernable passions id
even their women subject them to. The wife
of Telore’s brother had some suspicion that
her husband conferred favors upon a favor-
ite femali! “ cook-e.” In a lit of jealousy, she
seized an infant belonging to the hitler, and
glutted her vengeance by dashing its brains out
against Ihe rocks. The mother saved her 111 c
by hiding herself in the woods. When we, men-
tioned it to the natives upon returning on hoard
the ship, it seemed nothing astonishing to them :
they expressed neither horror nor surprise at
such a savage and cruel act.
For thi! first week we were all busily em-
ployed in relitling our rigging, procuring water,
&e. All thoughts of whaling being given iiji :
2 i


two of 0111' boats wore sold to different ships ;
the try-works pulled down, and the large iron
pots taken ashore, to lighten the ship as much
as possible for the tempestuous passage we
should most probably experience, before arriving
in fine weather latitudes, after doubling Cape
Horn.
We were allowed two pounds of fresh pork per
dav, and as much bread and potatoes as we
choose to eat. The captain also procured n sea.
stock of nearly six tons of potatoes : a necessary
precaution against the scurvy, after so long a
cruise; and likewise to save the consumption of
bread, which was getting rather short, from the
unexpected length of the voyage,
H. W. Sloop the Alligator, of twenty-eight
guns, was lying at Covie covin, when we entered
the huy. There had been some misunderstand-
ing with the chief Beanmori, who had seized a
small schooner of about fifteen tons, belonging to
some persons trading there ; and it required some
threats on the part of the commander of the
sloop, to induce him to relinquish his prize.


Wore it not for the occasional visits of men or
war, at the islands belonging to these barbarians,
little regard would be paid to the lives or pro-
perty of Europeans ; as they would, upon the
most trilling, real or pretended, misunderstand-
ing Of dispute, take the one or seize upon (be
other.
Before we left the bay, there were twenty-
seven sail of Colonial and English vessels, prin-
cipally whalers, at anchor in it.
A very severe gale of wind happened whilst
we lay here. Several vessels arrived in the bay
with the loss of bulwarks, try-works, boats, Sec.
The Cadmus, of London, had a narrow escape;
owing to an error in their reckoning ; fur, owing
to the darkness of the night, they wore within
three seas of the rocks, near Cape Bret, before
the land was soon. Had it not been for the
excellent qualities of the ship, and the quick-
ness with which she answered the helm in wear-
ing round, within a few minutes more she would
have been dashed to atoms in the tremendous
surf, which the vast unbroken swell of the great


Paeilio sets upon these shores, during a gale from
the eastward.
Two of my old shipmates sailed iu this vessel
from Sydney some weeks before us ; and very
had success had attended her, slits having got hut
one hundred barrels of oil in that time ; and
nearly all her crew had run away from her at the
various islands she had visited. The two I have
mentioned left her at tins Bonin Islands, in the
dapan Seas. These islands have been lately
peopled by Englishmen and Sandwich Islanders,
sent from Woahoo, by the consul there. Two
females with whom these men were acquaint-
ed, when at Woahoo, in the Recovery, happened
to be among the number ; and, no doubt, combi-
ned with the ill success ol the Cadmus, had a
great share iu inducing them to leave her. How
singularly individuals are thrown together in the
most remote quarters of the globe. A young
man of very superior abilities and education,
with whom I became acquainted at Sydney,
came to New Zealand in her. He had shipped
on hoard the Albion after we sailed, and left her
at Wallis’ Island: where lie lived with the


natives for several weeks; obtained a tole-
rable knowledge of tlieir language; and was
partly tattooed, after tlieir manner, round the
body from the loins half way down the legs,
which resembled, at a distance, a pair of fancy
blue drawers. When the Cadmus arrived otV that
island to trade, he escaped on board, and worked
his passage to the Bay of Islands.
The language of New Zealand is particularly
easy to learn, and hears a great affinity to that
of the Sandwich Islands, Otaheite, and several
other groups in the North and South Pacific.
The young man who arrived in the Cadmus,
found that many of their words corresponded in
moaning with those of Wallis’ Island. The
words expressing numbers, were precisely the
same, from one to a hundred, with the excep-
tion of a few, which varied only in the termi-
nation of the last syllable.
How some of the islands situate at such
immense distances from each other, and from
any main land, in this vast ocean, first became
peopled, would bo impossible to prove. But


the similarity of language which exists be-
tween many of them ; and the certainty that
canoes full of people, have been driven by
the winds and currents, to great distances from
one island to another, throws great light upon
this curious circumstance ; and allowing for the
changes which climate and various other circum-
stances must unavoidably make in the course
of time, so great a dillerence docs not exist, as to
throw any doubt upon the probability that the
inhabitants of many of them have descended
from the same ancestors ; hut from what
quarter the originals came, might he more diffi-
cult, through not impossible to determine.
The huts of the New Zealanders are of the
most dirty and miserable description. The na-
tives of most of the other islands had the floor
covered with mats, which gave them some ap-
pearance of cleanliness and comfort ; but here
the bare earth sufficed, covered with mud, dirt,
and filth of every description. Their food con-
sists principally of dried fish and potatoes, and
was formerly of a much poorer description ; fern
root being then eaten in room of the latter.


Pigs arc very plentiful in some parts ; but from
the number of ships which now visit the bay,
they are become scarce, and refreshment of all
descriptions is dear in proportion.
Muskets arc now so common that they will
not fetch one fourth of what was given for them
seven years back ; and are so well understood,
that unless good and perfect, are not saleable
at all.
A few days after the ship came to anchor,
Rivers, the chief, came on board with his two
daughters ; one of them wars the same that was
on board tin; Toward Castle ; the other was
younger.
i!y the first of April all our preparations for
pulling to sea were nearly concluded. The
captain and all hands were alike anxious to be
once more under weigh for homo, from which we
had been absent so long. There was one man
however, who preferred staying at New Zealand.
Whatever bis motives could be, I cannot ima-
gine ; but 1 am inclined to believe that he adopt-
ed the resolution when in a state of intoxication.
Such men as leave ships at this place, are board


cd and lodged by the landlords of the grog shops,
until they ship again in some other vessel; when
the landlord is paid out of the advance. A
great many white men were living ashore in
this manner, who had run away from different
ships owing to many real and more imaginary
grievances.
1 had almost forgot to mention the beautiful
mats, which in making, show the great patience
and ingenuity of the females. They trade with
them for clothing, and are made of 11 ax, which is
prepared nearly as fine as silk; and those of the
finest quality, I was told, would occupy a
female two moons to complete ; these are called
the “ ketueko ” mats. Others of a far inferior
kind arc called “kakohoo” mats, and arc worn
by the “cook-es” and lowest class of na-
tives. The best kind are now but seldom made
at the Bay of Islands, and are consequently
scarce ; a musket, or a good blanket, is the com-
mon price for one ; the latter is usually pre-
ferred. They wear it in cold weather across the
shoulders, after the manner of a shawl. The
mats, which are bordered with black strings,


when thrown over their bonds and shoulders, the
dark ends intermixed with their long hair, and
partly covering the face, give them a wild and
peculiar appearance, quite in unison with their
general character.
On Sunday, the Cth of April, wo hove up cur
anchor, with hearts as light as the thoughts ami
expectation of home could make ns. It fell calm
about nine o’clock, and after towing the ship
dear of the vessels lying around us, wc dropped
the anchor again. A light breeze sprung up
again at eleven, and wo got under weigh. Two
other vessels, the Elizabeth and Gladstones were
under weigh at the same time. Three cheers
were given by the crews of the ships lying near
ns, and wo glided slowly down the harbour. Thu
wind continued very light and variable until four
o’clock in the afternoon, when a fine breeze,
to our great delight, sprung up from the north-
west. “ Square away the yards there,” ordered
the captain, “ aye, aye, sir,” was the ready res-
ponse. The sails were soon trimmed to the
wind, and before dark, the black sullen-looking
mountains of New Zealand were far astern,
2 o


The Elizabeth’s boat came alongside us when
oil 1 the mouth of the bay, bringing Mr. Haven,
late second mate of that ship, who, from age
and infirmity was judged incapable of duty ; our
captain brought him home. He had been twenty-
five years in the south sea trade, and part of
that time with Captain Clarke, now retired and
living in Snll'olk.
We left New Zealand with but little regret.
In fact, I believe all hands, from the captain to
the cook, were heartily tired of our stay,
although short, in the hay. Jack, when on
liberty ashore, was always in some squabble with
the natives, and he seldom escaped without some
loss. Either his bottle of grog, or some part
of bis wearing apparel was usually stolon from
him.
Like most uncivilized tribes, when they have
once learned the use of ardent spirit, they soon
become excessively fond of it, and give way to
the most intemperate excess. The natives of
the Sandwich Islands and New Zealand in par-
ticular of both sexes will drink great quantities.


For the first fortnight after leaving New
Zealand we experienced very fine weather, light,
breezes and cairns, during which time wo made
but little progress on our passage.
Wo were now put upon an allowance of five
pints of water, each man, per day ; one pound ot
salt junk, and as much bread and potatoes as
wo choose to cat.
On the 19th April the wind began to freshen
from the north-east; accompanied with thick
hazy weather and rain, which continued for seve-
ral days ; keeping us continually wet, night and
day. Onr situation was far from being enviable,
us it was not possible to dry our clothes ; anil
turning out of a warm hod in the dark, cold,
wet, nights to keep our watch on deck with wet
clothes, was a change not very conducive to our
health, nor agreeable to the feelings. This,
however, was borne with cheerfulness ; wo were
on our passage ho.mf. : and onr present hardships
only tended to heighten those pleasures wo en-
joyed in anticipation.
The weather, so far as regulated by the direc-
tion of the wind in this quarter of the globe, is


exactly the reverse to that experienced in En-
gland. On this side Cape Horn, a south-west is
a very cold and dry wind, and a north-east mild
and wet, The temperature is, in a corresponding
degree of latitude, much colder to the southward,
than it is at the same season of the year to the
northward. Even in the height of summer, the
cold is severe in the latitude of Cape Horn, and
the land is covered with perpetual snow ; though
the Cape is situated, in nearly the same lati-
tude, in the southern hemisphere, as the city of
Glasgow, in Scotland, is in the northern.
The winds got stronger as wo proceeded to
the southward, with a long hollow sea running,
which caused the ship to labour excessively.
The passage from this time until we doubled the
Horn, was very miserable, in consequence of the
dampness of the ship below, which made our
bedding cold and uncomfortable, and the seas
which were continually breaking over our heads
when upon deck.
From the length of time we had been from
England, our clothing had become very scanty ;


some had a pair of old shoes and others had
none ; onr food too had, in a groat measure, lost
its nutritions properties, and was not of that
kind which is host adapted to support men
through hardships, in a cold climate. Our grog
also was expended, which was severely felt.
Had we been detained long, hy contrary winds,
in this boisterous climate, there is no doubt but
the scurvy would soon have made its appearance
among ns ; as we had been hut little more than
three weeks in harbour, during a period ol
twelve months.
At this time, most of ns wore troubled
with boils, of the most painful nature, which,
broke out upon our wrists and arms, occasioned,
I judged, hy the change of climate, and the fric-
tion of the sleeves of our jackets, which were
continually wet with salt water.
Albatrosses, pens, speckled haglets, called by
the sailors cape pigeons, and several other kinds
of birds, which are found only in these dreary
regions, were constantly round the ship, and
seized with avidity any kind of offal that was
thrown overboard. Many were caught, and when


they are well stewed, their flesh is not unpalate-
ablc; hut it is very apt to disagree with those
who partake of it, if eooked any oilier way.
On the 9th of May, we experienced a heavy
gale of wind from the north-east. The top-gallant
yards wore sent down, and the ship hove to
under the fore and main storm-stay-sails, and
close-reefed main top-sails. The sea kept rising
as the wind increased, and the ship pitched very
heavily: the bowsprit and spritsail-yard were
often under water.
It was my morning watch below, from eight to
twelve. At seven bells, (half past eleven) we
were roused out, to clue up the main top-sail and
furl it. The wind was very strong, in squalls,
with sleet and snow. Onr watch immediately
after went below to dinner, wet through, and half
frozen with cold, A mess-mate, of the name of
Taylor, gave each of ns a glass of grog out of a
small stock he bought at New Zealand. “ Here
yo are my lads ” said ho, “ the last of the keg ;
perhaps we.shall not live to enjoy it to-morrow.”
The words, although frequently made use of by


sailors, struck us a, few hours after as almost
prophetic.
At twelve o’clock it; was our watch upon deck :
the wind and sea still continued unabated ; some
hands were sent aloft to put preventer gaskets
upon the yards to keep the sails from getting
adrift. I was ordered out to secure the jib,
when the spanker got partially adrift, and i
jumped aloft, being nearest, to make it fast.
The ship directly after was struck by a sea,
which broke over her from stem to stern. We,
aloft, were enjoying a hearty laugh at the cxpcucc
of those who got so agreeable a sousing upon
dock, when we hoard the cry of “ a man overboard."
Upon looking round, the crown of Taylor's hat
was seen just above water; his face was com-
pletely under, his arms were lifted up over his
head, and in one hand he hold a man’s shoo.
Being no swimmer, he was perfectly helpless, or
he had every chance to save himself.
It may be judged what our feelings were to
behold a shipmate, but a boat’s length from us,
perishing before our eyes, without the possibility
of rendering him the least assistance. A rope


was liovc close to him as the ship slowly forded
ahead, but to no purpose ; he waved his arms
over his head, and still retained the man’s
shoe in his grasp. His only chance for life was
now over, and as he went astern, the albatross
and other birds gathered over his head, as if in
anticipation of their repast. We were obliged
to turn from the melancholy scene to conceal
our emotions. This distressing occurrence,
throw a damp upon our feelings, from which wc
did not recover for some time.
The unfortunate man wont out with another
hand to make fust the jib. When the sea struck
■the ship she pitched very heavily ; and ho was
capsized over the boom; losing his hold, he
grasped the other man’s legs, he held on for
a few seconds and then fell, dragging off one of
the man’s shoes with him.
Before four o’clock the following morning, the
wind came fair for us, but was still blowing very
fresh. The ship was put before it, and in a few
minutes was rushing through the water at the
rate of ton knots per hour. What a noble look-
ing object is a ship, when seen scudding in a


self tolerably warm by that means. Unci we
continued long in this climate, but few would
have been loft able to do duty. One severe
night, in which all bands wore two hours upon
the fore yard, attempting to reef the foresail,
we were so exhausted, that, upon turning out at
four o’clock next morning, only four hands and
myself wore able to come upon deck.
The worst part of the passage was now over,
and we were to the eastward of the Horn, steer-
ing to the Northward and Eastward. The
breeze was strong and fair; each successive day
brought an addition of clay-light, and in a, fort-
night’s ran, the genial warmth of the sun began
to be sensibly felt. The rapidity of the change
from the chilling frosts of winter to the gentle
zephyrs of summer, could only be equalled by
uni' pleasure at the transition. Every week
made some alteration in the articles of dress ;
and wo were soon reduced from wearing two and
three shirts, guernseys, waistcoats, stockings,
&c., to a single shirt and a thin pair of duck
trousers, which constitute all the dress of a
sailor in warm climates.


On the 27th of June, we were in IS. 25. S,,
where wo got the south-east trade wind. The
ship now hegau to wear a different appearance to
her snug and reduced sail in the wintry region,
which was now far behind. Every sail that
could be possibly set, was now sent aloft to in-
vite the prosperous gale. Studding sails, llying-
iih, royals, top-gallant sails, &c., made a (infer-
ence in her, resembling the contrasted appear-
ance of a plant, when, after having been robbed
ol its foliage, by the cold blasts of winter, it is
clothed afresh with all the luxuriant verdure of
(he spring.
On the 2nd of July, wo crossed the oquinoeiial
line, in the longitude of IS. \V. Ships either
outward or homeward hound, usually cross it
between the meridians of 18. ami 22. W., (0
avoid the calms which almost constantly prevail
between these longitudes and the coast of Africa.
Several sail wore in sight every day ; hut we
spoke none of them. Wo had now been absent
from England three years and nine days : having
circumnavigated the globe : traversed the Pacific
and Indian Oceans in various directions : and ex-
perienced all climates ; from the scorching bents


ill’ India, to tiio cold freezing blasts of (.lie south-
ern Frigid Zone.
Although seamen employed in a whaling voy-
age, are, from (lie nature of it, greatly exposed
to privations and various hardships; yet few
vessels, milking long voyages, can shew cleaner
bills of health. In the course of the voyage four
hands had been lost. Two by accident previous
to going into Port Jackson ; one died a natural
death soon after leaving that port ; and the other
poor fellow lost his life a few days hefnre doub-
ling Cape Horn.
About this time, each man was put upon an
allowance of live pounds of bread per week ;
the bad qualities of which, as well as of our salt
provisions from age, made this reduction se-
verely felt. When the breeze was strong and
fair, these privations were, by most of ns, re-
garded as trifles: lint, during the calms and light
ballling winds
“ When nil tins canvass hangs supine,
And niuiAii and wateii failing,” —
onr feelings were none of the must pleasing
nature.


On July Sth, we were in S. 8. N. This day
wo got a light breeze ; and a vessel hove in
sight. The chief mntc lowered a boat and wont
on hoard. Shu proved to lie the Messenger, be-
longing to the isle of Jersey, hound to Rio
Janeiro from North America. She reported
eight ships lost in the gulf of St. Lawrence,
whilst she was there. The captain of her sent
letters by us to the owners, announcing her
safety. They had boon becalmed upwards of a
week, before they saw ns, after losing the north-
east trade wind.
From this time until the nineteenth, we had
foul and hallling winds, accompanied with much
rain, which enabled ns to save between eighteen
and twenty barrels of excellent water; a most
seasonable supply, ns the passage to England
wore the appearance of being much longer, than
in the eagerness of onr hopes, we had at first
anticipated.
On the 1 Utli, the north-east trade wind set in,
gradually increasing in strength as wo advanced
to the northward ; the weather being beautifully
clear and line


On the 20th, wo were in 28. 7- N. anil 35. W.
Saw plenty of gulf-weed, which is supposed to
lie thrown into the Atlantic, by the strong cur-
rent that sets out of the Gulf of Florida. Two
days afterwards we lost the trade wind, and had
a succession of light breezes and calms.
Only those who have been long absent from
their friends and connexions—from those whose
affection and esteem they prize—and, in again
beholding them more than half the pleasure of
return consists, can form an idea of the tedi-
onsucss of delays on board a ship, especially
when occasioned by calms. There were some on
hoard, who felt only the ordinary impatience
which seamen usually evince to arrive at any
port. I envied their equanimity ; hut pitied
them for the loss of that cxtatic pleasure, which
the warmer emotions of the heart only can
bestow.
On the 7th of August, wo saw Corvo and
Flores, two of the Western Islands. This was
the first land wo had seen since leaving New
Zealand, and had the weather been favorable fur
that purpose, it was the captain’s intention to


obtain a supply of the delicious fruits, which
these islands produce so abundantly. But
the breeze was strong ami fair : wo were impa-
tient again to behold the laud of our birth ; and
the refreshment, however desirable, would scarce-
ly have been considered an equivalent for the
delay, even of a few hours. In the afternoon
the breeze freshened considerably, accompanied
with a long, heavy swell, from the south-west;
ami the royal yards and masts wore sent down.
The breeze continued strong and fair for about
twenty-four hours, when it again, to our great
disappointment, look us all aback in a squall,
shifting round, soon after, to the east-north-east,
dead in our teeth.
We were detained with calms and light winds
until the 10th, when a licet of North America
timber-men hove insight. Then ind freshened
up from the eastward, it having been a dead
calm the two previous days ; they wore standing
to the westward under a crowd of canvass, stud-
ding-sails on Both sides, and made a noble ap-
pearance. There were hat few on hoard of ns,
however, hut who wished to see their jibs draw.


for If wc did not got a supply of provisions, nod
the wind continued in the same (pnirler (or a
fortnight, our stuck would be exhausled. The
ca[ilidn Iherol'orc pniilonlly determineil In lower
u boat, and obtain a few cwt. of broad, if possi-
ble, from one, of tbe. ships, by wbiob we were
now surrounded. The mate went on board this
Marshal Macdonald, the captain of which vessel,
it is bat justice to state, acted like a Ibilish
seaman to others in distress, lie bad oven an-
ticipated, and prepared to relieve, our wants,
before the boat was within bail of Ids ship, lie
seat three cwt. of bread, a keg of rum, a stock
of coffee, sugar, and tobacco. A most seasonable
supply, particularly tbe latter.
Tbe color of the sea bad now changed from
the deep blue to a dark green, which induced us
to try for soundings with the deep sea. lead
line, and we found bottom at eighty fathoms.
Wo killed several porpoises with a harpoon
whilst boxing off the mouth of the channel,
which were eaten by ns with a relish, which
those only who have been five months constantly
on salt meat, can form a competent idea of.


On the 20lb, the wind hauled round to the
northward, and the ship lay on her course.
Early on the morning uf the 21st, we entered
the Channel, ami got a pilot from a Cowe’s boat,
which was cruising oil' the Land’s end. The ■wind
was now strong and lair, and the weather delight-
fully line. When oil' Dover, the French coast
was plainly discernible with the naked eye. We
were obliged to lie to hero about half an boni-
fur another pilot, ns the Channel pilots arc not
allowed to lake a, ship further than the Downs.
Our captain went ashore, and took coach for
Loudon ; we gave him three hearty cheers as the
hunt shoved oil'from the ship.
A stock of fresh beef, with potatoes, onions,
cabbages, &c., was sent oil' to us by the owner’s
agent. The vegetables, not even the potatoes
excepted, were partly oaten before the cook had
time to prepare his coppers.
It was amusing to witness the surprise and as-
tonishment of a native young man whom wo had
brought from Rotunuih, at the many strange, ami
to him wonderful, objects which now began to sur-
round him. But the size of the legs of beef seemed
2 t


most to attract his attention. He had never
seen a larger animal than a pig, and his mind
seemed absorbed in the idea of the immensity of
the monster, the leg only of which was larger
than any animal he had ever before any concep-
tion of. “By and by” said he in his broken
English “ me go Rotnmah, mo speak all that me
see, Rotumah man say, mo tell plenty lie.”
After doubling the North Foreland, the wind
came foul, but with a beautiful working breeze ;
wo brought up in the evening a few miles below
the Nore light, until next tide. In the two fol-
lowing tide’s work we got about three miles
above Gravesend, when a small steamer sheered
alongside, and offered to take ns up for eight
pounds. Every man willingly agreed to ho his
share, and by throe o’clock the next morning,
Sunday, having gained a day by circumnavigating
the globe, we were safely moored in the Now
London Dock basin ; making exactly throe years
and two months from the time of sailing from
Gravesend.
U. B. Jarman, Printer, Bwlw.


