

■ :
i/HUivt /fa uynyyvcK tj?l
%tru.OA<-jUS fa
* fill /r ■
y<UX~ 'Cpt^jr/ f£ N. vT. M
,7
t tti <m


• >


JOURNAL OF A ROUTE
FROM
BATHURST TO LIVERPOOL PLAINS,
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
0*
EXPLORED BY
MR. ALLAN CUNNINGHAM,
HIS majesty’s botanical collector for kew gardens.
(With a Map.)


■ • V
;T ~ • •: ■: ■■ ' ; ~ r •>. * -
"f ' ; ; • ; :


JOURNAL,
On Monday the 31st March, 1823, I set out
with my people for the settlement of Bathurst.
In the afternoon we crossed the Nepean River,
and encamped at the foot of the Blue Mountains,
about two miles beyond the settlement of Emu.
At daybreak of the Ist April we resumed our
journey over the mountains. Upon reaching Spring-
wood, about noon, we rested our horses awhile, and
then continued onward until sunset, when, having
travelled twenty-four miles, we halted, and pitched
our tents at a swamp, which afforded us abundance
of tolerable water, although the supply of grass
or herbage for our horses was exceedingly small.
The thermometer had a considerable range in the
course of the day. At six A.M. the mercury
stood at 66°, at eleven at 83°, from which it fell
at seven P.M. to 68°. Much rain fell in the
course of the night.


The morning of the 2d, however, although a
little cloudy, had every appearance of a fair day.
The thermometer, at seven A.M., when we con-
tinued our journey, showed 70°, rising to 75° at
three P.M., when we reached Blackheath, another
day’s stage. A southerly wind, that had been
blowing fresh all the day, at length brought up
some heavy black clouds, which, in passing to the
N.W., drenched us with rain, ere we could pitch
our tents. At night again, heavy rain, with
thunder and lightning, set in for the night, con-
tinuing with alarming fury until daybreak of the
3d, when the storm partially subsided, leaving
me, however, undetermined to advance, since fre-
quent showers were falling, and a thick mist co-
vered the whole of the mountains in the vicinity.
About eight A.M. the thermometer stood at 59°,
and the clouds breaking to the westward, I was
induced to make an effort to reach Cox’s River in
the course of the day. The air was exceedingly
moist and raw, and every way disagreeable for
travelling. We descended the pass without acci-
dent, and arrived at Cox’s River early in the after-
noon, when I again rested my horses for this day.


having in view a fatiguing stage to-morrow, that
would occupy the whole of that day. The ther-
mometer was stationary at 60° throughout the
afternoon, falling 2° at eight P.M.
4th. The morning was exceedingly cloudy, and
much rain fell in the hilly range before us to the
Fish River, which we crossed at two P.M.; and
upon advancing four miles beyond it, to Emu
Valley, we encamped for the night, when rain
again set in, with a fresh S.E. breeze.
Saturday, sth. Raw, moist atmosphere; wind
at S.E.; the thermometer, at seven P.M., was 59°.
Having despatched my cart and pack-horses on
their last stage to Bathurst, I rode forward, in
order to reach that settlement early in the fore-
noon, to secure a ration of fresh beef from His
Majesty’s store for myself and people, who did not
arrive at the plains until sunset.
6th to the 14th. The weather has been between
these periods extremely unsettled and variable.
On Monday the 14th, I superintended the
packing of my provisions, reducing my heavy lug-
gage to pack-horse carriage, and issuing to each


of my five men a complete suit of warm winter
clothing.
Tuesday, 15th. Morning very foggy, with
every indication, of a warm day. Took my de-
parture from Bathurst with five heavy laden pack-
horses and five men, with provisions for ten weeks,
purposing to explore the country north from the
Cugeegong River, as far as the extensive clear
tracts of level land called Liverpool Plains. The
vegetation of the line of country to the Cugeegong
River (whose left bank we reached in the afternoon
of the 18th) assumed a very different appearance
from that which I observed in November last.
Few plants were in flower; but the late rains had
caused a great exuberance in those species that
clothe the lower lands and are generally valuable
to the grazier. Having crossed the Cugeegong
at my old ford, I pitched the tents on a flat, upon
its right bank, which, from the near approach of
the hills to the river, afforded me greater security
for my horses. Weather clouded, with a thunder
squall to the westward in the afternoon.
Saturday, 19th. A very fine morning. Since


it is very probable that I may, in my return from
my proposed long tour, penetrate through the
broken mountainous country to the eastward of
my present encampment, whence the Cugeegong
derives its origin, I have determined to trace the
river upwards to a small cleared flat, void of timber,
named the Plain of Daby, in order to make such
observations upon the country as will be useful to
the colonial government, and enable me fully to
recognize certain leading features of it, should I
be obliged to return southerly through it to Ba-
thurst, at the close of this journey. I accordingly
reforded the Cugeegong, directing my people to
proceed forward with the horses up its left bank.
Steep, abrupt hills, inclining sharply to the water,
soon, however, obliged me to quit the river alto-
gether in search of a better and more moderately
rising country for my heavily laden beasts. At
length, after pursuing a route varying S.S.E. and
E. for four hours, I found it only possible to proceed
forwards by climbing a main range, from which I
found all the minor rocky hills diverged. About
four P.M. a favourable and easy descent induced
me to quit the range, when I soon entered the


valley discovered last year, crossed the pretty
swamp-oak creek that runs through it, and in an
hour I got among my old marked trees, leading
me to the junction of the creek and the Cugeegong
River, as well as to the spot where I had forded
the latter last December. As the day was closing
in upon me, and my horses were much fatigued,
I halted on a flat near the river for the night,
sending three of my people up the stream, in
search of a safe shoal, to lead the pack-horses over,
to the north or right bank. The night throughout
was very chilly, although my thermometer con-
tinued stationary at 46°.
Monday, 21st. Morning foggy. Thermometer,
at seven A.M., 46°. Resuming our journey east-
erly, we pursued our route as near the bank of
the river as the rocky hills, clothed with an un-
interesting brush-wood and callitris pyramidalis,
would allow us, occasionally passing through some
grassy valleys, thinly clothed with a stunted
timber of the few ordinary kinds of eucalyptus.
The Cugeegong, in these stages of our ascent,
presents some pretty basins of deep stagnant
water, from which it occasionally dwindles to


a small glassy creek, whose channel is wholly
choked up with reeds (arundo phragmites) and
typha minor. Crossing at one of these narrows,
our course was E.N.E. over a fine grassy country,
occasionally seeing the river meandering below us;
when, having effected twelve miles, and rain again
falling, we were induced to encamp on a fine reach
of the Cugeegong, about four miles west of the
plain of Daby. In this day’s stage I observed no
signs of inhabitants, and no animals of any de-
scription. Granite is frequent on the hills and in
the bed of the river; limestone being also abundant
on the higher lands, as well as on the immediate
banks of this stream.
Tuesday, 2!*Jd. Heavy rain continued through-
out the fore part of the day, obliging us to remain
within our tents. In the afternoon, I sent two
men to the eastward, to a swamp observed from a
ridge in the route of yesterday, and suspected to
be the flat named by the natives Daby. In the
evening they returned, reporting that they had
crossed the plain, or flat, which was about three
miles and a half distant from our tents, and that
on the western edge of it an extensive grazier, re-


siding at Bathurst, had recently erected a hut and
stock-yard. The wind continued fresh from the
east, with exceedingly clouded weather. Thermo-
meter, at eight A.M., 52°, and at four P.M. 55°.
Wednesday, 23d. Much wind during the night,
and cloudy weather continued this morning. At
eight A.M. we proceeded E.N.E. through a tim-
bered grassy country about four miles, when we en-
tered the open bare lands of Daby, through which
the Cugeegong winds from the eastern broken
country, being joined on the western side of the
plain by a creek of running water, proceeding from
the northern rocky semicircle of hills. The Cu-
geegong here preserves an uniform width of twelve
yards, the banks being low, muddy, and abounding
in reeds; and thus it divides the heart of the flat
lands of Daby from east to N.W. Daby, of whose
fine pasturage much has been said at Bathurst,
may be described as a tract of several miles in
length, from S.E. to N.W., well covered with
an abundance of grazing herbage, thinly wooded,
having patches perfectly bare of tree or shrub, and
of an exceedingly rich, black, moist, loamy soil,
adapted to all the purposes of agriculture. Amidst


these fine patches of land there are portions some-
what elevated above the ordinary level of the flats,
which are composed wholly of a loose deep sand,
and productive (in conformity with the general
character of the continent) of several curious and
interesting plants. A double hill, bearing east
from my tent, induced me, by its rocky aspect and
elevated appearance, to ascend it, as well to exa-
mine its botanical productions, as to take a few
cross bearings of the principal points of this irre-
gular country. Several small kangaroos were
skipping around the rocks, of which the higher
parts of the hill are formed: they were, however,
too active to allow us to shoot them, instantly re-
treating into the deep recesses of the summits.
24th. My horses had been so negligently shod
at Bathurst, that the shoes of two were falling off
already; and I was obliged to despatch a man
back to the settlement for a supply of spare shoes
and nails.
The man having returned to me on the after-
noon of the 26th, the shoes of all my horses were
secured, and some repairs to their pack-saddles
being effected, I determined to proceed northerly on


Monday, 28th. The exceedingly broken sub-
mountainous structure of the country at N.E., N.
and N.N.W., obliged me to commence my route
from the plain of Daby, on the Cugeegong, con-
siderably to the west of north, in part over a rising
open forest land, tolerably well watered, lightly
timbered, and occasionally interspersed with con-
fined brushes. Availing myself of the country’s
at length allowing me to travel north, I descended
to a grassy valley, bounded by rocky hills of mo-
derate ascent, which I traced, as it declined at
north by west along the margin of a swamp; when,
having effected ten miles, we halted in a vale
beneath a part of the boundary hills, which was
studded with limestone of an excellent quality.
29th. Throughout the following seven miles the
country is a succession of wet valleys and dividing
ridges; the former declining westerly towards the
Cugeegong, into which it was evident that the
waters that had collected and formed in each a
swamp, drained the land at due north, and more
especially to the east of that point, continuing
broken and very irregular. The timber was the
same as that of the river, with occasionally a tew


iron-bark trees, on the brushy descents from the
hills. The general disposition of the leading ridges,
at nearly right angles, with a direct north course,
rendered the succeeding ten miles of the journey
rather fatiguing, especially as the ascents to the
summits of the intersected ranges were exceedingly
steep, rocky, and otherwise difficult; and the inter-
jacent narrow valleys continuing to dip westerly,
showed us that their only point of easy access is from
the bank of the river. An extent of apple-tree (ango-
phara lanceolata) flats at length succeeds, with little
or no interruption during four miles, to the base of
a ridge of hills lying east and west; and although
this part of the country abounds in kangaroos of
large size, it appeared wholly unfrequented by
natives, no traces whatever (such as had been every
where obvious on the trees in our previous route)
being observed in the whole extent. This cir-
cumstance may, however, be reasonably attributed
to the absence of water, none being found by our
expedition until we had reached the foot of some
rising grounds, bounding these flat lands to the
north. The timbers are of apple-tree, iron-bark,
stringy-bark, and box of ordinary size. The rocks


Were chiefly of a decomposing sand-stone, with a
pudding-stone studded with pebbles of quartz and
jasper. A few detached blocks of granite were
also observed in a swampy vale.
30th. Upon leaving our encamping ground
under a hill named Mount Burchell, and passing
through a boggy tea-tree (melaleuca linariifolia)
swamp, at the immediate base of the above-men-
tioned boundary hills, whose waters it receives;
and upon penetrating thence about a mile through
a body of honeysuckle (banksia integrifolia) brush,
our route was effectually stopped by the broken
precipitous aspect of the country. Perpendicular
ridges, faced with rock, overhanging ravines of
considerable depth, occupied a range of the com-
pass from north to E.S.E. By dint of much la-
bour we attained the summit of a grassy range at
N.N.W.; and I hence beheld not only the frightful
irregularity of the country easterly, to whose verge
we had approached, but had a bird’s-eye view of
a very promising land, extending forty-five or fifty
miles before us, to the base of a range of moun-
tains lying east and west, and which bounded
my view to the north; the intermediate country,


although hilly, appearing very practicable. Having
taken a set of important bearings of points above
the horizontal summit of this extensive range,
which I considered might possibly constitute the
grand southern boundary of Liverpool Plains # , we
descended to a rich grassy valley winding to the
N.W.; and having traced it about four miles,
crossed a fine creek running to the westward, and
forming the boundary limit, north of the extensive
vale, which it abundantly and permanently waters.
May Ist. Onward northerly, about three miles,
since the ranges of hills, which were generally
disposed N.N.W. and S.S.E., would not allow us
to pursue a course better than N.N.W., we tra-
velled over a continuation of low grassy hills and
vales, thinly timbered with the usual species of
eucalyptus; when upon penetrating through a
narrow patch of iron-bark brush, the country at
once became open, the soil rich and loamy, the ge-
* An inference drawn from the observations of a Mr. Scott
y
who (with Lieutenant Lawson) in searching for Liverpool
Plains last year, having penetrated to the base of a lofty im-
passable range of mountains, returned, considering that he
had passed either to the east or to the west of those extensive
cleared tracts of country.


neral surface nearly level and but slightly wooded,
enabling us to advance due north about five miles,
with no other interruption than that of passing
a large muddy watercourse descending westerly,
which, although nearly dry and choked with reeds
at this , is evidently a considerable rivulet in
the rains-, as we gathered from the ufreck of wood
and stubble upon its banks. Another mile, north
by east, brought us to the base of a rocky sterile
range of bare hills, which appeared to extend them-
selves far to the eastward, whence another creek of
like form and importance with that we had passed
rose, receiving, as it advanced westerly, the drained
waters of the broken rocky ridge at whose foot it
ran. Although the country to the westward, in
continuation of the thinly wooded forest land over
which we had travelled, appeared perfectly open,
moderately timbered, and every way adapted to
travelling, as far as I could observe from the higher
rocks of the bold range, its northern boundary, yet
having already made more westing in my northerly
course, in consequence of the general disposition
of its main ridges, than I had originally intended,
I penetrated through an uninteresting brush-wood


of the irregularly-surfaced rocky ridge, and then
proceeded N.N.E. about two miles over a diversified
tract, in part a sterile siliceous scrub, connected
with the ridge, and in part a patch of thinly wooded
grassy flat, indifferently watered, and named by
the aborigines Nandoura, which again immediately
becomes invested with considerable sandy brushes
of honeysuckle.
2d. From the small flat of Nandoura, an uni-
formly bad country extends nine miles, the greater
portion of which consists of a level forest, inter-
sected by deep, muddy, reedy creeks and stagnant
holes of water, clothed with a small useless timber
of box and blue gum; the soil being for the most
part a stiff tenacious clay, producing a wiry grass,
interspersed with tufts of rushy and harsh plants
of cyperaceae, decidedly indicative of a permanently
wet tract of country, from whose nearly level sur-
face the rains are but partially drained.
3d. Low stony ridges, covered with a very
dense, lofty brush of underwood, and heavily tim-
bered with tapering iron-bark, occasionally inter-
sected our route.
4th. And as the country at length obviously


declined to tlie N.E. and east, in the direction of
some prominent points in the belt of mountains
before us (of which bearings had been taken in the
earlier stages of our journey), we fully hoped we
were fast approaching the verge of a more open
and improved tract of land, although at a lower
V
level than the miserable desolate country through
which we were penetrating.
6th. Pursuing a steady course N.E., we, in two
miles, passed the confine of these uninteresting,
unprofitable washes; and upon reaching the brow
of the ridge of forest hills, we at once descended to
a fine tract of good country, watered by a stream,
whose winding channel could be easily traced by
the particularly dark verdure of the swamp-oak
(casuarina paludosa) on its banks, several miles in
a N.E. direction. This small river (which I since
learnt is the Goulburn of Lieutenant Lawson,
whose marked trees we have repeatedly intersected
in our route from the Cugeegong) presented to us
at this period a stream thirty-six feet wide, flowing
to the S.S.E. and S.E., within an ample outer
reedy channel of fifty yards in breadth, which
should seem to be filled in some seasons of heavy


rains, wherein its waters are swollen to a perpen-
dicular height of twelve feet above the present
ordinary level, as appears by the lodgment of stubble
in the branches of the stupendous swamp-oaks on
its margin. The Goulburn evidently takes its rise
in the south face of the mountainous ranges, which
were distant from us from ten to fifteen miles, and
which extend (as far as could be observed) from
N.W. to about E.N.E.; and the river having
watered some beautiful open grazing lands on its
left bank, winds S.W. to the rocky bases of the
hilly ridges, by which we had descended to this
truly fine country, and thence it takes a decided
bend to the S.E. Its rocks are of a sand-stone,
often coloured with oxyd of iron; and although
fragments of a compact whin were met within its
channel, they appear to have been rolled down
from the lofty northern ranges in the vicinity. The
large cod and bream (as they are called) of the
waters falling westerly, which by reason of their
voracious nature are easily taken by the angler,
have not been observed in this river, the deep clear
pools of which abounded with a short, thick, black
fish, not to be tempted by our baits.


Upon taking a retrospect of my irregular route
(exceeding eighty miles) from the Cugeegong River
to this stream, I would observe that, although
portions in my latter stages are barren and unim-
provable, the interjacent valleys, in the hilly part
of my tour, afford excellent cattle pasturage, and
will probably ere long be every way worthy of the
consideration of the grazier, their respective points
of entrance being evidently from the banks of the
Cugeegong, or country in a north line from Mudgee.
Goulburn River is distant, by the most prac-
ticable route, 125 miles north from Bathurst, and
about sixty-five or seventy miles N.W. from the
head of Paterson’s River (a branch of Hunter’s
River), a good meridional altitude of the sun
placing the ford, by which we passed it, exactly in
the parallel of 32° south, its presumed longitude
by estimation being 149° 54'.
7th. Along the left bank of this interesting
stream, to the N.E., an extent of nine miles of
rich grazing tracts meets the eye, consisting of
clear open levels or small plains, and grassy hills
of the most easy acclivity, which to the S.E.
are bounded by ridges of forest land, thinly


clothed with timber. The level tracts, immediately
bounded by the river, occasionally break into small
plains, whose areas comprise from 100 to 150
acres, clear of tree or shrub, and with the downs,
or open gently rising grounds, furnish all the
grasses and herbage of the Cugeegong and other
western rivers, with the addition of a tall luxuriant
species of danthonia, or kind of oat-grass, not re-
marked on other streams.
The soil of these limited plains, or more level
lands, is of a moist alluvial nature; whilst that of
the small downs, especially near the southern ex-
tremity of this beautiful tract of country, is rich,
loamy, and dry, possessing every advantage of local
situation to call forth the diligence of the agri-
culturist; and being admirably adapted to the
formation of artificial meadows for sheep, or wheat
lands, as far as the boundary rocky hills to the S. E.
Viewed collectively, the lands on Goulburn River
offer an eligible situation for the establishment of
a very profitable and convenient agricultural and
grazing farm, inasmuch as it will be centrically
distanced between the located pasture-lands on
Hunter’s River, and our future stock stations on


Liverpool Plains. Their only possible line of com-
munication will, by reason of the structure of the
country, be found to intersect the Goulburn, at or
about the ford by which we passed that stream.
Bth. Leaving Goulburn River, our course to the
N.E. led us about seven miles over a part of the
hilly ridge, forming the lateral branches of the
northern belt of mountains before us, which ap-
peared to extend very far to the eastward; and
upon descending to a narrow, rich, grassy valley,
we reached another water, having all the characters,
in point of breadth, depth, velocity, and tendency,
of the Goulburn. This small stream, which was
discovered last year by Lieutenant Lawson during
his tour with Mr. Scott, was then named the
Wemyss, as a compliment to our Deputy Com-
missary-General, and together with a third stream,
which I have now named Scott’s Rivulet, flowing
through an open, clear apple-tree flat, about a mile
east of it, rises in the northern barrier, and pursues
a course through a very considerable level, wooded
country to the S.S.E. and S.E.
9th. Continuing our route N.E. along the margin
of Scott’s Rivulet, towards some very conspicuous


points in the mountain barrier, distant about fifteen
miles (of which bearings had been originally taken
in the earlier stages of these journeys), the country
again becomes hilly, and in other respects resembles
the land to the westward of Wemyss’s River. It,
however, becoming more lofty, irregular, and broken
by deep narrow valleys, as I approached within
five miles of a lofty point in this barrier of moun-
tains, which I have named Oxley’s Peak, I deemed
it prudent to halt, and having encamped, to ex-
amine the country around me from the most com-
manding eminence to which I could ascend, being
fully satisfied that the distance to which I had pene-
trated from Bathurst, and the course by which I
had conducted my little expedition, ought to have
brought us to the verge of those large plains, to
whose vast extent Mr. Oxley has in his Journal
made special reference.
10th. It was w r ith no small difficulty, and by a
penetration to the centre of this formidable barrier,
in which I crossed numerous streamlets proceeding
from the many branching, steep, walled ravines
around me, whose union formed the pretty rivulet
which ran past our tents to the S.S.E., that I was


enabled to reach the summit of a mount, which
I have named M‘Arthur’s (after my respected
friend Hannibal M‘Arthur, Esq.), and which com-
mands a most extensive view on all sides, amply
repaying me for the fatigue experienced in attain-
ing these pinnacles of the barrier.
The country to the westward of our line of route
from the Cugeegong appeared open, level, and mo-
derately timbered, compared with the course I had
pursued thence to Goulburn River ; as did also the
lands bearing from S.E. by south, to south, through
which that stream, together with other waters
which we had passed to the east of it, flows. The
view between those points extends for a distance
of between forty and forty-five miles to ranges of
hills of ordinary elevation, which border upon that
extreme point of Paterson’s River, situate N.W.
from the point of Howe’s line of intersection, as
seen in Mr. Oxley’s large chart, published by Arrow-
smith. This entire extent of southern country, on
whose ample surface small patches of plain were
remarked, seemed as if it would afford to the farmers
of Hunter’s River (upon passing the hills in their
own immediate vicinity) every facility of com-


munication with the N.W. interior by the way of
Goulburn River. To the S.E. the land is irregular
and ridgy; and thence more east to N.E., and even
N.N.E., it gradually rises to a bold and mountain-
ous feature, the declination of the country being
uniformly south. Upon looking north and N.N.W.,
I was gratified with a most extensive view of those
considerable plains, which have been in part the
object of my search, whose expanse of cleared sur-
face we should ere this have traversed, had the
structure of the country been favourable to our
northerly advancement. The greater body of
Liverpool Plains hereabouts lie N.N.W., from
which narrow lateral branches extend several miles
to the east, between some detached woody ridges,
variously disposed on the general surface. These
strips stretch themselves again south to the im-
mediate base of the barrier ranges on which I was
stationed. A few detached mounds of conical and
rounded figures were scattered on the greater or
main patches of plain, beyond which the expanse
of level country continues for a distance which I
could not justly estimate, on account of the haze
that hung over it. The rock of the more elevated


parts of this mountainous range is a compact whin,
generally disposed in horizontal strata, although,
on the summit of the point whence'l had taken a
set of bearings of the country around, it assumed
a basaltic form, being disposed vertically in cubical
masses: the bases are sand and pudding-stone.
Although there appeared no difficulty in passing
along the winding declivities of the northern face
of the mountains to a branch of Liverpool Plains
immediately beneath me, the ascent, nevertheless,
to this station from my encampment was so ex-
ceedingly steep and precipitous, as to render it
totally impossible to lead my packhorses over them.
I therefore determined (since the moderate appear-
ance of the ranges east favoured my intention) to
trace their south base in that direction in search
of a pass, by which not only my horses, but the
cattle and sheep of the farmer, might pass without
danger, to those extensive pastures situate on their
northern side.
11th to 16th. However, after pursuing an
easterly course five days, in which we effected
about thirty-five miles of very severe hilly tra-
velling, all further advancing was totally stopped


by the mountain ranges; and their lateral wings
becoming bluff and fronted by perpendicular rocks,
which formed a chain of deep precipitous ravines
from N.E. to nearly S.S.E., an outlet to the flat
southern country at south by west, and S.S.W.,
was the only direction left us to pursue. Ex-
hausting as may easily be conceived to be a journey,
whose course had uniformly met at right angles
the lofty lateral branches of this collection of moun-
tains, it nevertheless was not without its interest
and importance ; since it determined the extent
northerly of the interjacent valleys, as well as the
number, size and general appearance of the creeks
or rivulets, which water them at so high a stage,
immediately beneath the main barrier, and at only
a mile or two from their origin.
From Goulburn River to our most eastern point
of penetration, no fewer than nineteen large creeks,
or swamp-oak rivulets, very distinct at their re-
spective points of rising, fall from the southern
declivities of these mountain ranges, and with a
considerable rapidity descend south and S.S.E. to
the fine level country, which, from all the points
in every stage of our eastern route, was seen at those


bearings. Several of these waters constitute at once
rivulets, which in some periods of heavy rains are
swollen to a width varying from eight to twelve
yards, the evidences of which were obvious in the
stubble that had lodged itself on the branches of
the swamp casuarinse, which clothe and shade their
banks; and of these one stream, proceeding from
a point of the mountains to which several ravines
converge, exhibited all the proofs of being, in the
wet season, so considerable as not only to fill its
ample channel (exceeding ninety feet in breadth),
but to inundate the fine grassy open meadows on
either bank. Heavy logs, the wrecks of successive
floods, were heaped upon one another, seven feet
above the then ordinary level, or two feet higher
than the outer bank.
Since the whole of these streams have one com-
mon tendency southerly, towards the extreme or
western point of that trunk or main branch of the
Coal River, which had been formerly intersected
by Mr. Howe, in his journey north from Windsor,
little or no doubt can exist of their constituting its
principal sources, especially as the body of water,
which the confluence of these rivulets might be


supposed to form, agrees with the magnitude of
Hunter’s River at that particular stage of its
ascent. The principal valleys, which generally lie
north and south, stretch themselves, from the im-
mediate base of the mountain ranges, to the mo-
derate country southerly, whence they are easily
accessible, are copiously watered, and furnish ex-
cellent cattle food, whilst their boundary hills
afford generally an ample range of sheep pasture.
Having failed in our attempts easterly, to dis-
cover any part of moderate elevation in this ex-
tensive line of bold mountainous land, by which I
might have passed to the northward, and with a
view of returning to my encampment on Goulburn
River, whence I had determined to explore the
continuation of this mountainous barrier westerly,
I descended south, purposing upon reaching the
open forest to pursue my journey west, at such a
distance from the lateral grassy ranges proceeding
from the mountains, as would enable my people
and horses (both of which had been harassed in
the course thus far to the eastward) to travel with
ease and despatch.
19th. In about eight miles of progressive descent


S.S.E. through a fine thinly-wooded grazing forest,
we intersected a small river, formed evidently by the
junction of several of the mountain streams, and
winding to the E.S.E. through a beautiful flat
tract, wooded chiefly with angophora or apple-
tree. Its outer banks were forty yards wide, al-
though the breadth of the stream at this season
did not exceed sixteen feet, by an extreme depth
of two fathoms; but as the land in its vicinity is
entirely alluvial, and exceedingly rich, and the
marks of floods were observed eighteen feet above
the surface of the water, it is evidently swollen
to a very considerable extent when heavy rains
fall upon the mountains. Upon passing this
stream at a pebbly ford, we continued our journey
south about three miles, through a level grassy
country, moderately wooded with several trees of
apple and gum, and bounded to the west by a
steep abrupt ridge of hills, extending south from
the barrier ranges from which we had retreated;
the country to the east, as far as S.E., still con-
tinuing in bold, lofty, hummocky ranges. In the
hope that the steep rocky chain of hills westerly,
which occasionally presented perpendicular stony


heads to the S.E. would terminate, or become so
moderate, that we might shape a direct course
across the country to Goulburn River, we travelled
as near its base as the small broken water-gulleys
proceeding from it would allow.
20th. Journeying onward south about sixteen
miles, through a rather indifferent country, occa-
sionally breaking to an open grazing forest, and
again becoming brushy, barren, and confined by
much underwood, we at length were enabled pro-
gressively to advance west, by penetrating an
abrupt, broken, narrow tract of country, con-
sisting of bold steep ridges, bluff heads, and
unconnected, irregularly-formed, stony elevations,
separated from each other by small sharp grassy
valleys, through which my pack-horses were able
to travel without difficulty. Doubtless the whole
once formed a line of connexion with the length-
ened range of precipitous hills, whose base we had
traced southerly twenty-five miles, and which at
this stage terminated in perpendicular rocky crags
of sand-stone, in a rapid state of decomposition.
From some points of the rising grounds in the
latter part of our route to this broken tract, I ob-


served the considerable expanse of open moderately-
timbered country, which we were leaving to the
east and S.E., to be bounded in the far distance
by low forest hills, and seemingly to afford every
facility to a penetration to the coast line.
21st. Quitting these narrow passes, we traced
a fine rich valley about three miles in a north-
westerly direction, when we reached the bank of
another river, flowing gently to the southward
between the hills that bounded the fertile flat on
which we had encamped. It is evidently formed
of a union of several of the mountain rivulets,
and although its stream did not exceed twenty
feet in breadth, by the depth of one fathom, I
could not but be forcibly struck with the obvious
proofs of the immense floods that at certain periods
descend from the northern ranges, and overflow
the high outer banks, which are at least eighty
yards apart. Heavy logs, the wreck of successive
freshes, were heaped upon each other on the se-
condary banks of this river, whilst the stems of
several sturdy swamp casuarinae inclined so as to
form an angle of about 45° with the bed of the
river; and those, that had withstood the enormous


weight and pressure of many tons of flowing water,
bore on their limbs a mass of small timber and
stubble at least twenty feet above the ordinary
level of the stream. There existed no proof of
these great floods occurring periodically. If they
did, they would render a country apparently so
intersected by mountain streams scarcely ha-
bitable. On the contrary, their occurrence seems
manifestly rare, from the decayed appearance
of the wreck that proves their existence at all.
Large water-worn pebbles of quartz, jasper, jade,
and their aggregate masses, were frequent in its
channel, but no rocks of any description were ob-
served on the higher banks, which, with the lands
on either side, are of alluvial decomposition. This
fine stream has received the name of Blaxland’s
River; and, with others flowing from the N.W.,
in all probability constitutes in twenty miles Pa-
terson’s River.
22d. A series of unconnected rocky ridges of
considerable elevation, and crowned with pine, lying
in no regular order, and separated from each other
by small grassy valleys, obliged me to pursue a
north course, upon quitting our encampment on
M 2


this river; and having with much labour accom-
plished eleven miles, by reason of the irregularity
of the country, which often opened to fine clear
grassy hills, we at length intersected a stream
which, possessing all the character of its banks,
current, and general appearance, induced me to
consider it the Blaxland, ten miles nearei to its
source.
Upon tracing its banks upwards, I observed, in
some deep pools, that were formed at the extremity
of its narrow reaches, the same species of small
fish that had previously been seen in the Goulburn.
Our attempts, however, to secure them by the hook
were here also unavailing, for on the least alarm
they darted from our sight to the darker recesses,
beneath the overhanging muddy banks. Upon
resuming our journey, we pursued a course west
from Blaxland’s River, through a moderately hilly
tract of forest country and intermediate valleys,
grooved with pebbly water-courses. Having ad-
vanced about five miles, several points of the
mountain belt, set at other stations to the west-
ward, were again fully recognized, and their
bearings being again taken determined our posi-


tioii, in the line of route in which we were tia-
velling.
The country at length becomes more open, less
woody, of a good loamy soil generally, and clothed
with the usual grasses. The hills also are of a
very easy acclivity, bounding rich valleys, which
afford good cattle and sheep pasture. Continuing
our route west northerly, over some low hills,
which at length declined to swelling open grassy
downs, we reached a large swamp-oak rivulet,
winding round the base of a ridge of hills on
its western side to the very open lower southern
country.
26th to 28th. Upon the left bank of this fine
limpid stream, which I have named Smith s Ri-
vulet, we were detained four days, in consequence
of the alarming sickness of one of my people; and
although my anxiety for his recovery, as also my
general attention to him, in order to effect that
recovery, did not permit me to proceed far from
our encampment, to examine the country around,
I nevertheless ascended a lofty ridge bearing about
west from our tents, and took a set of valuable
bearings to all the leading points on the northern


ranges, having a tolerable view of the country
around me. From S.S.W., by way of south, to
S.S.E. the land appears (with the exception of a
few low wooded ridges) perfectly level, for an esti-
mated distance of thirty-five or forty miles, to the
base of a long-backed range lying east and west,
and being evidently connected with the broken
mountainous land in the vicinity of Daby, upon
the Cugeegong River. The open downs, or grassy
easy declivities, which extend along the east bank
of Smith’s Rivulet, are traced, round the bases of
the hills whereon I was stationed, to the level
southern country, where they are circumscribed by
the land becoming wooded; and beyond this, on
the general level, are observed two small plains,
lying relatively north and south, each appearing
about a mile in diameter.
The mean of four meridional altitudes of the
sun placed the situation of our encampment on
Smith’s Rivulet in 32° 2' 6" south latitude, the
presumed longitude being about 150° 24' east.
29th. Resuming our journey to the westward,
we passed along the foot of some forest hills to a
wide thinly-wooded valley, extending several miles


N.W. and north, towards the base of the moun-
tains, from which a large stream, similar to Smith’s
Rivulet, descended, meandering through the bosom
of the very pretty vales, along which we travelled
upwards of two miles. A hilly irregular tract of
forest country succeeds about five miles, whose
higher ridges are rocky, and occasionally covered
with a brush of plants, uninteresting even to the
botanical traveller. ;
Upon passing these, however, we gradually de-
scended to a level open tract, not so permanently
watered, or productive of such tolerable timber, as
the country through which we had passed of late;
and upon pursuing an uninterrupted route west
about six miles (part of which was over clear
grassy downs lying N.E. and S.W.) we at length
crossed Scott’s Rivulet, and in another mile N.W.
passed Wemyss’s River at the very spot where we
had three weeks before forded it.
30th. In order to avoid the more difficult lofty
ridges in our former route from Goulburn River,
we commenced our journey from our encampment
on this stream, two points to the south of west, and
having travelled about eight miles of generally a


hilly irregular country, we intersected our old
marked trees, near the open flats of Goulburn
River, by which we returned to our original posi-
tion on that stream, after an absence of twenty-
four days, in which period I had ascertained the
nature and importance, to the grazier, of the country
a degree to the east and north from the base of an
impervious belt of mountains, towards the western
extremity (at present known) of Paterson’s River,
in a south direction ; as also, the number and mag-
nitude of the several streams that (rising in the
south face of those barren ranges) descend and flow
through a declining southern tract of country, and
which, from their tendency, are (on reasonable
grounds) presumed to constitute the principal
sources of the trunk or main branch of the Coal
River.
June Ist. Although my provisions were very
considerably reduced, on my return to our en-
camping ground on this river, as were also the
conditions of my people and horses, and although
I ran a risk scarcely warranted by prudence, since
I could not foresee what swollen waters might in-
terrupt our quick return to Bathurst; nevertheless,


conformably with the plan I had digested, upon
failing in the discovery of a passage north to Li-
verpool plains in my route easterly, I reduced the
weekly ration of myself and people, determining
to employ a period of seven days in exploring, in
a north-westerly direction, the continuation of
these mountains, which appeared to extend their
blackened ranges westerly for an unlimited
distance.
2d. Having given the people and horses a day’s
rest, we proceeded upon our new route to the N. W.
over a rising open forest, but observing, upon an
advance of a mile, a most evident break of the
main ranges of hills at north and N.N.E., I was
induced to alter my course to that direction. A
route thus commenced I was enabled to maintain
with little variation during the succeeding eleven
miles, through several narrow but rich, well-watered
valleys, and over some very moderately-rising minor
hills, without much labour to my pack-horses, all
of which had become thin and debilitated.
3d. The summits of the leading hilly ranges
appeared very rocky, and thinly timbered with
stringy bark, box and blue gum; whilst their ac-


clivities, from the grazing valleys which they
bound, were well covered with a grassy herbage,
constituting dry walks for sheep. At length,
an irregular series of lofty mountainous ranges,
peeping over one another northerly, as far as the
eye could see, and extending from the eastward
towards the N.W., obliged us to climb some steep
hills, and pursue a western course across some
narrow valleys and lofty forest ridges, lying north
and south, at right angles with that route.
4th. Upon accomplishing a laborious journey,
though not exceeding seven miles, a lateral branch
of the mountain range trended to the S.W., and
being faced by a very narrow deep ravine, whose
bottom I could not perceive, totally prevented our
further procedure in that direction. From the
point at which we had halted, we observed the
country from east to north, and thence to N.W.,
to be a vast collection of bold lofty ranges, occa-
sionally in series one behind the other, and again
divided and terminating in steep precipitous heads,
which overhung deep yawning glens and sharp
rocky ravines. In this route westerly, we passed
the lofty ranges which separate the eastern and


western waters; for, upon descending to their in-
termediate valleys, we remarked the rivulets which
ran through them to incline most decidedly to the
S.S.W. and S.W., being the first streams we had
observed to have that tendency during the last
four weeks. Seeing, therefore, the country from
east, by the way of north, to almost west, was
closed against us, and that there appeared no pro-
bability of discovering, by further perseverance
westerly, any passage through this formidable
barrier, I had almost determined to quit its black-
ened ranges altogether. However, upon observing
some patches of open plain, bearing S.S.W. in the
only direction left us to pursue, I resolved to
descend to them, and from thence I should be able
to see distinctly that tract of country, over which I
could proceed a day or two longer with tolerable
ease to my pack-horses, and which would best
meet the views of my expedition prior to my re-
turn to Bathurst, a route I should be obliged very
soon to pursue, as well on account of the condition
of my men and horses, as of the very reduced pro-
visions which we had to subsist upon.


sth. I accordingly conducted my party through
a fine rich valley, watered by a creek, issuing from
the ravine, and wooded with apple-tree, blue gum,
and swamp oak, and having traced it about seven
miles, it broke into small open plains perfectly
clear of timber, which lying N.N.E. and S.S.W.
appeared to extend between some rising grounds
three or four miles. The steep range of forest
hills that limited the valley on its western side,
upon extending to this strip of plain, which I have
named Duguid’s, becoming exceedingly low and
moderate, induced me to advance to the westward
over it, through an open grazing forest, which
soon brought me within sight of another heavy,
bold, lateral range, constituting the boundary of a
valley, much more ample at its entrance from the
forest, and more promising, in its trending, to the
object of my research, than any recess towards this
belt of mountains that we had yet explored. The
aggregate body of these mountainous ranges evi-
dently inclined to the N.W., and their respective
principal branches descended generally S.S.W.
parallel to each other, forming valleys more or less


spacious, through which the waters rising in the
southern declivity of this belt escape to the interior,
bearing S.W. and W.S.W. from us.
The difficulties with which we had to contend
in every stage of our journey, more especially
during our near approaches to these mountains,
considered with the observations I have of late made
on the arrangement of their main or aggregate
body, and its respective parts, fully convinced me
that the only practicable mode of continuing their
examination, with a view towards discovering a
passage through them to the northward, would be
by travelling on the broad base, formed generally
in the lower country at the southern extremities
of their lateral branches, exploring at each stage
those large valleys that open upon it, and which,
by their general tendency, might afford the hope
of ultimate success. Thus impressed, and deeming
the valley south of us well worthy our examination,
I continued our journey to it over a fertile flat of
apple-tree, the soil partly of a loose, rich, vegetable
decomposition, and partly of a still alluvial nature,
particularly along the margin of a fine brook, which
ran through the vale from the N.E. Upon an in-


dining plane, we were enabled without difficulty
to trace this valley to the N.N.E. about eight miles;
when finding it became very contracted and sharp,
by reason of a converging disposition of its boundary
and other minor ranges, I was induced to halt and
ascend a high point of the western range above us,
being fully satisfied, from the northing we had
made since we left Goulburn River, that we could
not be many miles distant from the southern limit
of Liverpool Plains. To my utmost gratification,
upon tracing the line of mountain ranges, which
continued very far to the N.W., a very considerable
depression in the back of the main ridge, distant
about three miles, afforded me a clear, although
limited, view of a part of the open plains north of
this extensive barrier; on which I immediately
recognized and identified several detached round
mounts, that had been previously seen from the
summit of a lofty pinnacle (Mount M‘Arthur)
situate in these mountains to the eastward of us.
6th. Having again taken their bearings, as also
those of several points around me, I descended to
my people, and lost no time in shifting my en-
campment to an open valley immediately at the


base of the mountains, and within two or three
miles of this apparently practicable passage to the
northern country.
7th. Upon proceeding to examine it, I found
that, from the level of the valley, the ascent through
a close, lightly-timbered forest was exceedingly
gentle and gradual to the highest part of the gap
or pass, which was distant from our encampment
about two miles; and the declivity on the northern
side of the ridge, although less moderate (its face
being grooved by small water-gulleys) was never-
theless found practicable, and not to exceed a mile
to the open wooded country at its base. This was
observed to be timbered with large and stately box,
and watered by a rivulet, which meandered through
the forest northerly, forming in its progress the
western boundary of a considerable extent of plain,
about eight or nine miles north from the highest
part of the pass, which on either side is overhung
by bold, lofty heads of the mountain range. Having
directed a line of trees to be marked from our en-
campment through the passage to the verge of
the nearest plain, I climbed to the summit of the
eminence on the east side of the pass, and thence


had a most beautiful and extensive view of the
country before me. From the northern base of
these mountains, a level, open forest land extends
from W.N.W. to north, to the foot of a long-
backed range lying east and west, and distant six-
teen or twenty miles; its ridge towards the western
extremity being exceedingly hummocky and irre-
gularly pointed.
On the eastern side of this woody country is
distinctly traced, by the line of swamp-oaks on its
banks, the small rivulet which rises in these moun-
tains and runs direct north, its line of course
forming, with the forest, the western verge of the
nearest or most southern extensive patch of clear
plain, whose visible extent easterly from my station
was limited to the N.N.E. by detached, steep ridges
of hills, between which, however, on their northern
sides, these cleared levels evidently stretch them-
selves, and communicate with several patches per-
ceived under some rising grounds as far to the
eastward as N.E. This southern plain, whose
breadth to a slight boundary line of apple-trees on
its northern side is estimated at ten miles, presents
a considerable expanse of brown grass and herbage


and, excepting a small clump and a few scattered
trees on its south-western angle, is perfectly clear
of brush or shrub. Upon extending the view
beyond it north, the plain or open level country
continues very many links, its general surface being
sparingly studded with a few detached mounts, or
an occasional line of small trees, through which a
few sharp points were barely discernible on the
distant line of horizon. It was a subject of regret
to me that the exhausted state of my provisions,
as also the generally debilitated condition of my
people and horses, would not permit me to ad-
vance northerly to explore these vast levels. I was
therefore obliged to content myself with the simple
discovery of a practicable passage through a bold
range of mountains to them, but for which those
unlimited, seemingly abundantly watered, grazing
levels would be entirely closed against us from the
southward.
Bth. A good altitude of the sun at noon gave
me for latitude of my tent in the valley 31° 43'
45 south, my longitude by estimation continuing
about 149° 30' east.
9th. In my journey to Bathurst, from which


the difference of latitude alone gave me a distance
exceeding 100 miles, I fully purposed intersecting
the Cugeegong River as near the stock-stations of
Mr. Cox or Lieutenant Lawson, as the structure of
the intermediate country would permit me, since
in the event of any failure of my provisions that
might take place from detention by swollen rivers
in my route, my party might procure a sufficiency
of aid from those establishments to carry them
forward to the southern settlement without distress.
We therefore proceeded on our homeward-bound
route along the vale, which we found declined to
the S.W., and consisted of rich grazing flat, watered
by a swamp-oak creek, and bounded by a steep
ridge of hills on its S.E. side, the mountain-range
overhanging it to the N.W.
At about eight miles the vale, which had not
throughout its extent from the pass exceeded a
mile and a half, at length opens to a clear patch
of plain, extending to the west along the base of
the mountainous range about two miles and a half,
and skirted over its S.E. side by a moderately-
timbered forest of apple-tree, box, and some white
gum; the creek which had, in its progress through


the vale, received some small addition to its stream,
being traced immediately under the range on the
west verge of the beautiful open level tract, which
I have named Harrison’s Plain.
Perhaps no situation, from its local advantages,
is more eligible for a general grazing establishment
than Harrison’s Plain, inasmuch as it not only
offers its open downs, which comprise at least a
space of cleared land exceeding 700 acres, free
from wet bottom, and therefore favourably adapted
to sheep-pasture, but it commands a very beautiful
and extensive cattle range, exceeding eight miles
throughout the vale, to the pass over the moun-
tainous range to Liverpool Plains.
10th. Desirous, under our present circumstances,
of pursuing as direct a route southerly as the trend-
ing of the ridge of hills to the eastward would allow
us, we stretched across part of the plain to the
skirts of the wooded land, and thence advanced to
the south and west, about eight miles, through
an uninteresting forest, occasionally rising to low
rocky ridges, covered with a scanty underwood.
At length a strip of iron-bark brushy forest obliged
me to direct our course more to the westward,


when we immediately descended to a fine open
wooded flat, connected with those fertile grazing
lands which appear confined to a narrow limit be-
tween the line of forest which we have penetrated,
and the foot of the ranges N.W. from ns, which
still continue to stretch themselves very far to the
westward southerly. Upon accomplishing fourteen
miles from the northern extreme of Harrison’s
Plain, we again halted upon a creek, which, re-
ceding from the foot of the western range, assumes
at this stage the character of a deep-banked, but
narrow, rivulet. A level, clear tract of land, devoid
of trees, between it and the above-mentioned range,
about a mile wide, and extending north and south
three or four miles, I have named Alcock’s Plain,
in compliment to another gentleman of His Ma-
jesty’s Treasury, that to the northward bearing the
name of one of its secretaries.
11th. Upon prosecuting our journey south about
a mile through a flat forest, we reached the edge
of another beautiful open plain, where the creek,
having taken a more westerly course, had stretched
itself again beneath the western ranges, which we
here observed of moderate elevation trending in the


line of W.S.W. This plain, which I have dedicated
to a friend, the worthy director of His Majesty’s
gardens at Kew, extends apparently six miles to
the W.S.W., is bounded on the north by the moun-
tainous range, and on the opposite point by a broken
ridge of sand-stone rock, covered with pine and
brushwood, and so extremely abrupt as totally to
prevent me from pursuing my direct course. We
were therefore obliged to pursue a route consider-
ably to the west of south, stretching from one
angle of the forest to another on the skirt of the
plain, whose greatest breadth, clear of timber, does
not exceed a mile. Upon quitting the verge of
Aiton’s Plain, we penetrated through a barren
forest of box, abounding in brushes of the native
indigo (indigofera australis) and the blue vine
(kennedia monophylla), and upon passing several
low gravelly ridges proceeding from the rocky pine-
range, which continued unbroken to the S.W., we
at length reached the foot of a detached rocky
head, which I ascended to observe the appearance
of the country around.
The barrier of mountainous land which has ex-
♦
tended from the pass thirty miles to the S.W. in


one uninterrupted impassable range, continues to
the west an estimated distance of forty-five or fifty
miles, and constitutes the northern boundary of
a very considerable tract of level, open, wooded
country in that direction. To the west of Aitons
Plain, and simply separated from it by a line of
apple-trees, is another of somewhat larger di-
mensions, which I have named Hawkins s Plain,
upon whose north side the creek that has followed
us from the northward runs, continuing under the
mountainous range to the westward. Upon look-
ing to the S.S.W. and S.W., the country, although
broken and ridgy, appeared very practicable for
the prosecution of our journey. Since, therefore,
we had already gone farther to the west, in conse-
quence of the disposition of the ridges of hills, than
I had originally proposed, I rejoined my people,
and continued our journey to the S.S.W. about six
miles, over a very barren, irregular forest, inter-
spersed with dense patches of brush, especially on
some lateral, low, rocky ridges, connected with the
pine-range still bounding us to the S.E.
12th. A low, heavily-timbered flat, abounding
in pools of water and bog-plants, and evidently


subject to occasional inundation, brought us, in
another mile from the dry barren grounds, to the
margin of a small river, whose muddy steep bank,
clothed with tall reeds, in many places concealed
the deep waters which ran through its channel to
the west.
Tracing its right or north bank to the eastward,
about a mile and a half, over a fine, rich, alluvial
forest-land, timbered chiefly with apple-tree and
blue gum, and affording an excellent grazing run
for cattle, we at last succeeded in fording to the
opposite bank, and thence we were enabled to
shape a more direct course towards our point of
destination than we had hitherto been enabled to
do. This small river, which, from its relative
position, may be presumed to be formed by an
union of three northern swamp-oak creeks, that
were intersected previously to the discovery of the
pass, is about twelve yards in breadth, of various
depth, not exceeding two fathoms at the time we
passed it; but subject in seasons of heavy rains to
be flooded to a height of ten feet, when the whole
of the forest-lands, from its banks to a pine-ridge
a mile distant, is laid under water. This river is


called Pubo-batta by the aborigines. I have, how-
ever, called it Lawson’s River, after the command-
ant of Bathurst, who first intersected it in January,
1822, to the westward of the point at which we
had passed it.
Continuing our journey S.S.W. we passed through
an open forest-country, productive generally of an
useless, ordinary-sized timber, of apple-tree, box,
and some blue gum, and very indifferently watered,
since in the space of five miles a very shallow
siliceous water-channel alone interrupted the dull
level sameness of the forest, in which I remarked
a few detached small pools of discoloured water.
ISth. A rugged bushy pine-ridge, lying east and
west, and extending in such direction as far as we
could perceive through the timber of the forest, at
length interrupted our progress southerly. How-
ever, having passed it, with some difficulty, to a
low declining valley, and finding some stagnant
pools of water resting on the stiff tenacious clay of
the country around, I encamped, as much to obtain
some bearings from a rocky head of the pine-ridge,
as to give my debilitated pack-horses (almost wholly
without shoes) a little rest, although in a place


affording them very indifferent pasture. Having
taken bearings of a hummocky, lofty range of hills
at S.S.E., and apparently distant from twenty to
twenty-five miles, which I satisfactorily recognised
as being situate near Mudgee, on the Cugeegong
River, we were induced to prosecute our journey
with as little loss of time as possible, especially
since the louring, unsettled state of the weather
had rather impressed me with the apprehension of
being detained by the rains.
14th. As some heavy showers began to fall, we
were able to effect only three miles and a half,
through a continuation of uninteresting open forest,
furnishing a heavier timber than the lands we have
passed, but equally destitute of living streams. A
few scattered native cypresses (callitris pyramidilis)
of blighted growth, together with occasional clumps
of honeysuckle (banksia integrifolia), tended in
some degree to diversify the too prevalent sameness
of the scenery around.
Continuing our journey S.S.E. about three miles,
we entered an extensive iron-bark forest, the deep
siliceous soil of which, resting on a stiff clay, being
rendered extremely rotten and boggy by the showers


that had fallen the preceding night, showed ns
that after two or three days of heavy rain, this
tract of country would be totally impassable. How-
ever, having struggled through its confined brushes,
we reached a somewhat improving tract of land,
more open, less timbered, and of a firmer surface,
but still very badly watered; only one creek of
any importance, filled with a stagnant putrid water,
being met with in a route of about twelve miles
and a half. This brought us to the neighbourhood
of some elevated lands, observed from the pine-
ridge I had ascended, one stage to the southward
of Lawson’s River.
Observing some rocky hills bearing from south
to S.W., we prosecuted an irregular route easterly
over some rising grounds, and along a ridge of
broken, low hills, upon which were scattered large
blocks of granite, whose decompositions being
washed into the narrow intermediate valleys, formed
a base, over which our horses travelled with con-
fident firmness. Having effected about ten miles,
we descended a ridge S.E. to a very wet valley,
when, to our surprise, we crossed several recently
trodden cattle-paths, which, as they led over some


rocky hills to the east, I did not deem it prudent
to follow. Their discovery, however, satisfactorily
proved to me our near approach to the Cugeegong
River.
We therefore continued a S.E. course, but had
scarcely proceeded a mile, before I had to regret
leaving the higher grounds for the valley, although
the former were broken and rocky, and consequently
injurious to the ill-protected feet of my pack-
horses. The rains which had recently fallen had
so super-saturated the deep soil, that my horses
were sinking in above the knee in these boggy
grounds, thus rendered by the partial rains as soft
as a quick-sand. At length we managed to struggle
about two miles to a broad but shoaly creek, evi-
dently the channel by which these wet lands are
drained into the Cugeegong; and upon crossing
its stream, which flowed to the westward, we halted,
both man and horse being fairly worn out with
the excessive fatigues of the day.
15th. Calculating that a course south, about
four or five miles, would bring us to the river, we
quitted our fires on the creek at an early hour;
but had not proceeded a quarter of a mile over the


open forest, before our horses fell under their small
loads in the boggy soil, obliging us to return to
the firmer grounds on the creek. Most unex-
pectedly, as we were tracing it westerly, we over-
took a stockman of Mr. Cox (an extensive grazier
on the Cugeegong), who was in search of strayed
cattle, and from him we obtained the information
of the discharge of the creek into the river about
three miles below his master’s station. Learning
that every part of the forest-land south from us
was perfectly impassable, by reason of the heavy
rains that had lately fallen upon the country around,
we continued winding along the creek W.N.W.
and N.W. about five miles, when it united with
the Cugeegong at a beautiful, clear, fertile flat.
named Gurrpi by the aborigines.
We continued our journey south up the bank of
the river, over rich alluvial flats, covered with strong
grasses and luxuriant nutritious herbage, consti-
tuting a permanent pasture for cattle. The late
rains had swollen the waters of the Cugeegong to
a level with its extreme banks. The declivity of
country nevertheless was so exceedingly moderate,
that its current was barely discernible. This ex-


ordinary fulness of the river afforded me but little
hopes of being able to cross its stream until its
waters had considerably subsided. However, upon
arriving at the part immediately opposite the hut
and stock-yard of Mr. Cox, we were shown a good
ford three feet and a half deep, by which we safely
crossed this considerable stream, and encamped at
that gentleman’s station.
16th. Here I rested my people and horses from
the fatigues of their journey, and we procured
such comforts, particularly vegetables, as this re-
cently-formed establishment afforded.
I have now traced my long-protracted journey
throughout all its stages, to the left or south bank
of the Cugeegong River, having ascertained (for
the information of the colonial government) the
structure and agricultural importance of the country
situate at the spring-heads of those streams which
constitute Hunter’s River, the character of the
lands westerly to the pass, through a formidable
range of mountains that forms the southern bound-
ary of Liverpool Plains, as also the route by which
the only line of communication can be opened to
them from the settlement of Bathurst; the mea-


sured distance between these open tracts of country
being 160 miles.
The mean of four meridional altitudes of the sun,
taken during the period of four days* rest at this
station, places it in lat. 32° 32' 54", my estimated
longitude being 149° 39' east.
20th. We pursued our journey to Bathurst up
the left bank of the Cugeegong, which consists
chiefly of rich alluvial flats, wooded generally with
the apple-tree, with little or no interruption by
rocky, brushy patches, about twenty-four miles S.E.
to the point at which the beaten path intersects
the river. These fine grazing grounds vary in
depth to the boundary ranges from one to three
miles, as the hills approach or recede from its
banks, and occasionally open into plains perfectly
clear of timber, and therefore affording excellent
situations for stock runs.
22d. Heavy, clouded weather, proceeding from
the southward, with every indication of a long con-
tinuance of rain being about to meet us, I lost no
time, upon reaching the beaten route to Bathurst,
at the point where it intersects the Cugeegong, in
advancing to the settlement, and we arrived there


on the evening of the 27th, showery weather
having prevailed ever since the 20th, on which day
we resumed our journey from Mannar, the native
name of Mr. Cox’s stock-station.
27th. Upon our arrival at Bathurst, we learned
that rain had fallen during the last six weeks on
the plains, and that the Macquarie River had been
flooded so considerably as to inundate the wheat-
lands on its upper bank, a circumstance never
before witnessed since the establishment of the
settlement.


4
/
ft


I If" f f
' ||||^ j tf§ L ' ' # ' I


*t — ——- — .'■>* -<r—• 1 *
? !*■ ' >’
•' fe : '1
i 4
| ( iJ&
•?% % "i %*•* i i i
-• • i ;
t 5 \%
f 4 j I j
t! ;
.
y * :
- . , —-. •
> v y h i
\„ f ’ i il j
I
i i
■■ .
x ■
-sr'
'- v -
\\
! J


■


80 S I
