

[No. 19.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
JOURNAL OF MR. LEWIS’S LAKE EYRE
EXPEDITION, 1874-5.
Arrived at Mount Margaret or Umbum Station, Mussel Waterhole, north end of Trigono-
metrical Station, lat. 28° 27' S., long. 136° 20', at 11 a.m. on the 14th November, 1874; my party
consisting of Mr. A. G. D. Beresford, surveyor and draftsman (second in command); Mr. KW.
Andrews, collector and naturalist; Mr. G. W. Tolmer, assistant; J. Davis, cook; and three
Affghan camel drivers, viz., Halleem (Jemmidah), Sheik Willie, and Nazere. This being our
final starting point, a general overlooking of saddles and packs was necessary.
Sunday, 15th November. —Mussel Waterhole, Umbum Station. Although this day is, and
ought to be, taken as a day of rest, we were all busy arranging our loads for the greater part of
the day, and then went fishing, at which profitable amusement we had considerable luck.
Monday, 16th November. —Mussel Waterhole, Umbum Station. Barometer 29"80; ther-
mometer 81°. While the sore back camels were resting, saddles being repaired, and packs
rearranged, I determined to follow down Umbum Creek in search of water, which I had heard
was procurable at or about the junction of Sunny Creek. Taking Mr. Beresford, Mr. Tolmer,
and an Affghan, we started at 4-30 p.m. on a general E.N.E. course, and at sixteen miles
camped on the south side of Umbum Creek.
Tuesday, 17th November.—Umbum Creek. Barometer 29'92; thermometer 67° ; wind west,
strong. Continued the same course as last night (E.N.E.) for five miles. Here Mr. Beresford,
Tolmer, and Affghan returned for the purpose of taking angles of the turns of the creek to the
Trigonometrical Station. I, with the black boy, crossed the creek, and passed over some good
redstone plain; at nine miles crossed again. Here it is slightly inclined to be boggy and salt.
Turned camels out for a short time. Started at 3"30 p.m. on an easterly course. Atone and
a half miles struck Sunny Creek, one and a quarter miles above its junction with Umbum Creek,
at a good waterhole, 100 yards long, fifty feet wide, and about four feet deep. I am of opinion
it is not permanent, although very pleasing to the eye, being fringed by melaleuca bushes, pretty
green shrubs, and gum trees, and covered with wild fowl, of which I managed to secure four.
Wednesday, 18th November.—Sunny Creek. Barometer 30-04; thermometer 79°; wind
south-east. I intended starting back early to bring the whole party down, but was prevented by
a very nasty boil, which for some days previous had been coming on my left wrist, rendering
riding almost impossible, the pain caused by the slightest movement being almost unbearable.
At 4-30 p.m. started on nearly due west course, and camped on plain at twelve miles.
Thursday, 19th November.—Camp on plain south of Umbum Creek. Barometer 30-00 ;
thermometer 15°; wind south-east. Started at 6-15 a.m., and arrived at Mount Margaret
Station at 10-45. During my absence, Mr. Cotton had arrived with Government sheep en route
for Alice Springs, and northward along the telegraph line; purchased two sheep from him and
Friday, 20th November. —Mount Margaret Station. Barometer 29-79; thermometer 66°;
fine clear morning. Morning, cut up and salted the two sheep. Started the camp off during
the afternoon to follow down the creek as far as possible. Mr. Beresford and I remained to get
observations for latitude and variation of compass.
Saturday, 21st November. —Mount Margaret Station. Barometer 29-58; thermometer 80.
Started at B*3o, and followed baggage tracks for about eleven miles, when we observed someone
ahead of us, about two miles distant; pushed on and tried to catch him ; in this we failed, but
caught the camp in four miles more, when we found that the person who had been riding ahead
of us was Mr. Tolmer. It appeared that the evening previous they had travelled about eleven
miles and camped ; shortly before camping, one of the Affghans (Sheik Willie) had left the
party to go in search of a water bag (which he had lost on his way up with Mr. Beresford
surveying the creek), and by some means or other missed the tracks. Mr. Tolmer started after
him early, and followed his tracks eight miles northwards of the camp, he then turned sharp
back, and came to the place he had missed the baggage, and followed along, arriving at the camp
almost famished for want of water, a few minutes before Mr. Tolmer did, who had been on his
tracks for some hours, carrying a bag of water for his relief. This completely spoilt my
day’s work, as I intended trying tc reach Sunny Creek, but as the man had suffered severely and
required a little rest, I was obliged to remain under the shade of some trees, and travel on about
two miles during the cool of the evening. • Sunday
A—No. 19.


Sunday, 22nd November.—Umbum Creek. Barometer 29-63 ; thermometer 76 0 ; wind
south-south-east. Started at 6-30, and arrived at Sunny Creek Waterhole at 2*30.
Monday, 23rd November.—Sunny Creek. Barometer 29 92; thermometer 72°; calm, very
cloudy all last night, with distant thunder and lightning; had a few drops of rain before sunrise.
There being every appearance of rain, we remained uncertain what to do till one o’clock, when I
started Mr. Tolmer down the creek in search of more water, with instructions to make a smoke if
he found any at a short distance ; if not, to follow down the creek for nine or ten miles. Mr.
Beresford was engaged defining the course of Umbum Creek at the junction of Sunny Creek.
Tuesday, 24th November.—Sunny Creek. Barometer 29’98; thermometer 85°; calm,
cloudy; every appearance of rain last night, but only a few large drops fell about midnight—
very annoying and disagreeable weather, as for three days and three nights I have neither seen
the sun nor a star for sufficient length of time to get an observation. At 9 , 30 Mr. Tolmer
returned, having followed the creek down for nine miles, and saw nothing but salt water. At
3*Bo I started, taking Halleem with me, to ascertain the actual mouth of the creek. We
both rode camels that had never been away from the mob before. It must be understood that a
good leading camel is a very hard thing to obtain; .and neither of the two on which we started
had been tried as leading camels previously. Halleem led his for more than a mile, mine following
quite contentedly; but when he mounted and endeavored to go ahead, the result was somewhat
ridiculous. Each camel tried to follow the other, so we rode round in a small circle for over a
quarter of an hour before we could stop. However, after leading, coaxing, and thrashing, we
managed to get fairly under weigh in the direction I wished to go—that was nearly due east for
nine miles, when we struck the creek at a turn. Changed to 110° for one and a quarter mile, and
camped on the shore of Lake Eyre. This was my first full view, and the result was anything but
gratifying : a broad, unbroken white horizon eastward, quite destitute of water, with samphire
bushes growing out for two and three miles from the shore. Lat. 28° 27' 58" south.
Wednesday, 25th November.—Shore of Lake Eyre, mouth of Umbum Creek. Barometer 30-04;
thermometer 72°; wind east, very cloudy. Started at 6T5 along shore of lake, bearing 23° for
three quarters of a mile, to mouth of creek with a view of crossing, but it was too soft; followed
up the right bank for one and a quarter miles to a turn, above which the creek runs due south for
a short distance. After repeated trials we managed to get across at a place where there was a
quantity of gypsum showing on both banks, and I believe the bottom was composed of the same,
as, on feeling my way with a stick, it met with some hard substance at a depth of from about two
inches to one foot. After crossing the creek, I proceeded in an easterly direction for five miles
to the shore of the lake; the first one and a half over marshy, samphire country, the remaining
three and a half sandhills, covered with cane grass, with claypan flats between. After taking a
number of bearings of the lake, I returned on my tracks to the place I crossed the creek, from
which place I followed up and took angles of the'whole course of the creek; but these I consider
unnecessary to give. Arrived at Sunny Creek at 3*40
Thursday, 26th November.—Sunny Creek. Barometer 29*97; thermometer 74°; calm,
cloudy. Started at 6 - 40, on bearing 10° 50'; at a trifle over three quarters of a mile, crossed
Umbum Creek. After crossing the creek we continued on a nearly due north course for nineteen
miles. The first eight and a half miles was over redstone plain, rather inferior, with small patches
of cotton and salt bushes, the remaining distance, ten and a half miles, was through low sand-
rises with claypan flat, in many places well grassed, but the whole is, generally speaking, inferior
country. At the end of nineteen miles we camped on a small creek, sooner than I intended; but
it was discovered that a galvanized bucket, which was slung to the back part of a saddle, had
chafed the camel’s back rather seriously, so we came to a halt rather short of what was intended.
Friday, 27th November.—Blind creek near the Neales River. Barometer 31T5; ther-
mometer 66°; strong westerly wind; very cloudy ; too cloudy all night to get an observation
for latitude. Started at 6-20, bearing 10°. At a little over half a mile we struck the
Neales. This considerably astonished me and altered my proceedings, as, not having looked at
anj previous maps of the country, I had not the slightest idea that the river maintained such a
southerly course after passing the Peake, consequently did not expect to cut it at least under
thirty miles. ~We followed it up for a quarter of a mile northwards, and obtained a fine supply
of beautifully fresh water by digging about one foot in the sandy bed. There were several
intensely salt waterholes above and below. Although we had only just made a start, I
determined to establish a depot and examine the Neales down to its mouth in Lake Eyre, and
from there survey the shore of the lake southwards to Umbum Creek. Lat. 28° 8' 32".
Saturday, 28th November.—Neales River. Barometer 30T5; thermometer 59°; wind
south-east, cloudy. Having been occupied the whole of )'esterday after getting into camp with
Mr. Beresford in plotting up my course from Sunny Creek to the lake, we could not make the
work correspond with the latitude. Thinking this very strange, as I had been very careful, we
had the curiosity to try the reading of the compass which I had used with our others, and to* my
disgust found, that on account of the prism being out of perpendicular, it read 2° 15' west of the
others. This being the case, and the work being altogether wrong, there was no other course
open for me but to return and do it over again. Having determined to retrace my steps and do
the work over again, I instructed Mr. Beresford to follow down the Neales to its mouth in Lake
Eyre ; thence along the shore till he met me coming northwards from Umbum Creek. Started
at 6-45, taking the black boy with me, I followed the tracks back to Sunny Creek, at which
place we arrived at sunset. This being a clear night, I obtained a satisfactory observation of
latitude—2B° 26' 4".
Sunday, 29th November.—Sunny Creek. Barometer 30-04; thermometer 90° • wind
south-east, cloudy and sultry. As my camels would not drink early in the morning, I delayed
my departure for two or three hours, as the chances are that they will not get any water for two
or three days, that entirely depending on the distance and time it may take Mr. Beresford to
map the Neales and the shore of the lake till he meets me. Started at 10-30, and took fresh
bearings down to the mouth of the creek, and stopped within a few yards of my’previous camp.
Monday, 30th November.—Mouth of Umbum Creek. Barometer 30-06; thermometer
60®.


60°. While the black boy was away after our camels I walked out on the lake for 200 yards
for the purpose of ascertaining the nature of the bottom. Having no spade, I cut a small stick
near where I camped, to enable me to break through the hard salt crust with which the lake is
in many places covered. On sitting down I began to dig with my sharp-pointed stick, and on
penetrating about three inches through salt and gravelly clay I came to black mud, very much
like thick black paint; and when I endeavored to enlarge the hole so as to scoop some of it out
with my hands, the whole upper surface gave way like broken ice for a distance of about
twenty yards around where I was sitting; to escape falling into the hole I had dug, I was obliged
to throw myself down and roll away till I got to firm ground again, very much pleased to get
clear in even this undignified manner. I did not feel inclined to try again, so quietly walked
back to my camp, leaving the nature and depth of the bottom at this part of the lake a mystery.
Started at 8 35 and followed up the creek to where I had previously crossed, and followed my tracks
to the shore of the lake. From this place I mapped the shore of the lake for nine and a half
milej north, to a narrow but very boggy arm running into the sandhills. I followed it
up westward for one and a half miles, and managed with considerable trouble to get across.
A few yards after crossing, I found Mr. Beresford had made a fire, also his tracks, going off
in a direction of 60° west of north, and followed them along for ten miles and camped, crossing
sandhills with claypan fiats between grassed in places, others very inferior. The shore of the
lake from Umbum Creek northwards to the arm previously mentioned has no defined shore,
excepting in places where a high sandhill may run close, other parts being a gradual slope, with
numerous small marshes or arms connected with the claypans in the sandhills, forming a complete
network; it would have taken an immense time to map the whole (and in reality they were not
worth it), so I confined myself to a general outline.
Tuesday, 1st December. —Sandhills near the Neales. Barometer 29-94; thermometer 70°;
wind, N.W., very cloudy. Had a great deal of trouble with the camels, as they were thirsty, and
had no feed; they kept wandering away in a straight line for Sunny Creek, and at last I had to tie
them up. Started at seven on same bearing as yesterday, and arrived at the Neales depot at 9-30.
Mr. Beresford and Mr. Tolmer having arrived yesterday, at 4 30, after surveying the Neales
down to its mouth in the lake, and thence along the shore to where I bad seen his tracks.
Lat. 28° 8' 32".
Wednesday, 2nd December.— Neales River. Barometer 29 95 ; thermometer 72°; calm,
very cloudy. Started at 6 45 up right bank of river. In one mile crossed to left bank;
proceeded up left bank on bearing 271° over good, stony ground; at two and a half miles
crossed an overflow running north, and joining the river below the depot; at three and three
quarter miles we got into well-grassed sandhills running nearly north and south ; changed bearing
to 245° for eight miles, when we struck Brown’s Creek ; tried in several places for water but
without success. Instructed Mr. Beresford to follow up the creek with the baggage for about
four miles, and camp if he did not find water. Following the creek down by myself I found it
joined the Neales in four miles. At the junction there was a small hole of red-colored, slimy, and
intensely salt water. I searched both up and down for over a mile without finding any water fit
to drink. I then returned on my tracks to where I parted from the others, and caught them
in three and a half miles; no water Lat. 28 c 8 19".
Thursday, 3rd December. —Brown’s Creek. Barometer 29-86; thermometer 53°; calm,
slightly foggy. 5 Started at 6 a.m , and followed the angles of the creek for twelve miles in a
general north-west direction to Brown’s Waterhole, crossing sandhills with grassy claypan flats
between, and passed three saltpans or marshes. The waterholes here are very good, particularly
the one about three quarters of a mile above the camp, which is one mile long, by about forty
yards wide; the creek below the waterhole is very inferior with regard to water. We dug and
obtained salt water in several places ; for half the distance we followed it, it forms no defined
channel, and the whole being of an intense saline character, I think the chances of obtaining
fresh water below Brown’s" Wateiholes are very vague. We were very fortunate in catching
between forty to fifty small fish—two different kinds. Mr. Andrews secured specimens of each, perch
and silarus. Lat. 28° O' 31"; var. 5° 10' east; magnetic bearing of Mount Margaret 210° 80'.
Friday, 4lh December.—Brown’s Waterholes. Barometer 29 ; thermometer 74° ; wind
east. Started at 6 5 ; course N.E. by E. At one and three quarter miles reached top of high
sandhill. This being the watershed between Brown Creek and Koorakarinna Creek, crossed
over a few low sand-rises, falling northwards for about one mile, to a well-grassed plain with
low rises topped with limestone. At four and a half miles passed a low limestone bluff on our
right. Continued over the same kind of country, and at nine and a quarter miles crossed head of
Koorakarinna Creek, Followed down left bank for two and a quarter miles to a good waterhole in
the creek. Here I turned out the camels, as the day was very hot, and also to wait for Mr Beresford,
who was behind testing some bearings. We caught some fish, of which there was an abundance,
but as the hole was very full of weeds it was not a favorable place for fishing. These perch had
very black backs. Started at 4‘53, and followed down the creek for three and a half miles,
crossing it twice, and traversing such country as it has rarely been my fortune to see,
the flats on both sides being profusely grassed; the country then gradually rises to undu-
lating stony plains, also well grassed. ’ One and a half miles below the waterhole at which
I turned out is another, about 200 yards long by forty yards wide and five feet deep. Camped
on a splendidly-grassed flat. Mr. Tolmer and the black boy went in search of water, but only
succeeded in finding about seventy or eighty gallons in the bottom of a very large waterhole,
at which they managed to fill four or five bags. The black spoke of this as being a good
waterhole, and also ol another lower down, but as this one is so nearly dry, so may the other one
be to which he alludes. Lat., 27° 52' 53".
Saturday, 5th December. — Koorakarinna Creek. Barometer 29 76; thermometer 71 ;
calm. Not judging it prudent to follow down this creek to the other water spoken of by the
black, as this one failed us, I started at 5 45 a.m. north, oyer fairly grassed, undulating, redstone
plain; at four miles crossed a narrow, boggy marsh diainage from the country westward, and
falling into Koorakarinna Creek; at five miles crossed another branch of the same marsh. At
e five
No. 19.


five and three quarter miles we changed our course a little to the eastward, and in two miles got
into good sandhill country. Continued course a little east of north for thirteen miles, following
a lon<r a small creek, which I observed spread in many places into salt marshes. At two and
a quarter miles crossed the creek (at a small, dry box waterhole—country around very good) and
got into good sandhills. At five miles crossed the Frew (native name, Manarrmna), quite dry.
After crossing the Frew we got to a well-grassed flat; but I fancy it is subject to lengt e e
At three and a half miles crossed another small creek; in the bed of this creek we
found an old native well, supply, I think, good but slightly impregnated with soda. Above
where we crossed is a very large and very salt waterhole. After crossing this creek we chang
course to north, and at two and a half miles struck the Macumba, at a small sand drainage we
found by scratching. After letting the camels go, all hands set to work to enlarge the hole ; but
after c 1 earing out a place eight feet long by four feet wide and two feet deep, we found the supply
insufficient. It was a very strange place ; situated in the bottom of a waterhole, inwiueh the
was a pool of frightfully salt water; the hole we cleared out was only two feet from the salt pool,
but the water we obtained was perfectly fresh; the bottom of the salt pool being covered w
sand then six or eight inches of soft, black mud, through which the salt water cannot dram.
On finding the supply insufficient for our wants, Mr. Beresford and Mr. Tolmer followed up
the river in search of more, while I and the others still kept enlarging the hole, timbering
it, and getting out what water we could. In a very short time they returned havmg found a
splendid sand drainage about three quarters of a mile above the camp. Lat. 27 37 35
P Sunday 6th December.—Mucumba River. Barometer 29-76 ; thermometer 68 , calm,
cloudy, and’very sultry. After a very early breakfast, Mr. Tolmer, Mr. Andrews, and two
Affghans started up the river to the place found last night, for the purpose of sinking an
timbering a well. I began with Halleem getting out the water here with buckets (or rather with
a quart pot into buckets) ; by ten a.m. we managed to water eight of our ca ™ els * Shortly a e
this, we observed a smoke up the river, which was the signal agreed upon with the well-sinkers
to inform us when the well was finished, and also to start the camels up to it. I sent them up,
and had them thoroughly watered with buckets—the supply being sufficient for any number, as
far as we could judge, at a depth of four feet. There had been great difficulty in getting down
even this small depth, as the sand was so fine it caved in as fast as it could be shovelled out, an
it was onlv by very close timbering that the work was accomplished; just as they had finished
watering the camels, the black boy (who had wandered up the river on his own account) returned
to them with the pleasing news that there was a fine fresh waterhole about half a mile higher up.
After dinner, Mr. Beresford, Mr. Andrews, and Mr. Tolmer went up the river to the waterhole
found by the black, for the purpose of shooting and fishing, and their labors were most satisfactory y
rewarded by obtaining seven ducks, and two and a half dozen small fish. Tbe fine fat condition
of the ducks was noted by all the party. „ . _• j
Monday, 7th December. —Macumba River. Barometer 29*77; thermometer / 4 , wind,
light from east. Started at 4*42, and proceeded one and a half miles up the river, past the well
which suited us so admirably yesterday, to the top-end of the waterhole found, and camped on a
splendid prickly acacia flat; here I determined to form a depot, leaving the P art y to examine
the country about the depot, the river down to Lake Eyre; thence along the shore to the
Neales, and to proceed up the Macumba myself with one companion to the telegraph line;
thence by the known portion of the Dalhousie Springs to the Charlotte Telegraph Station,
to obtain a slight supply of rations, and to return to the Dalhousie and follow them eastward as
far as possible, then return by a southerly course to the depot—how I was greviously disapppinted
in carrying out these intentions the following few pages will show. Lat. 27 35 54 ; variation,
6° 18' east.
Tuesday, Bth December. —Depot on the Macumba. Barometer 29*67; thermometer 76°;
light wind from east. Taking the black boy, and two riding and one pack camel, with ten days
rations, I started at 4-35 p.m. on a general west-north-west course for seven miles over splendid
country, composed of low sandrises, patches of chocolate scil, thickly grassed, and covered with
salt and cotton bushes, and camped in the bed of the river—if such it can be called, being
nothing more than a claypan flat, densely covered with stunted gums and saltbush. .Previous to
leaving the camp I instructed Mr. Tolmer to take Halleem and examine the river down nine or ten
miles for water, and in the event of success, requested Mr. Beresford to move the camp to any
water found, leaving a note for me at the depot. „
Wednesday, 9th December.—Camp in bed of Macumba. Barometer 29-80; thermometer 70 .
A little after dark last night the sky became thickly overcast, with distant thunder and lightning to
the westward, so that I could not get an observation for latitude. Started at 6-5 a.m., course N.W.,
up bed of river, over claypan and saltbush country. At four and three quarter miles got to right
hank. Observed and took bearings of a low line of hills westward, and running parallel to
course of river, at a distance of about four miles. After leaving the river bed I continued the
same course, over good redstone plain, and at six miles struck a small creek, rising, I believe, in
the ridges southward. A number of blacks were busily engaged fishing when I arrived, and
from the fact of their having associated with whites during the time Mr. Ross had sheep here,
and not having seen any for a length of time, their begging for tobacco and bread was a dreadful
bore. I do not for a moment consider any of the waters in this creek permanent, as they were
not more than four feet deep, and a quantity of this was, I believe, from late rains. In
consequence of the heat of the day, I turned my camels out for the purpose of resting them, and
also to ascertain, by questioning the blacks, if there was any known water north of the
Macumba in the sandhills; but after questioning them in every way, all I could learn was that
a number of blacks were out in the sandhills at water, but could not return on account of the
distance to be traversed, they having travelled out on rain waters, which were now all dry.
Started at 2 p.m., course N. half W. Crossed two miles of good plain, to a depression covered with
stunted gums and acacia (doubtless an overflow from the river), half a mile wide north and south,
and extending apparently westward to the ridges. At ten and a quarter miles struck right ban
of rher; crossed over numerous small channels to the most northern one, in which we found a
native


native well about ten feet deep, and the supply apparently not over plentiful. A number of
blacks were camped at the well, and on forming my camp about 200 yards away I had the usual
ordeal to undergo in serving them out with what food and tobacco I could spare. Lat. I i U o ,
Thursday, 10th December. —Native well in Macumba. Barometer 29-88; thermometer b8 ;
wind south-west, very cloudy. Started at 7-55, bearing 231°, to get out of the bed of the riven
At one and three quarter miles on right bank, high stony plain S. and S.W., well grasse ,
changed to N.W. half W. over rather inferior country extending to river bank, but improving
S.W. • at three and three quarter miles crossed broad shallow watercourse, which breaks ott
from the river higher up ; at seven and a half miles crossed same watercourse, and for two miles
traversed wretchedly-grassed sandhills, with hard gravelly flats between; the sandhills extended
about three miles from the river, S.W., and continued same course over plain almost destitute
of vegetation, gradually rising to the S.W. for three and three quarter miles to bed ot river.
For the last seven miles the river has been confined to two fairly-defined channels, averaging
about one mile apart, with a high piece of stony ground between; turned my camels out to rest
a little in the shade, it being quite purposeless looking fora bit of feed; even camels would perish
in such dry country—every particle of vegetation either dead or very dry. Thermometer i 1 .
At 4-45 p.m. started course west over same barren stony plain, and at ten miles camped on a
point of the river in one of the most wretched places I ever saw, a few half dead bushes an
stunted gums, no saltbush alive; and even cottonbush, which is considered a very hardy
shrub, during drought presented a brown and dismal appearance. Lat. 27° 10 41".
Friday, 11th December. —Barren place on Macumba. Barometer ; thermometer ,
wind west-south-west, very strong. Just after getting into camp last night a black
ioined us, and promised to take us to, what he represented, as a magnificent waterhole in the
sandhills on the north side of the river. Started at 8 15; course W. by N. across bed of river.
At three miles reached left bank; changed to N.W., and crossed very inferior country, full ot
cracks, evidently the spread of a watercourse. At two and a half miles came upon a small, but
well defined creek; following it up, through sandhills, it became a chain of claypans, at one mile,
at two miles well defined channel again. At four and a half miles our black guide took us to a
waterhole and camp of his companions. I rode past the hole to a shady tree, and let the camels
go • but, although they walked straight back to the water, I observed that they did not drink, i
walked down to find out the reason, and found the water to be as thick as it possibly could e
without actually being mud. Around the waterhole, which was about 100 yards in circumference
and one foot'deep, the natives had from twelve to twenty holes scratched, each with a
little water in it. I dug a large hole close to the edge, but the water drained through
so slowly that it took me two hours to fill a six-quart waterbag. In this water I was terribly
disappointed, as the position of it gave me a good start towards the Dalhousie; but as the camels
will not drink out of the hole, they would never have satisfied tnemselves by drinking out of the
small wells, I was reluctantly obliged to abandon the idea of cutting straight across to the bprmgs—
the distance and nature of the country being too uncertain to venture upon with camels that had
already been two days without water. Started at 6-15 on bearing 249° 30 across sandhills, fairly
grassed. At two miles camped on a splendidly-grassed flat, near a clump of bushes, wmch the
camels devoured ravenously. This day was almost thrown away through the beast of a black-
fellow representing the waterhole as a good one; but I believe I am not the only one
who has been led astray by the inborn inclination of the Australian black to lie. They y
tell a traveller what they think will please him most. If he wants water, there will be plenty,
and all other things to the same effect: and they are exceeding discerning the wants of
those who are unfortunate enough to be dependent on them. Lat. 27° 4' 14". _
Saturday, 12th December.—Sand ridges, north of Macumba.— Barometer 29 88 , the
mometer 66°; wind east, cloudy. Started 7-15, course W.S.W. over good sandhills, with well
grassed flats between, for seven miles, to a hard, clayey flat, fairly grassed, extending west to low
range, and south to the river. At ten and a quarter miles got into a low jumble of hills or broken
country changed course to 211° 30', crossing broken country and sandhills to the river, which
we struck in four and a half miles. Where we struck the river was at a large waterhole
( unfortunately dry) which the blacks lower down the river represented as one that never tumbled
down. I scratched in the sandy bottom, but got to clay in eighteen inches quite dry. I followed
the river up for seventeen miles, looking carefully in the numerous channels, and scratching in
all likely places ; I also examined a branch creek going from the south-west—all without a drop
of wateJ Hoover, at seventeen miles, we got to alarge waterhole half a mile below thejunoUon
of the Alberga and Stevenson—one camel very nearly done. This brute going so lame has
most effectually put an end to my intention of visiting the Dalhousie.
Sunday, 13th December.—Camp on Macumba, below junction of Alberga and Stevenson.
Barometer 29-78 ; thermometer 61°; calm, very cloudy. As my lame camel had not improved
during last night, I determined to halt to-day. During the afternoon I followed up the river and
ascertained that the actual junction of the two rivers Alberga and Stevenson bore N.N.W.,
dlSta Mo*nday 14th December.—Camp on Macumba below junction of Alberga and Stevenson.
Barometer 29-53; thermometer 49°. Started at 6-30 and crossed river; followed down right
bank over splendidly-grassed but very stony ground for four miles; here the river turned slightly
to the southward. Not wishing to follow all its turns, I changed my course to nearly due west,
crossing sandhills fairly grassed, with claypan and box flats between (many of the box flats
would hold water for a considerable time after ram), for eight milesto stony S r o un d again,
seventeen miles from my camp struck and crossed river; here a well defined (but dry) channel
with high ground on both sides. At eighteen miles camped on a small stony creek,
N.N.E. S from high stony ground southward, in which I was fortunate to find a few surtab
bushes for the camels ; had I continued on, and got into the barren plain, a portion of wh
cossed on my upward journey, I am afraid my beasts would have fared badly; lame ca
Decem ber.—Dry Creek south of Macumba. Barometer
No. 19.


mometer 63°; calm, clear. Started at 6; course west over inferior stony plain, rising and
improving southwards. At seven miles crossed a creek, course N.N.E., very deep, but dry stony
bed, bank prettily lined with gum and acacia; continued same course over plain and portion of
bed of river; passed my camp of Thursday, 10th December, about half a mile, and turned out
my camels ; too hot to travel. Thermometer 110° in the shade. Started at 5'15 p.m., and
followed along my upward track; camped at nine o’clock. I was reduced to riding my pack
camel, (a rough lumbering brute), as my own could not carry me any further; in fact, we had great
difficulty in getting her along by leading. I was obliged to camp in a most wretched place on
this account; had I pushed on, I might have lost the camel altogether.
Wednesday, 16th December.—Barren plain, south of Macumba. Barometer 29*54; ther-
mometer 68°; calm, clear. Two of the camels strayed away last night; the lame one did not go
more than twenty yards, and it is a well known fact that camels are so fond of their mates that,
if one stays behind, it must be very bad indeed; this is the first instance I know of during my
camel experience. We recovered our two stray ones at 7*45, and started at B*s, course about
S.E. (I did not take bearings), for Pecherina Waterhole, at which we arrived at 4 p.m., the
lame camel completely done up; and, as for the black boy and myself, we could hardly speak,
for thirst, having had our last drink at 9 a.m.; from that time till 4 p.m. was quite long
enough, considering that the thermometer stood at 123° at 3 p.m. Had the camel not got so
much worse I could have easily (and intended doing so) reached this place last night, conse-
quently started from the junction with a scanty supply of water. Lat. 27 3 17' 14".
Thursday, 17th December.—Pecherina Waterhole. Barometer 29*53; thermometer 89°;
wind S.W., cloudy. Started at 8 for the depot, following back nearly along my upward tracks.
At 12*30 arrived at the depot, and found a memo, from Mr. Beresford stating that he had moved
the camp nine miles lower down the river, to a waterhole found by Mr. Tolmer. The day being
frightfully hot, I turned out the camels during the extreme heat —thermometer 130° in the shade.
I managed to procure three ducks, which were very acceptable, as our breakfast only consisted
of a small piece of bread each. Shortly after partaking of our frugal meal a very severe gale of
wind sprung up from the S.S.E., carrying clouds of dust before it, and breaking off several large
limbs of the surrounding trees. Started on again at 4*50 p.m., and followed down the left bank
of the river, passing over reasonably well-grassed sandhills and flats. At 7*lo arrived at the
camp ; found all well. From this place, during my absence, Mr. Beresford had followed down
the river, in order to find out its mouth into Lake Eyre, and from there survey the shore of the
lake southwards to the Neales, but had been prevented by what he thought was a large swamp
joining the river from the sandhills south. This was afterwards found to be the Salt Creek.
This mistake was one that any traveller might have made, as the Salt Creek below the junction
of the Macumba forms no channel, being merely a broad salt marsh, penetrating in between the
sandhills in all directions—and, leaving out the question of crossing, it is in many cases un-
approachable.
Friday, 18th December.—Lat. 27° 41' 23". Brackish waterhole, Macumba River. Barome-
ter 29*94; thermometer 71°; calm, clear. This morning, on hearing Mr. Beresford’s account
more fully, I was obliged to abandon the attempt of reaching the mouth of the Macumba by
following it down. Thirteen miles below the camp, Mr. Beresford learnt from a black boy that
the mouth of the river was two day’s journey from there. In consequence of this I determined
to return to the mouth of the Neales, and from there survey the shore of the lake as far as
possible northwards. This I was prevented from carrying out at once, as, when riding along
yesterday evening, I caught swelling-blight in one of my eyes, and while walking about to
examine the waterhole on which the camp was, one eye completely closed up, and rendered the
other one unfit for taking and following a bearing.
Saturday, 19th December.—Brackish waterhole, Macumba River. Barometer 30*06; ther-
mometer 69°; calm, clear. Leaving Mr. Beresford in charge of the camp, with instructions to
move down the river about five miles, to where he had found some good waterholes, I started,
taking Mr. Tolmer with me, at 7*lo. On bearing 213° 30' for two miles, over low sandhills, to
a high red point. Changed to 229°, over sandhills with samphire flats between. At one mile
crossed the Frew Creek; continued same bearing for five and three-quarters miles, over similar
samphire country, when we got into a number of small salt lagoons between low sandhills. At
six miles more struck the main baggage track. Changed to S.W, by S., and at 4*50 arrived and
camped at the middle waterhole in Koorakarrina Creek. After letting our camels go, Mr.
Tolmer and I began to fish, and by dark had caught over four dozen, which we cleaned and
soaked in a small pool of intensely salt water for half an hour, when they were thoroughly cured,
and kept quite sweet for three days after.
Sunday, 20th December.—Middle waterhole, Koorakarrina Creek, Barometer 30*05; ther-
mometer 68°; wind south-east, clear. Started at 6*20, and followed up the creek to the upper
waterhole, which I was sorry and surprised to find had fallen over a foot in depth. Leaving the
creek we proceeded on bearing 132° 30', crossing over splendidly-grassed, undulating, red stone
country, intersected by numerous small gullies, thickly fringed with gigia trees, forming a valuable
and pretty piece of grazing country. At nineteen and a quarter miles crossed a small overflow
which breaks out from the Neales three miles up, and joins again five miles below. At twenty-
two miles struck the Neales a quarter of a mile above Camp No. 6. We then followed up the
river to a place I was desirous of seeing if water could be got by sinking in a bed of rushes. We
got plenty about six inches under the surface, but, to my surprise, it was quite salt—in fact, a
salt spring ; however, we obtained a plentiful supply of fresh water, by sinking about four feet, a
few yards higher up.
Monday, 21st December.—Neales River. Barometer 29*90; thermometer 74°; calm, clear.
Started at 7*20, and followed down the left bank of the river, I did not take bearings, as Mr.
Beresford had previously mapped the course of it. We only made a journey of ten miles, as I
unfortunately, while endeavouring to get a shot at some ducks, put down a prismatic compass,
and did not notice my loss till we got some five miles from it. During the time it look me to go
back Mr. Tolmer put down several holes in likely-looking places, but obtained nothing but very
salt


salt water. Camped a quarter of a mile north of the mouth of the Neales, on a well-grassed,
scrubby flat. I don’t think either of us got more than an hour’s sleep, as the ants pestered us
frightfully. Lat. 28° 3' 53".
Tuesday, 22nd December.—Mouth of the Neales River, north side. Barometer 29-87 ; ther-
mometer 66°; calm, clear. Started at 715 northwards, along the shore of the lake, for four and
a quarter miles. Along this part of the lake I was obliged to consider the boggy part the shore,
there being nothing in the shape of a bank, and the samphire and loose loamy soil extended back
nearly a mile all the way. At four and a quarter miles we were stopped by a sharp turn of the
lake to the westward ; followed this turn four miles, when we got into high barren sandhills for
three miles, with numerous very boggy arms, extending from the lake between them, over which
we had great difficulty in crossing. Continued along the shore over very inferior samphire
country. At four miles crossed a narrow but very boggy salt creek. Shortly after crossing the
creek 1 was obliged to turn out the camels, on some stony ground where we fortunately found a
few bushes, as the heat was simply unbearable, and clouds of salt dust blowing off the lake was
frightfully painful to our eyes. We made a shade, covered it with a thick rug, then bushes on
the top of that; even under such a thick covering the thermometer registered 141°. Started at
5-10 p.m. over well-grassed stony ground. At one and a half miles crossed Gigia Creek (dry).
At three miles I was obliged to alter my course to 273°, for Koorakarinna Waterhole ; the wind
was blowing a perfect gale off the lake, and carrying so much dust along with it that we could
not see twenty yards. At five miles camped on high stony.plain ; not much grass, but abundance
of cotton and salt bushes, and a few low shrubs. Short hobbled our camels, as they showed
great signs of thirst and an evident desire to make to the nearest water — even a camel must get
very thirsty during a hot dusty day as this was,
Wednesday, 23rd December.—Camp on Stony Plain. Barometer 30"04; thermometer 70°.
Mr. Tolmer started after the camels at daylight, but did not get them back to the camp till 10-30,
when we started on nearly the same course as yesterday evening for the waterhole. At eight
miles reached it and camped, as both ourselves and camels required a little rest after the dust we
had swallowed,
Thursday, 24th December.—Koorakarinna Waterhole. Barometer 30-08 ; thermometer 64°.
Started at 6-50, and returned to Thursday night’s camp. Started from it 8*45, bearing 25° over
fairly-grassed red-stone plain, sloping to the lake. At two and three quarters miles struck Koora-
karinna Creek, at a very nice waterhole; turned out so that the camels might be thoroughly
watered; caught a dozen and a half of fish, averaging about six inches in length. At 150
started and crossed the creek; at three quarters of a mile crossed salt marsh, and followed it
down for two and a quarter miles to the lake. Proceeded along edge of lake, through very well
grassed low sandhills, for two miles, to a loamy soil plain, surprisingly well grassed, and dotted
with saltbush, cottonbush, and shrubs. Continued along the shore (which here consist of high
gypsum cliffs) for seven and a half miles, over the same rich well-grassed plain, to sandhills again.
I was really surprised to see such a fine piece of country, surrounded by sandhills on three sides,
and the lake on the fourth; or, more properly speaking, the hills ran parallel to the shore,
distant from a half to three quarters of a mile, and gradually sloping to the salt crust of the lake.
Followed along the shore for two and a half miles, and camped in a small gully draining higher
portions of the sandhills, in which we found a few green bushes of the native lupin plant, every-
thing else being quite dead. Lat. 27° 53' 31".
Friday, 25th December,—Camp in gully north of Lake Eyre. Barometer 30-06 ; ther-
mometer 68°. Started at 6-45, and followed the shore of the lake for five miles, over loose sandy
ground, nothing on it but samphire and a few canebushes, to the top of a very high sandhill
overhanging the lake. From here we had a dismal and disheartening view—nothing to be seen
but the white lake south, and high barren sandhills north, with nothing on them but dead cane-
bush and samphire. Here the shore of the lake turned considerably to the south, and being quite
sick of it for one journey, and thinking it might be more easily surveyed from some more eastern
water, I determined to let it rest for a while. Continued an easterly course for five miles, over
terrible sandhills, with hard claypan flats between. On one occasion we had to go a mile out of
our course to get down one of them; but it is impossible to give even a vague idea of the height
of those hills and the steepness of the eastern side. At five miles we were effectually stopped by
what I thought was a large marsh, but which eventually proved to be the Salt Creek. On
nearing this place I thought it was a large marsh southward, and a smaller round one north,
separated by a narrow neck of land, which we followed along between the marshes. We were
very much disappointed on finding them connected by a narrow strip, about 200 yards wide, and
very boggy. I walked half-way across, and tested the softness and depth with a stick, but did
not judge it safe to take the camels over it. Around the northern marsh the sandhills were
perfectly perpendicular; nothing short of a wallaby could ascend or descend them, consequently
I was obliged to follow round the edge and estimate the distance across. On rounding the
marsh we continued over the same high, barren, steep sandhills (course west of north) for five
miles, when we struck a southern branch of the Macumba; followed it up for two and three
quarter miles, to where we-found some native lupins, flourishing wonderfully, considering the
dryness of everything else, and camped. By going on two miles we could have got to some
native wells, found by Mr. Beresford ; but as Mr. Tolmer said they were extremely brackish, and
not opened out, I judged it better to let my camels have a little green feed than to take them to
wells out of which I could not obtain a sufficient supply.
Saturday, 26th December.—Camp below brackish wells, Macumba River. Barometer 30-01;
thermometer 66°. Started at 6-30, and followed up right bank of river. At two miles got to
native wells previously spoken of, found to be in the bottom of a dry waterhole, varying in depth
from one to two feet—some very brackish, others quite salt. Continued up right bank, and at
about half a mile came upon a camp of natives, who had a well put down in sand fully eight feet
deep. At eight miles reached another well, found by Mr. Beresford ; by scratching near this we
gave our camels sufficient water to enable them comfortably to reach the camp. At fifteen and
a quarter miles found the camp pitched on the bank of the river, near some very nice waterholes,
1 fresh
No. 19.


fresh and brackish, which Mr. Beresford had, in my absence, appropriately named and mapped
Christmas Waters. The chain of waterholes in the river is about two miles long, and might
water a few head of stock for six months ; but the country on both sides is absolutely worthless,
consisting of high, barren, and precipitous sandhills,.which run close to the river, growing nothing
hut samphire, pigsface, and canebush, and, in my opinion, only suited for the natives to prowl
over after rain, when pigweed doubtless grows profusely, and at other times, when the seed of
the pigface plant is ripe. After resting for an hour or so, we tried our luck at what, in bush
language, is called driving a waterhole for fish. This is done by cutting a quantity of bushes
and twisting them together, so as to reach across the waterhole ; then, by pushing it slowly from
one end to the other, the fish are either driven before it or entangled in the bushes. At this we
failed greatly—whether from want of practicable experience or the depth of the water I cannot
say; but, after working hard for three hours, we only obtained three small tookerie, or bony
bream. Lat. 27° 43' 42".
Sunday, 27th December. —Christmas Waters, Macumba River. Barometer 30*03; ther-
mometer 68°; calm, clear. Halted. Very hot day ; thermometer, under a thick shade of bushes,
122°, at 2 p.m. A whirlwind passed right through the centre of our camp, from south to north,
carrying away everything that was loose in the shape of towels, bags, &c., some of which went
too far to be recovered.
Monday, 28th December.—Christmas Waters, Macumba River. Barometer 29*86; ther-
mometer 61°; calm, sultry. Started at 7 2 down right bank of the river ; at two and three quarters
miles crossed the Frew, a dry sandy bed, bordered with acacia and silver wattles. At eight miles
reached the first w*ater found by Mr. Beresford. Turned out and sank and timbered a well five
feet deep ; water fresh and plentiful. Watered the camels, although we had only travelled a
short distance. 1 thought it prudent to give them a drink at the last available water. At 5*12
p.m. continued down right bank of river for four miles to the brackish native wells previously
mentioned, and camped on the north side of the river. Tried to use the water, but found it
rather too brackish. Lat. 27° 44' 3".
Thursday, 29th December.—Brackish Wells, Macumba River. Barometer 29*84; ther-
mometer 68° ; calm, hazy. While the camels were being loaded, Mr. Beresford and I walked
half a mile to the top of a sandhill, bearing 82*15, when we found that a white boggy channel
of the river took a sharp turn northwards ; took some bearings, and Mr. Beresford walked across
the point while I followed round with the baggage. We then followed down the left bank for
five and a half miles to the junction of Kallakoopah; crossed it, and followed the left bank for
three miles N.E., passing several large salt waterholes to where our black guide had promised to
show us a good well of water; but on arrival at the place the good well proved to be three small
holes in the bottom of a dry waterhole, about two feet in depth, containing a small quantity of
water on blue sandy clay. After unloading the camels and fixing our camp we began work
and cleared out two large holes, one twelve feet by four, but the water only covered the
bottom about two inches deep. This was of no use to us for the camels, the whole of which kept
coming around us, although repeatedly driven away. After waiting some time to see if more
water drained in, I left and went to the camp, and began arranging our movements for the
next few days with Mr. Beresford. My intention had been to leave the baggage and four
men in charge of Mr. Beresford (the water being sufficient for them), while two Affghans
returned to the last well on the Macumba with the camels for water, taking the black boy, I
purposed making a push through the sandhills to the salt creek. During the time we were
settling our movements, Mr. Tolmer returned to the hole for the purpose of filling a waterbag;
the water not being sufficiently deep to enable him to dip it up, he made a small hole in the
clay at one end, but fortunately going a little too deep, he penetrated through the clay to
sand again, when all the water disappeared; this excited his curiosity, and he perseveringly set
to work and put down a hole about seven feet to water again. Immediately on reporting this
cheerful news to me, we all set to work enlarging the well, and got plenty of water; but after
watering three camels the sides gave way and half filled the well; cleared it out again, and
although the work was very hard (as the quantity of sand we had to remove made the well fully
forty to fifty feet in circumference at the top), we had the satisfaction of watering five more camels
bv nine p.m., working by candle light, and half smothered in dust. At sunset the wind rose
from the southward and increased to a gale, carrying clouds of dust and sand before it, the salt
nature of which rendered our task very unpleasant.
Wednesday, 30th December—Tommy’s Well, Kallakoopah Creek. Barometer 29*82 ;
thermometer 92°, clear; wind east, by north. Spent a most miserable night, through the dust.
During the early part of the night it came in gusts, but about ten o’clock the wind increased, and
the whole atmosphere was filled with fine dust, which gave the appearance of a fog, so thick that
I could not see a star sufficiently clear to take an observation. On visiting the well we found
nearly all our camels standing round it; they had broken in a good deal of the surface, but by
dipping the water carefully we got enough to satisfy nine of them. Cleaned it out again, and
with the aid of a few sticks of silver wattle (which two of the Affghans carried over two miles)
we managed to make a permanent job of it, and by 3 p.m. had thoroughly watered our stock.
Considered it too late to make a start for the Salt Creek, and being very much puzzled, as the
creek we followed up was certainly flowing to the southward, and thinking this to be the same,
till we noticed the driftwood also showing a southward flow, we concluded that there were two
creeks. After finishing watering the camels, Mr. Beresford and I started and followed our tracks
back for one mile and a half, to the corner where we left Kallakoopah. Followed up the left
bank ; at two miles crossed a salt, boggy channel; leaving it, and going eastward, struck north-
east for the point of a high sandhill, from which we saw the creek close under us, and stretching
as far northwards as we could see. By this time it was getting dark, so we started homeward in
a straight direction. At one mile and three quarters struck the creek we had crossed ; found it
too boggy to cross, followed it down, and were stopped by a large, boggy marsh. Our camels
did not fancy travelling over soft ground in the dark—being blocked in two directions, we
thought it was better to camp (although we had neither food nor water) and wait for daylight.
Thursday,


Thursday, 31st December.—Camp on Salt Creek, near Tommy’s Well; light wind from the
east. Started at daylight; followed up the creek to where we crossed it previously, and arrived
at the main camp at 7 a.m. Being desirous of seeing a little more of Kallakoopah Creek, after
breakfast I took the black boy with me; I returned to the high sandhill, where we had seen it
comino- from the north ; I followed it up for four miles north-easterly, when I found myself in a
sharp turn. Altered my course to nearly due east, still on the left bank of the creek, and at
eight and a half miles camped on a flat between the sandhills, where I found a few green bushes
for the camels, . . ,
Friday, Ist January, 1875.—Camp on Kallakoopah Creek. Clear; strong wind from south.
Started early, course south-east by east. At one mile struck turn of the creek. Here the black
pointed north, to where he said he had camped with several others at a waterhole. The creek
being too boggy to attempt crossing the camels, I tied them up and walked across (up to my
knees in mud) to the waterhole, but found it quite dry: by digging down six inches, I got very
soft, blue clay—no water. Returned to the camels, and being quite satisfied with this creek, I
made all possible baste to the camp, at which we arrived at 625 p.m. To obtain even a faint
idea of this country it must be seen —the sandhills (sand mountains would be more appropriate)
are high, barren, and steop, growing nothing but a little canebush, samphire, and pig’s-face
(mesembryanthemum) . The country' up to the dry waterhole I visited is simply frightful;
the north side of the creek seemed to be high hills running parallel to it, and close to the
bank ; on the south side a high range followed along about one and a half miles off, and
throwing off spurs at right angles into the creek, with narrow boggy channels between. To follow
the creek up and down, I had to make considerable detours to cross the boggy channels, and also
to get down or up the east side of the sandhills. The creek would be fresh while
flooded, but I am quite certain, from the salt nature of the bed and the surrounding country, that
the water left would not remain drinkable for half a day. Tommy’s Well is undoubtedly perma-
nent and fresh, but the country around it is abominable; to take a view from any slight elevation
of the bare sandhills, sandcliffs, and utter want of vegetation, is sufficient to create thirst, without
having to travel over it. Lat. 27° 41' 11". .
Saturday, 2nd January.—Tommy’s Well. Barometer 29-96 ; thermometer 65°; clear, wind
south-south-east. On visiting the*well, I found the water to be three feet deep, six feet long, by
four feet in width. East of the camp, the creek which blocked Mr. Beresford and I, forms into a
large marsh, or rather the creek overflows to the eastward and forms the marsh, vv hile the
camels were being loaded I walked on with the black boy, to find a crossing-place. On bearing
158° at one mile, crossed and waited for the others to come up ; followed down the left bank
southward for five miles, to another marsh; crossed a portion of it one and a half miles in width,
then five miles of very high sandhills to the Salt Creek ; course from E.N.E. to W.S.W. Our
first introduction to this river was at a large salt waterhole, fully two miles long, and from seventy
to eighty yards wide. Followed up the right bank for two miles (easterly), crossing numerous
water channels formed by the river overfloAving, to a sharp bend to the southward ; still folloAV-
ing the river, Ave passed some very large but, unfortunately for us, dry waterholes. At three and
three quarter miles I left the party and crossed the river on foot, Avhere a portion of it breaks off
and goes south; here I found horse tracks (probably a Aveek old) around a small palt pool in the
south branch, but, as the water was intensely salt, I Avas at a loss to imagine hoAV they came
there. After vainly searching for fresh Avater I returned to the party, and continued up the
river for three miles, and camped. On arranging the camp, Mr. Beresford and Mr. lolmer took
their guns, and Avalked out in search of water, and also to procure gamein the former they
were partially successful, having found a small fresh drainage on the south side of the river ; but
from the position of it (being between two channels, one of Avhich avc would have to cross), and
the supply being, as far as they could judge, rather small, I concluded it would be better for us
to continue our upward journey, rather than Avaste time over a spring Avhich Avould, in all pro-
bability, be insufficient for our Avants. Lat. 27° 50 27".
Sunday, 3rd January.—Salt Creek. Barometer 29-98; thermometer, 65°; calm, clear.
Before proceeding any further, I wish to say that this river has been known by several names—
Salt Creek, Will’s Creek, and, by Warburton, it Avas considered the Barcoo, KnoAving such I
declined naming it, and left the matter to the Surveyor-General, Avho has been pleased to call it
the Warburton. Walked on with Mr. Beresford to a high pointed sandhill overhanging the
river, bearing 3°, distant quarter of a mile; here Ave found that our baggage camels could not
follow, the hill being so steep on the east side that it was Avith considerable difficulty we got our
camels down by leading them. Sent the party round with instructions to make back
again* to the river as soon as possible, and continued on, crossing a good saltbush flat, about
three quarters of a mile Avide for two miles, Avhen we crossed some native paths. Leaving Mr.
Beresford to Avait for the party, I walked on Avith the black boy, and, after following numerous
tracks, avc found three small holes scratched under the right bank of the river, near a very large
salt Avaterhole; on clearing one of the holes out I found the water to be perfectly fresh, but not
much of it, Mr. Beresford had by this time passed, so I sent the boy to recall him. When we
had unloaded, a large space was cleared out; but, while this Avas being done, I tried on a
sandspit, and obtained perfectly fresh Avater in eighteen inches. This seeming to be the simpler
Avay of obtaining water, Ave abandoned the bank spring, and cleared out and timbered a hole
eight feet by three feet, two feet six inches deep. By the time we had Ayatered four camels the
water began to get brackish, and by watering three others it became quite salt. Ihe reason of
this Avas, that the great body of salt water being so near, its drainage was much larger than
the fresh. This was a great disappointment to all. We then tried the bank drainage, but could
not open out a place large enough through the earth breaking doAvn. After dinner Mr. Tolmer
and the Affghans cut a place level Avith the sand, six feet into the bank, nine feet long,
and from ten to twelve feet deep, and by timbering the back with saplings (of which for-
tunately there Avere plenty), and using very strong props, we succeeded in keeping the eart
from falling, although the pressure was very great. Obtained a good supply of perfectly fresh
water. Lat. 27° 47'52". Monday,
B—No. 19.


Monday, 4th January.—Depot on the Warburton. Barometer 29-96 ; thermometer 76’;
clear, light wind east-north-east. On visiting the well we found the water still continued fresh ;
but, as our timbering might give way any moment, I determined to look at some springs the
black boy informed me he knew of a short distance higher up. After watering some of the
camels I took the boy and followed up the river for two and a half miles, and found the springs
situated under a high sandhill overhanging the right bank, twelve to twenty in number ; some
required opening out, others had a small stream trickling from them to the salt water. For two
days I had been very much puzzled as to where the birds got water —such as parrots, bronzewing
and topknot pigeons; but,from the tracks about the springs,! should think that some thousands
of all kinds of wild fowl water at them. Any quantity of water might be obtained by a little
labor, but the approach is rather difficult.
Tuesday, slh January.—Depot on the Warburton. Barometer 29-72; thermometer 72°;
calm, clear. From this place I determined to try and reach the mouth of the river into Lake
Eyre. Leaving Mr. Beresford in charge of the camp, I struck across the sandhills in an westerly
direction to the place we first struck the river. I then continued down the right bank for six
miles to the junction of the Macumba, crossing over nothing but undulated saltbush country—little
or no grass. It took me some time to satisfy myself that I was at the junction, for the Macumba
runs south, the Warburton north ; they meet each other fair in the face, and go off eastward.
Camped in a small patch of saltbush at the junction. Lat. 27° 5T 23".
Wednesday, 6th January.—Junction of the Macumba and Warburton. Barometer 29 - 89 ;
thermometer 61° ; calm, clear. Tried to cross both the Macumba and Warburton, but could not
find a place sufficiently hard to bear me on foot. Followed up the branch of the Kallakoopah
coming from Tommy’s Well, trying in all likely-looking places without success. Although there
was no water visible, the mud was so soft that a piece of earth would sink in it, and with the
longest stick I find I could not reach the bottom. Followed up the creek, and crossed
below Tommy’s Well; filled up the casks at the well, and followed the tracks down the creek
to the junction. Crossed the Macumba on a south course, and came to grief in the most
southern channel through one of the camels getting bogged; it was the one the black boy was
leading, and, on going down the bank it broke the nose rope. I rode on, thinking it would
follow ; but, with the usual perverseness of a camel, the brute chose another place and got bogged.
It took us some time to extricate it. Camped on the right bank ; very heavy clouds about the
horizon, and every appearance of rain during the early part of the night.
Thursday, 7th January.—Camp opposite the junction of Kallakoopah Creek. Barometer
29-80; thermometer 76°; clear, light wind from south-east. During the night I suffered very
much from the effects of the water from Tommy’s Well: the silver wattle sticks which we put
in it imparted a very disagreeable taste to the water, and also rendered it a violent purgative and
emetic. Started at 6TO, and followed southward down the right bank of the Macumba, for eight
and a half miles, to the junction with the Warburton, crossing high points of sandhills with
samphire flats between. This portion of the river is about two miles wide, fairly grassed, and
producing very large saltbushes. The junction of the two rivers, when viewed from the north
side, presents innumerable small boggy channels. I tried to cross the first one I came to, which
was only about six feet wide, but without success, as a stick could be thrust down to any depth.
Followed round a marsh for three miles and struck the Warburton again; continued down it
north of east, and crossed the narrow neck connecting the river and the marsh, which, as pre-
viously mentioned, baulked Mr. Tolmer and myself. At 1-40 a strong breeze came up from the
south-east, and gradually changed to south, carrying clouds of dust with it. Ten minutes after
the wind came fiom the south I was obliged to turn out, the camels would not face it, and, in
addition to this, I could not see. We made a shelter with our blankets, which served us but
very little, as the whole atmosphere was thick with dust, and the sun hardly visible. At 5-30
the force of the wind abated a little; we saddled up and continued our journey downwards for
four miles, when the dust again became unbearable. What color I was lam unable to say, but
the black boy was nearly white, with furrows down his cheeks where the tears ran down from his
eyes, caused by the salt nature of the dust. On searching about we fortunately came across a
steep water-washed gully, in which we were partially sheltered. After dark I endeavored to set
out my artificial horizon; this proved no slight undertaking, and, although the boy held a large
rug around me, I am certain I had to filter the quicksilver twenty times before I could get it
clean—before the trough was half full it was generally quite covered with sand. However, all
things have an end, and at about 9 o’clock the wind ceased, and I was enabled to take the neces-
sary observations. The result of three sights north and south of the zenith gave the latitude as
27° 54' 6". This was certainly the most trying afternoon I ever spent, and sincerely trust that no
one else will ever be caught during a dry season in a south gale on the north end of Lake Eyre.
One thing I am quite sure of, that is, had the wind continued all night, we would have figured
on the list of missing explorers, as our water was becoming short, having, incredible as it may
seem, consumed fully two gallons each during the afternoon, and, had economy not been neces-
sary, would gladly have had more.
Friday, Bth January.—Camp on the Warburton, near Lake Eyre. Barometer 29-81 ;
thermometer 75°; wind S.E.; cloudy E. and S.E. To my surprise I found myself nearly on
the shore of the lake, although it was in no manner visible last night; rode to the shore, and
along it westward, and took a number of bearings ; returned to the mouth of the river and
walked out on the lake for half a mile, the surface consisting of dry loamy dust about eight
inches in depth, then a slight layer of clay, with black mud underneath; followed the river up
and took bearings to the place where the dust storm caught me, then along my downward tracks
to the marsh crossing; made a straight course north across terribly steep barren sandhills to my
camp on the Macumba (January 6th), thence to Tommy’s Well, where we arrived at 2*30,
thoroughly exhausted.
Saturday, 9th January. —Tommy’s Well. Barometer 29-78; thermometer 78°; calm,
cloudy. During the night we had a good deal of thunder and lightning, and about daylight I
was in hopes the storm, which was E.N.E., would reach our locality, but it cleared off. Started
at


at 6T5 on bearing 117° for main camp on the Warburton, across medium sandhills at four and
a quarter miles; struck the point of the marsh from Tommy’s Well, tried to cross and nearly
lost one of my camels ; changed to 200° for half a mile to get round the end of the marsh,
continued same course (117°) ; at four miles more crossed a salt claypan three quarters of a mile
wide and two and a half miles long, to well-grassed sandhills and valleys for six and a half miles
to the Warburton, one mile and a quarter below the depot. Crossing the well-grassed sandhills
from the salt claypan was very agreeble after the dreary Lake Eyre business, although the
eastern side of them was very steep; at 12'45 arrived at the depot and found all well.
Sunday, 10th January.—Depot on the Warburton. Barometer 29’80 ; thermometer
84°; cloudy, wind W.S.W. Believing this water to be as near to the lake as any we would find,
I determined to try and cross the river and go down to the east side of the mouth of the "War-
burton, and then level out on the lake for a few miles. Started at 7T5 with Mr. Beresford, Mr.
Tolmer, Halleem, and Sheik Willie, and followed all the turns of the river down without finding
even a likely place to cross till we came to where the branch breaks off south. The river is in
two channels —the north one very boggy; over this we made a bridge by laying saplings close
together as a foundation, then covered them with boughs, saltbush, and earth; having finished
this our work began—some of the camels would not even go down the bank, so we had to push
them, but with coaxing, thrashing, and pushing we got them across in about an hour. I pre-
viously mentioned having seen some horse tracks about a salt waterhole in the south branch, but
omitted that I noticed several crows sitting on the sand on the east side of the waterhole. After
Ave got across and were resting I noticed a number of crows again; this excited our curiosity so
we Avalked down to it to find out the reason why they frequented the same place so much, and
on removing the sand about an inch or tAVO in depth, near the Avaterhole, avc obtained brackish
water ; we then tried several places back from the salt Avater and got abundance of fresh, but it
tasted frightfully of gunpowder when the holes Avhere first opened ; this I believe Ayould go off
were the Avater exposed to the air—had this been learnt sooner it vvould have considerably for-
warded our actions with respect to the lake, by giving us a nearer starting point; after resting
and thoroughly testing the quantity and quality of Avater obtainable Ave started at 12’40 (course
nearly W.S.W.) for the eastern side of the mouth of the Warburton, crossing very steep barren
sandhills, running nearly N. and S., the eastern side of them being in many places too steep to
descend; at nine miles crossed a marsh formed from the Warburton; at ten and a half miles
camped on the shore of Lake Eyre, thoroughly tired.
Monday, 11th January.—Camp on Lake Eyre, east of the Warburton. Barometer 29• /0 ;
thermometer 73°; calm, cloudy E.N.E. Mr. Beresford, Mr. Tolmer, and Halleem began
levelling out on the lake ; I took the other Affghan Avith me to hold my camel while I walked
across the mouth of the Warburton to a pole I planted on the north side on my previous visit,
from Avhich I Avished to take more bearings. After getting about 150 yards out on the river bed
it became too soft to bear me, the upper portion consisted of nearly pure salt, Avith about an
inch of clay, then black mud to a depth of Avhich it is impossible to form an opinion; returned
to the camp, and instructed the Affghan I had Avith me to folloAV Mr. Beresford out on the lake
and sink holes in all places he might be shoAvn ; I then continued along the shore of the lake
easterly for eight and a half miles to an arm going north, followed along it for two miles to the
top of a very high sandhill, from which I observed the shore of the lake trending considerably
southward; continued my course N.E. over very barren sandhills, Avith claypan flats betAveen,
and at three miles struck the other branch of the Warburton; Avhile crossing the claypans I
observed a great number of old horse tracks as if they had been Avalking about there Avhen the
water was nearly gone ; I then followed dovm the right bank of the overflow, and at about three
miles came upon an old horse pad, as if a number of horses had been repeatedly follcnving in
each others footsteps; this pad followed nearly all the bends of the creek to about two miles from
its mouth in the lake, then turned AvestAvard over the sandhills'to the shore. While riding about
I found a place where someone had camped, in a A r alley between the hills, apparently for tAvo or
three days ; who it could have been in such a desolate place lamat a loss to imagine War-
burton’s track is shoAvn on his plan on the east side of the river, consequently it could not haA r e
been the tracks of his party. While travelling doAvn the creek the wind Avas bloAving furiously
from the south, carrying clouds of dust before it, and on arriving on the shore of the lake it
began to rain lightly, accompanied by a perfect gale of wind; after searching about for some
time 1 managed to find a sheltered nook in a valley, and turned my camel loose ; the brute fed
steadily off in the direction I had come, but thinking it Avas getting too far aAvay I folloAved in
order to bring it back to my camp, this the beast did not seem to see, as on *py approach it
bolted, and it was only after considerable trouble I managed to catch it ; Avhen caught 1 deter-
mined to make a secure job, so I tied it to a bush and then made use of the Affghan s plan of
tying the legs to prevent them from rising. My camp Avas anything but a pleasant one, being
alone, in cold beating rain, no fire, and only bread and Avater to eat, as I left Mr. Beresfoid all
the tea, sugar, and meat Ave brought from the camp Avith us—his Avork, Avalking out on the lake
and carrying a theodolite, being so much harder than Avhat I thought of doing.
Tuesday, 12th January.—Camp on the branch of the Warburton. Barometer 29‘92;
thermometer 79°; calm, cloudy—every appearance of more rain; a little before daybreak the
rain, which had continued all night, ceased. Started at 5 - 47 and folloAved up the right bank of
the creek for fourteen miles to Avhere avc crossed the Warburton, traversing some nice, but very
small saltbush flats ; the creek contains nothing but intensely salt Avater of a lurid red color; at this
place I had arranged to meet Mr, Beresford, but observing their camel tracks recrossing the
ver, I folloAved them along and arrived at the depot at 3 p.m.
Wednesday, 13th January.—Depot on the Warburton. Barometer 29 94 ; thermometer
59°; calm, cloudy, N.E. The well at this camp (in the bank of the river) is 200 yards
on bearing 118° from a large tree marked At six o’clock, Mr. Beresford and I Avalked
quarters of a mile on bearing 7° to the top of a high sandhill, overhanging the right bank of the
river, doAvn which Ave found it would be impossible to take our baggage ; waited till the party
came
No. 19.


came up and sent them westward round the high hills ; on the baggage rejoining us, we altered
our course to 35° along the bank, for two miles over poor sandhills, bearing nothing but canegrass
and a few shrubs, to a sharp point of the river, which we now found to be running nearly N.W,
followed the course of it for four miles and three quarters into the bend, where we found a number
of natives, at what we first imagined a good spring ; turned out the camels and watered two or
three, but the drainage was so slow, it was quite useless to us. At 352 p.m. continued up the
river for five and a half miles, crossing two sandhills to a plain, subject to inundation, but pro-
ducing abundance of saltbush and a little grass, extending from two to three miles along the
river, and three to four miles northwards; at 6h. Bm. camped on a most beautiful little plain,
thickly covered with grass and saltbush, and lightly timbered with gum trees, very straight and
grim; from the mid-day camp five natives followed us and camped on the opposite side of the
river, where they obtained abundance of water by removing a little sand. Lat. 27° 45' 47".
Thursday, 14th January.—The Warburton. Camp on plain. Barometer 29*92; thermometer
66°. Started at 5 55, same course as yesterday evening (36° 30'), for tour miles over a good
saltbush plain, extending from two to three miles north from the river, thickly covered with old
and very dry grass; here for the first time on the journey I saw a flock cf yalah parrots. We
then crossed two or three low sandhills running close into the river to another small, but well
grassed plain, studded with acacia and gum trees; at seven miles struck the river at a sharp
bend, where we found a well of good water and a native camp, the only occupants of which were
an old man and a dog; directly the old fellow sighted us, he and the dog cleared out; which was
the most frightened I cannot say, but they ran as if the whole lower regions were at their heels,
and hid themselves in some long grass. After leaving the well, we followed the course of the
river for four and a half miles over splendidly-grassed sandrises, but frightful to travel over, on
account of the numerous watercourses, in many cases eight or ten feet deep, with steep banks;
the watercourses were, I believe, formed by the drainage from some very high sandhills which we
could see about four miles northwards; after getting out of the gullies on to a nice little plain, we
saw natives on the bank of the river, and making in towards them, found a camp of about forty
men, with the usual accompaniment of lubras, children, and dogs ; turned out the camels, to wait
for Mr. Beresford and Tolmer, who were following the river up in hopes of getting some game ;
cleared out a hole in the sandy bank, six feet by three feet and about eighteen inches deep; the
supply of water was splendid ; I believe it would have watered a hundred head of stock. We
also tried several places within a distance of 150 yards down the river, and obtained good water
at a depth of from six inches to three feet; two or three men could make this a splendid watering
place by a few days work. At 4*20 I started Mr. Beresford (and the party) with instructions to
follow up the river and camp at about six miles, while I examined the country northwards; I
went about four miles out from the river over magnificently-grassed low sandhills, timbered with
mulga and wooden pear trees ; at the end of four miles I could not observe any change in the
character of the country ; as far as the eye could reach, it appeared to be the same. I then altered
my course towards the river, where I arrived after sunset, and found Mr. Beresford just turning
out the camels on a pretty piece of country, quarter of a mile from the river.
Friday, 15th January.— The Warburton. Barometer 29*85 ; thermometer 66°; calm, clear;
did not get an observation for Lat. last night; I was so unwell I could not hold the sextant steady
enough. Just after daybreak about forty natives came up from the river much to our surprise, as
we had not the slightest suspicion that we were so near them; after starting the party off in charge
of Mr. Beresford I went with the natives to their camp to see what the water was like; at a quarter
of a mile struck the river and got water by scratching in the sand; followed it up for half a mile
(south),* and got water in several more places ; although the surface water was intensely salt, the
sand contained abundance of fresh water; I did not see the water at which the natives were
camped, as they were very numerous, and being alone I did not care to venture among them in
their camp. After getting rid of a.number'of the blacks who persisted in keeping me company I
followed the bends of the river, and at fifteen miles (by his reckoning) met Mr. Beresford. How
many miles I rode in following the bends I cannot say ; but I was well rewarded by finding fresh
water in five places by scratching, and I have no doubt there were many places I missed. The
place I met Mr. Beresford at was on the point of a very high sandhill, overhanging the river, under
which, in a large salt waterhole, a number of natives were fishing. The sandhill was thick with others ;
they all came up to us, and the howling and screeching was something frightful. After they had
exhausted their indignation a little we managed to ask a few questions, through our blackboy,
about water; they pointed across the river, and said there was a waterhole, to which one of the
boys volunteered to guide us, saying that it was only a little way. We descended the hill to the
river, got over one branch all right, but the second one impeded our progress considerably, being
very boggy. However, after a great deal of trouble, through two stubborn brutes of camels that
refused to face the bog, we arrived safe on the south side, continued along the south bank of the
river over a splendidly-grassed saltbush flat, and at three and a half miles our guide brought us
to a good fresh waterhole, situated in an overflow from the river; native name Wadlarkaninna.
From the waterhole the watercourse continues about three miles in a south-westerly direction,
and then spreads out on the flat. The waterhole is about quarter of a mile long, averaging thirty
yards wide and four feet deep, surrounded by very large gum trees, and the country round it
being extremely good, it forms a very pretty place; but Ido not think it can be considered per-
manent water. After forming our camp we caught two dozen fish and shot a few ducks. The
natives informed us that tw r o horses watered at this hole, and judging from the number of tracks
they must have made it their home for some time. Lat. 27° 52' 16"; Long, 5° 20' E. Tree
marked on east bank of waterhole.
Saturday, 16th January.—The Warburton, Wadlarkaninna Waterhole. Barometer 29° 92';
thermometer 77°; wind S.E , cloudy. Not being quite satisfied about some bearings which we
took from the sandhill when we came upon the natives, I requested Mr. Beresford to return to
the place and test their accuracy, and from there follow up the right bank of the river till he
struck my tracks with the baggage, as I intended crossing again as soon as possible. I had
hardly


hardly got fairly started when the natives came up again and offered to show me another water-
hole on the same side of the river that I was on ; this upset my arrangements with Mr. Beres-
ford, and as I had no one to send after him to advise him of the alteration of route, I was
obliged to go myself, and send the party, under the guidance of a score or so of blacks, to the
waterhole they spoke of. I caught up to Mr. Bercsford on the top of the sandhill, and after
takin" the necessary bearings we returned to Wadlarkanlnna. Started at 146 from a low sand-
hill near the waterhole, on bearing 36° 30', over good saltbush country, extending about one and a
half miles from the river to low well-grassed sandrises. At five and a quarter miles reached the
top of bald red sandhill. As we had seen nothing of the baggage tracks it was evident we were
eastward of them ; changed to 358°. Immediately under the sandhill we crossed a very boggy
salt creek, which takes its rise about three miles eastward, from stony flats and claypans in the
sandhills. At two and three quarter miles struck the river at a native fishery (rocky falls). Con-
tinued same course for three quarters of a mile more to the top of a sandhill, still without anj
signs of the tracks. While deliberating as to the best course to pursue we observed a smoke
down the river, recrossed the river at the fishery and followed down the left bank lor two
miles and found the party camped at a fresh waterhole in the main channel. Ibis I named
Gardiner’s Waterhole, after Mr. Robert Gardiner, of the Surveyor-General’s office. The reason
we missed the party was that the natives represented the w r aterhole to be a long day s walk from
Wadlakaninna, and on the same side, in place of which it proved to be only six and a-half miles
and in the main channel. Lat. 27° 46' 59'.
Sunday, 17th January. -The Warburton,‘ Gardiner’s Waterhole.—Barometer 29° 88 ;
thermometer 65°; light wind from E.S.E.; cloudy E. and E.S.E. Halted, as I did not take
bearings when following the river down from the fishery to this place. I requested Mr. lolmer
to proceed to the bald sandhill previously mentioned to ascertain the bearing and distance of it;
found the bearing to be (from the waterhole to the hill) 320°, distance three miles. We were
very fortunate in catching about twenty bream, one of which weighed over three pounds, and had
admirable and profitable sport in shooting crested pigeons and yalah parrots. Another large
camp of natives about three quarters of a mile below us. The proportion of sexes in this camp
was fully three females to one male. Very dull sultry day.
Monday, 18th January—The Whrburton, Gardiner’s Waterhole —Barometer 29° 82 ; thermo-
meter 79 ; calm, cloudy. Finding we could procure plenty of birds and a few fish at this camp, also
being desirous of learning the nature of the country, I determined to camp a day and send out one of
the party northwards. At 6a m. started Mr. Tolmerwith instructions to travel as far as possible
north, leaving suffi ;ient time to return before dark. He returned a few minutes after sunset,
having travelled about twelve miles on a northerly course, over undulating sandy country, well
grassed, salt and cotton bush plentiful, and timbered with acacia and wooden pear trees. A few
minutes after Mr. Tolmer returned Halleem came to me and reported that the following day was
one of their holidays, or, as he termed it, one of their Christmas days, and requested a day’s
holiday in order to pray. Knowing that if I refused I should get no work out of the two other
Affghans. I had to grant their request, although it was very annoying. Had I known it in the
morning I could have given Mr. Tolmer instructions and rations to stay out two days in place of
OnC Tuesday, 19th January.—The Warburton, Gardiner’s Waterhole. Barometer 29° 78';
thermometer 89°; wind E. by S., cloudy. Started Mr. lolmer and Ha\is out south-eastward
of the river. He travelled quarter of a mile on bearing S. 45° E., three miles, S. 70° E., two
and a half miles, S. 35° E., over good grass and canebush sandhills ; then two miles S, 10° E.,
over a large claypan ; changed to S. 35° E., crossing sandhills with well-grassed valleys inter-
vening, acacia and other bushes in the sandhills. He returned at dusk with one of the camels
quite blind, or nearly so. This camel by an accident had one of her eyes injured while on the
road from Beltana to Mount Margaret, which resulted in blindness, and during the previous night
o-ot a grass seed in the other one, which rendered it nearly as bad. They had great trouble in
getting the beast back to the camp. Mr. Tolmer was obliged to walk fully half of the return
journey.
Wednesday, 20th January.—The Warburton, Gardiner’s Waterhole. Barometer 29° 77';
thermometer 86° ; wind N.E., cloudy. Started at 6-40, bearing 64°, for the end of my tracks,
near the fishery. At two and a half miles reached the point; changed to 14° over a heavily
timbered saltbush flat, subject to inundation, extending about three miles westward from the
river. At seven miles reached the top of a very high and conspicuous sandhill. Here we
observed the river turned considerably to the eastward ; changed to 98°. At one and a quarter of
a mile struck a narrow, steep, and very boggy salt creek, running out of the river and going north-
wards. Followed it up for a mile and a half before we could cross. Followed down the creek
and crossed the river about half a mile above its outlet, to a -waterhole situated about
quarter of a mile eastward. This waterhole is filled from large gravelly flats, and from the river,
when flooded. On the bank of it is a red pointed sandhill, visible five or six miles, by which it
may easily be found/ Lat. 27° 43' 41".
Thursday, 21st January.—The Warburton, Yellow Waterhole. Barometer 29° 73'; ther-
mometer 79°; wind N.N.E., cloudy. Our black boy having repeatedly told me that Kallakoopah
was a branch or overflow from this river, I determined to form a depot and examine the country
northward to test the accuiacy of his statement, leaving Mr. Beresford in charge of the party,
with instructions to search up the river for more water, and also examine the country S. and S.L-
I started (taking the blackboy with me), at 6T5, bearing 332° across the river. When about one
mile from the river the wind began blowing furiously from the north, carrying such clouds of
dust with it as to render keeping a correct course impossible, I therefore continued on a general
north course, and at twenty-two and a half miles struck Kallakoopah Creek a broad bed fully
half a mile wide, without any' defined channel, and profusely covered with grass and saltbush.
Having crossed the bed of the channel the blackboy noticed some native tracks, which he said
were recently made. We followed them across the sandhills till dark, without any success, and
then returned and camped in the bed of Kallakoopah. Too cloudy to get an observation.
Friday,,
No. 19.


Friday, 22nd January.—Kallakoopah Creek. Barometer 29*75; thermometer 92°; wind
E.N.E.; dull, cloudy; very heavy clouds westward. On leaving the native tracks last
evening, we observed that they were gradually turning towards the creek again, and being most
anxious to ascertain where they camped, I started up the right bank; at two miles cut the
track, followed along them, and at four miles crossed the creek, and found where they had
scratched in the sand and obtained water; having no shovel with me, I opened out a place
nearer the salt water, which in a few minutes filled with brackish water; one of the camels soon
drained this; the next supply was very salt, owing to the excess of salt water over the fresh.
After trying several other holes with the same result, I proceeded S.E,, and at one mile and
a half crossed what I then thought to be the Warburton, still on the .native tracks; followed up
the left bank, over splendidly-grassed sandy country of peculiar formation—low irregular sand-
hills, or, more properly speaking, sand hillocks. At about six miles and a half, we came upon
an old black and three boys fishing with a net in a very large salt waterhole. Through the
noiseless manner in which camels travel, we were enabled to get to the bank right over them
before they noticed us ; the black boy then spoke to them, but it required all his powers of
persuasion and promises of tobacco to get them out of the water. After the old fellow’s fear
wore off, he trotted along ahead of us to his camp, where we found abundance of water in
springs, under a sandcliff on the left bank. It being impossible to get the camels down to the
springs, the old man volunteered to show us another place higher up. We then crossed the
river, and after following him for half a mile, I suddenly, and rather to my disgust, after passing
through a small belt of scrub, found myself close to a large camp of natives. At first they did
not know whether it would be best to run or stand; but seeing my two companions, I presume,
gave them confidence, and after a little jabbering, they came up, and allowed us to go to their
water. We could not get the camels down to the spring, but in about two minutes they carried
from thirty to fifty pirras, each holding fully a gallon of water, up the bank, which thoroughly
satisfied my animals. I then gave them all the tobacco and matches I could conveniently spare,
and cleared out; however, before leaving, I tried to count them; with the men I managed fairly,
and got up to 120 full grown, but to count the lubras and children was impossible, as some of
them were running about yelling, and others planting behind trees and bushes; all told, I believe
there were fully 350. From the springs, I took a short bearing of 263° to the top of a low
sandy rise, from which the view was most pleasing—richly grassed, undulating, sandy country,
with a profuse growth of saltbush and herbage, and timbered with acacia, silver wattle, and gum
trees, extending six or seven miles northwards; changed to 258° for three miles, over the same
rich country: at 7 o’clock, camped on a good saltbush flat, one mile from the western branch of
the river; every appearance of rain.
Saturday, 23rd January.—Saltbush Flat, west branch of the Warburton. Barometer
29*81; thermometer 80°; calm, cloudy E. and S. Had sufficient rain during the night to make
everything disagreeable, without doing any good. Started at 6*20 on bearing 257°, over saltbush
flat for one mile, to low sandhills, fairly grassed, running close on to the creek; changed to
260°, and at three miles reached the top of a high sandhill; from this point I had a fine view,
low sandhills extending about four miles northwards; took bearings of the course of the western
branch, and also the place where Kallakoopah Creek leaves it; followed the course of the creek for
fifteen miles and a half, a little W. of N., over nine miles of low, well-grassed sandhills, to a
gypsum plain, thickly covered with grass, saltbush, and cotton bush, which extends one mile and
a half eastward from the creek. Proceeded along the plain for five miles, to sandhills again,
rather high and inferior. At one and a half miles more camped on a claypan flat, Avhere we
found about a bucketful of very muddy water. From this point I could see Kallakoopah Creek
turning sharp to the westward, very high sandhills on both sides. After supper I became very
unwell—a pain in my stomach resembling cramp, and vomiting violently. This, I fully believe,
was caused by eating a small portion of a tin of meat, purchased in Adelaide, and preserved by
Hince ; it was as sour as vinegar, but provisions being scarce in such country, I had to eat that
or nothing. Latitude by Betelgeux and Canopus, 27° 14’ 19".
Sunday, 24th January.—Claypan Flat, east of Kallakoopah. Barometer 29*88; ther-
mometer 92 3 ; calm, hazy. Still unwell from the effects of the meat last night. Started at
B*3o, course neary due north, through sandhills, with good claypan and grassy cottonbush flats,
extending from half a mile to one mile wide. At five and three quarter miles passed the point of
a large claypan, stretching about three and a half miles to N.W., when it was hidden by high
sandhills. At seven and a half miles came to a very nice acacia flat, on the edge of a salt marsh,
six miles in circumference. Being still very unwell, I determined to camp; in addition, the feed
was very good for the camels. Leaving the black boy in charge of the pack camel and his own,
I rode on about two miles, to the top of a high sandhill. The prospect was anything but cheer-
ing, To the -westward I could see the claypan I passed ; N. and E. nothing but sandhills. On
returning to the camp I foolishly partook of the remains of Hince’s tin of meat. Shortly after I
was again seized with the same pain and vomiting, only in a more violent manner; it continued
till midnight. This is the only time I ever thought I was near death ; the pain was so excru-
ciating that I thought my time was come; so much so that I wrote a note by the light of the fire
to send by the black boy to Mr. Beresford, advising him how to carry on the expedition.
Monday, 25th January.—Latitude 27° 6’ 49". Salt marsh, east of Kallakoopah. Barometer
29*82; thermometer 81°; wind S.E , light clouds E. and S.E. Being so unwell, and seeing no
prospect cf a change of country in any direction, I judged it best to return along my tracks
to the depot. The black boy positively assured me that it was no use following Kallakoopah in
search of water. I only saw one small waterhole in the distance ; we followed it, and that was
frightfully salt, as the natives could only live on it for a short time after a flood. Started at 6*lo,
following my tracks to the camp on the creek on the night of the 21st. Left the camp at 5*12,
bearing 183°, across the creek, for one mile ; changed to 173° for six miles. On this bearing I
was fortunately very nearly travelling with the sandhills. At seven o’clock camped on the top of
a tableland or sand range gradually rising from Kallakoopai..
Tuesday, 26th January.—Sandrange, South of Kallakoopah. Barometer 29*72; ther-
mometer 82°; wind south, cloudy. Started at 6*35 (same course as yesterday, 173°), over
sandy


sandy tableland and low sandhills, valleys well-grassed, and cottonbush abundant, timbered
with acacia and wooden pear trees. At four and three quarter miles struck a marsh formed by
the creek, which leaves the Warburton below the yellow waterhole. We had great difficulty in
crossing this, although it is only one-eighth of a mile wide. After crossing I altered my course to
about S.S.E., and at three miles struck the creek, which fills the marsh, fortunately at a place
where we crossed easily. South and west of the crossing is a magnificently grassed flat; con-
tinued same course over well-grassed cottonbush country, and at tour and three quarter miles
I was stopped by a sharp bend of the creek; changed 55° for one and a half miles to clear the
bend. From this point I could see the red sandhill overhanging the yellow waterhole, bearing
149° ; at five and three quarter miles reached the depot, having traversed (during the last seven
miles) as valuable a piece of grazing country as ever I saw—low sandrises and cottonbush flats
thickly grassed, and dotted with gum trees and acacia. On arriving at the depot I found a memo,
from Mr. Beresford, stating that he had moved the camp up the river in search ol water ; the sun
being frightfully hot (130° in shade), I turned out the camels. At 5 p.m. started, and followed
the camel’s track for about six miles over a plain splendidly grassed, and thickly coiered
cotton and salt bushes, extending about five miles east from the river. At six and a half miles
crossed a high sandhill; at seven and a half, crossed a deep boggy creek running into the river
from the eastward; continued up the river over low well-grassed sandrises and flats ; and at about
five miles camped on the left bank of the river—rather a miserable camp —no food, no tobacco.
Wednesday, 27th January.—The Warburton, camp above Yellow Waterhole. Barometer
29-77; thermometer 82° ; wind east, cloudy, and every appearance of rain. Started at 6-50
along the boggy tracks over the same well-grassed sandrise country, and at three and a bait miles
arrived at the camp. Mr. Beresford rode up to the camp at the same time from the river ; he
had started early with Mr. Tolmer up the river, and found a good spring on the right bank, and
had left Mr. Tolmer digging out a place to water the camels. After waiting to get some break-
fast (the blackboy and I having had nothing since the previous morning), we proceeded up the
river, on bearing 76° 30', and at one and a half miles crossed to the springs on the right bank.
Mr. Tolmer, although far from being well, had managed to dig out a place large enough to water
the camels right away. During my absence, Mr. Beresford had been up the river before, accom-
panied by Mr. Tolmer. in search of water without success; on their return, when about eight
miles from the depot, Mr. Tolmer was taken seriously ill—giddiness accompanied by nausea and
while endeavouring to dismount, fell off the camel, which quietly returned the compliment by
kicking him ; while Mr. Beresford was assisting him to the shade of a bush, one of their camels
(a cow) broke her nose-rope and made off down the river to the depot with all the water they had.
This was a very serious predicament for Mr. Beresford to be placed in—a sick companion almost
perishing for a little water to drink, and also bathing his head, it being well known that in the
case of sunstroke (which I believe this to have been), water is invaluable, and one camel escaped ;
however, he proved himself fit for the occasion, and after having done all he could to relies Mr.
Tolmer and shade him as well as possible, he rode to the depot, after the camel and a supply
of water; this took three hours hard riding to reach Mr. Tolmer again, who was much worse ;
hut having had a copious supply of water to drink, and his head well bathed, he was able in a
short time with a little assistance to ride to the depot, where they arrived at dark. Afrer a day s
rest, they again started south-easterly for seven and a half miles over fine open well-grassed
country, rather stony; then N.E. for four and a half miles, crossing three miles of good plain
country, and one and a half miles of sandhills to a waterhole in a creek. This was named
Chandler’s Waterhole, after Mr. J. W. C. Chandler, stationmaster, at Beltana, to whom we were
all indebted for much kindness. After following the creek down for one mile and a half, they
struck westward for the depot. Mr. Beresford described the country in most glowing terms, as also
did Mr. Tolmer. Chandler’s Waterhole is not large, but very deep, and surrounded by fine gum
trees. From the Springs we saw a number of low stony hills to the south-east, and being the first
of the kind we had seen I determined to visit them. Started at 4 p.m., with Mr. Beresford and
Mr. Tolmer, on bearing 140 c 30' across a barren flat producing only a little saltbush; at two
and a half miles reached the top of a stony hill, which, although it looked a good height from
the river, I found by barometrical measurement to be only sixty feet above the sunounding
country. On the top of this we erected a pole eighteen feet long, and a pile of stones. From
this place we sighted higher hills south of east. I requested Mr. Tolmer to return to the camp
as he had not thoroughly recovered from his late indisposition, and was unfit for work. Left
the hill at 5-25, accompanied by Mr. Beresford, on bearing 130°, across an extensive undulating
stony plain, with light loamy soil patches in places, all well grassed, and growing a fair amount
of cotton and salt bushes. At four miles camped in small clump of gum and acacia trees.
Thursday, 28th January.—Camp at acacia clump on plain. Barometer, 29 74;
thermometer, 89°; wind, E.N.E.; very cloudy. Started at 6-18, same course (130°), for bluff
hill. At one and three quarter miles, top of bluff, 100 feet above surrounding country. From
this hill we had a fine view of the country. Northwards the plain extends six or seven miles
to sandhills and stony rises ; eastward to a large claypan; from the bluff a line of stony hills
run south-east; and to the westward open stony plains. After taking a number of bearings of
hills eastward, and erecting a pile of stones eight feet in height and eight feet in
circumference at the base, and scrambling down the precipitous eastern side of the bluff, we
left the foot of it at 8-50 on a bearing of 96° 30', for a low stony point near the claypan, crossing
remarkably well-grassed country; at three miles top of stony point. From this place we did
not get as good a view of the claypan as I had anticipated, there being a piece of high country
intervening. We, however, sighted more hills south-east. Shaped a course of 3O for the
most prominent; at four and a half miles struck a narrow parr of the claypan, quite dry, clay
bottom strewn with gravel; at six and a half miles got across to high stony plain, well grassed;
at ten miles struck and crossed the south-east portion of the claypan, loose loamy soil bottom;
after crossing the last portion we got to undulating stony plain, thickly covered with grass,
saltbush, cottonbush, and herbage, intersected by numerous small watercourses; at seventeen
miles from the stony rise, and twenty miles from the piled bluff, we reached the top of the hill
for
No. 19.


for which we started. This I named Mount Hogarth, after the Honorable Thomas Hogarth,
M.L.C. It is 170 feet from the base to the top, and standing on very high ground forms a
prominent landmark; nearly the whole of the hill is covered with large gneiss boulders.
Westward of the mount the country is open plain, apparently well grassed; southward, stony
hills for six miles to a low line of tablelands; and eastward, six miles of plain to sandhills.
Camped on the north-west side. I regretted very much not having a sextant with me to more
accurately place this hill.
Friday, 29th January.—Mount Hogarth. Barometer 29‘64 ; thermometer 83°; wind N,,
cloudy. Started at 630„ on bearing 310°; at twelve miles reached the eastern side of the
claypan; continued same course across it; passed through a great quantity of long cane grass;
at fourteen and three quarters miles on west side; here the banks are from 10 to 20 feet high,
and very steep ; but by careful searching, I could not find any watermarks showing a greater
depth than one foot; changed course to 300° for two and a half miles more to rising ground, from
which we saw the claypan extending considerably northwards; here we separated, Mr. Beresford
going north to ascertain the actual extent of the claypan; I started for the depot on bearing
288°, and also to examine a pile of stones on the plain which we had seen from the piled bluff.
I was very much disappointed in finding it to be simply an immense pile of stones in a valley
about 20 feet high. Mr. Beresford and I reached the camp at the same time, 7 pm.; from
where we separated, he travelled three and a half miles north over some good plains to sandhills,
then westward nine miles to the depot, crossing another claypan about midway. Latitude by two
observations, 27° 4' 34".
Saturday, 30th January.—The Warburton, springs near Bluff, Barometer 29*74; thermo-
meter 87°; wind N.N.E.; few light clouds. Started at sunrise on bearing 140° 30' for one
mile across the river, to get clear of the thick timber on the left bank; changed to 75' for two
and a quarter miles, over saltbush flat, with large, barren patches, subject to inundation to top of
low sandhills; from this point we sighted more hills N.E. Leaving Mr. Beresford with the
party, with instructions to follow up and examine the river for about seventeen miles, I started
at 8-5 a.m. on bearing 41° 15' for the highest point visible ; crossing three miles of good redstonc
plain to sandhills for one and a half miles, to cottonbush plain splendidly grassed, extending
fully six miles eastward, to broken stony country and sandhills, and westward nearly to the river,
six miles; at eight miles got to sandhills again, with flats between thickly covered with stunted
gums, or what is known in the other Colonies as “ carrakatahat nine and a half miles the
country changed to low irregular stony rises and sandhdls, with well-grassed claypan flats inter-
vening ; at twelve miles, reached the top of the bluff hill, which I found to be 150 feet above
the surrounding country, well grassed to the top, but thickly covered with sharp angular stones
like road metal; the country west of this hill consists of a jumble of stony hills and sandhills
for about three miles—north, high stony ground, well grassed; N.E. and E., well-grassed plain
for three miles, to stony hillocks, broken country, and sandhills; left the hill on bearing 340° to
cut the river, over high, well-grassed stony country for two and a half miles, where it became
too stony to produce any vegetation; at six miles I got clear of the stones to a magnificent
valley, thick with grass, and dotted with fine shady honeysuckle trees (Banksia); the country
eastward is very good, to the westward rather stony and inferior; after following the valley for
three miles, it opened out to a fine rich loamy-soil plain, well grassed, with patches of cotton and
salt bushes ; at eleven and a half miles the grass nearly disappeared, giving place to very large
saltbushes growing close together; at fifteen* and a half miles from the stony hill I struck the
river; could not find any fre§h water, nor &ee anything of the baggage tracks; by this time it
was getting dark, and although I had no food nor water I was obliged to camp; at about B’3o
p.m. it began raining, and continned all night; it was unfortunately so very light, that not a
drop of water remained on the ground. I did not spend a very pleasant night; no food, in the
misty kind of rain all night, and apy amount of blacks in the same locality; though they are
quiet and obliging enough to a number, I doubt much if they would treat one man very tenderly.
Sunday, 31st January.—Camp alone on the Warburton. Barometer, 29 - 80; ther-
mometer, 79°; calm, very cloudy. Using the card of a small pocket compass for a protractor I
roughly plotted my course, and found that I was fully twenty-three miles from where I left
Mr. Beresford. Knowing this was more than he could accomplish in one day, I followed down
the river to meet him. Started at 6‘30 down the river; at one and three quarter miles found a
nice waterhole on the edge of the plain, filled from low sandhills and claypans; the water w'as
quite fresh, hut strongly impregnated with soda. Continued down for three miles, and struck
the river at a fine waterhole (brackish) ; at two and a half miles more got to the party in camp.
Mr. Beresford was absent; having started very early with the black boy and found fresh water ;
he (Mr. B.) remained to dig out a well, and sent the boy back to the camp with a note to Mr.
Tolmer to move the camp up when he observed a smoke. The Affghans while after the camels
had also found some fine large claypans east of the camp full of water. Having plenty of known
fresh water it was useless expending time and labor digging out wells, so I started the camel-
drivers to load up during the time I got breakfast, and proceeded up the river to the brackish
■waterhole; sent the black boy to inform Mr, Beresford of our movements; w’e reached the
waterhole at noon and camped. Mr. Tolmer having finished his duties first, went down the
hank, threw in his fishing line, and in less than half a minute had the pleasure of landing a fine
fish three pounds in weight; seeing this all hands (excepting one to mind the camp from natives)
set to work fishing, and by sunset we had over a hundred weight of fish. The waterhole is
328 yards in circumference; six feet from the bank it is from eight to ten feet deep, excepting
the upper end w'here we could not get bottom. Mr. Beresford and the black boy vainly tried to
ascertain the depth by diving. We then tried in the centre, with a tomahawk tied to a fishing
line, without success, and I very nearly came to grief through getting mixed up with a coil of
line I had in my hand while in the centre of the hole. The water though brackish is quite
drinkable, and we got fresh by digging under the right bank.
Monday, Ist February.—The Warburton, camp at fish-hole.—Barometer, 29 84; ther-
mometer, 74°; wind east, very strong, clear sky. After such good fortune in the fishing line,
I decided on camping a day to try again. Started Mr. Tolmer out early to examine the country
across


across the river, W.N.W.; the remainder of the party fishing, shooting, and repairing saddles
all day. Mr. Tolmer returned after sunset, having travelled nine miles about W.N.W; first
five miles over good saltbush flats, subject to lengthened inundation in places; four miles of
sandhills running nearly north and south, cotton bush and claypan flats between, with small
patches of grass. At the camp we secured three ducks, a few pigeons, and about two dozen
fish. Lat. by Betelgeux, Canopus, and a Crucis, 27° 17' 34".
Tuesday, 2nd February.—The Warburton, camp at Fish-hole, Barometer 29 73; ther-
mometer 79°; wind east, clear. Started at 6-27, north-north-east for two and three-quarter
miles to the soda waterhole, crossing good grassy saltbush country; after filling our casks
and waterbags, we changed course to east by north, over a well-grassed and heavily-timbered
saltbush flat, extending about three and a half miles south-east from the river to stony ground;
at four and a half miles crossed a small but very steep-banked creek, which takes its rise from
high ground five miles eastward, with abundance of water in it from the late rains ; at five and
a quarter miles changed course to nearly north, over high redstone country. Mr. Tolmer, who
was on ahead of the party, chased a blackfellow till he stood and showed him where the others
were camped on the river at a well. After a short time a large number of them came up and
promised to show us a good waterhole. Continuing our course up the river, at nine and a
quarter miles we crossed another small creek running west to the river, in this there was also
plenty of water. After crossing the creek we traversed three miles of low sandhills, extending
about one mile eastward from the river bank to a saltbush flat, from two to four miles from east
to west; the country eastward then changes to redstone plains with sandy patches, rising
eastward; after leaving the low sandhills, we followed up the river north over fairly-grassed
saltbush country, thickly timbered in places, for three and three-quarter miles, and camped near
a number of native wurleys, under a high pointed sandhill; river channel here very small.
Lat. 27° 7' 11".
Wednesday, 3rd February.—The Warburton Camp, at old native wurleys. Baro-
meter 29-60 ; thermometer 87° ; wind E.N.E., clear. Walked on a quarter of a mile, on bearing
4° to top of high sandhill, close to left bank of river. At 610 started from sandhill, bearing
45° 30' over a fine grassy saltbush plain, extending four to five miles eastward from the river to
sandhills and stony ground. At three and a quarter miles stopped on an isolated sandhill, going
in a south-easterly direction as far as I could see. Changed to nearly north, and at one and a
quarter miles came to a corner of the river which was so small that I was in doubt as to whether
it was the original thing or not. After sending the party up the river, with instructions to turn
out the camels on the first good feed they came to, and wait for me, Mr. Beresford and I crossed.
I rode about two miles N.W. No sign of any more river—nothing but unbroken saltbush plain
as far as the eye could reach. Returning to the crossing-place we proceeded eastward till we
got to rising stony ground. This proved undoubtedly that what we had crossed was all that
remained of the river. Returned to where we left the party, and followed the tracks for half a
mile to where we found them resting. At 4-19 p.m., started again, on bearing 34°, over lightly
timbered saltbush flat with numerous polygonum watercourses intersecting it in all directions.
At one mile we cleared the timber to a large saltbush plain, hard and barren in patches. After
travelling one and a half miles on the plain, the rain, which had been threatening all the after-
noon, fell in torrents. This placed us in a pretty fix ; the country was too low to camp on, and
not a single tree for firewood or shelter. The claypans also became so slippery that the camels
could not travel over them. I did not like to return to the timber, as the country was even lower
there than where we were, and as the sky showed every sign of a heavy rainfall, I was anxious to
get to high ground. After the rain abated a little we sighted a clump of trees eastward, apparently
standing on high ground. We blundered through the claypans towards them for three-quarters
of a mile, when the country changed to loose loamy soil, very much cracked ; on this we got
along much better. At two and a half miles reached the clump, which proved to be the run out
of a small creek. From the clump we could see high stony ground about two miles eastward of
us, but as the rain had ceased, and the sky brightened considerably, I did not care about going
more east, it being out of our way ; so selecting the highest piece of ground we could, we camped,
and erected our tents.
Thursday, 4th February.—Camp at Gum Clump, end of creek. Barometer 29-90; thermo-
meter 60° ; wind south ; raining. Commenced raining heavily last night at 8-30, and continued
till daylight, when it cleared off for half an hour; it then began again heavier than ever till 9
o’clock; by this time, the whole of the plain was under water, excepting about two acres, on
whi«h we were camped. At 9 30, I requested Mr. Tolmer to go to the high ground eastward,
and see if we could get out in that direction ; he walked out to it, but found the water too deep
and the country too soft for camels. At 12 o’clock, while we were having, dinner, the wind
commenced blowing furiously from the south, which cleared off a few of the clouds, and. made
things look a little more pleasant, although the water still kept rising and getting nearer to us.
At last it became apparent that if we did not move soon, our camp would be under water, so I
sent after the camels; when the Affghans got them up to the camp, Mr. Tolmer’s riding cow
was missing; this was very surprising, as the men positively asserted having seen her with the
others in the morning—in fact, none of them were more than half a mile from the camp. Mr.
Tolmer immediately started in search of her, and shortly after the black boy and I followed,
leaving the others to pack up and saddle the camels. In a few minutes we found the cow coiled
up under a lage saltbush, quite blind. We managed to get her up, but neither persuasion nor
thrashing would induce the beast to take a single step ; I then sent the black boy to the camp
for one of the very few camels I ever saw that would move in soft ground, to give the cow a lead.
In the meantime, Mr. Tolmer and I managed, through pushing and twisting, to get about a dozen
yards nearer the camp. When the boy returned with my riding camel we managed to get the
cow along (though very slowly) to the others. When we had two camels loaded, the rain began
to pour down again; the water was also rising fast. The most serious difficulty we had to
contend with was that each camel, after being packed and made to rise up, would persist in lying
down again with its rump southward, to avoid the driving rain. But all things must have an
end,
C—No. 19.


end, and we made a start. This was speedily put a stop to, as the blind cow refused to move, and
while we were endeavoring to get her along, all the others were down again; this was easily
accounted for—the ground being so soft, by standing in one place, they kept sinking deeper in the
mud. The water by this time had nearly covered our camping ground, and it became imperatively
necessary to hasten our departure. 1 was reluctantly obliged to have the saddle removed from
the cow, and placed on one of the baggage camels, and abandon her to what I then thought,
certain death. I was afraid to risk the lives of the party and more camels', for one. At 2*30 p.m.
we made another start south-west for the sandhills—all hands walking over their knees in mud
and water. After a considerable amount of bogging and breaking of nose-ropes, I believe the
camels got frightened, and travelled along in an admirable manner. For three .miles we toiled
our weary way through mud and water, varying from one to four feet in depth, to a small patch
0 stony ground ; this gave us firm travelling for 200 yards to water and bog again. At four and
a half miles, we reached a sandrise in a timbered hollow—this was hailed with delight by all,
suiting us in every respect; dry ground, shelter, and plenty of camel feed, and rising sandy ground
to a high sandhill, forming a safe retreat from the still rising water. Camped and pitched our
tents with a sense of safety and relief impossible to describe. A written description of this day’s
work falls far short of reality; none but those who were actors in the scene can in any way
imagine the hardship, danger, and anxiety attached to this short day’s march of four and a
half miles.
Friday, sth February.—Sandy Valley, east of the Warburton. Barometer 29*94; ther-
mometer 64°; strong wind from S.S.E., very cloudy. The rain ceased at B'4o last night. After
breakfast I started two Affghans to our last camp for the purpose of bringing the blind cow. They
returned towards evening, and reported having found the cow standing where we left her, still
refusing to move. Hadeem also informed me that, although a great deal of water had disappeared,
the ground was more boggy than when we traversed it—they had to walk all the way, excepting’
over the small patch of ground. Remainder of party drying clothes, provisions, and saddles.
Saturday, 6th hebruary.—Sandy Valley, east of the Warburton. Barometer 29'90 ; ther-
mometer 75°; wind, S., cloudy, Mr. Andrews became very unwell this morning—a touch of
fe\ei and ague. Continued drying our things as much as possible. Towards evening Mr.
Andrews was much worse ; a severe attack of dysentery in addition to the fever and ague : this
1 believe to be the result of the severe wetting he got on Wednesday night and Thursday.
Country too boggy to travel. The camels never moved off the sandy rise.
Sunday, 7th February.—Sandy Valley, east of the Warburton. Barometer 2978; thermometer
75 ; wind S.S.E., cloudy, and every appearance of more rain. Mr. Andrews improved a little in
health. Started Mr. lolmer, Halleem, and Nazere with one of the strongest camels and a
quantity of rope to try and pull the blind cow along. They found her very nearly on the same
spot; tried to lead her without any success, then formed a collar and traces of the rope, and
tied the traces round the cow’s neck. The draught camel, lam confident, was strong enough to
draw tens, but with all his strength was unable to move the stubborn brute. They returned
to the depot in the evening, having had a hard but fruitless day’s work. During the afternoon I
rode one and a half miles across the plain east to the point of sandhills, end of bearing 45° of
Wednesday s journey, to fix this camp, having taken no reliable bearings from the camp at Gum
Clump, hound the ground getting much firmer, but still great quantities of water flowing
towards the river. Impossible to get an observation, as I have not seen the sun nor a star since
Wednesday last.
Monday, Bth February.—Sandy Valley, east of the Warburton Barometer 29*68; ther-
mometer 1 9 , wind E.S.E., cloudy. Through the illness of Mr. Andrews, who was quite unable
to travel, and the loss of one camel, I determined to leave the party in charge of Mr. Tolmer and
push on N.E. with three companions. Started at 8 o’clock, taking Mr. Beresford, Halleem, and
the blackboy, five camels, and three weeks’ rations; also Mr. Tolmer and Nazere to accompany
me to the Gum Clump Camp, to have one more try to move the blind cow. On getting to the
camp we found that the poor brute had eaten all the saltbushes around where she stood quite
down to the roots. We first tried to drive her in the midst of the others ; then pulling with two
camels and four of us pushing. In this manner we managed to get about fifty yards, when our
draught camels refused to try again; indeed the case was quite hopeless, as this was on dry
ground, and there being many boggy watercourses to cross between the camps, it would have
taken a team of bullocks to accomplish the job. Having tried all means in my power, there
remained but two things for me to do—either to leave the camel to perish with thirst, or kill and
eat her. The first would have been brutal, and to the latter I had a decided objection, wishing
re^ur . n ,^ ein Beltana, and not to make such messes as some previous camel expeditions.
After giving the matter due consideration, I instructed Mr. Tolmer to visit the place again on
Friday, the 12th, and if the cow was not better, or showing signs of improvement, to shoot her and
jerk the meat, and afterwards move the camp down to the fish hole, and there await my return.
Started from Gum Camp at 11*35 on bearing 62°, over good saltbush country. At two miles got
to high redstone plain, fairly grassed, extending eastward as far as -vye could see; at two and a
half miles changed to 25“ 30', and at one mile struck a honeysuckle creek, which we had great
difficulty in crossing. This takes its rise from the stony plains eastward, and spreads out on a
saltbush plain three miles west of where we crossed. I turned out under the shade of one of the
trees on the north side of the creek, on account of the excessive heat. The thermometer
registered 136° in the shade. The heat of the sun (which at this time was shining brightly), and
the steam rising from the damp ground, was almost suffocating. At 4'20 p.m. started again on
bearing s°, over rather inferior redstone plain—grass, cottonbush, and saltbush in patches
extending about four miles eastward and half a mile west to saltbush plain. At two and a quarter
miles got to undulated, saltbush plain, not much grass. At four and a half miles, as I could see
nothing ahead but unbroken plain, and the weather did not look very promising, I changed course
to 83° 15' for sandhills visible; but finding that we could not reach the hills till after dark, I
decided on camping in a clump of gums on the plains at 7 o’clock.
Thursday, 9th February.—Camp at Gum Clump, Saltbush Plain. Barometer 29-72; ther-
mometer


mometer 81°; calm, cloudy. Began raining at 12 o’clock last night, and continued till daylight.
Started at 7 *lO bearing 10° 30' over saltbush plain, with good grassy patches. When we had
proceeded about a mile. Tommy (the black boy) saw three natives about two miles to the eastward
of us. I requested Mr. Beresford to continue on the course we were going, and I took Tommy
to see if I could get any information from them. We found them to be two lubras and a man.
The information we got was of no value; they said there was another river northwards, but could
not give us either direction or distance. I returned to Mr. Beresford, who was waiting, and
changed course to 346°, and at three quarters of a mile struck a splendid sheet of water a quarter
of a mile wide, and three and a half miles long, from E.N.E. to W.S.W. Mr. Beresford and
Tommy went in to ascertain the depth, and found it to be from four to five feet deep twenty
yards out, and six to seven feet about the centre. Judging from the growth of trees (gum and
acacias) on both banks, and the dense masses of polygonum, I should call it permament. Followed
up the south side for one mile, and while I was trying to shoot some ducks a thunderstorm
came on, barely giving us time to unload and secure our traps. As the rain continued, I was
obliged to camp. The lagoon was covered with wild fowl, ibis, spoonbills, and every known
kind of duck in large numbers. This I have called “ Goyder’s Lagoon,” after G. W. Goyder, Esq
Surveyor-General. Lat. by three observations — Betelgeux, Canopus, and Procyon, 26° 53 11".
Wednesday, 10th February.—Goyder’s Lagoon. Barometer 29-77 ; thermometer 78° wind E.,
raining. Halted. Rained till about 4 p.m. Although game being plentiful our shooting was
not profitable, the water being too large. Tommy shot a large, speckled duck—the first of the
kind I ever saw; but unfortunately, native-like, he plucked the breast of it before reaching the
camp to see if it was fat: had it not been for this I would have preserved the skin for the
collector.
Thursday, llth February.—Goyder’s Lagoon. Barometer 29-76 ; thermometer 78°; wind E.,
cloudy. Started at 8 o’clock, bearing 91° 30' along edge of lagoon and polygonum swamp—high
redstone plain south. At one and a half miles we got into the swamp, and the water becoming
too deep, changed to 127° along the swamp in search of a shallower place. At one mile found a
suitable looking place. While travelling along the swamp I narrowly escaped being bitten by a
snake of the most poisonous kind—yellow with black band about an inch wide crossing its back.
I was walking along, trying to get a shot at a flock of ducks ; watching them, and not looking
where I was stepping, I trod on the snake, and it caught me by my trousers. Started across the
swamp on bearing 90° through water from three to four feet deep—at one mile got to dry ground
again. The swamp extends eastward as far as could be seen, with saltbush plain south, and high
stony plain north of it. Changed course to 337°, over inferior saltbush and polygonum plain.
At five and three quarter miles Ave got into a mass of nasty polygonum Avatercourses ; followed
up these north-east for four and a half miles, Avhen we sighted Avhat appeared to be a high, stony
hill northwards. Changed to 345° over most Avretched, flooded country, full of large cracks, and
destitute of vegetation excepting polygonum, and a feAv stunted black acacia bushes. At seven
miles and a quarter reached the supposed stony hill, Avhich turned out to be sandhills, throAvn up,
I presume, by mirage Avhen Ave first sighted it. It however suited our purpose Avell; the feed
was good, Avater sufficient for our Avants, and pigAveed in abundance. Camped at 5 p.m. Lat.
by tAvo observations, 26° 39' 26". ,
Friday, 12th February. —Camp cn sandhill north of Saltbush Plain. Barometer 69 67 ;
thermometer 82° ; Avind E., cloudy. On looking round Avith the glasses in the clear morning
light, the view from the top of the sandhill Avas most pleasing, except southAvard. East, Avest,
and north, the country consists of loav, splendidly-grassed sandhills and a alleys ; along undei the
sandhills on the edge of the plain, is a thick line of timber, which at first led me to suppose
marked a watercourse. Having completely lost the river, we decided on going a few miles north-
west before going further north. Started at 8-20, bearing 297° over magmficiently grassed sand-
hills, and valleys thickly timbered. At one mile the country changed very much in quality, many
of the valleys between the sandhills being very barren, and shoAving signs of lengthened inunda-
tion, full of large cracks, and producing very little but polygonum; others as thick with grass,
saltbush, and herbage as possible. At two and three quarter miles crossed a gum creek (dry)
about eight feet deep, and from seven to eight yards Avide, running from north to south. At eight
and a half miles struck and followed up a large hollow or Avatercourse for a quarter of a mile, and
found a very good Avaterhole seventy yards Avdde, three hundred feet long, and three feet deep.
We turned out on the east side of the Avaterhole near a large camp recently deserted by the
natives. At 4 p.m. proceeded north, crossing numerous small Avatercourses and flats draining
into the waterhole; country remarkably good, but of peculiar formation; loav Avell-grassed sand-
hills ; some of the flats between swampy and covered with long grass others with claypans and
saltbush; all thickly timbered Avith very large gnarled gum trees, acacias, and shrubs, amounting
in many places to actual scrub. At two miles Ave lost the watercourse; and, leaving Mr. Beresford,
to continue north, 1 struck westward to see if it Avas in that direction. At t\yo miles stopped on
top of a sandy rise; no sign of anv creek. To the westward the country appeared flat, and very
heavily timbered: low sandhills northwards. Struck N.E. and cut the camel tracks, and came
up to Mr. Beresford at dark. Camped on a sandhill five and a quarter miles from the midday
halting place, at waterhole. Lat. Canopus 26° 31 11"; B. Centauri 26 31 10'.
Saturday, 13th February.—Camp in low sandhills, No. 39. Barometer 29 67 ; thermometer
85° ; wind 8.E., light clouds all round the horizon. The mosquitoes were so troublesome during
the night that the"camels would not feed ; they came up to the camp, and one of them quietly
rolled in what little fire we had—wood not being very plentiful at this particular spot. In their
wanderings through and through the camp they were not at all particular as to what they trod
open, which rendered (in addition to the mosquitoes) our night’s rest rather a failure, than other-
wise. At 8*25 started on bearing 348° over a fine flat with low sandrises and small saltbush
plains or patches, all Avell grassed, thickly timbered in places, and exceedingly pretty country to
ride over —most of the sandrises being thickly covered Avith prickly acacia and gum trees, the flats
with gum trees, saltbush, and grass, small clear ridges and flats showing frequently ; altogether
forming a pretty and valuable piece of grazing country. At five miles got into high sandhills,
• direction
No. 19.


direction from N.N.W to S.S.E., principally covered with canebush and shrubs ; visible five or
six miles westward, and gradually rising for about the same distance north; wide well-grassed
valleys between, with patches of nardoo and claypans. Changed to 67° over points of sandhills
extending a quarter of a mile south, to thickly-timbered flat. At four miles came upon six
natives collecting nardoo. Tommy could not understand them, but by signs and a few words, we
persuaded one to accompany us to water. Changed course to 50°, over canebush, sandhills, and
nardoo flats, many of them resembling dry lakes more than anything else, having a belt of gum
saplings round them, and showing watermarks three feet deep. At four miles our black guide
turned to nearly north; after proceeding in this direction for three quarters of a mile, we struck
a deep creek lined with enormous gum trees at a small waterhole; followed it up north and east
for two and a quarter miles to two very good waterholes, and camped at 3-5 p.m. Native name
of creek “ Koorenjula I named it the “ Gerty.” Where we first struck the creek, and south-
ward down it, the country on the east side consists of low well-grassed sandrises and timbered
flats, subject to inundation. Shortly after getting into camp, Tommy brought a welcome supply to
our larder, in the shape of five yellow whistling ducks. Lat. 29° 2T 29"; two observations N.
and S.
Sunday, 14th February.—The Gerty. Barometer 29-69; thermometer 85°; wind S.E.,
cloudy. In addition to being Sunday, a day for rest, the place was pretty enough to induce
anyone, and under any circumstances, to halt a day or two. The camp was pitched on a sandy
knoll, about fifty yards from the right bank of the creek, lined on both sides with gum trees three
and four feet in diameter, and a splendidly-grassed saltbush plain extended about two miles,
west and north, dotted with pretty, green gum trees and acacias. The waterhole under the camp
we ascertained by actual measurement to be 230 yards long, fifty yards wide, and a depth of
three feet six inches, with a blue, sandy clay bottom, and fringed with marsh mallows; the
banks of the creek thirty feet high. One-eighth of a mile higher up is another hole 225 yards
long, forty yards wide, with the same blue clay bottom and banks, apparently deep in the centre.
Both holes are full of mussels, and the banks are covered with millions of shells, showing heavy
feeding on the part of the natives. Opposite the camp the country consists of low, broken
sandhills, covered with shrubs and grassy, timbered flats. During the day we got ten ducks,
about two dozen fish, and as much pigweed as we chose to gather and cook; so I shall ever
gratefully remember our day’s halt on the Gerty.
Monday, 15th February.—The Gerty. Barometer 29-56 ; thermometer 78°; wind E.S.E.,
cloudy. Started at 7-40, and followed up the creek northwards (half a mile up found another
waterhole, 300 yards long, thirty to forty yards wide, with what might be called a native village
on the east side), traversing good sandhills. At one and three-quarter miles got to a plain
extending two miles west from the creek, generally speaking very good, although parts of it are
subject to inundation and barren. At five and three quarter miles crossed a portion of the creek
which, in about two miles, opened out to gravelly flats between the sandhills; continued north
for one mile to top of very high sandhill. From this point we could see sandhills and heavily-
timbered nardoo flats, extending northwards as far as the eye could reach. Changed course to
east. At one mile crossed another branch spreading out in the same manner on the flats north.
At two miles crossed a third and largest branch. Followed up the left bank north for one and a
quarter miles, when it also disappeared. Changed again to east, over timbered, flooded country
(parts very much cracked and barren), for two and a half miles, to high sandhills; same view
from this point northwards—nardoo flats and sandhills north and south. No more sign of the
Gerty. lam of opinion that, although we lost the creek as far as actual channel is concerned,
that it is by no means the head of it, but simply a spread ; and had we been inclined to continue
a northerly course up some of the nardoo flats, we should have found the creek collect together
again. Continued east, over very high hills for two miles, to claypan flat nearly covered with
water. Saw a number of black swans. Blundered across the flat for two miles, the camels
sliding about in all directions, to a still higher hill. On reaching the top we were considerably
sold—on looking round there appeared to be a large lake with no visible limit. Changed course
to 10° east of north. At two miles our pleasant dreams were dispelled, as the lake turned out to
be a flat three miles wide, and so closely covered with claypans it might be considered one sheet
of water ; the deepest part was, I believe, not more than two inches. What distance it extends
north I cannot say, as it appeared to join the horizon. At 3 p.m., while I was taking bearings
of the sandhills and claypan flat, it began raining and compelled us to camp. Continued raining
nearly all the evening and night.
Tuesday, 16th February.—Camp at large claypan east of the Gerty. Barometer 29-76; thermo-
meter 73°; cloudy; wind S.S.E. Started at 7-42, bearing 87°, over rather high sandhills; direction
N.N.W. and S.S.E., with intervening flats, varying from one-eighth of to a mile in width, well-
grassed in places where they are sandy. At six miles changed to 122°, over a fine saltbush plain
for a line of timber. At two miles struck a wide, deep creek full of water and thickly timbered
with large gum trees and the Queensland bean tree. This I called the “ Eleanor.” Followed
up the right bank over low sandhill, well-grassed. At one and a half miles got to a very fine
plain, well-grassed, abundance of herbage, salt and cottonbush in patches, and dotted with gum
trees, extending three miles west from the creek and four and a half miles north. Continued
along the plain up the right At three and a half miles the creek opened out into numerous
small watercourses or swamps. Leaving Mr. Beresford to continue our course, I took Tommy with
me and crossed the watercourses eastward to a sandhill to ascertain the extent of them. On my
return we missed Mr. Beresford’s tracks, and had some trouble in picking them up again. After
considerable searching we found them going east, over richly-grassed, lightly-timbered country.
At four miles found Mr. Beresford seated on top of a high sandhill, overhanging a large river,
flooded bank high. This river I have since named the “ Everard,” in honor of the Honorable
William Everard, M.L.C. A large number of natives were camped a little below our camp on
the opposite side of the river; they were shy and frightened, and would not come near us but
sent (as is customary with them) six of their lubras as a peace offering; but we gave them each
a pipe of tobacco and immediately started them back to their rightful owners. Lat. by two
observations, N. &c S., 26° 11' 27". Variation of compass 6° E. Wednesday,


Wednesday 17th February.—The Everard. Camp on sandhill. Barometer 29-71 ; ther-
mometer 74°• very cloudy; wind S.S.E. Began raining last night at 11 o’clock and continued
till davlieht ? The view from our camp was as refreshing and fine as possible to imagine ; the
sandhill on which we camped extends three miles N.N.W. through a splendid plain, and about
four miles S.S.W. down the bank of the river to the W. and N.W. of the rich hghtly timbered
plain we had partly crossed; to the east, across the river, is a plain thickly grassed and studded
with fine green gum trees, most park-like in appearance ; and the river, a broad unbroken sheet
of water fully eighty yards wide, and lined with enormous white gums—forming one of those
charming prospects seldom seen, and over which people love to linger. Shortly after daylight a
number of natives came to the opposite side of the river. _ I took the boy lommy down for the
purpose of having a yarn with them, but it required considerable time and tact to get over to our
side • we could only deal in signs, as Tommy did not understand a word they said. After about
a quarter of an hour beckoning, they were joined by another who had been down on the
Warburton on some business or other, consequently he spoke a few words that the boy understood.
We then got on a little better. One came down to the edge of the water, turned round and had a
jabber with his companions and retired; another got up to his knees, the third a little further in
and the fourth, who was extremely brave, swam across to us ; he was speedily followed by th
others. Just at this time the camels appeared on the top of the sandhills, and u pset all y
arrangements; the first who saw the camels and gave the alarm was seized from beh y
another, and in a moment they were all in a string, each looking over the shoulders of the one
immediately ahead of him; and the frantic efforts of the first one to escape from his position,
made ther/sway and wriggle about like a huge snake, in a manner most ludicrous to witness.
We had some trouble in preventing our four from making a bolt of it; but after a short time ey
calmed down and came across, and followed us up to the camp Their knowledge of
seemed to be very limited, all we learnt from them was a cock-and-bull stor) about the rver
coming from white fellows’ springs, many days’ journey distant. Started at 8 17, after our things
got a little dry, on bearing 340° along the camp sandhill for one mile and a quarter. Chang
353° over first-class plain, lightly timbered with gum and acacia. At three and a quarter miles
got into numerous watercourses from the river, and forming the Eleanor .At five.and a hatf
miles cleared the watercourses, to fine open country extending five and a half miles west to sand-
hills. Changed to 32° for the river. This was an unfortunate start, the country being fri S ht u
to travel over, full of cracks and precipitous gullies. At one mile struck the river at one o t
prettiest spots 1 ever saw, high sandy banks thickly grassed, and coveted mth gum and
bean trees; water ninety yards wide, with a high red sandhdl near the left bank Followed up
the right bank on bearing 325”, crossing several thickly-timbered watercourses from the river.
At twl and a half miles cleared the timber, to the most thickly-grassed plain I have seen m South
Australia. At four and a halt miles changed to 358” over the same rich plain At tour m. es
(6 p.m.) camped at a small, but very good lagoon surrounded by a thick belt of trees. Country
very good. Lat. 25° 58' 17", placing us two miles over the Queensland Border.
Thursday 18th February.—The Everard. Camp at lagoon on plain (Queensland). Barometer
29-74* thermometer 78°; calm, light clouds. Started at 7-30, bearing 28°. At half a mile
struck the river, ninety wideband about 150 yards bank to bank-extensive flat on opposite
side south-east. The bank of the river being too thickly timbered, I changed course to about
N W to clear it. At two miles cleared to fine country, splendidly-grassed, plain, with small,
timbered sand hillocks rising abruptly from it. Any description 1 might write of plain would
fall far short of doing it justice—to realize the value or beauty of it it must be seen. Chang
course to 2 4 0, for bluff hill visible. At three miles got to splendidly-grassed, high, stony, ground
extending two miles westward from river to sandhills, from which we had a good view of the
country east of the river. It consists of timbered sandhills and stony rises, apparently we -
grassed. At four and a half miles crossed a small, stony creek (beautifully clear stream of water)
to open grassy plain, nearly covered with water. At eight and a half miles, top of bluff ridge,
sixtffeet above plain. From the stony creek to foot of the bluff we travelled nearly all the way
through water rising fast; east and north-east to the river the plain was under water. After
taking a number of bearings we descended to the plain again; and by a mark which we had
p W on the edge of the water we found that it had risen three inches in about three quarters of
SThour This las not a pleasant prospect and caused us to consider how
1 oriTP nlain if the ranidlv-rising waters got down before us and flooded it. Alter trying several
places^to get in towards the river, we were forced, on account of the depth of water and bog, to
and camp.^ruary.—Ti ie Everard> Camp unde r stony bluff. Barometer 26-60 ; ther-
mometer 85°; calm, clear. Although the water rose an inch during the night we determined
upon having another try to reach the river. The mosquitoes were so bad during the night that
our camels Strayed fully five miles. Started at 9-34, bearing 39°, through slush and water. At
three Quarters of a mile had to turn back—too boggy; returned to camp and followed our tracks
back for a mile. Tried again S.E.; progressed fairly for one mile, when the water became too
deep to be safe Changed course to north of east—from bad to worse sat half a mile had to
abandon the attempt. When looking at this portion of the plain fromi the; bluff
drv ground • but on testing it, it turned out to be a belt of large saltbushes five and six eet
h ghfSng the water, which was four feet deep. Returned to the dry ground, along our tracks
where we wme pleased to arrive safely, but with one of the camels then to the
camp under the bluff, and had dinner—pigweed and one duck Leaving Halleem s to trv
the camp, Mr. Beresford and I started at 3 p.m. (with two of the
river again) on bearing 31°. Succeeded in reaching a stony rise (two miles), the prospe
river seemed more hopeless than ever. Eastward to the river there was nothin* to
be but water and trees; to the north-east two stony hills-one distant one and a half mffes
the other seven and a half miles (this hill I afterwards fixed by cross bearings, and called it
“ Louey’s Hill”), rising out of the water like islands in the sea. Irom the stony rise we tried
north-east, along a tongue of clay (that is to say ground not covered with water, but it was wet
No. 19.


and boggy enough). At the end of three miles, and within two miles of a line of low, stony hills,
we came to water again. Tried in all directions to proceed, but we Avere baffled again and forced
to retrace our steps. Arrived at the camp at 6 o’clock. Lat. 26° 50' 40"; Long. 139° 26' 30".
Variation of compass 6° 25' east.
Saturday, 20th February—The EA'erard. Camp under stony bluff. Barometer 29*74; ther-
mometer 98* ; calm, clear. Not relishing the idea of being beaten, Mr. Beresford determined to
have another shot for the river. Started at B*2o, bearing I°, we progressed fairly for tAvo and a
half miles to a sandy rise. Changed to 39° for stony point. On this course, we avoided the bulk
of the Avater from the river, but had to cross innumerable watercourses from the sandhills north-
wards, all frightfully boggy. Mr. Beresford, Avho Avas riding ahead, nearly disappeared in one of
them, camel, and all. I certainly never expected to see the camel get out, but the beast struggled
bravely to the hard ground. At four and a half miles, top of hill, nothing but water and trees;
E.*and N.E. to the m*er, timber. By the aid of the glasses, I could distinctly trace the course of
the river to the eastward; across it the country appeared to be plains as far as the eye could
reach ; Louey’s Hill, from this point, appeared to be about 200 feet in height, round, and tapering
up to a sharp peak, and entirely surrounded by Avater. To the N.E., Avas an unbroken sheet of
Avater for nine or ten miles—these placing an unsurmountable barrier between us and the river.
Having taken all the necessary bearing of the hills east of the river and Louey’s Hill, we proceeded
northAvards over well-grassed, stony, tableland, for one and a quarter miles, to a splendid hollow
surrounded on three sides (N., 8., and W.) by high stony ground, richly-grassed, and profuse in
saltbush, cottonbush, and herbage—and timbered with honeysuckle, acacia, and a beautiful
ornamental tree knoAV in Ncav South Wales and Queensland as the Emu Apple tree (native name
Qragru). This tree groAvs to the height of about twenty feet, with a large bushy top resembling
bright green ferns. It is certainly one of the prettiest Australian trees. Previous to descending
into the holloAv, Ave saw high stony ground stretching away N. and N.W. for many miles, but as
the Avater extended in a broad sheet around the high ground northAvard, I was reluctantly obliged
to abandon the attempt to reach the river—except by going north along the high lands. This
course was not suitable for two reasons—Avant of rations, and the danger of being cut off from
the depot, if the flood got doAvn before we did. Farthest point lat. 25° 37' S., long. 139° 30' E.
Not feeling inclined to return to the camp by our upAvard route, we started from the valley on
bearing 251° over high stony ground for one mile, to good sandhills and valleys. At tAvo and a
half miles passed a large claypan three and a half to four miles in circumference, full of Avater
one foot in depth, filled from high stony ground N.W., and gravelly flats betAveen the sandhills
N.W, of the claypan, the country consists of jumbled stony points and sandhills for about three
miles, to a plain extending as far as can be seen Avith the aid of powerful glasses. At three
miles, changed to 181° 30' for the camp, over well-grassed sandy plain. Before avc had proceeded
two miles, I heartily Avished Ave had gone more west, as we got into the same watercourse that
bothered us in the morning. We had to dismount and lead our camels, as they became so
fagged, they Avould not face any Avater or bog Reached the camp at 8 o’clock thoroughly tired,
and to make matters worse, Tommy had been very unlucky shooting, so our supper consisted
principally of pigAveed.
Sunday, 21st February.—The Everard. Camp under stony bluff. When the camels were
brought up to the camp, Mr". Beresford’s riding camel showed such fatigue and testimony of the
previous day’s hard Avork I Avas obliged to halt a day to rest the poor brute. During the
afternoon, Ave ascended the bluff and erected a pile of stones, and ascertained it (by boiling point
of Avater) to be 1,146 feet above sea level, and fifty feet above the plain.
Monday, 22nd February.—The EA'erard. Camp under stony bluff. Barometer 29 72 ;
thermometer 88°; calm, clear. Started at 7*40, bearing 91°, over sandy ground rising northAvards
to jumbled sandhills and stony points, Avith good plain on our left. At four and a half miles
crossed Duck Creek. I omitted to mention previously having named this Duck Creek Avhen Ave
crossed it on our upward journey, from the quantity of ducks Ave saw on it. After crossing the
creek, the country changed to sandhills and Avell-grassed valleys. At seven miles the sandhills
receded northward, and we got to the plain again ; followed round the edge of it for four and three
quarter miles to the top of a sandhill, from Avhich we sighted large flats N.N.W. Changed
course to 324° along top of hill for one mile, to gravelly claypan flat. At three and a quarter
miles camped on a red pointed sandhill rising abruptly in a gravelly flat. Half a mile west of
the camp, is high sandhills going north to a high point, Avhether sand or stone, I could not make
out —I am inclined to think the latter. Westward, a hard inferior gravelly flat tAvo and a half
miles to sandhills; the flat stretches north for five miles, Avhen the sandhills fall off, and the
country apparently becomes open plains for ten or tAvelve miles. Lat. 25° 54' 38".
Tuesday, 23rd February.—Bald sandhill on gravelly flat. Barometer 29*57; thermometer 82°;
wind S., clear. Started at B*4, bearing 159°, over barren, gravelly flat for four miles to plain,
fairly grassed in places; other parts hard and barren. At ten miles the country changed to good
plain and sandridges. At fifteen and a half miles we halted for an hour on a good sandhill.
Changed course to 112° 30' for camp No. 46 on the Everard. At one and a half miles passed a
good lagoon, in one of the watercourses Avhich form the Eleanor, 400 yards long, fifty yards Avide,
and four feet deep. Continued over the previously-described richly-grassed plain and AA’ater-
couises.. At 430 arrived at the Everard (five and a half miles) and turned out at Camp No. 46.
Wednesday, 24th February.—The EA'erard. Barometer 29'66 ; thermometer 79° ; Avind
S.S.E., clear. Started at 7 58, bearing 164° 30', over good grass country for half a mile, to hard
plain covered Avith green grass and herbage; but judging by the absence of old grass and the
hard nature of the soil, I consider it inferior. At five miles struck the river; followed the course
of it nearly due south, over well-grassed sandhills and valleys. At eight miles crossed an overflow
from the river to a very good saltbush flat. At ten miles struck a point of the river. Changed
to 199°, across a good plain, profusely covered Avith cottonhush, saltbush, grass, and herbage. At
three miles camped on a sandrise under an enormous bean tree—country around remarkably
good. After letting the camels loose I walked westward for three miles, crossing the overfloAv
and a sandhill to a fairly-grassed claypan plain, with patches of cotton and saltbushes, extending
south.


south as far as I could see, west four miles to sandhills, and north I six miles to sandhills. I also
noticed that it would be necessary to make some easting to get back to the river. Lat. 26° 26' 49".
Thursday, 25th February.—The Everard. Bean tree camp on plain. Barometer 29 66;
thermometer 84°; cloudy eastward. Started at 7-4, bearing 140°, over good plain with sandrises
thicky covered with grass (green and old), cottonbush, saltbush, geranium, pigweed, and other
herbage, and dotted with gum trees. At three and a half miles crossed a watercourse, which
leaves the river two miles north-east. At four and a quarter miles struck the river—loo yards wide
and apparently very deep; banks eight feet above water, fringed with polygonum, and timbered
with gum and bean trees; current scarcely perceptible. Large native camp on right bank ; over
forty gunyahs capable of accommodating six or seven people each. Changed course to south over
some good plains, intersected by numerous small watercourses, and studded with clumps of gums,
in many of which we saw small, deep lagoons. At six and a half miles we were blocked by an
immense polygonum swamp. Though travelling for the last half mile on dry ground, there was
a narrow sheet of water, about fifty yards wide, on our right hand (westward) between us and a
low sandrise. We tried to cross the water to the sandrise, but came to grief, and had to retrace
our steps northwards around it, and followed the sandrise till the swamp baulked us again. The
view from this place was anything but encouraging—surrounded on three sides by water. By aid
of glasses I could trace the course of the river to nearly due east; high sandhills on the opposite
side, extending to a point east by south—estimated distance eight miles. There were also sand-
hills visible south-east, about six miles away: between these two points I could see no limit to
the swamp. Wishing to know positively whether this was the spread of the river or not, I
decided upon camping and returning round the water to the river, and follow it as far as possible.
Leaving Mr. Beresford in the camp alone (Tommy was up to his neck in the swamp after ducks),
I took Halleem and started at 2-45 p.m., on bearing 48°, across the plain. At three miles struck
the river at the point of a low sandhill; we forced our way through a tangled mass of grass,
polygonum, and gum saplings to the water, from eighty to ninety yards wide, and within two feet
of the top of the bank. The opposite side appeared to be a densely-timbered swamp for three
quarters of a mile, to the sandhills. Followed down about 200 yards when we were brought to a
standstill by an overflow about eight feet wide, running south-west; a camel could not get within
twenty yards of it. Leaving Halleem holding the camels, I crossed on foot by throwing in some
timber; I then walked down the river till the banks disappeared, and the water spread in the
swamp. Having seen the place it actually spread, I was satisfied, returned to the camels, and
made my way back to the camp with all possible dispatch. During my absence Mr. Beresford
had been considerably harassed and annoyed by five natives, not over friendly, who persisted in
making his acquaintance. Tommy was unfortunate in shooting—-he only secured one duck:
four of us made supper off it; but in addition we had unlimited pigweed. The boy while
shooting had been out two miles in the swamp south, with the water up to hi-s middle all the way.
Friday, 26th February.—The Everard. Spread of river on plain. Barometer 29*73;
thermometer 75°; wind S., cloudy. Camels strayed a long way, through the mosquitoes. Started
at 7*47, bearing 276°, over good saltbush flat, with low sandhills close on right hand, swamp on
left. At two miles, top of sandhill, changed to 230°, crossing splendidly-grassed sandrises
between the swamp and plain, north At one mile crossed watercourse from the river; it
continues about one and a half miles to the swamp, to low, irregular sandhills, splendidly-grassed,
extending three or four miles south and two miles north to plain. At three miles cleared the
hills to fine saltbush plain. Changed course to 232°; at five miles got into very bad country
(boggy watercourses), which I believe to be the run out of the Eleanor, as we could see a thick
line of timber bordering high sandhills, about five miles northwards. After blundering through
boggy watercourses for one mile we were obliged to halt and rest our camels for an hour, and
have a feed of pigweed ourselves. Continued our course over plain as hard as rock, producing
nothing but solitary bunches of pigweed and a few small herbs for two miles, to very loose, loamy
soil which, contrary to the usual state of such country, was thickly covered with good grass.
This continued for two and a half to three miles to hard, barren soil again, intersected by
numerous shallow watercourses, fringed with polygonum, running from north-east to south-west.
At seventeen miles from the commencement of hearing 232°, and nineteen miles from last camp,
we located ourselves for the night on the west side of some polygonum watercourses, extending
fully two to three miles eastward; a most dismal looking place, not a tree visible : the plain
westward as level, and almost as smooth as a billiard table, producing a small quantity of sickly-
looking pigweed, of which we had some difficulty in collecting our usual supply for supper.
Lat. 26° 43' 33".
Saturday, 27th February.—Camp on barren plain. Barometer 29*77; thermometer 72°;
wind S.E., clear. After getting into camp yesterday, Mr. Beresford plotted up our work to date.
We started at 7*3, on bearing 214°, to strike our outward tracks of Thursday, 11th, at the corner
end of bearing 40°, on the edge of the polygonum swamp filling Goyder’s Lagoon, which,
according to our plans, was a direct line. After travelling over three miles of hard barren plain
parallel with the watercourses on which we camped, they turned westward nearly at right angles
to our course, consequently we had to cross them. This entailed two miles of terrible hard
travelling for our camels. I believe, in the aforementioned distance, we crossed from fifty to
sixty watercourses, varying from two to ten feet in width, and from six inches to two feet in depth,
full of water—with boggy, sticky, clay bottoms. After clearing them, we got to good red stone
plain country, well-grassed, and dotted with salt and cottonbushes, extending as far eastward as
we could see. At eight miles the country changed to loose loamy soil, producing a fair amount
of grass and a little saltbush. This continued for about three miles to inundated saltbush country.
At a little under fifteen miles, we struck our tracks 200 yards north of the corner for which we
had been steering. Closing our work so well, pleased us very much. Proceeded three and a
quarter miles west, and camped at the old place on Goyder’s Lagoon, crossing the swamp that
baulked us before, now nearly dry.
Sunday, 28th February.—Goyder’s Lagoon. Barometer 29*86 ; thermometer 68°; wind
S.S.E., sky overcast. Halted the camels, requiring a day’s rest. By the marks which we left
on
No. 19.


on the edge of the lagoon, we found that the water had fallen about four inches. Any amount
of wild fowl, but they kept out of gunshot, in the centre of the water during the day. Very
cloudy from 4 p.m. till dark.
Monday, Ist March.— Goyder’s Lagoon. Barometer 29*85; thermometer 68°; calm, sky
overcast. Started at 8 o’clock, bearing 234° (for the purpose of ascertaining where the river
collects into one channel again), over redstone plain, well grassed. At three and a quarter miles
passed south end of Goyder’s Lagoon to good saltbush plain; abundance of tall saltbushes and
grass, excepting on the watercourses and depressed portions, where there are only stunted
saltbush and polygonum, dwarf gum, and acacia trees scattered about. At twelve and a half
miles struck the Warburton, about ten feet wide, and full of running water; thick belt of
polygonums on both banks, and straggling, gnarled gum trees for 150 yards on both sides. West
and north-west the country appeared (I could not get across to examine it) to be of the same
character as that which we crossed from Goyder’s Lagoon. Followed down the left bank; at
two and three quarter miles crossed a boggy overflow from the river, running south-east for two
and a half miles, when it spreads over the plain. At three and a quarter miles struck another
overflow; this blocked us for a long time before we could find a place to cross. After repeatedly
trying to get my camel to face it, I was obliged to lead the brute across up to my middle in slush
and water. At five and a quarter miles camped on the left bank of the river, at the place I
previously mentioned, where the party waited for Mr. Beresford and myself on the 3rd February.
Tuesday, 2nd March. —The Warburton. Camp No. 51. Barometer 29*89 ; thermometer 72°;
wind E.S.E., fine, clear morning. Started at 7T5, bearing 254°, to cross the river to get clear of
the timber, over medium country, generally fairly grassed; saltbush and herbage abundant; patches
very much cracked and subject to inundation, dotted with gum trees and acacia. At three miles
changed to 209°. At four miles top of isolated sandhill, extending two miles W.N.W. and one
and a half miles E.S.E. to the river. From this we sighted high sandhills, distant about seven
miles. Descended the sandhill to the finest saltbush plain I ever saw, extending as far west as
we could see, with the aid of powerful glasses, studded with sufficient number of gum and acacia
trees to afford a nice shade for stock, and forming such a valuable piece of grazing country as is
rarely seen. At five and a quarter miles struck and crossed several densely-timbered water-
courses to high redstone plain, fairly-grassed, extending about three and a half miles to the river.
The watercourse spread into a richly-grassed and prettily-timbered swamp, parallel to our course;
west of the swamp, fine saltbush plain for six or seven miles. At fourteen miles struck the river,
and followed it down, keeping a short distance out to avoid numerous ruts. At nineteen miles
crossed the western branch ; turned east, and at one mile crossed the river to the Fish-hole ;
found the remainder of the party all well, but rather tired of inactivity. Mr. Tolmer had managed
everything in a very persevering and praiseworthy manner during our absence, and had spared no
pains or trouble to procure food by shooting, &cc., to save the rations. He reported that on the
night of the 10th of February the water rose so high that they had to build a stage at the camp
where I left them to keep the provisions and saddles dry. The journey downwards had also been
very arduous on account of water. The most pleasing news he had to impart was that, through
doctoring, he had recovered and restored the sight to one eye of the camel which I left quite
blind at the Gum Clump Camp, No. 34. All things considered I was well pleased with our trip
to the Everard, and the proceedings at the camp.
Wednesday, 3rd March. —The Warburton. Camped at Fish-hole. Barometer 29*93 ;
thermometer 72°; calm, clear. Began after breakfast finishing up plan, and regulating our
baggage, which, as we had not been expected for two or three days more, was all piled up on a
stage seven feet high for safety—in case of another flood. During the day Tommy disappeared
in a most mysterious and unaccountable manner. Early in the morning Mr. Tolmer went down
the western branch shooting, and I sent Tommy also, telling him that if he accompanied Mr.
Tolmer till noon, he could then rest and sleep all the afternoon. They returned at 1 p.m.; the
boy then came to me (I was busily engaged with Mr, Beresford at the time) and asked if he
might go and sleep, and having obtained permission, left the camp. But the strangest part of it
is that no one knew when he actually went, nor in which direction. He however managed to
get out of sight with his blanket, a tomahawk, and several other small articles. Why he left us,
lamat a loss to imagine, as he was well clothed and shared all food alike with us. I also
promised to take him to Adelaide, at which, he expressed the liveliest pleasure; and, in fact,
seemed generally contented.
Thursday, 4th March.—The Warburton. Camp at Fish-hole. Barometer 30*02 ; thermo-
meter, 76°; strong wind from E.S.E. ; sky very much overcast at daylight. Tommy’s disappear-
ance upset all my arrangements, which had been to send Mr. Beresford and him down the western
branch; Mr. Tolmer and the party down the eastern or main channel; and to go by myself to
the large claypan (supposed Warburton’s Lake Howett) —all to meet at the Yellow Waterhole.
I was therefore compelled to abandon my journey to the claypan, which had been for the purpose
of seeing if it had been filled by the late rains. Leaving Mr. Tolmer in charge of the party, with
instructions to follow down the river with all possible dispatch, to the Yellow Waterhole, and
there wait. I, accompanied by Mr. Beresford, started at 7*15, bearing 234° across the river, and
over fine grassy saltbush flat extending down the river south about four miles. At two miles, top
of sandhill westward, we could see the western branch one and a half miles away; then low sand-
hills and flats, covered with saltbush, as far as could be seen. Changed course to 206° across low
broken irregular sandhills and claypan flats thickly grassed; cottonbush, saltbush, and herbage
plentiful, extending from one-half to one and a half miles eastward to good saltbush flat or plain;
and westward to the branch at six and a half miles top of sandy peak, we noticed that the branch
had separated into two channels, and ran parallel for three and a half miles, about one and a quarter
miles apart. Changed to 218°, for high red pointed sandhill, over good sandhills and cracked
timbered flats. At three and a half miles, top of sandy point. From this we had a fine view,
good country all around—one portion of the branch close under the sandhill—this we could
distinctly trace with the aid of glasses running south, through low and apparently well-grassed
sandhills and timbered saltbush flats for ten miles, when it joins the main channel. We could
also


also see the other part treading considerably to the westward. Ptoceeded from the amdy peak
™ Wrintr 285° Had great difficulty in crossing the creek under the hill, it being yer> deep
and full of water from the late rains, over lightly-timbered saltbush flat. At two miles struck
and crosLdThe UstSn portion of the branch. The flood had not reached this part, nor was it
in anv wayafiected by the rain. We then got into the rich open country I previously visited and
out on Kallakoopah Creek. Continued same bearing down the right bank for
two mUes- it then turned sharp southward. Altered our course to 204°, and at three quarters of
a mile camped at a small muddy waterhole in a shallow watercouse 200 yards from right bank of
creek. This watercourse rises, I believe, from sandhills about five miles distant N. by W. It is
so insignificent, I did not consider it necessary to mark it on the plan. As the water at our
camp was rather too thick to be pleasant, I cleared out one—of a number of shallow native wells
in the bottom of a dry waterhole in the same watercourse, about midway between the camp and
the river—and obtained abundance of clear fresh water, Lat. by Canopus, 27 25 29 . My eyes
were so sore, I was unable to take another observation.
Friday sth March.—'Western branch of the Warburton. Barometer 30-1/ ; thermometer
68°• wind 5 5.5. E., sky clear. Started at 7-42 and followed down the river to the springs where
I saw the large camp of natives. On plotting up the work, it closed within a quarter of a mile
with what I had previously done from the Yellow Waterhole. Having thus finished the work on
this portion of the river, we followed it down without taking bearings, to the high^^n dhlU over-
hanging the right bank of Kallakoopah (four miles below where it leaves this branch), hiom
which point we started at 1-39 p.m., on bearing 165°, crossing Kallakoopah to a good saltbush
flat extending to western branch, with very high sandhills on right hand westward. At three
miles struck the branch at a sharp bend eastward, at waterhole forty to fifty ?
fresh From where I struck it the branch runs east for one and a half miles and then turnsi shai p
back again west, with low, Singular sandhills along the right bank Changed' co ™to ! 243 for
one and a quarter miles to another point of the branch-same good waterhole. At this place 1
narrowly escaped an accident. I took the breech-loading fowling piece from Mr. Beresford, who
was carrying it, to have a shot at two teal sitting on a point of sand. I fired, and was
astonished at missing them that, without looking at the gun, I paced thedistanceand f ound
be twenty-five yards. This disgusted me awfully, and I walked straight back to Mr. Bere
and handed him the gun; he then discovered that four inches of the muzzle, was blown away,
thus fully accounting for my bad shooting. Changed again to 200°, over a sman hut splendid y
grassed flat. At one mile, top of high, red sandhill westward, we oouUsee «ie high,, sandy
tableland I camped on on the 25th January; and westward across the branch high, bairen
sandhills. Proceeded half a mile on bearing 112°, and camped on a good flat, extending half a
mile west to branch, and a quarter of a mile south to sandhills. After being in camp a shoit time
we were honored by a visit from five natives. Lat. 27° 30' 24". ,, r qn.on •
Saturday, 6th March.—Saltbush flat, western branch of the Warburton —Baiometer 30 20
thermometer 55° calm, clear. Started at 7-40 and followed down the right bank east of south
for eight and a half miles, to where it spreads or empties into a large claypan, one and a half
and three quarters of a mile wide. The country from the camp to the claypan is veiy
indifferent. The west side consists of a high sandrange running parallel to the creek, distant one
mile, with spurs running east from it to the right bank ; between each spur is a flooded flat hard
and barren. On the east side is a hard, saltbush flat about half a mile wide, then a line of h g ,
barren sandhills for about four miles; the sandhills then became broken and irregular, and jeU-
grassed. We crossed below the claypan, and at two miles struck the main channel, brom the
camp to the claypan the creek was full of beautifully clear fresh water from the late rams—
drainage from the hard flats on both sides: but judging from the quantity of samphire and
numerous other saline plants growing along the banks and on all depressed parts, I am of opinion
Sthe water would remain but a short time fresh. From the claypan to the nyer it does not
form any channel, only a slight hollow, which might easily be crossed without being noticed by
anyone travelling up or down the right bank of the main channel. As we could not cross at the
function with the camels we let them loose, and Mr. Beresford swam over and walked a mile, to
the top of a high sandhill to take some bearings. At 3-22 started on bearing -44
the branch and a heavily-timbered flat to splendidly-grassed low acacia sandnses and flats. A
one and a half miles changed course to due south. At five and a half miles struck the river
opposite the Yellow Waterhole ; too deep to cross; followed down a quarter of a mile, and
crossed at rocky falls, then up to our original camp, where we found the party all safe and well
they Sunday!7th Waterhole, the Warburton. Barometer 30 09 ; thermometer
71° • wind S., clear. Leaving Mr. Beresford in charge of the party, with instructions to follow
down the eastern side of the river to Wadlarkaninna, I took Davis with me for the Impose 0
ascertaining the extent of the marsh I crossed when on my way to Kallakoopah Creek. i
recrossed the river and proceeded to the top of a high sandhill, bearing from W
278°, distance two miles—from which point I started at 10 o clock, on beaiing ’ . ’
well-grassed sandhills one half to three quarter mile apart, good cottonbush flats intervening
direction N.N.W. and S.S.E., slightly rising northwards. At five and three quarter mdes sig e
a marsh one mile wide, on left hand. At six and a half miles I was obliged to turnout, as my
eyes were so sore, I could not see fifty yards ahead of me At p.m. sar e , g
along edge of marsh, over good saltbush flat, with high sandhills on right hand At one a,id a
half miles changed to 269° 30' for water in marsh ; found it to be frightfully salt Crossed^the
marsh westward, to high stony ground. At one mile struck a very boggy pom . , frpfk
course to nearly south, to get round it. At one and a quarter miles struck and crossed large fresh
water claypan, and camped on S.W. side, on low sandrises covered with sa usn an p '
was nearly blind till dark, when my eyes improved slightly. Lat. by Canopus and Procyon
27° 39' 54". t>
Monday Bth March.—Camp at claypan in sandhills west of AYarburt?J-
-29-99 ; thermometer 59° ; clear, cool morning. My eyes were so bad that I considered for some
D—No. 19.


time whether I should return or go ahead—determined on the latter, and started at 7*2 bearing
314°, along edge of marsh, over fairly-grassed sandhills and cottonbush flats. At two and a half
miles we were blocked by a turn of the marsh west, and an arm going south: changed to 222°.
At one mile crossed the arm (which extends about three quarters of a mile south, 100 yards wide,
and very boggy), and changed course and followed along the main marsh, over good cottonbush
flat north-westerly for four miles, and crossed another boggy arm running one and a half miles
south-east into the sandhills. Followed along the edge, and at four miles the marsh was only a
quarter of a mile wide ; it then opened to a broad, white lake, four miles wide. At eight miles I
was obliged to camp on account of my eyes ; for the last six miles I could only just read off the
prismatic compass, and had to get Davis to travel ahead and follow him with a shade over my
eyes to shield them from the glaring sun. From the camp Davis examined the country ahead
with the glasses, and could trace the lake for five miles north-west, where it either ended or
turned sharp round the sandhills to the westward. For the last eight miles of our day’s work,
around the camp, and north-west along the lake, the country consists of sandhills, covered with
canebush and shrubs, with good, grassy cottonbush flats between ; north and eastward, across the
lake, apparently high, barren sandhills such as I saw westward from Kallakoopah. This country
although admirably grassed and rich in shrubs and herbage, will never be available for stock on
account of the sandy, loose nature of the soil: Ido not believe that water would remain on the
surface a minute after rain. We camped without a stick of firewood. To boil one quart of tea,
which was all we could afford, Davis had to collect dead saltbush—not a tree nor a bush over
three feet high visible. Lat. 27° 29' 45".
Thursday, 9th March.—Salt Lake, west of the Warburton. Barometer 29*86; thermometer
67°; calm, clear morning. When starting from the claypan camp, I foolishly supposed that we
would find more claypans, ;onsequently we only supplied ourselves with two small bags of water—
the last of this we used for breakfast. Started at 6*35, bearing 186°, over fairly-grassed sandhills
and cottonbush flats. At seven and three quarter miles changed to 126°. At five miles the
country became rather inferior, sandhills higher, and the flats marshy in places. At eleven miles
sighted a densely-timbered valley, and water. At one and a half miles reached the valley, and
found several good clayholes about six inches in depth—halted. At 3*30 p.m. continued same
course (126°), crossing well-grassed low irregular sandhills and good flats, in many places densely
covered with shrubs. At five and a half miles camped. Time, 6*30. Lat. 27° 45' 50".
Wednesday, 10th March.—Camp in sandhills, No. 58, north of the Fishery. Barometer 29*97;
thermometer 74°; wind S.S.E., clear. Started at 6*50, bearing 94°, to hit the corner of the tracks
above the Fishery, over exceedingly good country—flat, with low sandhills or sandrises—abundantly
covered with saltbush, cottonbush, herbage, and grass. At four and a half miles struck the
tracks. Changed to 163°. At half a mile crossed the Warburton at the Fishery Falls. The
broad level rock above the falls was covered with about six inches of water, which fell in numerous
channels to the large hole below. The water being perfectly fresh and clear, it formed an
exc edingly pretty picture. We found two native men and several boys busily engaged in fishing.
Across the large channels, they had nets stretched; and in the smaller ones, grass and hushes.
I am quite satisfied that I shall not exceed the mark by saying that they had thousands of fish,
varying in length from one to eight inches. After watching them feed for a short time, we
continued our course for two miles, to top of high bald sandhills; then S.E. along our upward
tracks to Wadlarkaninna, where we arrived at 3 p.m. I was very sorry to find Mr. Beresford
with very sore eyes, one completely closed up, and the other considerably inflamed. Nazere was
also very nearly blind. The day after the arrival of the party here, Mr. Tolmer had followed
down the south side of the river for twelve miles. He reported the country to be similar to the
north side—that is, sandhills and saltbush flats—but rather inferior. At dark, when the camels
were mustered, the two I brought in were missing, through carelessness and inattention in not
putting them with the others, they had strayed in search of their mates.
Thursday, 11th March. —The Warburton. Wadlarkaninna Waterhole. Barometer 29*96 ;
thermometer 73°; wind S.E., cloudy. The stray camels were not recovered till 7*30; we then
saddled up and made a start for Kopperamanna at B*s, on bearing 155°, to top of high sandhill
(one and a quarter mile) for the purpose of selecting the easiest south-east route. Changed
to 130°, over sandhills and good, grassy cottonbush flats. At three and a quarter miles changed
to 136° 30", and sighted a narrow marsh running parallel to our course, distant two miles. At
six miles lost sight of marsh ; it was the end of it, or hidden by sandhills—the former I believe.
At nine miles ran foul of a salt lake, three miles across from east to west. * Changed course to
94°, along the shore for one mile, then to 156° 30', still on the lake. At three miles waited for
the baggage camels to come up ; as they did not put in an appearance I camped on a small, but
very good acacia flat on south-east side of the lake. A poor day’s journey through a late start,
and the camels travelling badly, as is always the case after a few days’ rest. Lat. 28° 3' 41" by
Canopus and Procyon.
Friday, Pith March.—Salt lake between Wadlarkaninna and Kopperamanna. Barometer
30*01; thermometer 68° ; calm, clear. Started at 6*52, bearing 154° for three quarters of a mile
to top of high, red sandhill. Changed to 143°, crossing sandhills (direction N. by W. and
S. by E.) from half a mile to one mile apart, flats between fairly-grassed, abundance of cottonbush
and a little saltbush on them. At nine and three quarter miles we found the tops of the hills
covered with spinifex. At eleven and three-quarter miles changed to 117°, over high sandhills
close together, flats between hard, and covered with limestone for one and a half miles; the
country then changed to sandhills, wide apart, and good flats. At eight miles got to well-grassed
gravelly flat or plain, extending N. and N. E. as far as could be seen, and eastward five miles to
high, sandy points. Changed course to 158°, along flat, with sandhill close on our right. At
one and a half miles camped on the edge of a swamp—native name Wooroowolannie. Lat.
28° 18' 5" by Arcturus and A. Centauri.
Saturday, 13th March.—Wooroowolannie Swamp. Barometer 29*92 ; thermometer 70° ;
wind S.E., clear. Started at 6 45, bearing 149° along flat, with high sandhill close on right hand.
Eastward, there are numerous small sandrises on the flat for four miles, then very high red sand-
hills.


hills. At four and a half miles changed to 141°—still along under sandhill— over rather inferior
country, redstone flat, and sand hillocks. At four and three quarter miles got into high red
sandhills close together, covered with canebush and shrubs, intervening flats very poor. At nine
miles struck an old dray track. Changed to 160° along dray track. At three miles the sandhills
formed into jumbles. Altered our course to 170°, to avoid crossing them. At one mile, from the
top of a sandhill, we sighted the Mission Station on Lake Kopperamanna, bearing 182°; made
all possible haste towards it, over irregular canebush sandhills and small grassy flat. At five
miles reached the old police station. We tried to cross the channel that fills the lake, to get to
the Mission Station, but found it too deep. When the baggage came up, we pitched our tents
near the old police quarters. Sent a blackfellow over to the Mission Station to inquire for
letters and papers. In the evening I went across in the boat, and was most kindly received by the
person in charge, Mr. J. L. Jacob.* Lat. 28° 35 25" ; variation 5 22 Last. _
Sunday, 14th March —Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-10; thermometer 69°; wind S.E.,
cloudy. Halted. Got a sheep from the Mission Station, and thoroughly enjoyed a day s rest
Monday, 15th March. —Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-11; thermometer 69°; wind
S.E., clear. Being totally impossible to do any mapping in a tent on account of wind
and dust, Mr. Beresford and I went across to the Mission Station to do it. 1 omitted to
mention that when at the first depot on the Warburton, No. 26, the two Affghans, ohiek
and Nazere, were very much dissatisfied with their rations —Mr. Beresford always weighed
out everything to them, and also to ourselves—giving them eight pounds flour per week
each, while we had six pounds, and an equal share of all other rations, but they could not
understand, nor could we drive it into their heads, why six of us should ha,ve more nee
or dried vegetables than two of them ; they then threatened to take two camels and return
to Beltana, but at that game they made a slight mistake—after a frightful amount ot talk
I succeeded in satisfying them, and promised that immediately on the arrival of the party
at Kopperamanna I would supply them with camels to return to Beltana; having got over
the worst part of the work, and being very short of rations, this arrangement suited me
admirablv, so I made it known to them that they could start for Beltana in a few days, whic
pleased them exceedingly. Mr. Beresford busily engaged making a tracing of the work done to
date to send to Adelaide. , ... ,
Tuesday, 16th March. —Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-16; thermometer 66 ;
wind from S.E. Having learnt from Mr. Jacob that the water in the channel of the Barcoo did
not extend more than a mile, I sent Davis with two camels to go around it and meet me . at the
Mission Station, I crossed in the boat and walked to it, distance three-quarters of a mile bearing from
camp at Police Station 172° 15'. Started from Mission Station at 9-35, bearing 159°, across sandy
timbered saltbush flat. At one mile top of low sandhill extending five and a-half miles S. by E.;
changed to 163° for pointed hill, over fairly grassed redstone plain—salt and cotton bushes in
patches. At thirteen miles crossed head of watercourse running north. At fourteen miles table-
topped hills on right hand. At fifteen and three-quarter miles top of pointed hill; this was
named Harry’s Hill by the Surveyor-General in 1866; descended Harry’s Hill and proceeded on,
being 156° 30'. At five and a-quarter miles camped under a high sandy point. The country
between Harry’s Hill and this point is very good-west of my track splendidly-grassed valley,
and eastward stony table-lands and sandhills mixed up together. I unfortunately forgot my map-
case when leaving the Mission Station, and could neither plot up my course, nor make out Gerty s
Hill, which, by the written instructions, had been given to me by the_ Surveyor-General as a
starting or a closing point. To close my work at Gerty’s Hill was the object of thisijourney.
Wednesday, 17th March.—Sandy point near Mosquito Creek. Barometer 29-94 ; ther-
mometer 61°; calm, very cloudy. At daylight sent Davis back to the Mission Station to bring
the map case I left behind. I proceeded south to Cooryanna Creek, crossing Mosquito Greek,
Maryella Creek. At eight miles crossed Cooryanna Creek, and followed it up two miles to the
old police station. On my way I took several bearings of Mount Flint, and what afterwards
proved to be Gerty’s Hill; I then returned and camped on Mosquito Creek. Davis arrived a
8-30 p.m. from Kopperamanna with the map case. Although I only rode about nineteen miles,
it was the hardest day’s work I did during the journey. 1 was riding an old camel nearly blind;
a very comfortable old beast to ride along after another, but something terrible to thrash along
when alone. Lat. 28° 55' 40", by Procyon, Regulus, and A. Centauri. . „ „
Thursday, 18th March.—Mosquito Creek. Barometer 30-05; thermometer 60 ; wind b.b.E.,
clear. During the night our camels strayed away; Davis did not recover them till 10 o clock.
The one he brought from Kopperamanna was frightfully lame. Started at 10‘27, bearing ,
over high red stone plains ; at three and three-quarter miles top of Gerty’s Hill, where we found
a small pile of stones two feet high, with a pole in the centre three inches in diameter and six
feet long. The hill is 500 feet above sea level, and 200 above the surrounding country. iNortli
of Gerty’s Hill, and close to it, is another hill about the same size and height. They are known
to the natives by the name of Kintala Woorloo, meaning two dogs—but how they make out the
resemblance I cannot say. Camped on Maryella Creek three-quarters of a mile S. j. o er J s
Hill; abundance of feed, but no water. Sent Davis down the-'creek in search ot some ; he
returned in about an hour, having found a small rainwater hole in the creek. T e ame came
was very much worse for the short day’s travelling over the stones. Lat. 28 67 12 ; \ana ion
5-28 E. . .
Friday, 19th March.—Gerty’s Hill. Barometer 30T1 ; thermometer 61°; calm; sky over-
cast. Started 7-40, and followed up a splendid valley to Harry’s Hill. My camel was so ame
I was obliged to twist about in all directions to get the best travelling ground. F eas ®
Harry’s Hill and followed down a small creek to two small rocky hills known as the rooper s
Knobs; then along the track to Kopperamanna, where we arrived at 5 p.m. Camel very lame.
Saturday, 20th March. —Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-10; thermometer 6 , win
S.S.E.; clear. Started the two Affghans off to Beltana with six camels and five saddles giving
them a fortnight’s rations. During the trip to Gerty’s Hill I caught a severe cold, which ma e
my eyes worse. „ ,
J Sunday,
No. 19.


Sunday, 21st March. —Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-06; thermometer 69°; wind
S.E., clear. My cold was much worse, accompanied by a severe headache and sore eyes. I
could hardly move about.
Monday, 22nd March. —Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-06 ; thermometer 68®; calm,
cloudy. I had intended starting for Lake Eyre, but found myself unable to get about. Preparing
tracing.
Tuesday, 23rd March.—Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-07 ; thermometer 70°; calm,
cloudy. Still too unwell to start for Lake Eyre. Finished tracing, and wrote to the Surveyor-
General.
Wednesday, 24th March.—Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-10; thermometer 76°;
wind S.E., cloudy. Feeling my health slightly improved, I left the party in charge of Mr.
Beresford, and started from the Mission Station with Davis and a blackfellow, on bearing 283° 30,
across the bed of the Barcoo ; but a stranger would need to be informed of such fact, as there is
nothing to show that it is the course of a large river, being simply a densely-timbered saltbush
flat. At three and a half miles cleared the timber to low sandhills. Changed course to 245°,
across points of sandhills rising northwards, with river channel on left hand. At three miles my
head became so bad I was obliged to stop for a short time and rest. Continued same bearing
(245°), over low sandhills covered with canebush and shrubs. At two and a quarter miles struck
and crossed a narrow, deep watercourse running northwards. Changed to 3° 30'; re-crossed the
watercourse, and followed up the left bank to the Mission Station on Lake Killalpaninna quite
dry: very pretty place, and good country. Got sufficient water out of one of two wells at the
place sunk by the missionaries. Too cloudy all night to get an observation.
Thursday, 25th March.— Lake Killalpaninna. Barometer 30-04 ; thermometer 70°; wind
E.S.E., clear. Started at 7 ; bearing 260° across the watercourse, and over good sandhills, rather
close together, well-grassed flats between. At three and a quarter miles changed to 224°, same
country; at three miles crossed a portion of the river at three three-quarter miles, changed
course to 236°, and crossed another branch of the river; it joins the other part quarter of a mile
west, at one and a quarter miles. Struck the river quarter of f. mile above where the Isa joins it,
when we found three native wells in the channel. Cleaned one of them out, but the water was
very brackish ; crossed the river and followed parallel to it (westward). Country broken, sand-
hills covered with canebush. I think our black guide was slightly out of his latitude, for after
proceeding six and a half miles westward he pointed nearly due south for another well. Changed
course, and at one and a quarter miles at native well in channel three feet deep; supply medium;
river channel about forty yards wide, and ten feet deep. I was obliged to camp as I had been
riding all day in terrible pain. Lat. 28° 38' 3", B. Centauri Arcturus, and A. Centauri.
Friday, March 26.—The Barcoo. Camp at native well. Barometer 30-10; thermometer
64°; calm, clear. Started at 7 - 50, bearing 277°. At one and three-quarter miles crossed the river, at
four miles crossed again to south side, and changed course to 316°; at two and three-quarter
miles the blackfellow showed us another well, and informed me that there were many other wells
lower down, but all gone salt. Camped and cleaned out the well, two feet six inches deep;
water perfectly fresh, and the quantity apparently unlimited. This was a very short day, but as
my camels had not had any water since leaving Kopperamanna, and I did not expect to get any
for the next four days, I judged it best to wait half a day and thoroughly water them before
tackling seventy or eighty miles of bad sandhill country ; river channel thirty yards wide, and
ten feet deep high red sandhill overhanging left bank.
Saturday, 27th March.—The Barcoo. Camp at Freshwater Well in channel. Barometer
30-08; thermometer 51°; calm, clear. Started at 7-50, on bearing 293° (south side of river)
over low irregular sandhills, well grassed. At four and a-half miles crossed the river (from this
point it goes two miles south to high, red sandy points) to sandhills gradually rising northward
for two and a half miles, where they form together into a sandridge at five and a quarter miles.
Changed course to 259°, crossing low but very steep hills running nearly north and south, with
good flats between. At three miles struck a sharp bend of the river; channel very shallow,
and covered with samphire ; followed down the right bank. A little south of west, at three and
a half miles, crossed to well-grassed sandy rises ; at four and three-quarters crossed again to
tolerably-grassed steep sandhills. At six miles struck the river again ; high sandy gypsum cliff
on right bank. Changed course to 325°.. Crossed the river at one and a half and two and
three-quarter miles. At three and a quarter miles changed to 281° over low, steep, irregular
sandhills, and at one mile camped under a high red sandhill, on a sharp turn of the river south-
ward. Lat. 28° 31' 22".
Sunday, 28th March. —The Barcoo. Camp under red sandhill. Barometer 30-07;
thermometer 67°; calm, sky overcast, very close. Started at 7*lB, bearing 280°. At a quarter
mile we were blocked by a salt marsh three-quarters of a mile wide, extending four miles north.
Changed to 213°. At three-quarters of a mile south end of marsh changed to 289°, over sand-
hills very high in places ; others low and well grassed, with good saltbush flats between. WFen
we had travelled ten miles on this bearing the sun became frightfully hot, and Davis’s cow quietly
coiled herself up under a bush and refused to move ; thrashing did not have the slightest effect.
After allowing her to rest half an hour we managed to lead her along for one mile, and turned
out on a thick patch of pigweed. This succulent plant camels eat freely, no matter how thirsty
they are, and it acts as food and water. At this point, and for three miles lower down, numerous
small branches break out from the river and form a marsh southward. At 4-4 p.m. started on
bearing 316° down right bank of river, over steep points of sandhills. At three miles the main
channel joined the marsh. At five and a half miles the marsh collected together again to about
100 yards wide, with high bank; then opened out again. This may be considered the mouth
of the Barcoo, as, by referring to the map, it will be seen that it empties into an arm of Lake
Eyre. Took bearings of the mouth of the river, and changed course to 334° over well-grassed
flat, rising northward for one and a quarter miles to top of a very high sandhill, from which I
took bearings of the river mouth and west side of the arm. Changed to 350° along a hard
claypan flat, falling north, with sandhill close on left, and camped at 6-28, where (fortunately)
there was a little camel feed. Lat. 28° 21' 48" by Regulus and A. Centauri. Monday,


Monday, 29th March.—Claypan flat, mouth of Barcoo. Barometer 30*20; thermometer / 8°;
wind S E clear At daylight, I ascended the high sandhill west of the camp, and could see the
Zm from the lake on three sides-west, north, and east. It appeard quite hopeless attempting to
cross it northwards, thus leaving me no course open, hut round it, to the eastward-apoorconso-
lation considering it was the opposite direction to the one I wished to go. Started at < 48,
bearing 76° over very steep barren hills. At three miles struck the marsh. This proved to be
only a narrow neck from the arm about one mile wide, running four miles 1 walked
halfway across, and found it sufficiently firm to bear the camels Crossed it on bearing 83 .
At one and a half miles changed 47° over two very high sandhills to a barren, sandy flat,
one and a quarter miles passed a small salt lagoon, half a mile east of course. At two and a
half miles changed to 351° along the most easterly part of the arm. Davis s cow began her
pranks again, and we were forced to halt, luckily on a patch of pigweed. At 2*42 p.m. started
and followed the edge of the arm one and a quarter miles north and seven miles westerly, over
barren sandy samphire country. We then altered our course to 347° away from the arm, to get
a little feed for the camels, as there was nothing near it but a little samphire struggling tor a
living. At three-quarters of a mile camped on top of sandhill, from which we could see Lake
Evre. I was very glad that we were no nearer, as it is not a pleasant place to camp near, bu
was very much disgusted to find that we had only made five and three-quarter miles in the
direction I wanted to go. Lat. 28° 16’ 38” by Regulus, Arcturus, and A. Centaun.
Tuesday, 30th March.—Camp on arm of Lake Eyre. Barometer 30*27 ; thermometer 7 ,
calm, cloudy. The camels strayed during the night, and Davis did not get to the camp with the
till B*3o. Started at 9*lo along edge of arm on bearing 288“. At two and a half mdes reached
the shore of Lake Eyre, quite dry and covered with a thick coating of salt. Changed to 335
along shore of lake, over high barren samphire sandhills; at four miles got to narrow neck o
land g between a marsh and the lake. After carefully examining the country ahead with the
glasses, I concluded that there was a clear track for us between them, so I kept on my hearing.
At six and three-quarter miles we were blocked by an arm half mile wide, connec g
Lake Eyre and the marsh, very boggy; but as I could see the marsh stretching away to
eastward, I determined at least to try and cross. We started across, leading our camels, and
managed very well for about two-thirds of the distance, the camels sinking up to their knees
every step to hard clay bottom. Suddenly my camel, which I was leading ahead, sank down to
his chest. I cried out to Davis to stop where he was with the two others, and let mine loose,
and he floundered along for about twenty yards to firmer ground Fortunately he was a fine
strong camel; a weak one would never have got out. By turning a few yards to our right hand
we found a reasonably good place for the others. At eight miles changed to 303 to get between
a point of Lake Eyre and a large marsh eastward, over terrible sandhills. Many times I had to
turn away from my course to get up them; marsh close on right hand. At four and a half
miles passed a salt lagoon on left hand, about four and a half miles in circumference. At five
and a quarter miles, 3 p.m., turned out, the day being frightfully hot and the hills so bad our
camels^began to look rather bad ; 4*52 p.m. started again, bearing 322 . Same steep barren hills
at four and three quarter miles. Camped on the edge of a salt marsh. Lat. 28 37 .
Wednesday, 31st March.—Camp at salt marsh, near Lake Eyre. Barometer 30 22 , ther
meter 65°; calm, clear. Started at 7*21, bearing 265 c , over two very high sandhills. At one
and a quarter miles struck the eastern portion of the Warburton; now an unbroken sheet of
water 200 yards wide, and extending about one mile out on Lake Eyre, beautifully clear, but *iery
salt. To find the water salt disappointed me exceedingly, through the water being somcean
fresh in the river at Wadlarkaninna, when we left it, I fully expected to find it at least drinkable.
Followed up the right bank of the branch, northwards. At four miles, struck a marsh formed
by it ; at a narrow part, about a quarter of a mile wide, but so boggy that I came to grief by
walking part of the way across to test it; tried a quarter of a mile eastward, with no better
luck Changed my coure to E.N.E.; at three quarters of a mile the marsh turned south, and
being covered with loose light earth, tackled it again, and found it quite firm. Not wishing to
go straight across,! then followed round the edge of it; I altered my c ou N.W., and at
one mile cleared the marsh, to low broken barren sandhil s. I then made W. by N- for the
branch; at three miles, 12*15, found a deep clayhole, full of muddy water, on a saltbush flat,
half a mile from the branch, This was an unexpected piece of good fortune ; on arriving at the
waterhole we had about a pint of water each, and the camels were as bad as fbey possibiy could
be, without being actually knocked up, although they had been only four and a half clays without
water This may appear strange to persons who have worked camels, and understand their habits
Td powers of endurance; but lam quite sure that no camel would live a week without wa er on
such dry and scanty food as is procurable near Lake Eyre, and climb the terrible sandhill
weather. After we had unsaddled, and they had thoroughly satisfied themselves with water, two
of them stretched out on the bank and would not move till nearly sunset. Camped near t e
W Thursday Ist April. —Camp at clayhole, branch of the Warburton. Barometer 30*10,
thermometer 56°; calm, clear. As the water in the clayhole was very thick, and unfit; to• use or
any length of time, I decided upon following up the branch to where it leaves the Warburton, o
take the latitude of the place, and get better water, and also give the catnels another halt day s
rest, which they badly required. Started at 9*40, and followed up the right bank the branch
found several more small holes of water, but all salt. At 12*20 camped on the Warburton at the
breakout of the branch. We found the Warburton full of water, but not running , a still, clear,
deep sheet of water, beautiful to look at, but not at all nice to taste. We tried several holes
the sand near to where we previously obtained fresh water, but to my surprise our only re wad
was intensely salt water. It struck me as being rather peculiar, that after a flood the places (oi
very near to them) where we had previously obtained fresh water during and, I beheve alter, a
long period of dry weather, should have become salt. After we had tried several more places in
the banks of the Warburton, Davis returned along the tracks and followed up a watercourse and
found a small hole of water, very clear, but it had a most decided taste of soda. Very cloudy ™
sunset, and continued so all night. n y ’
No. 19.


Friday, 2nd April.—The Warburton. Camp at breakout of branch. Barometer 30-05;
thermometer 68° ; calm, very cloudy, every appearance of rain. Started at B*B to the waterhole
Davis found, and filled our kegs, then down right bank of branch, passing our camp of the 31st
March, and crossed the marsh one and a quarter miles west of our upward tracks and made for
the spot, we struck the branch, then followed it down and camped in a sandy gully half a mile
from the shore of Lake Eyre, nearly opposite my camp of the 11th January. Lat. 28° 3' 25"
by A. Crucis, B, Centauri, and Arcturus.
Saturday, 3rd April.—Lake Eyre. Camp at mouth of branch from the Warburton. Ba-
rometer 30*20 ; thermometer 67°; wind S.E., clear. While Davis was after the camels I walked
down to the shore of the lake and tried to cross the branch ; the water was not more than three
inches deep, but the first step 1 took I went down over my knees in mud, so I thought it advisable
not to try any further. Started at 6-30 and followed my tracks back to where I camped on the
30th March. Left the camp at 9 24, bearing 61° along edge of salt lagoon over points of very
high sandhills. At two miles changed to 67°, crossing broken sandhills covered with canebush
and pigface. At two miles struck the marsh from the branch of the Warburton. Crossed it on
same bearing one mile wide to Samphire Flat, Changed to 106° across flat (half a mile) to low
steep hills. At two and three-quarter miles changed course to 121° 30', same steep hills with flats
between, varying from 100 yards to half a mile wide; parts very well grassed; good deal of cotton
and saltbushes. At seven miles (515 p.m.) camped on a claypan flat.
Sunday, 4th April.—Claypan flat in sandhills, east of Lake Eyre, Barometer 30-15 ; ther-
mometer 45°; calm, clear. Started at 6*55, bearing 131°, over high sandy ground, with sandrises.
At two and a half miles struck a marsh, connected by a narrow neck with the one filled by the
branch of the Warburton. Where we struck it, it is not more than 200 yards wide, but fright-
fully boggy. We followed it along a short distance east, and crossed on some old native tracks.
After crossing, we found ourselves in a corner —at first, I thought on an island. Followed along
the edge of it for three and a half miles to the south end. Followed south end of marsh on
bearing 104° for two miles; then over high sandhills, with claypan and cottonbush flats between.
At seven miles changed to 133°. At six miles sighted a salt lake, extending as far as could be
seen, eastward. Changed course to 185° for a narrow neck. At one and a quarter miles crossed
neck (quarter of a mile wide) rather boggy. At two and a quarter miles camped on flat between
sandhills covered thickly with low shrubs and a little cottonbush—good place for the camels, but
most miserable for us. No wood. Lat. 28° 19' 3".
Monday, sth April.—Camp at Salt Lake, in sandhill east of Lake Eyre. Barometer 30-21 ;
thermometer 59°; wind E.S.E., cloudy. Started at 7-39, bearing 135°, for point of lake over
flat covered with samphire and shrubs. At one mile changed course to 130°, across high sand-
hills and flats fairly grassed in places. At seventeen and a-quarter miles, top of sandrange
watershed, south to the Barcoo and north to either very low ground or a continuation of the
lake; I camped on the latter I believe, but it was imposible to arrive at anything definite as the
country northwards was all enveloped in mirage. At twenty and a half miles camped. My
intention had been, when starting in the morning, to camp at the fresh water well, but this would
have been at the expense of a camel—Davis’s riding cow was thoroughly done up.
Tuesday, 6th April.—Camp in sandhills, near the Barcoo. Barometer 30-19 ; thermometer
63°; calm, very cloudy. Started at 7, bearing 127°, over easy sandhills sloping to the Barcoo.
At one and a half miles crossed the river ; found three native wells in the channel, all salt. At
four and a quarter miles reached the fresh water well —it was nearly filled up with sand, so we
halted and cleaned it out. At 3-7 p.m., bearing 80°, over low steep tolerably grassed sandhills
and flats for three miles, to high hills and hard blue bush flats, very little grass. At eight
miles camped—very poor spot, but Davis’s cow refused to go any further.
Wednesday, 7th April.—Camp in high sandhills north of Barcoo. Barometer 31-12; ther-
mometer 67° ; wind E.S.E.; cloudy. Started at 6-55, bearing 91° over high inferior sandhills
and flats. At two miles the country improved considerably, hills still high but wider apart, with
good grassy cottonbush flats between. At thirteen and a quarter miles reached Lake Killal-
paninna Mission Station, then along the track to Kopperamanna, where we arrived at 2 p.m.
Found everything all-right, and all hands well, excepting Mr. Beresford, who was suffering from
bad eyes.
Thursday, Bth April. —Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-09; thermometer 78°; calm,
clear. Engaged all day with Mr. Beresford finishing up my work down the river and along the
lake. After arriving here yesterday Davis took the liberty of absenting himself from the camp,
and going over to the Mission Station, spent the afternoon and night there. At 10 a.m. he was
pleased to put in an appearance, after I had sent for him twice. When he returned he was (I
will not say drunk,) but considerably the worse for liquor. I asked for some explanation of such
conduct, his reply was that he considered a man was entitled to a little rest after working hard
for some days, Sundays included—forgetting the many days that I had left him in camp with
nothing to do excepting to pass the time away. It came to my knowledge, while on the
Warburton that he had been growling about being left in the camp so much, for which reason I
took him out with me from the Yellow Waterhole, on the Warburton, and down the Barcoo, just
to see how tramping about the country agreed with his constitution. Thinking he had me in a
corner, and that I could not do without him, he gave me a week’s notice, stating as his reason for
so doing that I was making him do two men’s work, because I took him down the Barcoo to cook
for me in place of leaving him in the camp to cook for others, who were quite willing to do it
themselves. I dispensed with his week’s notice, and told him that he might go at once and find
his way to Adelaide at his own expense, such being the understanding previous to leaving Beltana.
He had entirely overlooked this fact, and was considerably taken aback by it, and slightly altered
his tone of speaking, and wanted to be taken on again, which I could not see. As the Mission
people were leaving Kopperamanna for Bocaltaninna, I made arrangements for Mr. Andrews (at his
own request) to go with them to Bocaltaninna, and there remain during my next trip to the lake.
This was the best thing I could do to further his collecting, there being nothing for him to collect
on Lake Eyre, no birds—not even a rat—only samphire and salt.
Friday,


Friday, 9th April.—Lake Kopperamanna. Barometer 29 99; thermometer 64°; calm, clear.
Started at 8-30, and followed up the waterchannel filling the lake, and then to the sandhills
previously mentioned, on the south side of the Barcoo, one mile from Mission Station. Left the
sandhill at 9-40, bearing 203°, over good, lightly-timbered, saltbush country, redstone plain on
left hand. At four and a half miles got to high stony country, inferior. At seven miles changed
course to 138° for one quarter of a mile, to waterhole (native name Etadunna) —very pretty place,
high stony ground on left bank, and red sandhill on right bank, forming a narrow gap ; good
water, but not much of it, and surrounded by nice green gum trees. This creek takes its rise
near Harry’s Hill—general course N.N.W. At the waterhole, a small branch breaks out and
spreads on the plain westward. The main portion continues nearly the same direction, and joins
the Barcoo Channel opposite (south) Lake Killalpaninna. Halted at the waterhole. as the -day
was very hot. At 3-30 p.m., started on bearing 226° over sandy cottonbush flat. At three
quarters of a mile crossed the branch to redstone plain extending northwards to the river, and
south to high ground. At one and a quarter miles changed course to 215° across the plain, with
high, very stonv ground on left hand, tolerably grassed, salt and cottonbushes in patches. At six
miles (6 p.m.) crossed and camped on the left bank of the Isa. From this point, to the junction
with the Barcoo, it forms a very little channel —a line of trees and clayholes mark its course,
good grass and cottonbushes in bed of creek, and on both sides.
Saturday, 10th April.—The Isa.—Barometer 30*03; thermometer 65°; very cloudy; few
drops of rain at daylight. Started at 7*37, bearing 223°, over red gravelly plain, not much grass,
abundance of cottonbush and a little saltbush. At two miles passed a small hill standing on the
plain with a small pile of stones on top of it, erected some years ago by the late Mr. Millner, and
changed course to 202°. Crossed a splendidly-grassed valley, with watercourses running north
to the Isa. At three and a half miles got out of the valley—high well-grassed stony ground and
sandy patches. At five and a half miles struck and crossed Tidnacoordaninna Swamp. Camped.
The feed and water being very good I determined to leave the camels here in charge of Mr.
Tolmer, as two of the three I had down the Barcoo were still very drowsy. The swamp was
covered with ducks, of which I managed to bag six. W e also saw a flock of about twenty black
swans.
Sunday, 11th April.—Tidnacoordaninna Swamp.—Barometer 30*17 ; thermometer 49 ;
wind S.E., very cloudy. Accompanied by Mr. Beresford I started at 8*26, bearing 315°, over
high sandy plain, well grassed and plenty cotton bush. At two and a half miles got to high,
well-grassed, but frightfully stony country. At four miles crossed a creek, which empties into
Lake Palankarinna, to sandhills and gypsum flats. At six and a half miles crossed a small
creek rising from sandhills S.W. ; then high sandhills and good flats. At eighteen miles
changed to 327° over same country. At five and at six miles crossed the Barcoo and struck my
tracks, and followed them to the freshwater well. Camped six o’clock.
Monday, 12th April.—Freshwater well in channel of Barcoo. Barometer 30*36 ; ther-
mometer 36°; calm, clear. Had to clean out the well before we could fill our kegs. Started at
11.35, course due west, over good sandhills and valleys; at five miles, on a turn of the Barcoo.
At fourteen miles crossed a very high line of sandhills or sandridge, extending about eight miles
E.S.E., and westward twelve miles, following the course of the Barcoo. At seventeen and three
quarters miles camped. Very cloudy all night.
Tuesday, 13th April.—Camp in sandhills south of the Barcoo. Barometer 30*39; ther-
mometer 45° ; wind S.E. by E., sky overcast. Started at 7*15, course due west, oyer low, steep,
and inferior sandhills for two miles ; the hills then got higher, and covered with canebush ;
valleys grassed in places. At six and a half miles small marsh on left hand, one and a half
miles long east and west, and about one mile wide ; at nine and a half miles, on south end of
salt lake, extending six miles north-west, one and a half miles wide, surrounded with high
sandhills, with a large sheet of water in the centre of it. After passing the point of the lake
the sandhills became very high, inferior, and close together. At sixteen miles struck and
crossed a narrow arm (300 yards wide) from Lake Eyre, to high, sandy tableland, thickly
covered with grass and cottonbush, but terribly dry; the grass was almost black, and half the
cottonbush dead. At twenty and a half miles reached the shore of Lake Eyre. Followed the
shore for a quarter of a mile south and camped, I then walked two and a half miles north
along the shore of the lake, and took bearings of two islands and the mouth of the marsh we
crossed. Mr, Beresford and I both had very sore eyes again. Lat. 28° 35’ 12".
Wednesday, 14th April.—Camp on Lake Evre, south of Barcoo. Barometer 30*42; ther-
mometer 55°; wind E.S.E., clear. Started at 7*27, bearing 153°, along the shore. At two miles
we were blocked by a large bay, followed round it on bearing 40° for three-quarters of a mile,
and 103° for four and a quarter miles to the eastern point, then changed to 179°, over low well-
grassed sandrises, covered thickly with shrubs, with limestone cropping up frequently. At six
miles, on shore of Lake Eyre—sandy cliffs thirty feet high mixed with gypsum bordering the
lake—followed the shore on bearing 124° over high splendidly-grassed sandy ground, extending
half to one mile east to sandhills. At four and three-quarter miles halted on top of a very high
limestone sandhill, quarter of a mile from lake and one and a halt miles from end of arm, N.N.E.,
changed course to 156°, and at four and a quarter miles camped on a low white sandrise 100
yards from shore of lake, where we found a few bushes for the camels, or I intended making a
longer stage; the whole of this day’s journey was over splendid grazing country —grass, cotton-
bush, saltbush, and other shrubs, but all very dry. Lat. 28° 48’ 52".
Thursday, 15th April.—Second camp on Lake Eyre. South of the Barcoo. Barometer 30 27 ,
thermometer 59°; calm, very cloudy. The camels strayed a good way during the night. Started
at B*B, along the shore, on bearing 156°, over good grassy country, of very peculiar formation a
low and almost milk-white sandrise ; following the shore of the lake, thin limestone flat, for three
quarters of a mile, to sandhills, running nearly N. and S. At five miles, stopped by a sharp turn
of the lake, changed to 106° for a quarter of a mile ; changed to 153° 30', along shore of lake, tor
four miles, it then turned sharp west. Altered our course to 182°, along a fine valley, between sand-
hills; at three miles we found ourselves in a corner of the arm or marsh into which the River Clayton
empties
No. 19.


empties itself. Being now south of the 29th parallel of latitude, I was heartily glad to think that
the whole of the east side of Lake Eyre was finished, as this joined on to the south and east end of
the lake, surveyed many years ago by the Surveyor-General, and I sincerely trust I may never
see it again; it is useless in every respect, and the very sight of it creates thirst in man and beast.
To read over my account of my travels on it will convey to the reader a very scanty knowledge of
the hardships and uninteresting work we had in mapping the shore ; I had instructions to level
the head of the lake ; this was only found to be practicable on the north end, on account of water,
and to sink holes ; and to ascertain the nature of the bottom we sank fully a hundred holes; when
we did get bottom it was fromfiin. to 3 and 4ft., on yellow clay, and blue sandy clay, other places
where there was black mud, and I should be sorry to hazard an opinion as to how far it is to the
bottom I could not find. I was also instructed that if the lake contained water to make a boat and
sound it; this was not necessary, as all the water we saw was under the surface ;we were out on
it for two or three miles in several places, and examined it with powerful glasses, and also from
the top of the highest sandhills, and never saw a drop of water. It is my opinion that Lake
Eyre is dry (as far as concerning surface water) north of the 29th parallel of south latitude. After
taking a number of bearings of the lake, we gladly turned our backs to it for Tidnacoordaninna.
At 3-30 p.m. started on bearing 61°; at a quarter of a mile tried to cross a narrow point of the
arm, found it too soft, and had to turn back and follow it round north; after getting round to the
point—to the end of the bearing, one mile—we changed course to 85°, along points of sandhills,
with samphire flat on right hand, extending three quarters of a mile, to the arm; struck and
camped on a narrow marsh from the arm, 450 yards wide ; most wretched place for the camels ;
Mr. Beresford was almost blind, and 1 conld hardly see to take an observation, Lat. 29° 0' 27",
Friday, 16th April.—Camp on marsh, near the Clayton Arm. Barometer 30-24; ther-
mometer 50°; with S.E., cloudy. Had to watch the camels all night; they would persist in
trying to cross the marsh south of the camp where it was very boggy. Started at 7, bearing 69°,
across the marsh to splendidly-grassed country rising eastward for two miles. At two and three-
quarter miles passed a small marsh on left hand; we could also see the marsh we camped on
stretching to N.W. about four miles. At four and a-quarter miles small marsh on right hand,
Clayton Arm distant one and three-quarter miles—country sandhills and well-grassed valleys. At
sixteen miles struck and crossed a point of Lake Florence (native name Dickadickinna), quarter
of a mile wide, very soft on top but with a firm clay bottom, at from six inches to one foot,
followed along the shore of the lake over very high sandhills. At twenty miles changed to 94°,
sandhills getting higher and worse ; one of the camels by this time was nearly knocked up and
mad from thirst. As he was following us along, he used to crawl slowly up the west side of the hills
and then mostly roll down the east side. I never before saw one in such a state; we gave him
two quarts of water out of the kegs which plucked him up a little. At four miles (making
twenty-four miles in all over frightful country) the poor brute gave in altogether, fortunately near
a fine patch of pig weed; the others began devouring it ravenously, but the knocked-up one would
not move, so Mr, Beresford and I set to work pulling and carrying it to him ; in about an hour
he staggered about and pulled it for himself. Mr. Beresford’s eyes still very bad; mine slightly
better.
Saturday, 17th April.—Camp in high barren sandhill near Lake Florence. Barometer
30-20; thermometer 65°; wind S.E. by E., very cloudy. Started at 7-54, bearing 94°, over
very high red sandhills, tolerably grassed flats between. At one and a quarter miles crossed a
gravelly flat extending two miles north. At five and a quarter miles halted on a high sandhill
peak on edge of Tankamarinna Swamp—a very pretty place, three and a half miles long north
and south, and one mile wide, splendidly-grassed and surrounded by a nice belt of trees, and
intersected by small watercourse also lined with trees. Changed course to 48° across the swamp.
At half mile stopped at waterhole fifty yards long and twenty wide, not deep; very
acceptable to our camels ; I thought they never would finish drinking. Continued same bearing
across the swamp, passing several more small holes of water, to top of high sandhills (two and a
half miles), extending from one to three miles south to a heavily-timbered flat. Changed course
to 64° oyer good sandhills and valleys; at three and a half miles cleared the hills to cottonbush
plain, with sandy patches; at five and a half miles crossed the creek that empties into Lake
Palankarinna to redstone plains; at seven miles reached the depot at Tidnacoordaninna;
found everything right. The water in the swamp had fallen very much during my trip. Lat.
28° 53' 19"; variation 5-35 E.
Sunday, 18th April.—Tidnacoordaninna Swamp, Barometer 29-98; thermometer 69°;
wind E.S.E., raining. Began raining at nine o’clock last night, and continued till four p.m.
Strange that rain seldom comes when it is wanted; now it is useless to us. A few days ago
the greatest blessing we could have had.
Monday, 19th April. Tidnacoordaninna Swamp. Barometer 30-01; thermometer 67°;
calm, cloudy. This swamp extends three-quarters of a mile N.N.W. (from camp), and half a
mile south. Sandy ground and stony rises on east side ; stony plain north, and sandy rises on
west. It is filled by a small watercourse from the east, and general drainage of stony plain south.
When full it overflows from the south end to the creek westward, . Started at 9-10 ; course, due
east across the swamp over sandy ground with stony patches for one mile to stony plain rising
eastward—tolerably grassed patches of cotton and saltbushes. At five and a half miles changed
course to 104° for the gap in Gerty’s Hill. At five and a half miles crossed the main branch of
the head of the Isa. At seven and a half and eight and a half miles, crossed two more small
branches of the Isa. At ten and a quarter miles, in the gap of Gerty’s Hill, country redstone
plain tolerably grassed, with patches of cotton and saltbushes. Changed course to 146° through
the Gap to my old camp of March 18th, on ‘Maryella Creek. Mr. Beresford’s eyes improved very
much since he has been able to wash them well, as also have mine. One camel very lame.
Tuesday, 20th April.—Gerty’s Hill. Barometer 29-67; thermometer 62°; calm, clear;
very heavy dew during the night. Started at 8-10, bearing 56° 15' for stony point, at three and
a quarter miles. Crossed Mosquito Creek, then over red stone plain fairly grassed; abundance
of cottonbush, and a little saltbush ; stony table-topped hills northwards. At five and a half on
, stony


stony point. From this point we sighted Lake Gregory—red stone plain all the way to it.
Changed course to 40° along foot of table-lands. Crossed four small watercourses running
towards the lake. At three and a half miles cleared the tablelands to red stone plain, and changed
to 46°. At four miles reached what is called by courtesy Lake Bocaltaninna -it certainly does
not deserve the name, being merely a lagoon; followed up the west side for one and three-quarter
miles to the Mission Station, situated at the head of the lagoon; turned down the east side for a
quarter of a mile and camped. On the night the station people and Mr. Andrews arrived here
from Kopperamanna the house and kitchen was unfortunately destroyed by fire, so everything was
in great confusion.
Wednesday, 21st April.—Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-03 ; thermometer 4, °; calm, clear.
Took a day’s rest. Mr. Beresford could not begin plotting, which was all behind during the
lake trip, on account of his bad eyes ; I had to request him not to attempt it for fear of perma-
nently injuring his ejes. Lat. 28° 50’ 13". ’ '
Thursday, 22nd April.—Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-04 ; thermometer 45 ; cloudy. Set
Davis to work again, as he admitted being wrong in what he had said and done. Mr. Beresford
and self working at plans. , .. . . ,
Friday, 23rd April.—Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-07 ; thermometer 42°; calm, light clouds.
Self finishing up some detail plans. Mr Beresford borrowed a horse from the station for the
purpose of examining the country N. and E. of Lake Gregory. Started Mr. lolmer E.N.E.
Mr. Andrews collecting and Halleem repairing saddles. Mr. Beresford returned at 8 p.m., having
followed round the north end of the lake for fifteen miles—all very poor sandhill country and
samphire flats near the lake. Mr. Tolmer travelled E.N.E. ten miles over high inferior
sandhills. ,
Saturday, 24th April.—Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-01 ; thermometer 42 ; Commenced
raining heavily at daylight and continued about two hours. Sent Mr. Tolmer back along our
tracks to test some bearings I took when coming here. Mr. Beresford mapping. My eyes w-ere
too sore to do anything.
Sunday, 25th April.—Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-04 ; thermometer 72°; calm, clear. Mr.
Beresford and I were occupied all day in making a tracing of the work done since our arrival at
Kopperamanna, to send to Adelaide; both of us nearly blind. Commenced raining at sunset,
accompanied by a strong gale of wind from S.E., and continued till 8-30.
Monday, 26th April.—Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-05 ; thermometer 55°; wind S.E., clear.
Everything was so wet, and the flats between the sandhills so boggy and slippery, I was obliged
to delay a°day. During the afternoon, Halleem was taken very unwell with dysentery. _
Tuesday, 27th April. —Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-01; thermometer 59°; wind south,
very cloudy. Halleem very much worse during the night; lie was up every five minutes, and
complained of cramp in the stomach. Mr. Tolmer attended him very carefully, and put mustard
plasters on his chest, which afforded him great relief.
Wednesday, 28th April.—Bocaltaninna. Barometer 30-08 ; thermometer 65°; calm, cloudy.
Instructed Mr. Beresford to make across the sandhills with the party, in a northerly direction, till
he struck the Barcoo, and there wait for me. I started alone, for the purpose of returning to
Kopperamanna, and from thence follow the Barcoo up, at 9-48, from the station, bearing 300
over two sandhills, to red stone plain, one and a quarter miles ; changed to 324° at three and a
half miles, on watershed, between the Barcoo and Bocaltaninna; at six and a half miles, top of
Marion’s Hill, 170 feet above surrounding country, named by the Surveyor-General; changed
course to 303°; crossed the head of a small creek, tolerably grassed indulating redstone plain,
cotton and salt bushes in patches; at six and a half miles camped at the Trooper’s Nobs; the
creek from Harry’s Hill runs through between these two little hills, and then spreads on the plain.
Thursday, 29th April.—Trooper’s Nobs. Barometer 30-30 ; thermometer 65° ; wind S.,
clear. Started at 8-40, bearing 329°, oyer good red stone plain. At four and a half miles, in
the bed of the Barcoo, thickly timbered, and a great quantity of polygonum and saltbush growing
in places; no water channels. At eight miles cleared the timber to sandhills ; at ten miles
stopped on a high hill, from which I took bearings of the north end of Lake Kopperamanna,
the station, Harry’s Hill, and Marion’s Hill. At 12 5, bearing 107°, over broken sandhills
covered with canegrass. At two and a quarter miles passed a small lake on left hand, nearly
full of salt water; at three miles crossed a densely-timbered watercourse, which fills the lake,
to a swamp or drv lake, actually the bed of the Barcoo. Changed course to 109°, up the swamp.
At one and three quarter miles it became too much cracked to afford pleasant travelling, so I
altered my course to 94°. At two and a half miles I got clear of the swamp to red stone plain,
with sandy patches, abundance of cottonbush, but very little grass. At four miles top of sand-
hill, when, to my surprise, I saw the river a long way north. Changed to 343° along top of
sandhill for a quarter of a mile; then over sandy cottonbush flat. At two and a half miles
struck the Barcoo ; channel about thirty yards wide, quite dry. Camped on left bank without
a drop of water. I passed through so much water on the plain, and in claypans in the bed of
the river, that I thought I should get plenty more, and neglected to fill my waterbag.
Friday, 30th April.—Camp on Barcoo, above Kopperamanna. Barometer 30-32; ther-
mometer 44°; calm, clear. Started at 7 52, bearing 21°, over broken sandy ground for three-
quarters of a mile to top of sandhill; could see no sign of the river, only a diy lake or swamp.
Changed course to 137°, along edge of swamp. At one and a quarter miles, south end of sw-amp,
no river in sight; followed the east side of sw r amp on bearing 343°. At two and a quarter miles
crossed the river, a shallow boggy channel, and up the right bank over a well-grassed sand} at,
on which I found a small clay hole. At four miles changed course to 97°, crossing a well-giasse
cottonbush flat three-quarters of a mile wide. At one mile crossed the river to east si e, ow
red sandhills close in to left bank. At two and a quarter miles changed to 41°, over red sand-
hills covered with canegrass—some close together, others quarter of a mile apart fairl}-grasse
flats between. At four and a half miles changed to 20° 30', same country. At one and a a
miles passed small sw-amp, spread of river. At two and a quarter miles crossed a small thickly-
grassed swamp, river close to course. At four and a quarter miles struck the ri\er running west,
° changed
E—No. 19.


changed course to 79°. At three-quarters of a mile crossed the river. At one and a quarter
miles struck a very boggy salt lake, filled by the river; followed round it on bearing 125° for one
and a quarter miles, and 81° for two miles to east end of lake ; from this point I observed
smoke ahead; knowing it to be made by the party I started for it on bearing 22° over high steep
hills. At two miles struck and crossed a splendidly-grassed swamp (spread of river) half a mile
wide and three and a half miles long. At three and a quarter miles crossed the river to top of
high sandhill, where I found Mr. Beresford and Mr. Tolmer making fires to signal me; changed
course to north for half a mile to camp at some claypans on left bank of the river. Mr. Beresford
reported that he arrived at this place about midday. Nothing but canegrass, sandhills, and
medium flats all the way from Bocaltaninna. The last three miles of my journey was at a very
slow pace, camel quite done up—the same that gave in on the last Lake Eyre trip, but being the
only one out rf the lot that will stay alone I was obliged to work him. Lat. 28° 20' 56",
Saturday, Ist May.—The Barcoo; camp at claypan on left bank. Barometer 30 - 29;
thermometer 35° ; calm, clear. Halted. Started Mr. Beresford out westward, and Mr Tolmer
north-west. As the river was very soft, they had to go down and cross near to where I did.
Mr. Beresford travelled twelve miles west by north, over sandhills covered with canegrass and
spinifex, medium fiats between. Mr. Tolmer started from the same point of the river N.W. by
N., first two miles over low sandrises to a gum flat subject to inundation ; then sandhills running
north and south, covered with canegrass ; flats between fairly grassed; cotton and saltbushes in
patches.
Sunday, 2nd May.—The Barcoo. Camp at claypans on left bank. Barometer 30'21;
thermometer 36°; calm, clear. Started at 8 31, bearing 22 0 , At one and a half miles crossed
the river running north, from a salt marsh. At two and a half miles changed course
to 69°, and crossed the river again to low, broken, canegrass sandhills; flats between fairly
grassed; abundance of geranium and other herbage. At two and three quarter miles a
nasty accident occurred, which forced us to camp. One of the bull camels had been savage for
some time, but of late had got so bad that it was very dangerous to lead the brute, as he was
not at all particular w'hether it was a man or a camel that he tasted. In consequence of this
Halleem used to secure the load on him as well as possible, and let him follow along behind.
We were quietly riding alongVhen he passed us like a racehorse, with the load gone and the
saddle under his belly, and kept kicking and bucking till the saddle was broken all to pieces,
The load was recovered half a mile back in the sandhills. This w'as at 10 - 30 a.m., and it took
Halleem till dark to patch the saddle up again. Remarkably good cottonbush country about
the camp.
Monday, 3rd May.—The Barcoo Camp, on the cottonbush flat. Barometer 30T8;
thermometer 47°; calm, clear. Started at 7 26, bearing 69°, over good low red sandhills; at one
and three quarter miles struck a long narrow lake, native name Pondapondinma, or Trepondinna,
water slightly brackish. Changed course to 7°, along edge of lake, over splendidly-grassed flats.
At three and a quarter miles crossed the swamp by which it is filled from the river; from this
point I instructed Mr. Beresford to go N.W. to the river, and follow it up to Lake Hope Creek,
then south down the creek to the Station ; I, with the baggage, followed the narrow lake south-
ward, for seven and a quarter miles, and fixed the length and breadth of it by bearings ; then
E. by S., two and a half miles, to Lake Hope Station, where we were most kindly received; we
then proceeded one and a half miles southward along the lake, and camped on what is known as
Point McKinlay. Lat. 28° 23'26" ; Var 5 20° E.
Tuesday, 4th May.—Lake Hope. Barometer 30-C0 ; thermometer 57°; calm, cloudy. As I
wished before following up the Barcoo to see Mr. Dermody, the overseer, who was away from
home. Mr. Gow kindly lent me a horse to ride round the lake to the eastern side, where he was
camped; I started at about 10 a m., and followed the shore of the lake, and took angles, for ten
miles, and camped with Mr. Dermody, at a stockyard.
Wednesday, sth May.— Camp on N.E. shore of Lake Hope. Returned to the Camp, on Point
McKinlay, and overhauled the packs, to leave some things at the Station while up the Barcoo.
'i hursday, 6th May.—Lake Hope. Barometer 30 08 ; thermometer 60; wind S.E., light
clouds. Started early and followed the shore of the lake to the mouth of the creek, and then up
it to Lake Appadare (dry) nine miles. The waters flow in a very strange manner—first the
Barcoo empties into Lake Appadare on the east side ; Lake Hope creek breaks out at the south
end, and after filling the lake flows back in the same channel to Lake Appadare; then the Barcoo
forms again at the north end. From the corner of Mr. Beresford’s tracks near Lake Appadare we
started on bearing 45° 15' across the lake, and camped on a sandhill on the right bank of the river.
Friday, 7th May.—The Barcoo. Camp near Lake Appadare. Barometer 30‘00; ther-
mometer 44° ; calm, few light clouds round the horizon. Mr. Beresford and Mr. Tolmer started
at sunrise to follow up the west side of the river. Started at 7‘20, bearing 42° across the river
and over good sandy flat to low canegrass sandhills at two and a quarter miles on a point of the
river. At three and a half miles changed to 12°, over low sandhills and swampy cottonbush flats,
timbered in places. At five and a half miles struck a very sharp point of the river; followed the
left bank. At six and a quarter miles changed course to 356° along left bank. At two and a
quarter miles struck a turn of the river at a very fine waterhole. Changed course to 83° for three
quarters of a mile, and 48° for one mile, to meet Mr. Beresford. I then left the party in charge of
Mr. Beresford, with instructions to proceed N.N.E. till he struck the river again and camp.
Started alone, bearing 342° across the river to inundated saltbush flat. At one mile and one and
a half mile crossed box watercourses to low broken and irregular sandhills covered with canegrass.
At five and a ha'f miles halted on a very high pointed sandhill. Nothing but high hills visible
N. and westward. Descended the sandhill on bearing 38° to a hard cottonbush flat extending
south to the river and north as far as I could see. At one and a quarter got to sandhills and box
flats, extending about three quarters of a mile south to a heavily-timbered box flat subject to
inundation. At five and a half miles got into a most wretched place; dry swamps frightfully
cracked and rotten. At six and a half miles cleared the swamps to low sandhills, and changed
course to 131° over half a mile of spinifex rises to saltbush flat. At three and three-quarter miles
crossed the river and struck the track about 200 yards below the camp on the right bank of the river
—a very good timbered saltbush flat. Mr, Beresford travelled over sandhills with cottonbush and
large swampy flat between. Lat. 27° 57' 35". Saturday


Saturday, Bth May.—The Barcoo. Camp on Salthush Flat, west side. Barometer 29-87 ;
thermometer 55° ; calm, clear. Instructed Mr. Beresford to follow up the right bank of the
river. I started at 6'53, bearing 109°, across the river and a small saltbush flat to low sandhill;
at a quarter mile box flat on both sides, half mile wide. Changed to 52° across densely-timbered
box flat to sandhill (one mile). Changed to 18° over flooded saltbush flat, very much cracked.
At two and a quarter miles crossed some watercourses running north to the river ; at three miles
on low sandhills, with a good deal of spinifex on them. Changed course to 339-30 along top
of sandhill for a quarter of a mile to box flat, with low sandhill on right hand. At one and a
half miles crossed the river and up the west side of Perrigundy Creek, over a hard grassy salt-
bush flat. At four miles top of high sandhill overhanging Perrigundy Creek, where I met Mr.
Beresiord. Followed up the creek on bearing 330°, over splendid cottonbush country. At two
and a half miles a heavy shower fell, and we camped on the right bank of the creek, half a mile
from -the south end of Lake Perrigundy. After the rain ceased I rode round the lake, and
ascertained by angles the extent and shape of it. The country on the east and north of the
lake consists of richly-grassed flats, extending from the water half a mile to a mile to good
sandhills; on the west is a high red sandhill close to the lake; on the south-west end a number
of splendidly-grassed watercourses break out, and run into the river about two miles above
where we camped, forming altogether a valuable and pretty piece of country. Lat. 27° 49 22";
variation 5-57 E.
Sunday, 9th May. —Lake Perrigundy. Barometer 29 93; thermometer 50°; wind S.W.,
light clouds. Halted. We were visited by a large mob of natives, armed with most murderous-
looking weapons; but they were very polite, and left their implements about 200 yards from
the camp, and came up, begging for tobacco. Very cloudy all day.
Monday, 10th May —Lake Perrigundy. Barometer 30-01; thermometer 46°; calm, heavy-
fog. Leaving Mr. Beresford in charge of the party, with instructions to follow the course of the
river, I followed down the creek to the sandhill, where I met Mr. Beresford on Saturday. Left
it at 7 o’clock; course, S.S.E. At two and a half miles crossed the river to thickly timbered flat;
low sandhill on right hand. At four miles got to broken sandhills and box flats. At five miles
struck and crossed a creek. Very high banks, and a good waterhole where I crossed, hollowed
it down for a quarter of a mile, where it spreads on box flats I then returned to the waterhole,
and continued S.S.E. for two miles over well-grassed sand hills and box flats to a dry lake or
swamp, thickly grassed, and surrounded by a thick belt of trees. On ascending a sandhill west
of the lake I could see a box flat stretching away south for four or five miles. Returned to the
lake and crossed it eastward to fine open saltbush country. At two and a half miles, top of high
red sandhill, from which I had an extensive view to the westward, two lakes—the one I crossed,
and a smaller one on the creek. South, sandhills and box flats; eastward, high inferior sandhills.
I then proceeded north over splendid saltbush flat, with sandhills on my right hand, and a branch
of the river on my left (the creek I crossed). At twelve and a half miles I crossed the river and
found Mr Beresford’s track. Followed them eastward for two miles, when I observed smoke
S.E. Changed my course towards it, across what I thought to be a swamp; in reality it was the
bed of the river. By this time it was dark, but as I had neither food nor water, I was obliged to
keep going. At six'and a half miles crossed the river again to very high sandhills, from which I
had hopeef to see the camp fire, but was disappointed. Continued the same direction for about
two miles, and camped in a cottonbush flat.
Tuesday, 11th May.—Camp alone in high sandhills east of the Barcoo. 1 returned along
my tracks and when about half a mile from the river met Mr. Tolmer, who informed me that they
had camped south of me on a sharp turn of the river at a good waterhole, and gave such a
blowing account of the place that I determined to return and see it, and found it considerably
exceedfng his description ; large grassy flats and sandrises, one hole of water very deep. We
induced some natives to go in and try to bottom it, which they could not do, and according to
their account it never tumbles down. We then proceeded north on the baggage tracks over
very good country, and at seven miles found Mr. Beresford camped on a large but shallow
waterhole in the river; began raining at 4 p.m., and continued, excepting short intervals,
throughout the night.
Wednesday, 12th May.—The Barcoo. Camp at shallow waterhole. Barometer 29-87 ;
Thermometer 54° ; calm, clear. Mr. Tolmer left the camp early to ascertain the extent of a
large swamp westward. I crossed the river below the waterhole, and went westward for two
miles to a. dry lake ; very gcod country. I then returned to the camp and followed the camels
up the river northwards. - At two and a half miles crossed a densely-timbered saltbush flat to
o-ood sandhill country at five miles. Mr. Beresford continued on north to see the extent of the
flat and to meet Mr. Tolmer. I changed course to N.E. across the flat and rich plain country to
high jumbled sandy points from which I could see the river going to the eastward, and then
turning sharp north again; high sandhills and timbered flats east of it. Altered my course to north
by west over low well-grassed sandhills; at six miles changed to east of north and crossed the
river, or rather a large barren flat on which it spreads at the top end of a waterhole, where we
found an old sheepyard, erected many years ago by the late John McKinlay. Continued a
northerly course across the flat (three miles) to high, barren, red sandhills, with claypan flats
between. At five and a half miles from McKinlay’s Waterhole we struck a sharp turn of the
liver eastward and camped ; good waterhole surrounded with large bean trees and gum trees.
Lat. 27° 26’ 43".
Thursday, 13th May. —The Barcoo. Camp at Bean-tree Waterhole. Barometer 29-98;
thermometer 46°; calm, clear. Leaving Mr. Beresford in charge of the party with instructions
to proceed to Lake McKinlay, and Mr. Tolmer to go southward, I started from a high sandy
point overhanging the left bank of the river, quarter of a mile w- st of the camp, at 7-53, course
westward, across the bed of the river—a hard barren fiat, intersected by numerous water-ruts.
At two and a half miles cleared the flat to high inferior sandhills, rising N.W. and W.; changed
course to nearly north. At six miles got to a cracked rotten flat (the watercourse from Lake
McKinlay); followed it two miles north and five and a half miles south to a small but very good
plain opposite the camp. 1 then struck eastward to Lake McKinlay, and followed it round to the
r ’ camp
No. 19.


camp on the N.E. end, on a thickly-grassed flat. This lake is not so large as Perrigundy, but
much prettier and apparently deep, and the water much better tasting. The natives showed us
an old charred stump which they said had been McKinlay’s marked tree Lat. 27° 23' 39".
Friday, 14th May.—Lake McKinlay. Barometer 30-19; thermometer 42°; calm, clear.
Requested Mr. Beresford to make towards the river and camp on it at about eight miles. I
started at 7 - 25, course northerly, over richly-grassed country, lightly timbered, for three quarters
of a mile, to box flats and sandridges, all well grassed; at two and a half miles top of very high
sandhill, when I had an extensive view, with the aid of the glasses I could trace the course of
the creek to and from Lake McKinlay to wdiere it joins the swamp I was on, another channel
then goes eastward; north of this I could see sandhills and box flats for many miles north; I
then changed course to S.E., crossing good sandhill country; at three miles passed a small lake
at my right hand; at four miles struck another lake two miles long, N. and S., and about half a
mile wide, both lakes surrounded by splendidly-grassed sandhills and valleys; followed the edge
of the lake northward to the watercourse which fills it; at two miles it opens out to a richly-
grassed swamp or dry lake; it then turns west of north and separates, one portion going to Lake
McKinlay, and the other gradually turning eastward through high sandhills; after passing the
dry lake, about one mile, 1 changed my course to east, and at two and three-quarter miles halted
on the shore of Moobonburrinna; this is surrounded by very good country; on the N.W. and
N.E. end the sandhills draw together and form a narrow gap through which it is filled from the
river; the water flows back in the same channel for a short distance and branches off w-est to
the small lakes and Lake McKinlay; left the lake at 1 ■ 45; course S.W. by S. over a richly-
grassed plain, which at times must be covered with a good depth of water, as I saw in many
places stakes that the natives had put in to fix their nets to ; at three and a quarter miles crossed
a timbered polygonum watercourse, an overflow from the lake, and back again ; at four and
and a quarter miles got to sandrises and samphire flats; changed course to S. by E. over, or
perhaps it would better to say along, sandhills rising southward at two miles on Watershed,
between the Barcoo and Moobonburrinna; at five and a quarter miles, crossed a portion of the
river to a frightfully cracked and rotten flat; at six and a half miles crossed the main portion of
the river and camped under a sandhill, where 1 fortunately found a little water in a claypan; as
I had not crossed the camel tracks it was evident that I was above them; very cold night; no
food.
Saturday, 15th May—The Barcoo. Camp alone on edge of barren flat. Barometer 30-29 ;
thermometer 47; wind S.E., clear. I waited a long time expecting to see Mr. Beresford pass
along on the opposite side of the river, but hunger prevailed, and I started at 9 20 northwards
across the riverbed; terrible travelling on account cf the cracked state of the ground. On reaching
the north side I found the tracks and followed them up the river two miles east and five miles S.,
over splendidly-grassed plain to top of high sandhills, where Mr. Beresford had made a smoke
to signal me, then sharp west to the bank of the river where the party were halting at a very
good waterhole—saltbush plain west of river, two miles wide and four miles long. At 2-58 p.m.
started and followed the course of the river south, over saltbush plain and sandrises. At four
and a half miles crossed at a very shaip turn north and camped. Lat. 27° 35' 42"; Var. 5° 21'
east.
Sunday, 16th May. —The Barcoo. Camp on sharp turn of river. Barometer 30*31); ther-
mometer 34°; calm, clear. Two camels missing; when found one was blind (the same that was
so affected on the head of the Warburton), and the other on the point of calving, both riding
cows, which reduced our means of moving about very much, having two others so lame that they
could only manage to keep up with the baggage. The country about this camp is as good as I
ever saw. South from the bend of the river a richly-grassed dry swamp extends seven miles to
a densely-timbered flat; S.E. plain and low sandrises for about six miles to high red sandhills.
Monday, 17th May.—The Barcoo. Camp on sharp bend of river. Barometer 30-27 ; ther-
mometer 35°; wind S.S.E , light clouds. Before daylight I walked down with Halleem to where
the cow calved, found it a weak puny thing that could only just manage to stand. I then sent
•Halleem back to the camp to saddle one of the others and carry it up. Leaving Mr. Beresford
and the party to follow up the east side of the river, I started at 8-33. I crossed and proceeded
northward over low well-grassed sandhills. At three miles crossed again to a sandy point and
Avaited for Mr. Beresford and the party, avlio did not come up for some time. Halleem had the
calf packed on one of the others, but did not seem to be able to make a job of it, as it repeatedly
fell off’. Mr. Beresford then Avent eastward to examine a timbered Avatercourse, and I followed
up the river, north. ..At one and three-quarter miles passed a lagoon on my right hand, to very
bad flooded flat full of nasty sharp Avater-ruts. At three miles passed another lagoon on left
hand. At fi\-e miles crossed a flooded flat going S.E. Met Mr. Beresford. The country then
changed to sandhills and inferior saltbush flats. At eight and a half miles (twelve miles from last
camp) Mr. Beresford and I halted near a number of native Avurleys, on a good lagoon three-
quarters of a mile from the river—richly-grassed, timbered saltbush country betAveen. The
baggage did not overtake us for tAvo hours, through stoppages in carrying the calf, so I determined
to leave the party in camp and go on to Innamincka Avith Mr. Beresford. Lat. 27° 25' 49".
Tuesday, 18th May.—The Barcoo. Camp at natiA’e Avurleys on lagoon. Barometer 30 28;
thermometer 37°, calm, clear. Taking Mr. Beresford, and a blackfelloAv lent to us at Lake Hope
by Mr. Uermody (Avhom I omitted to mention before, as he Avas so useless), I started at 7-25,
course N.E. at tAvo miles on bank of river. At three miles avc Avere blocked by a sharp turn
southAvard, both sides of the river covered for a quarter of a mile Avith almost impenetrable scrub.
Changed course to S.E. by 8 for tAvo miles to clear the scrub and bend of river. Then E.S.E.
o\ r er medium sandhills, Avith flooded flats betAveen, river heaAily timbered on both sides. At five
and three-quarter miles crossed one branch of the river to rather inferior saltbush flat, Avith sand-
hills on right hand, ("hanged cour-e a little more to the east, and at three and a quarter miles
struck the main part of the river running north, channel A-ery deep, the bottom composed of blue
clay, sand and rotten sandstone. We then folloAved the branch south for tAvo miles, and changed
to N.E. by E. across the river to a sandy flooded flat, inferior. At tAvo and a half miles reached
IoAV


low sandhills, from which we could see another branch or line of trees north and eastward, and
the one we had crossed trending considerably southward. Proceeded south along the sandhills,
and at three miles camped on well-grassed saltbush country sloping westward to the river. We
had great difficulty in collecting sufficient water for the night, out of some small claypans ; the
river was quite dry. Lat. 27° 32' 40".
Wednesday, 19th May. —The Barcoo. Camp on saltbush flat. Barometer 30-23 ; thermometer
39°; wind E.S.E., clear sky. Started at 8.20; course S.S.E. At one and a quarter miles
crossed the river to polygonum flat, intersected by hundreds of cracked watercourses very trouble-
some to cross. At two and three-quarter miles reached the sandhills. Here the case was worse
than ever. It was simply impossible to cross the flats between them on account of the cracks
and polygonum, which in many places was five and six feet over our heads on tall camels, so we
were obliged to stick to the flat and blunder along as best we could. At seven and
three-quarter miles cleared the flat, and halted on a very remarkable red sandhill, fully 150 feet
high, with a narrow polygonum swamp close under, westward. We could see the other branch
which we crossed, S.W., distance three and a half to four miles. After resting the camels, which
they badly required after crossing the polygonum flat, we started E.S.E., over high, red,
double-topped sandhills, and flooded flats at six and a half miles. Changed to E. by N., same
high hills and inferior flats. At one and three-quarter miles cleared the hills to a box flat ex-
tending to the river and some distance S.E. At four and a quarter miles crossed the river, a
broad sandy bed (dry), and lined with fine gum trees, to splendidly-grassed sandy ground and low
sandrises—abundance of cotton and saltbushes, timbered with a few gum trees and a great
quantity of acacias and shrubs extending as far north as we could see. At five miles from the
river we camped on a small creek at a good waterhole lined with gum and acacia. Beautiful
grassy saltbush country all round. Lat. 27° 39' 39".
Thursday, 20th May.—Camp at waterhole in creek north of the Barcoo. Barometer 30-21;
thermometer 40°. Light Avind from S., clear. Started at 8-24. Course E.N.E. over Avell-
grassed flat and sandrises for two miles to sandhills wide apart—flats covered \vith grass saltbush
and cottonbush. At nine miles halted at a high red sandhill. I had been steering for one ot a
number of table-topped hills, which the black said Avas close to the Station; but he found that he
Avas decidedly out of his reckoning by the appearance of the country ahead. North ot where
Ave stood a strong flat extends as far as could be seen, Avith a high red sandhill east ot it. N.E.
and E. high red stone plain to tablelands. As far as I could judge of it with the glasses, it
appeared A-ery inferior. Descended the sandhill, and proceeded E.S.E. over a hard, inferior,
stony flat rising eastAvard, with sandhills on right hand. At five miles crossed a small gum creek
running south from the tablelands, and high stony plains. Folkmed it down S. by W. for one
mile to a native camp. Changed to S.E. by E. Crossed a hard inferior flat, a sandhill, and
another small creek —a branch of the Gum Creek we crossed —to stony plain rising east-
Avard, at four miles on the fall to the Barcoo, and changed course to S.E., by S. doAvn rather a
sharp stony fall to sandy ground and sand hillocks. At three miles struck the river, and found
it running. FolloAved doAvn for a short distance to a ford, and then up the right bank east
for tAVO miles to Innamincka Station, near Burke’s grave. Avhere Ave Avere most heartily received
by Mr. Frank Doveton, Avho had just shot a beast Avhich Ave Avillingly helped to skin, as fresh
beef Avas rather neAv to us. Lat. 27° 43' 18" S. ; Long. 140° 43 30" E. ; Var, 5° 35 east.
Friday, 21st May.—The Barcoo. Innamincka Station. Barometer 30-20 ; thermometer
38°; calm, clear. Bought some beef and salted it. Mr. Beresford rode up the river three miles
to see a Avaterhole. I did not Avrite doAvn the native name of it, and consequently have forgotten ;
it i? generally knoAvn as Howitt’s Depot. In the evening I had the melancholy satisfaction of
\ 7 isiting the place where the gallant but unfortunate Bourke was buried; it is on the bank, or near
it, of the Barcoo, about 300 yards E.N.E. of the Station, a dreary dismal looking spot; all that
noAv remains to mark the place is a hole in the sand at the foot ot a gnarled gum tree, being the
initials of Burke, HoAvitt, and McKinlay, and a tree near marked jJp by Mr. Dunne, Inspector of
Queensland Native Police. I marked another tree Avith
SAG
• L
75
Saturday, 22nd May. — The Barcoo. Innamincka Station. Barometer 30-16 ; thermometer
55°; calm, cloudy. As Mr. Doveton Avished to go doAvn to our depot with me, by the Avay ot
Sterzelecki Creek on horseback, I requested Mr. Beresford to follow down and examine portions of
the river Avhich Ave missed Avhen coming up, Avith all possible speed, and get to the other with the
beef, having left them Avith only tAvo small pieces they Avould necessary be quite out. Mr.
Doveton sent after horses early in the morning, but as they Avere not forthcoming till nearly
sunset Ave did not start. „
Sunday, 23rd May.—lnnamincka Station. Calm, cloudy. Followed down the Barcoo lor
three and a quarter miles, to Avhere Sterzelecki Creek breaks out, and then down the bed of it
S. by E.; high stony ground east of the creek, and low, well-grassed sandhills west; the channel
for two and a half miles is scarcely perceptible; it then becomes defined, and turns west of south;
at three and a quarter miles, changed course to S. by W., along fairly-grassed flat, with sandhills
on left hand; at three and a half miles the creek spreads on a saltbush flat, about one and a hal
miles wide and three miles long; at four and a half miles changed to S.S.W., along same flat
and points of sandhills ; at four miles, halted on a high pointed sandhill for ten minutes. Started
again, course W.N.W., over good cottonbush flat; at one mile, crossed the creek to a good
grassy saltbush flat, sandhills N. and S. ; at three and a half miles, got to a A'ery hard, inferior,
flooded flat; at five miles, crossed a deep creek, and camped on the right bank; native name
Talatchi. This creek breaks out of the Barcoo, nine miles below Innamincka, and joins
Sterzelecki Creek twelve to fourteen miles below where we camped.
Monday, 24th May.—Camp on Talatchi Creek. Calm, cloudy. Started at 8.48 ; course
N.W. for a quarter of a mile to top of sandhill, from Avhich I took bearings of the break out of
Talatchi Creek, and the course of it below the camp. Changed to W.S.W. W., over barren
flat and two low sandhills ; at two miles crossed a creek which breaks out from Talatchi, two
miles
No. 19.


miles from the Barcoo, fine cottonbush flat north; between the two creeks, below where I
crossed, it spreads on a cottonbush flat extending south five or six miles; continued same course
for one and three-quarters miles to sandhills well grassed ; changed course to W.S.W. £ S., over
sandhills and cottonbush valleys to plain well grassed in patches; other parts hard and bare,
generally inferior. Changed to W. by N. At three and a quarter miles struck and crossed a
creek running about S.W., at a dry waterhole (native name Wadrawadrinna), This hole, the
natives at Innamincka told us, never went dry , and Mr. Doveton brought his blackboy on purpose
to guide us to it; but as far as I could judge it might have been dry for the last twenty years.
We then proceeded west down the creek, over a very inferior cracked, flooded flat for four
miles; then across points of sandhills and flooded flats between. At seven and a half miles the
creek splits into two narrow channels. Changed course to W. by N. across points of sandhills
for one mile to fairly-grassed flat, with sandhills on right hand ; at six miles altered to N.W. by
N. over richly-grassed low sandhills for two miles; thence N. by W. to a light loamy soil,
barren plain full of cracks and crabholes, extending three miles east to heavy timber, and five
miles west to sandhills. After floundering over the plain for seven and a half miles we got to
high broken sandhills. At eight miles changed to N.N.E. to another cracked, barren flat; at
one and a half miles struck a dry, deep, timbered creek ; followed it down westward for one
mile, when it spreads on a plain ; then up for about one mile, not a drop of water to be found.
Camped in the bed of it. No water nor food.
Tuesday, 26th May.—Camp in dry creek south of the Barcoo. Wind E.S.E., cloudy.
Followed down the creek to where we first struck it, and started from there at 9-30 (the horses
strayed during the night for water, which made our start late) ; course N. £ W.‘, over terribly
cracked, barren flat for one mile, to high well-grassed sandhills. At three and three-quarters
miles top of red sandhill referred to on Wednesday, 19th. We then proceeded N.W. by W.
over high, well-grassed sandhills ; some of the valleys between very much cracked and inferior,
extending north to the river, and from a half to one mile south to a plain and the spread of the
creek we camped on. At three miles changed course to N.W. over flat for two miles; then
points of well-grassed sandhills for five miles. At this point the sandhills east and west of the
creek draw together, and it partly forms a channel. Changed course to N.W. by N. over our
sandhill to cracked, flooded flat. At two miles struck the creek where it forms a channel again,
and followed it down northwards in search of water for three miles, when we found a small hole,
this was at 2*40 p.m., and as we had not had a drink since the previous morning at breakfast,
it may be judged we were rather thirsty. The horses were also very bad through travelling
over such cracked, soft ground. After halting for about two hours we continued down the
creek, and at half a mile struck Mr. Beresford’s downward tracks; followed them W.N.W. over
low irregular sandhills and sandy flats, covered with splendid grass; cottonbush, saltbush,
herbage, and shrubs abundant. At ten miles (8-50 p.m.) reached the depot very tired and
hungry, hound all well, only another camel had calved during my absence.
Wednesday, 26th May.—The Barcoo. Depot at native wurleys. Barometer, 30’13;
thermometer, 40°; wind south-west, raining. The rain began at 3-30 a.m., and continued
nearly all day. Could not move out of the camp.
Thursday, 27th May.—lhe Barcoo. Depot at native Avurleys. Barometer, 33*16;
thermometer, 55°; Avind S.S.E , raining. The rain ceased about midnight, and began again at
daylight—not heavy, but quite enough to prevent us from moving. At 730 it cleared off again,
and the sun came out, and as our goods Avere all more or less Avet, Ave gave them the benefit of
it. Being now hampered Avith two carrel calves, one of Avhich (the youngest) is lively enough,
but the old one can only just Avalk, I determined to send them and the baggage by the nearest
route, under the guidance of the blackfelloAV, to Lake Hope, and return myself Avith the other
doAvn by Avay of McKinlay Creek. I kept four riding camels, and one to pack, and started the
others at 11 o’clock Avith Davis, Halleem, and the black, Avith instructions to make to Lake Hope
by easy stages and the best route. I started at 12*8 Avith Mr. Beresford, Mr. Tolmer, and Mr.
AndreAvs, to Avhom I had given the chance of going Avith me or Avith the baggage. Course
W. by b. At one mile struck the river, but could not cross on account of the steep banks.
FolloAved it up for a quarter of a mile to where it branches, one part goiijg north for about a
mile, and then turns south again. While getting down the bank Mr. Andrews, who Avas a little
behind on my favorite riding camel, got a severe fall. Strange to say the brute had carried him
quietly for months. Being a little behind he got frightened, and trotted doAvn a steep bank, and
gave lavo or three nasty backs at t-he bottom, and landed Mr. Andrews on his back, luckily in a bed
of sand, Although the place was soft he was considerably shaken, as it is a good height to fall
from a large camel. Mr. Beresford had to exchange Avith him. We returned to the opposite
bank, Avhere Ave struck the river, and proceeded on our course over an inferior cracked flat. At
two miles crossed the other branch to high red sandhills and valleys Avell grassed. Changed
course to Avest, and at thirteen miles camped on the south point of Lake McKinlay; not a bit of
Avood to be had, and Ave Avere nearly starved to death during the night Avith cold.
Friday, 28th May.—South end of Lake McKinlay. Barometer 30*15; thermometer 42°;
Avind S., cloudy. Struck across the sandhills and plain. Course W. by S. to the bean tree camp
of Wednesday, the 12th, and left the point of the sandhill quarter of a mile Avest of it. At 9*39,
course S.W. by S., across the spread of the river, at four miles on point of sandhill north of
Avhere McKinlay’s creek forms from and leaves the Barcoo. Changed course to W.S.W. over a
fine saltbush flat. At tAvo miles on sharp turn of ri\*er at a good Avaterhole. Halted to have a
shot at some ducks. Continued W.S.W., and crossed a small Avatercourse running from the
creek, AvestAvard, into the sandhills. At three miles changed to S.W. by S. over loav Avell-
grassed sandhills and inferior flooded flats; bed of creek densly timbered Avith box trees, and
about three and a quarter miles Avide. At three miles changed course to S. three-quarters E.
over red sandhills, rising Avestward, and box sapling flats, very good in places. At five and a
half miles turned sharp to the creek, and found such a fine Avaterhole that I' called to Mr. Beres-
ford, and Ave camped on the south end of it; it is three-quarters of a mile long and fifty to sixty
yards wide, Avith richly-grassed banks right to the edge of the water. Having noticed from a
high


high sandhill, when we were travelling, another watercourse and swamp east of the creek, after
we got into camp Mr. Beresford walked across the sandhills east, and at one and a half miles
came to a fine grassy swamp one mile wide, and stretching away southward. He could also, by
the aid of glasses, trace the watercourse, that fills, by the trees to where it leaves McKinlay
Creek. Lat. 27° 37’ 53", by A Cruces ; and 27° 37’ 53" by Arcturus, taken by Mr. Beresford
Saturday, 29th May.—McKinlay Creek. Camp at waterhole. Barometer 30 27; ther-
mometer 34°; calm, clear. Returned west, to the point where we turned to the creek, and
proceeded S. by W. over splendidly-grassed box flats and sandri-ses; at one and a half miles the
creek spreads out again; at four and a half miles in the bed of creek—at this point it forms a kind
of box and polygonum sw r amp with clear well-grassed patches; at five and a half miles the creek
forms into two channels, one rising S.E. and the other S.W. round low sandrises, at nine and a
half miles struck and crossed the Barcoo at a sharp bend, one mile east of the junction of
McKinlay Creek; changed course to 212°, across well-grassed but very rotten swamp extending
about two miles south; at three and a quarter miles changed to 204°; at one mile oossed the
river to nasty cracked timbered flats, probably as much the bed of the river as where I marked
it; at three and a quarter miles struck Mr. Beresford’s tracks at a corner end of second bearing
from Perrigunday; as this concluded all we could do about this part, we proceeded down the
right bank of tbe river, and camped near our old camp of May 7th.
Sunday, 30th May.—The Barcoo. Camp on saltbush flat, below Peragundy. Started very
early, and followed the river down to Lake Appadare, twenty-one miles as the crow flies
probably thirty-one up and down the hills—and dewn the creek to Lake Hope, eleven miles,
where we arrived at B‘3o ; about half an hour after this the mail came from Manua, and brought
instructions from the Surveyor-General to fix the position of some hills between Mount Attraction,
near Mundowdadon, and Gerty’s Hill.
Monday, 31st May.—Lake Hope Station. Barometer, 30T9 ; thermometer, 51°. Moved to
where we camped before, on Point M‘Kinlay. The baggage arrived at 3 p.m., with the camels
frightfully lame, and one calf; the other died on the way down. ~
Tuesday, Ist June.—Started Mr. Tolmer out with a blackfellow, to see some swamps that
are reported to be about thirty miles N.W. or N. of this place, and also instructed him to visit
Mr. Hogarth, and ascertain if the large claypan (supposed Lake Howitt), had been filled by the
rains when we were or the Warburton.
From Wednesday, 2nd June, to Saturday, sth.—Waiting for Mr. Tolmer's return, and
plotting up a great deal of work. I wish it to be understood that we were seldom in the camp,
there were many hundreds of miles travelled during the journey after the camp was chosen, but
the tracks not shown in examining country. All the natural features and description of countiy
shown on the map is by actual inspection, not imagination , as is customary; nor were creeks,
rivers, or lakes sketched on the maps a yard further than they were positively known to go;
consequently everything but actual exploration got very much behind. Mr. 1 olmer returned very
late at night.
Sunday, 6th June.—Lake Hope. Received Mr. Tolmer’s report, and plotted his work.
1 find that he had travelled thirty-five mile*, on about a N.W. course to Mount Hogarth from Lake
Appadare—seven miles low, well-grassed, sandhills; twelve miles of steep sandhills, covered with
canegrass and spinifex; intervening flats gravelly in places, generally speaking inferior ; eight
miles along a narrow red stone plain, fairly grassed, sandhills east and west of it; the remainder
of the distance over well-grassed cotton and saltbush country (plain). Ihe swamps which I had
sent him to see only exist in the fertile immagination of somebody. He crossed two small sandy
creeks on the way, but says that the route we came from Wadlarkinna to Kopperanaanna is decidedly
superior for either drays or stock going to the Warburton; to ascertain this was the principal
object of the journey. ,
Monday, 7th June.—Lake Hope. Barometer 3018 ; thermometer 47 °; wind N.L , cloudy.
Started Mr. Tolmer and Mr. Andrews off to Beltana, with five camels, two riding and three
pack saddles, gun. rifles, ammunition, and sundries. I intended starting myself for Boocaltaninna,
hut through the absence of Mr. Gow, who was out on the run, I couFd not settle accounts with
the Station.
Tuesday, Bth June. —Lake Hope. Barometer 30-16; thermometer 45°; calm; cloudy.
Went to the Station to get some flour (of which they could only spare 25fts.), and left at 11*35,
bearing 205°, over high canegrass sandhills ; at four miles passed a claypan on the right hand,
distance one mile ; at twelve and a half miles camped on rather a poor spot, but the camels were
travelling very badly, breaking their nose ropes, and it only amounted to killing time. Lat. 28°31’ 8".
Wednesday, 9th June.— Camp in sandhills, S.S.W. of Lake Hope. Barometer 30-02 ; ther-
mometer 36°; calm, clear Started at 8-26 bearing 205° over red sandhills varying in height and
distance apart, covered with canegrass, flats between lightly grassed, cotton and saltbushes in
patches. At thirteen and three-quarter miles got bearings of Marion’s Hill and Mount! 4 lint;
changed to 218° 15' over same country at three and three-quarter miles on point of Salt Marsh
extending south nearly to Lake Gregory; altered course 3° more S. at four three-quarter
miles; after crossing a gravelly and partly salt claypan we struck Mr. Beresford’s tracks, and
followed them three and a half miles to Boocaltaninna, where we arrived at 5-10 p.m., and camped
at the same place E. of the lagoon. A short time after getting into camp, Mr. Beresford
required a little flour for some purpose, and to the apparent surprise of Davis and Halleem, the
flour bag was missing ; they loaded the camel between them in the morning, and both strongly
denied having missed or thought of the flour, but taking the matter all through it appeared a very
mysterious affair to me, and a gross piece of neglect in not reporting it to me before. *
Thursday, 10th June.—Boocaltaninna. Barometer 30 05 ; thermometer 60°; wind N.L..
very cloudy. On inquiring at the Station, I learnt that the person in charge was absent, and had
the key of the store with him, consequently I could not get any flour; the cook also informed
me that he believed their supply to be so short that, even if Mr. Jacob was at home, I should not
get any. This only left me two courses open (having got all that could be spared at Lake Hope),
either to go to Manuwalkaninna and get some (which was very improbable), or to Mundowdadon,
and
No. 19.


and work back northwards. I decided on the latter course. Started at about noon for Mun-
dowdadon, where we arrived on Sunday, 14th, and were most hospitably received by Mr. Cj. War-
lands ; caught Tolmer and Andrews; got plenty of tea, sugar, and flour, but no meat; had to
wait Monday and Tuesday till it was killed and salted. ,
Wednesday, 16th June.—Mundowdadon. Started early, and were occupied to \N ednesday,
30th, in fixing the position of thirteen hills by trigonometrical survey—viz., Margum, 1 ipeclay
Hill, North-East Cliff, Tree Cliff, Two Hills, Red Stone Hill, Yarra Hill, Hayes’ Hill, b lorence Hill,
Davis’ Hill, Halleem’s Hill, Mount Flint, and Gerty’s Hill. Through being delayed three days by
rain at Red Stone Hill, I was obliged to visit Boocaltaninna again for a small supply of rations ; re-
turned to Mundowdadon by way of Mount Flint, Mulga Point (a small hill on the tablelands north ot
the Clayton, which we also piled to test some angles), Attraction Hill, and Decoy finally
arrived at Beltana on Monday evening, July 12th, and delivered remainder of camels to Mr.
Phillipson. In conclusion, I beg to offer my thanks to the whole party for their kindness and
courtesv, and a few remarks as to their abilities. To Mr. Beresford I am deeply indebted oi
willing," cheerful, and efficient help throughout, having been willing at ajl times to exert himselt to
the utmost either mentally or physically, and has sufficient power of mind to make the best ot a
bad job, and content himself under any circumstances. Mr. Tolmer and Mr. Andrews both
worked very hard, and were very much interested in their respective situations, and willingly
performed any task allotted them. Davis performed his duties as cook in a very kind and clean
manner, but is the worst bushman (that is in finding his way about) that I ever saw. HaJleem
(the jundar) was extremely careful of the camels and saddles, as clearly showed, for I started with
sore-backed camels and returned three cured, and in all other respects worked hard and willing
The other two Affghans when they left Beltana knew nothing at all about camel driving, but soon
learnt a little, and were very hard working men—in fact, about the best hands at well making i
ever saw have, &cc.,
CVC1 oaw. TVTTTT Cl
J. W. LEWIS
Leader Lake Eyre Expedition.
Remarks on the Plants, Sfc., collected by Air. F. IV. Andreics , Collecting Naturalist to the Party.
The country beyond the Macumha for some distance during our trip was of the most sterile
and barren character—no rain had evidently fallen for at least, say ((rom all the information \vc
could gather from the natives) two years. We had no spring time “to unlock the flowers to
paint the landscape,” At my suggestion Mr. Andrews at once turned his attention to making a
collection of the grasses indigenous to the parts of the country through which we travelled.
With these prefatory remarks I pass on to the list of the zoological collection made . and I am
quite certain that all opportunities for collection were eagerly embraced by Mr. Andrews, who
spared no time nor trouble.
J. W. LEWIS.
Catalogue of the Specimens of Natural History, Minerals, Fossils, collected by Mr. F. IF. Andrews, collecting
naturalist to the Lake Eyre Expedition, under the command of Mr. T. W. Lewis.
MAMMALIA.
* CHEIROPTERA, or BAT TRIBE.
Scotophilus morio Chocolate bat.
RODENTIA or RAT TRIBE.
Hapalotis conditor Building rat Mua vellerosua Tawny rat
“ Mitchelli Mitchell’s jerboa rat Hydromys fulvolavatus I ulvoua beaver rat.
“ cervina Fawn-colored jerboa rat
MARSUPIALIA.
Onycbogalia lunata Crescent marked nail-tailed I Bettongia Grayi Gray’s jerboa.
kangaroo
ENTOMOPHAGA or BANDICOOT TRIBE.
Perameles fasciata Banded Perameles \ Peragalia lagotis Long-eared Peragalia.
AYES.
ORDER RAPTORES.
Family Falcomda;.
Falco subniger Black falcon (rare) 1 I Tinnunculus ccnchroides .... Nankeen kestrel
Hieratidea occidcntalis .... Western brown hawk | Elanus scriptus Letter-winged kite.
Family Stkigida:.
Strix delicatula Delicate owl.
ORDER INSESSORES.
Family Cafrimulgidje.
Eurostopodus guttatus ... White-throated nightjar.
Family llirundixidje.
Cberamccca lencosterna White-breasted swallow.
Family Meropida;.
Merops ornatus Australian bee-eater.
Family Alcedinida:.
Toderamphus pyrrhopygius Red-backed kingfisher.
F amily


Family Artamid^e.
Artamus personatue .... Masked wood swallow I Artamus melanops .... Black-faced wood swallow.
“ leucopygialia .. White-rumped wood swallow |
Family Ampbudje.
Pardalotus rubricatus .... Red-lored diamond bird | Pardalotus striatus Striated diamond bird.
Family Campephagidas,
Campephaga humeralis . White-shouldered Qimpephaga ) Pacbycephala Gilbert! Gilbert’s thickhead.
Family Muscicapidjb.
Smicromis brevirostris Short-billed Smicrornis.
Family Saxicolid.®.
Petroica Goodenovii Red-capped robin | Melanodryas cuculata Hooded robin. .
Family Menukidas.
Sphenostoma cristatum .... Crested wedgetail Geobasileus chrysorrhous Yellow-rumped Acanthiza
Malurus Lamberti Lambert’s warbler Ephthianura aiinfrons .. Orange-frontedEphthia^
“ leuconotus White-backed warbler “ tricolor.... Tn-colored Ephthianura
(very rare) Pyrrholsemus brunneus.. Ked throat _
Amytis Goyderi Goyder’s wren (n. sp.) Chthonicola sagittata .. Little Chthomcola.
Family Fhinqillidal
Taeniopygia castanotis Chestnut-eared finch.
Family Melurid.e.
Cinclosoma cinnamoneum Cinnamon ground thrush.
Family Corvidje.
Corvus australis hite-eyed crow.
Family Crateropodidas.
Pomatostomus ruficeps Chestnut-crowned Pomatostomns.
Family Meliphaoidaj.
Ptilotis cratitia Wattle-cheeked honeyeater Lichnotentha picata ..,. Pied honeyeater
“ plumula Plumed honeyeater Melithreptus hetior .... Beautiful honeyeater
“ penicillata White-plumed honeyeater Dicocum lurundmaceum Swallow Dicaeum.
Family Cuculidje.
Scythrops Novae Hollandiae Channel bib.
Family Psittacidje.
Cacatua roseicanilla Rose-crested cockatoo Euphema Bourkii . urk ’ 8 S rass P arrake ® t
Lacatua roseicapiua lidded narrakeet Melopsittacus undulatus Warbling grass parrakeet
Sphote jmthorrhouV:; Yellow-bated parraloet Geopsittacnsocoident.il, Western grnmd parrakeet
Euphema splendida Splendid grass parrakeet
ORDER RASORES.
Family Columbidaj.
Phans chalcoptera Common bronzewing I Ocyphaps lophotes Crested bronzewing
“ P histrionica Harlequin bronzewing I Stictopeha cuneata Little turtle dove.
Family Turnicida:.
Tumix varius Varied turnix.
ORDER GRALLATORES.
Family Charadridje.
Eudromius australis Australian dottrell I iEgialophilus ruficapillus Red-capped dottrell.
Family Tringidje.
Actodromas australis Little sandpiper \ Glottis glottoides Greenshank.
Family Tantalidaj.
Carphibis spinicollis Straw-necked ibis.
Family Ardeidje.
Ardea pacifica Pacific heron.
ORDER NATATORES.
Dendrocygna eytoni • • Eyton’s tree duck.
REPTILIA.
SNAKES.
2 Diemenia superciliosus A large-banded variety of the brown snake
2 Pseudechis australis Orange-bellied brown snake.
SAURIA or LIZARD TRIBE.
I 3 Grammatophora angulifera
I “ A new allied specie. . I 1 Gramn.atopl.ora ? New species.
FISH.
22 fishes (five specie,), undetermined, from tributaries of Late lyre. These will be forwarded to the Count P. do
Castelnau, Melbourne, to be named and described.
SHELLS.
Various specimens of laud and fresh water shells, comprising two or three species of Uuios (fresh water mussels);
Phvsac Sp. (?); two species of Helix.
CRUSTACEA.
Some specimens of land craba, which were very abundant after a shower of rain The shell i. remarkably thru
P and brittle, and it was with difficulty that a few specimens were preserved.
INSECTS.
The insect, found were hut few, ou account of a long drought; they consist principally of some
and Buprestidae.
F—No. 19.


Minerals. —The country for many miles around Lake Eyre being in a low, depressed portion of this continent,
the minerals found (some of which had evidently been washed in drift by floods) consisted of small specimens of iron
ores, fragments of selenite, and a great variety of chalcednnic pebbles, comprising jasper, cornelian, and various
agates. A specimen of a good building stone (a lilac-looking sandstone) was procured at a depot of the Moravian
Mission Station (Booltakarrinna); it is soft and easily worked and quarried, and hardens rapidly.
Eleven bottles containing efflorescence from various mineral springs in the neighborhood of Lake Eyre; also
specimens of the saline silts bordering Lake Hope. .
Ethnological Specimens— Koories, used by the natives in certain ceremonies, made from a large shell (Me to
diadema), found on the North Coast; a wooden instrument called a moolawilpa, for piercing a hole through the
nose: portions of a fishing net made of rushes. ,
Fossils. —Various fossil shells, and portions of a belemnite found at Stuart s Creek. This fossil throws a
valuable light on the formation, as it belongs to a family of ancient cuttle fish considered to be found only in the
secondary formation.
[For Plan, See Parliamentary Paper No. 114, 1875.]
