

JOY TRIUMPH A
MEMOIR OF MRS. M ,
Who died in Collingwood, 29 th March, 1873.
REV. ROBERT HAMILTON,
Minister of the Presbyterian- Church, Fitzroy.
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS. !) MA(!KILLOP-ST.
1874.




F I o i
JOY TRIUMPHANT :
MEMOIR OP MRS. M ,
Who died in Collingwood, 29 th March, 1873.
REV. ROBERT HAMILTON,
Minister of the Presbyterian Church, Fitzroy.
HRllnnmu:
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP-ST.
1874.




The following sketch of a peculiarly happy death-bed expe-
rience is published after urgent and continued applications to
have it put in a permanent form. Many pressing engage-
ments have prevented its appearance through the press at an
earlier period. Believing that its circulation in type might
conduce to the direction and encouragement of many anxious
inquirers after the way to true happiness, it has at length
been issued.
The memoir possesses not a local interest only, but one
affecting humanity at large. It discloses the secret of peace
in life, victory in death, and glory in eternity. It was given
in substance from the pulpit at the time, and it is believed
was blessed to the spiritual benefit of many. A thing spoken,
however, can only reach hundreds—when printed, it can
■embrace thousands. It is earnestly pressed on all who are
interested in the extension of the Gospel and the salvation
of men, that they give the little publication a place in their
prayers, and do what they can to widen the sphere of its in-
fluence. It is hereby commended to God’s blessing, and to
the prayerful interest of Christ’s people.
R. H.


“ That the trial of your faith, being much more precious
than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire,
might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ: Whom, having not seen, ye love,
in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory.”— l Peter i, 7, 8.


JOY TRIUMPHANT:
<OR, MEMOIR OF MRS. M , WHO DIED IN COLLINGWOOD,
29th march, 1873.
“ Oh, glorious hour! oh, blest abode !
I shall he near and like my God ;
A nd flesh and sin no more control
T he sacred pleasures of my soul.
“ My flesh shall slumber in the ground
Till the last trumpet’s joyful sound ;
The n burst the chains with sweet surprise,
And in my Saviour’s image rise.”
The Gospel of Jesus Christ has been found, in all ages, when
cordially believed, to be the source of real happiness. This
has been the experience of myriads of the human family.
Multitudes in the present day, all over the world, can bear
the same testimony. How can it be otherwise ? There is not
a single feature in Christ’s whole life on earth, which can be
pointed out as fitted to repel any man from His presence and
fellowship.
The whole history of Christianity may be appealed to, in
proof that no man ever received the Gospel message of
mercy, and engaged faithfully in the service of the Lord
Jesus, without being blessed. The hearty belief of good news
necessarily makes a person happy. The criminal rejoices in
the reception of pardon. The prodigal is full of joy in his
restoration to the lost privileges of a son. The traveller who
has lost his way is filled with thankfulness and praise, when


he has been rescued by a friendly hand from his wanderings,
and has been brought into the path of peace and safety.
The man who has been snatched from the jaws of a terrible
death, is filled to overflowing with the praises of his deliverer.
So is it with the man who has been awakened to a sense of
guilt and danger in the prospect of death and eternity, and
who recognizes in Christ Jesus his divinely appointed and all
gracious Redeemer. When he is enabled to trust in the Son
of God for eternal salvation, to look to Him as an atoning
sacrifice for his sins, and to believe on Him as his almighty
Saviour, then may he feel warranted, nay constrained, “to
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.” If death is
abolished, what has the disciple of Christ to fear ? And if
the Gospel really means what the term imports,—good news,
then Christ has overthrown the dominion of death. He has
done this in a manner so effectual, that “ He that hath the
Son hath life,” and “ shall not see death.”
By the doing and dying of Jesus the curse and power of
sin are removed, and thereby the sting of death is taken
away, so that to every believer it is rendered harmless. Be-
sides this, the glorious work of sacrifice which Christ finished
on earth, has struck an effectual blow at the usurped throne
of him who has the power of death. The utter and final
abolition of death, therefore, to all who believe and love the
Redeemer, is only a matter of time. “ The hour is coming
and now is when all that are in their graves shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.”
Christ is “ the resurrection and the life, he that believeth in
Him though he were dead, yet shall he live.”
To every penitent and believing sinner Christ dispenses
freely, through His own merits alone, the blessing of pardon,
and thereby gives a pledge of full salvation, deliverance from
death and the grave, and introduction into the realms of
endless life and joy. In addition to all, the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in the hearts of His people affords a foretaste of the
joys of immortality. The promises of God in Christ imply
an everlasting duration of happiness. The inheritance to


which a title is given to every child of grace is incorruptible
and unfading.
The pleasures, provided by infinite wisdom and grace for
him who loves the Saviour, are “for evermore.” Not only
is heaven a place where there is no death, but where life
flows in endless streams of blessing. In the world to come,
Jesus Christ is to all His ransomed followers a well-spring of
eternal life. A belief in the risen, exalted, and glorified
Redeemer—a full persuasion regarding the reality, the bliss,
and the immortality of heaven —a consciousness of personal
interest, through grace, in the incorruptible kingdom of
Christ, may well fill the soul with an enrapturing gladness ;
and when the Christian, sinking beneath the weight of
mortal trouble, feels that he is nearing the close of the
voyage over the ocean of earth’s ills, that the haven of rest
is in sight, that God and Christ, and myriads of ransomed
spirits and of holy angels are ready to welcome him to a
home of infinite glory, is there anything unreasonable—
anything wonderful—in his expressing himself in bright
enrapturing hope, or even sometimes in extraordinary out-
bursts of spiritual joy 1
The subject of this memoir was a married woman, living
in Collingwood. She was born in Stirling, Scotland, on the
25th Feb., 1842. At an early period of her life she belonged
to the Napier-street Presbyterian congregation, Fitzroy, and
was a regular pupil for a number of years in the Sabbath
school. She seems to have received good impressions from
the instruction imparted, but the knowledge she received
does not appear to have ripened into decided conversion.
For a considerable number of years, through various causes,
after the school period of her life, she was not in connection
with us as a church. She ever retained towards us, however,
the affection which originated at an early period, and was
exceedingly delighted some time ago when she was enabled
to resume the alliance which she so much desired. Her
attendance on ordinances, however, was not regular, on
account of delicate health, as well as family affliction and


bereavement ; and, at length, through increasing trouble
and declining strength, she was wholly unable to attend the
public worship of God.
As to her spiritual condition in the beginning of her
illness, she was without hope. She did not feel that she had
ever experienced a saving change. She believed she had
simply a name to live, and had not obtained the life which
Jesus, the author of salvation, bestows. When she felt
her health was rapidly giving way, through disease of the
lungs, and that she might be even suddenly ushered into the
presence of her Judge, she became exceedingly uncomfort-
able and even alarmed at the prospect. She knew that a
mere profession would not avail her—that it was only the
gold and silver of genuine Christian experience, which would
stand the test of the judgment seat, and that the wood and
stubble of a dry, barren form of Christianity would be
swept away into everlasting burning.
As elements in the series of events which led to the happy
change which she experienced, it may be mentioned that
about fifteen months previous to her own decease her brother-
in-law died under her roof ; that he was attended by the
Presbyterian missionary* of the district, who made her ac-
quaintance, and afterwards visited her, with a view to her
spiritual welfare ; that his visits and conversation were not
relished and not encouraged; that he continued to call at
intervals for a period of eight months without seeing any
favourable tokens of a blessing on his efforts; and that it
was only when the Lord laid upon her the hand of serious
personal affliction that she became alive to her lost, guilty,
and unsaved state, and experienced an awakened concern for
her soul. About six months before her end, the state of her
health became, in some respects, very alarming. Time was
infinitely precious. The thought would seize her mind,
“ she might be suddenly cut off, and if she should die in her
existing state, she was not prepared to meet God !” She
felt, “ when she lay down at night, that before the morning
* Mr. Gamble.


she might open her eyes in hell. ” The fear of death seized
her ; the pangs of hell took hold of her ; she was in an agony
of distress; eternity was about to embrace her in its solemn
realities, and she was not prepared ; the judgment-bar of
heaven was near to her view, and she had no friend to plead
her cause. “Was her soul, then, to be lost for ever ?—would
she go down to the grave without hope ?—was hell to be her
portion 1 ” She was in a whirlpool of dread. And who can
describe the excruciating nature of the pangs which spring
from an awakened conscience—a sense of guilt—a conscious-
ness of not being ready to meet the Judge 1 “A wounded
spirit who can bear 1 ”
In her great extremity, she called to disclose to me her
state of mind, and ask advice. I was not at home.
She was driven to cast herself on Him who is ever pre-
sent to help the pleading soul in the time of need ;
she remembered Him who said, “Come unto Me all ye
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest,” and who never bade any of the seed of Jacob
“ seek His face in vain” ; she retired to her chamber, fell on
her knees, and, with streaming tears of contrition, cried for
mercy, and implored God to save her soul from death. It
was also her prayerfid desire that the Lord would send the
missionary to speak to her about the way of salvation.
With some degree of composure, from having come to the
fountain-head of mercy, she resumed her household duties.
Within about half an hour after her earnest prayer, it was
announced that the missionary called to see her. She was
delighted ; it seemed as if God were hearing and answering
her cry, and she might soon be happy. She was still, how-
ever, in darkness and awful fear ; she was bent, at the same
time, on knowing whether there was any possibility of her
receiving salvation ; she freely unbosomed her feelings ; she
soon encouraged full conversation on the momentous ques-
tion, what she should do to be saved ’I The very depths
of her spiritual nature were stirred within her. With pro-
found emotion and a flood of tears, she said—“ If I were to


die to-night, I would be lost.” She was told, “No anxious
enquirer would be at all likely to be lost.” She answered,
“ The Lord said, no unconverted soul could enter heaven,
and my soul is not saved. ” The missionary’s own experience
was given her for encouragement. “I, too, have felt the
burden of sin, and can now look back to the time when I
was coming from a prayer-meeting. I said to my wife, ‘ I
fear I shall never see heaven.’ She answered, ‘No one in
your state will perish. ’ That same night I was enabled to
believe in Jesus, and I found peace.” Besides conversation, a
portion of Scripture was read, and prayer was offered.
Notwithstanding the means used, she continued a stranger
to peace. Her spirit was still crushed under a sense of
unpardoned guilt. The whole night after the interview
mentioned, she was most painfully exercised on the subject
of her personal interest in Christ. The morning dawned,
and the bright sun shone upon her, but her mind was under
a dense cloud of threatening judgment. She knew not
whither to go, to whom to appeal, or what means to use to
obtain help and peace. The heavens seemed brass, and the
earth iron. All hope failed. She went to and fro in unre-
lieved mourning and grief. She met a Christian friend on
the street. The one grand subject that lay nearest her heart
was the topic of converse. She was directed in plain and
earnest language, in substance, simply to come to J esus ; to
believe on Him with all her heart; to obey His call, and
look to Him alone, and be saved ; to accept His promises ;
to comply with His invitations of love; to lay her burden on
Him ; to bring all her sins to the fountain of His blood,
which wipes out every stain; to trust for the future to Jesus,
and to abandon at once all her fears.
At length, the dark clouds opened, and the bright streaks
of Divine light from the Sun of Righteouness poured down on
her benighted soul. She saw, bright and clear, the love of the
Son of God to her as a sinner. She perceived that salvation
was free—was all of grace. She felt the mysterious influence of
God’s love in Jesus melting the icy coldness of unbelief and


alienation in her heart. She could now trust Christ, and
commit the jewel of her soul’s salvation into His wise and
gracious hand. Every promise she could appropriate. Her
eyes were open to see the glory of the Saviour and His
finished work. There was “ now no condemnation ”to her.
Could she believe the extraordinary fact 1 She could, and
her heart overflowed with inward joy. Was she a child of
grace, and an heir of heaven ? The thought was exhilarating
in the highest degree. She had found Christ. She knew it.
There was no delusion in the matter. She believed in Jesus
do the saving of her soul; Christ was precious. She had
found a treasure of infinite value, and her peace gushed like
a, river. She was a saved sinner—a conqueror—a king’s
daughter. Her joy was unspeakable.
Nor could she conceal the joy she experienced. She could
not help speaking from the fulness of her heart to all her
friends and acquaintances, as they came across her path,
■and telling them what a salvation she had obtained in
resting on Jesus; and it was not in a self-righteous spirit
she manifested her joy, but for the purpose of bring-
ing honour to Him, who had granted her out of His
own free love, such a glorious deliverance. Her experience
was so new, so remarkable, and so blessed, that she was
constrained, like David, to say to all, “ Come and hear, all ye
that fear God, and I will declare what God hath done for
my soul.” In telling her own experience to a devoted
Christian friend, who became a constant attendant during
her illness, she said “ her joy was so wonderful, she felt
anxious to know whether it would ever leave her. Every-
thing seemed new—there was nothing now in the family or
in the business to fret about, nothing to find fault with,
everything happened as it ought to do. ” Her countenance
was brightened; her eye sparkled with inward peace ; the
smile of satisfaction played upon her features; her whole
tone and manner were changed, and indicated the happiness
which reigned in her heart. During one whole week she had
endured a terrible conflict, but a brilliant victory resulted,


and she never ceased to raise the shout of triumphant praise
till she entered the promised land. Weeping was for a night,
but joy came in the morning, and its blessed waves con-
tinued to swell till they broke in hallelujahs on the shores of
Emanuel’s Kingdom in glory. Her darkness was deep and
dreadful while it continued, but the bright rays of redeeming:
love broke upon her soul, and her short path of sorrow
became brighter and brighter till the perfect day of painless,
bliss in heaven.
Soon after her happy change, it pleased her heavenly Father
to lay upon her a stroke of bereavement—she lost her infant
child. The chastisement was without doubt severe ; the
maternal heart was wrung with sorrow; but with her new
experience she was enabled to bow in humble submission
saying, “ Not my will, but thine be done.” She felt sus-
tained now under a painful trial in a way she could not
otherwise have done. She looked on the mercy rather than
the severity displayed in the trying dispensation ; she could
only see wisdom, grace, and love where at another time she
would have seen cause for dissatisfaction and murmuring.
She thought simply of her little one taken away from the
evil of this world to the happiness of another; she felt
solemnized with the idea that her child had just gone the
way in which she was soon to follow. She could not weep
like one who had no hope, but rather humbly rejoice in the
prospect of a speedy re-union in that world where separation
and tears are unknown.
In the highly critical state of her health her medical
attendant advised a change to the country. She cheerfully
submitted. At the same time, she thought more of her
usefulness to others than of receiving benefit to herself.
Her resolution was, “Well, I shall go and speak to my
friends about Jesus.” On her way to her destination she
could not help speaking about the plan of salvation to those
who, though perfect strangers, were near her in the train.
Her heart was full of the idea of redemption obtained
through Christ, and the blessedness of trusting in His merits.


—rising above the ills of life and standing prepared for the
heavenly world. When she reached her place of sojourn her
mind was filled with the one object of commending Christ
and His gospel to the acceptance of others, and seeking to
bring them to the enjoyment of the same happiness as her-
self. In every letter she sent home it was made to appear
that she was still happy in Christ—that her great lamentation
was she was not more useful, and there were so few with
whom she could hold free intercourse on the all-important
things of God—and that her absorbing desire, while she
lived, was to bring others to know the gospel of Christ in its
enlightening and rejoicing power. In the absence of that
full Christian fellowship, which she relished so much at home,
she would retire to a lonely place in the bush, to read the
Scriptures and pour out her soul in prayer. It was the grief
of her heart she should have so much difficulty and so little
success in working for Jesus. She ventured to call at a
cottage situated in a retired position, found a woman within,
and at once began to talk to her about her soul’s everlasting
interests. A good impression had evidently been made, as a
letter followed her to town, inquiring “what she must do to
be saved ? ” Wherever she went she left a hallowed savour of
her presence and influence as a genuine disciple of Christ and
an heir of immortality. She could no more be silent about
Christ’s love to sinners, and the way to be happy in the
prospect of death and judgment, no matter in whose presence
she was, than she could refuse to take her daily food.
After her return to town she felt no improvement in
health, but was greatly cheered by the presence, sympathy,
and fellowship of many Christian friends. Knowing that
the sentence of death was in her, it was her great anxiety to
improve her time for the spiritual benefit of all in whom she
was specially interested. Her chief concern was on behalf of
those of her acquaintance, whom she believed to be in an
unconverted state. To numbers of friends, while she was
able, she wrote letters beseeching them to think of their
soul’s salvation, and to begin at once the great work of pre-


paration for heaven. When she was unable to write she sent
invitations to various persons to visit her, that she might tell
them of the love and mercy of Jesus, point them to her own
happy experience, encourage them to leave off following the
world, entreat them to come with all their heart to Christ,
and implore them most affectionately to make ready and meet
her in glory. It was one of the most affecting sights that
could be witnessed on earth to see her lying with her wasted
frame, hardly fit to speak, within a few days of eternity,
talking and giving counsel, with winning tones and looks, to a
number of acquaintances standing around her dying bed, in
health and strength, it is true, but melted and overwhelmed
with tender emotions, as if they were the only objects of
compassion, while she, enfolded in the very arms of death,
was alone calm and tranquil, her face beaming with love and
joy, and her whole soul absorbed with the one idea of saving
sinners from ruin, and winning them for Christ.
Besides using personal efforts, so far as opportunity offered,
and as long as strength permitted, for the salvation of others,
she would earnestly entreat Christian friends to follow up
the work after she was gone. Sometimes she would send
one direct from her dying chamber to speak about their soul’s,
salvation to individuals whom she believed to be in danger,
and endeavour to woo them without delay to union with
Christ. Those who were near and dear to her, it may well
be believed, had a high place in her anxious and affectionate
desires. “Ihave no doubt,” she would say, “I shall meet
them in heaven. I have given them by faith to Jesus.”
She had every confidence she was soon to meet her two.
departed children in glory.
About three weeks before she died, she asked a devoted
Christian friend, who was attendant and companion till her
end, to read to her, repeating the verse, “In my Father’s
house are many mansions. If it were not so I would have’
told you. Igo to prepare a place for you.” She said “ there
was a mansion prepared for her.” The 14th chapter of John’s
gospel was read, one of her favourite portions of the New


Testament. There was also read the following hymn, in
which she had great delight :
“ In the Christian’s home in glory,
There remains a land of rest;
Where the Saviour’s gone before me,
To fulfil my soul’s request.
On the other side of Jordan,
In the sweet fields of Eden,
Where the tree of life is blooming,
There is rest for you.
“ He is fitting up my mansion,
Which eternally shall stand ;
My stay shall not he transient
In that holy, happy land.
“ Pain nor sickness e’er shall enter,
Grief nor woe my lot sh all share,
But in that celestial centre
I a crown of life shall wear.
“ Death itself shall then he vanquished,
And its sting shall he withdrawn,
Shout with gladness, all ye ransomed ;
Hail with joy the happy morn.
“ Sing, 0 sing, ye heirs of glory,
Shout your triumphs as you go ;
Zion’s gates will open to you,
You shall find an entrance through.”
She kept constantly repeating the last words for a time, as if
enraptured with the idea, “ Sing, O sing, ye heirs of glory,
&c,” and many times during the remainder of her life, did
she break out in this expression of praise, her heart over-
flowing with joy at the prospect, clear and unclouded, of
entering in triumph the heavenly gates. Just as she was
finally laid up, and unable even to leave her room, when she
seemed slightly to rally, her medical attendant said to her,
“ You look so well, you might almost be down stairs.” She
replied, “ I have no wish to go down stairs again—my soul
is saved—l wish to go home to heaven—the fear of death is
gone. ” In all his future visits, she seemed anxious to im-
press his mind with the blessedness of believing in Jesus,
trusting in His love and mercy, and rejoicing in the hope of
glory.


Throughout the following week, her presence was the scene
of continuous praise and joy, except during intervals of quiet
and rest, required by exhausted nature. All the night,
when the cough did not trouble her, and she was not dis-
posed to sleep, she was always speaking of Jesus. There
seemed to be a beautiful harmony between the clear soft
moonlight, and the calmness, light and peace of her soul, in
that poor frame, that lay sunk so low under the blasting in-
fluence of the curse. Sometimes she would speak in the
warmest terms, of her minister’s daily visits, she felt as if
the heavenly happiness she enjoyed was an answer to his
prayers. Then she would have hymns read, and again she
would hear some favourite chapter of the Bible. Thus the time
of her life, which was drawing so quickly to a close, was
spent as if in the very atmosphere of heaven. One night, a
good deal was read to her by a female friend —she had leisure
to listen as the cough was not troublesome, and she was not
able to sleep—a number of revival hymns were read to her,
in which she delighted. She was asked what portion of
Scripture she would like best to hear, the psalms being
suggested. In reply she asked to hear the 103rd read and
then the 42nd. The last was a special favourite, “As the
hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul
after thee, O God ! my soul thirsteth for God, for the living
God ; when shall I come and appear before God h ” With
her whole heart she entered into the spirit of the psalmist,
and made the sentiments he expresses her own. It was in
no formal manner, but in earnest self-application and in
deepest sincerity, she expressed her gratitude for the blessings
of redemption in the language of the psalm :—“Bless the Lord,
O my soul, and all that is within me bless His holy name !
Bless the Lord, 0 my soul, and forget not all his benefits ;
who forgiveth all thy iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases ;
who redeemeth thy life from destruction ; who crowneth
thee with loving kindness and tender mercies. ”
When lying at peace, but unable either to sleep or to
converse with kind friends, she would ask them to sing some


hymns. One of her favourite hymns was “ I’m going
home.”
“ My heavenly home is bright and fair,
Nor p ain nor eath can enter there,
Its glittering towers the sun outshine,
That heavenly mansion shall he mine.
I’m going home, I’m going home,
I’m going home to die no more,
To die no more, to die no more,
I’m going home, to die no more.
My Father’s house is built on high,
Far, far above the stormy sky ;
When from this earthly prison free,
That heavenly mansion mine shall he.
While here a stranger far from home,
Affliction’s waves may round me foam,
And though, like Lazarus, sick and poor,
My heavenly mansion is secure.
Then fail this earth, let stars decline,
And sun and moon refuse to shine,
All nature sink and cease to be—
That heavenly mansion stands for me.”
It was not, however, unmitigated sunshine with her. Her
joy certainly was like an overflowing river. But there was
one exception. The enemy, for wise ends, was allowed to
test her faith. Her physical trouble may have been the
occasion. At all events, after a severe attack of pain, she
felt as if her end was come. She was very low, and thought
it was the last visit she should receive from some of her dear
friends. A dark cloud of doubt as to her real preparation for
heaven came over her mind. Prayer was offered on her
behalf. All present thought she was about to depart. When
she was asked if she still felt happy 1 her reply was unusual ;
“ Well, Ido not know—l think something came over me —I
suppose it was a temptation. ” The answer given her by her
attached female friend was, —“Very likely it was, it might
be one of the last darts of the enemy and the words were
quoted for her comfort —“ There is therefore now no con-
demnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.” She rejoined,
“Yes, I know my sins are washed away,” and she repeated


the words over and over again —“He’ll not be in glory and
leave me behind.” The words of another hymn were sug-
gested to her—
“ When shall these eyes thy heaven-built walls
And pearly gates behold,
Thy bulwarks with salvation strong
And streets of shining gold ?”
In speaking of this temporary depressing experience she
explained, that “ a doubt came across her mind—was she
safe if she died then % Was she really secure 1 Then she
felt as if her face crimsoned over with fear lest there should
be anything insecure in her case, lest it should be any thing
else than a temptation of the enemy.” She afterwards
believed it was an assault of the foe.
In the unspeakable mercy of God the dark cloud passed
away. She lay quiet and prostrate, wasted as she was to a
shadow, every one beside her expecting the undying spirit
would soon depart, and praying that her end might be peace
and triumph. All of a sudden, she seemed to be animated
as if with new life and energy. Her countenance brightened.
Her soul appeared on fire of celestial wonder, adoration, and
joy. It looked as if she had obtained a revelation of the
Redeemer’s love, and of the divine glories of his presence
and fellowship. She grasped the hand of her female friend,
then clasped her two together, and, in an ecstasy of joyful
emotion, raised herself up in bed and cried in perfect
exuberance of feeling—“ O, I am happy now ! O, lam so
happy ! lam going to glory ! lam going to glory to-night!
Glory! Glory!” Exclamations of this kind were long
continued. Her countenance was radiant with the highest
delight. Her eyes glistened with the loftiest rapture. She
gazed steadfastly upwards, as if she was privileged to
penetrate the intervening space and feast her wondering
soul on the glories of her Saviour and God in the highest
heavens. The tones of her voice were clear, shrill, and
strong, far beyond what any one could have believed she was
capable of littering, and were raised higher and higher till


they reached a marvellous intensity. She clasped her hands,
stretching them upwards, as if her utmost wish was at once
to take flight, leaving all the weakness, sorrow, and corrup-
tion of this life for ever behind, and entering on the everlast-
ing enjoyment of the inheritance, that was now so brightly
presented to her enchanted vision. Her loud and enraptured
utterances could at a considerable distance from the
house, while all within, who had lain down to rest, were
aroused, and hastened to witness the extraordinary rapture.
In the midst of her exciting joys, she was perfectly collected
and considerate. She did not by any means forget the dear
friends around her. She seemed to feel as if it was not for
herself only, but also for them, that her enrapturing expe-
rience was granted. She clasped one of them in her arms,,
and said, “ Oh, come with me to heaven ! Will you come
with me to glory 1 Promise me you’ll meet me in glory L
Oh the blessed Saviour, will you not love Him ? Who would
not love the dear Redeemer 1 Oh, is He not good % To
think He would look on a poor creature like me, and pardon
my sin and save my soul! Glory ! glory !” To one and an-
other individually, and to all around her, she looked with a
most benignant and winning smile, and cried with all the
earnestness of a dying love, and with the fullest assurance of
entering, within a few passing moments, into the inconceiv-
able joys of heaven, “Oh, I want to meet you in glory I
Sisters, come with me to glory ! Brothers, come with me to-
glory ! Meet me all in glory ! O what a joyful meeting !
What a glorious day !” One and another she would single
out, and with the most joyful looks and tones express her
gladness at the prospect of meeting them in the happy home
with Jesus and being for ever with the Lord. To the mis-
sionary, for all his persevering and successful interest in her
spiritual welfare, she gave her hand, saying, “I’ll see you in
heaven. I will bid you welcome when you come to glory. I
am praying for you now. ”
She lay back on her pillow completely exhausted. It was
no wonder. No one could have dreamed she was able to-


show such animation and joy. The whole scene was ab-
solutely indescribable, and such as those who witnessed it can
never forget. To be present and witness such a remarkable
experience was like treading on the very portals of the celes-
tial temple, and catching some of the sounds of its lofty and
enrapturing praise. The air that was breathed was hallowed.
The chamber of this departing saint was the very porch of
heaven. The world, with its fascinations, cares, and gilded
pleasures, faded away into its merited nothingness, and all
around within that charmed circle, at this midnight hour, seemed
as if arrayed in the gorgeous hues of heaven’s reflected glory.
To mortals having still to do with health and life, sin and
conflict, temptation and pain, the experience was instructive,
impressive, and solemnizing in the highest degree. It was
well fitted to suggest the aspiration of the Psalmist—“ O
that I had the wings of a dove ! for then would I fly away
and be at rest;” or the prayer taught by the Saviour—
“ Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven. ”
As she lay tranquil and composed, her face still beaming
with the joy that reigned within, it was proposed to her to
read her favourite chapter, the fourteenth of John’s Gospel.
She looked with a bright expression on her countenance and
said, “Won’t you sing first?” She was asked what she
would like them to sing. She replied, “ That sweet hymn
'‘l’m going home to die no more.’” This was sung as she
desired. The Word was also read, and prayer offered.
She also named “ The Christian’s home in glory ” to be sung,
which was done. It seemed as if she could not be sufficiently
filled with the praises of redeeming love and mercy. Reading
Scripture, prayer and praise never wearied her. Another
hymn in which she delighted was sung,—“ Beautiful land of
rest.”
“ Jerusalem, for ever bright,
Beautiful land of rest j
No winter there, nor chill of night,
Beautiful land of rest.


The dripping cloud is chased away,
The sun breaks forth in endless day.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
Beautiful land of rest.
Chorus—Beautiful land, &c.
Jerusalem, for ever free,
Beautiful land of rest;
The soul’s sweet home of liberty,
Beautiful land of rest!
The gyves of sin, the chains of woe,
The ransomed there will never know.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
The beautiful land of rest.
Jerusalem, for ever dear,
Beautiful land of rest!
Thy pearly gates almost appear,
Beautiful land of rest!
And when we tread thy lovely shore,
We’ll sing the song we’ve sung before,
Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
The beautiful land of rest! ”
It was past midnight, while the heavenly exercises of
Christian fellowship still went on. There was no weight on
time’s wheels. It was the chamber of death, but without
the slightest gloom. The Sabbath hours had silently crej)t
upon them, and every one expected, the sufferer herself
especially, that her departure was about to take place from
the day of rest on earth, to the everlasting day of sweet repose
in heaven. Many a longing desire she expressed, that Jesus
would come and take her to himself. She could not believe
that the night would pass, without her being received into
her Saviour’s bosom.
She fully realized her position, and so far from dreading
dissolution, or shrinking reluctantly from a bed in the dust,
it is impossible fully to express the ardent longings of her
soul for the approaching crisis. She was as perfectly assured
of coming glory in the presence of her redeeming God as any
person can be of a present possession. That which was a
house of corruption and death to the natural sense, became
to her, through faith in Christ, the very gateway of Para-
dise. The real feeling of her heart was, “ Though I walk


through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for Thou art with me ; Thy rod and Thy staff, they
comfort me.”
Nor was she exclusively absorbed in the prospect of her
deliverance from all the ills of this mortal state, and her
elevation to the infinite beauty and glory of Eman-
nuel’s person and kingdom. She always felt that her own
happiness and that of others were bound up together. Not
content with an assurance of her own personal salvation, she
sought most earnestly to be confident of the preparation of
■others for the joys of the redeemed. Hence, impressed with
the nearness of her own introduction into the habitations of
the redeemed, she rejoiced in the prospect of friends she loved
meeting her soon in glory. With the mansions of bliss fully
in view, and expecting every hour to be conveyed to their
possession and enjoyment, she delighted in the hymn, “ Shall
we gather at the river !”
“ Shall we gather at the river,
Where bright angels’ feet have trod,
With its crystal tide for ever
Flowing by the throne of God ?
Yes, we’ll gather at the river,
The beautiful, the beautiful river—
Gather with the saints at the river,
That flows by the throne of God.
On the margin of the river,
Washing up its silver spray,
We will walk and worship ever,
All the happy golden day.
Ere we reach the shining river,
Lay we every burden down ;
Grace our spirits will deliver,
And provide a robe and crown.
At the smiling of the river—
Mirror of the Saviour’s face—
Saints, whom death will never sever,
Lift their songs of saving grace.
Soon we’ll reach the silver river,
Soon our pilgrimage will cease,
Soon our happy hearts will quiver
With the melody of peace.”


The Sabbath morn was well advanced, before she evinced
any inclination to give up those exercises in which her soul
so greatly delighted, and which she believed would prove the
prelude to her employment in the inner sanctuary on the
other side the veil. Death, however, was not to be immedi-
ate, as she fully expected ; wasted nature was not yet quite
exhausted ; there were still a few days awaiting her on earth,
contrary to all expectation, and against the earnest longings
of her spirit ; there is still work for her to do ; she has a work
of suffering to complete, and consequently a work of patience ;
she has a work of testimony and a work of influence, which
must be finished before she goes hence ; the cup which her
heavenly Father gives her requires to be drained. Mean-
while, after the animating, if not exciting, experience of the
night, she sought to compose herself to a little rest, pillow-
ing her soul on the bosom of Jesus. It was impossible her
raptures should continue ; her feeble frame could not have
sustained them long. Besides, it is not consistent with God’s
all-wise arrangements that any of His people should, in the
present state, be blessed with a continued enjoyment of high
absorbing contemplation of invisible glories. Paul was
caught up to paradise, but his spirit could not continue
there while he was still in his mortal state. The dreams and
visions of the Lord were to him transient, not permanent.
John’s revelation was extended, and yet it was confined to a
small portion of his long life, while he was a prisoner in
Patmos, and just before the end of his days. The bright
refreshing seasons of the church, when the Holy Spirit is
poured out from on high, are only temporary, not the general
rule ; and so it was with the subject of this memoir. There
can be no doubt, however, that her lofty flights, left most
happy effects, both on her own spirit, and on that of others.
Her faith was wonderfully strengthened,—her peace continued
to increase in the rapidity of its course, towards the infinite
ocean of heaven’s life and gladness.
Feeling that her foretaste of the joys of paradise, indicated
the nearness of the period when the full cup would be put to


her lips, she looked on every moment of her remaining time
as given to be improved for the benefit of others. What
could she do for Christ, and for the souls of her fellow-
creatures 1 was her all-absorbing question. She could not be
idle now —her tongue, the only instrument she could employ
in the service of Jesus, she must diligently use for the sal-
vation of others.
The first expression that falls from her, in speaking to
inquiring friends on the Lord’s day is, “ The Lord is sparing
me a little longer—He has more work for me to do on earth
—I am quite disappointed I was not taken away last night—
I fully expected I would have been—there is some good and
wise purpose to be served by my living a little longer.” Not
a word of murmuring escaped her lips ; on the contrary her
joy was continuous, and at times, exuberant ; she fully
realized the experience enjoyed by the Apostle Paid, —she
“ rejoiced in the Lord always.” In spite of suffering and
exhaustion, her few last days on earth were a scene of con-
stant triumph.
Nor is she contented to have a continual feast of joyful
experience herself, she feels she must redeem the time for the
salvation of others. To all her Christian friends on visiting
her, she expresses her feelings with perfect freeness and
warmth, in regard to inward peace, the heavenly glory
awaiting her, the extraordinary love of Jesus, the affection
she cherished to them, and more especially to those who had
ministered to her spiritual wants, and the assured hope she
had of soon seeing them in glory. To those who come at the
call of friendship and sympathy, but who are not yet recon-
ciled to God by faith in Christ’s atoning death, she makes
the most solemn and impressive appeals to become decided,
and surrender themselves wholly to God without delay ; and
in the most encouraging and affectionate tones, charges
them to meet her in heaven. Her appeals were most
awakening, sounding as if they came from the depths of
eternity, and never failed to melt into tears those who heard
them.


But it was not enough that she had an opportunity of
speaking to those who casually visited her. There were
several acquaintances, in whose eternal welfare, for various
reasons, she was specially concerned. She sent messages
that she wished to see them. She felt her end was at hand,
and she'could not be satisfied with herself, till she had an
opportunity of speaking to them about their soul’s salvation
before she departed.
To these friends she speaks with failing breath, but not
with failing earnestness, telling them, “ how happy she is, —
that she is going home, —that Jesus has washed her sins in
His blood, —that He is able and willing to save them as well
as her, —that she hopes they will now come to Christ, —and
that they will make ready to meet her in glory. ” Then she
would single them out and address them individually. To
one she says : “ O, how happy am I ! what would I do with-
out Christ, now when lam dying 2 Will you not trust in
Jesus ; he is so kind, so good, so ready to pardon.” The
reply is given ; “I know the way of salvation, but I cannot
feel that I am saved.” She rejoins : “O, it is so simple,
you have only to believe with all the heart that Jesus Christ
died for you, and you will be saved. ”
In these individualizing addresses she looked with the
intensest earnestness and the tenderest love, while the party
spoken to could not fail to be deeply moved. Addressing
another friend who was married about the same time as
herself, and in whom she felt a special interest, she said ;
“ Well, M , how is it to be 2 We have long known each
other on earth ; are we to meet in Heaven 2 ” The reply
was ; “I hope so.” She then urged ; “The change must
be now ; you must prepare now. Don’t wait till it is too
late.”
At other times, she was in raptures of joy, more or less.
It seemed as if she had bright seraphic views of the Redeemer,
and could not sufficiently extol His name. “ Kind, loving
Jesus ! O, is He not good 2 who would not speak for Jesus !
O, that I had more strength to speak for Jesus ! O, that all


the people round might be gathered near my bed that I
might tell them of Jesus ! ”
Again she would say: “0, I wish I could know that all my
friends and acquaintances were safe in Christ before I die ! ”
To a friend she said, with emotions of deep and tender
interest ; “O, I hope to meet you in glory ! Promise me
that you will meet me in glory ; give your heart to Jesus,
and He will pardon and save.”
To another, who had received advice from her before she
was entirely confined to her room, in explaining the way
of salvation and enforcing its simplicity, she said : “It is
like a person carrying a heavy load up hill, and then just
dropping it. ” She anxiously pressed upon her the necessity
of “coming to Christ, —coming with all speed, and then be
happy as she was.”
Her heart was always full of praise, and frequently did it
overflow in accents of warmest admiration and love to her
God and Saviour. Then she would repeat the words ;
“ Praise God, from whom all blessings flow;
Praise Him, all creatures here below ;
Praise Him above, ye heavenly host;
Praise Father, Son, a»d Holy Ghost! ”
She wished she could praise God without ceasing. Day and
night, if she had only strength, she could exhaust with
praises to God and the Lamb. Sometimes during the night,
after lying quiet for a while, she would break the silence
with such expressions as these : —“ 0 that He would take me
home ! ”
“ I long to he with Jesus,
Amid the heavenly throng ;
And sing with saints His praises—
To learn the angels’ song.”
The glorious theme of J esus’ love was the one of all others
on which she delighted to dwell. This was at all times
uppermost in her thoughts. It was like her meat and drink
to talk to her friends of the grace and mercy of her Redeemer.


“ He is so loving, so kind, so good,” were expressions that
came freely from her lips. By way of extolling Jesus, a
quotation was made to her by one, “ There is a friend that
sticketh closer than a brother ; ” and the remark was made,
that “there was much we could do for one another during
life, but when we came to the brink of death, then it was
Jesus alone who could help us across the Jordan.” She
replied at once by a quotation from one of the hymns :
;; There’s a Friend above all others—
Oh, how He loves!
His is love beyond a brother’s ?
Oh, how He loves !
Earthly friends may pain and grieve ns,
One day kind, the next deceive us ;
But this Friend will never leave us—
Oh, how He loves! ”
The Word of God was exceedingly precious to her. It
had now a charm it never used to possess. She saw it with
new eyes. She felt as if it were armed with fresh power. It
was “A light to her feet and a lamp to her path.” It was
the staff by which she was sustained while passing through
the valley of the shadow of death. It was the hidden manna
on which her soul feasted. The book was esteemed by her
as inexpressibly more precious than any treasure of time ; yet
there were some portions for which she had a special relish.
Among these, as has been mentioned, was the 14th chapter
St. John’s Gospel. She was always pleased to have this
portion read and explained, and it did not matter how often.
One verse in particular afforded her the highest grati-
fication to dwell upon in her meditation. It was
the following ; —“ If I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again and receive you unto myself, that
where lam there ye may be also.” After having revolved
this sweet promise in her thoughts for a while, on one occa-
sion she fell into a slumber. In her temporary sleep she
dreamed about the promise, and thought the Saviour was
coming that day to take her home to Himself. She imagined
she saw Jesus just opening the heavens to come and receive


her. The very idea of the Saviour coming to take her to
her heavenly mansion gave her “joy unspeakable.”
On several occasions during the last week of her life, after
the first extraordinary rapture which she experienced, she
was elevated far above any ordinary standard of spiritual
enjoyment. One day, in the writer’s presence, she broke into
a perfect ecstacy of delight, when the idea presented itself
vividly before her mind that she was just about to depart
and be with Jesus. Her expressions, gesticulations, and
enrapturing hopes were all of the same character as those
already related. The scene was such as is rarely , witnessed
in this vale of tears. The system of truth which could
inspire the mind with such peace, such joy, such triumphant
hope in the midst of such physical exhaustion and trouble,
must be divine. She was already within the jaws of that
enemy who has been the terror of the human race for six
thousand years, and yet was she not only free from every
particle of fear, but was exalted to the highest pinnacle of
triumph. She could challenge the foe to do his worst. She
would not deign even to look him in the face, far less to
parley with him. The poison was extracted from the serpent.
Hay, his head was bruised under her feet.
Death to her was abolished by the power of her redeeming
God, and she felt no need to fight with a shadow, or even to
notice a nonentity. Witness that wasted shadow in human
form in that upper room. Death seems to have triumphed
to the fullest extent of his power, except that a mere spark
of life remains not quite extinguished ; and yet there is
shining forth from the midst of that wreck and ruin which
you see occasioned by the arm of death, a gem of exquisite
beauty, a jewel of untarnished splendour, a crown of
immortal grandeur. All around her are in tears and distress,
though in health and strength, as in deep sympathy they
gaze on the merciless oppression and ghastly effects of
death s vengeful influence. She is not only unmoved, but in
the very highest conceivable enjoyment, fier speech is all
of blessedness and victory. “ O death, where is thy sting?”


Her songs are hallelujahs. Her emotions are raptures.
Her feelings are ecstacies. She is hardly alive —scarcely of
the earth. She is more in heaven. She is not so much in
as out of the body. The atmosphere of heaven is more her
element than the air men breathe. She is more familiar
with the glories of the kingdom above than with the objects
of sense and time.
She had no care, no anxiety about family, about business,
about any worldly subject whatever. “I do not trouble
about anything. I have given all up to Jesus.” The bosom
of Jesus was the pillow on which she constantly reclined.
The love of Jesus was the bed of roses, the garden of spices
in which she enjoyed an all-absorbing happiness. As she
gradually sunk in bodily weakness, her spirit rose in high
Christian experience. To one who, she believed, was a
stranger to the grace of the gospel, she endeavoured to con-
vey in the most delicate maner an idea of the power and
privilege of believing as exemplified in her own case. Ac-
cordingly she expressed her surprise that she had lived so
long in such a state of weakness, and when from day to day
she seemed so near her end —“ 0,1 am so happy. It is such
a blessed thing to know that your sins are all forgiven, that
you are going home. If every one was as happy as I am,
they would not want much of the doctor’s medicines. O,
who would die without Jesus 1”
Sometimes she would spend the whole night, when she was
unable to sleep, and when a congenial Christian friend was
watching beside her, in hearing the Word, in prayer, in con-
versation as she was able, and in listening to favourite hymns.
At intervals she would seem as if favoured with glimpses of
the glory to which she was drawing near. Frequently she
would make the remark, “ Jesus is with me,”as if his presence
with her in a peculiar sense— ‘ ‘Do you not see Him ? He is
here waiting for me. ”
As she drew near her end, her cough at one time was very
troublesome, and seemed painful and severe. The friends
endeavoured to soothe her with their sympathy. She said,


•“ I think you feel it more than I do. I don’t feel it. lam
so filled with Jesus.” A relative who had been a constant
■attendant said to her, when she seemed to wear so long,
“Jean, you might live some time yet.” She replied, “My
jprecious Jesus! He will not keep me waiting long, now.
I am ready and longing for Him. He will soon take me
home.”
At the beginning of the week she was in the highest ecstacy
■of joyful hope, believing she was within a very few hours
•of seeing Jesus face to face, being with Him to behold His
glory, and then dwelling for ever with the Lord. She has
lingered on, however, under the gradual sinking of bodily
strength till near the end of the week, beyond all human
anticipation. Her spirit has been at the same time marvel-
lously sustained in the purest and loftiest flights of celestial
delight. On Friday she is extremely low, able to speak in
the faintest whisper. She asked an intimate friend who
■called, “Do you think I will be long!” The reply was, “No,
I do not think you can be long.” A friend standing by
said, “ If it will be any comfort to you, I may tell you that
the doctor said that you cannot live longer than over
to-night.” At once, in a transport of joy, she clasped her
wasted hands. The feebleness of expiring nature seemed to
be exchanged in a moment for spirit and strength, and she
•actually cried in tones which otherwise would have been
■deemed impossible, ‘ ‘ Glory! Glory! I’m going to glory! I’m
going to Jesus ! 0, my precious Jesus! He is coming. He
will soon take me. He is here. 0, is He not good?”
It was her earnest desire that her friend the missionary
should be present at her departure. About two o’clock next
morning she sent for him, thinking her end was come. After
remaining for a few hours, comforting and cheering her with
passages of Scripture, hymns and prayer, seeing she revived,
he left. At parting she said, “If we should never again
meet on earth, we shall soon meet in heaven. ” She lingered
till the forenoon of Saturday, 29th March, when the end
which she so ardently desired arrived. She fell asleep in


Jesus, at the age of 31 years. Her latest breath was peace
and victory. Her last words were, “ Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Dear friends, farewell. We will soon meet again
where there will be no parting. ”
Of all questions that can engage the attention of man, the
most important is, “ What shall?! do to be saved?”—and the
most gladdening information that can be conveyed to his
heart is that which is expressed in the Scripture answer,
“ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shaltbe saved.”
The happy death recorded is an illustration of the efficacy of
the gospel plan of deliverance from misery and ruin. This
scheme of happiness is absolutely unfailing ; no one was ever
disappointed who gave it an honest trial.
The way of preparing for eternity to one is the way to all.
God is one ; He is unchangeable ; His mind can never be
distracted between opposite, irreconcilable, and contradictory
plans. “ There is one God, and one Mediator between God
and man—the man Christ Jesus.” “ This is the stone which
was set at nought of you builders, which is become the Head
of the corner.” “Neither is there salvation in any other;
for there is none other name under heaven given among men
whereby we must be saved.”
Unity of designis seenin nature. There is but oneway of illu-
minating the globe—one way of watering the earth and making
it fruitful—one way of supporting the life of man and beast. In
the moral government of God, unity of purpose is equally
apparent. There is only one law of health and happiness to
the whole human race, and that remains unchanged through-
out all generations. Oneness of scheme is specially to be seen
in redemption. The teaching of Scripture in regard to ruin
by sin, and redemption by divine grace, is the same from
beginning to end. Neither is there ever an uncertain sound
uttered in the Bible in regard to the necessity of repentance,
faith, and new obedience on the part of man in order to sal-
vation. The path to happiness and heaven is an old path,
and it is always safe and sure ; it never disappoints—never
deceives.


The subject of this memoir found the purest, the highest,
and realest happiness whenever she took the right way. And
it was not a novel scheme she tried. It was the patent plan.
No other could have suited her case. No other can meet the
wants of guilty humanity. The method of mercy proposed
to Adam, to Enoch, to Noah, was the same as that revealed
to Job, to Moses, to David, and to all the prophets and
believers of former times. The Old Testament and the New
Testament plan is one and the same. That which secures
the humiliation of man and the exaltation of God is the
right one, and it invariably prompts the exclamation, “ Not
unto us, not unto us, but Unto Thy name give glory, for Thy
mercy and Thy truth’s sake.” The proclamation from
heaven by angelic messengers was “ Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will to men. ” And when
anyone listens to the proclamation and looks to the “child
bom,” “the Son given,” and the bleeding sacrifice offered,
he smites his breast and cries for mercy, while his soul is
filled to overflowing with admiration, thankfulness and joy
as he embraces a free pardon and the hope of eternal life
presented in the Gospel. The Lord bless this narrative to
the joy and rejoicing of many precious souls, and to His
name be all the glory ! Amen.
“ Let all that dwell above the sky,
Or on the earth below,
With fields and floods and ocean’s shores
To thee their homage show.
“ To Him who sits upon the throne,
The God whom we adore !
And to the Lamb that once was slain,
Be glory evermore.”




