

JUBILEE
OF
South Australian Journalism.
THE REGISTER'S FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY.
Reprinted from the South Australian Register,
of June 3, 1887.
ADELAIDE:
W. K. THOMAS & CO., GRENFELL STREET.
1887.




JUBILEE
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN JOURNALISM.
To-day (Friday, Juno 3, 3887) is the
fiftieth anniversary of the South Jus'
tralian Register , and of the foundation
of the newspaper press of the colony.
On that day fifty years ago the first
number of the Register issued on this
side the globe was published in Hindley-
street by the pioneer Pressmen of the
colony, the name of one of whom
was the same as that which
appears in the imprint which the news-
paper now bears. Of the struggles,
failures, and successes which the first
journalists of the colony experienced an
interesting account will be found else-
where. It is to the Register itself that we
wish to refer in this place. No record
of a lifetime could be so full of memories
as is its fifty years’ retrospect of journal-
istic work. The shelves that hold the
ponderous yearly and half-yearly volumes
include the only complete record now in
existence of the material, social, and
religious history of South Australia. The
leaves are yellow with age upon which
writers and compositors and printers
wrought out the work of their lives, for
in this colony it may be said that the first
generation of workers is now practically
extinct. Here and there a veteran re-
mains of the early days, and it is largely
to do honour to these old pioneers that
anniversaries such as the present are
celebrated. But the first few volumes
are the work of heads and of hands
that have long since been at rest.
Few daily papers in the British Empire
have had so long and varied a record as
the Register. It is older than three out
the six great London morning dailies, and
probably there is not more than one
journal in Australia which can point to so
long a period of uninterrupted publica-
tion. The newspaper Press in its present
form is, it must be remembered, a com-
paratively recent development, and of
those journals which existed in 1837 only
a few possessing the rare adaptability of
organic growth have lived throughout all
the vicissitudes of modern improvements.
The complete and unbroken fifty years’
file of the Register is therefore a remarkable
rarity.
What varied mementos the volumes in-
clude ! Here we have preserved the
records of the birth of a now important
colony, of half a century of growing com-
merce and increasingly diversified labour ;
of religious and intellectual struggles and
advancements and of sports and amuse-
ments. Within these volumes of the
Register are preserved the public an-
nouncements of the deaths of at
least one generation of the South Aus-
tralian inhabitants, and of the births
and marriages of those who are now old
or middle-aged men and women. The
newspaper has indeed been a “register for


the colony. Every occurrence of public
importance has been duly chronicled, and
in times of discussion the various phases
of each debate have been set forth with
minute clearness. Ample room for con-
troversy indeed there must have been, to
judge by the enormous number of subjects
dealt with and the wide range of opinions
expressed in correspondence and public
and Parliamentary discussions. The paper
has been to the people of the colony what the
Areopagus was to Corinth, or the Forum
to ancient Rome, the common ground
upon which public announcements were
made and discussed with all the ardour of
a free people. As a rule, through all the
vicissitudes of the colony the Register
has maintained its characteristic of breadth
of sympathy. No genuine grievance
which might have been wholly or partially
redressed by publicity has been left un-
noticed —always provided that the matter
was one of genuine public interest. This
at least has been the object aimed at,
and in a fifty years’ retrospect it
is gratifying to note how steadily it
has been kept in view.
The Register has grown with South
Australia. It would be difficult, pro-
bably impossible, to point to any place in
the world where the progress of the
country and of its Press has been so
closely identified. The success of one
year has been, so to speak, built
upon the labours of the preceding
years; and while individuals who have
been connected with the journal have
occasionally grown weary of journalistic
work and the constant strain which it
involves, still the newspaper has always
gone on, growing with the growth of the
colony and strengthening with its
strength. A newspaper, indeed, has a cor-
porate existence, like a nation or a society,
and in a young colony it is so closely
dependent upon the measures which it
advocates that the necessity for mutual
trust and confidence between the people
and the Press becomes most especially
apparent. Loyalty to the colony and to
the best interests of its inhabitants may
well be the watchword of a newspaper
such as the Eegister, for in such a
place as South Australia the country
and its representative Press will
sink or rise together. A Minister
of the Crown may occasionally, like a
quack doctor, prescribe or recommend
remedies whose evil after-effects may be
of ten times greater consequence than the
immediate apparent good wrought by
them. Momentary applause may be all
that is sought for, because the Minister
and the quack doctor alike may be here
to-day and gone to-morrow. But the
conductors of a newspaper whose
prosperity rises and falls with that of the
people by whom it is read must, of
necessity, feel unceasingly a deep sense
of responsibility, and act accordingly.
Sincerity and a regard for truth thus
become traditions to be most scrupu-
lously adhered to, and rigidly insisted
upon. The interests of no section and no
set of prejudices are t® be allowed to
interfere with the strict performance by
the journalist of his duty in this matter.
True liberty, of course, lies in the
exercise of all rights and privileges,
which do not interfere with those of the
community. Public criticism, therefore,
should be guided and controlled by con-
sideration for the public wellbeing. If
this rule be acted upon in all sincerity,
the Press, like the Legislature and the
Courts, will take its share in affording
the best safeguards to the liberty of the
subject. The truth of this has not
always been recognised in Australia —
as the history of the Begister itself
can testify ; and even in the
present days of enlightenment, fear-
less criticisms of public actions have
occasionally entailed petty attempts at
coercion. But throughout every expe-
rience the Register has enjoyed the
support and sympathy of the community.
The newspaper is a friend in each
family. The Pressman who collects with
the aid of phonography and telegraphy
the news of the day from close at hand
and from distant parts of the world comes
mentally into contact and brings his
readers into contact with thousands upon
thousands whose very names he will
never know. In thus working he is a


benefactor to his kind, and his best re-
compense, and the best recompense
of all who devote the hours of
night to the duty of bringing
out each successive number of the paper is
to know that their labours are not unappre-
ciated. This appreciation is, after all,
the best test of success, and it has never
been wanting in the case of the Register.
Fifty years of progress have made the
Press of South Australia what it is, and
colonists who travel in foreign
countries are not ashamed of the
comparison with journals in other
parts of the world. The past is
an augury of the future, and the best
endeavours of the Register will be in
future, as they have been during the past
half-century, directed towards the true
advancement of South Australia.
Ic is a rare thing in the history
of journalism for newspaper enter-
prise to be contemporaneous with
settlement, and even the originality
of the adventurous Englishman has
only once gone so far as to con-
ceive the idea of starting a news-
paper to represent the views and aspira-
tions of an unborn community. In the
case of Australia the older colonies of
New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land were years without a news-
paper, and even go-ahead Victoria was
content to wait for a time before her
Press was represented in even so primitive
a form as in a manuscript journal.
To the promoters of the South Aus-
tralian Gazette and Colonial Register ,
Messrs. Robert Thomas and George
Stevenson, is due the credit of furnishing
a unique example of pioneer journalism.
It is fifty-one y ears since those gentlemen
originated the idea of starting the news-
paper referred to. The first number,
which was printed “ for the proprietors by
William Clowes & Sons, Duke-street,
Stamford-street, Lambeth, London,” ap-
peared on June 18, 1836, some time before
the appointment of the first Governor.
The history of the Register is pre-
eminently the history of South Aus-
tralia, for the newspaper was not
only the forerunner of settlement, but
it has been associated with all the ups
and downs of our colonial history. It has
shared in the vicissitudes of the province,
participating in its prosperity, and being
sympathetically affected by its adversity. It
has photographed the varied events of each
day as they succeeded one another in un-
ending rotation ; recorded the hopes and
fears, the successes and the failures of its
people ; noted alike their rejoicings and
their complaints ] given utterance to their
opinions, and served as the battlefield upon
which contests have been fought out which
are none the less noteworthy because
they have been bloodless, and because
the issues involved have had to do not with
national existence or national aggrandize-
ment, but with the laying on a true and
safe basis the foundations of a free and
well-ordered State occupied by a con-
tented and prosperous people. In the
early numbers of the paper old colonists
find embalmed the history of occurrences
in which they themselves took a pro-
minent part, while their descendants
can trace there the accounts of
incidents which took place either
before their birth or in their unen-
lightened infancy. Step by step the
Register has advanced, growing with
the growth of the community. On
December 2, 1878, it reached its ten
thousandth number, and to-day marks
its twelve thousand six hundred and fifty-
third issue.
It is just fifty years ago to-day
since No. 2, Vol. 1., was pub-
lished. It was popularly supposed
—indeed, the belief is cherished now
by many old colonists—that it first saw
light under a giant eucalyptus at Glenelg
—not the historical “Temple Bar” tree—
but as a matter of .fact it was printed in
a pise building erected upon an acre in
Bindley-street —one of the first structures
of the kind raised on the site of the
future City of Adelaide. This house or
hut, as it was colloquially termed, was
at the time deemed quite a triumph
of architecture as compared with the
rude reed huts which the first


settlers had to content themselves with.
The plant was rather extensive for a com-
mencement, consisting as it did of about
half a ton of bourgeois and brevier type, a
good fount of small pica for printing official
documents, and a quantity of general
jobbing type ; it comprised also a demy
Stanhope press and a wooden press of the
most antiquated pattern. The bulk of
the type was stowed away in the Africaine
for ballast, and the bills of lading pro-
bably not having been properly checked a
large portion of it was carried on to Hobart
Town by the Africaine, whence, in course
of time, it was brought back. The print-
ing presses and a few cases of jobbing
type were left behind and landed on
the seabeach at Holdfast Bay, and thus a
little Government printing which was
actually required by the “departments”
was executed. In the ordinary course
of the original plan No. 2 of the
Register should have come close upon the
heels of the proclamation of the
province, but owing to this contretemps
the issue was delayed. Respecting the
initial act of official printing, the late
Mrs. Robert Thomas—who took so active
and useful a part in the journalistic
department of the paper that she might
well have been classed as one of the firm
of Robert Thomas & Co.—says, in her in-
valuablemanuscriptrecordsof pioneerexpe-
riences now in the possession of her
grandson—“ We built a rush hut a short
distance from our tents for the better
accommodation of part of our family, but
they had not long occupied it before
everything was suddenly ordered to be
cleared out to make room for the printing
press, in order to print the proclamation
of the colony, and in this place (about
12 feet square) the first printing
in South Australia was produced.”
This was on December 20, 1836.
On Decjmber 30 she adds :—“ This day
Mr. Thomas received orders to prepare
his printing press for the proclamation,
which would be required immediately,
and in consequence we were obliged to
hire a truck to bring up one of the presses
and the type, which with some other
packages still remained on the beach,
where we had intended they should
remain till our final settlement, as we did
not expect to commence printing until
then.” “We remained at Glenelg,”
Mrs. Thomas afterwards writes, “till
June 1, 1837, when we removed to a town
acre of our own in Adelaide, No. 56,
Hindley-street, where Mr. Thomas had
previously been making arrangements
for a printing establishment.” With
reference to an incident intimately
connected with the same circumstances
she remarks ;—“ The first parcel of letters
which left the colony was dispatched from
our tent at Glenelg. It having been in-
timated that a ship was about to sail for
Sydney we were requested to receive the
letters of such of the settlers who wished
to write to their friends in England, and
accordingly many availed themselves of
the opportunity and brought their com-
munications to us, all of which I enclosed
in a brown holland bag, the best I had for
the purpose, and being carefully sealed it
was sent to Sydney to be thence con-
veyed to England. So that a rush hut
was the first printing-office, and a canvas
tent the first post-office in South Aus-
tralia.” And she might have justly
added, “and the pioneer printer’s wife
was the pioneer postmistress.”
The difficulties that had to be faced in
what would appear now to be a simple
undertaking, that of producing six pages
of single demy, were, under the peculiar
circumstances, most formidable. In these
days of magnificent mechanical appliances
for printing, competent compositors, and
skilled reporters it is hard to realize how
much anxiety was felt in providing for the
successful issue of that pioneer paper, but
in addition to the naturally primitive
arrangements there were other hard
matters to contend with. One of the
printers, a young man named Osborne,
was lost in trying to cross Kangaroo
Island, and was never seen in life again.
It was almost impossible to procure hands
at all, and to get experienced men was
out of the question. Such a professional
as a skilled reporter was then unknown,
and Mr. Thomas and his partner had to
do the best they could with the limited






staff they had, assisted by the lady
members of the family. Nevertheless in
that inconvenient pise building in
Hindley-street, and under circumstances
calculated to damp the enthusiasm of any
man but a genuine pioneer, the first
number of the newspaper and offieial
organ was given to the little world of
South Australia, and successfully, as the
character of the sample testifies.
It was intended, even at first, that the
paper should come out weekly, but
events were otherwise ordered, and
this is the erratic record of
its earlier appearances June 3,
July 8, July 29, August 12, September
16, October 4, October 19, and November
11. The reasons for the irregularity
are not far to seek, but the
Editor was sometimes at his wits’
end to pacify irate subscribers. One
colonist of the time remarks—“ The
Editor thus apologized on November 11,
1837 :— 1 The late appearance of the Re-
gister has been occasioned by the miscon-
duct of a journeyman printer, who has
thought proper to desert his employment
at a moment while engaged in making up
or arranging the types for the present
number. There are a certain set who
have not scorned to tamper in a most
scandalous manner with our printer’s
servant, but if they have succeeded in
enticing him away from his duty they
will not escape the exposure which awaits
them for their pitiful and disgraceful con-
duct.’ ” This indignant protest ends with
a pathetic appeal to the public to bear
with any future possible irregularities.
The Editor’s fears were prophetic, for the
next number was not issued till January
6, 1838, leaving a good gap from No-
vember 11; and again an ill-conditioned
journeyman is blamed. He seems to have
been practically indispensable, for the
Editor bewails his loss because he cannot
be replaced, and again pours out the vials
of his wrath upon those who enticed the
man away. The Editor did his best with the
aid of the late Mr. William Kyffin Thomas,
then a lad of 16, who had had two months’
experience in a printing-office in London,
and who at this early age began a practical
connection with the paper which only
ended with his death some forty years later.
Fortunately at this juncture several com-
positors arrived from the old country,
and regularity of issue was thus ensured.
In April, 1840, Messrs. Thomas and
Stevenson purchased from Mr. W. C. Cox,
the proprietor, the plant and copyright of
the Adelaide Chronicle , which thus became
incorporated with the Register, its day of
publication being Wednesday and that
of the Register Saturday. The Chronicle
was edited by Mr. J. F. Bennett,
whom very old colonists will re-
member. He was a man of “ many
parts.” On the Chronicle becoming
defunct through the depression of the
times, Mr. Bennett accepted the position
of mate in one of the Adelaide liners—a
brig of some 200 tons —and coming again
to the colony in the “ good times” engaged
in mercantile pursuits for a period, when
he again returned to his native country,
entered the army, and eventually attained
the position of Major. It was not long
before the Editor of the t egister got into
hot water with the Administrator of the
Government by reason of the bold and un-
compromising fashion in which the paper
denounced what were regarded as errors
and abuses in the management of affairs,
and his partner, Mr. Thomas, was in
consequence deposed from his office of
Government Printer. Mr, Thomas went to
England to make a personal appeal to the
Imperial authorities, but returned without
having obtained the redress he sought.
For a time indeed the prospects of the
paper grew blacker and blacker. Seeing
that the colony was popularly believed to
be “going to the dogs,” and salaries for
the most part were “ owing,” one can
imagine that the Register must have had
as hard a struggle with backward sub-
scribers as the proverbial backwoods news-
paper, where the proprietor had to take
out his subscriptions in kind because
he could not get it in cash.
The first number printed in the
colony contained all the official
announcements under the heading of
the “S.A. Government Gazette,” and
the general news under the title of “The


Colonial Register.” Apart from its his-
torical value this number has points of a
peculiar interest, inasmuch as it contains
lists of the original sales of town acres,
with the names of the purchasers, prices
paid, &c. In this number we have, under
date Glenelg, December 28, 1836, “His
Excellency JohnHindmarsb, Knight of the
Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order, Cap-
tain of the Royal Navy, produced in
Council this day His Majesty’s Order
in Council, dated February 23, 1836,
erecting South Australia into one pro-
vince, and constituting the Council
thereof.” Then we find the Orders in
Council, and names familiar as household
words as those of dead and gone but highly
esteemed pioneers. An announcement
as to the establishment of the Government
exhorts the colonists to “conduct them-
selves on all occasions with order and
quietness, duly to respect the laws,” &c.,
and “ by a course of industry and
sobriety, by the practice of sound
morality and a strict observance of the
ordinances of religion, to prove themselves
worthy to be the founders of a great and
free colony.” We find also that it was
the Governor’s firm determination to
punish with exemplary severity all acts of
violence or injustice practised or attempted
against the natives, who were “to be
considered under the safeguard of the law
as the colonists themselves, and equally
entitled to the privileges of British sub-
jects.” Unfortunately the inevitable fate
of gradual extinction follows the aboriginal
inhabitants. Iu reference to the natives
the paper says “ It is a source of much
gratification to find that the natives of
that part of the province chosen for the
first settlement are far superior to the
ordinary race of New Hollanders. Their
friendly dispositions, honesty, and in-
offensive conduct may fairly set at rest all
the fears that might at first have been
entertained. It ia to be hoped that an
attempt to bring them within the pale of
civilization judiciously begun and firmly
conducted will soon be made.
That the early settlers fully valued the
advantages of education is proved by the
statement that the “South Australian
School Society ia already fully organized
and in vigorous prosecution,” and the
pioneer Press lends its aid by earnestly
advocating the cause thus taken in hand
by the Association. In these times
of disturbance in the labour market it
seems strange to read of the labour ques-
tion coming prominently to the front in
the newspaper of a colony only a few
months old, but in this “broadsheet” of
June 3, 1837, we read of “ the state of
the labouring population,” “extrava-
gantly high wages,” and testimony is
borne to the “generally good and
orderly conduct of the working classes.”
The first birth recorded in this paper ia
that of a son to Mrs. Robert Gouger on
December 29, 1836, and we have the
first sad record of death in that of the
wife of the Hon. Robert Gouger at the
early age of 32, and a pathetic intimation
of the death of the son, Henry Hind-
marsh Gouger, aged 11 weeks and 1 day.
The session of gaol delivery furnishes
some interesting particulars, and the
colony is complimented upon a “ Grand
and petit Jury,” forming “an array
alike striking whether we regard its re-
spectability or its intelligence.” Would
not a J ury of the present time stare at
being so distinguished in the Press ? A
column is given to an eloquent speech
by His Honor Judge Jeficott to the Jury,
and we find from it that burglary is not
indigenous to the colony, but “an im-
portation from Van Diemen’s Land,” and
two whites have been stealing “ a jacket”
and some spears and waddies from the
blacks, or “aboriginal inhabitants,” as
they are politely termed ; and this crime
was committed “in a hut which these
poor natives had constructed for them-
selves at the town of Glenelg in imitation
of our huts, being the first which had
been constructed by them. ” It was thus
specially hard upon the natives that the
earliest attempt at civilization on their part
should have called down upon them such
a punishment. Breaking into a native’s
wurly could not, however, have yielded
much in the way of plunder.
The Colonial Register starts with a
modest leader about “Ourselves,” intro-






ducing the infant paper on its appearance
“in its own country.” In the first
number printed in England the editorial
character was merged in that of the
compiler and narrator, but here the paper
was on the scene of action. The editor
professes to know no such distinctions as
Whig, Tory, Conservative, or Radical, and
says truly that the interests of the colony
are those of everybody In it. There is
a report of the arrival and installation of
the Governor, ending with a wish-pro-
phetic “May South Australia flourish.”
We are told of the surprise and satis-
faction felt at the large sum pro-
duced by the sale of town sections,
and it is amusing to compare that estimate
with the present price of small portions of
those very town acres, hearing as we do of
£2OO, £3OO, and even £SOO a foot being
refused. A good deal is said about the
prosperity and spirited enterprise of the
South Australian Company, and there is
much jubilation over a “sawmill of
seventy saws,” a flourmill of four pairs of
stones, a patent slip for ships of 500 tons,
and a steam engine of 20 • horsepower
being expected from England We have
an example of how history repeats itself,
when we read a fifty-year-old paragraph
headed “ Look out for convicts,” and calls
to mind the recent anxiety about “ rdcidi-
vistes.” In accordance with the arrange-
ment with the Government made in
London the Register, containing the news,
was entirely under independent control,
the Government retaining the right
to at any time publish a separate Gazette.
This provision, chiefly for reasons already
given, was put in force on June 15, 1839,
but Messrs. Robert Thomas & Co. still
undertook the Government printing. The
newspaper was henceforth known as the
South Australian Register, and through all
its vicissitudes and change of proprietary
it has retained that title and maintained
its position, Its earliest rival was the
Southern Australian, but it held its own
against that and all subsequent comers.
In the beginning of 1840 it was en-
larged, and instead of six pages of single
demy it appeared as eight pages, and on
August 29, 1840, it assumed the more
dignified form of a “broadsheet.” A
double-deray Columbian press was ex-
pressly imported for the purpose of pro-
ducing it in its enlarged form. The press
from which the first number was thrown-
off is in existence, and still in use in
the Jobbing Department of the paper.
In August, 1842, there was a change in
the proprietary of the Register, the paper
and plant being disposed of to Mr. James
Allen, who, for a short time, carried on
operations in the old establishment on
Acre 56 near the west end of Hindley-
street. By-the-way, a portion of the old
printing-office—the composing-room, built
of brick, which was added to the original
pis 6 structure a year or two afterwards—
was standing for many years as a dwelling-
house, but it yielded to time and the march
of improvement some eight or nine years
ago. Mr. Allen had not been very long in
possession before it become apparent that
there must be a change of position, as the
infant town was steadily developing, and
the stockyards and vacant land in the
now busy thoroughfares of Hindley-street
and King William-street north were being
superseded by the buildings which the
energetic settlers were putting up for
dwelling or business purposes. It could
be seen that the trade of Adelaide was
not to be confined to the westward of
Morphett-street, but was extending east-
ward, and even Rundle-street was assert-
ing its right to be considered from a
business point of view. Mr. Allen
bought a vacant block of land at
the corner of Rundle and King Wil-
liam streets, and thereon erected a print-
ing-office. The pressroom, publishing
office, and accountants’ room occupied the
ground floor, and the upper apartment
was used as a caseroom. The block is
known to latter-day Adelaideans as
the Beehive corner, and the building as
it now stands is the same as when
Mr. Allen had it, with the excep-
tion that shopfronts have been added.
It was fortunate that Mr. Allen had per-
severance and some business ability, for
those qualities were in those days needed
to s;eer a man clear of the depths
and shoals of a financial career. The


colony had got into a depressed state owing
to a variety of causes, and nearly every
one was more or less in difficulties.
People put their hands in their pockets to
find nothing there, and the Govern
ment were in as bad a plight as those
they governed. Civil servants’ salaries
were pretty much like the midshipman’s
allowance—a farthing a year paid quar-
terly. A revenue would have been a
curiosity, and a Bank balance a wonder.
It has been said of those troublous
days that when the Burra Mine came to
the rescue of the province, and enabled
the people to feel their feet again
that there was only one merchant
who had kept his head above water.
It is suggested that he had the advantage
of being a canny Scot, and he died a
year or two ago, leaving £217,000.
Mr. Allen himself was in a chronic
state of poverty, and had frequent
Visits from bailiffs, but in those days
he was not singular in that respect.
One bailiff was in possession for nearly
three months, and might almost have
been regarded as a proprietor. He seems
by all accounts to have been a rather
jovial sort of officer, and being a sailor
by calling he was in the habit of enter-
taining the distrained with nautical yarns.
On February, 1843, the Register under-
went another change, as it came out twice
a week. The proprietary was ambitious
to still further develop the usefulness of
the paper, and at the end of another year
sought to bring it out as a daily in the
form of a single sheet of demy, but the
times were not advanced enough for such
a forward step, and the experiment proved
a failure. After persevering for a few
weeks the proprietor repented of his enter-
prise, and the paper resumed its original
form and issue. During the pro-
prietorship of Mr. Allen two other
newspapers were issued besides the
Register, namely, the Southern Cross
and the Monthly Times. The former was
originated for the sole purpose of writing
down Governor Grey and his administra-
tion, and the pen of Mr. Allen was more
than ordinarily bitter and sarcastic whilst
dealing with this subject. The latter
paper partook of the character of our
present Summaries for Europe, being
principally a compilation of the news of
the month.
In Jane, 1845, the Register again
changed owners, Mr. John Stephens be-
coming the proprietor. Some two years
previous to his purchase Mr. Stephens,
who possessed an English literary reputa-
tion, was engaged on the editorial staff
of the j ßegister, but he was of too indepen-
dent a stamp to suit Mr. Allen, and a
separation soon took place. The colony,
through the discovery of the Burra
Mine, had by this time regained
its prosperity, and the ranks of
those settlers who had through sheer
necessity gone out of town a couple
of years before in order to eke out
a maintenance from the products of
the soil were continually being added
to. Wheat was being grown in excess
of local requirements, and as the ruling
price was exceedingly low farmers were
looking about for foreign markets. Under
these circumstances Mr. Stephens deemed
that a weekly paper, devoted to the in-
terests of the farmers, was a desideratum.
He therefore engaged the late Mr. John
Dickius, who canvassed, on foot, the coun-
try districts with such success that the
contemplated journal was issued on July
1, 1843, under the title of the Adelaide
Observer. As Mr. Stephens had no plant
of his own the printing of the Observer
was entrusted to the late Mr. George
Dehane, whose office then was situated in
Morphett - street. By reason of the
addition of the Observer to the
Register the building at the Beehive
Corner was found to be not sufficiently
commodious, and more extensive pre-
mises were taken in Hindley-street. on
the site of what is now Beach’s Res-
taurant and the two adjoining shops.
In March, 1848, Mr. Anthony Forster
became connected with the editorial
department of the Register under Mr.
Stephens, but relinquished the posi-
tion after occupying it for some
months in order to embark in
pastoral occupations. It now appeared
to be pretty plain sailing, as the Register


was in a fair way to become a paying con-
cern and the colony was recovering, but
troubles again thickened around it owing
principally to the plain speaking which
characterized the policy of the new proprie-
tor. Mr. Stephens wielded a trenchant
pen, and as the result of his belli-
gerent disposition enemies rose up
around him, who in many instances
sought redress for their imagined wrongs
at the hands of the law. The late Sir R.
D. Hanson, who arrived about this time
from New Zealand, had a standing re-
tainer to defend the actions; but his
talents were often insufficient to enable
his client to come out successfully. Mr.
Hanson also assisted editorially, many of
the leading artices in the Register being
the product of his pen. Mr. Stephens was
in the habit of making it his boast that
there never should be a maiden session if
he thought there was a wrong to redress,
and which would probably involve him in
a libel action. At the time of his death
his name occurred nine times in the
cause list of the Supreme Court as defen-
dant in libel actions.
These entanglements in the law and
the expenses consequent thereupon kept
Mr. Stephens very low financially. On one
occasion it seemed as if the concern would
have to sink under its difficulties, but it
had a deal of vitality. Mr. Stephens was
unable to meet a rather heavy bill which
had become due, and the Sheriff’s officer
with his myrmidons made a descent upon
the establishment, and removed all the
printer’s plant to Neales’s Auction Mart
over the way in preparation for sale.
Here was a substantial difficulty enough
to discourage any man but a newspaper
proprietor, and there seemed very little
prospect of the subscribers obtaining their
Register as usual. The execution of the
writ was, however, intercepted so far as
to give permission for the plant to be
used for the purpose of getting out the
paper, and the novel sight of an auction
mart turned for the nonce into a printing-
office was presented with the compositors
working hard and probably incited to
extra effort by the somewhat humorous
side of the situation. In the evening,
however, a cruel order came prohibiting
work, as the indulgence had been withdrawn
in consequence of Mr. Stephens refusing
to sign a bond drawn up by his creditor.
This was piling on the agony with a
vengeance, but Mr. G. Dehane cour-
teously came to the rescue with an offer of
his office to Mr. Stephens, and the Register
came out of its troubles triumphant,
although slightly altered in appearance.
As matters could not be immediately ar-
ranged between Mr. Stephens and his
creditor, and the room occupied by the
printing materials in a comparatively small
auction mart was inconvenient to the
auctioneer, they were again removed, and
this time taken to a large room in
Blyth-street. Another dilemma, how-
ever, faced the proprietor, for
the Government Gazette had to be
issued on the Thursday, and he did not
possess the means to fulfil his engagements.
Mr. W. O. Cox, the late Government
Printer, who was then the Mechanical
Manager of the RegisUr, being on intimate
terms with the issuer of the writ, obtained
permission from him to use the printing
materials, and thus the Government
Gazette appeared as usual. In the course
of a few days matters were finally ar-
ranged, and the types and presses were
restored to their owner.
Mr. Stephens had assumed a responsi-
bility which required decision of character,
indomitable pluck, and untiring energy,
and these qualities he possessed in
an eminent degree. He had the
fullest confidence in the capabilities
of South Australia, and looked for-
ward to a fine future for the
land in which he had cast his lot. It
was no small matter for a man in those
days of limited population and scanty
facilities for properly circulating a paper to
undertake the task he assumed, and after
fearlessly fighting his business and
journalistic way against great odds in the
shape of the bitter disappointments and
continual worry we have spoken of, he
died in November, 1850, the “ victim
of the severity of his own discipline
and labour, but not until he had
established on a permanent basis the


reputation and success of the Begister."
So says one who knew him well
and who has paid this tribute to
his worth: —“ He was the unflinch-
ing and unvarying advocate of civil
and religious liberty, the truthful and
uncompromising exposer of every proved
corruption and abuse.” Mr. Stephens
left a widow and family, and in their
interests the late Mr. John Taylor in a
generous and manly spirit, and at great
personal sacrifice, undertook the manage-
ment of the paper—which in 1850 had
become a daily issue. The circumstances
under which he embarked upon his self-
imposed task in the interests of friendship
were most disheartening, and had he not
possessed great kindness of heart, a
resolute will and high intelligence, besides
being a skilled business man, he would
not so speedily have overcome the
obstacles in his path. The numerous
departures to the gold discoveries in Vic-
toria at this period for a time again
checked the colony’s progress, and also
rendered it somewhat difficult to bring out
the Begister, nearly all the staff having
caught the gold fever. Fortunately this
state of things did not last long, as the
return of many successful diggers speedily
restored confidence, and Mr. Taylor had
the satisfaction in little more than two
years from Mr. Stephen’s death of raising
the financial fortune of his widow and
family and making them comparatively
independent.
The Begister underwent another change
of ownership on May 24, 1853, when it
passed into the hands of a number of
gentlemen. It was not long before some
of these disposed of their interest, and the
property became vested in Messrs. A.
Forster, E. W. Andrews, W. K. Thomas,
and Joseph Fisher. The editorial manage-
ment devolved upon Mr. Forster, who
had as his coadjutors Dr. Andrew Garran,
who has recently retired from the editorial
charge of the Sydney Morning Herald , the
late Mr. J, H. Barrow, who subsequently
left the Begister to conduct the South
Australian Advertiser , and later Mr.
W, R. Whitridge, who died while in the ser-
vice of the paper. Mr. Forster rendered
important aid both in this journal andinthe
Legislative Council in securing the passing
of the Real Property Act and in main-
taining the principle of a complete
severance between Church and State. He
retired from the proprietorship of the
Begister in 1864, and the first use he made
of his leisure was to publish a compre-
hensive and carefully complied “History of
South Australia.” He is now residing in
England, his age being “ as a lusty winter,
frosty, but kindly.” In 1865 Mr. J.
Fisher, who still resides among us,
sold his interest to Mr, John Howard
Clark, and the firm thereupon became
known as Andrews, Thomas, and Clark.
In 1868 the issue of the Evening Journal
was commenced, and the paper speedily
acquired an important position as regards
circulation. Two years later the broad-
sheet form of the Begister , which had
been continued for sixteen years, gave
place to eight pages of smaller size, the
price being still kept at 3d. It may be
here mentioned that the first price of the
Begister was 6d.; that between 1839 and
1843 Is. a number was charged ; that
subsequently the sixpenny rate was
revived, which in course of time was
changed to 4d.; that in May, 1864, the
price was lowered to 3d., and on January
1, 1882, to 2d. The ownership of the
Register, Observer, and Evening Journal
remained unchanged until the begin-
ning of 1877, when, on the death of
Mr. Andrews, Messrs. Charles Day, J. H.
Finlay son, and R. K. Thomas, who had
for many years filled responsible positions
in the office, were taken into partnership.
In May, 1878, anothergapintheproprietary
took place, Mr. John Howard Ciark having
succumbed to a pulmonary complaint.
During the greater portion of the time of
his connection with the Begister he filled
the editorial chair, and was a copious
contributor to the leading and literary
columns of the paper. As a writer he
possessed abilities of the highest order,
and the versatility of his talents found
full play in the humorous column,
“Echoes from the Bush,” edited by him
under the title of Geoffrey Crabtliorne.
On July 4, 1878, Mr. W. K. Thomas, the


oldest remaining proprietor, died at his
residence, Glenelg. He was the son of
Mr. Robert Thomas, the pioneer pressman
of South Australia, whose death had oc-
curred in July, 1860, at the ripe age
of 78, and had shared with his
father the trials and difficulties
of the early history of the paper.
The death of Messrs. Thomas and Clark
resulted in the business being left in the
hands of the younger partners, by whom
it is still being conducted under the title
of W. K. Thomas & Co.
In 1853 the premises in Hlndley-street
not being sufficiently capacious for the
growing requirements of the Register and
Observer , the block of land in which the
present premises stand was purchased,
and the buildings upon it at the time,
which had previously been occupied
by Messrs. Amsberg, Brunskill, and
others, were adapted by excavation and
otherwise for the reception of the printing
plant and appliances. Two or three years
afterwards an additional story fronting
Grenfell-street was erected, and sub-
sequently the extensive premises at the
rear, which are now occupied by the
publishing, jobbing, news, and other de-
partments, ,were built. In November, 1854,
the circulation of the paper having in-
creased so largely that the hand machines
were found unequal to the task imposed
upon them, steam was introduced and
printing machines of the newest pattern
in order to keep abreast of the demand.
These have from time to time been
succeeded by still more powerful
and rapid presses. The proprietors
having had a narrow escape from
a serious fire by the bursting of
a camphine lamp in the composing-
room decided upon the manufacture of
gas—an industry then untried in
the city. They erected two gas-
ometers, made their own gas, and
in 1860 the various departments were
illuminated by it. The plant erected
served the purpose exceedingly well until
the Gas Company introduced their city
service. In 1870 the Register was made
an eight-page paper, and subsequently at
various times it has been lengthened and
broadened, until in March, 1884, it
assumed its present shape of an eight-
page paper, each page containing eight
columns.
We have thus brought down the history
of the Register and its associated news-
papers from the infancy of South Aus-
tralia to the present time. In the vary-
ing fortunes of South Australia from first
to last the Register has been a partici-
pator. It has, as we have before said,
had its periods of adversity as well as
of prosperity, but through all it has
been able to maintain its position as
an independent organ of public opinion.
It has good reason to be satisfied with the
support given to it, and it has en-
deavoured to deserve the success that it
has met with. Its anxiety has been to
promote the interests of the people, to
secure for them the blessing of free and
liberal institutions; to guard against all
attempts of Church or class to encroach
upon their liberties and rights; to
give the fullest publicity to all
shades of opinion. As a purveyor of
news it has endeavoured to keep pace with
the requirements of the community, and
it has had the satisfaction of knowing that
its efforts have been appreciated. It has
had a constant stimulus to enterprise In
the fact that enterprise has almost in-
variably met its full reward, and thus a
good understanding a genuine sym-
pathy—has been maintained between it
and the public of South Australia.
W. K. Thomas Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


