

' ' ' |^|
(if THE
I LAUNCESTON |
§ ’ institute, §■
| |
LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA : flm.
PRINTED AT THE “EXAMINER” AND “TASMANIAN OFFICE.




JUBILEE CELEBRATION.
■HIS institution completed its Jubilee on Bth March, 1892,
and in commemoration of that interesting event a
Conversazione was held in the Large Hall in the
evening of that day. Although the weather was oppressively
hot, there was a large attendance of members of both sexes.
The hall was suitably decorated, and photographic views of many
pretty spots in Tasmania were placed on tables, arranged for the
convenience of the audience. Altogether the arrangements were
very complete, and the reunion was most enjoyable.
The Board of Management requested Mr. Henry Button, one
of the first contributors to the library, to preside on the occasion,
and he read a carefully prepared paper, reviewing the whole
career of the Institute, which was listened to with much attention ;
and at its conclusion, on the motion of Rev. W. Law, seconded
by Mr. A. W. Birchall, a vote of thanks was passed to Mr. Button
for his excellent address, with a request that he would place it at
the disposal of the Board of Management, in order that it might
be printed with their next annual report.
The remainder of the evening was spent in social enjoyment.
A number of ladies and gentlemen, including the Philharmonic
Society, gave selections and recitations, which were heard with
much pleasure. The programme was as follows ; —Selections,
Philharmonic Society; song, “Flowers of the Forest," Miss A.
McDonald; serenade (with violin obligato by Mr. W. Scott), Miss
Grant; song, “ Only a Voice,” Miss Alice Wathen ; song, “ Going
to Market,” Miss A. McDonald ; recitation, “ The Last Man,” Mr.
A. Barrett; recitation, “ Comic sketch,” Mr. O. Balfe; dialogue,
“ Brutus and Cassius,” Messrs. Balfe and Barrett. During a short
intermission light refreshments were handed round, which were
much appreciated. \
Apologies for non-attendance were received from His Excel-
lency the Governor, the Premier (Hon. P. O, Fysh), and His
Worship the Mayor (Mr. S. J. Sutton). The Conversazione was
terminated at about half-past 10 o’clock by a vote of thanks to
the ladies and gentlemen who had assisted.


THE CHAIRMAN’S ADDRESS.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
OTJHE Board of Management has done me the honour to request
il, me to preside at this commemoration to-night, because I
suppose some one, like King Ahasuerus of old, has been searching
the records, and it has been found there that it was my privilege
to be one of the very first contributors to the library of the newly
formed Launceston Mechanics’ Institute. The Board seems to
regard me as one of the few remaining links that connect that
distant past with the throbbing present, and all its eager yet
anxious anticipations of the future. Conscious of my inability
to perform the task that has been entrusted to me as I could wish,
it might have appeared ungracious on my part had I refused
compliance with the invitation of the Board ; I must therefore throw
myself on your kind forbearance for a short time whilst I endeavour
as' best I may to bring before you some of the facts connected
with the formation and growth of this Institute, reviving slumbering
memories in those who still survive the vicissitudes of fifty years,
and reciting facts which in all probability will come as news to a
large majority of this audience.
The traveller who has been toiling over a long and perilous
pathway, on reaching the table-land he has seen from afar, looks
back with mingled wonder and pleasure at the wearisome road he
has traversed, and lingers with interest on the various landmarks
that he recognises, each of which recalls its own peculiar incidents.
In just such a position is this Institute to-day. For fifty years it
has pursued the course marked out for it by its founders, and now,
without halting in its career, it is but natural and right to cast a
retrospective glance over the distance left behind to see what
mistakes have been made and what good has been achieved, so
that for the future similar dangers may be avoided, and greater
success may be attained. Half a century may appear but a
handbreadth in the history of our race, but it forms a very
appreciable proportion in the life of an individual, and it is the
same, though in a less degree, in the case of an institution like our
own —our colony itself not having yet reached its first centenary.
On an occasion like the present it seems to be fitting that the
chief part of the brief period at my disposal should be devoted to
a review of the circumstances connected with the establishment
and maintenance of the Launceston Mechanics’ Institute, that
those who now enjoy its advantages may have some slight


acquaintance with the difficulties that had to be surmounted, that
so they may estimate, at their true value, the care aud wisdom
with which it was nursed through the perils of infancy, until it
reached the vigour of manhood.
When the preliminary meeting was held on Bth March, 1842, to
consider the desirableness of forming a Mechanics Institute, the
population of Launceston probably did not exceed 6000 souls; it
required, therefore, no small amount of faith in the object itself
and the willingness of the people to sustain it. That meeting was
held in the Infant School-room in Frederick Street, a building that
tor several years furnished almost the only accommodation for
public gatherings that the town could boast of. Lieutenant W. H.
Breton, R.N., Police Magistrate, occupied the chair, and there
was a large attendance. The first resolution, affirming that a
Mechanics’ Institute was extremely desirable and be now formed,
was moved by Mr. William Henty, and seconded by Mr. Thomas
Button. The second resolution, setting forth that the objects of
the Institute were to be the promotion of science and the arts and
the diffusion of general literature, was moved by the Rev. John
West, and seconded by Mr. Robert De Little. The third resolu-
tion, moved by Mr. Luckhurst, and seconded by Mr. Peter Kelly,
stated “ that, as the Institute was formed with a special view of
promoting the intellectual culture of the operative classes,
mechanics and workmen of all classes are invited to enrol their
names and promote the objects contemplated.’ The fourth resolu-
tion bespeaking the gratuitous assistance of professional gentlemen
and others on the northern side of the colony as lecturers, was
moved by Mr. T. J. Connor, and seconded by Mr. Michael
Kennedy. The last resolution, moved by Mr. J. Ferguson, and
seconded by Mr. A. M. Milligan, appointed a provisional com-
mittee to draw up rules, arrange for a course of lectures, and
attend to all matters necessary to the carrying out of the previous
resolutions, consisting of Messrs. V\ . Henty, R. De Little, P. Kelly,
I. Aikenhead, V. W. Giblin, W. H. Luckhurst, T . Button, J. Tozer,
T. Stubbs, J. Drysdale, J. W. Bell, T. J. Connor, M. Kennedy,
I. Sherwin. At the close of the meeting, about 50 persons enrolled
themselves as members. On 26th April a public was
held in the same room to receive the report of the provisional
committee, which stated that promises had been given foi seven
lectures, 160 members had been enrolled, 80 volumes had been
presented towards the establishment of a library, ami permission
had been obtained to use the public school-room in Cameron
Street tor the purposes of the Society. The draft rules having
been read, the introductory lecture was delivered by the Ret. C.
Price, on “ The objects and advantages of Science.”
It may be interesting to note that at the time to which I refer,
the Cameron Street School-room had not been enlarged by the
addition on its northern side. It was a simple parallelogram,


having a small recess on its eastern side, as if it had originally
been designed for a porch, but as the building proceeded the
design seems to have been altered, and the entrance porch made
to face Cameron Street as it does still. The recess thus formed
remains to this day, and formed the first depository for the library
of the Launceston Mechanics’ Institute !
The first general meeting of members was held on 10th May,
in the Cameron Street School-room, Mr. William Henty in the
chair, and as the proceedings of that meeting are of special interest,
as forming the foundation of the noble superstructure, whose
Jubilee we now celebrate, 1 venture to read the minutes in
full;—
The rules and orders for the government of the Institute were read by
Mr. Connor. The following resolutions were then submitted to the
meeting and carried unanimously :
x. Proposed by Mr. Robert De Little, seconded by Mr. J. S. Waddell —
"That W. H. Breton, Esq., be President of this Institution.”
2. Proposed by Mr. Aikenhead, seconded by Mr. Stubbs —“ That the
following persons be appointed the Board of Managers for the first session,
viz.—Messrs. J. Drysdale, J. Tozer, W. H. Luckhurst, W. Capon, sen., W.
Tyson, J. Tevelein, F. W. Townley, P. Kelly, J. W. Bell, Wm. Henty, Jos.
De Little, Thomas Button, Dr. Gaunt, Messrs. A. Learmonth, S. E. Harvey,
James Ferguson, T. Alcock, W. Wilson, M. Bates, A. M. Milligan.”
3. Proposed by Mr. J. W. Bell, seconded by Mr. Milligan —“ That
Messrs. Giblin and Connor be solicited to act as joint secretaries to the
Institution.”
4. Proposed by Mr. Milligan, seconded by Mr. Tyson —“ That Isaac
Sherwin, Esq., be requested to act as Treasurer to the Society.”
5. Proposed by Mr. Connor, seconded by Mr. Hay—" That the rules and
regulations which have been read be received as the laws of the Launceston
Mechanics’ Institute.”
6. Proposed by Mr. Drysdale, seconded by Mr. James Tait—" That
thanks be returned to those gentlemen who have presented donations to
the Society.”
7. Proposed by Mr. F. W. Townley, seconded by Mr. Geo. Luckhurst —
“That the following gentlemen be appointed Trustees of the Society:
Messrs Isaac Sherwin, J. W. Bell, W. Henty, P. Oakden, J. S. Waddell.”
Mr. Henty having vacated the chair, Mr. Sherwin was called to preside,
in order that the former might explain the benefits to be derived from the
Institute ; after which it was moved by Mr. W. S. Button, and seconded
by Mr. R. De Little—“ That the thanks of this meeting be presented to Mr.
Henty for his courteous conduct in the chair.”
Curiously enough one looks in vain through these early minutes
to learn what was the fee of membership ; but in the report of
the initial meeting published in the first issue of the Launceston
Examiner on 12th March, 1842, I find it stated that “it was
thought that a dollar per quarter would be sufficient.” In those
days, and for some time previously —owing probably to closer
relationship with India —the dollar was the ordinary currency
of this colony, and its nominal value was four shillings and


fourpence. When small coins became scarce a disc equal to
one-fourth was struck out of the centre of the dollar, and was
known as a “dump,” and the remainder of the original coin was
called a “ holy dollar.”
The Board met on 16th May, all but two being present,
thus inaugurating that diligent attention to the duties and details
of the work they had undertaken which through all the changing
years has characterised their successors. At this meeting it was
fixed that the reading room should be open on Monday, Thurs-
day, and Saturday evenings from six o’clock until nine, and that
the library be open on the same evenings from seven until
nine. On 2nd August the Board resolved to memorialise the
Government for pecuniary aid, and that the lectures should be
delivered twice a month, yet so as not to interfere with the
meetings of the Teetotal Society.
The first lecture session for which the Board of Management
had been elected having expired, the second general meeting of
members was held on nth October, Mr. Henty in the chair, when
about 40 members were present. The report stated that ten lectures
had been delivered ; many donations of books had been made
to the library, which then numbered 170 volumes; the Governor,
Sir John Franklin, had consented to become Patron of the Institute,
and had expressed the interest he felt in its welfare; it was also
mentioned that the Government had replied to the application for
pecuniary assistance that as the Society had been formed so
recently the prayer of the Committee could not then be entertained.
At this meeting the officers were elected for the ensuing year,
most of the names re-appearing as before, Mr. James Robertson
taking the place of Mr. Sherwin as treasurer, and Mr. T. J.
Connor uniting in himself the offices of secretary and librarian.
On Ist November the Board resolved to form a debating
society in connection with the Institute, and that during the
summer months the reading room should be open on Thursday,
evenings only. In the minutes of a Board meeting held on 6th
December occurs the first record of a movement to obtain a
building suitable for the use of the Institute, Mr. T. Button
proposing a subscription for that purpose, but the motion was
negatived. From that time, however, the subject was never
allowed to slumber. This brings us to the close of 1842, and
thenceforward the Board met quarterly.
On March 28th, 1843, the Board of Management decided that
the reading room and library should be open on Monday and
Thursday evenings, except when interrupted by lectures, and then
that books should be changed at the close of the lectures. At
the same time a committee was appointed to consider a plan
suggested by Messrs. Learmonth and Giblin for the erection of a
suitable building, and on 4th April a special meeting was held
to receive their report. A draft prospectus was submitted which


proposed to raise /iooo in a thousand shares of £i each, and to
build a lecture hall, library, museum, depository for apparatus,
committee room, etc.; to be vested in twelve trustees, to whom
the Mechanics’ Institute should pay a rent equal to at least five
per cent, on the cost, and who were to be empowered to let the
hall for other purposes when not required by the Institute. Some
idea may be formed of the great inconvenience experienced by the
infant society, from the fact that a project so evidently insufficient
for the purposes contemplated should have been adopted by the
Board when it neither had land to build on nor any prospect of
getting it. Additional need for action in this direction arose on
27th June, when the secretary, Mr. Connor, informed the Board
that he no longer possessed power to allow the Institute to
continue the use of the Cameron-street room. A committee
was then appointed to endeavour to obtain permission from the
trustees to continue the use of the room, but it would seem
without success. On 7th September a special meeting of the
Board was held in connection with the proposed building, when
it was resolved to ask the Government for a piece of land having
not less than 100 feet frontage by a depth of 150 feet; and it was
further resolved to call a special meeting on 14th September for
the purpose of addressing Sir John Franklin on his departure from
the colony. As this event is invested with more than ordinary
historic interest, from the mournful fate of that excellent man, I
may be permitted to give both the address and his Excellency’s
reply: —
To Sir John Franklin, Lieutenant-Governor of the island of Van
Diemen’s Land and its dependencies, etc., etc.
We, the members of the Launceston Mechanics’lnstitute, desire to address
you as our Patron on the occasion of your approaching departure from the
colony.
We beg to acknowledge the high sense we entertain of the uniform and
consistent interest you have shown in the advancement of science and of
those institutions calculated to extend the intellectual progress of our country,
and in the prosecution of which objects our Institute has shared your
countenance and support.
The readiness with which you became our Patron, the encouragement we
received by the honour of your attendance at our lectures, the additions
made to our library both by yourself and your excellent lady, and the
interest you evinced in our application for a site for our buildings —are
benefits which will always be gratefully remembered by us.
In respectfully bidding you farewell, we desire to express our kindest
wishes for your welfare and that of your lady and family. We shall hail
with pleasure the intelligence of your safe arrival on the shores of your
native land, and most sincerely hope you may be long spared to science, to
your friends, and to your country.
On behalf of the members,
(Signed) WILLIAM H. BRETON,
President.


[reply.]
Hobart Town, V.D.L., 19th September, 1843.
Mr. President and Gentlemen, .
Accept the assurance of my sincere thanks for the kind and compli-
mentary address you have done me the honour to present to me.
I cannot but feel that you have been led on this occasion to over-estimate
the value of the assistance which it has been in my power to render to you.
Be assured, however, that I have ever appreciated the importance of your
enlightened exertions, and have contemplated them with feelings of
unfeigned pleasure as being the most valuable which it was in your power
to give me, in the promotion of the best interests of society in this colony.
Allow me, gentlemen, to express my hope that your exertions in the great
cause of public instruction may go on and prosper with ever-increasing
success. . . r
I am well convinced that whatever be the importance to the colony ot
other improvements, the advancement of its intellectual interests is infinitely
greater, and I shall at all times regard your Institution with peculiar
sympathy, persuaded that my convictions are responded to by everyone
among you —from him who so ably fills the office of your President, down
to the humblest individual who is associated with him.
For your kind acknowledgment-of the interest Lady Franklin has taken
in the objects of your Society, and for your good wishes for her and the rest
of my family, accept our cordial thanks with the assurance of our heartfelt
wishes for your progress and Parity. j QHN FRANKLIN.
To the President and Members of the Launceston Mechanics’ Institute.
The original reply in Sir John’s own handwriting is still
preserved in the archives of the Institute, and should be very
highly prized as a memento of a great and good man who has
made the world his debtor. .
The third general meeting of the members of the Institute was
held on 10th October, 1843- The report spoke cheerfully of the
progress made, and stated that by permission of Rev. Dr. Browne,
the lecture and reading room had been removed to the Elizabeth
Street school-room; that the Government had given a piece of
land in Wellington Street, having a frontage of 80 feet by a depth
of feet-* that a special fund had been started for the purchase
of apparatus, £25 having been raised, and that Mr. McNaughton
had advanced and remitted it to the Glasgow Institute, with
a request that it would undertake the duty of purchasing what
might be required. At a Board meeting on 26th December it
was announced that the secretary and librarian, Mr. Connor, was
about to leave Launceston ; a vote of thanks was passed for his
services, and Mr. Vincent Giblin was elected secretary and Mr.
W H. Luckhurst librarian. The secretary was directed to apply
for a grant of the Laid, possession of which had been vested in
the trustees ; and a committee was appointed to procure a room
suitable for the library and lectures.
* The land referred to formed part of what is now known as Wellington
Square.


A special meeting of the Board was called for 25th January,
1844, to consider the practicability of opening the reading
room daily, and it was decided in the affirmative. The Board
reported that it had received several offers of premises, and
recommended that Mr. Alexander Kidd’s be accepted. Mr.
Kidd proposed to build a room 23 feet by 15 feet adjoining his
cabinet manufactory in St. John Street, to provide necessary
furniture, shelving, firing, and attendance from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
daily, and to take charge of the library, for per annum,
payable quarterly; the room to be taken for two years, or until
the Institute could provide a more suitable building ot its own,
and three months’ notice to be given prior to termination of
agreement. This very liberal offer was promptly accepted, the
room was occupied in March, and the quarterly meeting of the
Board that month was held in it. It is interesting to note that a
special meeting of the Board was held on 12th April to meet Mr.
W. Westgarth, treasurer of the Melbourne Mechanics’ Institute,
who submitted a suggestion from the curator of that body to the
effect that the members of the two institutions should correspond
and interchange the natural productions of their colonies. The
record says: “It was resolved that endeavours should be made to
carry out the objects of Mr. Westgarth’s letter, and that as soon
as possible exchange of specimens of natural history, fossils, etc.,
etc., should be made. Mr. Breton, the President, kindly undertook
to forward some specimens from his own collection to the institu-
tion at Melbourne.” In June it was resolved to revert to monthly
meetings of the Board. The annual meeting was held on Bth
October, the number of members then being 109, and the library
comprised 495 volumes and 116 periodicals. The report referred
to the need of a lecture hall, and the new Board was strongly
urged to devise means for securing one. On 29th October the
Board requested the Government to exchange the piece of ground
fronting on Wellington Street for a piece in St. John Street
adjoining the old watchhouse, almost identical with the site of
the present building; but the Government, while not unwilling
to make the exchange, seemed determined to surround it with
unnecessary and unreasonable limitations; and on 30th September,
1845, it was resolved to ask the Government to sell the land in
question to the Board, if it could not be granted free from all
restrictions as to the use to which the projected hall should be
applied. It would seem, however, that the remonstrance of the
Board was effectual, for on 3rd January, 1846, the Colonial
Secretary tendered the allotment at the corner of St. John and
Cameron Streets, and at its meeting on 27th of that month the
Board accepted the offer and voted the survey fee. But the
matter was not then settled, for on 13th February the Colonial
Secretary submitted another plan, and asked if the alteration
therein shown would suit the Institute as well as the c. rner block.


In reply the Board proposed an amendment, of which, if the
Government approved, the corner site would be given up; but
for some reason, probably shown in the correspondence though
it does not appear in the minutes, the latter was retained. On
10th March, 1846, the secretary was directed to acknowledge
a letter from Henry Hopkins, Esq., of Hobart Town, and to
thank him for his offer to contribute to a building fund; also
to announce by advertisement that Mr. Kidd would take charge
of any specimens preparatory to forming a museum in connection
with the Institute. This was perhaps the first practical step that
was taken for establishing a museum, and it was not the fault of
the successive Boards of Management that many years elapsed
before it passed beyond that stage. The annual meeting for 1846
was thrown open to the public in the hope of awakening wider
interest and support. In conformity with a resolution passed at
that meeting a memorial was sent to the Government praying that
pecuniary assistance might be given, as was done in the case of
the Hobart Town Institute. The memorial was presented by a
deputation of the Board to Sir William T. Denison when visiting
Launceston in February, 1847, but his Excellency replied that he
could not promise a grant of money without the consent of the
Legislative Council. Steps were then immediately taken to secure
the support of Sir Richard Dry and other honourable members.
In the latter part of 1847 an Art Exhibition was projected, the
proceeds of which it was hoped would leave a substantial balance
in aid of a building fund. The Exhibition was held in January,
1848, in the Cornwall Assembly Rooms, and though there was a
most creditable collection of pictures and other works of art, the
financial result was a deficit of ss. qd. Disappointed, the Board
was not disheartened, feeling assured that public taste would be
awakened and stimulated by the Exhibition, and that the objects
of the Institute would to that extent be promoted, and indirectly
its funds would be benefited. In June, 1848, the Colonial
Secretary informed the Board that the Lieutenant-Governor had
approved of £SO being paid to the treasurer for that year. This
was repeated in 1849, the amount was doubled for 1850, and in
1855 was raised to This was continued until 1864,
when the vote was increased to £ 250, and then it was entirely
withdrawn.
One of the principal objects contemplated by the founders of
this Institute was the instruction of its members by means of
lectures, and for many years admirable series were delivered by
talented men, many of whom came from long distances in the
country for the purpose. For a time the audiences were good,
but when the novelty had worn off, the attendance of members
and the public became very discouraging. The same thing has
been observed in later years, only in an aggravated form, so much
so, indeed, that regular courses of lectures have been abandoned,


the Board not feeling justified in asking gentlemen to devote
the time and labour necessary for the preparation of lectures,
when they felt assured that there would not be an average
attendance of fifty to hear them. This tendency began to manifest
itself very soon after the Institute was started, but before it became
chronic, on 25th May, 1849, the Board by a majority of eight to
six, decided as an experiment to admit the public free. The
annual report for the same year spoke of the experiment as having
been so successful that even those who had opposed it were fully
convinced that it was the right step. Unfortunately its virtue did
not long continue. ,
Not to weary you with too many details, which, however, are
intensely interesting to those who have followed the fortunes of the
Institute from its inception, I must very hurriedly pass over
succeeding years, extracting only those items which have a distinct
bearing on the growth and present position of the Institute.
In September, 1850, it was decided to insure the property of
the Institute for and the following month the Board voted
/SO as the commencement of a building fund, which almost
immediately afterwards was supplemented by a donation of £$
from Port Phillip cricketers who had played a match at Launceston.
So urgent had the need become for a building specially suited to
the purposes of the Institute, and so remote seemed the probability
that sufficient funds would be raised for a brick or stone edifice,
that in February, 1851, a proposal-was made to the Board of
Management to obtain an iron one from England.
On 29th July, 1851, the Board resolved that an endeavour be
forthwith made to raise a sum for building purposes, and that /50
from the Government grant be added to the fund already com-
menced; a committee was also formed to obtain subscriptions,
and a deputation was appointed to wait on the Lietenant-Governor,
to explain to him the objects of the Institute and to solicit a donation.
It is worthy of note that at this time permission was given to
members to hold a chess class in the library three nights a week, but
in consequence of a protest, signed by 62 members, permission
was withdrawn at the next meeting of the Board.
On 14th October, Mr. Giblin resigned as secretary, but the
Board requested him to retain the title of honorary secretary, and
appointed as assistant secretary Mr. W. F. Wathen, then librarian,
thus again combining in one person the duties of both offices.
The only salary paid at first was per annum for a lad as
assistant librarian, which continued for some time after Mr. Wathen
filled the two offices ; then it was raised to and remained at
that until the librarian became assistant secretary, and thence on
until iB6O, when the secretary became a paid officer at a salary of
P er annum. At this time there was supposed to be an
honorary secretary, but no one could be induced to take the office.
In consequence of changes in the public schools, Mr. Wathen


resigned the librarianship in March, 1854, and was presented with
£zo. On his returning to Launceston, eighteen months later, he
was appointed on the Board, and then became secretary, and
I believe he has continued to discharge the duties of that office
to the present moment, with what zeal and assiduity the members
of every successive Board can testify.
At the annual meeting held on 21st October, ten years after the
establishment of the Institute, the library contained 1579 volumes,
and the building fund amounted to
In 1853 Mr. Giblin left Launceston, and an address was
presented to him by a deputation of the Board, accompanied by a
purse of one hundred sovereigns, which had been subscribed by
his fellow-townsmen, the presentation being made by Dr. Casey.
For a year or two nothing special occurred in the history of the
Institute to disturb the even tenor of its way. The Board discharged
its duties with customary diligence, the usefulness of the library
increased, lectures were delivered with unflagging regularity though
to very discouraging audiences, and the annual reports, though
always dwelling on the importance of having premises specially
suitable for the Institute, invariably expressed regret that successive
Boards had not been able to see their way clear to take definite
action in the matter. On 17th August, 1854, a special meeting of
the Board decided to take steps to erect a building as early as
possible, that an appeal be made to the public to assist in providing
the funds, and that the Board be authorised to procure plans and
specifications. This, however, seemed only another flash in the
pan, though doubtless it served to keep interest alive, and so
helped the matter eventually. At the annual meeting in 1855, the
members agreed to pay their secretary a salary, and, as was proper
under such circumstances, at the following meeting the Board
decided that the reading room should be supplied with composition
candles ! In March of this year, a member of the Board, Mr.
A. J. Green, carried a motion for a public meeting to consider the
necessity for forming a useful knowledge mission in connection
with the Institute, but nothing came of the movement.
It may be mentioned here, to avoid interrupting the succeeding
narrative, that in September, 1859, at the suggestion of the Rev.
F. Hales, the soldiers then stationed in the town were admitted to
the reading room gratuitously.
We now arrive at the year 1856, when the determination to
secure suitable premises as the Institute’s own property became
the chief object to which the Board of Management directed its
efforts, and decisive steps were really taken to obtain for the
Institute “ a local habitation and a name.” Plans and estimate,
drawn by Mr. W. H. Clayton, architect, were submitted to the Board
and approved at a meeting held on 12 th November, and efforts
were earnestly made to raise the necessary funds. On 15th
January, 1857, the Board was authorised t© call for tenders.


Four were received and opened on 16th February, the tender of
Mr. G. R. Russell, at being accepted. The foundation
stone was laid on 24th June, with masonic honours, by the Rev.
R. K. Ewing, Provincial Grand Master, and at the time President
of the Institute. It was a notable day in Launceston: business
was entirely suspended, the banks, public offices, and shops being
closed. The Mayor, Aldermen, and all the public societies
assisted at the ceremony, and in the evening a banquet was
held in the Cornwall Assembly Rooms. Subscriptions were now
vigorously solicited and liberally given; and at the annual meeting
of members on 13th October the President stated that the entire
sum subscribed to that date amounted to In addition the
ladies had consented to get up a bazaar, and were working most
zealously. The bazaar was opened on 17th February, 1858, and
netted £670. In 1859 Parliament voted £3OOO in aid, which, in
addition to subscriptions subsequently received, the proceeds of
two concerts given by the Sacred Harmonic Society, and other
entertainments, totalled the large sum of The new
hall that wherein we are now assembled was opened on
Easter Monday, 9th April, iB6O, by the President, Dr. Casey.
This duty was to have been performed by the Governor, Sir
Henry E. F. Young, but he was indisposed on the first day, and
his address had to be postponed until the closing of the carnival
on Saturday evening, 14th April, after a week of pleasurable
excitement and mutual congratulations—a continuous bazaar, an
exhibition of pictures and other works of art, addresses by several
leading men, and a final lecture by Mr. Stutzer. All classes of
the community, far and wide, joined heartily in the undertaking,
the ladies especially, by their untiring interest and effort, con-
tributing immensely to its success. And now, as the result of
all this planning, working, anxiety, and jubilation, we have a
building consecrated to intellectual culture, with all its associated
advantages, which has undoubtedly done great things for the
residents of this city, and of which they are justly proud.
Before the hall was completed it was seen that it would be
desirable to secure the use of a small piece of land that formed
part of the Waterworks depot and adjoined the property of the
Institute. In November, 1859, the President reported to the
Board that the Municipal Council would lease the land in question,,
but such an arrangement would not have permitted the Institute
to extend its building as desired, and ten years later the Corpora-
tion agreed to sell the land for To provide funds for this
purpose a Bruce auction was held which realised £i%2. A loan
was then obtained and quarters for the librarian were erected in
1870, which were afterwards pulled down in 1884 to make room
for a more commodious structure. Mr. Leslie Corrie was instructed
to prepare plans, which were to include a large committee 100 m
on the ground floor, a still larger room for a museum upstairs,


enlargement of the librarian’s quarters, and other alterations and
improvements to the original structure. This was done to the
satisfaction of the Board, and Mr. H. T. Russell’s tender at
was accepted. The contract was commenced 9th December,
1884, and the building was opened on 28th September, 1885, by
a series of varied public entertainments extending over a week.
As soon as the room was ready for their reception, the specimens
which had been slowly accumulating for a museum were trans-
ferred thither, and Mr. Morton, the able and obliging curator of
the Hobart Museum, very kindly offered to arrange them. The
Board gladly accepted his services, and the museum was opened
to the public two afternoons every week with very encouraging
results. This, however, was only a beginning. The Board
undertook to initiate a museum, fully recognising its inability to
sustain from existing sources for a lengthened period such an
institution as might ere long be expected to develop in a rapidly
rising city like Launceston, but it was relieved of the duty earlier
than was anticipated. The growing desire that an International
Exhibition should be held in Launceston led to an appeal to
Parliament for aid in the erection of a building that should in the
first instance be used for that object, and afterwards be available
for a public museum and art gallery. The appeal was successful,
and though the site of the projected edifice was changed from the
City Park to what has long been known as the Invalid Depot
Grounds, but which will soon become the Botanical Gardens, in
due time a magnificent structure was reared there. When
completed, by special authority of the members of the Mechanics’
Institute, the museum was transferred to the new building—now
its permanent home —under the control of the City Council, Mr.
Morton again tendering his services to superintend operations.
At the same time the splendid collection of royal portraits, which for
many years had been entrusted to the custody of the Institute on
behalf of the residents of Launceston., together with a portrait of
the late Sir Richard Dry (who had been a warm supporter of the
Institute and a munificent contributor to its new hall), and a
large group of Tasmanian aborigines, was transferred to the Art
Gallery. All these pictures were painted in oil by the late Mr.
Robert Dowling, and form a collection of which this city may well
be proud. The painting of the aborigines is invested with special
ethnological interest, as every individual depicted was drawn from
life, and it constitutes probably the very best representation that is
possible of the physical peculiarities and mode of life of a race now
extinct. This picture has been on view at two International Exhibi-
tions held in Melbourne and one at Sydney ; application was also
made for it for the Calcutta Exhibition, but the Trustees declined to
incur the risk of sending it so far. The projected Launceston
Exhibition was, however, delayed by various causes, and during the
interval it expanded in design and dimensions: the Municipal
