

3?VFp
Si D
lumli of iffruumj.
“ We’ll note tfyee in our book of memory ”
JUBILEE
DR. BEVAN’S
MINISTRY
July 1865 July 1915
PARKIN COLLEGE,
ADELAIDE,
JULY 6th, 1915.
f«S-
-i.l'


TYRRELL’S f|m |MITED
“ The Booklover’sM&l Bargain Shop"
CASTLEREAGH ST.UW SYDNEY, N.S.W.


JV Paafe of 4Hemorg.
“ We’ll note tfyee in our book of memory ”
JUBILEE
DR. BEVAN’S
MINISTRY
July 1865 July 1915
PARKIN COLLEGE,
ADELAIDE,
JULY 6th, 1915.




REV. LI. D. BEVAN. LL.B




The REV. LLEWELYN DAVID BEVAN, LL.B.,
SOMETIME MINISTER AT
The King’s Weigh House Chapel, London ;
Tottenham Court Road Chapel, London ;
The Brick Presbyterian Church, New York ;
Highbury Quadrant Church, London ;
Collins Street Independent Church, Melbourne
AND NOW
The Principal of Parkin College, Adelaide.
Entered New College, London, 1857, as a Student
the Ministry ;
became Principal of Parkin College, 1909.
What though assaults run high
They daunt not him who holds his ministry
Resolute at all hazards, to fulfil
Its duties—prompt to move, but fain to wait- —
Knowing things rashly sought arc rarely found.”
Wordsworth




Foreword.
This short sketch is not meant to present any-
thing like a complete record of Dr. Sevan’s fifty
years of ministerial life ; nor to describe his busy
service in Education, Literature, Philanthropy, and
Religion. At this time, however, it seems fitting to
glance at the churches to which he has ministered,
and briefly to refer to the many happy associations he
has had and still has with them.
So, with gratitude for the past, we pray for many
years of glad and helpful service to come.




Fifty Years in the Christian Ministry
A Child of Cambria.
When Dr. Bevan was a few months old,
a great meeting of the Anti-Corn Law League
was held in London. It was attended by 700
representatives of the Nonconformist clergy,
who, indicating what each one saw in his minis-
try, bore witness to the conditions cutting off
the mass of the population from the possibility
of religious life. “ The Times ” commented on
the assemblage as a “ freak ” and a “ drollery ”
no less absurd than the British Association for
the advancement of science. It was generous
enough to admit that Lord Ducie and Mr.
Cobden were decently dressed, but it con-
temptuously added, “ None of the dissenting
ministers could show a clean shirt at the Con-
ference.”
It is interesting to read of this in Trevel-
yan’s “ Life of John Bright,” a few months after
the British Association commanded world-wide
interest by holding its meetings in Australia,
for which the late Dr. Vaughan Bevan was
appointed one of the sectional Secretaries, and
at the time when his father, Dr. Bevan, dissent-
ing minister, is celebrating the jubilee of a world-
wide ministry.
Nonconformist blood runs pure through Dr.
Bevan’s veins. He was born in the year 1842
at Llanelly, in the County of Caermarthen, in
Wales. His father was Mr. Hopkin Bevan, of


that town. He was a descendant of Lewis Rees,
the apostle of Congregationalism in North Wales,
who was one of the well-known preachers of the
seventeenth century. The wife of Lewis Rees
was a Penry ; thus the Be vans are able to trace
a connection with the martyr of Congregation-
alism in Elizabeth’s days. Dr. Sevan’s grand-
father on his mother’s side was David Davies,
the minister of Rehoboth Chapel, near Llanelly.
An incident of Dr. Sevan’s childhood,
like the comment of “ The Times ” above re-
ferred to, goes to show how the passage of years
brings great changes in the opinions of men.
One of the first temperance advocates to visit
the Principality was Paxton Hood, the famous
minister. His cause was so unpopular that it was
impossible for him to obtain the use of church,
chapel, or school hall in which to hold his meet-
ings. A woman, the keeper of an inn, having
heard of the lecturer’s difficulty, came forward
and said, “ Goodness knows I have suffered
enough from the evils of drink. I have a large
room in my inn. Come and hold your meeting
there.” And Paxton Hood did so.
School and College Life.
After studying at a preparatory school in
his native town for some years Mr. Sevan took
his son to London to attend the University
College School. At the age of sixteen he left
the school, having taken the senior prize in
Greek. He then became a student at New Col-
lege, one of the institutions in London for the
education of those who were to become Congre-
gational ministers. Among his teachers at New
College were the Principal, Dr. Halley, the father


of the Rev. J. J. Halley, for so many years
the able and popular Secretary of the Congre-
gational Union of Victoria, Dr. William Smith,
the celebrated editor of the educational series
under his name, and Dr. Edwin Lancaster, the
father of Professor Ray Lancaster, a President
of the Royal Society.
After leaving New College Mr. Sevan spent
a year in studying at the University College.
He took his degrees in arts and law at the Uni-
versity of London, obtaining his LL.B. with
first-class honors. He was an exhibitioner in
English and English literature, and a “Harris
Scholar,” a “Pye Smith Scholar,” and a “Wil-
liam’s Scholar,” all prizes in the educational
world.
King’s Weigh House.
Mr. Sevan became the assistant minister to
Dr. Thomas Binney on July 2, 1865. At the
time of his receiving the invitation to the Weigh
House Chapel he was also invited to become the
minister of Snow Hill, Wolverhampton. After
serving for one year as assistant to the great
preacher, he was formally elected co-pastor,
in which capacity he remained for three years.
He then became the sole pastor of the church,
Dr. Binney being made honorary pastor.
This church was established by one of the
ejected ministers about the year 1662. The
congregation clinging to the ministrations of the
ejected clergyman used to meet in one of the
rooms which was used as an office for the col-
lection of the royal duties on commodities
brought by traders to the city, and was known
as the King’s Weigh house. Hence the name of
the chapel. When Mr. Bevan joined him Dr.


Binney had been exercising his ministry for
forty years in the noble building on Fish-street
Hill quite close to the Monument. London,
however, was feeling the need of expansion.
The building was in the way of the new under-
ground railway. It was subsequently sold, and
the present Weigh House Chapel in West Lon-
don was built with the proceeds.
Among the many estimable qualities of the
great preacher was that of a fine and tender
sympathy with young men, so the relations
between him who was just beginning his minis-
terial life, and the “ old man eloquent ” just
closing it, were of the happiest nature. The
singing of the congregation was excellent, and
was led by Mrs. Marshall, the sister of the late
Charles Santley. Among the members of Dr.
Sevan’s congregation were Mr. McKinnon Wood,
who became in course of time a minister of the
Crown, Edward Miall, the great apostle of non-
conformity and the founder of the “ Independent
and Nonconformist,” Samuel Morley, merchant
and philanthropist, and Dr. Pye-Smith, who at
that time was a young and rising physician in the
metropolis.
In 1906 Dr. Bevan spent the fortieth anni-
versary of his ordination in London, and con-
ducted one of the services at the new King’s
Weigh House. As far as he could learn, there
were only two of the original members of his
congregation present.
Tottenham Court Road Chapel,
1869-1876.
This is one of the most famous churches in
London. It is now known as Whitfields, and


was the scene of the devoted labours of the late
C. Sylvester Horne, M.P., who was cut off at the
very height of his power as a preacher and a
great leader in public life. It was one of two
churches founded by George Whitfield in the
eighteenth century. Dr. John Campbell was
for many years minister of this church, and, in
conjunction with it, of the tabernacle in Moor-
fields. The congregation of the tabernacle
subsequently was absorbed in that of the larger
church.
Just before Dr. Bevan took up the pastoral
oversight, a brilliant ministry of a few years
had suddenly come to an end, and the young
preacher at the Weigh House was sought out
and was persuaded to accept an invitation to
become the minister.
He undertook the work with the cordial
approval of his old chief, and all who had the
wellbeing of the historic church at heart. The
new task was no easy one, Dr. Bevan, however,
drew crowded congregations, and the church roll
was added to by something like a hundred
members each year.
It was a distinguished gathering which met
the preacher from Sunday to Sunday. Between
twenty and thirty members of the congregation
were students for the ministry. Among the
attendants were Dr. Frederick Wood, a dis-
tinguished member of the University of London,
and a leading barrister, Dr. John Williams,
one of the first physicians of London, and Dr.
Tuke, the great psychologist. The congregation
was an inspiring one, and the preacher has often
spoken of the thrill he experienced when he
recognised James Martineau one Sunday morn-
ing amongst his hearers.


Binney had been exercising his ministry for
forty years in the noble building on Fish-street
Hill quite close to the Monument. London,
however, was feeling the need of expansion.
The building was in the way of the new under-
ground railway. It was subsequently sold, and
the present Weigh House Chapel in West Lon-
don was built with the proceeds.
Among the many estimable qualities of the
great preacher was that of a fine and tender
sympathy with young men, so the relations
between him who was just beginning his minis-
terial life, and the “ old man eloquent ” just
closing it, were of the happiest nature. The
singing of the congregation was excellent, and
was led by Mrs. Marshall, the sister of the late
Charles Santley. Among the members of Dr.
Bevan’s congregation were Mr. McKinnon Wood,
who became in course of time a minister of the
Crown, Edward Miall, the great apostle of non-
conformity and the founder of the “ Independent
and Nonconformist,” Samuel Morley, merchant
and philanthropist, and Dr. Pye-Smith, who at
that time was a young and rising physician in the
metropolis.
In 1906 Dr. Be van spent the fortieth anni-
versary of his ordination in London, and con-
ducted one of the services at the new King’s
Weigh House. As far as he could learn, there
were only two of the original members of his
congregation present.
Tottenham Court Road Chapel,
1869-1876.
This is one of the most famous churches in
London. It is now known as Whitfields, and


was the scene of the devoted labours of the late
0. Sylvester Horne, M.P., who was cut off at the
very height of his power as a preacher and a
great leader in public life. It was one of two
churches founded by George Whitfield in the
eighteenth century. Hr. John Campbell was
for many years minister of this church, and, in
conjunction with it, of the tabernacle in Moor-
fields. The congregation of the tabernacle
subsequently was absorbed in that of the larger
church.
Just before Dr. Bevan took up the pastoral
oversight, a brilliant ministry of a few years
had suddenly come to an end, and the young
preacher at the Weigh House was sought out
and was persuaded to accept an invitation to
become the minister.
He undertook the work with the cordial
approval of his old chief, and all who had the
wellbeing of the historic church at heart. The
new task was no easy one, Dr. Bevan, however,
drew crowded congregations, and the church roll
was added to by something like a hundred
members each year.
It was a distinguished gathering which met
the preacher from Sunday to Sunday. Between
twenty and thirty members of the congregation
were students for the ministry. Among the
attendants were Dr. Frederick Wood, a dis-
tinguished member of the University of London,
and a leading barrister, Dr. John Williams,
one of the first physicians of London, and Dr.
Tuke, the great psychologist. The congregation
was an inspiring one, and the preacher has often
spoken of the thrill he experienced when he
recognised James Martineau one Sunday morn-
ing amongst his hearers.


At that time Tottenham Court Eoad became
one of the places for American visitors to London
to “do” on Sundays. Through the intimacy
thus arising with leaders in American religious
life, Dr. Bevan, with Lord Shaftesbury and Sir
Arthur Kinnaird, became the founder of the
“ Freedman’s Aid Society.” This society had
as its object the uplifting of the great mass of
coloured people in America who had been
emancipated by Abraham Lincoln. These
people were in a parlous condition when liberty
was first won for them. They were largely out
of employment, without means, and in a low
condition morally through lack of education.
To speak in detail of the wide circle of inte-
rests of Dr. Bevan at this time the space of this
little book will not permit. We can only men-
tion some of the activities in which he was en-
gaged. He was for many years a director of the
London Missionary Society, and a prominent
member of the Liberation Society. He was
associated with Frederick Denison Maurice in
his work at the Working Men’s College, and a
member of the council of that institution. He
gave lectures there in Great Ormond-street, and
later he took over the “ Master’s ” (as his friends
used to call Maurice) Bible class. He renewed
his old associations with New College by becom-
ing attached to the teaching staff. He became
Dean of Faculty, and also occupied the chair of
English Language and Literature. He was a
member of the London School Board, taking his
seat just after the retirement of Professor
Huxley. Besides the many claims made upon
him by his own church and various societies
connected with it, he was constantly helping
other churches in the way of conducting special


services in and around London and in the pro-
vinces. It was his custom to minister to
prisoners and the outcasts of society. He
identified himself with Mr. Moody’s mission.
He organised and created an interest in the
visit of the Jubilee Singers. The success of
that wonderful coloured choir was largely due
to Ms advocacy of their mission to build a
university for coloured people in America.
In August, 1874, he visited America, and
was the preacher for two months at the Central
Church, Brooklyn, presided over by Hr. Scudder.
During that visit he made the acquaintance of
Emerson, Oliver Wendel Holmes, Whittier,
Henry Ward Beecher, and many other eminent
persons. Shortly after his visit to America
he received two invitations, the one from
Collins-street, Melbourne, and the other from the
Brick Presbyterian Church, 3sTew York. For
some time he had been feeling the strain of the
many calls made upon his time and strength
in London, and after careful consideration he
decided to change the sphere of his labours by
accepting the call to America. A great farewell
meeting was held in Tottenham Court Eoad
Chapel, at which Mr. Henry Eichard, M.P.,
presided, and, among other speakers, were Dr.
Aveling, Dr. Hannay, Dr. Joseph Parker, Dr.
Allon (of Islington), and the Eev. W. Braden.
These and many others bore witness to the great
work done in London by the departing minister,
and the hope was expressed that before many
years had passed, England would welcome him
back. It was during his ministry here that he
received invitations to pastorates at Montreal,
Brooklyn, Boston, Melbourne, and Stamford
Hill, London.


Brick Presbyterian Church, New York,
1876-1882.
On December 3, 1876, Dr. Bevan sailed
with Ms family in the Cunard liner u Batavia.”
After a very stormy passage the party arrived
at their destination, and were soon established
in the new home. The Brick church was one of
the two leading Presbyterian churches in New
York, and was so called from the simple fact
that it was built of brick, a great achievement
when the church was erected. Most buildings
were then iron and wooden structures.
The question of leaving England was a
serious one, and its gravity was intensified
because it meant also a change in ecclesiastical
adherence. The exchange of ministers between
America and England was not then so frequent
as it is now. To his English friends at first it
was a great disappointment that so stalwart a
Congregationalist should become a Presbyterian.
The cleavage between the two orders, however,
in America was not as sharp as in England.
Dr. Bevan reflected that in things essential he
was at one with his brethren in the Presbyterian
Church, and in regard to things non-essential
it was quite possible for him to hold the opinions
in which he had been bred, and at the same time
to be loyal to the new order under which he was
to become a minister. It was generally known
besides, that the exchange of ministers in
America was a common occurrence. There is
no doubt that the example set by Dr. Bevan
made it easier for Dr. Jowett in later years to
effect the same kind of change.
While resident in America the Princeton
University conferred upon him the D.D. degree.


As the minister of the Brick Church Dr.
Sevan came into touch with influential ministers
(notably Dr. Storrs, Dr. Shedd, and Dr. John
Hall) and citizens of the Republic. The church
played an important part in the life of the city.
It had many activities. The demands made
upon the minister’s energies and times were little
less than those of London. But Dr. Bevan
threw himself into his new life with characteristic
zeal and energy. In 1880 he was moderator of
the Presbytery of New York City.
He made many lifelong friends, and after a
successful pastorate of six years he bade farewell
to a sorrowing city and congregation.
A great “valedictory” meeting was held on
the eve of his departure for Europe in 1882,
which was attended by more than fifty ministers
of the different denominations. They spoke of
the conspicuous services rendered by Dr. Bevan
to the religious, public, and social life of the
city. Many testimonies were given to the
brotherly spirit of this great preacher.
The following cutting from the “ British
Weekly,” dated December 26, 1911, gives an
interesting peep into the American life of our
friend :
“ Dear Sir —Dr. Bevan, who I rejoice to see
is visiting this country, was the first to give the
greeting of a friend by calling at the New York
Hotel, where my wife and I had landed, within
half an hour of our arrival, to enjoin us not to
unpack our baggage, but to transfer it ins tauter
to his abode. Although what he intended as a
residence for an indefinite time could only be
made into a visit repeated now and then, the
heat of a warm heart and the music of a warm
welcome seemed to bridge the Atlantic and make


us feel at home. His abode was almost palatial;
and he told us when he came he found it fur-
nished as we found it then, and provisioned for a
month, with tarts in the pantry and toys in the
nursery galore.
The Brick Church, where it was my privilege
to preach for him, was not in Boston, as
your graphic contributor describes, but in the
Empire City of New York, and I could not help
considering its minister the most sterling
44 brick ”in the fabric. It is the church which
formed the scene of the ministry of the saintly
Dr. Spring, whose fervid work, entitled 44 The
Attraction of the Cross,” inspired my early
thoughts. Dr. Bevan introduced me to Dr.
John Hall, Dr. Taylor, and a constellation of
contemporary lights. His return fills me with
a desire to send my grateful love to a friend to
whom my debt is deep.
Yours, &c.,
(Signed) ARTHUR MURSELL.
Highbury Quadrant, 1882-1885.
Highbury Quadrant is one of the newer
churches in London, and was spoken of in 1883
as one of the most hopeful and interesting ex-
periments of London Congregationalism. The
movement which resulted in the erection of the
noble building in which Mr. Harold Brierley
now exercises so potent a ministry, was led by
Mr. Robert Sinclair, one of Dr. Raleigh’s deacons.
The church was erected in the midst of a dense
population of well-to-do people.
Dr. Bevan, when visiting London from
America in 1881, was invited to open the new


school hall which had been built as a first instal-
ment of the larger scheme. And, to the joy of
a host of friends, about two years later he
accepted an invitation to become the first
minister of the new church. The building, which
cost £12,000 and seated 1,200, was opened in
June, 1882, with many expressions of joy at
the doctor’s return to England. He carried on
here a wonderful work. A large congregation
had gathered by the time he took the regular
duties of minister, but very soon the building
was crowded.
Besides the various societies connected
with a London church, which included a large
Sunday-school, there was a Mother’s Meeting,
with more than a thousand members. There
were also two large forking men’s clubs. Many
friends attempted to get the former champion
of the radical cause on the School Board, to stand
again for election. This, however, he declined,
as the office demanded more time than he was
able to spare from the ordinary duties of his
growing church. During Mr. Gladstone’s ministry
Dr. Sevan was sent for from Downing Street
and asked by the Government to stand for
Parliament, the Government offering to pay his
expenses. Two other Liberal seats were offered
him in Parliament, including that for Llanelly,
his native town. These honours he also
declined, as he considered his first work was that
of a Christian minister, and he could not well
serve as a member of Parliament, and at the
same time be faithful to his duties in the
pastorate of an important church.
After being the minister of Highbury Quad-
rant for four years he received a fourth call


to become the minister of Collins-street Inde-
pendent Church. This time he determined to
accept the invitation to work in Australia, and
announced his intention to the sorrow of his
congregation and his London friends.
Mr. Albert Spicer (now Sir Albert Spicer)
occupied the chair at the farewell meeting, and
near him his venerable father, Mr. James Spicer,
was seated.
Among those present were the Revs.
Edward White (the advocate of the doctrine of
“ Conditional Immortality ”), Dr. Hannay, Dr.
Edmond, Dr. Kennedy, Professor Newth, Ben-
jamin Wangh (the founder of the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children), H. S. Toms,
W. Garrett Horder, and Ossian Davies. Among
the laymen were Mr. Sinclair, Professor Evans
(of New College), and Mr. James Clarke (of the
“ Christian World.”) Mr. White, in speaking
as the Chairman of the Congregational Union,
said —“ We must part, but Australia becomes
less distant every year.” He gladdened the
heart of the meeting by reminding Dr. Bevan
that in six weeks time he would step ashore at
Melbourne, and the next day they would hear
by telegraph of his safe arrival. Sir Albert
Spicer, who was shortly after to be Dr. Bevan’s
guest in Melbourne, told the audience that the
abilities and experience of their guest were just
those to fit him for a great work in the dominions
beyond the seas.
Collins Street Independent Church,
Melbourne, 1886-1909.
Collins Street Independent Church was
founded in the year after the accession of Queen


Victoria. It was the beginning of Congrega-
tionalism in Melbourne. A temporary building
was erected in July, 1839. Previous to this
services had been held in a private house.
In September, 1839, the foundation-stone
of a permanent building was laid by Mr. Henry
Hopkins, of Hobart Town, and it was opened
for service on January 1, 1841. The opening
sermons were preached by Mr. Waterfield (Con-
gregationalist), Mr. Forbes (Presbyterian), and
Mr. Orton (Wesleyan). Thus the catholic spirit
of the church which was early shown, has ever
marked it.
The following is a list of the men who had
ministered in the church up to the time of Dr.
Sevan’s settlement: —W. Waterfield, 1838-1843 ;
A. Morison, 1843-1864 ; A. Fraser, 1864-1866 ;
A. M. Henderson, 1866-1876 ; Thomas Jones,
1877-1880; Samuel Hebditch, 1880-1881 ; D.
Jones Hamer, 1882-1886. The present building
was erected when Mr. Henderson was pastor.
Mr, Hamer died in Eotorua, Hew Zealand,
in March, 1886 ; and on a fourth invitation
being sent, Dr. Sevan decided to make Australia
the land of his adoption. It was recognised
at the valedictory meeting at Highbury Quad-
rant that going to Melbourne meant he would
not return to England to a settled ministry ;
and this thought gave a more than usual cast of
melancholy to the feeling of the speakers.
Dr. Sevan arrived in Melbourne on the P. & O.
s.s. “ Yaletta,” and began his ministry on
Sunday, November 14, 1886.
Christopher Crayon, in March, 1889, de-
scribed Collins Street as a “ stately street, and
one which would be an ornament to London


itself.” The church building is worthy of the
street. It is spacious and cool, it seats 1,300,
and all that the decorator could do to make it
beautiful has been done. Christopher Crayon
also said “ there was a breadth and vigor about
the doctor’s sermons. His audience seemed to
be wielded at his will, and was a noble one;
men and women, to whom the service of the
sanctuary is not a form or symbol of respecta-
bility, but a joy and delight.”
The picturesque figure of Dr. Sevan has
now been a familiar one in all the churches of
the States for more than a quarter of a century,
and the common church life has been enriched
by his devoted services. He has travelled
through the length and breadth of the land,
and is looked upon as the possession of the
churches at large more than as the minister of
any one particular church. Nevertheless it was
to his ministry in Collins Street that he chiefly
devoted his time and strength, and it is with
that church mainly that his name will always be
associated.
The early years of his ministry were passed
in the time of the great “ boom ” in Melbourne.
The passion for speculation spread like a con-
tagion. Land was eagerly sought by individuals
and syndicates. Stately and costly buildings
made their appearance in rapid succession.
It did not seem possible to pay too high a price
for property of any kind. The “ boom ” was,
of course, not confined to Melbourne, but raged
through Victoria and every part of the Common-
wealth.
In the crash that followed, prominent men
lost their city homes, and had to move their
families to a farther distance from the town.


The church itself suffered heavily through the
loss of rents and the changed condition of its
members, and the lease of the land around its
central building was thrown upon its hands.
Collins Street only recovered from the blow a
year or two before the termination of Dr. Sevan’s
ministry.
Dr. Sevan has always maintained that the
behaviour of the people in Melbourne and the
Australian public in general was admirable.
They met the difficulties of the time with great
courage. The people were patient, and exhi-
bited a remarkable readiness to help one another
in the difficulties in which they found themselves.
And we may be sure that the large-hearted
minister helped to mend many a broken fortune
by inspiring the dejected with new hopes,
and showing that practical sympathy which
has been so characteristic of him throughout
his long ministerial life.
“ Business as usual ” has become a prover-
bial saying of late. Although the losses of the
church were so heavy, in no way was its prac-
tical Christian work contracted. Not only were
its home institutions maintained, but the usual
aid rendered to outside organisations was neither
denied nor reduced. In the days of its trial
and difficulty it founded two mission churches
in addition to one already existing. Collins
Street has now three mission churches in the
city, and their beneficial work is steadily sup-
ported.
The jubilee of the establishing of Con-
gregationalism in Victoria was celebrated by
raising a large sum of money for the extinction
of the debts on all the churches. In this move-


ment Dr. Bevan and the officers of his church
played conspicuous parts. At the celebrations,
his old friend, Dr. Alexander Hannay, and Mr.
Henry Lee, of Manchester, were present as re-
presentatives of the English churches. A few
years later similar festivities were held in Ade-
laide and the other States, when Dr. Dale, of
Birmingham, and Sir Albert Spicer were present
as commissioners from the Congregational Union
of England and Wales.
The ministry of Dr. Bevan was a very suc-
cessful one, and he speedily came to be regarded
as one of Melbourne’s great citizens. Strong
efforts were made to induce Dr. Bevan to trans-
fer his work to Pitt-street Church, Sydney. The
announcement made in Collins Street, that he
had declined the invitation, was received with
the utmost gratitude and enthusiasm, not only
by his own people, but in Melbourne generally.
For sixteen more years he continued to wield a
powerful influence in Melbourne. His beautiful
home, rich in its literary and art treasures,
became a centre of social influence in the
Victorian capital.
The Salvation Army, movements for alle-
viating distress, the London Missionary Society,
the Home Mission of our churches, the Victorian
Congregational College, and many other reli-
gious and philanthropic institutions always
found in him a ready helper and sympathetic
friend. He was thrice Chairman of the Con-
gregational Union of Victoria, and also the Pre-
sident of the Australasian Congregational Union.
He was Vice-President of the International
Congregational Council held in London in 1891,
and held the same position in that which met at
Boston in 1899. He has travelled on preaching


and lecturing tours in every part of Australia,
and has preached the official sermons of the
Congregational body in every State. He identi-
fied himself with the work of the Y.M.C.A.,
was a member of the committee appointed some
years ago in Victoria to draw up a scheme of
religious education for the State schools, and
took an active part in the Torrey-Alexander
Mission held in Melbourne.
One of the public services that interested
Dr. Bevan most was his connection with the
great International Exhibition held in Mel-
bourne in the days of its prosperity. He was
Chairman of the Jury on Education, and this
gave him a particularly good opportunity of
making himself familiar not only with our own
educational work, but also with that of other
countries. The French exhibit was most re-
markable both in its extent and thoroughness.
In recognition of his services on that jury the
French Government conferred on him the
honour of “ Officier de L’lnstruction Publique
de la Republic Francaise.”
Parkin College, Adelaide.
Hr. Bevan thus exercised a wonderful
ministry at Collins-street for twenty-three years.
He was looking forward to completing a quarter
of a century of ministerial work in Melbourne,
when the Governors of the Parkin Trust invited
him to become the first Principal of the newly
established College in 1909. The education of
students for the Christian ministry has ever
been an object of keen interest with him, and
the prospect of having a direct part in the train-
ing of Australian young men for the Australian


ministry was very attractive to Mm. He
accepted the invitation, and for six years has
now been engaged in this work. The ripe experi-
ence, the familiarity with the conditions and
demands of our life, the great oratorical power
and erudition, the theological learning and wide
human sympathy, and the almost childlike
Christian spirit of the Principal, augur well for
the future of the Australian Congregational
ministry.
Afterword.
The highest praise we have heard given to
Dr. Be van is that “ he is so brotherly an elder.”
And as such he is held in the affectionate
memory of many in England, America, and
Australia. When he was in Melbourne a few
months ago he received an invitation to attend
the Fraternal Association of Ministers, which
was holding its meeting at that time. Almost
simultaneously he was invited to attend the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the “Chi Alpha
Society,” the leading ministerial Association of
New York, and a third invitation was put into
his hands by the postman, from the President of
Convocation of the University of London, an
old schoolfellow, to attend a social gathering
in London. He is recognised as one of the most
fraternal members of the Fraternal Association
of Adelaide, and a regular attendant at its
meetings. Thus the voices of the near past and
the far past unite with the voices of the present
in celebrating “ the greatest thing in the world ”
by raising the old chorus —
“ Behold how good and pleasant it is
For brethren to dwell together in unity.”


** % man tfyc rubber, reef tljc sail,
(©beg ttje (mice at ebe, nbegeb at prime-


