

UNITED TRADESMEN’S LOD6E,
No. 4, S.A.C.
JUBILEE OF THE LODGE
A Paper read at a Lodge Meeting held on December
20th , iSgB, in the presence of the M. W. the Grand
Master (His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
Bro. S. J. Way), the Mayor of Adelaide (Bro.
A. W. Ware), Officers and Members of Grand
Lodge, Masters, Officers, and Brethren of City ,
Suburban , and Country Lodges.
Some particulars concerning the formation of the Lodge; some
of the most interesting and most curious events recorded in
the Lodge Books during the fifty years of its existence; and
some remarks as to the present position of the Lodge.
Extracted from the Lodge records By the Hon. Secretary, Wpl.
BRO. JAMES EVANS, P.M., Senior Grand Deacon.
ADELAIDE:
J. H. Sherring & Co., Printers, 42, Currie Street.




UNITED TRADESMEN'S LODGE,
No. 4, S.A.C.
JUBILEE OF THE LODGE.
A Paper read at a Lodge Meeting held on December
20th, iSgB, in the presence of the M. W. the Grand
Master (His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
Pro. S. J. Way), the Mayor of Adelaide (Pro.
A. W. Ware), Officers and Members of Grand
Lodge, Masters, Officers, and Prethren of City ,
Suburban, and Country Lodges.
Some particulars concerning the formation of the Lodge; some
of the most interesting and most curious events recorded in
the Lodge Books during the fifty years of its existence; and
some remarks as to the present position of the Lodge.
Extracted from the Lodge records by the Hon. Secretary, Wpl.
BRO. JAMES EVANS, P.M., Senior Grand Deacon.
ADELAIDE;
]. H. Shekrikg & Co., Printers, 42, Currie Street.


OFFICERS.
S.W Bbo. E. H. Leader
J.W " J. H. Jones
Treasurer ... “ E. K. Threlfall
Hon. Secretary ... “ James Evans, P.M., S.G.D.
S.D. " W. F. Egberts
J.D. “ J. M. Cocking
D.C. “ C. J. Chittleborough, P.M.
Organist “ T. H. Jones, Mus. Bac.
LG. “ J. E. Perceval
Stewards... ... “ G. J. Jones, W. Eadfobd, and Q. A. Wake
Tyler “ N. Kildael, P.M.
United Tradesmen’s Lodge
flo. 4, S.fl.C.
— OS.CQ., William OTatotc Shahd.^—
PAST MASTERS.
Beo. H. E. Downer, P.G.M.
“ S. E. Egberts, P.G.Prsvt.
“ J. H. Cunningham, G.Sec.
** S. Solomon, P.G.Pres.B.G.P.
“ F. Slaney Poole, M.A., P.G.Chaplain
“ E. Cooke, P.S.G.W.
“ J. Bee, G.D.C.
“ O. H. SCHOMBURQK
“ James Evans, S.G.D.
“ T. G. Blackwell
“ C. J. Chittleborough
J. H. Cooke


UNITED TRADESMEN’S LODGE,
No. 4, S.A.C.
JUBILEE RETROSPECT.
FORMATION OF THE LODGE.
The only information I have been able to gather from our records
about the foundation of the Lodge relates to the first Installation,
and is as follows :—“ A Dispensation having been granted by the
Prov. G.M. for the Province of South Australia, under the E.C.,
the Prov. G.M., Henry Mildred, and about twenty other Free-
masons met at the Temple Tavern, Gilles Arcade, Adelaide, on
December 12th, 1848, to instal the first W.M., John Lazar, and
the Officers of the United Tradesmen’s Lodge, No. 853.” The
names of the Masons who thus met, and of the Officers who were
installed are recorded but need not be here repeated.
The Prov. G.M., Henry Mildred, having been a relative of the
present Hon. Sec. of the Lodge, that Officer may claim to have
had a family interest in the Lodge from the commencement of
its existence.
NUMBER OF THE LODGE,
In October, 1863, a printed circular was read stating that the
number of the Lodge had been altered. It was resolved —“ 1 hat
as the document did not bear the signature or seal of the Grand
Secretary no notice be taken of it.” From November, 1864,
however, the Lodge number appears in the records as 583 in place
of 853 as before. In May, 1884, the Lodge joined the S.A.
Constitution and received the number it now bears (No. 4).
CO-OPERATING WITH OTHER MASONIC LODGES.
There are many entries in our books showing that from the
commencement of its existence, this Lodge has co-operated with
other Lodges in the matter of Masonic Festivals, Installations,
and other matters, and also in other functions besides Masonic
gatherings. One of the earliest of these entries is as follows :
1849, February— Resolved that the three Lodges (Friendship,
Harmony, and United Tradesmen’s) co-operate and give Bro.
Lazar, W.M. of the United Tradesmen’s Lodge, their patronage
by attending the New Queen’s Theatre, on March Bth
next,


1849, May B—Resolved that the brethren of this Lodge meet the
brethren of the other lodges to celebrate the festival of St. John
the Baptist. (These festivals were celebrated in several subsequent
years.)
1849, Oct. 30 —Resolved that the members of the Lodge
celebrate the Anniversary of its Foundation, on the 12th December
next, by dining together at Bro. I. Solomon’s Temple Tavern, and
invite the whole of the members of the Prov. Grand Lodge to
meet them. (Many subsequent anniversaries of the formation of
the Lodge were marked in a similar manner.)
1851, May 6 — Resolved that the members of this Lodge take
part in the Masonic ceremony at the laying of the foundation
stone of the German and British Hospital.
1853, Oct. — The Lodge resolved to take ten shares in the pro-
posed Masonic Hall.
1853, Dec. 27—Members of the Prov. Grand Lodge of South
Australia and of the Private Lodges met at the New Masonic Hall,
North Terrace, which building was then consecrated in due form,
and the W.M.s of four Lodges were then and there installed
(Harmony, Friendship, United Tradesmen’s, and Unity). (Other
United Installations were held in later years.)
1858, Dec. —An Installation was held in the New Masonic
Hall, North Adelaide.
1877, Nov. —A Committee was appointed to act with other
lodges in collecting subscriptions to purchase a site for a Masonic
Hall.
1879, Dec. —Resolved to subscribe £2 per head towards the
Alfred Masonic Hall.
1880, Dec. —A general meeting of the Craft was held at the
Town Hall Exchange Room to appoint a Committee to acquire a
permanent place of Meeting, the scheme for erecting a Lodge
Room at the Alfred Masonic Hall, Waymouth Street, having been
abandoned.
In 1881 members of this Lodge attended the laying of the
foundation stone of the Freemasons’ Hall, Port Adelaide.
1883, Dec. —Resolved (by 54 votes to 1) that it is desirable
that a Grand Lodge of S.A. be formed, and this Lodge gives its
hearty support to the furtherance of this object.
1886, March— Mostyn Lodge requested that as the R.A.
Chapter, 583, E.C., had ceased to exist under the E.C., that this
Lodge would grant permission for a new Chapter to be affiliated
with it under the S.A.C. The permission was granted.
1886, April— United Tradesmen’s Lodge was informed that
the Supreme Grand Chapter had granted a warrant for a R.A.
Chapter, to be called the S.A. Chapter to be attached to this
Lodge; the first meeting to be held in April, 1886.


1890, Sept. 27 —Members of this Lodge assisted at the laying
of the corner stone of the nave and towers of St. Peters
Cathedral, which stone was laid with Masonic honors by His
Excellency the Earl of Kintore, M.W.G.M.
EARLY SUCCESS OF THE LODGE.
During the early history of this Lodge so many members were
initiated that Emergency Meetings were very frequently held. On
various occasions resolutions were passed that no more initiations
be held till the business in arrear was settled. Petitions were con-
stantly being received from brothers praying that they might be
passed and raised. In 1849, 6 7 members were proposed; in 1854,
61. From 1848 to 1856, both inclusive, 346 names were proposed,
an average of 43 a year during the 8 years. During the 50 years
932 propositions for membership have been made (Initiations and
Joinings).
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
As early as 1850 arrears of subscription were a source of trouble,
and in February of that year it was resolved that the By-Law
which stated that “ the name of any brother whose subscription
is over twelve months in arrear shall be erased from the books,”
should be enforced.
iB6O, May —The W.M. called the attention of the Lodge to
the large amount of arrears due by certain members. He was
authorised to compromise with the members in order to close
their accounts, provided they call off.
BENEVOLENCE.
In 1850, May —Special meetings were held with a view to
establish a Benevolent Fund. Since then a large amount has
been disbursed in relieving cases of necessity.
JEWELS TO I.P.M.s.
The custom of presenting a P.M.’s Jewel to the retiring Master
was commenced in 1851.
LODGE FUNDS.
This Lodge has usually had a good credit balance, and it has on
various occasions been requested to assist other Lodges and
Chapters by loans of money. It has also had other amounts out
at interest.
One of its loan transactions proved very unsatisfactory. In
1885, was lent on Mortgage on some cottages at Glenelg.
The property had to be taken over in satisfaction of the claim,
and several years after it was sold at a considerable loss, after
having been a continual source of trouble to the Lodge and its
officers.


The Lodge’s credit balances may have been due partly to
generally careful management. From August, 1870, for twelve
months no lodge funds were expended in refreshments or
banquets, “owing to depression of the times” the resolution states.
On another occasion (Sept., 1880) the sum to be expended
at Installation Banquets was by resolution “limited to and
“ then only at a change of Masters.”
In 1883, July— lnitiation Fees were increased to seven guineas.
At one time the Lodge received over a year Subscriptions.
Initiation Fees received have reached over a year.
FAX FUND.
In 1884, Bro. Thos. Fax—who for some time had held office as
Treasurer of this Lodge—died, leaving a sum of money to the
Lodge, the interest of which was to be devoted to the education
of an orphan of a poor deceased brother of this Lodge. This
fund has been and is now being devoted to the good object
mentioned by Bro. Fax in his Will. In September, 1884, a Special
Masonic Service was held in memory of Bro. Fax, and the
portrait of our late Brother was obtained and hung in the Banquet
Room of this building where it now is.
TRUSTEES.
The Trustees of the Lodge are Bros. T. G. Blackwell, E. Cooke,
and J. Evans.
LODGE OFFICERS
W.M.s, Wardens, &c. —So many distinguished Brothers have
filled these chairs that time will not permit even to mention names.
I, therefore, refer at length to only two of the more permanent
officers—Secretary and Tyler.
Secretary.— There have been several changes here. On one
occasion the W.M. stated that the Secretary had resigned, and on
account of the small amount of business and the state of the
Lodge finances, he had not appointed a successor but had taken
upon himself the duties of Secretary. Bro, S. E. Roberts acted
as Secretary in 1865 and 1873. In 1877 he was again elected,
and he faithfully and efficiently discharged the duties till 1898,
when failing health compelled him to retire. The Lodge, on his
retiring from the office of Secretary, cordially and unanimously
elected him an Honorary Member in consideration of his long
and valuable services. He was elected an Honorary Member of
Friendship Lodge in December, 1873.
Tyler.— Five members acted as Tyler between 1848 and 1880.
One of these brothers absconded after embezzling money belong-
ing to the Lodge. Bro. Monck held office for 23 years, from 1857
till 1880, when he died. Bro. Kildael has acted as Tyler, since 1880.


ORGANIST AND CHOIR.
Some years ago it was decided to have the services of a voluntary
Organist and Choir, but although—like the American Organist—
our brothers “ did their best,” the voluntary system was soon given
up, and the Lodge was glad to again secure the regular services of
an efficient paid Organist and Choir, whose efforts add so much to
the pleasure of our meetings. In 1885 a hearty vote of thanks
was passed to Bro. Adams for his generous gift of “ iron railings
for the Choir.” (No doubt to keep j these brothers from “falling
out.”)
PLACES OF MEETING.
The meeting room has frequently been changed, nearly a dozen
different rooms having been used by the Lodge. In 1848, the
Lodge met at the Temple Tavern, Gilles Arcade. In 1851, at the
Royal Exchange Hotel, Hindley Street. In 1853, at Bro. Ramsay’s
Napoleon Buonaparte Hotel, King William Street, and sub-
sequently at the Masonic Hall. In 1856, the Board of the Masonic
Hall Association gave notice that the Hall was to be sold, and
possession would have to be given up. 1857, May—The Lodge
removed to the Prince of Wales Tavern, Angas Street, and in Oct.,
1857, to Bro. White’s Assembly Rooms, King William Street.
1862, June —Resolved to move to Bro. Aldridge’s Rooms. 1863,
Sept.—Resolved to return to the Prince of Wales Hotel, Angas
Street. 1865, Nov.—Bro. Henning’s large room over Mr. Davis’
Shop, Rundle Street, was used by the Lodge. 1869, Jan. and
Feb.—Met at the Freemasons’Tavern, Pirie Street. March, 1869
—Again met at the Prince Alfred Hotel, King William Street.
1871, Dec. —Alfred Masonic Hall, Waymouth Street. 1875, May
—Eagle Chambers, King William Street. 1881, Feb. 15 —Met for
the first time at the Freemasons’ Hall, Flinders Street.
GRAND LODGE.
Many references to Grand Lodge appear in our records.
There appear to have been, at times, some serious disagreements
in Grand Lodge. In 1851, a Committee of the Grand Lodge
having investigated a matter between the Prov. G.M. and the
Deputy Prov. G.M., requested the Prov. G.M. to resign.
1851, May —Resolved to write to the Grand Lodge, England,
re delay in remission of Warrant and Certificates.
1852, Sept. —A quarrel occurred between two members of this
Lodge. The matter was referred to the Prov. Grand Secretary.
One of the two brothers, then Treasurer of the Lodge, resigned
his office and called off.
March —United Tradesmen’s Lodge wrote to the Grand
Lodge, England, with respect to forming a Royal Arch Chapter.
1854, Jan.— The form of application for Royal Arch Chapter
was received from England.


1857, May—The W.M. of a Tasmanian Lodge, and that lodge
having “committed high contumacy” against the Prov. Grand
Lodge of Tasmania, the United Tradesmen’s Lodge was cautioned
against receiving as a visitor any member of the Union Lodge of
Tasmania.
1861, Jan. —Bro. H. E. Downer was for the third time elected
W.M. The Prov. Grand Lodge having ceased to exist, a dispensa-
tion permitting Bro. Downer to act for the third year could not be
procured, and the “ dispensation ” had, therefore, to be “dispensed”
with.
1861, Feb.—This Lodge had the temerity to pass a resolution
disapproving of the appointment of a certain brother as Prov.
G.M., and it was decided to prepare a memorial to the G.M.,
England, on the subject.
1862, May —The Prov. G.M. referred to, with his Officers,
visited this Lodge, when a P.M. and the S.W. left the room, and
refused to re-enter, although requested by the Prov. G.M. so to do.
Subsequently, however, they did return to the lodge room.
1867, Aug. —Certain brothers suspended by the District G.M.
appealed to the Grand Lodge, England. The appeal was allowed,
and the suspension reversed by the Grand Lodge,
1877, June —Resolved that this Lodge petition the District
Grand Lodge of South Australia to strengthen the action of sister
lodges in England, in memorializing the Grand Lodge of England
to enter a protest against the continued exclusion of Jews from
Masonic Lodges of Germany.
1878, May —The Lodge cordially agreed with the action taken
by the Grand Lodge of England in refusing to admit members of
the Grand Orient of France, since the action they have taken in
omitting from their Constitution the name of the Diety.
1884, March —The District G.M. of South Australia revoked
the appointment of the Deputy D.G.M, and stated that Bro. J.
H. Cunningham resigned the Office of District Grand Secretary,
and promised to hand over the books, &c., but subsequently re-
fused to carry out the arrangement, “ and has set my authority at
defiance.” The District G.M. signified his disapproval of the
holding of the next ordinary meeting of the District Grand Lodge,
and “ warned and prohibited ” every mason from attending the
same.
1884, April —Resolved that all the property of the Lodge be
vested in four Trustees until the Grand Lodge of South Australia
is formed, when the Trustees shall transfer the property to the
W.M., Officers, and Brothers of this Lodge.
1884, May 20 —Resolved that as the Grand Lodge of South
Australia has been established, the present Charter to the Grand
Lodge of England be surrendered, and we place ourselves under


the Grand Lodge of South Australia. The brethren were then
marshalled by the D.C. past the chair, and each saluted the Warrant
from the Grand Lodge of England. On the same date the
authority from the M.W.G.M. of South Australia was received,
and the first meeting under the new Constitution was held.
LODGE TROUBLES.
In 1857, owing to a dispute, it was proposed that the W.M. be
requested to resign the Chair. The dispute was, however, settled,
but in Feb., 1858, a Committee was appointed to consider certain
charges against the late W.M. The Committee reported that the
late W.M.’s conduct had been most unwarrantable, disgraceful, and
insulting. It was resolved that he be requested not to again
attend the Lodge. He promptly sent in his resignation.
1863, March —Thirteen pages of a minute book (x 6 x 10 in.)
are filled with a report of a lodge meeting, when it was resolved
that four brothers (two of whom are now “ eminent masons ”) be
excluded from the Lodge for having combined to blackball every
person proposed during the then W.M.’s term office. In Oct.,
1865, this resolution was rescinded, and some of the four brothers
rejoined.
1864, Aug.—A visiting W.M., one of the four brothers just
mentioned, was refused admission to the Lodge.
GRATITUDE FOR ASSISTANCE
1864, Jan. —A brother mason, a ship captain, who ten years
previously had received assistance from the Freemasons of Adelaide
in a time of sickness and distress, sent to Adelaide a gold watch
and chain of considerable value to be sold, and the proceeds
devoted to benevolent purposes.
SOME “CURIOS” FROM THE MINUTE BOOK.
1851, Feb. —Two brothers were examined as to their proficiency
in the 2nd Degree. The W.M. declared that one of the two had
not sufficiently advanced to induce him to confer the higher Degree
upon him. (Comparatively recently I have, with regret, noticed,
in various lodges, that some other candidates have given the
W.M. cause to act in a similar manner.)
1852, Nov. 30 —In consequence of the fire which occurred this
evening in Grenfell Street, there were not sufficient members
present to hold a Lodge. It was, therefore, adjourned for a week.
1854, Aug. 15 —The W.M. hoped that the brethren would come
“ cloathed ” in black coats, and, if possible, black “ trowsers.”
1875, Jan. —Resolved that brothers be allowed to appear in
white clothes during the hot weather. (This resolution has not
been rescinded.)


Many entries appear of the Lodge being called off for refresh-
ments for five, ten, or fifteen minutes, and then recalled to labor.
In fact, it was almost a regular custom formerly.
1855, May —Resolved that Masters of Lodges taking part in
the business of the working of the Lodge shall not be charged for
their suppers.
1859, Aug. —Only six members being present, a Lodge meeting
was adjourned.
1865, April —Bro. S. E. Roberts having being proposed as a
Joining Member, was to be ballotted for, but there were not
sufficient ballot balls. The Tyler was called in and told to procure
more ballot balls, but he did not succeed, and the ballot was post-
poned till May, when Bro. Roberts was elected.
1868, Dec. —Meeting to instal W.M. Owing to absence of
P.M.s competent to perform the ceremony, it was postponed. The
W.M. (Bro. Dr. A. Mclntyre) was installed at a regular lodge
meeting of Harmony Lodge, in January, 1869.
SOME WELL-KNOWN NAMES, FORMERLY MEMBERS
OF UNITED TRADESMEN’S LODGE.
Andrews, R. B.; Abrahams, A.; Boucaut, J. P.; Bray, Tom
Cox; Bagot, John Tuthill; Deering, Sami.; Fenn, Chas.; Fisher,
Jas. Hurtle ; Hartley, J. A.; Madley, L. G.; Mann, Chas.; Pater,
T. K.; Salom, M.; Tolmer, Alex.; and many others might be
mentioned.
PRESENT POSITION OF THE LODGE.
There are now 57 members’ names on our roll.
The Financial Statement at date of last balance, May 31st, 1898,
showed a credit balance on current account,
The amount now held by the Trustees under the Fax Bequest
is £s 6 °-
Present Members whose names have been longest on the books 5
and dates of joining : —1849, S. E. Roberts ; 1857, H. E. Downer •
1869, J H. Cunningham ; 1874, S. Solomon, W. Whitehill;
W. W. Shand (the present W.M.), Rev. F. S. Poole, L. Grayson’
J. Evans (now Hon. Sec.), 1877, R. J. Willshire; 1878, E. Cooke]
Our team of Officers is considered a good one, and I believe
they rather pride themselves on the quality of their lodge work.
Like some other lodges our attendances are at times smaller than
we like, and there has for some time been a strong feeling that it
would be very advantageous to one or two other lodges, as well as
to us, could we but join our forces.
In conclusion, we express our gratitude to the Great Architect
of the Universe for all the favors received by the Lodge during
the past half century, and we implicitly trust Him for such time as
we are permitted to labor in the lodge below,


3 1508 02055844 6 ;


