

Jubilee Year
1885 1935
of Shepparton Presbyterian
Charge
Including the Churches at —
ORRVALE
KIALLA
AND
PINE LODGE
Minister: REV. JAMES GEORGE SCARFE
Celebrated from August 11th to 26th, 1935.
"He hath not left Himself without witnesses."


Golden Jubilee — !
OF THE SHEPPARTON PRESBYTERIAN CHARGE
PINE LODGE CHURCH
SHEPPARTON CHURCH
ORRVALE CHURCH
KIALLA CHURCH


THE MODERATOR, THE RT,
STEELE, M.A.,
who inaugurated the Jubilee Celebrations of shep-
parton Charge on Sunday, August 11, 1935.


A FOREWORD
The trumpet of Jubilee, sounded in the fiftieth year of the congregation of
ISRAEL, is represented in our case by the united thanksgivings of the Church com-
prising the SHEPPARTON PRESBYTERIAN CHARGE. Our history affords
abundant evidence of the good hand of the GOD of Bethel upon His people. “The
LORD hath done great things for us whereof we are glad.”
Our thought is fittingly portrayed in the verses of Dr. E. N. Herrington’s hymn:
“GOD of Eternity, LORD of the Ages, Thankful we come to Thee, LORD of the
FATHER and SPIRIT, SAVIOUR of nations,
men; , Praising Thy faithfulness, mercy and grace
Thine is the glory oi time s numbered „ ~
p ag . egj Shown to our fathers in past generations,
Thine is the power to revive us again. Pledge of Thy love to our people and race.”
Actually our history begins at least 9 years before the settlement of the first
minister and our establishment as a separate charge. Taking a general survey, four
distinct features may be summarised.
I.—THE GEOGRAPHICAL BOUNDARIES.
The territory covered by the pioneer missionary extended from the river at
Murchison to the Murray. At that time Shepparton appeared as only a small village
nestling on the banks of the Goulburn. Our mother church was in the thriving and
much larger township of Mooroopna on the other side of the river. We were indebted
to their first minister, Rev. W. Thomson in 1876, for starting our congregational
life in the Shepparton Shire Hall
11. THE ROMANCE OF DEVELOPMENT
Changes in the designation of the Presbytery reflect a rapid growth of our
forefathers’ faith.
(a) The first name recorded was The Castlemaine Presbytery. On January 2,
1876, Mr. Thomson, then a Home Missionary, was placed under their care. A little
later, July 12, 1876, they inducted and ordained him as the earliest MOOROOPNA
minister.
(b) The Presbytery of Seymour was next constituted on December 5, 1876,
with jurisdiction over this portion of the State. It included the newly-fledged
minister in its membership.
(c) The third and present title, The Goulburn Valley Presbytery, became neces-
sary through the increased number of charges. This formation was authorised by
the General Assembly of 1892, with Shepparton as the natural centre.
111. A CIRCUMFERENCE OF CHARGES
Practically the whole of this Presbytery is composed of churches that radiate from
Mooroopna. From this hub generated movements whereby the Presbyterian cause
became established at Tatura, Kyabram, Numurkah, Tongala and Dookie, as well
as Shepparton.
IV.—NOTICEABLE CHANGES
Travelling is very much easier. Bullock waggons over rough winding tracks
have been superseded by rapid rail and motor traffic on bituminised roads. Mr.
Thomson’s “first footin’” is thus described: “Hot, dusty, tired, ne stepped out of
the mail coach from Seymour, 60 miles away. Hours elapsed before Mr. Lyons, the
Mooroopna Church secretary, put in an appearance. He made amends for any delay.
Sunday morning he traversed the streets armed with a bullock bell calling folk to
worship. His vigorous effort drew a crowded congregation together.”
Well made bridges and highwavs now span the river to Shepparton instead of
the old punt at McKinney’s store (in High St., near Commercial Bank). The little
hamlet has grown into a promising and vigorous Borough. An artificial lake covers
what was the town swamp. Adorning the Valley are farms and irrigated orchards
which once formed large pastoral runs. Staunch worshippers also sought an improve-
ment on the public hall for worship. They determined to erect a Church for Divine
service, the golden anniversary of the opening of which we now celebrate.


HONOR TO THE PIONEERS!
Bearing the Heal and Burden of the Day
MESSAGE OF CONGRATULATION FROM FIRST PREACHER
REV. WILLIAM THOMSON
were continued by my successor, the Rev. Mr. Finlay, until
the new minister was inducted.
The leading Presbyterian families in Shepparton in my
time were the Messrs. McKinney, Samuel McDonald, Bar-
tholomew and Butters. They drove me across the punt to the
morning- service in Mooroopna and were liberal supporters of
the Church. Mrs. S. McDonald was a daughter of the late
Mr. Lambie, minister of Little River, Geelong. Mrs. Bar-
tholomew was a daughter of the late Rev. McKenzie Fraser,
of High Church and St. Giles, Geelong.
When I began the evening service fortnightly in Shep-
parton, they and other Presbyterians attended. When I got
an assistant (Mr. Snell) about six months before I left Moo-
roopna, the service in the evening was held every Sunday,
and a service was begun in Kialla in the State school room.
I had great encouragement in my pioneering work from
the Presbyterians of Sheppartcn.
- I hope you will have a very happy
and successful Jubilee Celebration
in Shepparton
Kindest regards to all. Yours very sincerely,
WM. THOMSON.
The following letter to Rev. J. G. Scarfe from the Rev.
Win, Thomson (the first minister who held Presbyterian ser-
vices in Shepparton Public Hall) is of special interest at this
time:—
Assembly Hall, Melbourne,
5/8/35.
Dear Mr. Scarfe,
The weather is too cold and the journey too long to go
to Shepparton for the Jubilee Celebrations.
Please ask the Shepparton Congregation to excuse
ray absence and give them my heartiest congratula-
tions on the attainment of your 50th year with
a settled minister.
I began the services when minister of Mooroopna about
the end of the year 1876. I think the Rev. Mr. Johnston was
inducted about two years after I left Mooroopna. (Rev. W.
Thomson accepted the call to Camperdown in November 1883
and was succeeded by Rev. H. H. Finlay on September 16,
1884). When I left Mooroopna the services in Shepparton
THE LATE MR. THOMAS
GUTHRIE
who purchased the Church site on
our behalf.


The Reginning of the Tharge
The following attended a subsequent meeting
to make Shepparton strong enough to call a
minister, namely, Messrs. McPherson and Mc-
Donald (Congupna), Rogerson and Sadler (Pine
Lodge), Knox and Streeter (Dookie), Suther-
land and Clydesdale (Shepparton). They also
urged the admittance of younger men for the
ministry.
On August 18, 1885, the Presbytery of Sey-
mour inducted and ordained the Rev. R.
Johnston at the Shepparton Public Hall. The
helpers at that time included Mrs. Morris (nee
Miss Stewart), who is the oldest living member
who attended the first services held in the Shire
Hall as far back as 1876. Mr. Don is specially
mentioned for faithful services; Mr. McDonald,
auctioneer; Mr. Attwood, first superintendent of
the Sunday School in 1883; Mr. T. Guthrie,
of the Broken River, several members of whose
family still reside in Shepparton. Mr. Guthrie
was indirectly responsible for securing the
minister’s life partner, Miss Muir, who came
on a visit to his home. Then followed the in-
troduction to the cleric. Subsequently she be-
came Mrs. Johnston in 1887. The newly married
couple set up their home in Edward street, near
Fairley’s, where the first son was born.
Meanwhile the idea of a new Church was not
forgotten. The land originally given by Mr.
William Fraser in High street was sold for £5O
and the site on which the Church now stands
(Fryers street) was secured at a Crown land
sale by Mr. T. Guthrie on behalf of the con-
gregation. The land was in its native state,
covered with box trees, and arrangements were
made for grubbing these out, fencing the pro-
REV. ROBINSON JOHNSTON
1885—1888
With the advent of Mr. Johnston from
New Zealand is associated the beginning of
the Shepparton Charge. Rev. A. Chambers
(Tatura) presided at the Presbytery meeting,
not long before, when Mr. Gourlay, of Kialla,
proposed and passed a motion for a division
of the Mooroopna Charge into two. The
river Goulburn was decided upon as the boun-
dary.
perty, and erecting thereon a buggy shed and
stable.
Messrs. A. B. Binger and John Attwood were
deputed to secure plans for the building and,
after twelve months of studying plans from
Yarrawonga and elsewhere, the design of the
Avenel church was finally adopted as suitable
for a place of worship.
The tender of Morris and Kittle was accep-
ted on August 31, 1887, for building the brick
Church at a cost of £463 17/6, and it was
opened in 1888. The Rev. Ingiis, of Ballarat,
held the opening service in connection with the
Church in the Public Hall on January 25, 1888,
as the building was not quite ready for occu-
pation. The occasion was well remembered when
this minister, although being very lame, proved
an eloquent speaker, and specially gifted as a
lecturer on Scotch worthies.
Mrs. E. H. Robertson enjoyed the honour of
being the first bride married in the new Church
and her daughter, Mrs. George Cronk, of being
the first christened there.
Nearly a year afterwards, in 1888, the minister
intimated his intention of accepting a call to
Lake Rowan. He received a suitable testimonial,
thanking him for untiring energy in the Church,
for their advancement spiritually, educational-
ly, and socially. For continual effort to save
souls, and preach Christ crucified—concluding
with the prayer that prosperity might follow
him and the Almighty continue to bless. This
was signed by the first committee:—-Thomas
Guthrie, Thomas Geddes, Joseph Marchant,
Henry Wallace, Alfred Binger, W. McClure
Abernethy, T. M. Knight, John Attwood, Wil-
liam Clydesdale, D. Ingles, Robert Graham.


“The Charge at that time,’’ he said, “con-
sisted of Shepparton, Kialla, Congupna, Dookie,
and Pine Lodge. Three services were held each
Sunday—Shepparton once always, and two each
of the others in turn. I had been settled only
a brief period when Mr. John Sutherland,
solicitor, who was also the Church treasurer—
remembered by all who knew him as a Christian
gentleman—suggested the holding of two ser-
vices in Shepparton each Sunday, since the
growing circumstances appeared to warrant the
change. Thus it was that the morning service
was introduced, and this opportunity for the
attendance of children more than fully justified
the proponent’s optimism, proving a source of
ultimate strength to the sacred cause. Mr.
Sutherland wag always generous, as he was also
a practical man, and he backed his suggestion
by a promise to double his financial support to
the Church.
“When the two-service plan was adopted
Dookie was entirely cut off, there becoming ap-
parent in the others a steady growth of all
congregations at that time.”
If example were needed of Mr. Shallberg’s
influence, that might be found in his successful
Over 40 Year Ago
REV. J. H. SHALLBERG, B.A.
(1889—1894).
He became the second settled minister
after a vacancy of eleven months. From his
cosy Melbourne home, where he lives in re-
tirement, he related the following reminiscen-
ces to a representative of “The Shepparton
News.” His wile recently passed away, much
beloved as an executive member of the Vic-
torian P.W.M.U. She was also held in high
esteem by the congregations of this Charge.
effort to have set apart a common, adjacent to
the town, as a village settlement. In that he
became supported by the Rev. Father McCarthy.
Certain tradesmen, whose time was only par-
tially occupied, had waited on Mr. Shallberg,
urging him to lead a deputation to the Council
to have the common opened up for settlement
so that they might have some occupation, dur-
ing their slack times of trade, and thus avoid
the necessity for their leaving home. That
course was adopted and proved of great help
at the time.
Reminded of those facts concerning this set-
tlement, Mr. Shallberg rejoined, happily, “I
need hardly say there was much opposition since
so many had felt it would prove a means of
bringing paupers to the district.”
“When I came to Shepparton there was no
Presbyterian manse,” he added. “A property,
afterwards greatly improved, was bought at the
back of the Church from Mr. Attwood, and that
has happily served.”
On December 9, 1894, the Rev. Shallberg
resigned and a seven months’ vacancy ensued
before the minister from Cobram became in-
stalled as his successor.
CHURCH AND SCHOOL
HALL AT SHEPPARTON


SHEPPARTON SESSION
Left to Right: R. Steele, J. T. Stuart, J. Caldwell, Rev. J. G. Scarfe, W. Elliot, K. Broom-
field (Session Clerk), J. Douglas.
SHEPPARTON BOARD OF MANAGEMENT
Sitting (left to right): R. H. Thomas, W. Gilchrist, V. E. Vibert (secretary), Rev. J. G.
Scarfe, A. Endall (treasurer), C. Mansell (jubilee secretary), L. Coulstock. Standing: W.
Pearce, A. W. R. Sims, E. J. Vibert, S. R. McPherson, E. G. Cameron, A. Grant, D. Ross,
J. McKinnon, G. Chessells.


ACTIVITIES OF THE SUNDAY SCHOOL
SUNDAY SCHOOL HALL, SHEPPARTON
Evidently the Sunday School started in the
Shire Hall in 1883, two years before the in-
duction of our first minister. One of the
scholars of that time, Mr. James Guthrie, holds
a prize given in that year.
Mrs. Joseph Marchant, Mr. John Attwood,
and Mr. A. B. Binger were the leaders of the
Sunday School in the early days. Mr. Attwood
was superintendent, but after his death Mr.
Binger carried on the work until he left for
Nathalia in June, 1889. Mr. T. M. Knight, su-
perintendent for many years, succeeded Mr.
Binger. “Much credit,” says Mr. Binger in a
letter dated July 3, 1935, “is due to Mrs. Mar-
chant for the part she took in starting the school
and for many years afterwards as teacher.”
Mrs. Seimons, one of the earliest teachers
and still a member of the Church, holds (as
also do a few others) a certificate present-
ed by the Sunday School to commemorate the
diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria in 1897.
The text, evidently arranged by the Rev. Frank
Milne, is 111 John 1:4 —‘ I have no greater joy
than that my children walk in truth.” The
Sunday School staff is likewise mentioned: Mr.
T. M. Knight (superintendent), Mrs. J. Mar-
chant (treasurer), Mr. A. Wiseman (secretary),
Miss McCracken (organist), Miss McLean (li-
brarian), Mr. Don (roll officer), together with
Mesdames H. Marchant, Milne, Murray, Misses
Guthrie, Hogg, McDonald, and Fitz-John, and
Mr. Murray.
Steady growth in the Shepparton Sunday
School caused the Board of Management much
concern. They considered the advisability of
renting a public hall and the means of meeting
the extra expense involved. In the meantime
a fund for the erection of a school hall was
MR. and the late MRS. JOSEPH MARCHANT
who were keenly interested in the formation of the
Sunday School. Mr. Marchant, a former treasurer of
the Church, returned for the Jubilee Celebration.
started during the Rev. F. Milne’s ministrations,
but the building of the hall only became pos-
sible in Rev. H. A. Erskine’s time.
When the tender of Messrs. J. D. Mitchell
and H. Thompson for £579 19/0 was accepted
on April 29, 1902, a further step in the Church’s
progress was taken. In the presence of a large
crowd of onlookers, with scholars mounted on
a platform, the Hon. William Orr, M.L.C., be-
loved and remembered for his sterling qualities,
laid the foundation stone on August 11, 1902.
The site was previously occupied bv the late
Mr. John Attwood’s workshop. Whilst the
building was in progress, Mr. George Mundy
contracted to make 45 kauri seats at a cost of
22/3 each. Plastering of the interior walls at
a cost of £3O was met by the generous offer of
Mr. James Stott.
Still further progress was made in the attend-
ance, and the Board of that day considered
the kindergarten children should not continue
to meet in the re-modelled Church, whereupon
the Rev. George Paul maintained that the only
way out of the difficulty was to build the ante-
room to the school hall, which became an
accomplished fact in 1909 at a cost of £l4O.
At the same time a piano costing £6O was added
to the equipment.
Following upon Mr. Knight’s transfer to
Kyabram in 1907, Mr. J. T. Stuart took charge
and occupied the position with great credit for
nearly 20 years, afterwards handing over the
reins of government to Mr. Robert Broomfield
During Mr. Broomfield’s regime the morning
Sunday School was inaugurated. It has proved
a success because of the increased attendances
and the opportunity of attending the first por-
tion of the Church service. The children also
provide a junior choir for the morning service.


SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHERS OF 30 YEARS AGO
Front row (left to right): Miss Flora Carroll, Mrs. Erskine, Miss Isabel Martin, Mrs.
Knight, Mrs. Marchant, Miss Mary Don, Miss Alice Palmer. Standing: Mr. D. Ash,
Miss Mary Palmer, Miss Ella Tomkins, Mr. T. M. Knight, Rev. H. A. Erskine, Miss
Ella Donald, Miss Taylor, Miss N. Hilet, Mr. N. G. Hickman.
TEACHERS AND STAFF OF SHEPPARTON SUNDAY SCHOOL
Front low (left to right): Misses Marion Sims, Ivy Hemingway, Jean Mansell (sec-
retary), Mr. Robt. Broomfield (superintendent), Mrs. J. G. Scarfe, Misses Marion
Broomfield and Hilda McCauley. Second Row: Misses Joyce Taylor and Jean Taylor,
Mrs. J, McKinnon, Misses E. Furphy, Ivy Grant, Molly Edgell, Winnie Sims, E. Keats
Dyson. Back Row: Messrs. L. Furphy, J. McKinnon, Rev. J. G. Scarfe, Mr. J. Wilson.


A DI e Th at Mas Severed
REV. FRANK MILNE, M.A., B.D.
1895—1901
(ASSEMBLY MODERATOR IN 1928-29)
The third minister was inducted on July
17, 1895. He was a gifted Hebrew scholar,
and acceptable preacher, and eventually be-
came the Assembly Moderator in 1928-29.
Early in his ministry prominence was given
to the local celebrations connected with Queen
Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee in 1897.
On October 11, 1898, an application was
made—and granted—to build the branch
Church at Kialla.
During his ministry in Shepparton the Rev.
F. Milne had received, in August, 1900, a pres-
sing call to the important charge of Bairns-
dale. (He had previously received a call to
Launceston, which he declined). At that time
a special meeting was called and Mr. Hogg ap-
pointed chairman to consider what action the
Board might take. He reported having inter-
viewed Mr. Milne, to whom he had stated his
belief that the congregation here desired him
to remain. The meeting had been called to
consider what should be done.
Each member favoured writing a letter to
him, and that a copy be sent to Kialla and to
Pine Lodge congregations as follows:
“Rev. F. Milne, Shepparton.
Dear Sir, —We, the undersigned members of
the Session and Board of Management cf the
Shepparton Presbyterian Church, desire to ex-
press to you our appreciation of your devoted
service as minister of our Church, and our
unabated confidence in you. coupled with our
earnest wish, in which we feel sure every mem-
ber and adherent cf the congregation will join;
and, while we are unwilling to stand in the way
of your promotion, that you wall continue to
minister to this charge. We recognise that,
during the summer season, the work is trying,
and it will be our endeavour to arrange that
you shall have a sufficient holiday in summer.
Should you see your way to continue with us,
we promise to render faithful and loyal support.
—James Hogg (Elder), Geo. Gordon (Elder),
J. Marchant, W. Clydesdale, T. M. Knight, F.
Friend, Albert Law, Jno. Sutherland, G. Hos-
sack, A. H. Wale, C. McPherson, A. Wishart,
snr. (Elder), A. Wishart, jnr., and H. M. Par-
ker.”
This was acknowledged by Mr. Milne, who-
stated the final decision rested with the Goul-
burn Valley Presbytery, -which body would con-
sider the matter at its meeting at Tatura on
September 25.
It was not until late in February, 1901, the
call was sustained Evidently a strong appeal
at the Presbytery meeting by Mr. J. Suther-
land and Mr. H. Gawne, of Pine Lodge, oppos-
ing his departure, deeply affected the minister.
Mr. Milne, with great emotion, reviewed the
circumstances of the call and his promise to-
personally strive after the re-uniting of the
Bairnsdale congregation. He felt it his duty
to go to them.
It was a Notable Farewell Gathering.
The high esteem of parishioners, and the cor-
dial relations between them and the minister
and his wife found expression in substantial
gifts from young and old, including one from
Mooroopna people.


LADIES’ ORGANISATIONS—SHEPPARTON
Front Row (left to right): Mesdames Seimons, L. Coulstock, A. Graham, J. G. Scarfe,
D. Ross, J. McKinnon, S. Day. Second Row: Mesdames A. Strawhorn, G. V. Furphy,
J. Grant, J. Caldwell, G. W. Foster, Miss Chessells, Mrs. Bell, Mrs. McColl. Back
Row: Mesdames D. Cameron, G. Chessells, Leak, Kell, Berkinsleigh.
THE P.W.M.U.
Ever since its inception in May, 1905, the
local branch has emphasised the value of mis-
sionary enterprise. Largely through their noble
outlook, unselfish devotion, courage and deter-
mination, they have enlisted the support of the
congregation in the great work of Home and
Foreign Missions. Their valued contribution
also constitutes a spiritual saviour of health and
progress for our denomination. Mrs. Erskine
was possibly the first president, while Mrs. Mc-
Kinnon also worthily occupied this position for
a year. Mrs. J. F. Fairley has been the esteemed
president for a number of years. She is ably
supported by Mrs. L. Coulstock as secretary,
and Mrs. S. Day as treasurer.
THE WOMEN’S GUILD.
Though not so old in terms of years, the
Women’s Guild has been a very useful adjunct
in the support and adornment of the Sanctuary.
For many years the ladies of the congregation
generously assisted the board with a Scotch Fair
and other entertainments. But through the
regular organisation of the Guild regular month-
ly meetings are held to also foster and retain
a continuous work. Amongst their many gifts
may be noted the communion table and chairs,
the Church carpet, pedestal, interior renova-
tions, while they also assisted with new fencing,
etc. Mrs. A. Graham, one of our worthy pio-
neers, gave a good lead for many years. Mrs,
Donald Ross continues in the fine succession
of presidents, with Mrs. G. V. Furphy as the
treasurer and Mrs. Elliot as secretary.
THE MOTHERS’ UNION.
Formed during this year, the above organisa-
tion promises to provide a much needed want.
Young mothers are enabled, at least once a
month, to enjoy an afternoon while their child-
ren are cared for in the adjoining kindergarten
room. Mrs. J. G. Scarfe, president, Mrs.
Birkensleigh secretary, and Mrs. Twose are the
foundation officers.
The Objects of this Organisation are Threefold:
1— To uphold the sanctity of marriage.
2 To awaken in mothers of all classes a
sense of their great responsibility in
training- their boys and girls—the fathers
and mothers of the future.
3 To organise in every place a band of
mothers who will unite in prayer and
seek, by their own example, to lead their
families in purity and holiness of life.
PRESBYTERIAN GIRLS’ FELLOWSHIP
Mrs. W. Fairley formed the branch in October,
1925. She left shortly afterwards so that the
regular meetings did not start until March. 1926.
This daughter organisation of the P.W.M.U.
is again seeking to assert new strength and in-
terest in their branch. They are greatly in-
debted to Mrs. J. McKinnon for her nine years’
unselfish leadership. She still takes a lively in-
terest in their welfare. Miss Marion Sims is
secretary, and M'ss Jean Taylor treasurer.


Happy Memaries
REV. H. A. ERSKINE, B.D.
1901—1907
At the board meeting on October 10,
1901, there came the fourth minister’s accept-
ance of the call. At the same meeting the
deaths of Mr. Colin McPherson and a little
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Hossack (by
accident) were the subject of a sad and
appreciative motion, the minutes of this meet-
ing being the first to be confirmed by the
signature of Henry Albert Erskine when he
presided on November 4, 1901.
Vivid is the remembrance of the Rev. H. A.
Erskine, who arrived in Shepparton, on show
•eve, 1901, after four years’ ministry in the
•Ovens Valley at Bright, coming from the land
of snow to this home of greater sunshine. The
vast expanse of sky, he writes, “seemed
strange, yet glorious, after residence in so deep
a valley. We had been welcome guests with
Mr. John Sutherland and his family for several
4ays, and there had been formed between us a
lasting friendship which time has not obliter-
ated. So graciously were we welcomed, and so
wide grew that circle, we were drawn to the
hearts of the young folk, of which there are
still happy memories—memories growing bright-
er as age advances.
“So much of kindness is remembered of that
six fruitful years of service, and so happy have
grown our recollections, Shepparton to us is
synonymous of Christian hospitality.”
“To mention friends would exhaust space;
yet, might I intrude with elders remembered in
Messrs Jas. Hogg, W. P. Milne, A. H. Wale, G.
Hossack and .1. Knight—good men all. Miss
N. Hilet (Mrs. E. Quiggin) was organist
throughout my ministry. Young men who were
a delight to me were Messrs E. E. Pescott and
W. Armstrong, chief workers.”
“The Sunday School was built in my time
and the Church enlargement was under way as
I departed. Spiritually those years were the
best in my life. Faithful and sincere was the
congregation, and this called for the
best that was in their minister. Delightful in-
terviews with old Mrs. Wishart, who had been
a member of the Bible Class of the famous Mr.
Cheyne, cf Dundee, I recall with delight,”
“Health reasons reluctantly compelled me to
close with an offer from Maryborough. That,
too, has been a happy change, and has meant
restored health, and I have lived with folk who
have keen kind, loving and sincere. Here have
I remained ever since and from here I call:
‘Advance Shepparton: God’s blessing be
upon its people.’ ”
On 15th May, 1905, the Presbytery ex-
pressed its pleasure at the establishment of the
P.W.M.U. in Shepparton. This organisation has
rendered efficient missionary service for the
congregation ever since.
Before closing this stage in the experiences
of this church there were two circumstances in
the termination of Mr. Erskine’s, ministry which
occasioned particular regret. The first
was on May 19, 1907, when, through the de-
parture to Kyabram, after 20 years’ service,
of Mr. T. M. Knight (since deceased), the
Church was called upon to lose one of its most
loyal workers in church and Sabbath school.
Three months later the death of Mr. Finlay
Mcßae was recorded—an elder since 1886.
He had been a great toiler and there was much
comfort in the remembrance of his steadfast
faith.


SERVICES HELD AT KIALLA AS EARLY AS 1873
KIALLA BOARD OF MANAGEMENT:
Sitting (left to right): Mr. A. Kerr, Rev. J. G. Scarfe, Mr. Moses Stewart. Standing:
S. J. Harrison, W. L. Ross, R. F. E. Newnham, E. J. Gribben, D. Kay, H. Grahame
This part of the district was originally por-
tion of the Arcadia Station before being cut
into blocks suitable for farming. The first
services were conducted by the Rev. Swift, of
Murchison as early as 1873 in the home of Mr.
Peter Sinclair, now occupied by Mr. E. Grib-
ben, and also at “Arcadia Homestead,” now the
home of Mr. Wm. Ross.
Mr. M. Stewart (still residing on the land he
selected) and Mrs. E. Grahame, of Moonee
Ponds, form the connecting links with the early
congregation. Both also remember the regular
services begun in 1878 by the Rev. W. Thom-
son, of Mcoroopna. These pioneers are
worthily represented by members of their
families in the Church today.
At the beginning of 1883 Mr. Snell came as
a missionary assistant to Rev. Thomson, to
help organise the growing congregation.
The Presbytery minutes of May 7, 1883,
state that Kialla was separated from the Euroa
charge and attached to Mooroopna, and with the
division of the latter charge by resolution of
the Presbytery on March 11, 1884, Kialla be-
came a portion of the proposed new Sheppar-
ton charge, which was constituted in 1885 with
the advent of Rev. E. Johnston.
Since Rev. R. Johnston began his ministry
there, they have continued as an integral
part under succeeding ministers. The State
school was the centre for worship, and Miss I.
Field became the first organist.
During Rev. J. H. Shallberg’s term of office
the services were transferred to the Kialla
public hall. A special collection was taken for
a Bible and reading desk. The record of 1891
reveals the following committee Messrs Geo.
McNabb, John Poustie (secretary for many
years), John Field, Moses Stewart (45 years
member of the Board), John Morgan, Alex-
ander Grahame, Thomas Noble, and Joseph Sin-
clair.
Rev. F. Milne had the honor of building the
present Church during the third year of hia
Ministry, 1898. Rev. Steele conducted the
opening services.
It was on the day of Rev. Erskine’s induc-
tion that the first bride entered the church. Miss
Ferguson married Mr. J. Clark (now of Shep-
parton).
The erection of the new church vestry is
credited to Rev. Geo. Paul. He visited Arcadia
and held a service in the hail for nearly 12
months, before the pressure cf work brought
about i.s discontinuance.
Today our Sunday school is conducted by
Mrs. W. L Ross. A Young People’s Fellow-
ship has been formed.


More Than a Quarter of a Century of Service
Apart from this problem, his task was not
easy. A large and growing district made a
big demand upon his time. The opening up
of the irrigation settlements found him fully
awake to the possibilities of Presbyterian ex-
tension. Largely through his efforts churches
were erected at Orrvale and Shepparton East,
the latter being later removed to Grahamvale.
Though the response in these directions did
not come up to expectations, he persevered in
his efforts. A missionary assistant became
necessary to cope with the added responsibili-
ties ; and among the number was the Rev. J.
Gray Robertson (cf St. John’s Elsternwick),
who is chaplain to the Moderator of the
Assembly. He also married Miss Pauline Paul,
a daughter of the Manse.
During the Great War Mr. Paul proved a
helpful pastor in assisting* the bereaved, and he
evidenced practical sympathy and kindness to
the poor and distressed. At the Mooroopna
Hospital he proved a most regular visitor, never
neglecting even the infectious diseases ward.
On great moral issues he was a real stalwart
of the Church. Other church representatives
paid the tribute that he was the spearhead of
the attack on harmful abuses in the community.
At a visitation of the Presbytery on Friday,
March 24, 1920, they recorded appreciation of
the minister and office-bearers’ efforts to fur-
ther the cause of the Master, also their worthy
upholding of the Church during the aftermath
of the Great War. Thev indicated that a spirit
of irreligion and indifference to God and
materialism in ’he community made the work
particularly difficult.
In addition to the ministerial duties, Rev. G.
Paul was clerk of the Presbytery for 21 years,
REV. GEORGE PAUL
(1908—1934.)
Coming to Shepparton on June 3rd,
1908, after having been happily placed
in Forbes, New South Wales, the Rev.
George Paul arrived in Shepparton
when the additions to the Church were
being finished, and he faced this debt,
as also the debt on the Sunday School.
and in that capacity rendered much assistance
to outside congregations.
During Mr. Paul’s ministry Congupna was
separated from Dookie charge and joined to
Shepparton, but through the removal of
families the remaining Presbyterians agreed
to support the Church if established at Tally-
garoopna, which was done. At first, the services
were held in the Public Hall, and subsequently
in the present Tallygaroopna Church.
Other features of work during his term, taken
from Church records, are as follow:
1912 Sites duly purchased in the irrigation
settlements at Shepparton East and Orr-
vale.
1913 — Orrvale Church begun at Easter. Mr.
P. Hanlin, theological student, engaged
as assistant for three months.
1914 Possibility of using building at Arcadia
for a preaching place was tested for a
short period. New organ secured in
Shepparton. Electric light put in Manse.
Cyclone fence erected around Church.
1915 — Suggestion to detach part of the Charge
as a Home Mission Station—carried out
later.
1916 Shepparton East Church opened by the
Rev. J. Barnaby,
1917 —A particularly trying time owing to
the Great War. During this period a
vote of sympathy was passed on the loss
of his son, Gordon, aged 20, after a
severe illness at home.
1919—Manse improvements. A “Church Quar-
terly” suggested.
1922—Honour Board erected and sound wires
erected in the Church, and electric light
in the Sunday Schocl.


1925 Rev. Paul visited Great Britain. Rev.
Marshall Campbell supplied the pulpit
during the interim.
1926 A tennis court erected to cater for needs
of young people. Proposal to get a
car. Sympathy expressed to Mr. J.
Griffin (organist for 16 years), owing
to his home being damaged by fire. Ap-
preciation expressed for services of the
voluntary organists: Miss Jessie Guthrie,
Mrs. D. Ross and Mrs. A. Voumard. Mrs.
W. J. Wright subsequently appointed,
but she resigned after a few months.
1927 New organist appointed in Miss Hazel
Bird, A.L.C.M. (now Mrs. S. Webb), who
is still at her post.
1984— About the time Mr. Paul resigned, his
son, Norman, was licensed to preach the
gospel. He has since been ordained and
inducted to the charge of Tallangatta.
Rev. G. Paul’s term of service to this Church
—26 years—more than equals the combined
ministrations of his predecessors.
We cannot do better than quote for our
closing sentences the message written by “The
Sheppaiton News” reporter, who wrote: —
He claims not to possess the power of
eternal youth and know* precisely hi* own
limitations; yet, he is a faithful toiler and
strives after the well-being of all. He has
been to this community a useful member
and has played a part in town advancement
so well that he is rightly regarded one of
its leading citizens.
SHEPPARTON CHURCH CHOIR
Front Row (left to right): Misses M. Sims and Mary Guthrie, Mrs. S. Webb (organist),
Mr. G. F. Long (choirmaster), Misses W. Sims, B. Caldwell, N. Scarfe. Second Row:
Mr. E. J. Vibert, Misses J. Taylor, S. Nelson, J. White, L. Edgell, Marjorie Guthrie,
Mrs. W. Williams, Mr. S. J. Vibert. Back Row: Messrs. V. E. Vibert, W. Williams,
S. R. McPherson (secretary), W. Pearce, J. Furphy, H. G. Richards.


Pine Lodge Church Board of Management
Sitting (left to right): G. Berry, E. Meldrum, Rev. J. G. Scarfe, G. Hosie, R. Sadler.
Standing; B. Peplow, A. Barnett, F. J. Kay, W. Threlfall.
Owing to her position on the Midland High-
way to Benalla, Pine Lodge Church has passed
through a more varied history than most of the
adjoining congregations.
It is recorded that Mr. Skidmore, of the
United Methodist Church, who resided at Pine
Lodge, conducted undenominational services
throughout the district. He and his congrega-
tions at Shepparton, Kialla West, and Pine Lodge,
applied for and were received into the Presby-
terian Church. On June 11, 1878, he was ap-
pointed by the Presbytery as a missionary of
the district.
Pine Lodge was incorporated as part of the
Shepparton Charge under their first minister,
Eev. Robinscn Johnston. In recent years it
became the centre of a Home Mission. Charge,
allied with Tallygaroopna and Orrvale. When
the present minister, Rev. J. G. Scarfe, received
a call to Shepparton, Pine Lodge again became
part of this Charge.
The Presbyterian cause started in the Pine
Lodge district about three miles past the pre-
sent Church. It was in the home of Mr. W.
Sadler that the first service began. Mr. J. H.
Harvey, missionary from Dookie, provided the
gospel message for the early settlers. They
continued in the Cosgrove South State school.
Finding more Presbyterians residing nearer to
the Pine Lodge South school, they transferred
to that place. Here the first tea meeting was
held under a marquee. Through the gift of a
quarter acre of land by Mr, Jas. Keagle, the
Presbyterian flock felt encouraged to erect the
Church,
Mrs. Palmer, of ‘ Pine Ridge,” Knight Street,
Shepparton, who is new in her 94th year, was
one of the earliest worshippers at Pine Lodge.
She is the oldest member in the charge. Her
son, John David Palmer, and Miss Jessie Gour-
ley were the first couple married in the church,
his bride being the first organist there.
Some of the early families are still connected
with the Church—the Hosie’s, Sadler’s, Gawne’s
and Berry’s. The first Sunday School was in-
stituted by the Rev. J. H. Shallberg, and Mr.
W. T. McCormack acted as superintendent. The
late Mr. Henry Gawne was superintendent as
well as elder and manager for a number of
years.
He was succeeded by Mr. Geo. Hosie, who
has been an elder and a manager for 33 years,
and Superintendent of the Sunday School for
the last 20 years.
Master Sadler, one of the scholars, is.
now studying for the ministry. Mr. P. Eodger-
son and Mr. F. Mcßae were the first elders.
Another staunch elder is Mr. Robert Meldrum,
who resides with his family at Caniambo.
The Board has recently effected improve-
ments in the Church, and a new Guild Fellow-
ship has been formed.


ORRVALE
The ground now occupied by the Orrvale
Church formerly belonged to Mr. Roberts. It
came into the possession of the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission when the dis-
trict was divided into irrigation blocks, and
from this Board it was secured by the Shep-
parton Church.
The Presbytery took a live interest in the
development adjacent to Shepparton, and largely
through the energy and enthusiasm of the Rev.
George Paul churches were erected at Shep-
parton East and Orrvale. The opening ceremony
of the former was conducted by the late Rev.
J. Barnaby. This church was afterwards re-
moved to Grahamvale, and eventually succumbed
to the weather and the ravages of white ants.
It was in Easter 1913 that the Rev. Buntine
preached the opening service at Orrvale.
Mr. Roberts worked here as assistant, followed
by Mr. Eipper. The Sunday School was for-
tunate in having Mr. W. Fairley who was an
enthusiastic worker and superintendent for over
12 years. His removal was a great loss to the
district.
The older settlers did not respond as well as
was hoped for, for though the church started
with great promise and received every encour-
agement from the Presbytery and the Shep-
parton Church, its growth was arrested. But
though the cause there has been as a ship in the
doldrums, the young people indicate the wind
has begun to swell the sails for further progress.
We are much indebted to Mr. Roy Roberts for
his interest in the Church, and to Mr. W. Pearce
as secretary and Mrs. Konig as organist.
Though restricted to a monthly service, we
trust that for this congregation the best is yet
to be.
The interior of the Church has been renova-
ted by a working bee in time for the Jubilee.
GRAHAMVALE
Earlier services began in the Grahamvale State
School. Afterwards they were transferred to
a building removed for convenience from Shep-
parton East in 1917. (It had previously been
part of a dwelling in Shepparton before being
adapted as a church). When the building de-
teriorated, it was decided to discontinue services.
Most of the congregation had by this time
secured motor cars and decided to attend the
Church in Shepparton.
Names of the workers then in the Sunday
School included Mr. A. H. Wale (superintend-
ent), Mr. P. Worcester (secretary and treasurer).
For the board of management the late Mr.
Mansell, Mr. P. Worcester, Mr. A. Young, Mr.
Robertson, Mr. W. Gilchrist (secretary), Mr.
R. H. Thomas (treasurer.).
THE RE-MODELLED MANSE, SHEPPARTON
OTHER ORGANISATIONS
The 0.8.8. has been re-constituted and is
making a bold bid fcr a stronger body of youth
workers, with Mr. Noel Boss as scribe.
The Presbyterian Table Tennis Club takes
part in the district competitions with two teams,
A and B, one of which gained the Premiership
shield. This year they have not been quite so
successful, but, like real sports, they play for
the good of the game.
The Presbyterian Tennis Club cannot boast
cf large numbers, but enjoy many pleasant af-
ternoons during the season.
Our Church Choir, under the baton of Mr.
G. F. Long, renders great assistance in the ser-
vice of praise. Their splendid services are be-
ing largely availed of during the many Jubilee
functions. In fact, their cheerful helpfulness
will mean a great factor toward the success of
our celebrations.
MEMBERS OF YOUNG MEN’S FELLOWSHIP
CAMP


MRS. E. H. ROBERTSON and
her daughter, MRS. G. CRONK,
first bride and first christening
respectively in present church.
MRS. PALMER
Oldest Member in the Charge.
MRS. J. F. FAIRLEY
President, P.W.M.U.
MR. MOSES STEWART,
45 years a member of the
Kialla Board.


Rerent Developments!
REV. JAS. G. SCARFE
INDUCTED AUGUST 1, 1934
After hearing several candidates for the
vacancy caused by the resignation of the Rev.
George Paul, a call was presented to our
present minister, who hailed from Glenhuntly,
and he, with Mrs. Scarfe, was welcomed by
congregations throughout the charge at a
large gathering in Shepparton on August I,
1934.
Improvements to the Manse were still being
effected when he arrived. The remodelled
Manse was opened by Mrs. Seinions at an after-
noon gathering on Wednesday, November 14.
1934, when the collection totalled £l4 6/. The
property is now more convenient and up-to-date.
In addition to re-organising work throughout
Ike charge renovations have been made to the
Church and Sunday School. The introduction
of the new Church Hymnary coincided with
the visit of the newly appointed Assembly Ad-
ministrator, the Rev. Andrew Barber, 8.A., on
Sunday, July 7, 1935.
With a good helpmate in his wife, Mr. Scarfe
is striving for a more' effective and stronger
church fellowship, a strengthening of youth
work and a lively, efficient functioning of the
Church’s organisations. It is an ambitious pro-
gramme requiring time and patience for its
ultimate fulfilment and there are not lacking
evidences of steady advancement towards this
aim.
The enthusiasm of our minister found early
expression in the unique success of the first
Goulburn Valley Presbytery camp conference
of the Presbyterian Young Men’s Fellowship,
held at Shepparton last_ Easter. Spiritually,
socially, and financially it justified the hopes
entertained by its sponsor.
Our congregation on Sunday, July 28th, 1935,
those a distinctive name, “Scots’ Church,” as a
commemoration of the Jubilee. We trust it
may represent a new and bright era of Spiritual
life for the succeeding- years.
The following words are quoted from the
Minister’s Jubilee pastoral;—
“Let there be more than a flash of enthu-
siasm or rejoicing over past achievement. The
Church challenges the World to get out of the
rut of cold, selfish interest, to begin a new era
whereby the teachings of Jesus may be applied
as a solution of its difficulties.”
“I trust that on this memorable occasion, you
will enjoy many gracious portions of Divine
goodness, through the merits of our Lord, and
the guidance of the Holy Spirit.’’
In conclusion our prayer finds expression
through Dr. Herrington's verse:
“Head of the Church on earth, Risen, Ascended,
Thine is the honour that dwells in this place;
As Thou hast blessed ur, through years that have
ended,
Still lift upon us the light of Thy face.”
Amen.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Jubilee History, 1885-1935
We acknowledge our indebtedness to all
who have furnished us with information for
this booklet; and to Mr. N. Colliver (“Toska
Studio”) for the gift of local photographs; to
Miss Harrison for those of Kialla Church; to
Mr. A. Barnett for Pine Lodge Church photo;
and to the following who have kindly loaned
photographs:—Misses Don, Miss M. Guthrie,
Mrs. W. Ross, Rev. McMinn, of Lake Rowan,
Mrs. Johnston and the Church Offices.
We regret that owing to sickness and
other causes many valued members in differ-
ent organisations have not been included in
some of the photos.
We have done our best with the material
and notes supplied in the time at our disposal,
and in the limited space available.


The Whole of This Souvenir
Including Art Work and Blocks —
with the exception of those used on
previous occasions—has been set up
ant! printed by—
“ The Shepparton News”
Publishing Coy.
(S. R. and F. D. McPherson)
19-21 High Street, SHEPPARTON
