

JUDGES of
YESTERDAY
ILLUSTRATED
, by
<PHILIP A. JACOBS


gj
l!p^
n








I
mBm : :^; ||'
■li -yWPBpjk ||||p :
iiir
-* •*• * :• - '»■•. i
Sir Samuel Griffith.


JUDGES of
YESTERDAY
Bg
PHILIP A. JACOBS
Of the Victorian Bar
“Haec olim meminisse juvabit.”
Melbourne ... MCMXXIV.
ROBERTSON & MULLENS LTD.


Registered by the Postmaster-General for transmission
through the post as a book
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Brown, Prior & Co. Proprietary Limited
Printcraft House
430 Little Bourke Street, Melbourne
1924


PREFACE.
The life-work of the Judges of Yesterday is recorded in
the Official Law Reports. These few pages may serve to awaken
some memories of their dispositions and idiosyncracies. With the
exception of the one entitled Limbs of the Law, all the articles
contained in this little volume were written in the lifetime of the
Judges to whom they relate, and appeared in the Argus , to the
courtesy of whose Editor I am indebted for permission to re-publish
them.
P. A. JACOBS,
Selborne Chambers,
Melbourne.
November, 1924.




CONTENTS.
Page
Sir Samuel Griffith .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Sir John Madden .. .. .. .. .. .. ..12
Mr. Justice Holroyd .. .. .. .. .. ..18
Mr. Justice A'Beckett .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
Mr. Justice Hodges .. .. .. .. .. .. 29
Mr. Justice Hood .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Judge Chomley .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
Judge Molesworth .. .. .. .. .. .. ..44
Limbs of the Law .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 49




SIR SAMUEL GRIFFITH.
“Thank goodness! we have a Court of Appeal,” a leading mem-
ber of the Bar exclaimed some years ago, on hearing a judgment
pronounced against him —as he thought, wrongly. The sentiment
underlying the remark was perfectly sound, indicating the neces-
sity of a court of supervision to rectify the errors of primary
judges. But whether the enthusiast for a Court of Appeal would
have extended his thankfulness to the simultaneous existence of
two courts, such as the Full Court and the High Court, with a
possible third, in the shape of the Privy Council looming in the
distance, is a matter of doubt. A maxim familiar to lawyers in-
forms them that it is to the interest of the State that there should
not be a multiplicity of lawsuits. The maxim might well be
made applicable to the existence of a multiplicity of Courts of
Appeal.
Since the establishment of the High Court,* criticism has flowed
freely in regard both to the personnel of its members and the sound-
ness of its decisions. So far as the Federal Chief Justice (Sir
Samuel Griffith) is concerned, his opinion is generally considered
to carry exceptional weight in the deliberations of the High Court.
And when it is observed that, with fatal frequency, the judgments
of the State judiciaries are declared by the appellate Court to be
wrong, popular gaze turns inquisitively to the over-ruling body,
and particularly to the Chief Justice, as being their spokesman
and most potent factor. The Full Courts of the States are, in
some instances, strong tribunals, whose decisions have hitherto
fared tolerably well with the Privy Council. The High Court, of
course, has the last word (subject, of course, to an appeal to the
Privy Council), and, in relation to the Full Court, is in a position
of supremacy. “La raison du plus fort est touiours la medicare.
The final Court, no doubt, has the advantage of reading the judg-
ments appealed from, and of hearing fresh arguments. One theory
*The High Court, at the time when this article was written, consisted of
Sir Samuel Griffith, Sir Edmund Barton, and Mr. Justice O’Connor.


may be indicated which goes some way towards accounting for the
divergences referred to. Before the establishment of the High
Court, appeals to the Privy Council were rare, owing to the
expense and delay involved. Hence, the likelihood of appeal being
small, the Full Courts tended to give decisions on broad, equitable
lines. Then the High Court, as a supervisory body, has felt the
necessity of checking these deviations from legal orthodoxy, and
hence has reversed the decisions below with some freedom. Lest it
be considered that this view involves any charge of heresy against
the Full Courts, it may be pointed out that the same tendency to
decide on what may be called liberal lines has characterised decisions
of the House of Lords, the ultimate English Court of Appeal.
Sir Samuel Griffith, who is so largely responsible for the shat-
tering of judicial idols, both here and in other States, has a master-
ful personality. No intelligent observer could fail to mark his
great mental gifts and versatility. Strength of intellect and pur-
pose, coupled with the self-confidence begotten by familiarity with
the science of the law, have given him an ascendancy in his court
such as Lord Watson (one of the greatest modern judges) obtained
over the House of Lords. Rarely does it happen that either of his
colleagues dissents from Sir Samuel. Perhaps, however, the instinct
of the fighting politician has to some extent outlived his Parlia-
mentary career; for when once his own view has been formed, he
hugs it closely, uninfluenced by the fact that other eminent reasoners
differ from him. Nor, it must be admitted, does he hesitate, in
dislodging the studied utterances of other judges, to employ com-
ments hardly describable as partaking of faint praise.
When the momentous fiat went forth declaring the first appoint-
ments to the High Court, curiosity was rife to ascertain the
qualifications of those appointed. Most of all, attention was
riveted upon the new Chief Justice. Whispers of his renown
as a constitutional lawyer had already travelled from Queensland,
where he had officiated as Chief Justice since 1893. At the present
time he has the reputation of being a lawyer of the very highest
order. He was well advised in choosing for his profession the
Bar, because he carries with him the pre-requisites to legal eminence,
quickness of perception, robust common sense, and a retentive
memory.
In the light of Sir Samuel’s present exalted position, an incident
which occurred during a criminal trial in Queensland, as far back


as 1868, has a quaint interest. The prisoner having been con-
victed of murder, an application was made to compel Mr. Justice
Lutwyche, the judge who tried him, to state a case on a point of
law for the opinion of the Full Court. In the course of the argu-
ment, Mr. Justice Lutwyche is reported to have said: —"Having
some tenderness, perhaps, for the inexperience of the three gentle-
men engaged in defending the prisoner, I said I would take a note
of the objection raised, and I did so." One of the three "inex-
perienced gentlemen" referred to was Mr. (now Sir Samuel) Grif-
fith! But much water has passed under the bridge since 1868.
Sir Samuel Griffith has had an unbroken line of professional
success, and is known to fame as Queen's counsel, Attorney-General,
Chief Justice, and member of the Privy Council. His power stands
out conspicuously in grasping and summarising the effect of
authorities bearing upon a case, and interpreting Acts of Parlia-
ment. His intellect is keenly analytical, dissecting, as with a
lancet, the reasons and arguments of Bench and Bar, and at the
same time massive and comprehensive, enabling him to detect and
apply broad principles, to conjure up analogous cases, and to fore-
see the results of deciding in a particular way. A rapid worker,
he has a great capacity for extracting principles from authorities,
and also for distinguishing cases. If a defect could (without
temerity) be suggested in so fine a judicial equipment, it would be
that 'his rapidity in coming to a conclusion sometimes lessens the
value of his findings on questions of fact.
The rare altitude attained by this learned judge becomes the
more astonishing when it is remembered that his legal training was
received in one of the less populous States, where the possibilities
for professional men are correspondingly fewer. A lawyer s men-
tal gear is perfected by association and competition with equals
and superiors in the profession. Ordinarily, therefore, the larger
fields existing in New South Wales and Victoria should produce
the abler men. Sir Samuel Griffith supplies an illustration ap-
parently of the triumph of intellect and vigour over the laws of
probability.
Whether talent or industry predominates in the Chief Justice of
the High Court it would be difficult to decide. Like Lord Chan-
cellor Truro, he may be described as having talent enough to
succeed without industry, and industry enough to succeed without


talent. Such assiduity, indeed, as he possesses is truly colossal.
The heights reached by men of his calibre
"Were not attained by sudden flight;
But oft, while their companions slept,
By toiling upwards in the night."
What, for example, is to be said of a judge who, not content
with his other arduous labours, scrutinises the documents in a case
before the sitting of the Court begins, and who is sometimes found
to have even investigated the reported authorities in point before
counsel have commenced their arguments? Nor is there any resting
when the day’s work is done, because his practice is to keep him-
self abreast of current decisions and Statutes. There is something
of the strenuous life about this, not wholly unexpected in the
framer of the Queensland criminal code and Supreme Court rules,
and the statesman who drafted the Federal Constitution adopted by
the Convention of 1891. In passing, it may be noted that the
rules of the Supreme Court in Queensland (adopted by Sir Samuel
Griffith from the English rules shortly after he was raised to the
Queensland Bench) are the basis of those now governing the pro-
cedure of the High Court. While, as a convincing illustration of
his Honour’s infinite capacity for taking pains, the fact may be
mentioned that, in preparing the Queensland criminal code, he con-
sidered it necessary to investigate the criminal law of Italy, and
for that purpose made a careful study of the Italian language.
Under the circumstances, it is pardonable if, during the intervals
of work, the Chief Justice "airs his mind" by translating Dante
into excellent English. Yet the study of the law appears, in his
case, to be a labour of love. Imagination leads one to suppose
that if perchance he were to be overcome with faintness, the appli-
cation of a musty law book or a piece of legal parchment to his
nostrils would do more to revive him than smelling-salts or "eau
de Cologne."
As is fitting in a court charged with the interpretation of the
constitution, and with important appellate powers, the fullest
attention is given by Sir Samuel Griffith and his colleagues to
the arguments at the Bar. Dignity and decorum are always main-
tained. The Chief Justice is in the habit of engaging coun-
sel in a lively discussion upon the points involved, but without
talking them down, or attempting, metaphorically speaking, to


sweep them off the face of the earth. While the argument is pro-
ceeding, the members of the Court pay profound attention, and
never without cause exhibit signs of impatience. Junior counsel,
so far from being snubbed, are listened to in a spirit of encourage-
ment, a point referred to by Mr. Bruce Smith in the House of
Representatives on the second reading of the Electoral Bill. Mr.
Smith stated that the merest fledgling at the Bar had just as much
influence with the High Court as had an array of King’s counsel
appearing before any tribunal in Australia.
Knowledge of human nature comes easily to votaries of the
law, who are of necessity in the habit of sifting motives and
criticising conduct. To say of an experienced judge that he under-
stands the ways of men is therefore almost unnecessary. An Eng-
lish Lord Chancellor once, on unexpectedly meeting an acquaintance
in a place of recreation, explained to him that he was there for
the purpose of studying human nature. Sir Samuel Griffith prefers
to make his observations within the precincts of his library, away
from scenes of revelry. Self-contained and independent, he does
not mingle freely with the madding crowd.
In manner, the Chief Justice is easy, unconstrained, and free
from the affectation which so often seeks to cover up defects.
His utterance is quiet and rapid. He is said to have shone in poli-
tics as a skilful draftsman and a powerful, though perhaps not
eloquent, debater; while, at the Bar, he was a searching cross-
examiner. On the Bench, as a notable lawyer and a man of
cyclopaedic mind, he ably sustains the role in which he is called
upon to “vindicate the majesty and power of law and justice.”


SIR JOHN MADDEN.
An impartial and discerning critic, seeking to discover which
institution reflected greatest credit upon the State of Victoria,
would probably fix upon the Supreme Court Bench. Of the occu-
pants of that Bench it may be unhesitatingly said that every one of
them can trace his position of eminence to his own merit. No
one of them but had a commanding practice at the Bar at the time
of his elevation. That this high standard is in part the outcome
of traditions created by their predecessors there can be little doubt.
Such names as Stawell, Molesworth, Fellowes, and Higinbotham
animate and stir the memory, while in some instances their personal
and living example has shaped the character and formed the'habits
of those who now administer the law.
Apart from the very recent appointment of Mr. Justice Cussen,
the judge who was last invested with the ermine is Sir John
Madden. Lifted at once into the office of Chief Justice, over the
heads of men of great experience and high attainments, Sir John
set himself an ambitious and lofty task. The openly-expressed
criticism in regard to his appointment indulged in at the time has
been lived down, and the Chief Justice is happy in the possession of
the public confidence and the goodwill and approval of the legal
profession.
As a member of the Bar, Sir John (then Doctor) Madden held
a unique position. Most successful barristers owe their prominence
either to their ability as lawyers, pure and simple, or to their powers
of sheer advocacy—i.e., the handling of witnesses, rhetorical skill,
and forensic tactics. Sir John was both a "lawyer" and an "advo-
cate," He was in his element, whether opposed to fighting counsel
of the type of Mr. Purves and Mr. Duffy, or whether measuring
swords in the dry legal atmosphere of the Banco Court with severe
logicians, now his compeers on the Bench. It may be conceded
that a judge stands more greatly in need of an intimate knowledge
of the science of the law than of pure forensic skill. And perhaps,
without detracting from his Honour's ability as a lawyer, it may
be admitted that his natural bent is more particularly in the forensic
direction. But the importance to him as a judge of his wide


V' ' >
i III f|| I - v -'™#® > ®' x 'MjipHpi >*11|«| ■■ I_- -„
. .Jl
-I* \ v^ s \‘ -v- \V$ v - - -" 4 \ »■ \ jaBs, £" s^% s \ ., ,' " ■■ \‘
, % %
----.... ■>.. x>: s
jl
/ .dSr‘ Sr *■ *~ ■■ ■' - W -
M; ■ jgf' mr aw
riiiiF i » ~ *./
aWitea^V .■. -WaIMMiv
r X/ •-/ 7
JM I mks*.
K - . * r . m .. , .,
Sir John Madden




experience in jury cases is incalculable. It gave him an intimate
knowledge of men and of affairs, and an exceptional facility in
dealing with witnesses and in guiding juries.
Professional men are in the habit of describing each other as
being ‘'good on law” or “good on facts,” if, indeed, they be good
on anything at all. Sir John is conspicuously ‘‘good on facts.”
Of the extensive range of matters which are dealt with in the
courts of law, there is rarely one in regard to which he has not
ready to hand a considerable store of information. His industry
and self-confidence seem to have urged him, like Benjamin Frank-
lin, to take for his province ‘‘the whole sphere of human know-
ledge.” But his Honour is an adept, not merely at gripping facts,
but at retaining and reproducing them. Watch the course of any
trial before him, during which evidence of a voluminous and
intricate character is given, and hear the learned judge, at the close,
sum it up with accuracy and facility, in a lengthy and voluminous
judgment, delivered, it may be, without reference to notes, and say
whether a really fine performance has not been achieved.
It is in regard to the actual soundness of some of his decisions
that criticism has been chiefly directed against Sir John. At the
same time, as indicating to some extent the opinion entertained of
him by the Privy Council, it may be pointed out that in some
instances Sir John Madden’s decisions, though reversed by the
Full Court, were afterwards, on appeal from the latter, restored
by the Privy Council. The recent cases of Payne v. the King,
and the Colonial Sugar Refining Co. v. the Attorney-General of
Victoria , may be mentioned in this connection. The same tribunal
has also generally upheld his decrees as president of the Vice-
Admiralty Court.
A great English judge was asked whether he preferred the work
of the Bench to that of the Bar. He said, ‘‘Yes. Here we have
to find reasons; there we had to search for arguments.” During
his earliest years on the Bench, it may be that Sir John had not
wholly divested himself of the habit of seeking arguments and
then battling stoutly for them, as if he were still the advocate.
But thirteen years of judicial experience have helped to mature
that faculty of “judgment,” which is, after all, a judge’s crowning
virtue. For the rest, his Honour’s powerful memory and his


familiarity with statutory and case law have stood him in good
stead in every jurisdiction. He has gone far towards —
"Mastering the lawless science of the law,
That codeless myriad of precedent,
That wilderness of single instances,
Through which a few, by wit or fortune led,
May beat a pathway out to wealth or fame."
Though generally engaged in Common Law cases at the Bar,
Sir John has applied himself with vigour and confidence to the
adjudication of many and difficult equity suits. As a junior at
the Bar, Dr. Madden studied or "devilled" in the chambers of
Mr. Justice Holroyd (then a prominent equity counsel), a fact
to which the latter referred with pride when his pupil was dubbed
"Chief Justice."
Lord Macnaghten said of Mr. Chitty, the great pleader, that
"he was never irritable or impatient. There was always a pleasant
word for his junior, and a cheery answer for his antagonist.
Nothing ever put him out. He had the sweetest temper of any
man I ever came across." Courtesy is a marked feature of Sir
John Madden in court; and good humour sits smiling on his brow.
In one jurisdiction—the Criminal Court—a quasi-comical touch
is given by his polite utterances to malefactors. Lord Chief Justice
Campbell was always considered to be most deadly when most
polite. When Palmer, the notorious poisoner, was put upon his
trial, his Lordship said, "Let the prisoner be accommodated with
a chair," whereupon someone in court whispered, "He means to
hang him!" And the prophecy came true. Sir John may, in like
manner, be heard to preface his harangues to the dock with com-
ments bland and almost flattering, and conclude by imposing a
sentence uncomfortably stiff, though, doubtless, well deserved.
In sorrowful tones he will tell the man with a long
record of prior convictions that it is most deplorable
for a person of such undoubted mental attainments to be found in
that lamentable position. He will, with much deference and sym-
pathy, remind him of his not unblemished career in the past.
Then, after dwelling upon the pain which the discharge of his
duties causes him, he will give his man 10 years, with an occasional
period of "solitary."
Baron Bramwell once commenced an address to a prisoner with
an exhortation to mend his ways. "You have been convicted "


he began. “ ’Ow much?” interrupted the prisoner. "Six months.
Take him away!” said the judge.
Our own Chief Justice would have had more compunction in
permitting a speech of his own, fashioned in words of English pure
and undefiled, to be thus nipped in the bud.
But he is an efficient criminal judge. He is, indeed, the only
Supreme Court judge who, when at the Bar, had a substantial
practice as a defender of criminals. Though sometimes considered
too severe in dealing with offenders of a particular class, he makes
allowances for the frailty of human nature; nor is he clothed in
self-righteousness. “C'esf un homme qui connait la vie.” In
this court, above all others, in which the proceedings are of an
almost solemn character, his calm demeanour and self-control make
him an apt president. Lastly, he realises that juries are much more
likely to return a particular verdict when addressed in a persuasive
manner than when they are dictatorially told that to bring in any
other verdict would be sheer folly.
The Chief Justice's chivalrous attitude towards the weaker sex
has led him to make frequent comments in the Divorce Court upon
“man's inhumanity” to women. Other judges, when granting
a divorce, usually content themselves with a curt “Decree nisi.”
As most divorce cases are undefended, and two sides are thus not
heard, it may be doubted whether the non-appearing respondent
is always deserving of the strong judicial comments indulged in by
the Chief Justice at his expense.
To law reporters, who are anxious to perpetuate his Honour’s
judgments, the Chief Justice is a subject of some consternation.
Though his delivery is clear, he proceeds at a very rapid rate, and
speaks at great length. Lengthy judgments are a burden, not
merely to the reporter, but to the litigant. For purposes of appeal,
and for other reasons, copies of judgments have often to be ob-
tained, and the expense is in proportion to the amount of matter
to be copied. To a mild complaint once addressed to his Honour
in regard to his rapid utterance, he wrote a characteristic reply:—
“I find myself” (so the letter ran) “best able to give expression to
my views when proceeding at the rate of speed most natural to
myself. If inexpert stenographers will be employed, the most
normal of speakers will appear to travel too fast. If, however,
at a given moment I seem to be driving too furiously, let the
reporter catch my eye, and give me a timely nod, whereupon I


shall know that lam not to go 'full steam ahead!' " History does
not record whether any reporter has yet taken the liberty of telling
a learned Chief Justice by dumb show that he is required to
“go slow."
Many turns of expression will be found frequently recurring in
his deliverances. Such phrases as, “It is abundantly manifest,"
“This is a perfectly clear case," “It is quite certain," etc., indicate
a confident judgment. A certain floridness of language is also very
noticeable. Anything regarded with approval will be described as
“eminently desirable." An untruthful witness was stigmatised as
“a facile and fairly resourceful liar," and a runaway thief as “an
evanescent spieler;" while upon one occasion an unduly discursive
counsel was told that he had “circumnavigated the entire globe of
irrelevancy"! Most apt and felicitous are his Honour’s sayings,
not to mention their freshness and originality.
Sir James Hannen, a very eminent judge, was in the habit of
sternly suppressing the slightest frivolity on the part of counsel.
“This court is not a theatre," he would remark. “No, but neither
is it a church!" a Q.C. replied, sotto voce. The profession are,
at all events, unanimous in their appreciation of the quips and
sallies with which their Chief enlivens the dullest of legal proceed-
ings. No judge of recent years, except the late Judge Hamilton,
could match him for humour. For instance, who but the Chief
Justice would have thought of saying, in a case in which several
orders had been made from time to time, adding fresh parties,
“This case began as an equity suit; it now resembles nothing so
much as an omnibus picking up passengers by the way." To a
barrister, who had been dwelling with lingering fondness on the
words of a statute of more than usual length and obscurity, Sir
John remarked, “Apart from the literary beauty of the section,
Mr. , what does it all mean?"
Lawyers in court laugh at his Honour’s jokes, not with “coun-
terfeited glee,” like Goldsmith’s school children at their teacher’s
jests, but because they are grateful for the mental refreshment and
stimulus afforded to them.
If an excuse were needed for occasional mirthfulness, it is easily
found in the prodigious amount of work which this learned judge
undertakes and accomplishes. It is for this reason, as much as
any other, that he has become so popular, both with his colleagues
and those who practise before him. In the discharge of his arduous


duties (heavier than those of a puisne judge), the Chief Justice
believes in no “pound-of-flesh" system. Rigorous and unsparing
devotion to his work has ever been his guiding principle. Witness
the fact that, somehow, the longest and heaviest cases
have very often fallen to his lot. Among these may be men-
tioned McLeod v. Henty, Shaw v. Webster, and Vinnicombe v.
McGregor. In the last-named, his judgment evoked from Mr.
Justice Williams, in the Court of Appeal, an expression of admira-
tion for the “monumental industry" displayed by the primary
judge. The judgment in Shaw v. Webster, the delivery of which
occupied seven or eight hours, is said to be the longest on record
in the Victorian courts. For some time after his appointment,
his Honour’s assiduity was thought by many to be going even too
far. The sittings of the Court were protracted long past the
ordinary hour for rising, and to an appeal from the Bar for an
adjournment for lunch the inexorable reply would come, “I see
no necessity for lunch." The only thing for which his Honour
“hungered" was work. Like Burke in the House of Commons, he
“ went on refining.
And thought of convincing, while they thought of dining."
Of late years, his Honour’s health has been a cause of
some trouble to him; but when in the enjoyment of full bodily
vigour he takes keen interest in various forms of sport and exer-
cise. Racing and boxing he always favoured, and at one time
himself cultivated the “gentle art" with no small success. On his
property at Frankston he has many a time put his hand to the
plough, in the literal sense; and in his younger days found great
pleasure in carpentering, which, by the way, the illustrious Black-
stone considered to be an ideal diversion for a lawyer.


MR. JUSTICE HOLROYD.
The elements which constitute a good judge have been tersely
summarised by Lord Bacon. Such a judge was, according to him,
“to draw learning out of his books, not out of his brain; he was
to mix well the freedom of his own opinion with reverence of the
opinion of his fellows; he was to fear no man’s face; he was to be
truly impartial; he was to be a light to jurors to open their eyes,
but not a guide to lead them by the nose; he was not to affect
an opinion of expedition by an impatient hearing of the counsel-
lors at the Bar; his speech was to be with gravity, as one of the
sages of the law, and not talkative, nor with impertinent flying
out to show learning.”
Shrewd criticism is contained in these words, though they are
not an exhaustive analysis of the judicial ideal. In reading them,
we are reminded of some of the characteristics of Mr. Justice
Holroyd. When the list of eminent Australian judges is com-
piled, at some later date in the nation’s history, his name will surely
not be omitted. He has filled the judgment seat since 1881, and
is now 77 years of age—the oldest of the present Victorian judges.
The law reports abound in his mature, careful and authoritative
decisions. From the leader of the Bar to the latest recruit in legal
ranks, everyone acknowledges his authority as a lawyer and his
distinction as a judge.
A story is told of an English judge whose judgments are fre-
quently reversed on appeal. It is said that if, perchance, the Court
of Appeal sustain instead of reversing him, he celebrates the event
by giving his family jam for tea. Mr. Justice Holroyd’s decisions
are rarely appealed from; very rarely reversed. His admirers even
say that his reserved decisions are equivalent to judgments of the
Full Court.
Heredity, no less than environment and training, has to be rec-
koned with in accounting for the possession of a “judicial mind.”
The names of Denman, Coleridge, Stephen, Pollock and Chitty
recall great lawyers who have handed down their gifts to succeed-
ing generations. So with Mr. Justice Holroyd’s ancestors. His
grandfather, Sir George Sowley Holroyd, was a judge of the Court
of King’s Bench, and a profound and able lawyer. His father was
a Commissioner of the Court of Bankruptcy.


Mr. Justice Holroyd may be said to have lived for his profes-
sion. A nice point of law is to him what a beautiful picture is
to an artist. In thinking of him, one recalls Baron Parke, who
explained to his wife that he was kept late for dinner by counsel
who had been arguing “a beautiful demurrer/'
In his pre-judicial days, this learned judge was a hard, methodical
worker,
"Unwearied to explore
The law's dim labyrinths and rugged lore."
While concentrating mainly on the equity side of the Court, he
was also largely in demand as an expert in mining law. Learmonth
v. Bailey, one of the causes cetebres in which he acted as counsel,
was a case involving a question of fraud in connection with the
sale of a mine. His practice was a very lucrative one. Judicial
honours were, in fact, twice refused by him.
Many of his judgments testify to his education as an equity
lawyer; witness a certain pride in tracing matters of procedure to
the "old equity practice" on the subject. In a clever parody of
Tennyson's "Dream of Fair Women," Mr. F. Gavan Duffy, K.C.
(now Mr. Justice Duffy), has thus depicted the learned judge:—
"Alas! Alas!" a low voice, full of care,
Murmured beside me, "turn, and look on me!
My youth in drafting settlements did fare,
My prime in Equity.
"And to the dreadful Moloch of the law
I gave my human heart and brain of fire;
Toiling, with stern resolve and modest awe,
And hope that would not tire.
"I won success, and wear it. What avails?
'Tis but a right to labour at the oar;
To sift with painful toil discordant tales,
And o’er dull pleadings pore.
"For me life has no leisure and no fun,
No rest from long debate of wrong and right;
Visions of work undone and to be done
Do haunt me day and night."
Though Holroyd, J., was reared in Equity, his Common Law
judgments are sound. Much of his Common Law learning was
acquired on the Bench.


In common with most judges, he discourages technicalities, but
will give effect to them, where necessary, for the purpose of pre-
serving a practice. Upon one occasion, his Honour gave short
shrift to an ultra-technical objection. “This affidavit,” said a
law clerk, “cannot be looked at, your Honour; there is a fatal
objection to it," “What is the objection?” asked his Honour,
looking over his spectacles. “It does not show on whose behalf it
was filed!” he was told in triumphant tones. His Honour took
up his pen, supplied the defect at the appropriate place in the docu-
ment, and, looking up, said, with a smile, “I think it is all right
now.”
Perhaps it is in the Banco Court, in which appeals are heard,
that his Honour appears to the greatest advantage. In this juris-
diction verbal evidence is not taken. The questions debated are
mostly topics of dry law, and the materials before the Court are
in writing, so that in this calm atmosphere the essentially legal
brain of Sir E. Holroyd has full scope. When he is a member of
this Court, no post-prandial judgments are perpetrated. His more
impetuous colleagues may be for “blowing the case out of the
water” without much ado. But his Honour will not be hurried.
He must first “read, mark and inwardly digest” every line of the
appeal book. It may be that the rest of the Bench are correct in
their rapidly formed opinion. But he must be satisfied, too. The
suggestion that hasty judgments are apt to be delivered in an
appellate Court may savour of sacrilege; yet those who ought to
know assert the existence of this danger.
A timely curb upon his brethren, therefore, is the senior puisne
judge, when occasion requires.
In another scene of judicial activity—the Practice Court —his
cautious progress is hardly so acceptable, and sometimes produces
inconvenience. In this court, actions are not heard; but a great
variety of matters preliminary and incidental to actions arc dealt
with, in addition to appeals from justices, and applications of all
descriptions, relating to trusts, companies, etc. The business here
is at times very congested, and requires to be handled with despatch.
His Honour’s very cautious procedure is no doubt the outcome
of a conscientious desire to do the fullest justice, while at the same
time his instinct as a lawyer prevents him from taking any step
which is not precise and in accordance with precedent. And it is
rarely indeed that rapidity and carefulness go hand in hand. He
is no believer in “Haste, twin-sister to delay.”


Br
mmm - ~ - "
Wm M
f m
W :
W ■ * ”"-■ s- \ M
..i.. >•/» sj&i'
Mr. Justice Holroyd.




Sir Edward’s reserved judgments show excessive care (even for
him) in their preparation. If, through pressure of judicial business
or for any other reason, he is unable to attend to the matter held
over, he is said to take it seriously to heart, and become as much
concerned over the delay to the litigant as if he himself were the
person inconvenienced. But, when leisure permits, he applies
himself whole-heartedly to the preparation of his judgment
incuriosus suorum (“heedless of his own labours”).
A noticeable trait of this judge is his independence of thought.
Not merely that he is no respecter of persons; but he has a marked
tendency to work problems out in his own way. The arguments
of counsel arc, of course, not unheeded by him. But frequently,
after an exhaustive disquisition at the Bar, his Honour will sur-
prise the bewigged gentlemen by deciding the case upon a point to
which neither of them even referred.
It is remarkable that Mr. Justice Holroyd, who did not at the
Bar practise in the Criminal Court, and who, as an equity counsel,
had scant reason to study either the criminal law or the criminal
classes, should yet be recognised as an admirable judge in this par-
ticular sphere. A resemblance may in this respect be noted to the
late Mr. Justice Molesworth, who is generally considered to have
been the greatest criminal judge the colony has ever known, while
as an equity lawyer his name was one to conjure with.
Mr. Justice Holroyd is fair. He does not begin a trial by
assuming everything against the man behind the rails. Though
not unemotional, he can temper feeling with reason. Lastly, he
does not regard counsel for the prisoner as his natural enemy.
A fault which the learned judge himself confesses to is a certain
testiness of manner. When receiving the congratulations of the
Bar upon having attained the distinction of knighthood, he
was good-humouredly reminded by Mr. Purves, K.C., of a court
official who remarked that “Holyrood, J., was a hot ’un, but a
honest 'un.” The object of the story joined in the general laugh
which followed.
His Honour is not always easy to address. An unsound argu-
ment jars upon his nerves; and if its propounder does not quickly
get on to safer ground, he is in danger of encountering something
like an explosion from his audience.
Stupidity or rascality, from whatever source proceeding, will
generally evoke from his Honour a display of some warmth.


He does not suffer fools—or knaves —gladly. Those who
know his foibles have come to associate the gathering of these
judicial thunderclouds with the appearance of a bandanna hand-
kerchief. If an argument which rings false is enunciated, he will
produce the coloured fabric, rise slightly in his seat, and, talking
right at the offender, tell him in strenuous tones, which brook no
interruption, what the law actually is, and then, having vigorously
blown his nose, sit back and wait for the next opening!
But trop de zele is a venial fault. There are spots on the sun!
When Sir Edward retires from the Bench, as he proposes to do
at no distant date, his friends will say of him, as Burke said of
Dr. Johnston, "It is well for a man, sir, if, at the end of his career,
he has nothing worse to look back on than a little hastiness of
manner."
The judgments of Mr. Justice Holroyd are marked by a good
literary style. They are terse and clear, and couched in well-
chosen language. His Honour made a recent allusion to the fact
that he at one time contributed to the English press. And it
may be remarked that, for some years after he began to practise
at the Bar, he wrote for the "Argus."
One of the penalties which a judge pays for the exalted position
he occupies is the "splendid isolation" to which it more or less
condemns him. He cannot foregather with his friends so freely as
he did. Still he need not eschew every form of conviviality. Sir
Edward Holroyd dislikes the notion of being a judicial recluse.
Society functions he does not cultivate. But until a few years
ago he presided over the Imperial Federation League, and under
their auspices delivered many a stirring address. He has for years
been President of the Athenaeum and Savage Clubs, where his
cheery presence is always heartily welcomed. Indeed, the "Savages"
rarely disperse from their smoke concerts without extending vocal
honours to their "good old President."
Away from the dusty purlieus of the law, his Honour is uncon-
ventional in manner and appearance, and likes an easy good-
fellowship.
His departure from the Bench will cause much "moaning at
the Bar," and will mark the close of a long and useful career —a
career not to be less lightly valued because he has not sought to
figure in the public gaze, but performed his duties quietly, with
dignity and with moderation.


MR. JUSTICE A’BECKETT.
Mr. Justice A’Beckett may be said to have law in his blood.
Like Sir Edward Holroyd, he comes of a legal family, as the son
of a solicitor, Mr. Thomas Turner A’Beckett, an early Victorian
colonist; as the grandson of a Wiltshire solicitor, Mr. William
A’Beckett, descended from the A’Becketts of Norman times; and
as the nephew of Sir William A’Beckett, first Chief Justice of Vic-
toria. He also resembles Sir Edward in having been brought up to
equity rather than common law. In the days when briefs did not
crowd too thickly upon one another, he picked up many crumbs
of jurisprudence by contributing to the law reports known as
"Wyatt, Webb, and A’Beckett’s’’ reports. In this work he was
assisted by Mr. Justice Webb, then at the Bar. At a later date he
compiled a text-book on the Transfer of Land Statute. Ulti-
mately, having attained a prominent position at the Bar, he was
invested with judicial honours.
This learned judge is an able and efficient member of an able
and efficient Bench. A mind well stored with case law and legal
principles; an instinct for readily grasping facts and arguments;
an almost uncanny facility in arriving at a conclusion—these are
the attributes of A’Beckett, J. His physiognomy conveys the
impression of a shrewd, far-seeing man, not easily swayed by
feeling, or prevailed upon by artifice; one who is well acquainted
with human nature and the varying phases of life; and who looks
upon everybody and everything with calm and philosophical tolera-
tion. Yet his visage is deeply furrowed at times, and his expression
so troubled, that the very cares of Empire would seem to be his.
One would say, with Milton, that—
"Deep on his front engraven
Deliberation sat, and public care."
But his demeanour for the most part betokens easy concentration
upon his work, which he regards not lightly, but with lightness
of heart.
The public and the profession applaud some judges for their
courtesy, and others for their learning, sagacity, and industry.


Mr. Justice A’Beckett is appreciated, inter alia, as the lawyers
say, because he is good-humoured and free from affectation.
His method of dealing with a case is unique, in some respects
recalling that said to have been adopted by Sir George Jessel, the
famous Master of the Rolls. During the opening address of
counsel for the plaintiff, he at first listens quietly, then interrupts,
and, after questioning counsel on the other side, discovers that the
points in issue between the parties may be narrowed down. Then
comes a request to counsel for the plaintiff to confine his remarks
to those points. A veritable stripping away of embroidery!
When the evidence is reached, it is quite a common occurrence for
the learned judge to take the witnesses out of the examiner’s hands,
and himself apply a series of interrogatories directed to the matters
which he considers important. The evidence concluded, instead of
allowing counsel to address him immediately, he delivers a kind
of preliminary judgment, indicating what his view of the case is
"up to date," so that it may be seen in what respects he is in
favour of and against each side. He will often add, ‘Of course,
this is all subject to my opinion being changed by any remarks
which counsel may have to make." But counsel mostly take this
intimation in a disconsolate spirit, knowing from experience that,
though his Honour listens to their subsequent argument, he rarely
departs from the first expression of his views. Somewhat discon-
certing, therefore, is this employment of the judicial pruning-
knife. His Honour is truly an economist of the public time and
the litigants’ funds!
A judicial wit once jestingly remarked, in the course of a Chan-
cery suit, "The estate will be distributed in the usual way —among
the solicitors." Our judge in equity will tolerate no such partition
by solicitors —nor barristers either. He resolutely refuses to
tolerate the scandals of “Jarndyce v. Jarndyce ." In a proceeding
in which a number of different parties were represented by distinct
counsel, one of them, having before the case was well on its way
duly explained his client’s attitude, was disagreeably surprised to
hear the judge remark; —"Yes, having heard what you say, I quite
understand your view, and I do not think you need remain in court
any longer." His Honour was, no doubt, thinking that if costs
must come out of the estate they need not be unnecessarily in-
creased. A good point this in a judge, the layman will contend.


jjgjy
' * jf
* Hf / Tiiffifnfji > 11111
W.„ ■% '%& %H| W A % ' < % # .
■v “*,:■ - -, .-as* at-.. fllHi - ., - ip
■ *■ J ' * JJr g Jk «| A- X %
& jO - JP »*iB» W I* \
K H ;. vjl m • WJ& : V
Jar *
Mr. Justice A’Beckett.




But short cuts across the field of litigation are looked at with a
somewhat dubious eye by lawyers of authority.
A quality which is of the highest value in a judge is candour,
and it may be truly said of Mr. Justice A’Beckett that he is candid
in a marked degree. The keenest mind may sometimes err; and
when a judge says, “I now realise that in deciding as I did in the
case of Smith v. Brown, I was mistaken/' one cannot but
admire his frank honesty. In like manner, a judge does not
seriously lose caste when he says, “I do not understand this matter,
Mr. Counsel, although it may seem clear to you”—while the
administration of justice is furthered by the admission.
An uninitiated observer, on entering Mr. Justice A’Beckett s
court, may sometimes he heard to say, in tones of indignation,
"Why, that judge is asleep!” "Oh, no!” he will be told; he
only seems to be asleep.” Needless to say, it is only a case of
seeming. Mr. Justice Cave, an extremely astute judge, used to
present the same appearance. Someone, in fact, described him as
being "a very good judge—when he is awake.” Any suspicion
that Mr. Justice A'Beckett is really a "Homer nodding” is effectively
dispelled when he pronounces judgment, showing clearly that he
has fully grasped and considered the case.
His Honour’s treatment of proceedings which he looks upon
either as frivolous, or at least as only worthy of adjudication by
some inferior tribunal, is characteristic. For such proceedings he
feels a contempt which he does not try to conceal. In one instance,
when his Honour, assisted by a jury, was trying a slander action,
which he regarded as trumpery, he showed his disapproval by tak-
ing the witnesses very rapidly through their evidence. The unsuc-
cessful party afterwards applied for a new trial, but found, to his
dismay, that the judge’s notes of the evidence were somewhat scanty,
the most conspicuous thing upon the pages of the judicial note-
book being a sketch by him of a cat with an elaborate pair of
whiskers!
His Honour is nothing if not unconventional. He often pro-
vides innocent amusement by the manner in which he presents his
written judgments for publication. These will frequently be
handed to the law reporter, written on the back of odd scraps of
paper, while the writing (without prejudice to the excellent mat-
ter which it embodies) is of a weird and cuneiform character.
A story, the authenticity of which cannot be vouched for, is


told illustrative of his somewhat absent-minded tendency when not
engaged in judicial duties. Strolling one day into the chambers
of a fellow judge, he remarked, “I say, , I heard an extremely
good tale as I came into town this morning.” His eye just then
was caught by a new edition of a law-book, and, picking it up,
he began turning over the pages, murmuring his admiration for
the work as he did so. Presently, he replaced it on the table, and,
without another word, walked out of the room, leaving his learned
brother quite unenlightened with regard to the promised story.
An episode that undoubtedly did take place concerns a co-judge
who found some difficulty in dealing with a matter that had come
before him. He sought the aid of the wizard in equity, to whom
he poured out the facts, arguments, etc., in extenso. “What on
earth ought I to do about it, A’Beckett?” he concluded pitifully.
After a pause, Mr. Justice A’Beckett, tittering in a manner that
characterised him, said, “Tell me, , are you at all fond of
iced asparagus?” “Well,” replied his astonished colleague, “I am!
But what has that ” “Oh, I’m very glad to hear that you
like it,” said A’Beckett, J. “I may tell you that I'm rather fond
of it myself!” The gospel of “Bear ye one another's burdens”
did not attract him.
There is, perhaps, no member of the Bench who has a keener
desire or greater aptitude for ascertaining on which side the real
merits of a case lie. Having ascertained the merits, Mr. Justice
A’Beckett adjudicates in accordance with what he considers, and
as a rule rightly considers, to be the strictest justice. While this
proclivity, in one sense, deserves the strongest commendation, its
desirability is questionable, when coupled with too rigorous a dis-
like for accepted principles of law, which may, in a given case,
conflict with the dispensing of abstract justice. It is chiefly in this
respect that experts are wont to criticise his Honour. No doubt
he wishes, as Lord Westbury did, that there were no such thing
as case law. Where another judge would say, “I regret that lam
bound by the authorities to make an order which is against my
personal view of the justice of the case,” his Honour, it may be
suggested, leans towards giving a decision based upon his own
notion of right and wrong. The litigant, under such circum-
stances, departs from his presence glowing with satisfaction, because
the judge has not allowed a legal absurdity to override his common
sense. But the lawyer shakes his head, and reflects that, when next


he has to advise upon a client’s rights in connection with a similar
matter, he will be unable to tell him, in view of his Honour's
latest ruling, what the law really is. It is more important, from
the lawyer’s point of view, that the law should be certain than that
it should be ideally just.
In criminal cases, it may be remarked, the “litigant” docs not go
away satisfied. “That man’s conduct,” his Honour reasons, “ap-
proaches pretty nearly to what the law prohibits. He ought to
be punished,” and punished he accordingly is.
Towards mere ignoble technicalities or quibbles, Mr. Justice
A’Beckett is, as one might expect, merciless. In an insolvency
proceeding, a barrister some years ago raised a number of micro-
scopical points, all of which the judge brushed aside. “Then,
your Honour,” proceeded the objector, “I come to the sixth ob-
jection.” “I overrule it,” said the judge. “But, with great
respect, sir, I have not even stated the objection yet,” was the
surprised rejoinder. “Oh, I beg your pardon,” his Honour cour-
teously said. “No more you have. Will you state precisely what
the objection is?” The objection having been duly expounded,
his Honour, with a bland smile, consigned it to the same fate
as its predecessors.
The remarks of this learned judge are often tinged with sarcasm.
In him we have
“A lord of irony, that master spell.”
Against the shifty or dishonest folk with whom the Courts of Law
are all too familiar, irony may be used with deadly effect. To the
youthful and inexperienced counsel it is sometimes embarrassing;
but juniors are, upon the whole, inclined to be partial to a judge
who, though occasionally cynical, is courteous and considerate.
With juries, however, irony is a dangerous figure of speech. Too
often, not being able to appreciate the subtlety of a sarcasm, they may
take the speaker at his word, and bring in a verdict the opposite of
what he intended. An illustration is supplied by the experience of
Mr. Justice Bowen with a Welsh jury. In summing up in a burg-
lary case, he said to the jury: “Of course, gentlemen, you may take
the view that the prisoner, though he was discovered on the house-
tops at midnight, was simply enjoying a quiet stroll, and that he
afterwards went inside the house out of a natural curiosity to
inspect it. You may also think that he took off his boots out of


consideration for the sleepers, whom he did not wish to disturb.
In that case you will acquit him." The jury missed the irony,
took the judge seriously, and acquitted the prisoner.
With reference to his Honour’s speeches to the jury, one may
venture to suggest that his diction is, in another respect also, some-
what over the heads of his audience. His language is singularly
polished and refined, and, in a judgment, reads admirably; but its
full effect cannot always be appreciated by the class of men who
figure on juries. In passing, one may refer to a useful and truly
remarkable faculty which his Honour possesses for condensation.
The facts and arguments of a case lasting for many days will be
summed up in a relatively brief deliverance, which, nevertheless,
on examination, will be found to comprehend everything of im-
portance which requires to be decided.
Mr. Justice A'Beckett keeps his Court well under control. He
preserves decorum without displaying severity. When opposing
counsel become quarrelsome, he rebukes them in a fatherly way, and
peace is soon restored. With a barrister who is stupidly persistent
his method is most original. Instead of thundering at him for
his folly, his Honour will listen and nod his head in apparent
acquiescence, leading the innocent counsel to suppose that he is
working his point, and thus to curtail his argument. Then his
Honour staggers him by giving an adverse decision.
Physically, Mr. Justice A’Beckett is extremely active. Though
he has reached the three score and ten, he can last longer at tennis,
walking, or cycling than many a man in his prime.


jk r \ \ |K / JSI
fc: '
g --, >v ■ * v . ■ ■■■■ •■..' . ■
;■ 3BB^-
tj : . - , .. .>
Mr. Justice Hodges.




MR. JUSTICE HODGES.
A “strong judge” may perhaps be best defined as one who is not
merely learned in the law and possessed of a judicial mind, but
who also takes strong views and firmly adheres to them. The
meaning of the expression is to some extent conveyed by a
criticism passed by a famous Master of the Rolls upon himself.
“I may be wrong,” he said; “I sometimes am. But I never
doubt.” In the category of strong judges Mr. Justice Hodges may
fairly be included. His presence and demeanour are suggestive of
strength. Tall, and with a powerful physique, and a face indica-
tive of intellect and determination, he has the appearance of a man
resolved
“To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.”
The author of the previously quoted parody on Tennyson's
“Dreams of Fair Women” bestows poetic praise on Mr. Justice
Hodges:—
“I, turning, saw the idol of my youth,
When life had idols in the years gone by,
The man of iron will and fearless truth,
And matchless loyalty.”
“Iron will,” like Hamlet’s “mobled queen,” is good! How much
that iron will must have meant to its possessor when he was an
aspiring lawyer! Brilliancy, or even genius, counts for less than
the outside world supposes in the strain and struggle of a lawyer s
life. Here dogged determination, courage, and common sense are
the pre-requisites of success. Above all, it is the iron will that
undertakes to grapple with the never-ending study of statutes,
cases, and legal principles, and to bear the heat and dust of forensic
fighting. This and self-reliance are qualities “writ large” upon
Mr. Justice Hodges. Observe the manner in which he delivers a
judgment which he has reserved. The facts involved may be in-
tricate and the law obscure. Yet he is sufficiently sure of himself
to give a viva-voce and not a written judgment. He is able to
dispense with notes. He speaks deliberately, earnestly, and in-
cisively. Every sentence, even every word, is carefully weighed,
and there is but little repetition. When he prefaces a finding of


fact or of law with the words “In my opinion,” or “I am of
opinion,” there is a zest and emphasis about his utterance which
preclude any idea of “the native hue of resolution” being “sicklied
o’er by the pale cast of thought.”
Mr. Justice Hodges’ frame of mind is severely logical. From
an argument which contains any faulty reasoning he instantly re-
coils. The law, in fact, is built on logical lines. His Honour’s
law is pre-eminently sound. His decisions accordingly carry weight.
Authorities bearing upon the case before him he respects; but, if
he disagrees with the reasoning on which they proceed, he is,
unless absolutely bound by them, prepared to substitute his own
judgment. Sympathy he casts on one side, in obedience to the
exigencies of the law. It is a mere synonym for weakness. The
law must be administered, and the heart must be steeled. But not
wholly will he suffer the successful but unmeritorious litigant to
triumph. Though constrained to decide in his favour on the main
question involved, he still has a discretion to take the gilt off his
victory by depriving him of costs. This power he exercises with
considerable freedom. “Woe to the vanquished!” may be the
ordinary rule in regard to which party must pay the costs. But
if the “vanquished” have merits, he is entitled to some consolation
in the shape of an order that his opponent must pay his own
costs. This would be his Honour’s answer to the poetical critic,
who asks him—
“ Why should all victor litigants appear
Unworthy to have costs?”
Whether a barrister, on being elevated to the heights of the
Bench, becomes divorced from his knowledge of merely mundane
matters is a question open to speculation. No less a judge than
Sir James Fitzjames Stephen once caused some alarm in court by
gravely inquiring, “What is the Grand National?” A parallel sim-
plicity sometimes proceeds from Mr. Justice Hodges. When a
witness in court stated that someone had been going for a walk
with his “donah,” his Honour's face wore an expression something
more than puzzled. “A donah!” he said, amid suppressed laughter
in court, “what is a donah?” The position which a judge occupies
debars him from reading every page of the book of life. Dignity bids
him stand aloof from the maddening crowd, and the result of that
aloofness is a certain nescience of their habits and modes of speech.


On the other hand, it may be remarked that his Honour was the
first person to give sanction to the word “barracker” by introduc-
ing it into a vigorous address which he delivered in church assembly
as chancellor of the diocese.
Let it not be thought that partial innocence with regard to the
commonplaces of life is inconsistent with an extensive knowledge
of human nature and affairs of a graver kind. His Honour is a
shrewd searcher after motives. From the watch-tower of the
judgment-seat he closely scans each witness who delivers his state-
ment. His notes of the evidence he takes rapidly and in short-
hand —a practice not usually followed by other judges. This gives
him a better opportunity of observing a witness’s demeanour, and
also, by requiring a more rapid statement of the evidence, prevents a
dishonest witness from framing an untruthful answer. When
counsel on both sides have examined and cross-examined the de-
ponent, Mr. Justice Hodges sometimes adds a few searching ques-
tions on his own account. If these are not satisfactorily answered,
he will, with a contemptuous That will do! intimate to the
witness that he may leave the box —unbelieved. His Honour, like
Cassius, is—
“A great observer,
And he looks quite through the deeds of men.”
The charge sometimes made (generally without justification)
that judges take their labours too lightly, should, at all events, be
withheld in this instance. His Honour takes his seat in court half
an hour before the accustomed time. With set face, he rigidly
applies himself to his work from the opening of the court until
it rises. To physical fatigue he is a comparative stranger.
“Tired?” said an English judge, after a long day in court.
“Tired? Not at all. I like it.” So with Mr. Justice Hodges.
If a delay occurs in the proceedings, he manifests some irritation,
and woe betide the person who has retarded the progress of liti-
gation! He is fortunate if he escapes with nothing more severe
than being exhorted to “get on!”
Not every judge can answer the description once given of Lord
Hatherley, “a mere bundle of virtues without one redeeming vice.”
The opinion may be ventured that Mr. Justice Hodges possesses
some of the faults of strong natures. His strength of purpose is
occasionally too pronounced. Having once made up his mind, he


lends a somewhat unwilling ear to arguments subsequently ad-
dressed to him. Sharpness of manner is also observable, which
makes him difficult to stand up against in a verbal encounter. No
doubt, the routine of Court work imposes a trial upon the pre-
siding judge. He has to tolerate the infirmities of witnesses and
the vagaries of counsel, and for ever to listen to the “dreary drip
of dilatory declamation.” It would perhaps be fairer to marvel at
the equanimity of those whose nerves endure the ordeal than to
carp at those who chafe under it. Hence it is that suaviter in
modo has an added charm in a judge. Yet those who appear
before Mr. Justice Hodges know that he will give them an easy
passage if their arguments are brief and clear, and their statements
accurate.
Granted that at times the atmosphere of his Court becomes
electrical, such a condition does not continue for long. An amus-
ing incident occurred in a case tried before this learned judge. A
barrister had been for some minutes urging a view with which his
Honour disagreed. At first the judge concealed his disapproval, but
ultimately, growing impatient, he exclaimed, with warmth, “Non-
sense!” The astonished barrister waited for an instant, and then
remarked, with great coolness, “Your Honour says ‘nonsense!’
Well, there have been a good many complaints lately about long-
winded judgments, and the consequent waste of public time. But
your Honour says ‘nonsense!’ May Ibe permitted to congratulate
your Honour upon having pronounced quite the shortest judgment
to which I have ever listened!” His Honour could not refrain
from smiling, and the situation was saved.
The way to Mr. Justice Hodges' heart may be said to be through
his head. Let the speaker keep well to the point and avoid cir-
cumlocution, and he will be sure of an attentive hearing. But if
he stray, though ever so little, from the direct route, let him
beware.
Apart from mere manner, there is no more sympathetic judge.
His emotions are powerful, and come readily to the surface, par-
ticularly in cases where the domestic relations are concerned.
Where, for instance, an order has to be made giving the custody
of a child to one parent, and denying it to another, the trying
nature of his duties seems to weigh heavily upon him. In the
criminal jurisdiction, again, where the chord of human feeling is
so constantly struck, his manner betrays the depths to which he is


stirred. Here his Honour displays especial zeal in the performance
of his duties. Here it is that the responsibility, rather than the
difficulty, of adjudicating is always so keenly felt. Vice, which to
all right-thinking people is a “monster of such hideous mien," is
perhaps unusually repellent to Mr. Justice Hodges. Yet he holds
the scales with evenness; nor does he allow his hatred of certain
offences to operate to the prejudice of those accused of them. His
charges to the jury are painstaking, luminous, and fair. In man-
ner they are impressive, and sometimes almost dramatic. His
sentences are distinctly humane.
Closely allied to the earnestness and emotionalism which charac-
terise his Honour is his religious sense, in regard to which it may
be allowable to say that he regards his office as being in the nature
of a sacred trust.
For the rest, his Honour is a rapid worker, his grasp of law
and facts being quick, and his retentive faculty strong. The
intensity of his nature does not admit much of the saving sense
of humour —a fact which he himself realises and deplores. A
standing jest about him is that, when at the Bar, he told a friend
that he intended during the ensuing term to make a special study
of humour! He is an effective speaker by reason of his vigour
and common sense.
In a word, Mr. Justice Hodges has a personality dependent in
the main upon clearness, force, and earnestness; and these, if Daniel
Webster may be regarded as an authority, are the qualities which
produce conviction."


MR. JUSTICE HOOD.
While Mr. Justice Hood, in common with all the Supreme
Court judges, commanded in his time a large practice at the Bar, he
alone of them was in the habit of appearing, during the early por-
tion of his career, before the less exalted forum of the County
Court. For some years he was facile prmceps in that jurisdiction,
having the lion s share of the briefs, and being very successful in
the conduct of his cases. A barrister actively engaged in the County
Court meets with a great variety of litigious work, and thus re-
ceives an excellent training for the more difficult cases which come
before the higher tribunal. In due course, his Honour entered upon
an exclusively Supreme Court practice, and before long his services
were in general demand. A reference to the back numbers of the
"Law Reports" shows that, in many of the heaviest cases prior
to and about the time of the land boom, a constantly-recurring
quartet of counsel engaged were Mr. Purves, Dr. Madden, Mr.
Hood, and Mr. Hodges. The last-mentioned (now Mr. Justice
Hodges) bears a considerable resemblance to the subject of this
article, alike in respect of his methods and of his career. Both
belonged to the Common Law Bar, and were elevated to the Bench
at about the same time. Again, each judge gets through his work
with exceptional despatch, while, in point of erudition, it would
be difficult to say which of them has attained the higher standard.
Anyone who for the first time observed Mr. Justice Hood in
court would at once notice the rapidity with which he accomplishes
his work. In this respect he is truly remarkable. But those whose
opportunities for observation are more frequent recognise a still
more striking feature in the fact that he is as careful as he is rapid.
The combination is a rare one. "Hasten slowly" is the rule which
most men prefer to follow. But his Honour is not to be judged
by ordinary canons. He has an unwonted and instinctive quick-
ness of sight, thought, and utterance. The conclusion of an argu-
ment is arrived at by him before another man has grasped the major
premiss. It is in the Practice Court that this habit of expedition
is most eagerly hailed by the profession. When business there is
heavy, a number of people have to wait about disconsolately for


their turn to be reached. There is ordinarily no list showing in
what order matters are taken. So that the speedier the judge, the
sooner each legal suppliant is at liberty to depart. The Court may,
at the beginning of the day, be thronged with barristers, solicitors
and clerks, anxious for their applications to be disposed of. One
wonders whether the rising sun of judicial vigour will be strong
enough to dispel the mists of legal business. Yet, behold! first
one, then another, applicant is dealt with; documents are scanned:
Acts of Parliament and authorities construed and criticised; argu-
ments adopted or rejected; and before the small hand of the clock
is at 4, the court is clear, and his Honour is eagerly looking about
for more work! He feels, like Tennyson s Ulysses
“How dull it is to pause, to make an end,
To rust unburnished, not to shine in use,
As though to breathe were life!’'
Over and above his natural speed, he has his work at his fingers
ends, and loses no time in coming to the precise point in issue,
and focussing his entire energies upon it.
Only one drawback exists where justice is dispensed at high
pressure. It is a little difficult for average mortals to travel as fast
as their illustrious pacemaker. Witnesses, and even lawyers, are
sometimes slow of thought and of speech. Yet it is necessary that
they should keep abreast of the judge. The danger is that, if
they fail to do so, “swift injustice” may result. Withal, his
Honour is not merely careful, but at all times conspicuously fair.
The author of “The Dream of Fair Judges” has delineated him
in felicitous language:—
“And so I saw not him who left last,
Of whom men murmur with admiring stare,
‘Behold ideal justice fair and fast!'
But less fast were more fair.”
Among others who regard his Honour as having well earned
the sobriquet of “lightning judge” are the recording angels,
whose duty it is to take shorthand notes of his judgments, either
for the law reports used by the profession or for the daily papers.
So closely do his thoughts and words follow upon one another,
that the task of the unfortunate scribe in endeavouring to accu-
rately report him is heavy indeed. His judgments are not verbose.
He always goes for the bull s eye. The substance of his remarks


being so apposite, it is not a little tantalising to lose any portion
of them.
With regard to Mr. Justice Hood's ability as a lawyer, an ap-
proving verdict may be said to have been given by the entire legal
profession. The law is a jealous and exacting mistress for those
who seek to excel in it. His Honour must have realised this early
in his career. He has long "scorned delights and lived laborious
days," allowing himself but few hobbies, and devoting himself to
an almost lifelong study of the law. His judgments betray clear-
ness of mind and close analytical reasoning. A tribute to his care
and ability was paid by the Privy Council in an important Tram-
way appeal dealt with by them some years ago. Their lordships
stated that, in making an examination of certain statutes, involving
nice and difficult questions, they had been "much aided by a very
full and careful judgment delivered by Hood, J." Speaking
generally, Mr. Justice Hood aims at giving decisions based upon
common sense, coupled with a due regard to established doctrines
of law.
Though firm, sometimes even to the point of severity, Mr. Jus-
tice Hood gives everyone a full and patient hearing. He approaches
a case with an open mind, free from prejudice in regard to class,
sex, or religion. The oath taken by a judge, on assuming office,
"to do equal justice to the poor and to the rich, without fear,
favour, or affection," is one which he respects to the fullest degree.
As becomes a judge, he is fearless, independent, and outspoken.
In point of outspokenness, his Honour is a tolerably hard hitter.
Methods vary on the Bench, according to the personal equation
of the judge, when it becomes necessary to decide upon a witness’s
credibility or character. One judge will be content to say, "I can-
not accept the evidence of Mr. ." Another will refer to him
in terms of emphatic denunciation. Obviously, there are times
when hard things must be said. But a judge’s remarks carry great
weight, and form public opinion. It may be hoped that the benefit
of the doubt is freely given, except where the necessity for criticism
is clear.
Counsel learned in the law, who propose to argue points of
subtlety before Mr. Justice Hood, had best prepare themselves for
the task by a course of mental gymnastics. His Honour very com-
monly resorts to the Socratic method in order to elucidate matters
of obscurity. Barristers are often vigorously pelted by him with


| i I
m JHBf
* il
, c '1H
,#-t.... ** ■'■■ rfxTcf
• ■ - '■ . - ‘. ::,
v- ‘ .»
*■;•. • : ■ * V ’ '!■«.» ,
Mr. Justice Hood.




a series of legal posers on points analogous to, or closely re-
sembling, those which require solution, so as to test the soundness
of the views they propound. These quasi-conundrums are not
easily answered off-hand; whereas, to evade the difficulty by replying,
"But the case your Honour suggests is very different from the
present," meets with a cold reception from the interrogator.
"How are you hurt?" is a favourite formula with his Honour,
when pressed to give effect to a technical objection. Technicalities
are an undesirable, but necessary, incident of our legal system.
By judges they are endured, but not encouraged. Armed with
authority, and with his eye "in a fine frenzy rolling," some youth-
ful jurist will point out to the judge that a certain step has been
taken by the opposite party one whole day after the prescribed
time for taking it has elapsed! When the inexorable reply comes,
"How are you hurt?" the taker of points subsides beneath the
judicial cold douche. The irony of the position is that, in the
days when his Honour used himself to proffer arguments to the
Court, there was no more technical counsel than he at the Bar.
Quantum mutatus!
Just as Shakespeare has said that a voice soft, gentle, and low
is an excellent thing in a woman, so freedom from vanity is a
pleasing trait in a judge. Mr. Justice Hood has a large store of
anecdotes, none of which he narrates with greater pleasure than
those which tell against himself. One of these turns upon an
incident which took place during a murder trial at Geelong. His
Honour, then at the Bar, was counsel for the accused, and sought
to show that his client, at the worst, was only guilty of man-
slaughter. While addressing the jury, he noticed one of them
weeping. At first he attributed this to his own eloquence, but a
few minutes later was disconcerted to overhear someone remark
that "that ’ere juryman’s a-cryin’ because the prisoner’s counsellor's
a-spoilin' of his case"!
An English judge once complained of a conversational buzz
which had been disturbing the proceedings of his court. "Really,
he said, "I have had to decide the last three cases without hearing
any of the evidence." Hood, J., rigorously insists upon the ob-
servance of decorum in courts of justice. If any casual spec-
tator" indulges in an audible laugh during the proceedings, the
crier will be instantly invoked by the judge to show the gentleman
outside; while in the Criminal Court the interested onlookers are


sometimes deprived of their amusement by an injunction to the
constable to "Clear the gallery!"
His Honour has not forgotten that he was once a junior
barrister, and gives every consideration to the younger members of
the Bar while they maintain an attitude of respect. But any lapse
from due deference is severely regarded, and where the audacity of
counsel has proceeded sufficiently far to warrant it, he has been
known to resort to the "extreme rigour of the law" by summon-
ing the sheriff.
Human nature is discoverable even in the occupants of the
Bench. Judges do not, for instance, deny themselves the luxury
of an occasional laugh during the progress of court proceedings.
They even consider that it braces them for the work which falls to
their lot. Mr. Justice Hood is especially appreciative of a hon mot.
Sitting beside Sir John Madden in the Full Court, he has often
been visibly affected by the quaint humour of the learned Chief
Justice. He himself possesses a considerable power of repartee.
As a barrister, he was once asked by a judge whether he was serious
in contending that the law was to a certain effect. "Your Honour,"
was the reply, "it is for 'seriously contending’ that I am paid."
His Honour has the appearance of a typical judge, with a stern,
thoughtful expression, suggestive of an ever-present feeling of
responsibility. "There is no pleasure like work, and no place like
home." he said recently, upon returning from a trip to Europe.
If a choice of epitaphs had to be made for his Honour, it might
aptly fall upon that devised by an equally alert judge for him-
self—
"Here lies a judge who never left a remanet."


JUDGE CHOMLEY.
Judge Chomley within the last few weeks has been raised to
the Supreme Court Bench, to keep the number of judges in that
court up to five during the absence of the Chief Justice on leave.
In his new capacity he is entitled to be termed Mr. Justice Chom-
ley; but it is as a County Court judge that he will be dealt with
in the present sketch, and, therefore, let us speak of him as Judge
Chomley—the title by which he has been so long and honourably
distinguished.
The Victorian County Court in one respect deserves more than
passing notice. Though described in the law books and statutes
as an “inferior" tribunal, it possesses, in reality, a large and
steadily increasing jurisdiction. Neither the corresponding New
South Wales District Court nor the County Court in England
deals with cases of so important or diversified a character. The
chief limit to its powers is that (except in cases arising out of
railway and mining accidents, and negligence by employers) the
amount involved in an action must not exceed £SOO. Acts of Par-
liament from time to time relegate additional work to the County
Court, thus enhancing its importance. One broad line of distinction
between it and the Supreme Court is that suitors in the County
Court are not allowed the luxury of “pleadings"—that is to say, the
written statements of claim and defence exchanged between the par-
ties before trial for the purpose of defining the issues. And, speaking
generally, the costs are much lower. Thus it becomes, more or
less, a “poor man’s Court"—neither dignified nor encumbered by
the costly trappings and paraphernalia of the more important
tribunal.
The necessity for strong, learned, and upright arbiters in this
sphere of legal activity is striking and undeniable. Though the
wealthy litigant may, in his Supreme Court proceeding, have an
imposing sum at stake, success or failure in the action does not
either make or mar him. But the humble £2O or £SO County
Court action for slander, negligence, or wrongful distress may
cripple or ruin the suitor, a lower scale of costs notwithstanding.


Not only so, but a decision in the County Court must, perforce,
be accepted as final in most instances. Provision for appeal of
course there is, but, unless he be “Dives," the party who is van-
quished (perhaps unjustly) must generally cry “Hold, enough!"
and steadily divert his gaze from the Court of Appeal.
With a due sense of his obligations. Judge Chomley takes up
his allotted task. Litigation, he recognises, must to some extent
be a Juggernaut-car—crushing and bruising its victims as it goes
along its way. His Honour's constant object is to make the load
on the car as mercifully light as he possibly can. No matter how
humble the litigant, or how small the bone of contention, he, for
the time being, gives himself up, body, mind, and soul, to the
adjudication of the questions in issue between the contending par-
ties. Conscientiousness is, from first to last, his most strongly-
marked attribute. With infinite pains he elicits from the witnesses
each detail of their evidence. Unflinchingly he grapples with and
sifts every point which is in any way difficult, obscure, or intricate.
And, with fulness and patience, he discusses the facts and argu-
ments with counsel at the close of the case. He makes the average
man feel
“How poor are they that have not patience!"
The action may be an important one of libel, the issue in which
may spell ruin or redemption to one of the parties: or it may be
so insignificant as to be visible only to the eye of a legal insect.
To all alike the judge devotes himself with Spartan fortitude,
regardless of flesh-weariness, remembering only that a willing spirit
is essential. One phase of his Honour’s care and thoroughness is
that he is an exceptionally keen note-taker. Some judges content
themselves with committing only the more important portions of
the evidence to writing, preferring to fill up the gaps between
taking one note and another by shooting keen glances at the wit-
nesses, so as to study their demeanour. This it is very necessary
to do; but so, on the other hand, is it desirable to have the pro-
ceedings as fully recorded as possible. Who, unless he himself be
a judge, shall say which method should prevail? Two observations
only it may be permissible to make about judges who display zeal
in perpetuating evidence. One is that a witness’s shifty look, or
change of colour, may sometimes prove to everyone in court, except
the taker of notes, that he is lying; another is that a plethora of
note-taking, by lengthening a trial, adds to the expense of litigation.


' , ' ■ . 5
•• • ■ :
.. .. : m?
Judge Chomley.




From the point of view of the litigant, not the least important
element in a judge’s composition is his digestive apparatus. If
Napoleon lost the Battle of Waterloo through an overnight attack
of dyspepsia, so has many a forensic Waterloo been cut off un-
timely by the ill-favoured condition of a judge s internal economy.
Let the litigant see to it, therefore, that his case comes on for trial
before a judge with no jaundiced eye. If his destiny has to be
decided by Judge Chomley, he may rest assured that the thorough-
ness of the hearing will not be jeopardised by the possibility of
any physical unevenness. Whether it be matter for praise, or merely
for congratulation, the fact is that his Honour does not, as some
judges do, have occasional “off-days,” when judgments are pro-
nounced, not really by the brain, but by the liver. Moods and
tenses do not govern him.
In spite of a comment made by a former member of the Supreme
Court Bench, that County Court judges could hardly be regarded
as lawyers of very high standing, there have been, and are. able
lawyers presiding in that jurisdiction. The author of the state
ment referred to, at all events, could not have had Judge Chomley
in his thoughts. Both the profession and his colleagues on the
County Court Bench (most of whom have practised before him)
regard him as a strong lawyer. There may be judges whose legal
learning is wider. But he excels by reason of his appreciation of
the real effect of an authority, or the object of a statute, and also
because he correctly applies the law to the case before him. As a
judge of facts (apart from law) he deserves to be ranked among
the members of that tribunal to which the critic quoted himself
belonged.
Incidentally, it is worthy of note that, while the heavier and
more difficult cases arc usually fought out in other places, many
knotty points of law arise before their Honours of the County
Court. The law relating to negligence, defamation, bills of sale,
and other matters familiar to practitioners in this jurisdiction, em-
braces questions of considerable difficulty.
The decisions of County Court judges are not usually included
in the law reports used by the profession, but an important ruling
by Judge Chomley is recorded, in which he deals with the basis
of valuation of the works, lands, and buildings of the Metropolitan
Gas Company. His Honour held that the “average annual value”


should be ascertained, not by taking the mean of several years, but
by comparing one year with another, so as to exclude any exccp-
tional profits or losses.
For a judge to have the confidence of the legal profession, and
to feel that he has it, must be not merely gratifying to him, but a
solid advantage in the accomplishment of his work. The legal
profession are a highly critical body of men, quick to detect a flaw
in the mental and moral powers of a judge. The judge who has
won their full confidence and esteem must be the possessor of many
fine attributes; but, above all, he must be pre-eminently fair.
Even among judges, who, after all, are only human, there may be
degrees of fairness. But not the most exacting critic could impute
partiality to Judge Chomley. Each individual is dealt with
strictly on his merits. Sometimes it has happened that a particular
counsel has attained a very leading position at the County Court
Bar, and thus gained a kind of ascendancy over one or more of the
judges by reason of his intimate knowledge of their habits and
views. Before Judge Chomley the veriest tyro in the law has as
fair a run as the man who starts behind scratch. One side or
another must be defeated in a lawsuit, but the loser before Judge
Chomley has the solace of knowing that his view has received full
and fair hearing. "I thought I was right,’* he reflects, "but the
judge has convinced me that I was mistaken."
Judge Hamilton used facetiously to compare certain unruly pro-
ceedings in a suburban Police Court to a dog-fight. Before Judge
Chomley lawyers seldom "behave themselves unseemly." Under
the watchful eye of a firm, courteous president, they instinctively
fall into professional line.
A few words may be said with regard to his Honour’s adminis-
tration of the criminal law. County Court judges act as chairmen
of Courts of General Sessions, which now have power to deal with
nearly all offences except those punishable by death. Principles of
criminal law are not usually abstruse. Difficulties which arise may
be referred to the Full Court. When a judge presides "in crime."
his most useful equipment is common-sense and worldly wisdom.
Judge Chomley is not one with whom
"Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers."


He is a Nestor of the Bench; one who secs men and things in their
right perspective; who divines motives: and who, without undue
optimism or pessimism, forms a calm, deliberate judgment. He
understands
“The dear, delightful, awful depth of things/'
Add to this that he brings to bear upon criminal investigations
a special experience formerly gained by him as Crown Prosecutor.
His Honour narrates an amusing experience connected with his
Crown Prosecutor days. A prisoner raised the defence of an
alibi —i.e., sought to show his innocence by proving that he was
elsewhere (in some public-house) when the alleged crime occurred.
In cross-examining the accused (a very illiterate man), Mr. Chom-
ley asked him how he knew what the time was when he was in
the public-house. “Because I looked at the clock, was the reply.
Pointing to the clock in the court-room, the Crown Prosecutor
asked him what time it indicated. The prisoner hesitated, and,
after remarking that “that was a very rum-looking clock." had
finally to admit that he could not tell the time at all, and the
defence, of course, broke down.
Judge Chomley’s court is not conspicuously attractive to the
onlooker. His real personality lies beneath the surface. No scin-
tillating epigram proceeds from his lips; his voice is somewhat
indistinct, and his assiduity in noting the evidence makes it irk-
some to follow the proceedings. The judge is in the background;
the client and the cause well to the fore. But, then, he is presid-
ing. not in a hall of entertainment, but in a court of law. A true
sense of his Honour’s worth comes, not from a casual survey, but
from a prolonged observation.
Never lacking in “sweet reasonableness," and at all times
prompted by a resolve to get at the truth, Judge Chomley deals
out even-handed justice to all.


JUDGE MOLESWORTH.
Judge Hickman Molesworth, who has for so long been asso-
ciated with the administration of the insolvency law, is of dis-
tinguished and interesting descent. His immediate progenitor, Sir
Robert Molesworth, has been described by an eminent authority as
“the father of mining law in Australia," and by some is regarded
as the greatest equity lawyer we have seen in the Southern
Hemisphere.
A more dreary atmosphere than that which pervades the Court
of Insolvency it would be difficult to imagine. Yet there Judge
Moiesworth presides, and has presided for 20 years, wreathed in
perennial smiles, crowned with optimism. Certificate applications
do not weary him, and to tedious motions to the Court he lends
an ever-willing ear. He grows jovial and happy on interminable
examinations, which often lead to nothing but costs and outer
darkness. Like Democritus of old, his wise philosophy is to
laugh, and never to grieve, over the folly of his fellow-creatures.
Each day that passes without a smile represents so many hours
irretrievably lost and wasted. How many tragic histories have
been unfolded in your court!" a friend once dolefully remarked
to him. "Yes; and how many comic ones, too," replied the judge.
"Don’t forget about them."
The judge of the Insolvency Court is required by Parliament to
play many parts. In addition to watching over his own particular
domain, he is called upon to officiate in the County Court, the
Licensing Court, and the Court of General Sessions. In one
aspect, the diversity of work thus entailed is acceptable enough,
because insolvency law in itself is hardly a subject of soul-stirring
interest. It has, in fact, been dubbed the Cinderella, or despised
sister, of the legal family. Prosy statements in regard to assets
and liabilities, and creditors, secured and unsecured, crop up as
regularly as recurring decimals, constituting a fifty-times told tale,
"Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man,"
albeit not of a drowsy judge.


| lip ;;•>-
E- * i
K|l
JW* ''J
1 ... * jp*! • '"■%
t — f„ jfH'
|i|v < ; * * ..is
I' "
- v' < ... t /Utr ' - Jiiit
f« f . •
Judge Molesworth.




In this particular jurisdiction, there is, perhaps, no more im-
portant or frequent class of cases than those arising in applications
for certificates of discharge. An important decision in relation to
these was given by the Full Court some years ago, which has served
as a useful guide to Judge Molesworth ever since in administering
the insolvency law. The Act of Parliament enables the Court
to grant a certificate after three months from the date of sequestra-
tion, if a dividend of 7/- in the £ 1 has been or will be paid: but
allows this condition to be dispensed with, if failure to pay the
dividend is due to circumstances “for which the insolvent cannot,
in the opinion of the Court, justly be held responsible/' In the
case mentioned, the insolvent had suffered enormous losses by
investing (without reckless speculation) in the shares of a com-
pany which, in 1892, was ruined by the great financial crisis.
When the insolvent purchased the shares he was a man of large
means, and able to pay all the calls that could have been made.
The Full Court, under the circumstances, allowed the condition
requiring payment of the statutory dividend to be dispensed with.
“The conduct and dealings of the insolvent must be looked at/'
they said, “not in the light of present knowledge, but, as far as
possible, in the view in which they would have presented them-
selves to a prudent man at the time they occurred."
In accordance with the spirit of the insolvency law, as declared
by the Full Court in this case, Judge Molesworth has since then
released many an insolvent from his incubus of indebtedness, and
given him a much-needed fresh start in life. He holds, moreover,
that, in the absence of fraudulent conduct or rash speculation, the
principle involved in the Full Court decision enables him to grant
unconditional certificates, not merely to insolvents whose liabilities
are on an imposing scale, but also to those who are indebted for
small, or relatively small, amounts. In the case referred to, his
Honour's decision was reversed by the Full Court, after they had
taken time to consider their judgment. A recent and much-
discussed decision of his was, however, after being overruled by
the Full Court, subsequently restored by the High Court, Several
points were involved in the case; but the one which principally
aroused public interest was whether certain property (including a
grocer's license), which was claimed by the trustees in insolvency,
had been purchased by the insolvent’s wife, and so belonged to her,
or whether it really belonged to the insolvent himself. In the


result, the High Court disallowed a claim by the trustees to the
property in question. No case of fraud, they maintained, had been
established as against the wife, the facts at most pointing to
suspicion.
It was an odd chance that led Judge Molesworth to the occu-
pation of the Insolvency Court Bench. His practice as a barrister
was concerned principally with jury cases, and more particularly
with the defence of accused persons, many of whom he has assisted
in restoring to the bosoms of their families. A story —often repeated
in legal circles, but, perhaps, not so familiar to those beyond the
professional pale—is told of the embryonic judge in insolvency
which brings to mind the days of his illustrious father, Sir Robert
Molesworth. The Supreme Court then was on the site occupied
by the present City Police Court. During the progress of certain
proceedings before the eminent judge referred to, a considerable
noise from without became noticeable, whereupon his Honour
despatched a constable to find out who was creating the dis-
turbance, and, if necessary, to apprehend him. The constable sal-
lied forth, and presently returned with the announcement that it
was "only young Mr. Hickman Molesworth addressing the jury
in the adjoining court."
From crime to insolvency is in some, though not in all, respects
a far cry. The Insolvency Act confers upon the judge power to
deal with a variety of offences relating to fraudulent conduct, and
in adjudicating upon these an experience in criminal cases is of un-
doubted service. Nor must it be forgotten that insolvency is only
one of the "departments" presided over by the judge in that juris-
diction. Judge Molesworth, as already mentioned, "goes" Sessions,
and here the knowledge gained early in his career stands him in
good stead. As a judge, he is considered to appear to greatest
advantage when determining questions of fact rather than points
of law. And, to discriminate still further, a shrewd observer has
remarked —what may seem paradoxical—that his decisions are
usually more accurate when given immediately after the proceedings
have concluded than when he has taken time for consideration.
No one will deny that Judge Molesworth endeavours at all times
to decide upon considerations of justice and common sense. In
some instances, it may be thought that he presses his desire for an
equitable decision too far, by depriving the successful party of


portion of the fruits of victory, and so tempering the wind to the
shorn litigant.
Familiarity with courts of justice by no means conduces to the
formation of a credulous view in regard to human conduct. Nor,
indeed, could any judge be regarded as having fully profited by
his experience if he forbore to peer behind the scenes of the drama
played before him. The learned judge in insolvency is certainly
not easy to capture by cajolery or plausibility of any kind. True
it is that nothing is set down by him in malice, while good humour
was never more conspicuous in any man. But, with the mistrust
bred of sad experience, he looks askance at the ways of his fellow-
creatures. In order that he may be satisfied, the cards must all be
placed upon the table—face upwards.
Anecdotes crowd thickly around some judges, just as they leave
others almost deserted. Some of those in which Judge Molesworth
figures hark back to the days when he held forth to the jury in
the capacity, not of judge, but of advocate. Under the system
of legal procedure then in vogue, jury cases were far more frequent
than they are to-day. Mr. Molesworth’s services as a barrister
were freely availed of, especially in the Western District, where he
became so familiar a figure that foremen on juries, in announcing
their verdicts, would sometimes say that they found “for Mr.
Molesworth/' In point of originality, perhaps, it would be diffi-
cult to surpass a reason supplied by a jury for their verdict in a
cattle-stealing case in which he was counsel for the defence. The
evidence for the prosecution was overwhelming; but the jury, to
everyone’s surprise, found the prisoner not guilty. One of their
number was afterwards asked privately what induced them to give
such a verdict. “Well,” he explained, “we reckoned it must have
cost the prisoner at least £2O to cover Mr. Molesworth’s fees, and
surely that is enough to pay for any cow!’’ The reasoning cer-
tainly was unanswerable!
On one occasion his Honour (at the Bar) received an amusing
reply from an Irish witness. He was cross-examining the latter,
with a view to shaking his credibility, and, among other things,
asked him whether he was not once put upon his trial for sheep-
stealing. “I was!’’ said the witness with alacrity; “and I was ably
defended by Counsellor Moulesworth, and honourably acquitted
by a jury of my fellow-countrymen!’’


Of all the occupants of the Bench, there is probably none who
feels the restraint incident to his position so keenly as the judge
in insolvency. Whether it be that the unusually prosaic branch
of the law which he is destined to administer produces a necessary
reaction, or whether it be that his Honour has an exceptional
amount of bonhomie, he shows, when the Court has risen, a keen
exuberance on being freed of judicial harness. It is a palpable
relief to him to sometimes forget that he is called upon to deliver
judgment ex cathedra upon his fellow-creatures. His pleasure is
to foregather with the Bar as if he were still one of their number.
With a hatred of conventionality, he wears a hat and coat (the for-
mer now historic by a recent description of it as “green and mossy")
which are quite unique, and, in conjunction with their owner’s
cheerful visage, are suggestive of happy pastoral avocations. Society
and outdoor functions of all kinds he freely patronises, while for
exercise he takes a keen zest in riding and hunting, rightly deeming
that —
“ ’Tis better to hunt in fields for health unbought
Than fee the doctor for a nauseous draught."
One practice observed by his Honour in the Insolvency Court is
novel and interesting. He never robes. Quixotic folk may asso-
ciate the disuse of wig and gown with want of dignity and a loose
conduct of court proceedings; but the observance of the same prac-
tice by the judicial committee of the Privy Council seems to afford
a sufficient precedent for its adoption.
The profession owe a real debt of gratitude to Judge Moles-
worth for the consideration he shows for their needs at certain
times. If, for example, counsel desire an adjournment on grounds
which ordinarily would be regarded as unacceptable, he will make
his utmost endeavour to meet them in the matter. Naturally, he
will not accede to every possible request for an indulgence; but
the worst that ever happens to an unreasonable claimant is a mild
protest against converting the Court into a “chapel of ease."
Ebullitions of temper, it may be remarked, are happily unknown
in the Insolvency Court.
With the public his Honour is appreciated, not merely for his
tolerant disposition, but because he administers in a spirit of
reasonableness a jurisdiction in which the necessity for a firm but
humane attitude is paramount.


LIMBS OF THE LAW.
Votaries of the law, great and small, revel in anecdote. From
the most sedate and dignified occupant of the Bench to the humble
solicitor’s clerk who encircles the auriferously endorsed brief with
the proverbial red tape, how the features light up when the latest
bon mot is being retailed about Mr. Justice or
, K.C.! What portion of the superficial area of the
remotest part of His Majesty’s solemn Temples of Jus-
tice, what nook or cranny of the professional chambers
tenanted by the members of the Bar, or of the office of each
and every solicitor who ever drew a bill of costs, has not overheard
innumerable stories with a legal flavour, some of them new, some
old, some side-splitting, and some pointless, and some that were
only “good in parts’’? Going to court, coming away from court,
in trains and trams, in season and out of season, you will find
your budding Blackstone or your embryonic Chief Justice telling
someone “the very latest,’’ or else “listening in’’ while he hears it
from his black-lettered friend. With certain of the learned tribe,
the treasuring up and outpouring of stories amounts almost to an
occupation. Others, again, distribute them in small homoeopathic
doses. A certain weary-looking, methodical, and most learned
lawyer of to-day is well known for his habit of visiting a friend’s
office at regular intervals, delivering himself of a carefully quanti-
fied amount of joke or anecdote, and then resuming his lucubrations
in his own den. This systematic teller of jokes aims only at
bracing himself for the dry work which falls to his unhappy lot.
But where now are the wits and humorists whose quips and
repartees float down to us from the days gone by? Where in
these times shall we look for an Ireland, an Aspinall, a McDermott,
a Purves, a Madden, or a Duffy? Learning, indeed, grows, but
humour lingers! And now the walls of our courts listen only to
men well versed in Queen’s Bench, and Chancery, and in the wis-
dom of Bullen and Leake, but lacking wit and devilry, or else
afraid to exercise it in the presence of a frowning and austere judge.
Whom shall we match with the late Judge Hamilton, at whose
quaint jibes the denizens of the old-time County Court rocked
with laughter? Picture, for instance, the lady summoned to his
presence as a fraudulent debtor. Without avail the judgment
creditor's counsel had tried to cross-examine her into an admission
of “means and ability’’ to pay up.


"Come, madam," he concluded, "you must have some property
of some kind."
"Well, I’ll tell you," she snapped—"my face is my fortune!"
Hamilton, J., shot a glance at her (she was not, by the way,
a Venus of Milo) and roared out —
"No assets! Summons dismissed."
Irresistibly funny this judge was, with his curious way of star-
ing straight ahead of him, his elbows resting on the bench, his
hands supporting his chin, and his wig all awry. He would blaze
out at witness or counsel in his rich Irish voice, and then suddenly
soften the effect with some droll remark or other. A female liti-
gant in his court once sued a Chinaman whose horse had bitten
her on the shoulder. As evidence of the animal’s savage disposi-
tion, the plaintiff called a number of St. Kilda folk who had seen the
horse biting or trying to bite various people. To their many com-
plaints the owner blandly replied, "Him no bite, him only play."
Judge Hamilton, summing up to the jury, said, "This horse,
gentlemen, seems to be a carnivorous brute that goes about eating
up the inhabitants of St. Kilda!"
In another equine case that came before him, the plaintiff com-
plained that the defendant, who had been left in charge of the
plaintiff’s horse, had carelessly allowed it to get bogged in a swamp,
and ultimately to die. The plaintiff, it seemed, had accosted the
defendant in some place near to where the carcase was lying, and
a fierce fight ensued between them, which the judge likened to the
struggle between Hector and Achilles over the dead body of
Patroclus.
Of earlier date was Townsend McDermott, whose reputation as
a wag rests as much on his queer wizened facial expression as
upon the pungency of his jibes. Violently personal remarks—
quite free of malice, and always tinged with humour—were his
characteristic. The classic story told of him relates to one of his
brethren (now departed) who, though possessing a very small
practice at the Bar, was in the habit of walking very rapidly to
and from the courts, bag in hand, as though rushed with work.
Overtaking McDermott on the way to court one day, he remarked,
"I’m going along like a steam-engine, you see, McDermott!"
"Steam-engine!" said McDermott. "Blooming donkey-engine, if
you ask me!" McDermott was nothing if not candid. In pari
materia with the foregoing was his reception of a latter-day, very


genial advocate, who was married three times. Returning from
honeymoon number three, he was passing by his professional cham-
bers in old Temple Court, and, catching sight of our friend, called
out, in the cheerfullest of voices, "Good morning, McDermott!
Good morning!" "Morning, Bluebeard!" quoth McDermott, and
went on his way.
Another "fellow of infinite jest and humour," Mr. W. P.
Forlonge, had a considerable practice in the Criminal Court,
where he defended his clients with much ability, and, while
preserving a demeanour of the utmost gravity, said the drollest
things in a basso profundo voice, every now and then introducing
a remark in a high falsetto. Judge and jury would often be con-
vulsed in laughter; yet somehow it would be impossible to suggest
that counsel had committed any contempt of court. "Gentlemen
of the jury," Forlonge was once heard to say in a most earnest
manner, "I am addressing you now as men of the world, as men
of intelligence, and as men of business ability and integrity"—
and so on. Then, in an aside to someone sitting beside him, he
would add, "A more stupid-looking jury I never saw in my life!"
Very frivolous, no doubt, but very amusing.
But of those who practised before the judges of yesterday, there
is none around whom more stories have centred than the truly
inimitable J. L. Purves, K.C. Twenty-odd years ago, at the
Athenaeum Hall, Mr, Purves regaled a very large audience (con-
sisting, as he told them, of "sucking Lord Chancellors") with
an extraordinary address, which he described as "Reminiscences of
Bench and Bar." In his introductory remarks, he referred to a
bag of chestnuts which he produced and stated had been sent
to him by a friend who had heard of his proposed address. Then
for about three hours he amused his hearers with a wonderful col-
lection of jests—not all of the drawing-room variety, it is true.
So often have the sayings of the renowned K.C. been bandied about
that it is difficult to reproduce any that do not belong to the species
contained in the bag already referred to. Yet it really was a bright
thought that prompted him, when himself called as a witness by
W. T. Coldham (who read in J. L.’s chambers), and smilingly
asked by his junior "What is your occupation?" to reply, "A
trainer of puppies!"
I remember an action in which the Railway Commissioners were


sued by a passenger in respect of injuries he had suffered through
the negligence of the defendants’ servants. A doctor, who spoke
with a stutter, was called to testify to the plaintiff’s injuries, and
stated that the latter had at some time subsequent to the accident
a very high temperature.
“But,” said Purves (cross-examining on behalf of the Rail-
ways), “may not this man have always had a high temperature?”
“N-n-no,” said the witness, “that is imp-p-possible.”
“Are you quite sure?” he was asked.
“Y-yes, quite sure.”
“Indeed! Now, suppose, doctor, I introduced you to a judge,
a real live judge, whose temperature was at all times and in all
seasons many degrees above normal, what would you say to that?”
“I should s-say,” replied the witness, “that he was a
n-n-n-atural phe-n-n-omenon!”
“So he is,” said counsel, amid laughter.
A favourite habit of Mr. Purves, in his splendid addresses to
juries, in which eloquence alternated with wit and invective, was
to begin with some very broad generalisation about mankind, and
then, bit by bit, work around to the persons concerned in the
litigation. Appearing once as counsel in an action brought against
a member of Parliament, he began his speech thus: “Of course,
gentlemen, in a case like this we must remember that it takes all
sorts and conditions of people to make a world. Fortunately, there
are people in the world of the very highest character and ability,
men who are destined to attain the most exalted positions in the
State, for example, Archbishops and” (glancing at his Honour)
“His Majesty’s judges. On the other hand, gentlemen, there are
men of the most degraded type, the lowest of the low —as, for
instance” (fixing his eye this time on the defendant), “a member
of Parliament!”
“Tactics” were a long suit with this clever advocate. A prose-
cution for embezzlement, in which he appeared for the accused,
was going badly for his client. The Crown Prosecutor, an ex-
citable man, and very sensitive about his reputation, had been
leaving the conduct of the charge almost entirely to his junior,
Mr. Eagleson, who alone of the two had mastered the intricate
details of the case. Mr. Purves remarked to his own junior that
the only possible chance of an acquittal was to lure the Crown
Prosecutor into making the final address to the jury,
instead of allowing his junior to do so. To this end


1
■.■ • i-M
I :* V
Mr. J. L. Purves, K.C




he thus apostrophised the sworn twelve: “We have had a most
amazing and scandalous exhibition, gentlemen, in this case. The
facts involved are of a perfectly ordinary character. Yet, although
the Crown is represented nominally, gentlemen—only nominally—
by a Crown Prosecutor, who is no doubt a very highly paid
official" (signs of distress from the Crown Prosecutor), “and who is
or ought to be conversant with the facts, but apparently has never
even looked at the depositions" (more agitation from the same
quarter), the whole burden of the prosecution has been
left to his struggling junior. I repeat, gentlemen, it is a grave
scandal! The result, of course, was to bring the learned Crown
Prosecutor to his feet. He replied in the feeblest of speeches, and
the prisoner was duly restored to the arms of his relations.
Other names recur to the memory—instance Sir Julian Salo-
mons, for many years leader of the New South Wales Bar, a
brilliant pleader, to whom many witty remarks are credited. Once,
by the way, he and Purves were pitted against each other in court,
when at least one passage-at-arms took place, in the course of
which Salomons told the court that his learned friend could teach
him nothing in regard to law, manners, or morals!
Sir Julian had a curious ocular defect, which made it appear
that his eyes were looking in different directions. Holding a volume
of the Law Reports close to one eye while he was addressing the
late Sir James Martin (Chief Justice of New South Wales), the
judge remarked,
“But you are merely stating your recollection of the case, Sir
Julian!"
“No, your Honour, I am reading from the Law Reports."
“But, Sir Julian, you are looking right at me while you are
talking."
“Oh! I think I understand," said Salomons, with a smile. “My
business eye was on the book. My pleasure eye was on the court!"
A legal text-book on “Infants" was sent to him with the com-
pliments of the author, Mr. Justice A. H. Simpson. The K.C.
returned it with a note stating that it was useless as it contained
no chapter on twins.
Keen legal discussions sometimes centre round the question as
to when the property or right of ownership in an article passes
from one person to another. Mr. Pilcher, a leading New South
Wales King's Counsel, once sought to elucidate his views on the
subject by an illustration.


"Suppose," he said, "my friend, Sir Julian, were to lend me
five pounds "
"Absurd supposition!" (from his opponent).
"At any rate, suppose he did, and then suppose I repaid
him "
"Ridiculous hypothesis!" snapped Sir Julian.
"But suppose that, before he got the money into his actual pos-
session, a third person came along and grabbed it. That would be
my learned friend’s unfortunate loss."
"No," said his opponent, "it would be your plausible excuse /"
Very merciless was the advice given to the young gentleman who
had written an extremely long poem, and sought Salomons’ opinion
of it. "I may say," remarked the poet, "that I dashed these lines
off rather quickly. You see, I have a good many irons in the
fire "
"Put your verses in the same place as your irons," said Salomons.
Yet another limb of the law—Mr. David Gaunson, who was
reputed to be a good constitutional lawyer. He was an amusing
speaker, with a great fondness for quoting from the Scriptures.
For some years he was a member of the Legislative Assembly. Mr.
Justice Hood, while a member of the Bar, visited the House on one
occasion, and Mr. Gaunson, catching his eye, came up and spoke
to him. Mr. Hood said that he was disappointed at finding
the proceedings in Parliament so dull; that he had hoped to witness
some lively interludes, and so on.
"Wait a minute!" said his friend. He thereupon took a seat
close to the member who was addressing the House on some very
dull topic. Presently he interrupted the speaker by a statement
that he was "not telling the truth." Cries of "Withdraw!" im-
mediately came from all quarters.
"I will not withdraw," he said. "The honourable member
is telling a deliberate lie!"
Of course, there was an uproar, and, after a good deal of trouble,
Mr. Gaunson condescended to apologise.
"Well," he remarked afterwards to Mr. Hood, "were you satis-
fied with the debate?"
"Thoroughly," said Mr. Hood.
Memories, these, of legal luminaries of the last decade, whose
bright flashes have enlivened the leisure hours of their brethren.
The lawyer of to-day thinks hard, works unremittingly, and jokes
with great difficulty. Tempora mutantur!


Brown, Prior & Co.Pty. Ltd,.
Printcraft House, 430 Little Bourke Street
Melbourne










