

JUDGMENT
WITHOUT EVIDENCE
A CROSS-EXAMINATION OF
“RELIGION WITHOUT SUPERSTITION
Bv D. M, BERRY, M.A.
(Ificumbent of All Saints’, Northcote)
Late Acting-Warden of Trinity College
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO., LIMITED
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE




“-b -1-5,
Judgment Without Evidence.
A PURE faith:'
Here is a book, the title of which cannot fail to attract every
mind which is at once devout and rational. “ Religion with-
out Superstition ” —is not that just what every thoughtful
Christian most earnestly desires ? “My soul is athirst for
God, even for the Living God,” and yet I would fain be in
harmony with all that is natural, all that is purely human, all
that is certain in human science and true in human thought.
“ Religion without Superstition ’’—that is, firm faith without
foolish credulity, service without slavery, adoration without
idolatry, the conscience set free without putting fetters on the
reason, the thirsting of the soul quenched, and yet the intellect
permitted to roam in wide pastures without fear.
But on opening this book with so attractive a title, what do
we find ? What is the nature of this “ Religion without Super-
stition ? Is it Christianity ? Certainly it is not anything
that we have been accustomed to call Christianity, for it begins
by condemning in the very introduction several doctrines
which we should call distinctive doctrines of Christianity.
These are the Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, the Inspira-
tion of the Scriptures, the Atonement, and the Second
Advent. These the writer denounces as “ mere crude super-
stitions,” whose “ effect is to disfigure and obscure pure and
true religion.”
Now, before I attempt to examine the reasons for this
sweeping judgment, I should wish to ascertain what the
writer intends to leave to me, after he has taken away so large
a part of my creed. I shall, therefore, take the liberty of
reading the last chapter of the book first. A strange way of
examining a new book, certainly ; but here are my reasons for


doing it in this way. Of the five chapters in the book, four
are devoted to pulling down my old faith, and the last to
building up a new one for me. It is but natural, therefore,
that I should wish to see the new one before I consent to have
the old one pulled down. It is not reasonable to expect me to
forsake the old ship, even if it is sinking, until I am convinced
that the raft which is offered me is strong enough to bear me
safe to shore, and will not leave me helplessly struggling in
the deep waters. Turning, then, to the last chapter, I look
anxiously to see what is the nature of that “ Pure Faith”—that
“ Religion without Superstition ” which was promised me at
the beginning. I find that it is “ Pure Theism.”
“ The tempest of doubt and the billows of superstition,” says the writer,*
“ have disappeared ; we are now on the calm blissful sea of pure theistic
belief—refreshing and invigorating in its simplicity—warm and glowing-
in its absolute, unclouded devotion to, love for, and perfect trust in God
alone.”
The writer further on speaks thus of the God in whom he
Avould have us believe:—
“ A God to whom [man] can always go freely and without fear, feeling
sure of a ready welcome, lovingly, and with perfect trust —with whom he
can always be in constant, direct, and immediate communion
■ftdio is the God of peace that passeth understanding—who will recom-
pense man with happiness for every good work, act, or thought—who,
being infinite, is infinitely just, wise, merciful, loving, and pure.” t
"A most comforting belief truly, and very much the same in
substance as what I believe as a Christian. Christianity rests
on the authority of Christ, but on what authority, or on what
basis of evidence, does this pure theism rest ?
Our author unhesitatingly declares that it is derived from
nature and received by a natural human instinct. “ Proclaimed
by nature—originating in instinct—accredited by reason.”
“ When once we have arrived at this belief,” he continues, “ its
truth and sweet reasonableness are so self-evident that, almost
at the moment of lighting upon it, it becomes a conviction.” I
Further on, he again refers to “ That conception of Cod which
has its birth in nature and instinct.” And again he reiterates,
apparently without a shadow of misgiving, “ How, then, did
this notion or belief originate ? I think it is clear it originated
in and from the teachings of nature ? ” §
Now, what sort of world has this writer been living in all his
life ? In what paradise can he have passed his happy days ?
* Page 79. t Page 81. | Page 79. § Page 91.


Surely these are not the words of one acquainted with this
world in which we live. He seems as unconscious of the
great perplexing question of the existence of evil as our first
parents were before they had eaten of the forbidden tree.
That which to most minds forms one of the greatest, if not the
greatest of all, obstacles to believing in a Supreme Being of
Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, seems never to have
suggested itself to his mind. The awful misery of this world
which God has made ; the manifold sufferings of sensitive
creatures ; the universal reign of death ; the pains in which
all creation (as far as we know it) “ groaneth and travaileth
until now ” —the difficulty of reconciling all this with belief in
the Infinite Love or Infinite Power of the God who permits
it—-is a difhculty of which our author takes not the smallest
account, and to which he makes not the faintest allusion.
His Gospel, as it seems to me, might have been suitable to
preach to Adam and Eve before the Fall, only that they had
then no need of any Gospel. But to address such teaching to
men and women who have to face the hard and terrible facts
of our present mortal existence is worse than idle; it is a bitter
mockery. The objections against it are at least as difficult
to surmount as all the objections against Christianity and the
Bible put together. And yet our author does not hesitate to
say,* “ Its truth and sweet reasonableness are so self-evident
that, almost at the moment of lighting upon it, it becomes a
conviction.” Well then, let him carry it into the streets and
lanes of our city, and see how “ its sweet reasonableness ” fares
there. “ Does not,” he pleads, “ the beauty of all things that
are lovely and sublime proclaim that God is Love ? ” *f* Yes,
but what of the hideousness of all things that are unlovely
and degraded—what does that proclaim ? The voraciousness
of the shark, the ferocity of the tiger, the poison of the serpent,
the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest, that
we see in nature—in what way do these proclaim that God
is Love ? And if, when we speak of nature, we are to
include human nature (and how can we possibly leave it
out ?), it really becomes doubtful whether in nature, as
we see it at present, the evil does not preponderate over
the good. And this evil God (if there be a God) permits,
either because He cannot help it or because Pie is not
willing to prevent it. In the one case, what becomes of His
Infinite Power ? and, in the other case, what becomes of His
* Page 79.
t Page 93.


Infinite Goodness ? In reading this new Gospel according to
the pure theist, I cannot help feeling somewhat of the exas-
peration of the fallen Titan when he heard—
“ Baby words,
In midst of this dethronement horrible.”
No ! the religion which we really need in such a world as
this is certainly not a religion which shuts its eyes to the
tremendous and appalling difificulty of the existence of evil.
What we need to save us from despair, or from a dreary
agnosticism, is something to convince us that the Supreme
Being has revealed Himself to us through the clouds and
darkness that are round about Him; that He has shown a face
beaming with the Light of Infinite Goodness and the tenderness
of Infinite Love, through the mists and storm clouds in which
we are enveloped.
And this assurance the Christian finds in Jesus Christ, as,
says the Apostle St. Paul, “ God who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness hath shined in our hearts, to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ.” —2 Cor. iv. 6. Far be it from me to deny that there is
much, very mmch, in nature which testifies to the goodness of the
Creator. “ The invisible things of Him are clearly seen from
the creation of the world, even His Eternal Power and God-
head.”-—Rom. i. 20. But, on the other hand, there is much in
nature, especially in human nature, which seems to contradict
either the power or else the goodness of the Creator, unless a
brighter and clearer revelation than that of nature is given to us.
And this revelation we have in Christ. “ The Word was made
flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory.” In the
human character of Jesus Christ I see a sympathy which
meets the cravings of my soul, combined with a righteousness
which satisfies the demands of my conscience, and I have His
own assurance that these are the sympathy and the righteous-
ness of God. “He that hath seen me hath seen the Father.”
“ I am in the Father and the Father in me.”—John xiv. 9, 10.
Who of mankind ever suffered so much from the evil of the
vrorld as Jesus ? Living for 33 years among the fallen and
degraded of the human race, and dying at last by the hands
of those whom He had lived to bless and save. He yet never
faltered in His testimony to the goodness and the love of
God. He suffered that death, which is my greatest and most
terrible enemy, and yet, even at that supreme moment, He
anticipated the final victory of good over evil.


My position as a suffering mortal is like the position of the
poor thief nailed to a cross, from which there was no hope of
escape. But he looked upon the face of Jesus, suffering at
that moment with him, and in that face he saw the anticipa-
tion of victory. And when he humbly prayed for a share in
that victory—“ Lord, remember me when Thou comest into
Thy Kingdom”—the answer of Jesus was prompt, unfaltering,
and clear, “ Verily, I say unto thee, to-day shalt thou be with
me in Paradise.”
But the writer with whom we are dealing would deprive us
of this implicit trust in Jesus Christ, which is, and from the
first always was, the very essence of Christianity; he even
finds fault with the theism taught by Christ, and ventures to
assert that “ The theism of to-day is more enlightened, purer, ,
more attractive, and more rational than even that of Jesus.”*
He has, in short, a new Gospel to proclaim to us. Well I, for
one, would answer him, and all such teachers, as the French
statesman Talleyrand once answered a person who pretended
to teach a new Gospel—“ Sir, when Jesus Christ brought a new
religion into the world. He was crucified and rose again the
third day from the dead. When you have done the same I
shall be prepared to hear all you have to say.”
But how does our author suppose that he or any other man
came into possession of that conception of God which he
expresses in his exposition of Pure Theism ? Apparently he
has great faith in “ The gradual growth of the conception of
God,” or what he rather strangely calls “The evolution of
God,”J* as something that really has taken place in the history
of mankind. Without professing to discuss this evolution of
God, He offers us a brief sketch of what he apparently supposes
to have been its course. But, according to his account, this
evolution has taken a very odd course indeed. First, he asks
us “to reflect for a moment upon the prevalent idea of God,
Zeus or Jupiter, in the days of ancient Greece or Rome ;
then to pass rapidly on to the God of the Patriarchs”:]; —that is,j ;
“to pass rapidly on” about a thousand years backwards\’ "
Now, I always thought that evolution was rather a strange
doctrine ; but I have never yet met with a theory of evolution
which made it go backwards.
But having gone backwards from Greece and Rome to the
Patriarchs, this evolution reverses with all the facility of a
railway engine, and goes forward again through Israel and the
* Page 80.
t Page 88.
t Page 88.


Prophets to Christian, and finally to modern times, “where it
reaches that growing and more enlightened conception that
most earnest thinking men and women have at the present
day a conception which, with the increase of knowledge,
and with the further revelations of nature, and of nature’s
laws, will assuredly become more enlightened still.” Now,
where are these “ earnest thinking men and women ” to be
found ? Can our author point to so much as one of them
who lives, or has lived, outside the limits of the influence of
Christianity ? Can he produce any evidence that men have
attained this more enlightened conception of God without help,
direct or indirect, from Christianity and the Bible ? The fact
is, that modern thought on moral and religious subjects, which
is immensely superior to ancient thought on the same sub-
jects, is continully showing off this superiority as being its
own property, and the result of its own progress, whereas
very much of it can be shown to be something borrowed
without acknowledgment, and perhaps unconsciously, from the
Christian Revelation. As one proof of this let the reader
pause, and reflect in what parts of the world, and among what
races of men, the effects of this so-called evolution are to be
seen. He will find them strongly manifesting themselves only
in those countries where the Bible is an open book, and a
scriptural form of Christianity prevails. We shall have to
refer, presently, to some quotations from ancient literatures,
which our author uses to show that lofty and spiritual concep-
tions of God prevailed in Egypt, India, Persia, and other
countries in very ancient times. What then, I ask, has
become of the “ evolution of God ” in those countries ?
How is it that, having had the start of us by thousands
of years, they have now fallen so far behind ? Has their
evolution gone backwards too? It is one of the most
striking proofs of the wonderful character of the Bible
that enlightenment on moral subjects, and progress and
improvement 6f every kind, have grown up wherever it has
been welcomed and studied, and have withered away wher-
ever it has been banished and forbidden. I am aware that
such a statement as this will, by some, be regarded as
worthy only of a fanatic and a bibliophile ; but my appeal
is to the plain and broad facts of modern European
history.
But our author takes up a position the very opposite to
* Page 89.


this, and emphatically denies that men are, or ever were,
indebted to the Bible for their knowledge of God.
“ Had there been no Bible,” he says, “ man would have had just
the same knowledge of God as he now possesses. That conception of
God which has its birth in nature and in instinct took its place in man’s
heart and mind ages before the birth of Jesus, or that of a Bible in any
shape or form.”*
In proof of this he quotes seventeen short passages from the
literatures off “those ancient and vast religious sects in
comparison with whose antiquity Christianity is but the
creation of yesterday.” These seventeen passages, he says in
a note, represent the Persian, Egyptian, Hindoo, Buddhist,
Grecian, and Arabian conceptions of God, and are quoted
from a book called “ Sacred Scriptures of the World.” Does
he mean “ Schermerhorn’s Sacred Scriptures of the World?”
(1883.) If so, I will give two quotations from the same work,
which, for anything the book says, may be as ancient as any
he has quoted. Here is one from the Hindoo selections :
“ He alone is a true Hindoo whose life is just, and he alone is
a true MAHOMETAN whose life is true !”| Here is another
from the Arabian selections “ Mohammed is no more than
an Apostle.” § And our author professes that his quotations
are from religious writings, “in comparison with whose
antiquity Christianity is but the creation of yesterday !”||
Will it be believed that a writer, pretending to deal critically
with the subject of Religion, has perpetrated this stupendous
piece of carelessness about chronology ? And yet, unless I
have mistaken the book from which he has quoted, or unless
he has proved the antiquity of all his quotations by referring
to the originals, he stands convicted of it. However, some of
these quotations, especially the Egyptian, may be of vast
antiquity for anything I know; but, if so, then so much the
worse for our author’s theory of the evolution of man’s
conception of God.
There is more in this chapter that might call for criticism,
but my space is limited, and I think I have said enough to
show that our author’s pure theism is beset by such difficulties
* Page 85. t Page 86. J Scheraierhorn, p. 298. § Ibid, p. 404.
II Note.— The first of the two passages I have quoted cannot possibly be of
earlier date than the Mahometan conquest of India, and probably belongs to the
time of Akbar the Great, who was contemporary with our Queen Elizabeth. Yet
it occurs on the next page to the twelfth of our author’s seventeen quotations,
with nothing to show that it may not be equally ancient. ’


as will make the doubter and the atheist, to whom he pro-
fessedly offers it, quite as unwilling to accept it as they are to
accept Christianity. And as for the intelligent Christian, what-
ever may be his doubts and fears—however he may be tempted
to forsake the ship in which he has hitherto been sailing, it
will certainly not be to take refuge on the flimsy raft which our
author has constructed. Our “ Religion without Superstition”
must be something stronger and sounder than a theism based
upon the vague and conflicting testimony of nature —developed
by an imaginary evolution—and taking no account of the
tremendous objections lying against it in the world as it is.
THE TRINITY.
To examine fully the questions raised in the negative part
of this work, namely, the first four chapters which are devoted
to attacking distinctive doctrines of Christianity, besides
being much too large an enterprise for a mere pamphlet, would
be to go over ground that has been trodden a hundred times.
I shall confine myself to examining our author’s own method
of making these attacks and briefly replying to him.
The first chapter attacks the doctrine of the Trinity, and
therefore, of course, is chiefly occupied with the question of
the Divinity of Christ and the personality of the Holy Spirit.
Now, of all religious questions the one I least like to debate
upon is this, because it is so certain that the debater does not
understand the terms he uses, and he nearly always debates
about them as if he understood them perfectly. When will men
come to understand that when they predicate Divinity, either
affirmatively or negatively, of any given subject—that is, in
plain English, whenever they say that any person or thing is
or is not God they are using an undefined predicate, that is,
using a term, “ God,” of which they do not fully understand
the meaning? Until I fully know what God is, it is impossible
for me by my own reason to say whether Christ can be God
or not. The most that we can do in such a question is just
what the divines of the Councils of Nice and Constantinople


attempted, to collect the teaching of the Scriptures on the
nature of Jesus Christ and the nature of the Holy Spirit,
as revealed to us in the Scriptures, and formulate them in
some way or other. The Church of England accepts the
creed which they formulated, not because she regards the
Councils as infallible, but because she is convinced that the
creed itself “ may be proved by most certain warrant of
Holy Scripture.” The Unitarians dissent from this view, and
most of the objections which our author brings forward are
the usual objections raised by Unitarians.
Now, as to the Divinity of Christ, it ought to be distinctly
kept in mind that there is no middle course between regarding
as a mere man, and regarding Him as being in some
sense—though it be an inscrutable sense—God. Now, can
anyone go fairly through the teaching of the Bible about
Christ, and say that the Bible makes Him a mere man ? Let
us turn to but one of the passages with which our author has
attempted to deal, the passage containing the doctrine of the
Logos, or the Word, in the opening verses of the Gospel of
St. John. Let us accept his explanation of the “Word” as
meaning “ The thought of God or the manifestation of God.”*
Now, observe that St. John tells us in the first verse that this
“thought or manifestation of God” was in some sense identical
with God, for he distinctly says—“ The Word was God.” He
also tells us, in verse 14, that “ The Word became flesh, and
dwelt among us,” and was, in fact, the Person to whom John
the Baptist bore witness, namely, Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ,
therefore, was no other than the Word who was identical
with God. Our author, indeed, contends that the expression
“ The Word was made flesh ” means nothing more than that
“Jesus was a messenger from God, revealing God and His
attributes to man.” But this is manifestly less than the plain
meaning of the words themselves, a meaning supported and
strengthened by the context. John the Baptist was a messen-
ger from God—“ There was a man sent from God, whose
name was John.” But what a broad line of difference is
drawn in the passage between John the messenger, the witness
who was sent to bear witness of the Light, and the Light
itself, another title which this passage applies to Jesus Christ.
“ That was the True Light which lighteneth every man com-
ing into the world. He was in the world, and the world
was made by Him.” How can anyone possibly maintain that
* Pages 19, 20.


all this is spoken about a mere man ? It is strikingly like the
testimony to Christ given by the writer of the Epistle to the
Hebrews (chapter i.) —“ God . . . hath in these last days
spoken unto us by His Son . . . who being the bright-
ness of His Glory, and the express image of His Person, and
upholding all things by the word of His Power, when He had
by Himself purged our sins sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high.”' To show how much greater Christ is than
angels, the writer of the Epistle continues—“ Unto the angels
He saith. Who maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a
flame of fire. But unto the Son He saith. Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever,” &c.—Hebrews i. 7, 8. I cannot
conceive how a critic, wishing to fairly examine the testimony
of the Scriptures on the Divinity of Christ, could think of
omitting this last and most important passage, yet to this
passage our author makes not the slightest allusion.
Coming to specific objections which he draws from Scrip-
ture against the doctrines of the Trinity, the Divinity of
Christ, and the Personality of the Holy Spirit, the first of
them is, that if these doctrines are really Scriptural, they
ought to be found clearly stated in the Old Testament. This
objection he brings forward in no less than three passages, on
pages 5, 11, and 28 ; but what does the objection amount to ?
The revelation of God in the Old Testament is confessedly an
imperfect and dim revelation. The New Testament gives us,
so to speak, a nearer and clearer view of God. To say that
the more distant view ought to be as clear as the nearer view,
is like saying that the cluster of stars into which a powerful
telescope resolves a nebula ought to be visible to the naked
eye, or ought to be visible through a smaller and less perfect
telescope.
Coming to particular texts, after quoting fifteen texts on
the Unity of the Godhead, which no Christian denies, he comes
to the famous interpolated text of i John v. y* “It only
exists,” he says, “in one Greek manuscript, and that of the
twelfth century.” “In other words, this remarkable text
makes its appearance 1,200 years after Jesus Christ, and is little
more than 600 years old.”*|* I believe this statement to be
perfectly accurate, but how does it agree with our author’s
* Note.—“ There be three that bear record in heaven—the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost—and these three are one.” This text does not occur in any
of the older manuscripts, and is admitted by all to be a late interpolation.
t Page 7,


statement on page 23 ? Speaking of the doctrine of the
Personality of the Holy Spirit, which was formulated as an
addition to the Nicene Creed by the Council of Constantinople
in A.D. 391, he says—“ Probably the origin of this doctrine is
due mainly, if not solely, to the detected interpolation of the
verse of the three heavenly witnesses.” A doctrine stated by
a council in the fourth century was “ due mainly or solely ”
to the text invented in the tzvelfth century! Could the
confusion of a careless criticism perpetrate a worse blunder
than this ?
Our author having shown to his own satisfaction that the
doctrine of the Trinity is unscriptural, severely condemns the
Christian churches for using Trinitarian expressions in their
prayers, and for addressing prayers to the Son. Probably he
would equally object to the prayer of the dying martyr
Stephen, who prayed, “ Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”
In treating of the Divinity of Christ, our author asserts very
strongly that Jesus Christ “taught pure and
that He “ repudiated in express terms the attribute of co-
equality with the Father.” We shall only here remark on this
point, that if his view be correct. Our Lord was not only very
much misunderstood by the Jews, but He deliberately led them
into the mistake, and left them in it, when the mistake was their
very motive for killing Him. Twice they took up stones to
cast at Him for blaspheming. Once, when He said, “ Before
Abraham was I am ;” and once, when He said, “ I and my
Father are One.” If these statements of Christ are not a
claim to a nature higher than that of a mere man —if they
are not a claim to Eternity and Divinity—at least the Jews
so understood them, and Christ took no pains to correct
them, any more than He did to correct Thomas when he said,
“My Lord and my God.” Our author, indeed, asserts, with
reference to the second of these passages, that Christ
“emphatically denies the charge of the Jews; that Thou
being a man makest Thyself God ;” but, in order to support
this statement, he is obliged to paraphrase after his own fashion
the words which Our Lord used on the occasion, and to take
one of those “ extensive liberties with the language of the
Bible ” which he accuses some Christians of taking.J*
The charge on which Our Lord was condemned to death by
the High Priest and the Jewish Sanhedrim was a charge of
blasphemy. The High Priest asked Him, “ Art Thou the
* Page 12.
+ See Page 16.


Christ, the Son of the Living God?” On His giving an
affirmative answer He was instantly condemned to death for
blasphemy. If the expression Son of God implied no more
than the expression son or child of God as applied to “ any
good man or woman,” which is what our author maintains,,
what reason could it have furnished for a charge of blas-
phemy ?
We need not discuss the subject of the so-called Trinities,
referred to on page 25, as having been part of the doctrine of
several religions “ far more ancient ” than Christianity. Those
among them which really are ancient have often been
regarded as an indication that the Trinity formed part of a
primeval revelation of which these ancient religions are a
feeble echo ; and for anything that our author has said, such
a view may still be held. But how many of them really are
ancient? With the same sublime indifference to dates that
he has shown elsewhere, he classes the Gnostic systems of
theology, a production of the first and second centuries, among
those which are far more ancient than Christianity.
A suggestion is made on page 29 that the doctrine of the
Incarnation of Christ may have been borrowed from that of
the incarnation of Buddha. Without attempting to discuss
Buddhism, a subject which Oriental scholars are still investi-
gating, I may make the following statements and fearlessly
challenge refutation: —(i) The legend of the Incarnation of
Buddha is not a part of the original Buddhism. (2) This
legend has not yet been traced back to times earlier than
Christianity, and, for anything that is certainly known, may
be some centuries later. (3) There is no evidence that
Buddhism was known at all in the West earlier than the
latter half of the second century. (4) The first Christian
writer who alludes to the legend of the Incarnation of
Buddha is Jerome, a writer of the fifth century. (5) There-
fore, those who have contended that Christianity has borrowed
anything whatever from Buddhism have done so in spite
of the strongest historical evidence to the contrary. (6)
On the other hand, it is certain that Christian missionaries
preached the Gospel in India in very early times. (7) And,
therefore, it is by no means improbable that the legend of
the Incarnation of Buddha, in the form in which our author
refers to it, may have borrowed some of its features from
Christianity.


THE GOSPELS.
We have already wandered into chapter two of the work
before us, and come to the subject of the Incarnation of
Christ. At this point our author withdraws from the con-
cession which he had hitherto made for the sake of argument,
and no more treats the Scriptures as inspired. He has now
reached that stage of his argument at which he' begins to
assail the truth and accuracy of the Bible, and the first point
attacked is the testimony of the Gospels of St. Matthew and
St. Luke as to the miraculous birth of Our Lord. He now
begins to make a free use of that method of inquiry with
which we have become only too familiar in the present day—
a method in which the inquirer accepts some part or parts of
the testimony of the Evangelists, just so far as it suits his
own ideas of what is likely to have been true, and rejects all
that does not so commend itself to his preconceived opinion,
as if he or anyone in the present day knew anything at all
about the life and teaching of Jesus Christ, except what His
witnesses have furnished to us. A small example of this free
and independent kind of criticism may be seen in the note
on pages 8 and 9 of this work, where the critic is Mr.
Matthew Arnold.
Perhaps some of our readers are not accustomed to this
method of dealing with the testimony of the Gospels, and
the New Testament generally, as to the facts of the Life of
Christ, which has become so common among modern
rationalistic critics —I mean the way of accepting a part of
the testimony, and rejecting the rest as incredible. To a
simple mind it would seem that if we had found the Evan-
gelists “ thoroughly untrustworthy ” in one part of their
narrative, we cannot possibly accept as certain any other
part of their testimony. But such a reader has little idea
how wise and clever men of the nineteenth century are,
especially in Germany.
In Germany was born that “ verifying faculty ” which, like
some chemical test, can detect falsehood in St. Luke or St.
Matthew, and can detect truth in the most spurious or
puerile of the apocryphal writings. But without this verifying
faculty how could we ever have such lives of Christ as those of
Strauss and numerous other German critics,and, later, the more


celebrated Vie de Jesus of Renan ? It is by this faculty that
these gifted writers have disentangled from the mass of testi-
mony which they regard as incredible, the residuum of rational
truth which they profess to give us. Really, the minuteness
with which they tell the details of the story, and the con-
fidence of their assurance that they know it better than all
the four Evangelists together, make us think that they must
have lived at the time, and on the spot. But it is all due to
the “ verifying faculty,” the peculiar heritage of the nine-
teenth century.
The worst of it is that their stories do not agree together—
not much better than those of the false witnesses who tried
to make out Jesus to be something different from what He
professed to be. Put them together, and they behave to each
other like the mighty men of Joab and Abner, who “caught
every man his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword into
his fellow’s side, and they all fell down together.”
Well, our author has made use of this verifying faculty to
overthrow the testimony of St. Matthew and St. Luke as to
the birth of Christ. His second-hand criticism is not very
powerful. He insists four times that the story is told by
these evangelists, not in their books, but in “ a preface,” in
each case, to their books. Suppose we granted that the
passages in question were of the nature of a preface, what
then ? Is a writer less careful about what he puts in his
preface than about what he puts in his book ? But, he adds,
“ with the possibility or probability of the prefaces having
been inserted by others after the books were Ah !
there we are, ready to fight it out, but he must not assume
what no critic has ever succeeded in establishing, or even
making out to be probable.
Our author insists strongly that the miraculous birth of Our
Lord is disproved by the fact—“ That in all four Gospels
Jesus is referred to as the actual and very son of Joseph and
Mary.” He dwells on the care which is taken, especially in
the genealogies, to show that Joseph was a lineal descendant
of David. On this subject I shall only ask one question—
Was not the legal position of Our Lord as a member of the
family of Joseph necessary to give Him the legal status of an
heir of the house of David 1 Suppose His genealogy had
been traced through His mother up to David, would this have
given him the legal status of an heir of David } I think not.
Page 32.


but I should like to see the question answered by someone
better acquainted than lam with ancient Jewish customs. It
seems to me that His legal connection with Joseph was as
necessary to make Him the Son of David, as His miraculous
birth was to make Him the Son of God.
But what is all this laborious criticism employed to prove ?
“That Jesus was the actual and very son of Joseph and
Mary,” and therefore was born in exactly the same way as
any other Galilean peasant. But does not this Jesus stand
out as a unique figure in all history, not only unlike His
countrymen and contemporaries, but peerless among the sons
of men ? If He does, then why should anyone be so anxious
to prove that He was born exactly as other men are born }
If He does not, then what is the use of raising any question
about His birth ? To me the miraculous birth of Jesus seems
only in proportion to everything else about Him. “ His
name shall be called Wonderful,” and not the least wonderful
thing about Him is the living power that He has exercised in
the world down to the present day. To quote the words of
Napoleon (which I regret I can only quote here from
memory) spoken during his captivity in St. Helena :
“ I know men, and I tell you that Jesus Christ was more than a man.
Alexander and Cmsar and myself have founded empires, but they were
founded on force. Jesus Christ founded an empire on love, and to this
day millions would die for Him.”
Amid such wonders, why quibble at the additional wonder
of a miraculous birth ?
THE BIBLE.
Coming to the question of the inspiration of the Bible, our
author insists that the reader should examine the Bible
“precisely in the way and with the same feeling as that with
which he would approach the consideration and examination
of any other book.” To this I have not the least objection,
only I would draw attention to a difference between the
Bible and all other books, which is too often overlooked.


Who ever heard of a book except the Bible which it took
fifteen hundred years to write ? Who ever heard of any one
book, the oldest passage in which was at least fifteen hundred
years older than the latest ?If any volume could be pro-
duced showing such a unity of design and structure that it
might still be regarded as one book, and that a continuous
thread of narrative or teaching, or both, might be found
running through it from beginning to end, would not such a
book deserve to be regarded as a kind of miracle in itself ?
But such a book is the Bible, and such another book is not to
be found in the literature of the whole world. Let the reader
pause for a moment and compare the subjects of the beginning
of Genesis with the subjects of the close of Revelation. In
order to show their striking unison we will here present them
in a tabular form :
In Genesis we Have —
The creation of the heavens and
the earth.
Paradise and the tree of life,
The fall, the curse and death.
The serpent as a tempter and
destroyer.
The institution of marriage.
In Revelation we Have—
New heavens and a new earth.
Restoration of the tree of life,
“No more death,” “No more
curse,”
The destruction of that old ser-
pent, the devil,
The marriage of the lamb and
the bride.
The Israelite Seer John, sitting down to write the Revela-
tion, returns to the subjects described by the Israelite Prophet
Moses fifteen hundred years before, and closes the majestie
volume which Moses had begun. That volume, like some
grand anthem, returns after many variations, many minor
chords of lamentation, to the same solemn harmonies with
which it had commenced, only now there are no minor chords,
no plaintive notes of sorrow, but a sublime chorus of heavenly
praise.*
But we are to pass over the fact and the significance of this
extraordinary and altogether unexampled character of the
volume which we call the Bible, and examine it as we would
“ any other book.” But how does our author examine it ?
On the one hand, he seems to have a profound respect for the
“ scholars and critics ” who have discovered points of “ differ-
ence, contradiction, and variance between one portion of
Scripture and another,” as well as for the “ men of letters and
* Note. —lt has been pointed out to me that I have here unconsciously bor-
rowed an idea from De Quincey “On Protestantism.” I would commend his
eloquent reinarks on the Bible to the notice of the reader.
18


science,” who have laid bare its “ many glaring anachronisms
and violations of natural and, on the other hand, he
shows an equally profound contempt for what he calls “ the
ecclesiastical school of metaphysicians,”"!* who have treated it in
a different way. Who these metaphysicians may be, is not
very clear. Evidently they are great sinners, in a literary
sense, but the head and front of their offending appears to be
that they are too “metaphysical.” Now, in what sense can
our author be using the terms “ metaphysician ” and “meta-
physical,” which he repeats so often in this connection } In
the Imperial Dictionary several uses of these terms are given,
but none of them helps me to understand the meaning
attached to them by our author. As far as I can determine
by his references, he classes together as “ metaphysicians ” a
considerable variety of commentators whom we should put in
different classes, inasmuch as some of them show great ability
and others show very little. The only conclusion I can come
to is, that he must have adopted the Scotchman’s definition :
“When ae man explains till anither what he disna under-
stand himsel’, that’s metapheesics ! ”
It is not the only instance in this book of a peculiar use of
some of the words in the English language. In the preface
(page vii.) “ dogmatize ” is apparently used as an active verb in
the sense of “ denounce ; ” but I am forgetting that, in our
author’s view, the preface is not an integral part of the book;
and perhaps we ought to conclude that this preface, like the
preface to St. Luke’s Gospel, is “ possibly or probably by a
later hand.”
But if he is original in his use of language, our author
shows little or no originality in the charges brought against
the Bible. The views put forward by negative critics are
repeated as if they had never been answered, and the
defenders of inspiration go into the ignominious class of the
“ecclesiastical metaphysicians.” A few of his objections,
indeed, are such as I do not remember to have met with
before. The three-fold repetition of the Prayer of Our Lord
in the Garden of Gethsemane, which, I think, to most readers
will seem a natural and most pathetic indication of the
anguish of His soul at the time, is pointed at as a violation
of the rule which He gave His disciples—“ Use not vain
repetitions.” j; The language of St. John, where he says, “ I
suppose that even the world itself could not contain the
* Page 45.
t Page 46.
J Page 51.


books that should be written ” concerning the things which
Jesus did, is called “ a palpably absurd exaggeration,” not to
be “ softened into a hyperbolic statement.”* Where St. Mark
tells us that Jesus walked on the water, and “ would have
passed by” the ship in which His disciples were—our author
explains him to mean that Jesus would have “missed the
ship had they not called out to Him.”*f* He finds an absurd
inconsistency in Christ having power to walk on the water,
and yet not sufficient eyesight to see the ship, but the absurdity
is nowhere but in his own brain. I think our author may
claim the sole glory of having discovered these three objec-
tions, but it is otherwise when he repeats the assertions of
those critics who have discovered two or more Isaiahs and two
Daniels. To the student who knows that this cutting-up of
the prophets originated merely in the fact that their writings
contained prophecy, and that prophecy, being a supernatural
thing, must at any cost be got rid of by the negative critics ;
and that, therefore, their ingenuity discovered different authors
of different dates for the books, it is exasperating to see
these charges repeated as if their falseness had never been
exposed. But when our author comes to deal with the Canon
of the New Testament, when he gives his version of how the
New Testament came into shape, he displays his glaring
ignorance—or the glaring ignorance of someone else, for the
words are partly quoted—of this very important subject.
Apparently, he thinks that the New Testament, as we have it,
did not exist in its present form till the Council of Carthage
in 397. The whole question of the Canon of the New Testa-
ment —that is, of the authenticity and genuineness of each of
the twenty-seven independent writings which form the volume
of the New Testament, can be discussed fully without reference
to the work of this council at all, as anyone knows who has
read, for example, Westcott on the Canon of the New
Testament, or a more elementary and popular work by the
same author, “ The Bible in the Church.” The evidence that
is really important all comes from the first three centuries of
Christianity, not from the fourth, and even our three principal
manuscripts are all older than this council. And yet our
author tells us that the New Testament was “compiled 400
years after Jesus ! ” |
Moral objections against the Old Testament are next
brought up in this learned work, special objection being made
Page 50.
t Page 66,
I Page 55.


to what is called “the filth that is to be found through-
out the Old Testament.” It is thought a most serious charge
that “ there are pages upon pages, and chapter upon chapter,
that no father or mother, worthy of the name, would ever
dream of reading to, or willingly allowing a son or daughter
to read. * And are there not, I would ask, a multitude of facts
in human life, which grown men and women must face, and
yet which no father or mother would tell to their children
And is the Word of God only to touch upon those facts in
human life which may safely and wisely be told to little
children ? If so, it cannot possibly deal with some of the most
crying evils which afflict society.
If it could be shown that there is in the Bible one word of
pruriency, a glossing-over of vice with false names, or even
one-tenth part of the real filth that is to be found in Shake-
speare, then it would be a real charge. But the worst fault of
the Bible on this side is that it tells plain truths in unvarnished
language, and does not try to make that which is actually
hideous appear specious.
I am reminded here of some observations made by Voltaire
on the Hebrew Idyll, called the “Song of Solomon.” He
praises it for its simple and innocent outspokenness, and says
that it belongs to an age of the world when men were less
refined in their language, but more pure in their hearts, than
the men of his own day. He contrasts it with the Parisian
drama, in which vice, dressed in specious forms, was exhibited
before a public, which yet would be inexpressibly shocked at
the undisguised naturalness of this Hebrew poem ; and he
concludes with these words : “ Purity has fled from our hearts
to take refuge on our lips! ”
Having denounced the immorality of the Old Testament
our author proceeds to assault the miracles of both the Old
Testament and the New. In the Old Testament, by the way,
he finds one miracle which I never remember to have heard
of before. On pages 62 and 63, reference is twice made to
‘ the miraculous conception of Manoah.” Now, I was taught
in the Sunday-school that Manoah was the name of the
father—not the mother—of Samson, so that our author’s
words make the miracle rather more extraordinary than the
Bible makes it. I would not be so cruel as to draw attention
to this unfortunate slip, but I am dealing with one who poses
as a critic of the Bible.
* Page 56.


To answer the numerous charges made by our author
against the miraculous stories of the Bible, would be a task
much beyond our present limits. I shall content myself
with quoting a remark which I read many years ago in one
of our leading reviews—“ As long as the great crowning
miracle of the resurrection of Jesus from the dead stands
upon so firm a rock of historical evidence as it does, it is
simply idle to dispute about minor miracles.” I did not
then understand what was meant by this “ rock of his-
torical evidence,” but I have come to understand something
of it since, and would that time and space would allow
me to put it before every doubting reader ! The reality of
Christ’s resurrection is the only possible way of accounting
for the very existence of Christianity at the present day,
when all the circumstances are fairly considered. It is as
essential to account for the victory of Christianity, first over
Judaism, and then over the Roman world, as the rains of
Abyssinia are necessary to account for the overflow of the
Nile. Without it Christianity is an effect without a cause.
Some of the keenest and ablest of sceptical critics of the
present century —from Baur down to Renan—have exhausted
themselves in trying to account for the origin of Christianity
without this extraordinary fact behind it, and they have
failed by the admission of the men of their own school of
thought. There is no rational way of accounting for it but
this, no way that does not involve such contradictions that to
reconcile them would be more difficult than to believe in any
number of miracles.
Besides, a religion without miracles is not worthy of the name
of religion. We must have miracles. We must have a resur-
rection. “I believe in the resurrection of the dead and the life
of the world to come.” And, if lam to give up this part of my
belief, I care not who takes the rest of it from me. But it all
rests on the word of Him who has said, “ I am the resur-
rection and the life.” “ I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish.” And if I want a bodily resurrection
hereafter, no less do I need a moral resurrection now. I want
the living Jesus Christ to work moral healing in my nature
by His spirit, like those physical healings which He wrought
when He put forth His hand and gave strength to the
paralyzed limb and cleansing to the leprous form.
Our author does not seem to think that we want anything
of this kind. He seems to have no doubt that it is within
his power to “ attain to the life of, and follow the example of,


Christ.” Happy man! Said I not well that he must have
been living in a paradise far away from evil around and evil
within ? But it is not so with me. Only let him do as he
says, and I will come and sit at his feet, and avail myself of
his help in doing that which is the Christian’s calling—“ To
follow the example of our Saviour Christ and to be made
like unto Him.”—(Baptismal service.)
A TONEAfENT.
I SHALL not detain the reader long with the discussion of
our author’s objections against the great central doctrine of
Christianity, commonly called the Atonement, and against
the doctrine of the Second Advent of Christ. That the
death of Christ on the cross had, in the counsels of God,
some necessary connection with the putting away of sin—a
connection such that the latter was impossible without the
former, is the clear and unmistakable teaching of the Scrip-
tures, not only of the New Testament, but also of the Old.
What that connection exactly was, and how the teaching of
Scripture on the subject should be formulated, is a question
on which there have been great diversities of opinion among
theologians of all ages since the time of Christ. Our author
indeed states that three distinct theories of the Atonement
have prevailed, and states the order in which they have arisen.
Perhaps he has read up the history of doctrine more
thoroughly than I have, but, if so, it is a pity he did not state
more fully when, and by whom, the three several theories have
been put forth. That none of the various theories upon the
subject has fully expressed the teaching of Scripture upon it
I can readily admit, but I entirely deny his unfounded state-
ment that one or any of them was “ resorted to in order to
maintain that doctrine in some form or another.” The fact is
that theology is always changing while Scripture is always the
same, and earnest students of Scripture are always more or
less correcting their theology by a return to the study of Holy
23


Scripture—often, I admit, under pressure from independent
human thought. Whatever be the connection between the
death of Christ and the pardon of sin, it must be the same
as is shadowed forth in type and symbol in the sacrificial rites
of the Old Testament. To deny this is to impugn, not the
teaching of the Old Testament alone, but the teaching of the
New Testament and of Christ himself. Christ himself
resorted to the Temple, where these sacrificial rites were daily
observed, and called it “ My Father’s House ; ” He partook
of the Passover, and conformed to the requirements of the
Ceremonial Law ; in short. He testified in every possible way
by His example to the Divine origin of that system of sym-
bolic religion which the Jews of His time had inherited from
Old Testament times. To treat the Jewish sacrifices, there-
fore, as of human origin is to impugn Christ’s teaching as
really, if not as directly, as the teaching of the Old Testament.
Christ taught with sufficient clearness that the shedding of
His own blood had to do with the actual putting away of sin,
as much as the Temple sacrifices and the blood of the Paschal
Lamb had to do with the symbolic putting away of sin. He
has taught this in the rite which He himself instituted at the
season of the Passover, and just before His own death. “ This
is my blood of the new covenant, which is shed for you and
for many for the remission of sins.” How could our author
forget these words, spoken on such an occasion, when he
penned the statement, “ All through the various histories of
the sayings and teachings of Jesus there is not one word to be
found either directly or indirectly bearing ” upon the doctrine
of the Atonement? *
The great fault in most of the orthodox teaching on the
subject of the Atonement is, that divines have contented
themselves with using the Jewish sacrifices, to interpret by
them the meaning of Christ’s Atoning Death, as if these
sacrifices themselves did not equally stand in need of being
interpreted. The subject has been treated, in my humble
judgment, too much from an Old Testament point of view.
To minds thoroughly habituated, as the minds of Jews were,
to the idea of sacrifice and offering for sin, this treatment
might have been sufificient. They saw in the death of Christ
what they had been taught to look for in the death of
sacrificial victims. But to Gentile, and especially to modern
minds, the whole subject should be treated from a different
point of view.
* Page 74.


Some theologians have tried to do this, and, it may-
be, have partially succeeded. It is not to be expected that
any one of them, or even that all together, should be able
to look at all the aspects of this many-sided truth. The
great difficulty of the doctrine is precisely the same as the
difficulty of the existence of moral evil in the world, a
difficulty of which our author, as we saw before, appears to
be sublimely unconscious, and therefore we are not surprised
that he cannot in the least appreciate the doctrine of the
Cross—that he cannot in the least sympathize with the
feeling of the Apostle of the Gentiles, “ God forbid that I
should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
The fact is, there are many aspects of this great sacrificial work,
each one of which may be illustrated in some small degree by
facts with which we are most familiar, but every one of which
is insufficient to give more than a partial reflection of the
great central truth. The aspect of self-sacrifice, for example,
was illustrated the other day, when a brave and generous
Englishman laid down his life in the attempt to rescue from
destruction thousands of poor Egyptians. The aspect of sin-
bearing is illustrated whenever a benevolent rich man pays a
fine for a guilty poor man. The aspect of imputed righteous-
ness is illustrated whenever a youth gets a situation, not for
his own merits, but for the sake of the merit of his father or
his elder brother. And so we might go on, showing every-
where, in the most ordinary facts of life, dim reflections of
particular sides of this great mystery. But my present
purpose is not to discuss doctrines, it is merely to show that
the great distinctive features of Christianity are not to be
obliterated with the flimsy tools which our would-be iconoclast
applies to them.
ADVENT.
In dealing with the difficulties involved in the doctrine
of the Second Advent, our author begins by taking up the
prophetic words of Christ, “ The stars shall fall from heaven,”
which he classes among the “ astronomical errors ” of the
Bible ; insisting, of course, that they must be taken in a


literal sense. Without here arguing the point, I would only
suggestion. When Joseph told his father Jacob,
“ I dreamed, and behold the sun, and the moon, and the
eleven stars made obeisance to me,” his father answered
him, Shall I and thy wothcv and thy bTcthvcfi indeed come
to bow down ourselves to thee ? ” What guided the mind of
Jacob to make this particular symbolic interpretation of his
son’s vision ? If we knew this, it might perhaps throw light
on the meaning of Our Lord s words in this prophetic passage.
But as the fulfilment of the prophecy is still in the future, it
would be rash to say positively what it does mean.
_ Again, our author insists that the expression “ this genera-
tion, in St. Matt. xxiv. 34> can only mean the generation of
rnen in which Christ lived. But it is at least doubtful whether
the word generation ”is used here with reference to time
at all, as appears from Christ’s words in St. Luke xi. 50,
That the blood of all the prophets which hath been shed
fyoin the foundation of the world may be required of this
generation. A single generation, in the ordinary sense of
the word, could hardly be held responsible for a series of
crimes committed from the foundation of the world.
The real difficulties connected with the Advent doctrine
these that the first disciples undoubtedly at one time
looked for the speedy coming again of Christ, and that some
c them- and notably St. Paul—at one time undoubtedly
thought it would take place in their own lifetime. They had,
moreover, been led to this expectation by the express words
of Chiist. This is half the truth, and it creates a real and
great difficulty. The other half of the truth partially clears
away this difficulty. While leading them to look for His
sudden return, Christ expressly told them that neither they,
nor the angels, nor Himself, knew of the day and hour
Further, He taught them that it depended upon the accom-
plishment of certain events. One of these events was the world-
c>f the Gospel. “ This Gospel of the kingdom
shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all
nations : and then shall the end come.”—St. Matt. xxiv. 14..
Now the disciples could have no conception how long
that work would take. As a matter of fact, it has not been
lully accomplished yet. Another was—“ Jerusalem shall be
trodden down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles
be fulfilled. St. Luke xxi. 24. Here there were two events,
each requiring an unknown length of time, both to be
accomplished before the Second Advent of Christ. When


the disciples, after the resurrection, asked Him. the question,
“ Wilt Thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel ?”
He answered them, “ It is not for you to know times and
seasons, which the Father hath put in His own power.”—
Acts i. 7.
So, along with the general expectation of the speedy
coming of Christ, there was in the minds of the disciples the
conviction that they were in uncertainty as to the time.
This appears—to pass over other passages—in the words of
St. Peter, “But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing,
that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day.”—2 Pet. iii. 8. The disciples,
therefore, were taught, and understood, that it was not so
much a question of so many days or years as a ques-
tion of certain events that must take place before the
end. I have shown that one of these was the preaching
of the Gospel of the Kingdom as a witness to all nations.
That has not yet been done. But it might have been done
long ago, if the Christian Church had not left its first love ; if
the faith and zeal of the first age had not cooled down ; if the
Church had been faithful to its “ marching orders,” “Go
ye and teach all nations.” And who shall say that one
reason why the second coming of Christ has been so long
delayed has not been this slowness and slackness on the part
of the Christian Church ? Is this a startling suggestion ?
St. Peter says something very like it in his Second
Epistle—“ What manner of persons ought ye to be ... .
looking for and hastening the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.”—2 Peter iii. ii (Revised version.) Again, he says
something very like it to the Jews —“Repent ye, therefore,
and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out, that so
there may come seasons of refreshing from the presence of
the Lord, and that He may send the Christ who hath been
appointed for you, even Jesus, whom the heavens must receive
until the times of the restoration of all things.”—Acts iii.
19-21 (Revised version.) The Church of Israel, by its refusal
to»be led by Jehovah, procured to itself forty years of
wilderness wandering instead of two ; and may not the
modern Israel, the Christian Church, by following the same
example of unbelief, have prolonged the period of its sojourn
in the wilderness of this world ?
27


CONCLUSION.
Here I must close a hasty examination of a work with
which I only became acquainted six days since. If I have
spoken sarcastically of- some of the errors in it, I trust that
the author supposing this pamphlet should ever meet
his eye—will not consider that such sarcasm is intended
ill-naturedly, or blame me for using such a weapon in meeting
such an attack. I am convinced that he wrote with the sin-
cere intention of benefiting the doubters and atheists to whom'
his work is addressed, by leading them to what he regards as
truth, though I much doubt if his work will have the effect
which he intended. It would be well if persons who have
such objections as his to make against Christianity would
first bring them to men who are qualified to deal with them,
before throwing them out upon a public, a large portion of
which are without that special knowledge which is required
for estimating their true force and value. It may be that,
writing in haste, I have also made blunders of which I shall
have to repent at leisure, and, if so, I hope that all such may
be pointed out to me, and I shall not complain if I, too, have
to feel the lash of sarcasm. I have endeavoured to say a
few words in defence and exposition of my own religion, and
if anyone asks what that is, it is the religion of the man who
said to Christ, “ Lord, to whom shall we go ? Thou hast the
words of eternal life. And we have believed, and know, that
Thou art the Holy One of God.”—St. John vi. 68, 69.
28
